Encyclopaedia Biblica, Vol. 4 (Thomas Kelly Cheyne and John Sutherland Black, 1903)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/encyclopaediabib04cheyuoft): the 1903 Toronto (Morang) edition, vol. 4 of 4 (Q–Z), ed. Cheyne & Black — complete through END OF VOL. IV.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ENCYCLOPAEDIA
BIBLICA

A  CRITICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  LITERARY

POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY

THE  ARCHEOLOGY  GEOGRAPHY

AND  NATURAL  HISTORY

OF  THE  BIBLE


EDITED BY

THE REV.  T. K.  CHEYNE, D.Lrrr., D.D.

ORIEL PROFESSOR OF THE INTERPRETATION OF HOLY SCRIPTURE AT OXFORD •

AND FORMERLY FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE

CANON OF ROCHESTER


J.  SUTHERLAND BLACK, M.A., LL.D.

FORMERLY ASSISTANT EDITOR OF THE 'ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA  '


VOLUME IV
Q  to  Z


TORONTO

GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY, LIMITED

1903


65


COPYRIGHT, 1903,
BY  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

First  edition. May.  1903.


NortoooB
J.  8.  Cuihing  &  Co.  —  Berwick  ft  Smith
Norwood  M»§H  U.S.A.


TO THE

MEMORY

OF

WILLIAM ROBERTSON SMITH


PREFACE

THE  idea  of  preparing  a  new  Dictionary  of  the  Bible  on  critical  lines  for the
benefit  of  all  serious  students,  both  professional  and  lay,  was  prominent  in  the

.  mind  of  the many-sided scholar to whose beloved memory the

Genesis  oi  the  . . ., ,

Encyclopaedia.  Present  volume  is  inscribed.  It  is  more  than  twelve  years  since
Prof.  Robertson  Smith  began  to  take  steps  towards  realising  this
idea.  As  an  academical  teacher  he  had  from  the  first  been  fully  aware  of  the
importance  of  what  is  known  as  Biblical  Encyclopaedia,  and  his  own  earliest
contributions  to  the  subject  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  carry  us  as  far  back
as  to  the  year  1875.  If  for  a  very  brief  period  certain  untoward  events  arrested
his  activity  in  this  direction,  the  loss  of  time  was  speedily  made  up,  for  seldom
perhaps  has  there  been  a  greater  display  of  intellectual  energy  than  is  given  in
the  series  of  biblical  articles  signed  '  W.  R.  S.'  which  appeared  in  the  Encyclopedia
Britannica  between  1875  and  1888.  The  reader  who  is  interested  in  Bible
study  should  not  fail  to  examine  the  list,  which  includes  among  the  longer  articles
BIBLE,  CANTICLES,  CHRONICLES,  DAVID,  HEBREW  LANGUAGE,  HOSEA,  JERU
SALEM,  JOEL,  JUDGES,  KINGS,  LEVITES,  MALACHI,  MESSIAH,  MICAH,  PHILIS
TINES,  PRIEST,  PROPHET,  PSALMS,  SACRIFICE,  TEMPLE,  TITHES,  ZEPHANIAH  ;
and  among  the  shorter,  ANGEL,  ARK,  BAAL,  DECALOGUE,  ELI,  EVE,  HAGGAI,
LAMENTATIONS,  MELCHIZEDEK,  MOLOCH,  NABAT^ANS,  NAHUM,  NAZARITE,  NINE
VEH,  OBADIAH,  PARADISE,  RUTH,  SABBATH,  SADDUCEES,  SAMUEL,  TABERNACLE,
Vow.

Nor  should  the  students  of  our  day  overlook  the  service  which  this  far-
seeing  scholar  and  editor  rendered  to  the  nascent  conception  of  an  international
biblical  criticism  by  inviting  the  co-operation  of  foreign  as  well  as  English  con
tributors.  That  names  like  those  of  Noldeke,  Tiele,  Wellhausen,  Harnack,  Schiirer,
Gutschmid,  Geldner,  appeared  side  by  side  with  those  of  well-known  and  honoured
British  scholars  in  the  list  of  contributors  to  the  Encyclopedia  was  a  guarantee  of
freedom  from  dangerous  eccentricity,  of  comprehensiveness  of  view,  of  thorough
ness  and  accuracy  of  investigation.

Such  a  large  amount  of  material  illustrative  of  the  Bible,  marked  by  unity
of  aim  and  consistency  of  purpose,  was  thus  brought  together  that  the  Encyclope
dia  Britannica  became,  inclusively,  something  not  unlike  an  Encyclopedia  Biblica.
The  idea  then  occurred  to  the  editor  and  his  publishers  to  republish,  for  the
guidance  of  students,  all  that  might  be  found  to  have  stood  the  test  of  time,  the
lacunse  being  filled  up,  and  the  whole  brought  up,  as  far  as  possible,  to  the  high
level  of  the  most  recent  scholarship.  It  was  not  unnatural  to  wish  for  this ;  but
there  were  three  main  opposing  considerations.  In  the  first  place,  there  were
other  important  duties  which  made  pressing  demands  on  the  time  and  energy  of


vm  PREFACE

the  editor.  Next,  the  growing  maturity  of  his  biblical  scholarship  made  him  less
and  less  disposed  to  acquiesce  in  provisional  conclusions.  And  lastly,  such  con
stant  progress  was  being  made  by  students  in  the  power  of  assimilating  critical
results  that  it  seemed  prudent  to  wait  till  biblical  articles,  thoroughly  revised  and
recast,  should  have  a  good  chance  of  still  more  deeply  influencing  the  student  world.

The  waiting-time  was  filled  up,  so  far  as  other  occupations  allowed,  by
pioneering  researches  in  biblical  archaeology,  some  of  the  results  of  which  are
admirably  summed  up  in  that  fruitful  volume  entitled  The  Religion  of  the  Semites
(1889).  More  and  more,  Robertson  Smith,  like  other  contemporary  scholars,
saw  the  necessity  of  revising  old  work  on  the  basis  of  a  more  critical,  and,  in  a
certain  sense,  more  philosophical  treatment  of  details.  First  of  all,  archaeological
details  had  their  share  —  and  it  was  bound  to  be  a  large  share  —  of  this  scholar's
attention.  Then  came  biblical  geography  —  a  subject  which  had  been  brought
prominently  into  notice  by  the  zeal  of  English  explorers,  but  seemed  to  need  the
collaboration  of  English  critics.  A  long  visit  to  Palestine  was  planned  for  the
direct  investigation  of  details  of  biblical  geography,  and  though  this  could  not  be
carried  out,  not  a  little  time  was  devoted  to  the  examination  of  a  few  of  the  more
perplexing  geographical  problems  and  of  the  solutions  already  proposed  (see  e.g.,
APHEK,  below,  col.  IQI/.).  This  care  for  accuracy  of  detail  as  a  necessary  pre
liminary  to  a  revision  of  theories  is  also  the  cause  of  our  friend's  persistent  refusal
to  sanction  the  republication  of  the  masterly  but  inevitably  provisional  article
BIBLE  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  to  which  we  shall  return  later.  The  reader
will  still  better  understand  the  motive  of  that  refusal  if  he  will  compare  what
is  said  on  the  Psalter  in  that  article  (1875)  with  the  statements  in  the  first  edition
of  77/i?  Old  Testament  in  tlie  Jcii'isJi  £7/;//r//(i88o),  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica,
article  PSALMS  (1885),  and  in  the  second  edition  of  The  Old  Testament  in  the
Jewish  Church  ( 1892).

It  is  only  just,  however,  to  the  true  'begetter'  of  this  work  to  emphasise  the
fact  that,  though  he  felt  the  adequate  realisation  of  his  idea  to  be  some  way  off,
he  lost  no  time  in  pondering  and  working  out  a  variety  of  practical  details  —  a
task  in  which  he  was  seconded  by  his  assistant  editor  and  intimate  friend,  Mr.
J.  S.  Black.  Many  hours  were  given,  as  occasion  offered,  to  the  distribution  of
subjects  and  the  preparation  of  minor  articles.  Some  hundreds  of  these  were
drafted,  and'  many  were  the  discussions  that  arose  as  to  various  difficult  practi
cal  points,  which  have  not  been  without  fruit  for  the  present  work.

In  September  1892,  however,  it  became  only  too  clear  to  Prof.  Smith  that
he  was  suffering  from  a  malady  which  might  terminate  fatally  after  no  very  dis
tant  term.  The  last  hope  of  active  participation  in  his  long-cherished  scheme  of
a  Bible  Dictionary  had  well-nigh  disappeared,  when  one  of  the  present  editors,
who  had  no  definite  knowledge  of  Prof.  Smith's  plan,  communicated  to  this  friend
of  many  years'  standing  his  ideas  of  what  a  critical  Bible  Dictionary  ought  to  be,
and  inquired  whether  he  thought  that  such  a  project  could  be  realised.  Prof.
Smith  was  still  intellectually  able  to  consider  and  pronounce  upon  these  ideas,
and  gladly  recognised  their  close  affinity  to  his  own.  Unwilling  that  all  the
labour  already  bestowed  by  him  on  planning  and  drafting  articles  should  be  lost,
he  requested  Prof.  Cheyne  to  take  up  the  work  which  he  himself  was  compelled
to  drop,  in  conjunction  with  the  older  and  more  intimate  friend  already  mentioned.
Hence  the  combination  of  names  on  the  title-page.  The  work  is  undertaken  by  the
editors  as  a  charge  from  one  whose  parting  message  had  the  force  of  a  command.


PREFACE  ix

Such  is  the  history  of  the  genesis  of  the  Encyclopedia  Btblica,  which  is  the
result  primarily  of  a  fusion  of  two  distinct  but  similar  plans  —  a  fusion  desired  by
p ,.  .  ,  ,  ,,  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  himself,  as  the  only  remaining  means  of
Encyclopedia  reansmg  adequately  his  own  fundamental  ideas.  With  regard  to
details,  he  left  the  editors  entirely  free,  not  from  decline  of  physical
strength,  but  from  a  well-grounded  confidence  that  religion  and  the  Bible  were
not  less  dear  to  them  than  to  himself,  and  that  they  fully  shared  his  own  uncom
promisingly  progressive  spirit.  The  Bible  Dictionary  which  he  contemplated  was
no  mere  collection  of  useful  miscellanea,  but  a  survey  of  the  contents  of  the  Bible,
as  illuminated  by  criticism  —  a  criticism  which  identifies  the  cause  of  religion
with  that  of  historical  truth,  and,  without  neglecting  the  historical  and  archaeo
logical  setting  of  religion,  loves  best  to  trace  the  growth  of  high  conceptions,
the  flashing  forth  of  new  intuitions,  and  the  development  of  noble  personalities,
under  local  and  temporal  conditions  that  may  often  be,  to  human  eyes,  most
adverse.  The  importance  of  the  newer  view  of  the  Bible  to  the  Christian  com
munity,  and  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  newer  biblical  criticism,  have  been
so  ably  and  so  persuasively  set  forth  by  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  in  his  Lectures
that  his  fellow-workers  may  be  dispensed  from  repeating  here  what  he  has  said  so
well  already.  '  There  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed.'  Let  us
assume,  then,  that  the  readers  of  this  Encyclopaedia,  whatever  be  their  grade  of
knowledge  or  sphere  of  work,  are  willing  to  make  an  effort  to  take  this  widely
extended  land  in  possession.

Every  year,  in  fact,  expands  the  narrow  horizons  which  not  so  long  ago
limited  the  aspirations  of  the  biblical  scholar.  It  is  time,  as  Prof.  Robertson
Smith  thought,  to  help  students  to  realise  this,  and  to  bring  the  standard  books  on
which  they  rely  more  up  to  date.  It  may  seem  hopeless  to  attempt  this  with  an
alphabetically  arranged  encyclopaedia,  which  necessarily  involves  the  treatment
of  subjects  in  an  isolated  way.  By  an  elaborate  system  of  cross  references,
however,  and  by  interspersing  a  considerable  number  of  comprehensive  articles
(such  as.  in  Part  I.,  APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE,  CAINITES,  DRAGON),  it  has
been  sought  to  avoid  the  danger  of  treating  minute  details  without  regard  to
their  wider  bearings.  Many  of  the  minor  articles,  too,  have  been  so  constructed
as  to  suggest  the  relation  of  the  details  to  the  larger  wholes.  Altogether  the
minor  articles  have,  one  ventures  to  hope,  brought  many  direct  gains  to  biblical
study.  Often  the  received  view  of  the  subject  of  a  '  minor  article '  proved  to  be
extremely  doubtful,  and  a  better  view  suggested  itself.  Every  endeavour  has
been  used  to  put  this  view  forward  in  a  brief  and  yet  convincing  manner,  without
occupying  too  much  space  and  becoming  too  academic  in  style.  The  more  com
prehensive  articles  may  here  and  there  be  found  to  clash  with  the  shorter  articles.
Efforts,  however,  have  been  made  to  mitigate  this  by  editorial  notes  in  both
classes  of  articles.

It  will  also  doubtless  be  found  that  on  large  questions  different  writers  have
sometimes  proposed  different  theories  and  hypotheses.  The  sympathies  of  the
editors  are,  upon  the  whole,  with  what  is  commonly  known  as  'advanced '  criticism,
not  simply  because  it  is  advanced,  but  because  such  criticism,  in  the  hands  of  a
resourceful  scholar,  takes  account  of  facts,  both  literary  and  archaeological,  which
the  criticism  of  a  former  generation  overlooked  or  treated  superficially.  They
have  no  desire,  however,  to  '  boycott '  moderate  criticism,  when  applied  by  a  critic
who,  either  in  the  form  or  in  the  substance  of  his  criticism,  has  something  original


x  PREFACE

to  say.  An  '  advanced '  critic  cannot  possibly  feel  any  arrogance  towards  his
more  '  moderate '  colleague,  for  probably  he  himself  held  not  very  long  ago
views  resembling  those  which  the  '  moderate '  critic  holds  now,  and  the  latter
may  find  his  precautionary  tests  end  in  his  adopting,  as  nearer  approximations
to  truth,  views  that  now  seem  to  him  difficult.  Prof.  Robertson  Smith's  views  of
ten  years  ago,  or  more,  may,  at  the  present  day,  appear  to  be  '  moderate '  criti
cism  ;  but  when  he  formulated  them  he  was  in  the  vanguard  of  critics,  and
there  is  no  reason  to  think  that,  if  he  had  lived,  and  devoted  much  of  his  time
to  biblical  criticism,  his  ardour  would  have  waned,  and  his  precedence  passed  to
others.

There  are,  no  doubt,  some  critical  theories  which  could  not  consistently  have
been  represented  in  the  present  work ;  and  that,  it  may  be  remarked,  suggests
one  of  the  reasons  why  Prof.  Robertson  Smith's  early  Encyclopedia  Britannica
article,  BIBLE,  could  not  have  been  republished,  even  by  himself.  When  he  wrote
it  he  was  still  not  absolutely  sure  about  the  chronological  place  of  P  (Priestly
Code).  He  was  also  still  under  the  influence  of  the  traditional  view  as  to  the
barrenness  and  unoriginality  of  the  whole  post-exilic  period.  Nor  had  he  faced
the  question  of  the  post-exilic  redaction  of  the  prophetic  writings.  The  funda
mental  principles  of  biblical  criticism,  however,  are  assumed  throughout  that  fine
article,  though  for  a  statement  of  these  we  must  turn  to  a  more  mature  production
of  his  pen.  See,  for  example,  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church™,  pp.  16
ff.  (cp  ist  ed.  pp.  24  ff.},  and  notice  especially  the  following  paragraph  on  p.  17  :  —

'  Ancient  books  coming  down  to  us  from  a  period  many  centuries  before  the  invention  of
printing  have  necessarily  undergone  many  vicissitudes.  Some  of  them  are  presented  only  in
imperfect  copies  made  by  an  ignorant  scribe  of  the  dark  ages.  Others  have  been  disfigured  by
editors,  who  mixed  up  foreign  matter  with  the  original  text.  Very  often  an  important  book
fell  altogether  out  of  sight  for  a  long  time,  and  when  it  came  to  light  again  all  knowledge  of  its
origin  was  gone  ;  for  old  books  did  not  generally  have  title-pages  and  prefaces.  And,  when
such  a  nameless  roll  was  again  brought  into  notice,  some  half-informed  reader  or  transcriber
was  not  unlikely  to  give  it  a  new  title  of  his  own  devising,  which  was  handed  down  thereafter
as  if  it  had  been  original.  Or  again,  the  true  meaning  and  purpose  of  a  book  often  became
obscure  in  the  lapse  of  centuries,  and  led  to  false  interpretations.  Once  more,  antiquity  has
handed  down  to  us  many  writings  which  are  sheer  forgeries,  like  some  of  the  Apocryphal  books,
or  the  Sibylline  oracles,  or  those  famous  Epistles  of  Phalaris,  which  formed  the  subject  of
Bentlefs  great  critical  essay.  In  all  such  cases  the  historical  critic  must  destroy  the  received
view,  in  order  to  establish  the  truth.  He  must  review  doubtful  titles,  purge  out  interpolations,
expose  forgeries  ;  but  he  does  so  only  to  manifest  the  truth,  and  exhibit  the  genuine  remains  of
antiquity  in  their  real  character.  A  book  that  is  really  old  and  really  valuable  has  nothing  to
fear  from  the  critic,  whose  labours  can  only  put  its  worth  in  a  clearer  light,  and  establish  its
authority  on  a  surer  basis.'

The  freedom  which  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  generously  left  to  his  successors
has,  with  much  reluctance,  yet  without  hesitation,  on  the  part  of  the  editors,  been
exercised  in  dealing  with  the  articles  which  he  wrote  for  the  Encyclopaedia
Britannica.  The  editors  are  well  assured  that  he  would  have  approved  their
conduct  in  this  respect.  Few  scholars,  indeed,  would  refrain  from  rewriting,  to  a
large  extent,  the  critical  articles  which  they  had  produced  some  years  previously ;
and  this,  indeed,  is  what  has  been  done  by  several  contributors  who  wrote  biblical
articles  for  the  former  Encyclopaedia.  The  procedure  of  those  who  have  revised
our  friend's  articles  has  in  fact  been  as  gentle  and  considerate  as  possible.  Where
these  articles  seemed  to  have  been  destined  by  himself  for  some  degree  of  per-


PREFACE


I


manence,  they  have  been  retained,  and  carefully  revised  and  brought  up  to  date.
Some  condensation  has  sometimes  been  found  necessary.  The  original  articles
were  written  for  a  public  very  imperfectly  imbued  with  critical  principles,  whereas
now,  thanks  to  his  own  works  and  to  those  of  other  progressive  scholars,  Bible
students  are  much  more  prepared  than  formerly  to  benefit  by  advanced  teaching.
There  is  also  a  certain  amount  of  new  material  from  Prof.  Smith's  pen  (in  two  or
three  cases  consisting  of  quotations  from  the  MS  of  the  second  and  third  courses
of  Burnett  Lectures),  but  much  less,  unfortunately,  than  had  been  expected.

Freedom  has  also  been  used  in  taking  some  fresh  departures,  especially  in
two  directions  —  viz.,  in  that  of  textual  criticism  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  that
of  biblical  archaeology.  The  object  of  the  editors  has  been,  with  the  assistance
of  their  contributors,  not  only  to  bring  the  work  up  to  the  level  of  the  best
published  writings,  but,  wherever  possible,  to  carry  the  subjects  a  little  beyond
the  point  hitherto  reached  in  print.  Without  the  constant  necessity  of  investi
gating  the  details  of  the  text  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  would  be  hard  for  any  one
to  realise  the  precarious  character  of  many  details  of  the  current  biblical  archae
ology,  geography,  and  natural  history,  and  even  of  some  not  unimportant  points
in  the  current  Old  Testament  theology.  Entirely  new  methods  have  not  indeed
been  applied ;  but  the  methods  already  known  have  perhaps  been  applied  with
somewhat  more  consistency  than  before.  With  regard  to  archaeology,  such  a
claim  can  be  advanced  only  to  a  slight  extent.  More  progress  perhaps  has  been
made  of  late  years  in  the  field  of  critical  archaeology  than  in  that  of  textual  criti
cism.  All,  therefore,  that  was  generally  necessary  was  to  make  a  strong  effort
to  keep  abreast  of  recent  archaeological  research  both  in  Old  Testament  and  in
New  Testament  study.

The  fulness  of  detail  with  which  the  data  of  the  Versions  have  been  given
may  provoke  some  comment.  Experience  has  been  the  guide  of  the  editors,  and
they  believe  that,  though  in  the  future  it  will  be  possible  to  give  these  data  in  a
more  correct,  more  critical,  and  more  condensed  form,  the  student  is  best  served
at  present  by  being  supplied  as  fully  as  possible  with  the  available  material.  It
may  also  be  doubted  by  some  whether  there  is  not  too  much  philology.  Here,
again,  experience  has  directed  the  course  to  be  pursued.  In  the  present  transi
tional  stage  of  lexicography,  it  would  have  been  undesirable  to  rest  content  with
simply  referring  to  the  valuable  new  lexicons  which  are  now  appearing,  or  have
already  appeared.

With  regard  to  biblical  theology,  the  editors  are  not  without  hope  that  they
have  helped  to  pave  the  way  for  a  more  satisfactory  treatment  of  that  important
subject  which  is  rapidly  becoming  the  history  of  the  movement  of  religious  life  and
thought  within  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  church  (the  phrase  may  be  inaccurate,
but  is  convenient).  Systems  of  Prophetic,  Pauline,  Petrine,  Johannine  theology
have  had  their  day ;  it  is  perhaps  time  that  the  Bible  should  cease  to  be  regarded
as  a  storehouse  of  more  or  less  competing  systems  of  abstract  thought.  Unfor
tunately  the  literary  and  historical  criticism  of  the  New  Testament  is  by  no  means
as  far  advanced  as  that  of  the  Old  Testament.  At  no  very  distant  date  a  real
history  of  the  movement  of  religious  life  and  thought  in  the  earlier  period  may
be  possible.  For  such  a  history  for  the  later  period  we  shall  have  to  wait  longer,
if  we  may  infer  anything  from  the  doubtless  inevitable  defects  of  the  best  existing
handbook  of  New  Testament  theology,  that  of  the  able  veteran  critic,  H.  J.  Holtz-
mann.  The  editors  of  the  present  work  are  keenly  interested  in  the  subject  at


xii  PREFACE

present  called  'Biblical  Theology'  ;  but,  instead  of  attempting  what  is  at  present
impossible,  they  have  thought  it  better  _to  leave  some  deficiencies  which  future
editors  will  probably  find  it  not  difficult  to  supply.  They  cannot,  however,  con
clude  this  section  without  a  hearty  attestation  of  the  ever-increasing  love  for  the
Scriptures  which  critical  and  historical  study,  when  pursued  in  a  sufficiently  com
prehensive  sense,  appears  to  them  to  produce.  The  minutest  details  of  biblical
research  assume  a  brightness  not  their  own  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  great
truths  in  which  the  movement  of  biblical  religion  culminates.  May  the  reader  find
cause  to  agree  with  them  !  This  would  certainly  have  been  the  prayerful  aspira
tion  of  the  beloved  and  lamented  scholar  who  originated  this  Encyclopaedia.

To  the  contributors  of  signed  articles,  and  to  those  who  have  revised  and
brought  up  to  date  the  articles  of  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  and  other  deceased
scholars,  it  may  seem  almost  superfluous  to  render  thanks  for  the
C  me^6  ^"  k^P  they  have  so  generously  given.  It  constitutes  a  fresh  bond
between  scholars  of  different  countries  and  religious  communions
which  is  surely  of  happiest  augury.  But  the  special  services  of  the  various  mem
bers  of  the  editorial  staff  require  specific  acknowledgment,  which  the  editors  have
much  pleasure  in  making.  Mr.  Hope  W.  Hogg  became  a  contributor  to  the
Encyclopaedia  Biblica  in  1894,  and  in  1895  became  a  regular  member  of  the  edito
rial  staff.  To  his  zeal,  energy,  and  scholarship  the  work  has  been  greatly  indebted
in  every  direction.  Mr.  Stanley  A.  Cook  joined  the  staff  in  1896,  and  not  only
has  contributed  various  signed  articles,  which  to  the  editors  appear  to  give  promise
of  fine  work  in  the  future,  but  also  has  had  a  large  share  in  many  of  those  that  are
of  composite  authorship  and  unsigned.  Mr.  Maurice  A.  Canney  joined  the  staff
in  1898;  he  also  has  contributed  signed  articles,  and  has  been  eminently  helpful
in  every  way,  especially  in  the  reading  of  the  proofs.  Finally,  the  editors  desire
to  acknowledge  their  very  special  obligations  to  the  Rev.  Henry  A.  Redpath,  M.A.,
editor  of  the  Concordance  to  the  Septiiagint,  who  placed  his  unrivalled  experience
at  their  disposal  by  controlling  all  the  proofs  at  a  certain  stage  with  special
reference  to  the  LXX  readings.

T. K.  CHEYNE.

J.  SUTHERLAND  BLACK.

2o//i  September  1899.


POSTSCRIPT

IF  in  what  was  written  more  than  three  years  ago  by  way  of  preface  to  the
Encyclopedia  Biblica  any  modification  were  to  be  thought  desirable,  it  would
chiefly  perhaps  be  in  the  sentences  devoted  to  the  immediate  prospects  of
Biblical  Theology.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more  obvious  that  the  yearly
advancing  study  of  the  apocryphal  and  apocalyptic  Jewish  literature  is  destined
to  have  considerable  effect  within  the  near  future  on  the  treatment  of  the
religious  ideas  of  both  parts  of  our  Bible.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  the  progress
now  being  made  in  the  investigation  of  the  early  Christian  literature  will  also
turn  to  the  advantage  of  the  Biblical  Theology  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is  on
this  ground  that  the  editors  have  ventured  to  include  in  Vols.  III.  and  IV.
a  number  of  introductory  and  descriptive  articles  connected  with  this  new
subject.  To  meet  a  possible  objection,  it  may  perhaps  be  added  that  the

researches  into  the  original  text  of  the  Old  Testament  with  which  the  name  of
one  of  the  editors  is  specially  connected  are  by  no  means  necessarily  unfavour
able  to  the  study  of  Old  Testament  Theology.  For  even  if  the  religious  contents
of  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  in  their  original  form  should  turn  out  to  be
somewhat  less  rich  and  varied  than  is  agreeable  to  traditional  ideas,  yet  the  text
in  its  present  form,  even  if  not  the  original,  has  an  independent  right  of  existence,
and  the  interpretation  put  upon  this  text  by  Jewish  and  early  Christian  students
deserves  the  most  respectful  attention.  The  Old  Testament  was  surely  not  a
dead  book  to  the  Jews  of  the  great  post-exilic  age,  but  was  full  of  light,  and
susceptible  of  the  most  varied  and  edifying  adaptations.  At  the  same  time,  the
historical  student  may  justly  cherish  the  hope  that  by  the  researches  into  the
underlying  text  of  precious  passages  in  psalms  and  prophecies  (not  to  add,
narratives)  which  have  just  now  been  referred  to,  the  course  of  historical  develop
ment  may  become  more  comprehensible  than  it  has  hitherto  been,  while  those
who  have  the  best  of  all  enthusiasms — the  enthusiasm  for  religion — will  be
stirred  up  to  more  and  more  admiration  of  the  wonderful  dealings  of  God  in  the
religious  training-  of  that  Israel  within  Israel  to  which  the  Christian  church  is

o  c>

under  perpetual  obligations.  The  Editors  would  also  take  this  opportunity

of  expressing  a  natural  regret  that  the  discovery  of  the  '  oldest  code  of  laws  in
the  world,'  that  promulgated  by  Hammurabi  king  of  Babylon  (2285-2242  B.C.),
and  disinterred  in  Dec.  igoi-Jan.  1902  by  M.  J.  de  Morgan  on  the  site  of
the  ancient  Susa,  was  not  made  a  year  or  two  earlier.  This  code  is  the  most
valuable  single  contribution  of  recent  years  to  that  study  of  ancient  Semitic  laws
and  usages  with  which  the  name  of  Robertson  Smith  is  specially  connected,
and  will  not  only  throw  fresh  light  on  the  legal  codes  of  the  Israelites,  but
also  give  a  fresh  impetus  to  the  critical  study  of  the  Hebrew  origines.  On  all


POSTSCRIPT

accounts  they  are  sorry  not  to  have  been  able  to  make  this  new  find  helpful  to
the  readers  of  the  Encyclopedia.

To  attempt  any  discussion  of  the  criticisms,  whether  favourable  or  adverse,
which  have  been  made  upon  the  methods  employed  or  results  set  forth  in  the
Encyclopedia  would  manifestly  be  out  of  place  here.  Other  opportunities  will
occur  ;  and  time,  too,  will  doubtless  exercise  its  mellowing  and  reconciling
influence.  It  may  even  be  hoped  that  the  confusing  practice  of  denominating
some  critics  super-naturalistic,  others  naturalistic,  some  critics  sober  and  safe,
others  extravagant  and  unsafe,  may  soon  pass  away  in  the  light  of  a  fuller  com
prehension  of  the  meaning  of  critical  results,  the  complexity  of  critical  problems,
and  the  variety  of  legitimate  and  necessary  critical  methods.  There  are

some  other  things  of  a  more  general  nature  which  the  editors  would  fain  say  in
all  simplicity  and  earnestness,  but  they  prefer  to  ask  leave  to  quote  a  passage
from  Dr.  Hort's  Introduction  to  the  now  famous  edition  of  the  New  Testament
by  himself  and  Bishop  Westcott,  with  the  spirit  of  which  they  are  in  deepest
sympathy,  and  the  expressions  of  which,  especially  in  the  closing  sentences,  they
can  heartily  adopt  as  their  own.

'  //  only  remains  to  express  an  earnest  hope  that  whatever  labour  we  have  been  allowed  to
contribute  towards  the  ascertainment  of  the  truth  of  the  letter  may  also  be  alloived,  in  ways
which  must  for  the  most  part  be  invisible  to  ourselves,  to  contribute  towards  strengthening,
correcting,  and  extending  human  apprehension  of  the  larger  truth  of  the  spirit.  Others
assuredly  in  due  time  will  prosecute  the  task  with  better  resources  of  knowledge  and  skill,  and
amend  the  faults  and  defects  of  our  processes  and  results.  To  be  faithful  to  such  light  as  could
be  enjoyed  in  our  oivn  day  was  the  utmost  that  we  could  desire.  How  far  we  have  fallen  short
of  t/iis  standard,  we  are  well  aware :  yet  we  are  bold  to  say  that  none  of  the  shortcomings  are
due  to  lack  of  anxious  and  watchful  sincerity.  An  implicit  confidence  in  all  truth,  a  keen  sense
of  its  variety,  and  a  deliberate  dread  of  shutting  out  truth  as  yet  unknmvn  are  no  security
against  some  of  the  wandering  lights  that  are  apt  to  beguile  a  critic  ;  but,  in  so  far  as  they  are
obeyed,  they  at  least  quench  every  inclination  to  guide  criticism  into  delivering  such  testimonv  as
may  be  to  the  supposed  advantage  of  truth  already  inherited  or  acquired.  Critics  of  the  Bible,
if  they  have  been  taught  by  the  Bible,  are  unable  to  forget  that  the  duty  of  guileless  workman
ship  is  never  superseded  by  any  other.'1

In  conclusion,  the  Editors  desire  anew  to  express  their  gratitude  for  the  in
valuable  services  of  the  members  of  the  editorial  staff — Messrs.  Hogg,  Cook,  and
Canney — which  have  been  continued  with  unabated  zeal  to  the  termination  of
the  work  ;  as  also,  their  great  indebtedness  to  Dr.  Redpath  for  having  read  the
proofs  with  a  special  reference  to  the  readings  of  the  LXX.  In  connection  with
the  maps  their  thanks  are  due  not  only  to  the  authors  of  various  articles  to  which
these  relate,  but  also  to  Prof.  Max  Miiller,  particularly  for  help  in  the  preparation
of  the  map  of  Syria  according  to  the  Egyptian  monuments,  to  Col.  Billerbeck  for
two  maps  of  Syria  according  to  cuneiform  documents,  and  in  a  very  special
degree  to  Mr.  (now  Prof.)  Hogg,  who  has  throughout  superintended  the  whole
map-work  in  the  Encyclopedia,  including  the  indexing.

T.  K.  C.
J.  S.  B.
2  7/7;  March,  1903.


GENERAL EXPLANATIONS

THE  labour  that  has  been  bestowed  on  even  minor  matters  in  the  preparation  of  this  Encyclopedia
seemed  to  be  warranted  by  the  hope  that  it  might  be  found  useful  as  a  students'  handbook.  Its
convenient  use  will  be  facilitated  by  attention  to  the  principles  that  have  been  adopted  in  regard  to
the  following  matters.

1.  Classes  of  Articles.  —  The  following  notes  will  give  a  general  idea  what  the  reader  may
expect  to  find  and  where  to  look  for  it :  —

1.  Proper  Names.  —  Every  proper  name  in  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament  canons  and  the
OT  Apocrypha  (Authorised  Version  or  Revised  Version,  text  or  margin)  is  represented  by  an
article-heading  in  Clarendon  type,  the  substantive  article  being  usually  given  under  the  name  as
found  in  the  AV  text. The  printing  of  Adoraiin,  on  the  same  line  as  ADOKA  (col. 71),  and
Adullamite,  three  lines  below  ADULLAM  (col.  73),  in  bold  black  type,  are  examples  of  a  means  of
saving  space.

ii.  Books.  —  Every  book  in  the  OT  and  the  NT  canons  and  the  OT  Apocrypha  is  discussed
in  a  special  article  —  e.g.j  Acts,  Chronicles,  Deuteronomy.  The  'Song  of  Solomon1  is  dealt  with
under  the  title  CANTICLES,  and  the  last  book  in  the  NT  under  APOCALYPSE.

iii.  General  Articles. — With  the  view,  amongst  other  things,  of  securing  the  greatest  pos
sible  brevity,  many  matters  have  been  treated  in  general  articles,  the  minor  headings  being  dealt
with  concisely  by  the  help  of  cross-references.  Such  general  articles  are:  ABI  (NAMES  WITH),
AGRICULTURE,  APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE,  APOCRYPHA,  ARMY,  BAKEMEATS,  BIRDS.  BREAD,
CAINITES,  CANON,  CATTLE,  CHARIOT,  CHRONOLOGY,  CITY  ;  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  HOLY  AND
PROFANE  ;  COLOURS,  CONDUITS  AND  RESERVOIRS,  COOKING  AND  COOKING  UTENSILS,  CUTTINGS
OF  THE  FLESH,  DISPERSION,  DIVINATION,  DRESS.

iv.  Other  Subjects.  —  The  following  are  examples  of  other  important  headings  :  —  ADAM  AND
EVE,  ANGEL,  ANTICHRIST,  ASHERAH,  AZAZEL,  BABEL  (TOWER  OF),  BEHEMOTH  AND  LEVIATHAN,
BLESSINGS  AND  CURSINGS,  CALF  (GOLDEN),  CHERUB,  CHRISTIAN  (NAME  OF).  CIRCUMCISION,
COMMUNITY  OF  GOODS.  COUNCIL  OF  JERUSALEM,  COVENANT,  CREATION.  DANCE.  DECALOGUE,
DELUGE,  DEMONS.  DRAGON.

v.  Things.  —  The  Encyclopedia  Biblica  is  professedly  a  dictionary  of  things,  not  words,  and
a  great  effort  has  been  made  to  adhere  rigidly  to  this  principle.  Even  where  at  first  sight  the  rule
seems  to  have  been  neglected,  it  will  generally  be  found  that  this  is  not  really  the  case.  The
only  way  to  tell  the  English  reader  what  has  to  be  told  about  (e.g.)  CHAINS  is  to  distinguish  the
various  things  that  are  called,  or  should  have  been  called,  '  chain '  in  the  English  Version,  and
refer  him  to  the  articles  where  they  are  dealt  with.

vi. Mere  Cross-references  (see  above,  1,  i. ;  and  below,  2)-

2.  Method  of  Cross-References.  —  A  very  great  deal  of  care  has  been  bestowed  on  the
cross-references,  because  only  by  their  systematic  use  could  the  necessary  matter  be  adequately
dealt  with  within  the  limits  of  one  volume. These  references  have  made  possible  a  conciseness
that  is  not  attained  at  the  expense  of  incompleteness,  repetition  of  the  same  matter  under  different
headings  being  reduced  to  a  minimum. For  this  reason  the  articles  have  been  prepared,  not  in
alphabetical  order,  but  simultaneously  in  all  parts  of  the  alphabet,  being  thereafter  worked  up
together  constantly  and  kept  up  to  date. The  student  may  be  assured,  therefore,  that  the  cross-
references  have  not  been  inserted  at  random  ;  they  have  always  been  verified. If  any  should  be
found  to  be  unwarranted  (no  such  is  known),  it  must  be  because  it  has  been  found  necessary,  after
the  reference  was  made,  to  remove  something  from  the  article  named  to  another  article,
removed  matter  will  no  doubt  be  represented  by  a  cross-reference.

The  method  of  reference  employed  is  as  follows  :  —

i.  Identification  of  Article,  (a)  Long  Names.  — To  save  space  long  headings  have  been
curtailed  in  citations  —  ^.,  APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE  is  cited  as  APOCALYPTIC.


xiv  GENERAL EXPLANATIONS

(b)  Synonymous  Articles.  —  Persons  or  places  of  the  same  name  are  ranged  as  I,  2,  3,  etc.
(Arabic  numerals),  under  a  common  heading  and  cited  accordingly.  In  other  cases  (and  even  in
the  former  case  when,  as  in  ADNAH  in  col.  67,  one  English  spelling  represents  different  Hebrew
spellings),  the  articles  usually  have  separate  headings,  in  which  case  they  are  cited  as  i.,  ii.,  iii.,  etc.
(Roman  numerals),  although  they  are  not  so  marked.  Usually  geographical  articles  precede  bio
graphical,  and  persons  precede  books.  Thus  SAMUEL  i.,  2  is  the  second  person  called  Samuel ;
SAMUEL  ii.  is  the  article  SAMUEL,  BOOKS  OF.  If  a  wrong  number  should  be  found  the  explanation
will  be  not  that  it  was  not  verified,  but  that  the  article  referred  to  is  one  of  a  very  small  number  in
which  the  original  order  of  synonymous  articles  had  to  be  changed :  the  precautions  always  taken  in
such  circumstances  must  have  failed  in  this  case.  Thus  the  BERED  referred  to  in  the  article  ALUSH
is  now  BERED  i.,  i,  not,  as  is  stated  in  the  earlier  impressions,  BERED  ii.,  i.

ii.  Indication  of  Place  in  Article  Cited.  —  Articles  of  any  length  are  divided  into  numbered
sections  (§§  I,  2,  etc.)  indicated  by  insets  containing  a  descriptive  word  or  phrase.  As  con
venience  of  reference  is  the  great  aim,  the  descriptive  phrases  are  limited  to,  at  most,  three  or
four  words,  and  the  sections  are  numbered  consecutively.  Logical  subordination  of  sections,
therefore,  cannot  appear.  Divisions  larger  than  sections  are  sometimes  indicated  in  the  text  by
I..  II.,  etc..  and  subdivisions  of  sections  by  letters  and  numbers  (a,  b,  c\  a,  (3,  y;  i.,  ii.,  iii.).
References  like  (BENJAMIN,  §  9,  ii.  ft)  are  freely  used.  Most  of  the  large  articles  (e.g.,  APOCALYPTIC
LITERATURE,  CHRONOLOGY)  have  prefixed  to  them  a  table  of  contents.

iii.  Manner  of  Citation.  —  The  commonest  method  is  (see  DAVID,  §  ii,  \c\  ii.).  EZRA  (q.v.,
ii.  §  9)  means  the  article  EZRA-NEHEMIAH,  BOOK  OF,  §  9.  Sometimes,  however,  the  capitals  or
the  q.v.  may  be  dispensed  with.  CHAINS  printed  in  small  capitals  in  the  middle  of  an  article
would  mean  that  there  is  an  article  on  that  term,  but  that  it  hardly  merits  q.v.  from  the  present
point  of  view.  In  articles  (generally  on  RV  names)  that  are  mere  cross-references  q.v.  is  generally
omitted;  so,  e.g.,  in  ABADIAS  in  col.  3.

3.  Typographical  Devices,  i-  Size  of  Type.  —  (a)  Letters.  —  Two  sizes  of  type  are  used,
and  considerable  care  has  been  devoted  to  the  distribution  of  the  small-type  passages.  Usually
the  general  meaning  of  an  article  can  be  caught  by  reading  simply  the  large-type  parts.  The
small-type  passages  generally  contain  such  things  as  proofs  of  statements,  objections,  more  techni
cal  details.  In  these  passages,  and  in  footnotes  and  parentheses,  abbreviations  (see  below,  p.
xviii^".),  which  are  avoided  as  much  as  possible  elsewhere,  are  purposely  used,  (b)  Numbers. —
Two  sizes  of  Arabic  numerals  are  used.  (Note  that  the  smallest  6  and  8  are  a  different  shape  from
the  next  larger  0  and  8.)  In  making  references,  when  only  the  volume  is  given,  it  is  usually  cited
by  a  Roman  number.  Pages  are  cited  by  Arabic  numbers  except  where  (as  is  often  the  case)
pages  of  a  preface  are  marked  with  Roman  numbers.  When  numbers  of  two  ranks  are  required,
two  sizes  of  Arabic  numbers  (5  5)  are  used  whether  the  reference  be  to  book  and  chapter,  volume
and  page,  or  section  and  line.  If  three  ranks  are  needed,  Roman  numbers  are  prefixed  (v.  o  5).

ii.  Italics. — Italic  type  is  much  used  in  citing  foreign  words.  In  geographical  articles,  as  a
rule,  the  printing  of  a  modern  place-name  in  italics  indicates  that  the  writer  of  the  article  identifies
it  with  the  place  under  discussion.  For  the  significance  of  the  different  kinds  of  type  in  the  map
of  Assyria  see  the  explanations  at  the  foot  of  the  map.  On  the  two  kinds  of  Greek  type  see
below,  4  ii-  (&)•  On  the  Greek  MS  D  as  distinguished  from  D,  see  below,  4  ii-  d.

iii.  Small  Capitals.  —  Small  Roman  capitals  are  used  in  two  ways:  (i)  in  giving  the  equiva
lent  in  RV  for  the  name  in  AV,  or  vice  versa,  and  (2)  in  giving  a  cross-reference  (see  above,  2  iii-)-
On  the  use  of  small  italic  capitals  see  below,  4  ii.  b.

iv.  Symbols.  —  (a)  Index  Figures.  —  In  'almost  always6  clear.'  the  6  indicates  footnote  6.
In  'Introd.(6)  'the  6  means  sixth  edition.  On  the  2  in  ;D.,'  etc.  see  below,  p.  xviii.^".

(b)  Asterisk.  —  B*  means  the  original  scribe  of  codex  B. If  the  Egyptian  dobet  were  printed
*dobet  the  *  would  mark  the  word  as  hypothetical  in  form  (e.g.,  uncertain  vocalisation), v.  5*  means
7>.  5  (partly).

(c)  Dagger.  —  A  dagger  f  is  used  to  indicate  that  all  the  passages  where  a  word  occurs  are
cited. The  context  must  decide  whether  the  English  word  or  the  original  is  meant.

(d)  Sign  of  Equality.  — '  AALAR.  i  Esd.  5  3e  AV  =  Ezra  2  59  IMMER,  i.,'  means  that  the  two
/erses  quoted  are  recensions  of  the  same  original,  and  that  what  is  called  Aalar  in  the  one  is
called  Immer  in  the  other,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  first  of  the  articles  entitled  IMMER.

(f)  Sign  of  Parallelism.  —  ||  is  the  adjective  corresponding  to  the  verb  =  .  Thus  :  '  Aalar  of
i  Esd.  5  36  A V  appears  as  Immer  in  ||  Ezra  2  59.'  ||  also  denotes  Hebrew  'parallelism.'  See,  e.g.,
CLEAN  and  UNCLEAN,  §  i  (3).

(/')  Other  devices.  —  '99  means  1899.  i  Ch.  6  81  [66]  means  that  verse  8r  in  the  English
version  represents  that  numbered  66  in  Hebrew  texts.  -^  is  used  to  indicate  the  '  root '  of  a
word.


GENERAL EXPLANATIONS


xv


v.  Punctuation.  —  As  a  rule  commas  are  not  used  between  citations,  thus  :  2  K.  0  21 25  Is.  21  7.
Commas  are  omitted  and  semicolons  or  colons  inserted  whenever  ambiguity  seems  thus  to  be
avoided  —  e.g.,  the  father  Achbor  [i]  is  called  '  Father  of  Baal-hanan  [i]  king  of  Edom,'  and  the
son  Baal-hanan  [i]  is  called  'ben  Achbor  [i]  ;  one  of  the  kings  of  Edom.1

4.  Text-Critical  Apparatus.  —  As  all  sound  investigation  must  be  based,  not  on  the  ancient
texts  as  they  lie  before  the  student,  but  on  what  he  believes  to  be  the  nearest  approach  he  can  make
to  their  original  reading,  the  soundness  of  every  text  is  weighed,  and  if  need  be,  discussed,  before
it  is  used  in  the  Encyclopedia  Biblica.

i.  Traditional  Original  Text.  —  In  quoting  the  traditional  Hebrew  text  the  editions  of  Baer
and  of  Ginsburg  have  been  relied  on  as  a  rule ;  similarly  in  the  case  of  the  New  Testament,  the
texts  of  Tischendorf  and  of  Westcott  and  Hort.

ii.  Evidence  of  Versions.  —  The  Vulgate  (ed.  Heyse-Tischendorf ),  the  Syriac  (ed.  Lee,  and
London  Polyglott ;  for  the  Apocrypha,  Lagarde  and  the  minor  Greek  versions  (Field,  Hexapla  ;
Hatch-Redpath,  Concordance)  have  been  quoted  quite  freely ;  the  testimony  of  the  Septuagint  has
been  attended  to  on  every  point.

In  exceptional  cases  '  Holmes  and  Parsons '  has  been  consulted ;  ordinarily  Swete's  manual
edition  (including  the  variants)  and  Lagarde's  Pars  Prior  have  been  considered  sufficient.  In
general  (for  the  main  exception  see  next  paragraph)  only  variations  of  some  positive  interest  or  im
portance  have  been  referred  to.  Almost  invariably  a  quotation  from  the  LXX  is  followed  by  sym
bols  indicating  the  authorities  cited  (thus  moi  [BAL]).  This  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  in
some  other  MS  or  MSS  a  different  reading  is  found;  it  is  simply  a  guarantee  that  Swete's  digest  of
readings  and  Lagarde  have  both  been  consulted.  The  formula  [BAL],  or  (§UAL>  standing  alone
means  that  the  editors  found  no  variant  in  Swete  or  Lagarde  to  report.  In  the  parts,  therefore,
where  Swete  cites  X  or  other  MSS  as  well  as  BA,  BAL  includes  them  unless  the  context  indicates
otherwise.  When  BAL  stands  alone  the  meaning  is  everywhere  the  same ;  it  is  a  summary  report
of  agreement  in  Swete  and  Lagarde.

Proper  names  have  been  felt  to  demand  special  treatment ;  the  aim  has  been  to  give  under
each  name  the  readings  of  Lagarde  and  all  the  variants  of  BJ<A  as  cited  in  Swete.  The  com
monest,  or  a  common,  form  for  each  witness  is  given  at  the  head  of  the  article,  and  this  is  followed
at  once  or  in  the  course  of  the  article  by  such  variants  as  there  are.  Where  all  the  passages  con
taining  a  given  name  are  cited  in  the  article,  the  apparatus  of  Greek  readings  (as  in  Swete  and
Lagarde)  may  be  considered  absolutely  complete.  In  other  cases,  completeness,  though  aimed  at,
has  not  been  found  possible.

The  distinction  between  declinable  and  indeclinable  forms  has  generally  been  observed ;  but
different  cases  of  the  same  declinable  form  have  not  as  a  rule  (never  in  the  case  of  common  nouns)
been  taken  note  of.  Where  part  of  one  name  has  been  joined  in  the  LXX  to  the  preceding  or  suc
ceeding  name,  the  intruding  letters  have  usually  been  given  in  square  brackets,  though  in  some  very
obvious  cases  they  may  have  been  ignored.

When  MSS  differ  only  in  some  giving  i  and  others  giving  et  this  is  indicated  concisely  thus :
(a(3ci.a  [B],  a/2ia  [AL],1  becomes  'a/3[e]ta  [BAL].1  Similarly,  -r.,  -TT.  becomes  -[T]T.

Much  care  has  been  bestowed  on  the  readings,  and  every  effort  has  been  made  to  secure  the
highest  attainable  accuracy.  Naturally  the  Hatch-Redpath  Concordance  to  tJie  Septuagint  has
been  freely  used.  As  has  been  already  stated,  however  (p.  xii),  the  Encyclopcedia  Biblica  has  also
had  the  benefit  of  Dr.  Redpath's  personal  help.  Unfortunately,  misprints  and  other  inaccuracies  —
inaccuracies  sometimes  appearing  for  the  first  time  after  the  last  proofreading  —  are  especially  liable
to  occur  in  a  work  of  this  kind.  Corrections  of  errors,  however  minute,  addressed  to  the  publishers,
will  always  be  gratefully  received.

Some  typographical  details  require  to  be  explained  :  —

(a)  In  giving  proper  names,  initial  capitals,  breathings,  and  accents  are  dispensed  with;  they
were  unknown  in  the  oldest  MSS  (cp  Swete,  vol.  I  p.  xiii  •2).

(fr)  The  Greek  readings  at  the  head  of  an  article  are  given  in  uncials,  and  the  Vulgate  read
ings  in  small  italic  capitals ;  elsewhere  ordinary  type  is  used.

(c)  The  first  Greek  reading  is  given  in  full ;  all  others  are  abbreviated  as  much  as  possible.
Letters  suppressed  at  the  beginning  of  a  word  are  represented  by  a  dash,  letters  at  the  end  by  a
period.  In  every  case  the  abbreviated  form  is  to  be  completed  by  reference  to  the  Greek  form
immediately  preceding,  whether  that  is  given  in  full  or  not.  Thus,  e.g.,  '  afte^aarru/j.,  (3.  .  .  .  TTI/X,
-TTtw,  /3eAcra ' x  means  '  a/JeAouTTtt/x,,  /3f.X.cra.TTi/j.,  /JcAoraTTeiv,  /ifcAcra.'  That  is  to  say,  the
abbreviated  form  repeats  a  letter  (or  if  necessary  more)  of  the  form  preceding.  Two  exceptions
are  sometimes  made.  The  dash  sometimes  represents  the  'whole  of  the  preceding  form  —  e.g.,  in.

1 '  Bf\<ra.'  with  a  period,  as  it  stood  in  early  impressions  of  the  art.  ABEL-SHITTIM,  would  mean  0f \<ra.TTfiv.


XVI


GENERAL EXPLANATIONS


cases  like  a/?ta,  -s  —  and  one  letter  has  sometimes  been  simply  substituted  for  another:  e.g.,  v  for
H  in  ei/u..  -v. These  exceptions  can  hardly  lead  to  ambiguity.

{(i)  The  following  are  the  symbols  most  frequently  quoted  from  Swete's  digest  with  their
meaning :  —

D  —  testimony  of  the  Grabe-Owen  collation  of  D
before  D  was  partly  destroyed  (see  Swete,
vol.  i  p.  xxiv).

Z*8'1  =  readings  inferred  from  the  collation  e  silentio.

^c.a  =  a  corrector  of  X  belonging  to  the  yth  cent.  (Sw.,
vol.  2  p.  viii ;  cp  vol.  i  p.  xxi).


* =  original  scribe.

1 =  his  own  corrections.

a,  b,  c  =  other  correctors.

»'> =  first  corrector  confirmed  by  second.

a?  b? =  a  or  b.

a?  b =  b,  perhaps  also  a,

a(vid)  =  prob.  a.

a  rid  =  a>  jf  it  be  a  bonafide  correction  at  all.


=  corrector  of  Xc-n  or  X  * ;  see  Sw.,  vol.  2  p.  viii.
=  corrector  of  Xc-a  or  X*;  see  Sw.,  vol.  i  p.  xxi.
=  B  as  in  Vercellone  and  Cozza's  facsimile  ed.


(e)  The  following  are  the  MSS  most  commonly  cited:  —

X Sinaiticus  (cp  Swete,  vol.  i  p.  xx).

A Alexandrinus  (Swete,  vol.  i  p.  xxii).

B Vaticanus  (Swete,  vol.  i  p.  xvii).

C Cod. Ephraemi Syri rescriptus Parisiensis

(Swete,  vol.  2  p.  xiii).
D Cod.  Cottonianus  Geneseos  (Swete,  vol.  i  p.

xxiii).
E Cod.  Bodleianus  Geneseos  (Sw.,  vol.  i  p.  xxvi).


F Cod.  Ambrosianus  (Swete,  vol.  i  p.  xxvi).

87 Cod.  Chisianus  (Swete,  vol.  3  p.  xii;.

Syr.  Cod.  Syro-Hexaplaris  Ambrosianus (Swete,  vol.  3

p.  xiii).

V Cod.  Venetus  (=  23,  Parsons ;  Swete,  vol.  3  p.  xiv).
Q Cod.  Marchalianus  (Swete,  vol.  3  p.  vii).
T Cod. rescriptus Cryptoferratensis (Swete,  vol.  3

p.ix/).


5.  Proper  Name  Articles.  —  Proper  name  articles  usually  begin  thus. The  name  is  followed
by  a  parenthesis  giving  (i)  the  original; (2)  when  necessary,  the  number  of  the  section  in  the
general  article  NAMES  where  the  name  in  question  is  discussed  or  cited ; (3)  a  note  on  the  ety
mology  or  meaning  of  the  (personal)  name  with  citation  of  similar  names ; (4)  the  readings  of
the  versions  (see  above,  4  ii-)- See  for  an  example AARON. The Hebrew 'ben1  ('b."), 'son
of,' '  b'ne,1 'sons of is often used, partly for brevity and to avoid certain ambiguities (see
above,  3  v-)  and  partly  because  of  its  indefinite  meaning.

6.  Geographical Articles.  —  The  interpretation  of  place-names  is  discussed in  the  article
NAMES. The  maps  that  are  issued  with  Volume  I.  are  the  district  of  Damascus,  the  environs  of
Babylon,  knd  '  Syria,  Assyria,  and  Babylonia1  (between  cols.  352  and  353). The  last-mentioned
is  mainly  designed  to  illustrate  the  non-Palestinian  geography  of  the  Old  Testament. It  is  made
use  of  to  show  the  position  of  places  outside  of  Palestine  mentioned  in  Volume  I.  which  happen  to
fall  within  its  bounds.

In  all  maps  biblical  names  are  assigned  to  sites  only  when  the  article  discussing  the  question
regards  the  identification  as  extremely  probable  (the  degree  of  probability  must  be  learned  from  the
article).

The  following  geographical  terms  are  used  in  the  senses  indicated  :  —


Der,  deir,  '  monastery.'
Haj(j),  'pilgrimage  to  Mecca.'
Jebel  (].),'  mountain.'
Kefr,  Kafr,  '  village.'
Khan,  '  caravanserai.'


Khirbet-(Kh.},  'ruins  of  — .'

Nahr  (N.),  '  river.'

Tell,  '  mound  '  (often  containing  ruins).

Wadl  (W.),  'valley,'  'torrent-course.'

Wel'i,  vjely,  '  Mohammedan  saint,'  '  saint's  tomb.'


7.  Transliteration,  etc.  —  Whilst  the  Encyclopaedia  Biblica  is  meant  for  the  student,  other
readers  have  constantly  been  kept  in  view.  Hence  the  frequent  translation  of  Hebrew  and  other
words,  and  the  transliteration  of  words  in  Semitic  languages.  In  certain  cases  transliteration  also
saves  space.  No  effort  has  been  made  at  uniformity  for  its  own  sake.  Intelligibility  has  been
thought  sufficient.  When  pronunciation  is  indicated  —  e.g.,  Behemoth,  Leviathan  —  what  is  meant
is  that  the  resulting  form  is  the  nearest  that  we  can  come  to  the  original  as  represented  by  the
traditional  Hebrew,  so  long  as  we  adhere  to  the  English  spelling.

In  the  case  of  proper  names  that  have  become  in  some  degree  naturalised  in  an  incorrect  form,
that  form  has  been  preserved :  e.g.,  Shalmaneser,  Tiglath-pileser.  Where  there  is  an  alternative,
naturally  the  closer  to  the  original  is  selected:  therefore  Nebuchadrezzar  (with  r  as  in  Ezek.,  etc.),
Nazirite.  Where  there  is  no  naturalised  form  names  are  given  in  exact  transliteration  —  e.g..
Asur-res-isi.  In  the  case  of  Assyrian  names,  hyphens  are  used  to  separate  the  component  parts,
which  begin  with  a  capital  when  they  are  divine  names  —  e.g.,  Puzur-Asur;  but  Asur-dan.

In  the  case  of  modern  (Arabic)  place-names  the  spelling  of  the  author  whose  description  has
been  most  used  has  generally  been  retained,  except  when  it  would  have  been  misleading  to  the
student.  The  diacritical  marks  have  been  checked  or  added  after  verification  in  some  Arabic
source  or  list.


GENERAL EXPLANATIONS


xvn


On  the  Assyrian  alphabet  see  BABYLONIA,  §  6,  and  on  the  Egyptian,  EGYPT,  §  12.  One
point  remains  to  be  explained,  after  which  it  will  suffice  to  set  forth  the  schemes  of  transliteration
in  tabular  form.  The  Hebrew  h  (n)  represents  philologically  the  Arabic  h  and  h,  which  are
absolutely  distinct  sounds.  The  Hebrew  spoken  language  very  likely  marked  the  distinction.
As  the  written  language,  however,  ignores  it.  n  is  always  transliterated  h.  The  Assyrian  guttural
transliterated  with  an  h,  on  the  other  hand,  oftenest  represents  the  Arabic  h,  and  is  therefore
always  transliterated  h  (in  Muss.-Arn.  Did.,  .r,  for  x),  never  h.  There  is  no  h  in  transliterated
Assyrian ;  for  the  written  language  did  not  distinguish  the  Arabic  h  from  the  A  rabic  h,  ',  g,  or  ',
representing  them  all  indifferently  by',  which  accordingly  does  not,  in  transliterated  Assyrian,
mean  simply  X  but  indifferently  S  or  n  or  h  or  tt  or  g.  Hence,  e.g.,  Nabu-nahid  is  simply  one
interpretation  of  Nabu-na'id.  Egyptian,  lastly,  requires  not  only  h,  h,  and  h,  like  Arabic,  but  also  a
fourth  symbol  h  (see  EGYPT,  §  12,  note).


TRANSLITERATION OF HEBREW (AND ARABIC) CONSONANTS


HEBREW.

ARABIC.

HEBREW.

ARABIC.

HEBREW.

ARABIC.

HEBREW.

ARABIC.

S

•

*

'

,

z

•>

z

h

1

J

i

sc

s

ufl

s

:

b
bh  (b)

^

b

n

h

c

h

D

m

r

m

p

k(q)

^

k

n

5

g

^.

J.g

r

h

^

J

gh(g)
d

d

D

t

t

C
1?

s

p

s

t

sh,  s

LT

sh,  s

1

n

dh  (d)
h

*

h

2

y

k

j

y

k

B

P

i

g

n

th(t)

1

w,  v

J

w,  u

kh  k)

£

ph

0

f

Extra  Arabic  Consonants:  ti


,  th,  t_  ;  «.>,  dh,  d  ;  \jO,  d  ;  Jc,  z.


VOWELS


'long'
Heb.  a  e  I  o  u


'  short '
a  e  i  o  u


very  short
a  e  8  or  a  e


almost  a  glide
8  or  e  or  '


Ar. a  I  u  a  (e)  i  (e)  u  (o)

Ar.  diphthongs  :  ai,  ay,  ei,  ey,  e  ;  a\v,  au,  o.

8.  Signatures.  —  Parts  of  articles  as  well  as  whole  articles  bear  the  signature  of  the  author  or
authors,  the  exact  share  contributed  by  each  writer  being  indicated,  where  possible,  at  the  end  thus  :
A.  B.  §§  1-5  ;  c.  D.  §§  6-io.  When  the  signature  would  be  too  complex,  and  in  a  majority  of  the
'minor  articles'  even  otherwise,  no  attempt  has  been  made  to  assign  a  definite  authorship  and
the  articles  rest  on  the  editorial  responsibility.  When  in  such  an  article  there  occurs  a  suggestion
that  seems  to  need  a  signature,  its  author's  initials  are  appended  to  the  whole  article.  A  key  to  the
signatures  will  be  found  on  p.  xxvii.

H.  W.  H.


ABBREVIATIONS, SYMBOLS, AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL

NOTES

The  following  pages  explain  the  abbreviations  that  are  used  in  the  more  technical  parts  (see
above,  p.  xiv  3  i.  [«])  of  the  Encyclopedia,  The  list  does  not  claim  to  be  exhaustive,  and,  for  the
most  part,  it  takes  no  account  of  well-established  abbreviations,  or  such  as  have  seemed  to  be  fairly
obvious.  The  bibliographical  notes  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  welcome  to  the  student.

The  Canonical  and  Apocryphal  books  of  the  Bible  are  usually  referred  to  as  Gen.,  Ex.,  Lev.,
Nu.,  Dt.,  Josh.,  Judg.,  Ruth,  S(a.),  K(i.),  Ch[r.],  Ezra,  Neh.,  Esth.,  Job,  Ps.,  Pr.,  Eccles.,
C(an)t.,  Is.,  Jer.,  Lam.,  Ezek.,  Dan.,  Hos.,  Joel,  Am.,  Ob.,  Jon.,  Mi.,  Nah.,  Hab.,  Zeph.,  Hag.,
Zech.,  Mai. ;  i  Esd.,  4  Esd.  (i.e.,  2  Esd.  of  EV),  Tob.,  Judith,  VVisd.,  Ecclus.,  Baruch,  Epistle  of
Jeremy  (i.e.,  Bar.  ch.  6),  Song  of  the  Three  Children  (Dan.  323),  Susanna,  Bel  and  the  Dragon,
Prayer  of  Manasses,  1-4  Mace. ;  Mt.,  Mk.,  Lk.,  Jn.,  Acts,  Rom.,  Cor.,  Gal.,  Eph.,  Phil.,  Col.,  Thess.,
Tim.,  Tit.,  Philem.,  Heb.,  Ja[s.],  Pet.,  1-3  Jn.,  Jude,  Rev.  [or  Apoc.].

An  explanation  of  some  of  the  symbols  (A,  K,  B,  etc.),  now  generally  used  to  denote  certain
Greek  MSS  of  the  Old  or  New  Testaments,  will  be  found  above,  at  p.  xvi.  It  may  be  added  that
the  bracketed  index  numerals  denote  the  edition  of  the  work  to  which  they  are  attached :  thus
OTJC^  =  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church,  2nd  edition  (exceptions  RPV^AOF^;  see
below).  The  unbracketed  numerals  above  the  line  refer  to  footnotes;  for  those  under  the  line  see
below  under  D2,  E-j,  Jo,  P2.

When  a  foreign  book  is  cited  by  an  English  name  the  reference  is  to  the  English  translation.

It  is  suggested  that  this  work  be  referred  to  as  the  Encyclopaedia  Biblica,  and  that  the
name  may  be  abbreviated  thus :  Ency,  Bib.  or  EBi.  It  will  be  observed  that  all  the  larger
articles  can  be  referred  to  by  the  numbered  sections  (§§)  ;  or  any  passage  can  readily  be  cited
by  column  and  paragraph  or  line.  The  columns  will  be  numbered  continuously  to  the  end
of  the  work.


AbuUv.  .  .  Abulwalid,  the  Jewish  grammarian
(b.  circa  990),  author  of  Book  of
Roots,  etc.

Afad.  .  .  The  Academy :  A  Weekly  Review
of  Literature,  Science,  and  Art.
London,

AF . . . See  A  OF.

AIIT  .  .  Ancient  Hebrew  Tradition.  See
Hommel.

Alt\tesf\. Unt.  . See  Winckler.

Amer.  Journ.  of  American  Journal  of  Philologv,
Phil.  'So/.

A[mer.'\f[ourn.~\  American  Journal  of  Semitic  Lan-
S\em,~\  /,[«;/§-.]  guages  and  Literatures  (continu
ing  Hebraica  ['S4-'95])(  '95 jf.

Am.  Tab.  . .  TheTell-el-Amarna  Letters^  =  A'/>'5)

Ant.  . . . Josephus,  Antiquities.

AOF  .  ,  Allorientalische  Forschungen.  See
Winckler.

Apocr.  Anted.  .  Apocrypha  Anecdota,  1st  and  2nd
series,  published  under  the
general  title  '  Texts  and  Studies  '
at  the  Cambridge  University
Press.

Aq.  .  .  .  Aquila,  Jewish  proselyte  (temp,
revolt  against  Hadrian),  author
of  a  Greek  translation  of  the  Old
Testament.  See  TEXT.

Ar. . . . Arabic.

Aram. . . Aramaic. See  ARAMAIC.

Arch.  .  .  Arc/neology  or  Archaologie.  See
Benzinger,  Nowack.

Ar.  Des. . . Doughty,  Arabia  Deserta,  '88.

.-/;-.  Ileid.,  or  Reste  arabischen  Heidentums.  See

Ileid.  Wellhausen.

Arm. . . Armenian.

Ass.  . . . Assyrian.

Ass.  HWB  .  Assyrisches  Handworterbuch.  See
Delitzsch.

As.  u.  Eur.  .  W.  M.  Muller,  Asien  u.  Europa
nach  altdgyptischen  Denkmalern,
'93-


A  T,  A  Tliche  .  Das  Alte  Testament,  Alttestament-
liche.  Old  Testament.

A  T  Unters.  .  Alttestamentliche  Untersuckungen.
See  Winckler.

AV . . . Authorised  Version.

ben,  Wiie  (son,  sons,  Hebrew).
. Baer  and  Delitzsch's  critical  edition
of  the  Massoretic  Text,  Leipsic,
'69,  and  following  years.

Bab.  . . . Babylonian.

Baed.,  or  Baedeker,  Palestine (ed. Socin),

Baed.  Pal.  (2),  '94; (3>,  '98  (Benzinger)  based

on  4th  German  ed.

Baethg.,  or  Baethgen,  Beitrage  zur  semitischen

Baethg./?t'//r. Religions-gesc/iichte,  '88.

BA  G  .  .  C.  P.  Tiele,  Babylonische-assyrische
Geschichte,  pt.  i.,  '86;  pt.'ii.,  '88.

Ba.AT?.  .  .  Earth,  Die  Nominalbildung  in  den
semitischen  Sprachen,  i.,  '89;  ii.,
'91;  (2) '94.

Baraitha . . See  LAW  LITERATURE.

BDB  Lex.  .  [Brown,  Driver,  Briggs,  Lexicon'}
A  Hebrew  and  English  Lexicon
of  the  Old  Testament,  based  on
the  Lexicon  of  Gesenius,  by  F.
Brown,  with  the  co-operation  of
S.  R.  Driver  and  C.  A.  Briggs,
Oxford,  '92,  and  following  years.

Be.  .  .  .  E.  Bertheau  (1812-88).  InA'Gff;
Richter  u.  Ruth,  '45  ;  <2>  '83;
Chronik,  '54;  <2),  '73;  Esra,
Nehemia  u.  Ester,  '62;  <2',  by
Ryssel,  '87.

Beitr.  .  .  Beitrage,  especially  Baethgen  (as
above).

Beitr.  z.  Ass.  .  Beitrage  zur  Assvriologie  -u.  semi
tischen  Sprachu'issenscJmft ;  ed.
Fried.  Delitzsch  and  PaulHaupt,
i., '90;  ii., '94;  Hi., '98;  iv.  i,'Q9.

Benz.  HA  . I. Benzinger,  Hebr'dische Archa

ologie,  '94.


ABBREVIATIONS, SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xix


Kon.  - A'onige  in  KIIC,  '99.

Bertholet, Std- A.  Bertholet,  Die  Stellung  do-  lu
lling  raelitcn u. der  Juden zu

Fremden,  '96.
Bi. . . . Gustav  Bickell  :

Grundriss  der  Jiebr'dischen
Grammatik,  '6<)/.;  ET,  '77.
Carmina  VT  metrice  etc.,  '82.
Dichtungen  der  I  1  dirtier,  '&2f.
Kritische  Bearbeitnng  de,
Prov.,  '90.

Biblioth.  Sac. . Bibliotheca  Sacra,  '43  ff.
BJ . . • De  Bello  Judaico. See  Josephus.
BL . . . Schenkel, Bibel- Lexicon ; Real
worterbuch  zum Handgebrauch
fiir Geistliche u. Gemeinde-
glieder,  5  vols.,  '69~'75.
Boch. . . S.  Bochart  (1599-1667) :

Geographia Sacra, 1646  ;
Hierozoicon,  sive  de  Animali-
Ints  Scriptures  Sacra,  1663.
Boeckh . . Aug.  Boeckh,  Corpus  Inscr.  Grac.,

4  vols.,  '28-'77.
BOR . . Babvlonian  and  Oriental  Record,

'8'y.f

Bottch. . . Friedrich Bottcher, Ausfuhrlich
Lehr bitch  der  liebr'disclien  Spra-
che,  '66-'68.
Bottg.  Lex. . Bottger,  Lexicon  z.  d.  Schriften  des

Ft.  Josephus,  '79.

BR . .  ' . Biblical  Researches.  See  Robinson.
Bu. . . . Karl  Buckle :

Urgesch. . Die biblische Urgeschichte (Gen.

1-124),  '83.

Ri.Sa. . Die  Bi'icher  Richter  und  Samuel,
Hire  Quellen  undihr  Aufbaujqo.
Sam. . . Samuel  in  SBOT  (Heb.),  '94.
Das  Buck  Hiob  in  //A',  '96.
Klagelieder  and  Hohdied  in  KHC,  '98.
Buhl  . . See  Pal.

Buxt.  Syn.Jud. Johann Buxtorf (1564-1629),

Synagoga  Judaica, 1603,  etc.

Buxt.  Lex.  . Johann  Buxtorf,  son  (1599-1644),

Lexicon Chaldaicum,  Talmudi-
ciim  et  Rabbinicum,  1639,  folio.
Reprint with additions by
Fischer. 2  vols.,  '69  and  '74.

c.,  dr. . . circa.

Calwer  Bib. . Cahver Kirchelexikon, Theologi-

Lex.  sches Handivorterbuch, ed. P.

Zeller,  '89-'93-

c.  Ap. . . contra  Apionem. See  Josephus.
CH  . . . Composition  des  Hexateuchs. See

\Vellhausen.

Chald.  Gen. . The  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,
by  George Smith. A  new  edi
tion,  thoroughly  revised  and  cor
rected  by  A.  H.  Sayce,  '80.
Che.  . . T.  K.  Cheyne :

Proph.  Is. . 7'he  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  2  vols.

('8o-'8l; revised,  (•"",  '89).
Job  and  Sol. Job  and  Solomon,  or  The  Wisdom

of  the  Old  Testament  ('87).

Ps. . . The Book of Psalms, transl.
with comm. ('88); <2>
written (forthcoming).

OPs. . . The  Origin  and  Religious  Con
tents  of  the  Psalter  ('  Bampton
Lectures,'  '89),  '91.
Aids  . . Aids to the Devout Study of

Criticism,  '92.
Founders . Founders of Old Testament

Criticism,  '94.

Intr,  Is. . Introduction to the Book of
Isaiah  ('95).


Is.  SBOT.

«

Jeremiah,  hi

':

1'

Pp

Jew.  Rel.  Lij
CIG

'-

r

CIL

1-
h

CIS

•

Class.  Rev.
Cl.-Gan. .
Rec. .
Co. .
Ezek.

•,

Einl.

es

Hist.

i-

\.

COT
Crit.  Man.

i.

Cr.  Rev. .

/.
0.

D .

D2 .

),

Dalm.  Gram. .

),
o.

Worte  Jesu
Aram.  Lex.

B.
i-

Dav.

Job .
Ezek.

.

;e

^»
li-
r-

DB  .

Is.
m

si.
e-

de  C.  Orig.

n-

\a

of

'->  /

De  Gent.  .
Del.

it!

of

Par.  .
Heb.  Lang.

haiah in SBOT [Eng.],

('97); [Heb.],  ('99).
:  Life  and  Times  in  '  Men  of  the

Bible'  ('88).
'* Jewish  Religious  Life  after  the

Exile,  '98.

Corpus  Inscriplionum  Grcfcantm
(eel.  Dittenberger),  '82^".  See
also  Boeckh.

Corpus  Inscriptionum  Latinarum,
Berlin,  '63,  and  following  years,
14  vols.,  with  supplements.
Corpus Inscriptionum Senntica-
rum,  Paris,  '&iff. Pt.  i.,  Phoeni
cian  and  Punic  inscriptions; pt.
ii.,  Aramaic  inscriptions; pt.  iv.,
S.  Arabian  inscriptions.
The  Classical  Revieiv,  '87  ff.
Clermont-Ganneau  :

A'ecueil  d^Archeologie,  '85  ff.
Cornill  :

L>as Buch des Propheten

Ezechiel,  '86.
Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Testa

ment,  '91  ; <;!),  '96.
History  of  the  People  of  Israel
from  tlie  earliest  times,  '98.
TheCuneiform  Inscriptions  and  the
Old  Testament. See  Schrader.
A.  H.  Sayce,  The  Higher  Criticism
and  the Verdict  of  the Monu
ments,  '94.

Critical  Review  of  Theological  and
Philosophical  Literature  [ed.
Salmond],  '"


Author  of  Deuteronomy  ;  also  used

of  Deuteronomistic  j^assages.
Later  Deuteronomistic  editors.  See

HISTORICAL  LITERATURE.
Dalman,  Grammatik  dcs  jiidisch-
pal'dstinischen  Aram'disch,  '94.
Die  Worte  Jesu,  i.,  '98.
Aramaisch - Neuhebraisches
W'orlerbuch zu Targum,
Talmud, und Midrascli,
Teil  i.,  '97.
A.  B.  Davidson  :

Book  of  Job  in  Camb.  Bible,  '84.
Book  of  Ezekiel  in  Cambridge

Bible,  '92.

W.  Smith,  A  Dictionary  of  the
Bible,  comprising  its  Antiquities,
Biography,  Geography,  and  Xat-
ural  History,  3  vols.,  '63;  DB^,
2nd  ed.  of  vol.  i.,  in  two  parts,

'93-
or,  J. Hastings,  .'/  Dictionary  of

the  Bible,  dealing  with  its  Lan

guage,  Literature,  and  Contents,

including  the  Biblical  Theology,

vol.  i.,  '98; vol.  ii.,  '99.
or,  F.  Vigouroux,  Dictionnaire  de

la  Bible,  '<)$/.
Alph. de Candolle, Origine des

Plantes  Cultivees,  '82; <4>,  '96.

ET  in  the  International  Scien

tific  Series.

De  Gentibus. See  Wellhausen.
Delitzsch,  Franz  (1813-90),  author

of  many  commentaries  on  books

of  the  OT,  etc.
or,  Delitzsch,  Friedrich,  son  of  pre

ceding,  author  of:

Wo  lag  das  Parodies?  ('8l).
The  Hebrew  Language  viewed


xx ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


in  the  light  of  Assyrian  Re
search,  '83.

fro/.  .  Prolegomena  eines  neuen  hebr.-

arain.  \V6rterbuchszum  A  T,
'86.
Ass.  II WB  Assyrisckes Handworterbuch,

'96.
DHM  Ep.  Denk. D.  II.  Muller,  Epigraphische  Denk-

m'dler  aus  Arabien,  '89.

Die  Propheten  in  i/tren  ursprunglichen  Form.
Die  Grundgesetze  der  ursemi-
tischen  Poesie,  2  Bde.,  '96.

Di.  .  .  .  Dillmann,  August  (1823-94),
in  A'Gff:  Genesis,  3rd  ed.  of
Knobel,'75;  «>,  '82;  «V92  (ET
by  Stevenson,  '97)  ;  Exodus  und
Leviticus,  2nd  ed.  of  Knobel,
'80;  3rd  ed.  by  Ryssel,  '97;
Numb.,  Deut.,  Josh.,  2nd  ed.  of
Knobel,  '86 -Jsaiah, (J>,  '90;  (edd.
1-3  by  Knobel;  4th  ed.  by  Die-
stel;  6th  ed.  by  Kittel,  '98).

Did. . . Didache. See  APOCRYPHA,  §  31,  i.
Dozy,  Suppl. . Supplement aux Dictionnaires

.-I rapes,  '79  ff.
Dr. . . . Driver,  S.  R. :

HT.  .  A Treatise  on  the  Use  of  the

Tenses  in  Hebrew,  '74; <2),
'Si; <:i>,  '92.
TBS .  Notes  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of

the  Books  of  Samuel,  '90.

Introd. .  An  Introduction  to  the  Litera

ture  of  the Old  Testament,

(D) '9!  ; («)> '97.

Par.  Ps. .  Para/lei  Psalter,  '98.

Deut.  .  Deuteronomv in The Inter

national  Critical  Commen
tary,  '95.

Joel  and  Amos in  the  Cambridge  Bible,  '97.

Lev.  SBOT  SBOT  (Eng.),  Leviticus,  as

sisted  by  II.  A.  White,  '98.

*  Hebrew  Authority '  in  Authority  and  Archaeology,
Sacred  and  Profane,  ed.
David  G.  Hogarth,  London,
'99.

Is. . .  Isaiah,  His  Life  and  Times,  in

'  Men  of  the  Bible,'  <2>,  '93.
Drus. . . Drusius (1550-1616) in Critici

Sacri.
Du. . . . Bernhard  Duhm :

Proph. .  Die Theologie  der Propheten

als  Grundlage  fur  die  inner  e
Entwicklungsgeschichte  der
israelitischen  Religion,  '75.

fs. . .  Das  Buch  Jesaia  in  IIK,  '92.

Ps. . .  Die  Psalmen  erkl'drt,  in  KHC,

'99-

. Old  Hebrew  historical  document.
Eo . . . Later  additions  to E. See HIS
TORICAL  LITERATURE.
EB^ . . Encyclopedia  Britannica,  gth  ed.,

'7S--88.
Ebers,  Aeg.  BM Georg  Ebers  ('37-'9S),  Aegypten  u.

die  B'ucher  A/ose's,  i.,  '68.
Einl. . . Einleitung (Introduction). See

Cornill,  etc.
Eng.  Hist.  Rev. The English Historical Review,

>86/.
Ent[st~\. . . Die Entstehung  des  Judenthums.

See  Ed.  Meyer.

ET . . . English  translation.
Eth.  . . Ethiopic.

Eus.  . . Eusebius  of  Ccesarea  (2nd  half  of

3rd  to  1st  half  of  4th  cent.  A.D.)  :

Onom.  or  OS Onomasticon  ;  '  On  the  Names

of  Places  in  Holy  Scripture.'


HE  .
P[r<?J.
Citron.
EV .

Ew.

Ltkrb.

Gesch.

Dichter
Proph.
Expos.


.  T[imes]
/and/". .
FFP

Field,  Hex.


F[r.-\HG  .

Fl.  and  Hanb.

Pharm.
Floigl,  GA

Founders .
Fr.


Frankenb.  .

Frazer . .


Fund. .


GA . .

GA . .
GBA .

GASm. .
GA  T .

Gei.  Urschr.


Ges.  .

Thes.

Gramm.
Lex. .

Ges.-Bu. .


Hi  star  in  Ecclesiastica.
Prcfparatio  Evangelica.
Chronicon.
English  version  (where  authorised

and  revised  agree).
Heinrich  Ewald  (1803-75)  :

Lehrbuch der hebr'dischen

Sprache,  '44; W,  '70.
Geschichte  des Volkes  Israel  ;
W  i.-vii.,  '64-'68  ;  ET  <-'>  5
vols.  (pre-Christian  period),
'69-'8o.
Die  Dichter  des  Alten  Bundes

<3>,  '66  /
Die  Propheten,  '40/5 <2>,  '67

/; ET'76/
Expositor,  5th  ser.,  '95^".
Expository  Times,  'Sg-'
following  (verse,  or  verses,  etc.).
Fauna and Flora of  Palestine.

See  Tristram.

F.  Field,  Origenis  Hexaplorum  qua

super  suntsive  Veterum  Inter  pre-

tum  Gracorum in totum  I'etus

Testamentum  Fragmtnta  ('75).

Fragmenta Historicorum Grceco-

ruw,  ed.  Muller,  5  vols.,  '4i-'72.

F.  A.  Fliickiger  and  D.  Hanbury,

Ph  a  rmacograph  ia  .
Floigl, Geschichte des semitischen

Altertums  in  Tabellen,  '82.
Founders  of  Old  Testament  Criti

cism. See  Cheyne.
O.  F. Fritzsche (1812-96), com
mentaries  on  books  of  the  Apo
crypha  in  KHG.

Sigismund Frankel,  Die aram'di-
schen Frcmdworter im Arabi-
schen,  '86.
W.  Frankenberg,  Die  Spritche  in

KH,  '98.
J.  G.  Frazer  :

Tot  em  ism  ('87).
Golden  Hough  ('90);  (2>  in  prep.
Pausanias's Description of
Greece (translation and
notes,  6  vols.,  '98).
J.  Marquart,  Fundamente  israeliti-
scher  u.  jiidischer  Geschichte,  '96.
Greek  Version,  see  above,  p.  xv.y."

and  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS.
Geschichte d. Alterthums (see

Meyer,  Floigl).

Geschichte  Agyptens  (see  Meyer).
Gesch. Babyloniens u. Assyriens

(see  Winckler,  Hommel).
George  Adam  Smith. See  Smith.
Reuss,  Geschichte  des  Alten  Testa

ments,  '8  1  ; <-',  '90.
A. Geiger, Urschrift  und  Ueber-
setzungen  der  Bibel  in  ihrer  Al>-
hangigkeit  von  der  inneren  Ent-
wicklung  des  Judenthums,  '57.
F.  H.  W.  Gesenius  (1786-1842):
Thesaurus  Philologicus  Criti-
cus Ling. Hebr. et Chald.
Veteris  Testamenti,  '35-'42.
Hebraische Grammatik,  '13  ;
(*),  by  E. Kautzsch, '96;
ET  '98.

Hebriiisches  u.  chaldaisches
Handworterbuch,  '12  ;  <u>
(Muhlauu.Volck),  '90;  ^
(Buhl,  with  Socin  and  Zim-
mern),'95;  (13)  (Buhl),  '99.
Gesenius-Buhl.  See  above,  Ges.


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xxi


Gesch.  .

GGA  .

GGN  .

GI .  .

Gi[nsb],  .


GJV .

Glaser .

Skizze

Gr. . .

Gra.  . .
Gesch.

Ps. .

Gr.  Ven. .

G  VI .


H

HA  or  Hebr.

Arch.
Hal.  .


Mel. .

Hamburger
\_RE\

Harper,  ABL


HC .


Heb.  .

Hebraica  .

Heid.  .

'Herst.  .


Herzog,  RE
Het  Herstel
Hex.  .

Hexap. .

HG . .

Hierob. .
Hilgf. .

Hist.  .

Hist.  Proph.
Man.


Hi[tz].


HK  .


Geschichte  (History).
Gottingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,


Gottingische  Gelehrte  Nachrichten,

'45  /•

Geschichte  Israels. See  Winckler.
Ginsburg,  Massoretico-critical  Edi

tion  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  '94,  In

troduction,  '97.
Geschichte des  judischen Volkes.

See  Schiirer.
Eduard  Glaser  :

Skizze der Gesch. u. Geogr.

Arabiens,  '90.
K.  Grimm  (1807-91). Maccabees

('53)  and  Wisdom(?te>)  mKGH.
Heinrich  Gratz  :

Geschichte  der  Juden,  i.-x.,  '74

ff.; ETi.-v.,  '9i-'92.
Kritischer Commentar zu den

Psalmen,  '82  f.
Versio  Veneta. See  TEXT.
Gesch. des Volkes Israel. See

Ewald,  Stade,  etc.

'The  Law  of  Holiness'  (Lev.  17-

26). See  LEVITICUS.
Hebr'dische  Archaologie. See  Ben-

zinger,  Nowack.
Joseph  Halevy. The inscriptions

in  Rapport  sur  tine  Mission  Ar-

chi'ologique  dans  le  Yemen  ('72)

are  cited: Hal.  535,  etc.

Melanges d'  '  Epigraphie et

d'A  rcheologie  Sem  itiques,  '74.

Hamburger,  Realencyclopadie  fiir

Bibel  und  Talmud,  i.  '70,  W  '92  ;

ii.  '83,  suppl.  '86,  '91  /,  '97.
R.  F.  Harper,  Assyrian  and  Baby

lonian Letters belonging  to the

/sf[Kuyunjik] collection of the

British  Museum,  '93^
Hand-  Commentar zum Neuen

Testament,  bearbeitet  von H.  J.

Holtzmann,  R.  A.  Lipsius,  P.  W.

Schmiedel,  H.  v.  Soden,  'Sg-'gi.
Hebrew.

Continued  as  AJSL  (a.v.).
Reste  arabischen  Heidentums. See

Wellhausen.
Kosters,  Het  Herstcl  van  Israel  in

het  Perzische  Tijdvak,  '93;  Germ.

transl. Die \Viederlierstellung

Israels,  '95.
See  PA'E.
See  Herst.
Hexateuch  (see  Kuenen,  Holzinger,

etc.).

See  Field.
Historical  Geography  of  the  Holy

Land. See  Smith,  G.  A.
See  Bochart.
A.  Hilgenfeld,  NT  scholar  (Einl,

etc.)  ,  and  ed.  since  '58  of  Z  WT.
See  Schiirer,  Ewald,  Kittel,  etc.
J.  F. M'Curdy,  History,  Prophecy,

and  the  Monuments:  \. To  the

Downfall of  Samaria  ('94)  ; ii.

To  the  Fall  of  Nineveh  ('96).


diger  ('47),  Hohelied  ('55),  Die
kleinen  Propheten  ('38;  <3\  '63),
JeremiasC1  4,1  ;  (-','66).  MsoDie
Psalmen  ('35~'36;  (3),  '63-'65).
Handkommentar  zum  Alien  Testa
ment,  ed.  Nowack,  '92  ff.


Holz.  Einl.


Hommel .
AHT


GBA

Hor.  Hebr.
HP . .


HPN .

HPSm. .

Samuel  in

HS . .
HWB .


IJG  . .

Intr[od].  .
Intr.  Is. .

It. . .
It.  Anton.


J . . .

J2

J\_ourn.~\  A\_m.~\
0[rJ\  S[oc.~]
Jastrow,  Diet.


J\_ourn^\  As.
JBL  .

JB  W  .
JDT  .
JE  .  .
Jensen,  Kosm.

Jer.  .

Jon.  .

Jos.  .

J\_ourn.~\  Phil.
JPT .

JQR  .

JRAS .


JSBL
KAT


. H.  Holzinger,  Einleitung  in den

Hexateuch  ('93),  Genesis  in  the

KHC  ('98).
. Fritz  Hommel  :

.  DiealtisraelitischeUeberliefer-

ung  ;  ET,  Ancient  Hebrew
Tradition,  '97.
.  Geschichte  Babyloniens  u.  As

sy  riens,  "85^".

. Lightfoot,  Horce  Hebraicic,  1684.
. Holmes  and  Parsons,  Vetus  Testa-

mentum Grtecum cum variis

lectionibus,  1798-1827.
. G. B. Gray,  Studies in Hebrew

Proper  Names,  '96.
. Henry  Preserved  Smith.
International  Critical  Commentary.
. Die  Ileilige  Schrift. See  Kautzsch.
. Rich  m's  Handworterbuch  des  bibli-

schen Alterthums,  2 vols.,  '84;

('2>,  '93~'94. See  also  Delitzsch

(Friedr.).

. Israelitische  u.jiidische  Geschichte.

See  Wellhausen.
. Introduction.
. Introduction to Isaiah. See

Cheyne.

. Itala. See  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS.
. Itinerarium Antonini, Fortia

d'Urban,  '45.

. Old  Hebrew  historical  document.
Later  additions  to  f.
Journal  of  the  American Oriental

Society,  ^\ff.
M.  Jastrow,  Dictionary  of  the  Tar-

gumiin,  the Talmud  Babli,  etc.,

and  Midrashim,  '86  ff.
Journal Asiatique, '53  ff.; 7th

ser.,'73;  8thser.,'83;  gth  ser.,'93.
Journal  of  Biblical  Literature  and

Exegesis,  '90  ff.; formerly  ('82-

'88)  called  Journal  of  the  Society

of  Biblical  Lit.  and  Exeg.
Jahrbiuher  der  bibl. Wissenschaft

('49-'6s).
Jahrbucher  fiir  deutsche Theologie,

'56-'7S.
The  '  Prophetical  '  narrative  of  the

Hexateuch,  composed  of  J  and  E.
P. Jensen, Die Kosmologie der

Babylonier,  '90.
Jerome,  or  Jeremiah.
Jonathan. See  Targum.
Flaviusjosephus  (b.  37  A.  D.),  Anti-

quitates Judaicie, De Bella

Judaico, Vita,  contra  Apionem

(ed.  Niese,  3  vols.,  '87-'94).
Journal  of  Philology,  i.  (Nos.  I  and

2,  '68),  ii.  (Nos.  3  and  4,  '69),  etc.
Jahrbucher  fur  protestantische'lheo-

l°gie>  '75-92-

Jewish  Quarterly  Review,  'SS-'Sg/I

Journal  of  Royal  Asiatic  Society

(vols. 1-20,  '34  ff.; new  series,

vols.  1-24,  '65~'92;  current  series,


Kau.


Gram.
HS .


See/^Z.

Die  Keilinschriften  u.d.  Alte  Testa

ment. See  Schrader.
E.  Kautzsch  :

Grammatik des BibliscJien-

Aramiiischen,  '84.
Die  heilige  Schrift  des  Alten
Testaments,  '94.


xxii ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


Apokr. .  Die  Apokryphen  u.  Pseudepi-

graphen  des  a  It  en  Testa
ments,  '98  /

. Keilinschrifiliche  Bibliothek,

Sammlungvon  ass.  u.  bab.  Texten
in  Umschrift  u.  Uebersetzung,  5
vols.  (i,  2,  3  a,  6,  4,  5),  '89-' 96.
Edited  by  Schrader,  in  collabora
tion  with  L.  Abel,  C.  Bezold,
P.  Jensen,  F.  E.  Peiser,  and
H.  Winckler.

Ke. . . . K.  F.  Keil  (d.  '88).
Kenn. . . B. Kennicott (1718-83), Veins
Teslamentum Hebraicum cum
•variis  lectionilms,  2  vols.,  1776-
80.

KG  . . . Kirchengeschichte.
KGF . . Keilinschriften  n.  Geschichtsforsch-

ung. See  Schrader.

KGH  .  .  K urzgefasstes  exegetisches  Hand-
buch.  See  Di.,  Hitz.,  Knob.,  Ol.

KGK  .  .  K urzgefasster  Kommentar  zu  den
heiligen  Schriften  Alten  u.  Neuen
Testaments  sowie  zu  den  Apo-
krvphen,  ed.  H.  Strack  and
O.'Zockler,  '&•]/.

KIIC . . Kttrzer Hand-commentar znm
Alten  Testament,  ed.  Marti,  '97_^i
Ki. . . . Rudolf  Kittel :

Gesch, .  Geschickle  der  Hebraer,  2  vols.,

'88,  '92;  Eng.  transl.,  His
tory  of  the  Hebrews,  '95-
'96.

Ch.  SBOT  TheBookofChronicles,Cn\.\ca\

Edition  of  the  Hebrew  text,
'95  (translated  by  Bacon).

Kim.  . . R.  David  Kimhi,  circa 1200  A.D.,

the famous  Jewish scholar  and

lexicographer,  by  whose  exegesis

the  AV  is  mainly  guided.

Kin[s\, . . Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Early

Arabia. See  W.  R.  Smith.
Kl.  Proph. . Kleine  Proplietcn (Minor Prophets).

See  Wellhausen,  Nowack,  etc.

Klo[st].  .  .  Aug.  Klostermann,  J)ie  Bucher
Sa m uelis  und der  Konige  ('87)  in
KGK.

GVI . .  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel  bis

zur  Kcstanration  unter  Esra
und  Arehemia,  '96.

Kn[ob].  .  .  Aug.  Knobel  (1807-63)  in  KGH:
Exodus  und  Leviticus,, (-)  by  Dill-
mann,  'So;  Der  Prophet  jesaia,
'43,  <3>,  '61.  See  Dillmann.

Ko. . . . F.  E.  Konig,  Historisch-Kritisches
Lehrgeb'dude der Hebraischen
Sprache,  3  vols.,  'Sl-'97.
Koh. . . Aug.  Kohler.

Kr. . . . Kre  (lit.  '  to  be  read '),  a  marginal

reading which the Massoretes

intended  to  supplant  that  in  the

text  (KethTb); see  below.

Kt. . . . KethTb (lit.  'written'),  a  reading

in  the  MT; see  above.
Kue.. . . Abr.  Kuenen  (1828-91)  :

Ond.  i .  Historisch-critisch Onderzoek

naar  het  onlstaan  en  de
verzameling  Tan  de  Boeken
des  Ouden  Ver  bonds,  3  vols.,
'6i-'65;  <V8s-'89;  Germ,
transl. ,  Historisch-kritische
Einltitung  in  die  Bucher
des  Alten  Testaments,  '87-
'92;  vol.  i.,  The  Hexateuch,
translated  by  Philip  Wick-
steed,  '86.


Godsd. . De  Godsdienst  van  Israel,  '6g-'jo;

Eng.  transl.,  3  vols.,  '73~'75.
De  Profeten  en  der  Profetie  onder  Israel,  '75 ;

ET,  '77.
Ges.  Abh. .  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen  zur

bibl. IVissenschaft,  German

by  Budde,  '94.

L  . . de Lagarde, Librorum Veteris

Testamenti  Canonicorum,  Pars
Prior  Greece,  '83.
Lag.  . . Paul  de  Lagarde  ('27-'9i)  :

Hag.  .  Hagiographa  Chaldaice,  '73.

Syr. . .  Libri  Veteris  Testamenti  Apo-

cryphi  Syriace,  '61.

Ges.  Abh. .  GesammelteAbhandlungen?(&.

Mitt.  .  Mitleilungen,  i.-iv.,  '84-'89.

Sym.  .  Symmicta,  ii.,  '80.

Prov.  .  Proverbien,  '63.

Ubers.  Uebersicht  fiber  die  im  Ara-

or  BN  mdischen,  Arabischen, und

Hebrdischen  iibliche  Bildung
dtr  Nomina,  '89.
Beitr.  .  Bcitrdge  z.  baktrischen  Lexiko-

graphie,  '68.

Proph. .  Prophetic  Chaldaice,  '72.

Sent.  .  Semi  tic  a,  '"]$f.

Arm.  St. .  Armenische  Stttdien.

Or. . .  Orientalia,  i.,  '79  ; ii.,  '80.

Lane . . E.  W. Lane,  An  Arabic- English

Lexicon,  '63^".
L  [and}  B . W.  M.  Thomson, The  Land  and

the  Book,  '59; new  ed.  '94.
LBR . . Later Biblical  Researches. See

Robinson.
Levy,  NHIVB J. Levy, Neuhebrdisches  u.  chal-

ddisches  Worterbuch,  '-j6-'Sg.
Chald.  Lex.  Chalddisches  IVorterbuch  uber

die  Targumim,  '67  ff.
Lehrgeb. . . See  Konig.
Leps.  Denkm. . R.  Lepsius,  Denkmdler  aus  Aegyp-

ten  u.  Aethiopien,  '49-'6o.
Lightf. . . John Lightfoot (1602-75),  Hora

He  bra  ica  ( 1 684  ) .
Joseph  B.  Lightfoot  ('28-'89) ;
commentaries  on  Galatians
(W,  '74);  Philippians  (<3>,
'73)  >  Colossians  and  Phile
mon  ('75).

Lips.  if.  .  .  Lipsius,  Die  Apokryphen  Aposlel-
geschichten  u.  Apostellegenden,

Low  . . „ J. Low,  Aramdische  Pftanzenna-

mcn,  '8 1.

Luc.  . . See  L.

LXX  or  @ . Septuagint. See above,  p.  xv  f.t

and  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS.

Maimonides  .  Moses  Maimonides  (1131-1204).
Exegete,  author  of  Mishneh
Torah,  More  Nebokhim,  etc.

Mand. . . Manda-an. See  ARAMAIC,  §  10.
Marq.  Fund. . J.  Marquart,  Fundamente  israeliti-
scher  u.  judischer  Geschichte,  '96.
Marti . . K.  Marti :

Gram. .  Kurzgefasste Grammatik d.

biblisch-Ara  m  di s ch e n
Sprache,  '96.

Geschichte  der  Israelitischen  Religion^,  '97  (a
revision  of  A.  Kayser,  Die
Theol.  des  AT*).

Jes. . .  Das  Buchjesaia,  in  KHC,  '99.

Masp. . . G.  Maspero:

Dawn  of  Civilisation,  Egypt

and  Chaldea  (<2',  '96).
Les premieres Meli-es des
Peuples; ET by McClure


Mey. .


GA~  .


Entst^eJi}.
Meyer

MGWJ .
MH  .

MI .


Midr.
Mish.


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xxiii

the end of the seventh
century  A.D. See  TEXT.

New English Dictionary on

.«-—,.  Historical  Principles,  ed.  J.  A.

MBBA . . Monatsbericht  der  Berliner  Aka-  II . Murray, '88  ff.; also H.

Bradley,  '97  ff.

MDPV  .  .  MitthejluntrenundNachrichtendes  Muss-Arn.  .  W.  Nuss-Arnoit,  A  Concise  Diction
ary  of  the  Assyrian  Language,
'94-99  (A-MAG).

Merx . . A. Merx, Archrv  f.  wissenschaft- MVG . . Mitlhcilungen der Vorderasiat-

ischen  Gesellschaft,  '97  ff.

in. See  ARAMAIC,  §  4.
Nominalbildung,  Barth;  see  Ba.

israelitischen Eigen  namen
nach ihrer religionsgeschicht-
lichen  Bedeutung,  '76.
Marginalien  u.  Alalerialien,  '93.
A.  Neubauer,  Geographic  du  Tal
mud,  '68.

Natural  History  of  the  Bible.  See
Tristram.

')-.  u.  chaldaisches  Worter-
buch.  See  Levy.

Th.  Noldeke :

Untersuchungen z. Krilik d.

Alien  Testaments,  '69.
Altteslamentliche  Litteratur,  '68.
W.  Nowack  :

Lehrbuch d. Hebr'dischen

Archaologie, '  94.
Die Kleinen Propheten (in

HKC),  '97.
New  Testament,  Neues  Testament.

Justus  Olshausen :

Die  Psalmen,  '53.

Lehrbuch der  hebr. Sprache,

'61  [incomplete],
Orientalistische Litteratur- Zei-

tung,  ed.  Peiser,  '98  f.
Historisch-critisch  Onderzoek. See

Kuenen.

Onkelos,  Onqelos. See  Targ.
See'  OS.

Origin  of  the  Psalter. See  Cheyne.
Onomastica  Sacra,  containing  the
name-lists ' of Eusebius and
Jerome (Lagarde, (-'),  '87; the
pagination  of  I1'  printed  on  the
margin  of  W  is  followed).
Old  Testament.

Testament in the Jewish
Church. See  W.  R.  Smith.

Priestly  Writer. See  HIST.  LIT.

Secondary  Priestly  Writers.

F.  Buhl,  Geographie  des  alien  Pal-
astina,  '96.  See  also  Baedeker
and  Reland.

Palmyrene. See  ARAMAIC,  §  4.

Palestinian  Syriac  or  Christian
Palestinian.  See  ARAMAIC,  §  4.

Proceedings  of  American  Oriental
Society,  '51^".  (printed  annually
at  end  of  JAOS).

lag das Parodies  ? See
Delitzsch.

Sayce,  Patriarchal  Palestine,  '95.

Pra:paratio  Evangelica.  See  Euse
bius.

MT  .  .  .  Massoretic  text,  the  Hebrew  text  of  PEFM[em.~]  .  Palestine  Exploration^  Fund  Me
moirs,  3  vols.,  '8i-'S3.

e  Exploration  Fund
[founded  '65]  Quarterly  State
ment,  '(Xjff-


The  Struggle  of  the  Nations

abc

—  Egypt,Syria,and  Assyria.

cen

Histoire  Ancienne  des  Peuples

Murray . . A

de  f  Orient  ('99  ff.}.

J

Monatsbericht  der  Berliner  Aka-

I

demic.

I

Mittheilungen  und  Nachrichten  des

Muss-Arn. . \V.

Deutschen Paldstina-  Vereins,

t

'951-

>

A. Merx, ArcJnv  f.  wissenschaft-

MVG . . Mi

liche  Erforschung  d.  A  T  ('69).

Ed.  Meyer  :

n. not

Gescliichte des Alterthums  ;

Nab. . . Na

i.,  Gesch.  d.  Orients  bis  ztir

NB  . . .No

Beeri'mdung  des  Perserreichs
('84)  ; ii.,  Gesch.  des  Abend-

Nestle,  Eig. . Di
t

Ian  des bis auf  die Per-

I

serkriege  ('93).

Marg. . A/i

Die Entstehung des Jtiden-

Neub.  Geoer. A.

thums,  '96.

o

f

H. A. W. Meyer (1800-73),

NHB . . Na

founder  of  the  series  Kritisch-

'

exegetischer  Kommentar  iiber  das

NHWB . . Ne

Neue  Testament.

I

Monatsschrift  fiir  Gesch.  ^t.  IViss.

no. . . . nui

des  Judenthums,  '51^.
Mishnic  Hebrew,  the  language  of

N6[ld]. . . Th
Unters. . (

the Mishna, Tosephta, Mid-

rashim,  and  considerable  parts  of

j

the  Talmud.

Now. . . W.

Mesha Inscription, commonly
known  as  the  '  Moabite  Stone.'

//Or.]  A{rch^

See  MESHA.

Kl.  Proph.

Midrash. See  CHRONICLES,  §6(2).

Mishna, the standard collection

NT . . . Ne

(completed,  according  to  tradi
tion,  by  R.  Judah  the  Holy,  about

Ol[sh]. . . Jus

r>

200  A.D.)  of  sixty-three  treatises

Is. .

(representing the  Jewish  tradi

Lehrb.

tional  or  unwritten  law  as  devel

oped by the second century

OLZ  (or  Or.  LZ} Oi

A.D.),  arranged  in  six  groups  or

t

/") / 7/  '

Seders thus  :  —  i. Zeralm (  1  1

Una. . . Jn

. tractates), ii. Mo'ed (12), iii.
Ndshim  (7),  iv.  N~ezikin  (  10)  ,  v.

]
Onk.,  Onq. . On

K  odd  shim  (  1  1  )  ,  vi.  Tohoroth  (12).

Onom. . . Set
OPs. . . Or

VAboda  zara,  iv.  8 Mikwa'oth,  vi.  6

/~1  O /^

Aboth,  iv.  9 Mo'ed  Katan,  ii.  ii

C/o . . . On

'Arakhin,  v.  5 Nazir,  iii.  4

'

Baba  Bathra,  iv.  3 Nedarim,  iii.  3

Baba  Kamma.  iv.  i Nega'im,  vi.  3

•

Baba  Mesi'a,  iv.  2 Nidda,  vi.  7

]

Bekhoroth,  v.  4 Ohaloth,  vi.  2

r

Berakhoth,  i.  i 'Orla,  i.  10

OT . . Ok

Besa,  ii.  7 Para,  vi.  4
Bikkiirim,  i.  ii Pe'a,  i.  2

OTJC . . Oh

Chagiga,  ii.  12 Pesachim,  ii.  3

(

Challa,  i.  9 Rosh  Ha(sh)shana,

PT>vi

Chullin,  v.  3 ii.  8

. . . i  ri

Demai,  i.  3 Sanhedrin,  iv.  4

P2 . Sec

'F.duyoth,  iv.  7 Shabbath,  ii.  i

Pal. . . F.

'Erubin,  ii.  2 Shebil'oth,  iv.  6.

Gittin,  iii.  6 Shebi'ith,  i.  5

t

Horayoth,  iv.  10 Shekalim,  ii.  4

&

Kelim,  vi.  i Sola,  iii.  5.

Palm. . . Pal

Kerithoth,  v.  7 Sukka,  ii.  6
KethQboth,  iii.  2 Ta'anith,  ii.  9

Pal.  Syr. . . Pal

Kiddiishin,  iii.  7 Tamid,  v.  9

]

Kil'ayim,  i.  4 Tebiil  Yom,  vi.  10

PA  OS . . Pro

Kinnim,  v.  ii Teiniira,  v.  6

Ma'aser  Sheni,  i.  8 Terumoth,  i.  6

Ma'aseroth,  i.  7 Tohoroth,  vi.  5

a

Makhshirin,  vi.  8 'I'ksin,  vi.  12

Par. . . We

Makkoth,  iv.  5 Yadayim,  vi._  ii

I

Megilla,  ii.  10 Yebamoth,  iii.  I

Pat.  Pal. , . Saj

Me'ila,  v.  8 Yoma,  ii.  5

MenachSth,  v.  2 Zabim,  vi.  9

PE . . . Pr

Middoth,  v.  10 Zebachim,  v.  I

b

Massoretic  text,  the  Hebrew  text  of

PEFM^em.'} . Pa

the  OT  substantially  as  it  was  in

f

the early part of the second

PEFQ[u.St.~\ . Pat

century A.D. (temp. Mishna).

[

It remained unvocalised until

1

xxiv ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL,  NOTES


Per.-Chip.


Pers.
Pesh.


Ph.,  Phcen.

PKE .


Preuss.  Jahrbb.
Prim.  Cult.

Proph.  Is.

Prol. .
Prot.  A'Z  .


PSBA

PS  7  hes.
Pun.

R

RJE  .
RD  .
RP  .
1-5  R


Rab.
Rashi


Rec.  Trav.

REJ .
Rel.  Pal. .

Rev.  .

Rev.  Sem.
Ri.  Sa. .


Rob.


BR


LBR  or  BR  iv.
or  BR^  iii.


Perrot  and  Chipiez  :

Histoire  de  I1  Art  dans  l\inti-
quite.  Egypt:  —  Assyrie  —
Perse  —  Asie  Mineuere  —
Grece  —  Etrurie  —  Koine;
'Si  f.

ET: Ancient Egvpt, '83;
Chald&a and  Assyria, '84;
Phoenicia and Cyprus,  '85;
Sardinia,  Judaa, etc., '90;
Primitive  Greece,  '94.
Persian.
Peshltta,  the  Syriac  vulgate  (2nd-

3rd  cent.). Vetus  1  estamentum

Syriace,  ed.  S.  Lee,  '23,  OT  and

NT,  '24.
W.  E.  Barnes,  An  Apparatus  Cri-

ticus  to  Chronicles  in  the  Peshitta

Version,  '97.
Phcenician.
Real-Encyklopddie  fur  protestan-

tische 'J  he  o  logic  u.  Kirche,  ed.
. J.  J. Ilerzog,  22  vols.,  '54-'68;

'-'», ed. J. J. Herzog, G. L.

Plitt,  Alb.  Hauck,  18  vols.,  '77-

'88; <3>, ed. Alb. Hauck, vol.

i.-vii.  [A-IIau],  'g6-'99.
Preussische  Jahrbucher,  '72^".
E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture,

'71  ; (3»,  '91.

The  PropJiecies  of  Isaiah.  See
Cheyne.

Prolegomena. See  Wellhausen.

Protestantische  Kirchenzeitung  fiir
das  Evangelisclie  Deutschland
(vols.i.-xliii.,'  54-'96);  continued
as  Prot.  Monatshefte  ('97^".).

Proceedings  of  the  Society  ofBMi-


Payne  Smith,  '1  hesaurus  Syriacus.
Punic.

Redactor  or  Editor.

Redactor  (s)  of  JE.

Deuteronomistic  Editor(s).

Priestly  Redactor(s).

H.  C.  Rawlinson,  The Cuneiform

Inscriptions of Western Asia,

i.-v.  ('6l-'84; iv.  i2>,  '91).
Rabbinical.
i.e. Rabbenu Shelomoh Yishaki

(1040-1105), the celebrated

Jewish  commentator.
Recucil  de travaux relatifs  a  la

philol.  ct a r  Archeol.  egypi. et

assyr.  >-]O  ff.
Revue  des  Etudes  juives,  i.,  '80;  ii.

and  iii.,  '81  ; and  so  on.
Reland,  Palicstina  ex  JMonumentis

veteribus  illustrata,  2  vols.,  1714.
Revue.

Revue  simitique,  '93  ff.
Die Bitcher Richter u. Samuel.

See  Budde.
Edward  Robinson  :

Biblical  Researches  in  Pales
tine,  Alt.  Sinai,  and  Arabia
Petrtta,  a  journal  of  travels
in  the  year  1838  (i.-iii.,  '41
=  BR^-\  i.-ii.,  '56).
Later  Biblical  Researches  in  Pales-

tine  and  the  adjacent  Regions,  a

journal  of  travels in  the  year

1852  ('56).
Physical Geography of  the  Holy

Land,  '65.


Roscher .

RP . .


RS  or  Rel.  Sem.
RV  .  .  .
RIVB  .  .

Rys.  . .

Saad. . .

Sab.  . .

Sab.  Denkm. .

Sam. . .

SB  A  IV . .

SBE  .  .
SBOT  (Eng.)


SBOT  (Heb.)


Sch'opf. .

Schr.  .

KGF
KA  T
COT


Schiir. .
GJV


Ausfilhrliches  Lexikon  d.  Griech-
ischen  it.  Romischen  Mythologie

('84/0-

Records  of  the  Past,  being  English
translations  of  the  A  ncient  Man  u-
ments  of  Egypt  and  Western
Asia,  ed.  S.  Birch,  vols.  i.-xii.
('73-'8i).  New  series  [A'/^Jed.
A.  H.  Sayce,  vols.  i.-vi.,  '88-'92.
See  ASSYRIA,  §  35.

Religion  of  the  Semites.  See  \V.
R.  Smith.

Revised  Version  (NT,  '80;  OT,
'84;  Apocrypha,  '95).

G.  B.  Winer  (1789-  1858),  Biblisches
Realworterbuch,  '20;  <3>,  2  vols.,

'47  /
Ryssel; cp.  Dillmann,  Bertheau.

R.  Sa'adya  (Se'adya;  Ar.  Sa'id),
the  tenth  century  Jewish  gram
marian  and  lexicographer  (b.
892)  ;  Explanationsofthe//tf/tf.v-
legomena  in  the  O  T,  etc.

Sabrcan,  less  fittingly  called
Himyaritic;  the  name  given  to
a  class  of  S.  Arabian  inscrip
tions.

Sabaische  Denkmaler,  edd.  Miiller
and  Mordtmann.

Samaritan.

Sitzungsberichte  der  Berlinischen
Akadeinie  der  IVissenschaften.

The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,
translated  by  various  scholars
and  edited  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  F.
Max  Miiller,  50  vols.  1879^".

[Otherwise  known  as  the  Poly
chrome  Bible}  The  Sacred  Books
of  the  Old  Testament,  a  new  Eng.
transl.,  with  Explanatory  A'otes
and  Pictorial  Illustrations  ;  pre
pared  'by  eminent  biblical  scholars
of  Europe  and  of  America,  and
edited,  ivit/i  i/ie  assistance  of
Horace  Howard  Fur  ness,  by  Paul
Haupt,  '97  ff.

Haupt,  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  Old
Testament  ;  a  critical  edition  of
the  Hebrew  text,  printed  in
colours,  with  notes,  prepared  by
eminent  biblical  scholars  oj  'Europe
and  America,  under  the  editorial
direction  of  Paul  Haupt,  '93^.

Gunkel,  Sch'dpfung  und  Chaos  in
Urzeit  u.  Endzeit,  '95.

E. Schrader  ; editor of KB


Keihnschriften  u.  Geschichts-

forschung,  '78.
Die  Keilinschriften  u.  d.  Alte

Testament,  '72; <2>,  '83.
Eng. transl. of  KAT& by
O. C. Whitehouse, The
Cuneiform  Inscriptions  and
the  Old  Testament,  2  vols.,
'85,  '88  (the  pagination  of
the  German  is  retained  in
the  margin  of  the  Eng.  ed.).
E.  Schiirer  :

Geschichte  des  jitdiscJien  Volkes
im  Zeitalter  Jesu  Chnsti  :
i.  Einleitung  u.  Politische  Ge
schichte,  '90;  ii.  Die  Inneren
Zustande  Palastinas  u.  des
jiidischen  Volkes  im  Zeitalter


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES xxv


Hist.


Selden


Sem.

Sin.

Smend,  Listen

Smith

GASm.
HG


WRS


OTJC
Propk.


Kin.  .

K\_el.~\S\_em


SP .

Spencer
SS .

St.,  Sta. .
GVI .

Abh.  .

St.  Kr. .
Stad.  m.  m.

Stud.  Bibl.
Sw. .


Jesu  Christi,  '86; new  ed.  vol.

ii. Die Inneren  Zustande,  '98,

vol.  iii.  Das  Judenthum  in  der

Zerstreuung  u.  die  jiidische  Lite-

ratur,  '98.
ET  of  above  ('go/".). Vols.  i/

(i.e.,  Div.  i.  vols.  I  f.)  =  vol. I

of  German; vols.  3-5  (i.e.,  Div.

ii.  vols.  1-3)  =  vol.  2  of  German

[=vols.  ii.,  iii. of  W].
J. Selden, de  Jure naturali et

gentium  juxta  disciplinam  Ebrtn-

orum,  7  bks.,  1665.

de  Diis  Syr  is,  1617.
Semitic.

Sinaitic; see  ARAMAIC,  §  4.
Smend, Die Listen der  Bucher

Esra  u.  Nehemiah,  '81.

George  Adam  Smith :

The  Historical  Geography  of
the  Holy  Land,  especially  in
relation  to  the  History  of
Israel  and  of  the  Early
Church,  '94  (additions  to  <•*>,
'96.)

William  Robertson  Smith ('46-'94):

77/6' Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish

Ch tirc/i,  '8 1 ;  W,  revised  and  much

enlarged,  '92; (Germ,  transl.  by

Rothstein,  '94).

The  Prophets  of  Israel  and  their
place  in  History,  to  the  close  of
the  eighth  century  B.C.,  '82;  <->,
with  introduction  and  addi
tional  notes  by  T.  K.  Cheyne,

'95-
Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Early

Arabia,  '85.

,]  Lectures  on  the  Religion  of  the
Semites:  1st  ser.,  The  Funda
mental  Institutions,  '89;  new
and  revised  edition  (fiSW),  '94;
Germ,  transl.  by  Stube,  '99.
[The  MS  notes  of  the  later  Burnett
Lectures — on  Priesthood,  Divina
tion  and  Prophecy,  and  Semitic
Polytheism  and  Cosmogony  —
remain  unpublished,  but  are
occasionally  cited  by  the  editors
in  the  Encyclopedia  Biblica  as
'  Burnett  Lects.  MS.]  '

A.  P.  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine
in  connection  with  their  history,
'56,  last  ed.  '96.

De  Legibus  Hebraorum  Ritualibus

(2  vols.  1727).
Siegfried and Stade, Hebraisches

Worterbuch zum Alien Testa-

mente,  '93.

B.  Stade  :

Gesch. d. Volkes  Israel,  '8l-

)OO

85.

Atisgeiv'dhlte  Akademische  Re-
den  u.  Abhandlungen,  '99.
Studien  und  Kritiken,  '28ff.
Stadiasmus magni marts (Mar-

cianus).

Studia  Biblica,  Essays  in  Biblical
Arc/neology  and Criticism and
kindred  subjects,  4  vols.,  '85-'9i.
H.  B.  Swete, The  Old  Testament
in  Greek  according  to  the  Septua-
gint;  (J),  '87-'94; <2>,  '95~'99-
Sitzungsberichte d. Wiener  Aka-
demie  d.  Wissenschaften.


Sym[m],  . .

Syr.  . . .
Tab.  Petit. .

Talm.  Bab.  Jer.


T[ar]g. .
Jer. .


Onk.  .

ps.-Jon.
TBS .


temp. .
T[extus]  R[e-

ceptus]
Th[e]. .

Theocl. .


Theol.  Studien


Thes.


Th.T . .
Ti.  or  Tisch. .


TLZ . .

Tosephta  . .
Treg. . .


Tristram .  .

FFP  .

NHB  .

TSBA .  .
Tub.  Z.  f.  Theol.

Untersuch.  .

Urgesch. .  .

v.

Var.  Apoc.  .

Var.  Bib.  .


Symmachus,  author  of  a  Greek
version  of  the  Old  Testament
{circa  200  A.D.).  See  TEXT.

Syriac. See  ARAMAIC,  §  1  1  /

Tabula  Peutingeriana,  Desjardins,
'68.

Talmud,  Babylonian  or  Jerusalem,
consisting  of  the  text  of  the
Mishna  broken  up  into  small
sections,  each  followed  by  the  dis
cursive  comment  called  Gemara.
See  LAW  LITERATURE.

Targum. See  TEXT.

The  (fragmentary)  Targum  Jeru-
shalmi.

Targum  Jonathan,  the  name  borne
by  the  Babylonian  Targum  to
the  Prophets.

Targum  Onkelos,  the  Babylonian
Targum  to  the  Pentateuch
(towards  end  of  second  century

A.D.).

The  Targ.  to  the  Pentateuch,
known  by  the  name  of  Jonathan.

Der  Text  der  Bucher  Samuel  is  :
see  Wellhausen;  or  Notes  on  the
Hebrew  Text  of  the  Books  of
Samuel  :  see  Driver.

tempore  (in  the  time  [of]).

The  'received  text'  of  the  NT.
See  TEXT.

Thenius,  die  Bucher  Samuelis  in
A'6Y/,'42;  (-','64;  (3),  Lohr,  '98.

Theodotion  (end  of  second  cen
tury),  author  of  a  Greek  version
of  the  Old  Testament  ('  rather  a
revision  of  the  LXX  than  a  new
translation').  See  TEXT.

Studien,  published  in  connection
with  Th.  T  (see  DEUTERONOMY,
§  33^).

See  Gesenius.

R.  Payne  Smith,  Thesaurus  Syria-
cits,  '68  ff.

Theologisch  Tijdschrift,  ^1  ff.

Tischendorf,  Novum  Testamentum
Gr<Ece,  editio  octava  critica
maior,  '6g-'j2.

Theologische Literaturzeitting,

'76  /.

See  LAW  LITERATI-RE.
S. P.  Tregelles, The Greek  New
Testament  ;  edited  from  ancient
authorities,  '$'j-''j2.
H.  B.  Tristram  :
The  Fauna  and  Flora  of  Palestine^

'89.
The  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,

<8>,  '89.
Transactions  of  Soc.  Bib.  Archaol.,

vols.  i.-ix.,  '72^

Tubingen  Zeitschrift  f.  Theologie,
'->&  ff

2S>J/.

Untersuchungen. See Noldeke,

Winckler.
Die biblische Urgochichte. See

Budde.

verse.

The  Apocrypha  (AV)  edited  with

various  renderings,  etc.,  by  C.  J.

Ball.
The  OldandNew  Testaments(\V)

edited  with  various  rendering!:,

etc., by T. K. Cheyne, S. R.


xxvi ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


Driver  (OT),  and  R.  L.  Clarke,
A.  Goodwin,  \V.  Sanday  (NT)
[otherwise  known  as  the  Queen's
printers'  Bible}.

Vet.  Lat.  .  .  Versio  Vetus  Latina;  the  old-Latin
version  (made  from  the  Greek) ;
later  superseded  by  the  Vulgate.
See  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS.

Vg.  .  .  .  Vulgate,  Jerome's  Latin  Bible :
OT  from  Heb.,  NT  a  revision
of  Vet.  Lat.  (end  of  4th  and  be
ginning  of  5th  cent.).  See  TEXT.

We.,  Wellh. . Julius  Wellhausen.

De  Gent.  De  Gentibuset  Familiisjudms

qua:  in  I Clir. 2  4  nume-
rantur  Dissertatio  ('70).
TBS .  Der  Text  der  BiicherSamuelis

('70-

Phar.  u.  Die Pharisaeru.d.Sadduc'dcr;

Sadd.  eine  Untersuchung  zur  in-

neren  jiidischen Gcschicht

('74).

Gesch. .  Gcsclnchte  Israels,  vol.  i.  ('78).

Prol.  .  2nd ed. of Gesch., entitled

Prolegomena  zur  Gesch.  Is
raels,  '83;  ET  '85;  4th
Germ.  ed.  '95.

IJG . .  Israelitische u. judische Ge-

schichte,  '94;  <3>,  '97;  an
amplification  of  Abriss  der
Gesch.  Israels  u.  Juda's  in
'  Skizzen  u.  Vorarbeiten,'
'84.  The  Abriss  was  sub
stantially  a  reproduction  of
'Israel'  in  EB^  ('Si;  re-
published  in  ET  of  Prol.
['85]  and  separately  as
Sketch  of  Hist,  of  Israel  and
Judah,  <3>,  '91).

[Ar.~]Heid.  fieste  Arabischen  Heidentums

(in  '  Skizzen  u.  Vorarbeiten ')

('87: <-V97)-

Kl.  Proph.  Die  Kleinen  Propheten  ilber-

setzt,  viit  Noten  ('92;  (3>,
'98).

CH . .  Die Composition des Hexa-

teuchs  und  der  historischen
Biicher  des  Alten  Testaments
('85;  Zweiter  Druck,  mit
Nachtragen,  '89;  originally
published  in /ZJ71  21  392^".,
[76],  "22  4°7  ['77],  and  in
Bleek,  Einl.  <4),  '78).

Weber  .  .  System  der  Altsynagogalen  Palasti-
nischen  Theologie;  or  Die  Lehren
des  Talmud,  '80  (edited  by  Franz
Delitzsch  and  Georg  Schneder-
mann);  <2>,  Jiidische  Theologie
auf  Grund  des  Talmud  und
verwandter  Schriften,  '97  (ed.
Schnedermann).

Wetstein  .  .  J.  J.  Wetstein,  A'ovum  Testamen-
tum  Gracum,  etc.,  2  vols.  folio  ;
1751-1752.

Wetz.  .  .  Wetzstein,  Ausgewahlte  griechische
und  lateinische  Inschriftcn,  ge-
s am  melt  auf  Keisen  in  den
Trachonen  und  urn  das  Hau-
rangebirgejbi, ;  Reisebericht  fiber
Hauran  und  Trachonen,  '60.

WF  .  .  .  Wellhausen-Furness,  The  book  of
Psalms  ('98)  in  SBO T  (Eng.}.

\VH  [W  &  H]  .  Westcott  and  Hort,  The  New  Tes
tament  in  the  Original  Greek,


Wi.  Hugo  Winckler :

Unters. .  Untersuchungen  z.  Altoriental-

ischen  Geschichte,  '89.
Alt[tesf\.  Alttestamentliche Untersuch-

Unt.  ungen,  '92.

GBA  .  Geschichte  Babyloniens  u.  As-

syriens,  '92.

AOForAF  Altorientalische Forschungen,

1st  ser.  i.-vi.,  '93~'97; 2nd
ser.  (AF^}  i.,  'gg/
GI . .  Geschichte Israels in einzel-

darstellungen,  i.  '95.
Sarg. .  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sargons,

'89.
KB$ . .  Die Thontafeln von Tell-el-

Amarna  (ET  Metcalf ).

Wilk. . . J. G. Wilkinson, Manners and
Customs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,
'37-'4i ;  i->  by  Birch,  3  vols.,  '78.
Winer . . G.B.Winer:

RWB .  Bibl. Realworterbuth; see

KWB.

Gram. .  Grammatik  des  neutestament-

lichen  Sprachidioms^,  neu
bearbeitet von Paul  Wilh.
Schmiedel, '94^; ET  of
6th  ed.,  W.  F.  Moulton,  '70.
WMM . . See  As.  u.  Eur.
Wr. . . . W.  Wright :

Comp.  Lectures  on  the Comparative

Gram.  Grammar of  the Semitic

Languages,  '90.

Ar.  Gram.  A Grammar  of  the Arabic

Language,  translated  from
the  German  of  Caspan  and
edited,  with  numerous  addi
tions  and  corrections  by  W.
Wright;  <2)  2  vols.,'74~'7^;
(s>  revised  by  W.  Robertson
Smith  and  M.  J.  de  Goeje,
vol.  i.  '96,  vol.  ii.  '98.
WRS  .  .  William  Robertson  Smith.  See

Smith.
WZKM  . . Wiener  Zeitschrift  fiir  d.  Kunde

des  iMorgenlandes,  87  ff.

Yakut  .  .  The  well-known  Arabian  geo
graphical  writer  (1179-1229).
Kitab  Mo  jam  el-Buldan  edited
by  F.  Wustenfeld  (Jacufs  Geo-
graphisches  Worterbuch,  '66-'7o).

Z . . . Zeitschrift  (Journal).

ZA . . . Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie  u.  ver-

ivandte Gebiete,  '86^".
ZA . . . Zeitschrift  fur  Agyptische Sprache

u.  Alterthumskunde,  '63^".
ZATW . . Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Alt/eslamentliche

Wissenschaft,  '8 1  ff.
ZDMG . . Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen-

landischen  Gesellschaft,  '46  ff.
ZDPV . . Zeitschrift  des  Deutschen  Palastina-

vereins,  '78  ff.
ZKF . . Zeitschrift  fur  Keilschriflforschung

und  verwandte Gebiete, '84  _/.,

continued  as  ZA.
ZKM . . See  WZKM.

ZKW  .  .  Zeitschrift  fur  kirchliche  Wissen
schaft  u.  kirchliches  Leben  (cd.

Luthardt),  i.-ix.,  '8o-'8ojf.
ZLT . . Zeitschrift  fiir  diegesammtc  Inther-

ische  Theologie  und  Kirche,  '40-

'78.
ZTK . . Zeitschrift fur Theologie und

Kirche,  '91  ff.

ZWT  .  .  Zeitschrift  fur  -wissenschaftliche
Theologie  (ed.  Hilgenfeld),  '5


ABBREVIATIONS,  SYMBOLS,  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES


ACL .


APK  .
Crit.  Bib.

GA .
OCL .


Ohnefalsch-Richter
SMA  IV
S(yr. )  c(ur. )
S(yr.)s(in.)


ADDITIONAL ABBREVIATIONS

Altchristliche  Litteratur  ;  e.g. —

Adolf  Harnack,  Geschichte  der  altchristlichen  Litteratur  bis  EH sebius,

of  which  there  appeared  in  1893  Pt.  I.  Die  Ueberlieferung  und  der

Bestand,  and  in 1897, Pt. II.  Die  Chronologic,  vol.  I.  down  to

Irenaeus  (cited  also  as  Chronol. ,  i ).
Gustav Kriiger, Geschichte der altchristlichen Litteratur  in den

ersten  drei  Jahrhunderten, 1895  (in Grundriss  der  Theologischen

Wissenschaften].

F.  Spiegel,  Die  alt-persischen  Keilinschriftcn,  1862,  <2'  1881.
Cheyne,  Critica  Biblica,  1903.
Geschichte  Aegyptens.
W.  C.  van  Manen,  Handleiding  voor  de  Oudchristelijke  Letterkunde,

1900.

M.  H.  Ohnefalsch-Richter,  Kypros,  die  Bibel,  und  Homer,  1893.
Sitsungsberichteder  Koniglichen  Akademieder  Wissenschaften,  Munich.
Curetonian  Syriac  version  of  NT  (see  TEXT,  §  25).
Sinaitic  Syriac  version  of  NT  (see  TEXT,  §  25).


Arranged  according  to  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  first  initial. Joint  authorship  is  where
possible  indicated  tints ;  A.  B.  ijjj  1-5  ; C.  D.  §§  6-10.


A.  A.  B.  BEVAN, ANTHONY ASHLEY, Lord Al- : F.  B.

nioner's Professor of Arabic, Cam
bridge.

A.  C.  M.  McGiFFERT, A.  C., D.D., Professor  of

Church  History  in Union  Theological G.  A.  C.
Seminary,  New  York.

A.  E.  C.  COWLEY, A. E. , M.A. , Sub-librarian, G.  A.  S.

Bodleian  Library,  and  Fellow  of  Mag
dalen  College,  Oxford.

A.  E.  S.  SHIPLEY,  A.  E.,  M.A., F.Z.S., Fellow,

Tutor,  and  Lecturer,  Christ's  Cgllege, G.  B.  G.
Cambridge.

A.  R.  S.  K. KENNEDY, Rev. ARCHIBALD R. S. ,

M.A.,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew  and G.  F.  H.
Semitic  Languages,  Edinburgh.  G.  F.  M.

B.  S.  STADE,  BERNHAKD,  D.D., Professor  of

Old  Testament  Exegesis,  Giessen.  G.  H.  B.

C.  F.  B.  BURNEY,  Rev.  C.  F.,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in H.  W.

Hebrew, and Fellow of St. John's

College,  Oxford.  H.  W.  H.

C.  H.  T.  TOY,  C.  H. ,  D.D. ,  Professor  of  Hebrew,

Harvard  University.

C.  H.  W.  J. JOHNS,  Rev.  C.  H.  W.,  M.A.,  Assistant I.  A.
Chaplain, Queens' College, Cam
bridge.  I.  B.

C.  P.  T.  TIELE,  The  late  C.  P. ,  D.  D. ,  Professor  of

the  Science  of  Religion,  Leyden.

D.  G.  H.  HOGARTH, DAVID GEORGE, M.A., I.  J.  P.

Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.

E.  M.  MEYER, EDUARD, Professor  of  Ancient

History,  Berlin.  J.  A.  R.

E.  N.  NESTLE,  C.  EB.,  D.D. ,  Professor  in  the

Evangelical  -  Theological Seminary, J.  D.  P.
Maulbronn,  Wiirtemberg.

E.  P.  G.  GOULD,  Rev.  E.  P. ,  D.D. ,  Philadelphia.

F.  C.  B.  BURKITT,  F.  C.,  M.A.,  Cambridge.  J.  J.


BROWN,  Rev.  FRANCIS,  D.D. ,  Daven
port  Professor  of  Hebrew  and  the
cognate  Languages  in  the  Union
Theological  Seminary,  New  York.

COOKE,  Rev.  G.  A.,  M.A. ,  formerly
Fellow  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.

SMITH,  Rev.  GEORGE  ADAM,  D.  D. ,
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew  and  Old
Testament  Exegesis,  United  Free
Church  College,  Glasgow.

GRAY,  Rev.  G.  BUCHANAN,  M.A. ,
D.  D. ,  Professor  of  Hebrew  in  Mans
field  College,  Oxford.

HILL,  G.  F. ,  M.A. , British  Museum.

MOORE,  Rev.  GEORGE  F. ,  I).  IX,  Pro
fessor  of  Theology,  Harvard  University.

Box,  Rev.  G.  H.,  M.A.  (Oxon. ),  London.

\VINCKLER,  H. ,  Ph.D.,  Privat-docent  in
•Semitic  Philology,  Berlin.

HOGG,  HOPE  "\V. ,  M.A. ,  Professor  of
Semitic  Languages,  Yictoria  Univer
sity,  Manchester.

ABRAHAMS,  ISRAEL,  Reader  in  Rabbinic,
Cambridge.

BENX.INGER,  Dr.  IMMANUEL,  formerly
Privat-docent  in  Old  Testament
Theology,  Berlin.

PERITX,  Rev.  ISMAK  JOHN,  Professor  of
Semitic  Languages,  Syracuse  Uni
versity,  New  York.

ROHINSON,  The  Very  Rev.  J.  ARMI-
TAGE,  D.  D. ,  Dean  of  Westminster.

PRINCE,  J.  D.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of
Semitic  Languages  and  Comparative
Philology,  New  York  University.

JEREMIAS,  JOHANNES,  Ph.D.,  Leipsic.


KEY  TO  SIGNATURES  IN  VOLUME  IV


XXVlll

J.  L.  M. MYKES, J. L., M.A., F.S.A., Student

and  Tutor  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
J.  M.  MASSIE,  JOHN,  M.A. ,  Yates  Professor  of

New  Testament  Exegesis  in  Mansfield

College,  Oxfoid.
J.  Mo.  MOFFATT,  Rev.  JAMES,  D.  D. ,  Dundonald,

Ayrshire.
J.  W.  WELLHAUSEN,  JULIUS,  D.D.,  Professor

of  Semitic  Philology,  Gottingen.
K.  G.  GELDNER, K. , Ph.D., Professor of

Sanscrit,  Berlin.
K.  M.  MARTI, KARL,  D.D., Professor  of  Old

Testament  Exegesis  and the  Hebrew

Language,  Berne.
M.  A.  C. CANNEY.  MAURICE  A.,  M.A.  (Oxon.),

London.
N.  M.  M'LEAN, NORMAN, M.A. , Lecturer  in

Hebrew,  and  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,

Cambridge.
N.  S.  SCHMIDT, NATHANAEL, Professor of

Semitic Languages and Literatures,

Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  New  York.
0.  C.  W. WHITEHOUSE, Rev. OWEN C., M.A.,

D.  D. , Principal and Professor of

Biblical Exegesis and Theology in

the  Countess  of  Huntingdon's  College,

Cheshunt,  Herts.
P.  G.  GARDNER,  P.,  Liu. D.,  F.S. A.,  Professor

of  Classical  Archaeology,  Oxford.
P.  W.  S.  SCHMIEDEL,  PAUL  W.,  D.D.,  Professor

of  New  Testament  Exegesis,  Ziirich.
S.  A.  C.  COOK,  STANLEY A., M.A. , Fellow of

Caius  College,  Cambridge.
S.  R.  D.  DRIVER,  Rev.  SAMUEL  ROLLES,  D. D. ,

Regius Professor of Hebrew, Canon

of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.


T.  G.  P.  PINCHES,  THEOPHILUS  G. ,  LL.D. ,

formerly  of  the  Egyptian  and  As
syrian  Department  in  the  British
Museum.

T.  K.  C.  CHEYNE,  Rev.  T.  K.,  D. Liu.,  D.D. ,

Oriel  Professor  of  the  Interpretation  of
Holy  Scripture  at  Oxford,  Canon  of
Rochester.

W.  C.  A.  ALLEN,  Rev.  W.  C.,  M.A.,  Chaplain,
Fellow,  and  Lecturer  in  Theology  and
Hebrew,  Exeter  College,  Oxford.

W.  C.  v.  M.  MANEN,  W.,  C.  VAN,  D.  D. ,  Professor  of
Old-Christian  Literature  and  New  Tes
tament  Exegesis,  Leyden.

W.  D.  R.  Ross,  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Merton
College,  Oxford.

W.  E.  ERBT,  W.,  Ph.D.,  Leipsic.

W.  E.  A.  ADDIS,  Rev.  W.  E.,  M.A. ,  Lecturer  in
Old  Testament  Criticism  in  Manchester
College,  Oxford.

W.  H.  B.  BENNETT,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Litt.D.,  D.D. ,
Professor  of  Biblical  Languages  and
Literature,  Hackney  College,  London,
and  Professor  of  Old  Testament
Exegesis,  New  College,  London.

W.  J.  W.  WOODHOUSE,  W.  J.,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Greek,  University  of  Sydney.

W.  M.  M.  MULLER,  W.  MAX,  Professor  of  Old
Testament  Literature,  Reformed  Epis
copal  Church  Seminary,  Philadelphia.

W.  R.  S.  SMITH,  The  late  W.  ROBERTSON,  D. D.,
Adams  Professor  of  Arabic,  Cam
bridge.

W.  T.  T.-D.  THISELTON-DYER,  Sir  WILLIAM  TUR
NER,  K.C.M.G.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,
Director,  Royal  Gardens,  Kew.


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME IV


Arranged  according  to  alphabetical  order  of  surnames.


ABRAHAMS,  I.
ADDIS,  \V.  E.
ALLEN,  \V.  C.
BENNETT,  W.  H.
BENZINGER,  I.
BEVAN,  A.  A.
Box,  G.  H.
BROWN,  F.

BURKITT, F. C.
BURNKY, C. F.

CANNEY,  M.  A.
CHEYNE,  T.  K.
COOK,  S.  A.
COOKE,  G.  A.
COWLKY,  A.  E.
DRIVER,  S.  R.
ERBT,  W.
GARDNER.  P.
GELDNER,  K.


I.  A.
W.  E.  A.
W.  C.  A.
W.  H.  B.
I.  B.
A.  A.  B.
G.  H.  B.
F.  B.

F.  C.  B.
C.  F.  B.
M.  A.  C.
T.  K.  C.
S.  A.  C.

G.  A.  C.
A.  E.  C.
S.  R.  D.
W.  E.
P.  G.

K.  G.


GOULD,  E.  P.
GRAY,  G.  B.
HILL,  G.  F.
HOGARTH,  D.  G.
HOGG,  H.  W.
JEREMIAS,  J.
JOHNS,  C.  H.  \V.
KENNEDY,  A.  R.  S.

McGlFFERT, A.  C.
M'LEAN, N.

MANEN,  W.  C.  v.
MARTI,  K.
MASSIE,  J.
MEYER,  E.
MOFFATT,  J.
MOORE,  G.  F.

MULLER, \V. M.

MYRES,  J.  L.
NESTLE,  E.


E.  P,  G.
G.  B.  G.
G.  F.  H.

D.  G.  H.
H.  W.  H.
J.  J.

C.  H.  W.  J.
A.  R.  S.  K.
A.  C.  M.
N.  M.
W.  C.  V.  M.
K.  M.
J.  M.

E.  M.
J.  Mo.
G.  F.  M.
W.  M.  M.
J.  L.  M.
E.  N.


PERITZ,  I.  J.
PINCHES,  T.  G.
PRINCE,  J.  D.
ROBINSON,  J.  A.
Ross,  W.  D.
SCHMIDT,  N.
SCHMIEDEL,  P.  W.
SHIPLEY,  A.  E.
SMITH,  G.  A.
SMITH,  W.  R.
STADE,  B.

THISELTON-DYER,  W
TIELE,  C.  P.
TOY,  C.  H.
WELLHAUSEN,  J.
WHITEHOUSE,  O.  C.
WINCKLER,  H.
WOODHOUSE,  W.  J.


I.  J.  P.
T.  G.  P.
J.  D.  P.
J.  A.  R.
W.  D.  R.
N.  S.
P.  W.  S.

A.  E.  S.
G.  A.  S.
W.  R.  S.

B.  S.

.T.  W.T.T.-D.

C.  P.  T.
C.  H.  T.
J.  W.

0 C.  W.
H.  W.
W.  J.  W.


MAPS IN VOLUME IV

ASIA,  WESTERN  (illustrating  TRADE  AND  COMMERCE)  . . . between  cols.  5160  and  5161

PALESTINE  and  PHOENICIA  (Trade  Routes) .  . . .  ,,  5164  ,,  5167

SYRIA, MESOPOTAMIA,  etc. (Assyriological)  .  ,,  4844  ,,  4845

SYRIA,  PHOENICIA,  PALESTINE,  etc.

(1)  After  Egyptian  Monuments . .  ...  ,,  4852  ,,  4853

(2)  After  Amarna  Letters  .  . .  ,,  4852  ,,  4853

TRACHONITIS,  BASHAN.  HAURAN,  GOLAN,  etc.  ...  „  5142  ,,  5143


CONTRIBUTORS


TO


VOLUME IV.


ABRAHAMS,  I.,  M.A.,  Cambridge
ADDIS,  Rev.  Prof.  W.  E. ,  M.A.,

Manchester  College,  Oxford
ALLEN,  Rev.  W.  C. ,  M.A. ,  Exeter

College,  Oxford

BENNETT,  Rev.  Prof.  W.  H.,
Litt.D.,  D.D.,  London

BENZINGER,  Immanuel,  Ph.D. .

BEVAN,  Prof.  A.  A.,  Cambridge.

Box,  Rev.  G.  H. ,  M.A. .

BROWN,  Rev.  Prof.  F. ,  D.D. ,
New  York

BURKITT,  F.  C. ,  M.A. ,  Cambridge

BUK.NEY,  Rev.  C.  F.,  M.A. ,  St.
John's  College,  Oxford.

CANNEY,  Maurice  A.,  M.A. ,
London

CHEYNE,  Rev.  Prof.  T.  K. ,
D.Litt.,  D.D.,  Oxford

COOK,  S.  A.,  M.A. ,  Caius  Col
lege,  Cambridge

COOKE,  Rev.  G.  A.,  M.A.

COWLEY,  A.  E. ,  M.A. ,  Magdalen
College,  Oxford.

DRIVER,  Rev.  Prof.  S.  R. ,  D.D. ,
Oxford

ERBT,  W.,  Ph.D.

GARDNER,  Prof.  Percy,  D.Litt.,
Oxford.

GEI.DNEK,  Prof.  Karl,  Ph.D.,
Berlin.

GOULD,  Rev.  E.  P. ,  D.  D. ,  Phila
delphia.

GRAY,  Rev.  Prof.  G.  B. ,  M.A. ,
D.D.,  Mansfield  College,
Oxford.

HILL,  G.  F.,  M.A.,  British
Museum

HOGARTH,  D.  G. ,  M.A.,  Mag
dalen  College,  Oxford.

HOGG,  Prof.  H.  W.,  M.A. ,  Vic
toria  University,  Manchester

JEREMIAS,  Johannes,  Ph.D.

JOHNS,  Rev.  C.  H.  W.,  M.A.,
Queens'  College,  Cambridge

KENNEDY,  Rev.  Prof.  A.  R.  S.,
D.D.,  Edinburgh

M'GiFFERT, Rev. Prof. A. C.,

D.  D. ,  New  York.
M-LEAN, N., M.A., Christ's

College,  Cambridge


Tunic,  etc. MAXEX, Rev. Prof. W.  C.  van,
Righteousness,  etc. D.  D.  ,  Levden.

Romans  (Epistle  to),  etc.

MARTI,  Prof.  K.,  D.D.,  Bern .

Year,  etc.

Thaddaeus.

MASSIE,  Prof.  John,  D.  D.,  Mans

Satan.

field  College,  Oxford

Stranger,  etc.

MEYER,  Prof.  Ed.,  Ph.D.,  Berlin
MOKKATT,  Rev.  James,  D.D.

Sidon.
Sermon  on  Mount,  etc.

Temple,  etc.

MOOKE,  Rev. Prof.  G. F.  ,  D.  D.  ,

Sacrifice,  etc.

\Vriting.

H  arvard  U  n  i  vers  i  ty

Temple,  etc.

MLLLEK, Prof. W.  M., Ph.D.,

Red  Sea,  etc.

Sheba,  etc.

Philadelphia

MYKES, J. L.  , M.A., Christ

Precious  Stones.

Text  and  Versions.

Church,  Oxford

Stars.

NESTLE,  Prof.  Eb.,  D.D.,  Ph.D.

Thomas.

Maulbnjim,  \Viirtemberg

Ship,  etc.

PERITZ, Rev. Prof.  I.  J.,  M.A.,

Synagogue.

Ph.D. Svracuse University,

Saul,  etc.

N.Y.

PINCHES,  T.  G.  ,  LL.  D.  ,  formerly

Tiglath-pileser.

Tent,  etc.

of  British  Museum

PRINCE, Prof. J. D., Ph.D.,

Scribes  and  Pharisees.

Tabor.

New  York

Samaritans,  etc.

Rom.  \  SON, The Very Rev. J.

Teacher,  etc.

Armitage, D.D.  , Dean of

Westminster

Trachonitis.

Ross, W. D.  , M.A., Merton

Stoics.

College,  Oxford

Tobit.

SCHMIDT, Prof. N., Ph.D.,

Son  of  God,  etc.

Quirinius.

Cornell  University,  N.Y.

SCHMIEDEL,  Prof. P.  \Y.  ,  D.  D.  ,

Resurrection.

Zoroastrianism.

Zurich

SHIPLEY, A. E., M.A.,  Christ's

Serpent,  etc.

Spirit.

College,  Cambridge

SMITH,  Rev.  Prof. G. A.,  D.D.,

Trade  and  Commerce.

Theophany,  etc.

LL.  D.  ,  Glasgow

SMITH,  the  late  Prof.  W.  Robert

Sabbath,  etc.

son,  D.  D.  ,  LL.  D.

Weights  and  Measures,  etc.

STADE, Prof. B., D.D., Ph.D.,
Giessen

Samuel  (Books  of).

Syria.

THISELTON-DYER, Sir W. T.  ,

Vine,  etc.

K.C.M.G.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,

Reuben,  etc.

Director,  Royal  Gardens.  Kew

TIELE,  the  late  Prof.  C.  P.,  D.  D.  ,

Satrap.

Leyden

Ritual.

TOY,  Prof.  C.  H.  ,  D.D.  ,  Harvard

Wisdom  Literature,  etc.

Sennacherib,  etc.

University

WELLHAUSEN,  Prof.  Julius,  D.  D.  ,

Zechariah.

Weaving,  etc.

Ph.D.,  Gottingen

WHITEHOUSE, Rev. Principal

War,  etc.

Thessalonians  (Epistle  to)

O.  C,  D.D.

WiNCKLER,  H.  ,  Ph.D.,  Berlin .

Sinai,  etc.

Serpent,  etc.

WOODHOUSE,  Prof.  W.  J.,  M.A.  ,

Sardis,  etc.

Sydney

xxxi

AN  ALPHABETICAL  LIST  OF  SOME  OF  THE  ARTICLES  IN
VOL. IV.,  WITH  THE  AUTHORS'  NAMES


QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN  .
QUIRINIUS

RAIN . . . .
RAMESES
REED .
REPHAIM

RESURRECTION  and  ASCEN
SION  NARRATIVES
REUBEN .

RHODES . . . .
RIGHT,  RIGHTEOUSNESS .
RITUAL  (BABYLONIAN)
ROMANS  (EPISTLE) .
ROME  (CHURCH)
RUTH,  BOOK  OF

SABBATH

SACRIFICE

SADUUCEES

SALAMIS  . . . .

SALT .

SALUTATIONS .

SAMARIA,  SAMARITANS .

SAMOS .

SAMUEL .

SARDIS . . . .

SARGON  (with  Illustration)

SATAN .

SATYRS . . . .

SAUI

SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES .

SCYTHIANS

SELEUCID.^.

SENNACHERIB  .

SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT .

SERPENT  .

SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD
SETH,  SETHITES
SHEBA .

SHEEP . . . .
SHEKEL  (with  Illustrations;
SHEPHERD  OF  HERMAS
SHILOH . . . .
SHIP  (with  Illustrations)
SHISHAK  .
SHOES .

Si  DON . . . .

SIEGE  (with  Illustrations) .

SILAS,  SILVANUS

SIMEON . . . .

SIMON  MAGUS  .

SIMON  PETER .

SIN

SlXAI AND  HOREB .
SlRACH .  .  .  .

SLAVERY  .
SMYRNA .

SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH .

SOLOMON .

SON  OF  GOD

SON  OF  MAN .

SPIRIT .

SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

STARS . . . .

STATER  (with  Illustration) .

STEPHEN  .

STOICS


Prof.  G.  F.  Moore.
Prof.  P.  Gardner.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  W.  M.  Muller.
N.  M'Lean.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  P.  W.  Schmiedel.

Hope  W.  Hogg.

Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.

Prof.  W.  E.  Addis.

Johannes  Jeremias.

Prof.  W.  C.  van  Manen.

Prof.  W.  C.  van  Manen.

Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne  and  the  late

Prof.  W.  Robertson  Smith.
Prof. Marti, Prof. Cheyne  and

the  late  Prof.  W.  R.  Smith.
Prof.  G.  F.  Moore
A.  E.  Cow  ley.
Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.
Prof.  Kennedy  and  the  late  Prof.

\V.  R.  Smith.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
A.  E.  Cowley.
Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.
Prof.  B.  Stade.
Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.
Rev.  C.  H.  W.  Johns.
Prof. G. B. Gray and Prof.

J.  Massie.
Prof.  G.  B.  Gray.
Prof.  T. K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  J.  D.  Prince.
Prof.  N.  Schmidt.
Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.
Rev.  C. H.  W.  Johns.
Rev.  J.  Moffatt.
Norman  M'Lean,  A.  E.  Shipley,

and  Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  T. K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  F.  Brown.
A.  E.  Shipley  and  S.  A.  Cook.
G.  F.  Hill.

Prof.  W.  C.  van  Manen.
Prof.  T. K.  Cheyne.
M.  A.  Canney.
Prof.  W.  M.  Mtiller.
I. Abrahams, S. A. Cook,  and

Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  Ed.  Meyer.
Prof.  O.  C.  Whitehouse.
Prof. P.  W.  Schmiedel.
Hope  W.  Hogg.
Prof.  P.  W.  Schmiedel.
Prof.  P.  W.  Schmiedel.
Prof.  W.  M.  Muller.
H.  Winckler.
Prof.  C. H.  Toy.
Dr.  I.  Benzinger.
Prof. W. T. Woodhouse and

Prof.  W.  M.  Muller.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  N.  Schmidt.
Prof.  N.  Schmidt.
Prof.  Addis  and  Rev.  E.  P.Gould.
Prof.  P.  W.  Schmiedel.
Rev.  C.  V.  Burney.
G.  F.  Hill.
Rev.  J.  Moffatt.
W.  D.  Ross.


STONES  (Precious)
STRANGER  ANDSOJOURNER
SYENE ....
SYNAGOGUE
SYNEDRIUM

SYRIA  (with  Maps) .

TABERNACLE .

TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF  .

TABOR ....

TAHPANHES

TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE  .

TEACHER

TEMPLE  (with  Illustrations)
TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS
TENT  (with  Illustrations) .
TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

TlIADD/EUS

THEOPHANY

THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLE)

THESSALONICA

THKUDAS

THOMAS  (the  Apostle)

TlGLATH-PlLESER .

TIMOTHY

TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS
(Epistles)

TlRHAKAH

TITHES  ....
TITUS  ....
TOBIT  ....
TOMBS  (with  Illustrations)  .
TRACHONITIS  (with  Maps)
TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

(with  Maps)

TURBAN  ....
UNKNOWN  GOD,  ALTAR  TO

UR  OF  THE  ClIALDEES

URIM  AND  THUMMIN
VINE ....

Vows,  VOTIVE  OFFERINGS

WANDERINGS,  WILDER
NESS  OF

WAR ....

WASHINGS,  CEREMONIAL  .

WEAVING  (with  Illustra
tions)

WEEK ....

WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

WIDOW ....

WIND,  WINDS  .

WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK

(with  Illustrations)
WISDOM  LITERATURE
WISDOM  (BOOK)
WONDERS

WOOL  ....
WRITING.

YEAR ....
ZADOK ....
ZEBULUN  ....
ZECHARIAH  (BOOK)  .
ZEPHANIAH

ZERUBBABEL .

ZILPAH ....

ZOROASTRIANISM


J.  L.  Myres.

Prof.  W.  H.  Bennett.

Prof.  W.  M.  Muller.

Prof.  I.  J.  Peritz.

M.  A.  Canney  and  the  late  Prof.

W.  R.  Smith.
D. G. Hogarth, A.  E.  Shipley,

and  H.  Winckler.
Dr.  I.  Benzinger.
Dr.  I.  Benzinger.
Rev.  G.  A.  Cooke.
Prof.  W.  M.  Muller.
Dr.  I.  Benzinger.
The Very Rev. J. Armitage

Robinson,  D.D.
Dr.  I.  Benzinger.
Rev.  J.  Moffatt  and  Prof.  Cheyne.
S.  A.  Cook.

F.  C.  Burkitt.
Rev.  W.  C.  Allen.
Prof.  G.  B.  Gray.
Prof.  A.  C.  M'Giffert.
Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.
Prof.  P.  W.  Schmiedel.
Prof.  Eb.  Nestle.

T.  G.  Pinches.
Rev.  J.  Moffatt.
Rev.  J.  Moffatt.

Prof.  W.  M.  Muller.
Prof.  G.  F.  Moore.
Rev.  J.  Moffatt.
Dr.  W.  Erbt.
Dr.  I.  Benzinger.
Prof.  S.  R.  Driver.
Prof.  G.  A.  Smith.

I.  Abrahams  and  S.  A.  Cook.

Prof.  W.  J.  Woodhouse.

Prof.  F.  Brown  and  Prof.  T.  K.

Cheyne.

Prof.  G.  F.  Moore.
Norman  M'Lean  and  Sir  W.  T.

Thistleton-Dyer.
Prof.  G.  F.  Moore.
Prof.  G.  B.  Gray.

Prof.  O.  C.  Whitehouse.

M. A.  Canney.

Prof.  A.  R.  S.  Kennedy.

Prof.  K.  Marti.

G.  F.  Hill.

The  Very  Rev.  J.  A.  Robinson,

D.D.

Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Prof.  A.  R.  S.  Kennedy.

Prof.  C.  H.  Toy.

Prof.  C.  H.  Toy.

M.  A.  Canney.

A.  E.  Shipley.

Prof.  A.  A.  Sevan.

Prof.  K. Marti.

Prof.  W.  E.  Addis.

Hope  W.  Hogg.

Prof.  J.  Wellhausen.

Prof. Driver  and  the  late  Prof.

W.  R.  Smith.
Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne.
Hope  W.  Hogg.
Prof. Geldner  and Prof. T. K.

Cheyne.


XXX11


ENCYCLOPEDIA  BIBLICA


Q


QUAIL  (l,  Maw,  Kr.  v,  stlayw ;
MHTP&;1  coturnix}.  Mentioned  in  EV  in  Ex.  1613
Nu.  11  si/  Ps.  10540  Wisd.  162  19i2f  ;  cp  rp3  rpy,  Ps.
7827.  That  the  quail,  not  the  sand-grouse  (?)  or
the  locust  (Hasselquist's  alternatives,  Travels,  443)  or
the  crane  (Dean  Stanley  and  H.  S.  Palmer,  see
§  2,  note  2)  is  meant,  is  generally  recognised.

The  Ar.  word  for  'quail,'  saliva,  which  is  a  loan-word,  was

found  by  C.  Niebuhr  (1774)  to  be  still  in  use  in  Egypt. Another

word  for  it  is  su»idml,  given  to  it  because

1.  Identification, of  its  'fatness,' and  Lagarde  (Uebers.  81)

has  proposed to  connect the  name  with

Eshmun-Iolaos,  the  god  who  restored  Heracles  to  life  by  giving
him  a  quail  to  smell  at.  The  quail  was  annually  sacrificed
among  the  Phoenicians  in  the  month  Feb. -Mar.  to  commemorate
the  reviving  of  Heracles  (Athen.  947,  referred  to  by  WRS,
Re!.  Sem.f-)  469).  There  is  no  trace,  however,  of  the  sacred
character  of  this  bird  among  the  Arabians  or  the  Hebrews.

The  Coturnix  communis  or  C.  dactylisonans  of  orni
thologists  is  well-known  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  where
it  passes,  migrating  northward  in  spring,  in  immense
flights.  Tristram  found  them  in  the  Jordan  valley
(Land  of  Israel,  460).  They  arrive  in  Palestine  in
March  and  April — though  a  few  remain  there  during
the  winter — on  the  way  to  their  breeding-places  in  the
plains  and  cornfields  of  the  upper  country.  Even  these
flocks  are  said  to  be  surpassed  in  numbers  by  the
autumn  flight  when  they  return  S.  to  their  winter-
quarters.  The  quail  flies  very  low,  which  Dillmann
supposed  to  explain  the  important  clause  at  the  end
of  Nu.  llsi  (but  see  §  2).  It  is  soon  fatigued,  and
hence  falls  an  easy  prey  to  man.  160,000  have  been
captured  in  a  season  at  Capri,  where  their  plump  flesh
is  esteemed  a  delicacy,  as  indeed  it  is  all  along  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  They  were  salted  and
stored  as  food  by  the  ancient  Egyptians  (Herod.  277).

A.  E.  s. — s.  A.  c.

There  are  two  references  to  a  supply  of  quails  for  the

food  of  the  Israelites — viz., in  Ex.  16 12/ (scene, the

., wilderness  of  Sin,  on  the  way  to  Sinai),

2.  The  quails  and  jn  Nu  T1 18-2331-34  (scene,  Kibroth-

hattaavah ,  after  the  departure  from  Sinai).
wanderings.  The  former  beiongs  to  P. He  has  just

made  Moses  and  Aaron  tell  the  Israelites  that  in  the
evening  they  shall  know  that  Yahwe  has  brought  them
out  of  Egypt,  and  that  in  the  morning  they  shall  see
Yahwe's  glory  (vv.  6/. ).  The  evening  event  is  the
arrival  of  the  quails  ;  the  morning  event  is  the  lighting
down  of  the  manna.  The  redactor  has  omitted  P's
account  of  the  fall  of  the  manna,  the  passage  from  '  the
dew  lay  round  '  to  '  has  given  you  to  eat '  being  J's  (see


(Di.).  The  right  Gk.  word  for  quail,  oprvf,  is  given  by  Jos.
and  Gr.  Ven.  On  Rabbinical  notices  see  Jomd,  75  b.  Cp  also
FOWL,  §  i,  col.  1159,  and  n.  i.


128


3989


Baentsch).  The  narrative  in  Nu.  11  [J]  is  much  more
detailed.  The  announcement  of  the  quails  specifies  a
month  as  the  period  during  which  quails  should  be  eaten  ;
after  this  the  flesh  was  to  become  loathsome  to  the  eaters.
The  coming  of  the  quails  is  thus  described  (vv.  31-34),
'  And  a  wind  from  Yahwe  [a  SE.  wind,  Ps.  7826]  took
up  quails  from  the  sea  [read  D'i'rB'  KVI  '"  nxp  mil],1  and
made  them  to  fall  by  the  camp,  about  a  day's  journey
on  this  side,  and  a  day's  journey  on  the  other  side,
round  about  the  camp,  like  heaps  of  wheat2  (ovrijTisa)
on  the  face  of  the  ground.'  The  appropriateness  of
the  figure  is  clear  from  what  follows.  '  And  the  people
rose  up  all  that  day,  and  all  the  night,  and  all  the
next  day,  and  gathered  the  quails  ;  he  that  gathered
least  gathered  ten  homers,  and  they  spread  them  all
about  for  themselves  [to  dry  them]  round  about  the
camp.'  But  the  result  was  a  fatal  malady.  'While
the  flesh  was  yet  between  their  teeth,  ere  it  was  chewed,
the  anger  of  Yahwe  was  kindled  against  the  people,'  etc.
The  story  (with  which  cp  Ps.  7826-31)  is  told  to  account
for  the  name  '  Kibroth-hattaavah '  (graves  of  lust) ;  it
belongs  to  the  large  class  of  astiological  legends.  The
more  correct  name,  however,  is  probably  '  Taberah. '
See  KIBROTH-HATTAAVAH.  T.  K.  c.

The  peculiarity  of  the  incident  needs  some  better
explanation  than  a  reference  to  the  statement  of  Aristotle
(d.  Plant.  1  5  ;  cp  Bochart,  ii.  1 15)  that
quails  eat  poisonous  things — e.g. ,  helle
bore — which  are  harmful  to  men.  It  may  be  more
instructive,  therefore,  to  give  a  parallel  case  from
the  Elizabethan  voyages.  The  ship  '  Desire '  be
longing  to  Cavendish's  last  and  ill-fated  expedition
to  the  east  by  way  of  the  Pacific,  put  back  for  home
from  the  Straits  of  Magellan  in  1592.  They  came  to
anchor  at  a  harbour  in  Patagonia,  named  after  the
vessel  Port  Desire,  and  found  on  an  island  near  it  such
numbers  of  penguins  that  the  men  could  hardly  go
without  treacling  on  them.  A  party  of  twenty-two
men  was  landed  on  the  island  to  kill  the  birds  and  dry
them  on  the  rocks.  From  3oth  Oct.  to  22nd  Dec.

1  [The  traditional  text  contains  two  improbabilities  —  J'DJ,
applied  to  a  wind  (Pasek  should  put  us  on  our  guard),  and
U'l  ((P,  efeWpacrei'),  from  "3,  which  occurs  again  only  in  Ps.
90 10,  where  (see  Che.  Ps.W)  it  is  corrupt.  Both  words  spring
out  of  the  reading  Ntj'3,  which  alone  suits  the  sense.  The
corruption,  however,  must  be  very  old  because  of  Ps.  78  26. —

T.  K.  C.]

'•*  [The  text  has  'about  two  cubits '  (DTISN2),  which  the  com
mentators  suppose  to  refer  to  the  very  low  flight  of  the  quails.
Dean  Stanley,  however,  (SP,  82)  thought  that  large  cranes
(storks?)  three  feet  high  might  be  meant.  Only  our  sub
servience  to  MT  has  prevented  us  from  seeing  that  the  true  text
must  be  C'aTjnDS,  a  figure  which  occurs  again  in  Ex.158
(ic-iyr-iriss).— T.  K.  c.]

3990


3.  The  malady.


QUARRIES

they  killed  and  dried  20,000  ;  the  captain  (John  Davis),
the  master,  and  John  Lane,  the  narrator,  were  able  to
make  a  small  quantity  of  salt  by  evaporating  sea-water
in  holes  of  the  rocks,  wherewith  they  salted  a  certain
number  of  birds.  '  Thus  God  did  feed  us  even  as  it
were  with  manna  from  heaven.'  Only  14,000  dried
penguins  could  be  got  on  board.  The  crew  were  put
on  rations  of  which  the  principal  part  was  five  penguins
every  day  among  four  men.  It  was  not  until  some
time  after  that  disease  broke  out,  the  dried  birds
having  begun  to  breed  a  large  worm  in  appalling
numbers  in  the  warmer  latitudes.

Various  symptoms  of  the  malady  here  described  are
sufficiently  characteristic  of  the  acute  dropsical  form  of
the  disease  called  beri-beri  (some  derive  the  name  from
the  Arabic) ;  there  are,  however,  dropsical  conditions
caused  by  parasitic  worms  apart  from  the  special  dietetic
errors  to  which  beri-beri  is  commonly  ascribed.  But,
however  this  may  be,  the  parallelism  between  the  two
narratives  is  obvious.  There  is  the  same  generic  cause,
and  the  quail  is  a  fat  bird,  like  the  penguin,  which  would
corrupt  the  more  easily  if  it  were  dried  with  its  fat.  In
St.  Kilda,  where  the  diet  used  to  be  of  air-dried  gannets
and  fulmars,  it  was  customary  to  remove  the  fat  before
curing.  C.  C.

A.  E.  s.— s.  A.  c.,  §  i  ;  T.  K.  c.,  §  2  ;  C.  C. ,  §  3.

QUARRIES  (RV'»e-  'graven  images';  Dv'pQ  ;
TOON  (-AYTTTCON  •  ^ota,  Judg.  3i926f).  The  plsilim
near  Gilgnl  are  a  well-known  landmark.  Heb.  usage  of
pisel  favours  the  sense  '  sculptured  sacred  stones '  (so
Moore,  Budde).  Many  scholars  find  an  allusion  to  the
stones  mentioned  in  Josh.  4820.  If  so,  ptsllim  is  used
in  its  original  sense  of  '  hewn  stones.'  Cp  Ass.  pasallu,
a  pillar  ;  Tg.  Pesh.  give  '  quarries,'  a  guess.

The  view  of  the  Ehud-story  advocated  elsewhere  (see  JEKICHO,
§  2),  which  detects  an  underlying  form  in  which  the  place-
names,  now  corrupted,  were  of  the  Negeb,  throws  doubt  on
both  the  above  theories.  Among  the  possible  corruptions  of
SxyCB"  (Ishmael)  is  ^53  or  7'QO!  cp  SHELEPH.  In  order  to
escape  to  Seirah  (for  the  reading  adopted  by  the  present  writer
see  SEIRAH),  Ehud  had  to  pass  an  outpost  of  Ishmaelites
(  =  Jerahmeelites);  for  Eglon,  the  Misrite  king,  was  a  Jerah-
meelite  (see  v.  13,  where  'Ammon'  and  '  Amalek '  both  =
'  Jerahmeel ').  For  C<S'DE>  read  therefore  probably  C'^NVH^"-

2.  Josh.  75  RVmjf.,  see  SHEBAKIM.  T.  K.  C.

QUARTERMASTER  (nnWQ-|b'),  Jer.  51 59  RV"»e-
See  SERAIAH,  4.

QUARTUS  (KOYARTOC  [Ti.  WH])  adds  his  saluta
tion  to  that  of  Tertius,  addressed  to  the  Christians  in
Rome,  at  the  close  of  Rom.  16 (22^  ).  It  has  been  con
jectured  that  he  may  have  been  one  of  those  Jews  who
were  expelled  from  Rome  by  Claudius.  See,  further,
SIMON  (the  Cyrenian).

In  the  lists  of  the  seventy  disciples  by  the  Pseudo-Dorotheus
and  Pseudo  -  Hippolytus  he  appears  as  bishop  of  Berytus.
In  the  apocryphal  Ac.'s  of  refer  and  Paul  he  is  a  member  of
the  praetorian  guard,  one  of  the  soldiers  who  have  charge  of
Paul  in  Rome.

QUATERNION  (TeTp<\AlON  :  Acts  124),  a  guard
of  four  soldiers.

QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN  (DV?L';n  n3^p  ;  6  H  BACI-
Aicc<\  TOY  OYP&NOY-  except  Jer.7i8  H  CTR&TIA  TOY
1  Cult  °YP^NOY1  [Acl-  s)'m-  Theod.  B&ciAicCH] ;
Vg.  regina  caell ;  Pesh.  pulhdn  semavva,
except  Jer.  44 19  malkat  semayyd ^  Tg.  N'EJJ'  712212),
an  object  of  worship  to  which  offerings  were  made  by
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  other  cities  of  Judah  in
the  seventh  century  and  by  Jewish  refugees  in  Egypt
after  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  ;  see  Jer.  7 16-20  4415-30.

The  peculiarity  of  this  worship  appears,  from
Jeremiah's  description,  to  have  been  the  offering  of  a
special  kind  of  cakes  which  were  made  by  the  Jewish
women  with  the  assistance  of  their  families  ( '  the  boys


1  Probably  reading  K3X,  as  in  82  19  13.

8  Contamination  from  (5,  which  is  otherwise  demonstrable  in
this  verse.

399^


QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN

gather  firewood  and  the  fathers  kindle  the  fire  and  the
women  knead  dough  to  make  cakes,'  etc.,  Jer.  7  18  ;  cp
44  19).  The  cakes  were  offered  to  the  deity  by  fire
(441517^  2125;  kilter,  nap,  erroneously  translated  in
EV,  '  burn  incense'),  and  the  burning  was  accompanied
by  libations  (44  17  /•)•  These  rites  were  performed  '  in
the  cities  of  Judah  and  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  '
(7  17  44i7)  ;  the  worship  jeems  to  have  been  domestic,
and  perhaps  specifically  a  woman's  cult  (see  44i$  19  25);  l
that  the  men  assist  in  the  preparations  (7  18)  and  assume
their  share  of  the  responsibility  (44is_^!)  is  not  in
consistent  with  the  latter  view,  nor  are  the  expressions
in  which  the  prevalence  of  the  worship  is  affirmed
(44i7).«

The  cakes  (kawwanlm, c'Ji|, Jer.  7i8 44i9t;3 (5

^ai'tD^es,  and  in  the  latter  passage  xouavej  [Q*],
Xai'/Sajves  [N*]  ;  Vg.  placenta;  Pesh.  zauthdre,  a  species
of  sacrificial  cakes  ;  4  Tg.  j«ani3  or  poma,  perhaps
XovSpIrai,5  Gen.  40  16)  were  rightly  compared  by
Chrysostom  and  other  early  commentators  to  the  iroirava.
or  Trtfj.fj.aTO.  of  the  Greeks,  of  which  there  were  many
varieties.  6  Some  of  these  were  made  in  the  likeness  of
a  victim  ;  others  imaged  or  symbolised  the  deity  to
%vhom  they  were  offered.7

It  has  been  thought  by  many  that  the  kaiuwanim  of  the
queen  of  heaven  represented  the  moon,8  or  —  upon  a  different
view  of  her  nature  —  the  planet  Venus  (see  below,  g  3).  Jer.
44  19  has  been  understood  to  testify  to  the  iconic  character  of
these  cakes,  the  verb  rnsi'H1?  being  connected  with  C'2S>5,'(Ii>°i-,
§  i/'),9  and  translated  'to  image  Tier';  but  both  the  text  and
the  interpretation  are  extremely  doubtful.

The  translation  'Queen  of  Heaven'  (EV)  represents
malkat  hassamdyim  ;  and  this  interpretation  —  the  only
_,...  one  which  would  naturally  suggest  itself  to
'  one  who  read  the  words  c'Deri  n^So  in  an  un
pointed  text  —  is  supported  by  the  oldest  exegetical
tradition  (<5).  The  vowelled  text,  however,  gives  roSrj
(rntUkct),  treating  ro^D  as  a  defective  spelling  of  roK'ro
from  ttatt^D.1'  '  work,'  and  this  view  of  the  derivation  of
the  word  is  represented  by  Pesh.  pulhan  semayyd
(religious  work,  cultus).  The  Jewish  scholars  with
whom  this  interpretation  originated  doubtless  thought
that  the  worship  of  the  o'Crn  roSa  in  Jer.  7  44  was  the
same  as  the  worship  of  the  'host  of  heaven'  (c'CC'n  K2!»),
Jer.  82  19  13  Zeph.  15  Dt.  4  19  17  3,  etc.

This  identification,  suggested  perhaps  by  a  general  comparison
of  the  references  to  these  cults,  would  seem  to  be  confirmed  by
the  passages  in  which  the  worship  of  the  C'CCTl  rC*?2  appears
to  be  equivalent  to  burning  offerings  or  making  libations  '  to
other  gods  '  (see  7  18  44  15;  cp  17-19),  as  though  the  cult  were
addressed  to  a  collective  object  such  as  the  heavenly  bodies.  A
warrant  for  taking  the  word  n^xVo  in  tn's  sense  was  found  in
Gen.  2  where  nDN^C  (God's  '  work  which  he  wrought')  in  v.  2/r
is  obviously  parallel  to  j<3^  in  v.  i.11  This  opinion  was  known
to  Jerome,  who  writes  (Coniiit.  on  Jer.  7  18)  :  reginae  ca;li  .  .  .
'quam  lunam  debemus  accipere,  vel  certe  militiae  creli,  ut
omnes  Stellas  intelligamus,'  and  is  given  a  place  in  the  margin
of  AV,  'frame,  or  workmanship  of  heaven.'

Modern  scholars,  however,  almost  without  exception,
have  adopted  the  older  and  more  natural  interpretation,

1  queen of heaven.  ' This prevailing opinion was
vigorously  assailed  by  Stade  in 1886  ; he  maintained

1  Peritz,  JBL  17  121  (1898),  without  apparent  reason,  connects

2  K.  23  jl>  with  this  cult.

2  See,  for  the  opposite  opinion,  Stade,  ZA  Tit'  6  ivj  j(f.

3  See  BAKEMEATS,  §  2.

4  [See  Lagarde,  Ges.  Abh.  42,  108.]

5  Jastrow,  Dictionary,  s.v.  [otherwise  Levy, Targ.  ffll'B,
384/L

'  See  Lobeck,  Aglaofkamus,  1060  ff.

7  See  Stengel,  Griech.  Kultusaltcrtiiincrtpi,  oo  ;  for  similar
customs  among  other  peoples  see  Liebrecht,  Zur  Volkskundc,


8  Comparing  the  a*i</>t(J)a>vTe?  of  Artemis  at the Munychia,
Athen.  H645  Ai  Preller-Robert,  Griech.  Mythologie,  1312.

9  So  Sym.,  Tg.,  Rashi,  and  others.

1°  Omission  of  silent  K-  Examples  of  tbis  spelling  occur  in
Phoenician  inscriptions  —  e^.,  CIS  1  no.  86  A  //.  6  q.  On  the
other  hand,  many  Hebrew  MSS  in  our  passage  have  intro
duced  K  into  the  text.

11  Abarbanel  on  Jer.  44  15,  as  the  opinion  of  older  interpreters.
Similarly  Stade,  ZA  TW  6  339.  See  also  Dfbarim  ratoa,  §  10
end.

3992


QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN

that  c'DBTt  nata  (?  malkut]  was  a  collective,  '  the  rule,
that  is,  the  ruling  powers,  of  heaven,"  a  more  compre
hensive  term  than  '  host  of  heaven  ' ;  at  a  later  stage  of
the  controversy  he  was  inclined  to  conjecture  that  m^D
(ro^Sc.  '  work '  ;  cp  Gen.  2  if. )  had  been  substituted  for
N3S  by  a  scribe  or  editor  to  whom  the  word  nax  was
offensive.  Stade  did  not,  however,  establish  his  main
contention  that  the  rendering  '  queen  of  heaven '  must
be  rejected  ;  the  result  of  the  discussion  upon  this  point
was  rather  to  confirm  the  conviction  that  that  is  the
only  satisfactory  interpretation  of  the  words.1

It  is  not  probable  that  a  deity  invoked  as  queen  of
heaven,  to  whose  displeasure  at  the  neglect  of  her

o  TJ  *-c  A-  worship  the  contemporaries  of  Jere-
3.  Identification.  miah  cou,d  attribute  the  calan;ities

that  had  befallen  them  and  their  country,  was  a  minor
figure  in  the  Semitic  pantheon  ;  the  presumption  is  that
the  rites  described  by  the  prophet  belonged  to  a  specific
cult  of  the  great  goddess  Astarte.  The  title  seems
also  to  indicate  that  the  worship  was  addressed  to  one
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  was  one  of  the  particular
cults  embraced  in  the  general  prophetic  condemnation
of  the  worship  of  the  '  sun  and  moon  and  the  whole
host  of  heaven.'  From  an  early  time  it  has  been
disputed  whether  the  queen  of  heaven  in  the  sky  was
the  moon2  or  the  planet  Venus.3  The  former  opinion
was  probably  in  its  origin  only  an  application  of  the
general  theory  which  in  the  last  centuries  of  the  ancient
world  identified  all  manner  of  goddesses  with  the  moon  ;
in  modern  times  it  has  appeared  to  follow  from  the
current  though  ill-founded  belief  that  the  Astarte  of  the
western  Semites  was  a  moon  goddess.  (See  ASHTORETH,
§  4. )  In  the  Babylonian  system,  which  was  at  the
height  of  its  influence  in  the  W.  in  the  seventh  century,
the  star  of  Istar  was  the  planet  Venus,  whilst  the  moon
was  a  great  god,  Sin.  The  traces  in  Syria  and  Arabia
of  cults  similar  to  that  described  by  Jeremiah  connect
themselves  with  the  worship  of  Venus.  Thus  the  name
Collyridians  was  given  to  a  heretical  Arab  sect  because
their  women  offered  cakes  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  to  whom
they  paid  divine  honours.4  See  also  Isaac  of  Antioch,
ed.  Bickell,  Imff.

More  than  one  of  the  questions  discussed  above
would  be  put  beyond  controversy  if  it  were  established
that  malkatu,  or  malkatu  sa  same,  the  literal  equivalent
of  the  Heb.  malkat  hassdmdyim,  occurs  in  cuneiform
texts  as  a  title  of  Istar  ;5  but  that  the  ideogram  A  A
should  be  read  malkatu  is  at  best  a  plausible  conjecture,
on  which  no  conclusions  can  properly  be  based.  Istar
is  called,  however,  belit  fame  and  sarrat  same?  the
latter  exactly  corresponding  in  meaning  to  the  Hebrew
malkat  hassamayim,  '  queen  of  heaven. '  In  a  catalogue
of  the  names  of  Venus  in  various  regions  and  languages
preserved  by  Syrian  lexicographers  we  are  told  that
Venus  was  called  malkat  scmayyd  by  the  Arzanians,7
that  is  the  inhabitants  of  Arzon,  a  diocese  in  the
province  of  Nisibis  (ZDMG  43  394n. ).  The  list  shows  in
other  particulars  accurate  information,  and  may  be  taken
as  evidence  that  a  cult  of  Venus  with  the  epiklesis  'queen
of  heaven'  survived  in  that  locality  into  Christian  times.

Herodotus  (lios)  sets  it  down  that  the  temple  of
Aphrodite  Urania  in  Askalon  was  the  oldest  seat  of  her
worship ;  thence  it  passed  to  Cyprus  and  Cythera.8

1  See especially  Kuenen,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  186-
211. [Cp,  however,  Crit.  Bib. — T.  K.C.]

2  Jerome,  Olympiodorus,  and  very  many  down  to  our  own
time.

3  Tg.,  Isaac  of  Antioch,  and  others.

4  Epiph.  Hirr.  78  c.  23  79  c.  i  18. Epiphanius  recognises^the
identity  with  the  worship  of  the  queen  of  heaven  in  Jer.  7  44.
It  is  in  fact  one  of  those  direct  transfers  of  a  Venus  cult  to  Mary
of  which there are many  examples. See Rosch, '  Astarte-
Maria,'  St.  Kr.  1888,  pp.  265^

5  Schrader  ;  for  titles  see  below,  §  4.

6  Eerdmans,  Melekdienst,  86.

7  Bar Bahlul, col. 244; some codd. have Darnftye. See
Lagarde,  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  16.

8  See  also  Herodot.  1  131.

3993


QUIRINIUS

According  to  Pausanias  (1.867)  the  religion  was  of
'Assyrian'  (Syrian)  origin,1  taken  up  by  the  people  of
Paphos  in  Cyprus  and  of  Ascalon  in  Phoenicia  ;  the
Cytherans  learned  it  from  the  Phoenicians  (cp  iii.  23  i)  ;
it  was  introduced  into  Athens  by  ^£geus.  We  may
take  these  passages  as  evidence  of  the  belief  of  the
Greeks  that  the  worship  of  the  '  heavenly '  goddess
(' A<j>po5ir7)  Ovpavla,  more  often  simply  i)  Otipavia)'2  was
of  oriental  origin.  It  is  highly  probable  that  in  this
they  were  right,3  and  that  the  epiklesis  is  it>  some  way
connected  with  the  title  Queen  of  Heaven  in  the
Semitic  religions.4

The  goddess  of  Carthage,  in  the  inscriptions  T-n-t
(pronunciation  unknown),  must  have  had  a  similar
title,  since  by  Latin  writers  and  in  Latin  inscriptions
she  is  called  Ccelestis.5

Alilkat  in  Phoenician  and  Punic  proper  names,  on
the  other  hand,  is  more  probably  the  divine  sovereign
of  the  city  or  community  (cp  Milk]  than  of  the  heavens.

G.  F.  Meinhard,  'Dissertatio  de  selenolatria,'  in  Ugolini
Thesaurus,  238n  jff.  (in  Thesaurus  theolvgico-philologicus,

I8o8_^  this  dissertation  appears  under  the
4.  Literature,  name  of  Calovius  ;  the  older  literature  very

fully  given  and  discussed) ;  Frischmuth,
'Dissertatio  de  Melechet  caeli,'  in  Tlicsaur-us  theologico-
philologicus,  1 866  jf.  ;  J.  H.  Ursinus,  Quastiones  tioticte,
221-25;  J-  G.  Carpzov,  Apparatus  antiquitatum,  510  f.  ;  B.
Stade,  'Die  vermeintliche  Konigin  des  Himmels,'  ZATW,
6123-132  (1886);  'Das  vermeintliche  aramaisch-assyrisches
Aequivalent  der  n'CK'H  fl^D.  JeT-  7  44,'  ZA  TW  6  289-339
(1886);  E.  Schrader,  'Die  Q'CE'n  mSn  und  ihr  Aramaisch-
assyrisches  Aequivalent,  SBBA,  1886,  1477-491;  'Die  Gottin
Istar  als  tiialkatu,'  ZA  8353-364;  A.  Kuenen,  '  De  Melechet
des  Kernels,'  I'erslagen  en  mededeelingen  der  Koninklijke
Akadoiiie  van  Wetenschapen,  Afd.  Letterkunde,  1888,  pp.
157-189  (Germ,  trans.  [1894],  Kuenen,  Gesaininclie  Abhand-
lungen,  186-211  ;  Eerdmans,  Melekdienst,  53^.',  Scholz, GStzen-
dicnst  und  Zaubcnvescn,  yx>/.,  cp  ZTiff.  ',  Griinbaum,  'Der
Stern  Venus,'  ZDMG,  1888,  pp.  45-51.  '  G.  F.  M.

QUICKSANDS  (CYPTIC  :  Acts 27 17),  RV  Syrtis,  q.v.
QUILT P^l), i  S.  19i3i6, RVn>e- See BED,
§§  3,  4  (6).

QUINCE. See  APPLE,  §  2  (4),  col.  269.
QUINTUS  MEMMIUS  (2  Mace.  11 34). See  MEM-


1.  Life.


QUIRINIUS  (KYPHNioc[Ti.  WH],  Lk.22).  The
name  of  this  official  is  given  in  an  inscription  as  P.
Sulpicius  Quirinius.  The  main  facts  of  his
life  are  given  by  Tacitus,  Ann.  848.  A  native
of  Lanuvium,  of  an  undistinguished  family,  he  was
elected  consul  in  12  B.C.  ;  some  years  later  he  was  sent
on  an  expedition  against  the  Homonadenses  in  Cilicia,
who  had  vanquished  Amyntas,  king  of  Galatia.  For  his
successes  against  these  mountaineers  he  received  the
honour  of  a  triumph.  When  Gaius  Caesar  was  sent
out  to  the  East  in  2  A.n. ,  Quirinius  accompanied  him  as
his  tutor.  In  6  A.D.  Quirinius  was  appointed  as  legatus
of  the  Emperor  Governor  of  Syria,  and  in  that  capacity
took  over  Judtea  on  the  deposition  of  Archelaus,  and
made  a  census  of  the  newly  annexed  district  (Jos.  Ant.
17 13  18 1).  At  this  post  he  remained  four  or  five  years.
At  a  later  time  (Tac.  Ann.  822)  he  caused  some  scandal
in  Rome  by  accusing  his  divorced  wife,  Lepida,  of  having
long  before  tried  to  poison  him.  Unpopular  at  Rome,
he  retained  the  favour  of  Tiberius,  who  in  21  A.D.
procured  him  a  public  funeral.

To  these  facts  one  of  importance  is  added  by  the  celebrated
Lapis  Tihurtinus  (CIL  143613),  which  inscription,  though  much
mutilated,  appears  to  prove  that  Quirinius'  proconsulate  of
Syria  in  6  A.D.  had  been  preceded  by  an  earlier  tenure  of  the

1  Cp  CIA,  2168627  1588.

2  Cp  also Herod.  3  8  (Arabs). '  Heavenly ' was originally
meant  in  a  physical  sense  ;  the  ethical  significance  Plato  gives
it  (Sympos. 180  u)  is  arbitrary,  and  in  conflict  with  what  we
know  of  the  attributes  and  cult  of  Urania.

3  Farnell,  Cults  of  the  Greek  States,  Iteof.  629/1  746^

4  See  Theodoret  on  Jer.  44  17.

5  Oupan'a  Herodian,  Ab  exc.  div.  Marc.  56;  cp  Philastrms,
Harr.  i;. See  Ruscher,  2614^".  ;  Cumont,  in  Pauly-Wissowa,
3  1247^  ;  cp  PHCENICIA,  §  n  (col.  374S/)-

3994


QUIRINIUS

same  office.  The  view  of  Mommsen  is  that  this  previous  tenure
was  in  3-1  B.C.,  and  that  the  crushing  of  the  Homonadenses,
who  dwelt  in  Cilicia,  at  that  time  attached  to  the  province  of
Syria,  was  an  event  of  this  first  proconsulate.  It  cannot  well
be  dated  earlier,  because  Sentius  Saturninus  governed  Syria
9-7  B.C.,  and  Quinctilius  Varus  from  7  B.C.  to  after  the  death  of
Herod  (Tac.  JIist.bg),  since  he  put  down  a  sedition  which
arose  when  Herod  died.

Amid  these  facts, the  statements  of  Lk. as  to the
date  and  circumstances  of  the  birth  of  Jesus  (2i-s)  raise

2  The  cerfbus mtr'cate questions. The miraculous

events  preceding  the  birth  cannot  be
discussed  from  the  historical  point  of  view  ;  but  the
asserted  census  in  Judaea  and  the  journey  of  Joseph  and
Mary  to  Bethlehem  come  within  the  field  of  historical
investigation.

Lk.  's  statements  are  as  follows  : —

1 i )  Crcsar  Augustus  decreed  a  general  census  of  the
Roman world. Of  such  a  general census  nothing  is
known from other  sources, though  Augustus  made  a
census of Roman citizens  only. However, we need
not  delay  over this statement, which  is  unimportant
for  our  purpose,  and  may  be  merely  an  exaggeration.

(2)  This  census  was  first  carried  out  in  Palestine  in
the  days  of  Herod, when  Quirinius  was governor  of
Syria. Here  several  difficulties  arise. From  the  above-
cited  testimony  of  Tacitus, it  appears  that Quirinius
was not proconsul of  Syria  until after  the  death  of
Herod. Palestine being not strictly a part of the
Roman  Empire,  but  a  dependent  or  protected  kingdom
under  Herod, a  Roman  census  would  not  be  carried
out  in  that  district. On  the  other  hand,  we  know  that
when  in  6  A.D.  Archelaus  the  son  of  Herod  was  deposed
from his tetrarchy of Judaea, and the district was
annexed  to  the  province  of  Syria,  Quirinius,  who  was
then  for  the  second  time  proconsul  of  Syria,  carried  out
a  census in  Judrea, which  caused, as  we  learn from
Josephus (Ant.  xviii.  1 1), much disaffection in that
country. It  is  not  unnatural  to  suspect  that  Lk.  may
have  misdated  his  census.

(3)  For  the  purposes  of  the  census  every  man  went  to
the  abode  of  his  family  or  clan  ;  thus  Joseph  went  to
Bethlehem the town of David,1 and with him his
affianced  wife, Mary. It  is,  however,  pointed  out  that
in  a  Roman  census  every  man  reported  at  his  place  of
residence. No  instance  is  known  to  us  in  antiquity  in
which  the  citizens  of  a  country  migrated  to  the  ancestral
home  of  their  family,  in  order  to  be  enrolled. In  any
case,  no  ancient  census  would  require  the  presence  of
any  but the  head of  a household. \Yomen  would
certainly  not  have  to  appear  in  person.

These  considerations  have  led  many  historians,  such
as  Mommsen,  Gardthausen,  Keim,  Weizsacker,  and

3  Ramsav's  ^cntirer,  to  the  view  that  Lk.'s  statements
Theory about  the  census  of  Quirinius  are  altogether

y'  mistaken.  On  the  other  hand,  some
writers,  such  as  Huschke  and  \Vieseler  and  many
English  theologians,  have  adopted  an  apologetic  atti
tude  in  regard  to  Lk.'s  statements.2  The  most  recent
apologetic  work  on  the  subject  is  that  of  Prof.  W.  M.
Ramsay,  Was  Christ  born  at  Bethlehem?  in  which
work  it  is  pointed  out  in  regard  to  Quirinius  that  Lk.
does  not  say  that  it  was  he  who  conducted  the  census,
but  only  that  it  was  made  when  he  was  in  some  position
of  authority  in  Syria  (yyffjubv,  not  dvBi'nraTos,  pro
consul).  He  may  have  been  in  command  of  troops  of
the  Syrian  province  against  the  Homonadenses  at  the
time.  It  is  further  maintained  that  a  census  conducted
by  Herod  in  his  own  dominions  might  decidedly  differ

1  [On  the  birthplace  of  David,  see  DAVID,  §  i  ;  DEBIR  •
JCDAH,  §  4.]

-  A  summary,  and  refutation  of  their  views  will  be  found  in
Schtirer's  GWft)  510-543  (ET  i.  2  105-143).


QUIVER

from  a  Roman  census,  especially  in  the  point  that  the
people  might  be  numbered  not  by  domicile,  but  by  clan
or  family.

A  new  element  has  been  introduced  into  the  discus
sion  by  the  discovery  from  papyri  published  by  Messrs.
Grenfell,  Kenyon,  and  others,  that  an  enrolment
occurred  in  Egypt  at  intervals  of  fourteen  years  from  the
year  20  A.  D.  onwards,  and  probably  from  the  time  of
the  regulation  of  Egypt  by  Augustus,  that  is,  also  in  the
years  6  A.D.  and  8  B.C.,  and  further  that  this  enrol
ment  was  a  census  by  families,  not  a  mere  valuation
of  property.  One  or  two  definite,  though  not  conclusive,
pieces  of  evidence,  seem  to  indicate  that  this  periodical
census  was  not  confined  to  Egypt,  but  was,  in  some
cases  at  all  events,  extended  to  Syria.

Arguing  on  the  basis  of  this  new  discovery',  Prof.
Ramsay  maintains  that  a  census  may  probably  have
been  held  in  Syria  in  9-8  B.C.,  and  gives  certain  reasons
why,  if  Herod  at  the  same  time  proposed  a  census  in
Judaea,  he  should  have  postponed  it  to  the  year  6  B.  c. ,
and  then  carried  it  out  on  a  different  plan  from  that
usual  in  a  Roman  census.  The  date  6  B.C.  Ramsay
accepts  as  probably  that  of  the  birth  of  Jesus.

To  set  forth  Prof.  Ramsay's  arguments  at  length  is  impossible,
and  they  are  so  minute  as  not  to  bear  compression.  But  if  we
grant  their  validity  they  leave  unexplained  several  difficulties.
Why  should  a  census  in  Judaea  be  dated  by  Lk.  by  the
irrelevant  fact  of  a  campaign  being  at  the  time  fought  by
Quirinius  in  Cilicia?  Even  if  an  enrolment  by  tribes  was
carried  out  by  Herod,  would  this  be  likely  to  involve  a  journey
of  all  Jews  to  the  native  town  of  their  family?  How  could
the  presence  of  Mary  be  required  at  Bethlehem,  when  it  was  a
settled  principle  in  all  ancient  law  to  treat  the  male  head  of  a
family  as  responsible  for  all  its  members?  In  Palestine  especially
it  is  difficult  to  imagine  such  a  proceeding  as  the  summoning  of
women  to  appear  before  an  officer  for  enrolment.  On  all  these
questions  the  new  discoveries  shed  no  light.

The  last  difficulty  is  further  increased  by  the  use  by  Lk.  of
the  word  ejucJicrreuju.e'i'T)  (unless,  indeed,  it  be  an  early  emenda
tion  of  the  text  by  some  scribe).  For  this  word  implies  that
Mary  at  the  time  was  not  the  wife  of  Joseph,  but  only  betrothed  to
him.  In  such  circumstances  her  travelling  with  him  to
Bethlehem  is  even  more  inexplicable.  She  would  not  go  as  an
heiress,  or  in  her  own  right,  as  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose
that  she  was  descended  from  David,  and  indeed  from  the
context  it  is  clear  that  she  was  not.

Josephus  tells  us  that  the  census  of  Quirinius  was  a
great  innovation,  causing  alarm  and  revolt ;  it  is  therefore
not  easy  to  think  that  a  similar  census  can  have  been
held  twelve  or  fourteen  years  earlier,  and  passed  off
with  so  little  friction  that  Josephus  does  not  mention  it.
It  is  true  that  Prof.  Ramsay  discriminates  in  character
the  earlier  census  which  he  supposes  from  the  Roman
census  of  Quirinius  of  6  A.  D. ;  but  it  is  doubtful  how  far
this  view  is  maintainable,  especially  as  Lk.  uses  the
same  word  (d.Troypa.(f>ri)  to  designate  the  known  census
of  Quirinius  and  the  supposed  earlier  census  (Acts
637).  Thus  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  supposition
of  errors  of  fact  in  Lk.  would,  from  the  purely  historical
point  of  view,  remove  very  great  difficulties.  The
question  which  remains  is  whether  our  opinion  of  Lk.
as  a  historian  is  so  high  that  we  prefer  to  retain  these
difficulties  rather  than  to  suppose  serious  errors  in  his
narrative  of  the  birth  of  Jesus.  See,  further,  CHRONO
LOGY,  §§  57^  ;  GOSPELS,  §  22  (col.  1780,  n.  2),  and
cp  NATIVITY,  NAZARETH.  p.  G.

QUIVEE.  i.  nB"'N,  'aspdk,  cp  Ass.  ispatu ;
<t>apfTpa  ;  pharctra;  literally  in  Job  39  23  (®  om.)  Is.  226;
figuratively  in  Is.  492  Ps.  127s  ((P  en-iflu/niW)  Lam.  813  Jer.
5  16  (<B  om.)t.  In  Lam.  813  arrows  are  called  'sons  of  the
quiver.'

2.  '7PI,  t'li,  fyaptTpa,  pharetra;  Gen.  273.  t  The  sense,  how
ever,  is  uncertain.  <B,  Vg.,  Tg.,  Ps.-Jon.,  Ibn  Ezra,  render
'quiver,'  but  Onk.,  Pesh.,  Rashi,  'sword.'  v'.tSl  means  'to
hang,  suspend.'  Possibly  -j'^rt  is  a  corrupt  repetition  (ditto-
gram)  of  the  preceding  "J'^D,  which  word  (EV  'thy  weapons')
would  quite  well  refer  to  the  quiver  and  arrrows.  Cp  WEAPONS.


3995


3996


BAAMAH


RABBAH


RAAMAH  (flpin;  pefMA  [BAD^EL]
[A]),  one  of  the  sons  of  CUSH  [g.v.]  Gen.  10?  (but
NDin  ;  i  Ch.  1  9  RV  Raama).  Raamah  is  also  grouped
with  Sheba  in  Ezekiel's  list  of  trade  centres  (27  22
ncjn  ;  papa  [B],  pay/j.a  [AQ]).  A  Sabaean  inscription
(Glaser,  1  155)  refers  to  •  the  hosts  of  Saba  and  Havilan  '
as  attacking  certain  people  'on  the  caravan  -  route
between  Ma'an  (  =  Ma'in,  ?  Bab.  Magan)  and  Ragmat  '
(Hommel,  AHT-z^o  ;  cp  ZDMGSQ™).  Here  we  have
at  any  rate  one  Raamah.  Glaser,  however,  places
Raamah  near  Ras  el-Khaima,  on  the  Persian  Gulf
(Skizse,  2252).  Against  identification  with  Regma,  on
the  Arabian  side  of  the  same  gulf,  see  Dillmann.  Cp
GEOGRAPHY,  §  23,  and  Crit.  Bib.  on  Gen.  10  7  Ezek.
27  22  where  '  Raamah  '  is  bjought  nearer  to  Palestine.
See  CUSH,  2  ;  SAKTA.

RAAMIAH  (PTOin,  '  Yahwe  thunders?'  cp  3  R,  67,
46  c  d,  where  Ramman,  the  storm  -god,  is  called  the
god  so.  rimi,  i.e.,  '  of  thunder  '  [Del.  Ass.  HWB,  605]  ;
the  Phoen.  proper  name  NJTOin  is  no  support,  the
true  reading  being  KJTOin),  one  of  the  twelve  leaders
of  the  Jews,  Neh.  7?t  (5ae/uta  [N],  peeX/wi  [A],  datfuas
[L],  va.afj.ta  [B],  j/ae/uia  [Bab]  ;  the  last  two  readings  are
due  to  the  proximity  of  NAHAMANI  [y.v.]).  Cp
GOVERNMENT,  §  26.

In  Ezra  1  2  the  name  is  miswritten  as  REELAIAH,  and  in  Zech.
72  (probably)  as  REGEM.MELECH  (g.r.).  All  these  forms  seem
to  come  from  '  Jerahmeel  '.  The  race-element  counts  for  much
in  the  later  history  of  Israel  [Che.].

RAAMSES  (DDJplH),  Ex.  lu. See  RAMESES  and

cp  PlTHOM.

RAB.  The  use  of  Tl,  rub,  '  chief,  head,  leader  '  in
compound  titles  descriptive  of  rank  or  office  (corre
sponding  to  the  Gr.  &PXI-)  is  sufficiently  well  exemplified
in  Assyrian,  Phoenician  ,  and  Aramaic.

Typical  examples  are  :—rab  dup-sar-ri  '  head  scribe  '  (see
SCRIBE),  and  rab  nikasi  'treasurer'  (cp  Heb.  C'D3J),  see  Del.
Ass.  ffll-'Bftogb,  Phcen.  tJ'in  31,  'head  workman  '  (CfS  1  64),
DIED  31,  '  head  of  the  scribes  '  (ib.  86  14),  C:ri3  3-,,  '  head  of  the
priests'  (z'/>.  119),  Palm.  xS'rt  3%  'general,'  NnTB'  31,  'leader
of  the  caravan  '  (in  Gk.  bilinguals  <TTpan)Aar>)s,  (rvvoSidp^rj^  '),
pits'  31i  'chief  of  the  market  "-(cp  N1JN  31,  'head  of  the  ayopd  ')  ;
and  Nab.  Njvig'o  3"li  '  chief  of  the  camp(s).'

This  usage  of  31  seems  to  be  wanting  in  the  S.
Semitic  stock,  and  in  Hebrew  is  not  frequent.  Here
the  more  common  term  employed  is  sar  (ib-,  peculiar
to  Heb.  )  which  is  frequently  found  in  pre-exilic  writings
(cp  PRINCE),  and  its  occurrence  in  the  later  literature
should  be  looked  upon  in  some  cases,  perhaps,  as  a
survival  of  a  once  popular  idiom,  and  in  others  as  an
intentional  archaism.

In  the  sense  of  '  great  '  the  Heb.  rab  is  not  common  3
in  the  early  writings  ;  the  best  instances  being  the
poetical  fragment  Gen.  2623  ('elder'  opposed  to  Tys),
Nu.  lisa  (J  or  E),  i  K.  197,  Am.  62.  In  agreement
with  this  is  the  usage  of  the  Heb.  compounds  of  31
which  express  a  rank  or  office.  Of  foreign  origin,  on
the  other  hand,  are  the  compounds  Rab-saris,  Rab-
shakeh,  and  Rab-mag,  which  appear  to  be  titles  borrowed
from  the  Assyrian.  The  rest  occur  in  later  literature
only,  and  are  mere  descriptions  of  office.

It  is  very  probable  that  they  have  been  formed  simply  upon
Assyrian  or  Babylonian  analogy;  (a)  C'n2n  31,  2  K.  25s  (in  an
exilic  or  post-exilic  narrative,  see  KINGS,  §  2  n.  2)  ;  cp


1  2uco£iapx»)5,  apparently,  only  in  inscriptions. Liddell  and
Scott  cite  Bockh,  4489.

2  De  Vogue,  La.  Syrie  centrale,  nos.  6,  7,  15,  28,  etc.

3  The  exact  opposite  is  the  case,  however,  with  31,  '  much,
many  '  (as  opposed  to  BJ?P).

3997


Dan.  2 14!  ; !  E  V  '  captain  of  the  guard,'  AVmg.  '  chief  marshal '
(apxWyf tpo«  187  BAQL]),2  see  EXECUTIONER,  i.  Contrast  with
this  D'nasn  IE-,  Gen.  3736  39  i  41  iz;  (b)  rra  31,  Esth.  1st,

officer  of  the  household  (otKOi/ojuo?  [BKAL/3])  ;  and  (c)  VD'10  31,
Dan.  1  3t  (see  RAB-SARIS),  but  O'D'lD.l  IE-,  Dan.  1  j-iiitl  (if-
XievfoOxos  [87  BAQI1]).  IJf  must  probably  be  looked  upon  here
as  an  intentional  archaism.  The  writer  has  modelled  the  narrative
of  Daniel  to  some  extent  upon  that  of  Joseph  (Bevan,  Dan.  31),
and  remembers  the  D'EIK,!  IE',  D'pSPBrr  ib,  and  DTOB.l  1°B>,
which  recur  in  Gen.  39-41.  SAC

RABBAH.  RABBATH  of  the  Ammonites  (Hin,  Din
pStf  "0?,  pa/30a,  Josh.  13  25  [A],  Am.  1 14  6  2  i  Ch.  20  i  [B  bis,

once  pappav  as  accusative];  pa.pBa.0.  28. 11  i  122720
1.  Name.  Jer.  492  [A],  i  Ch.20i  (Ms  A];  pa/3/3a»  uiw

a^ntov,  2  S.  12  26  [B],  17217  [A],  Ezek.2120;
ptftftaS  Jer.  49  3  [KJ ;  paj3/3u>0  Jer.  49  3  [Q*vid.J ;  pa/3o9  Jer.  49  2
[K«] ;  pa/Sad  vlitv_\ftn<ov,  jz  S.  12  26  [A],  17  27  [B].  In  Dt.  3  n
<ES  translates  ev  rfj  aupa  riav  viiav  Anfiiav  and  in  E?ek.  25s,  TTJC
iroAii' TOV  A/ufiioi'.  In  josh.  13  25,  B  reads 'ApaS.  The  Vulgate
has  Rabbet  or  Rebbath  according  to  the  Hebrew  construction,
except  in  Jer.  49  3  Ezek.  25  5  where  we  have  Ral'batk  for
rial.  In  Polyb.  Hist.  v.  7  4,  it  appears  as  paS/Sara^cn-a).

Rabbah  is  mentioned  in  Dt.  3n  as  the  location  of
Og's  'bed'  or  sarcophagus  (see  BED,  §3);  also  in


2.  History.


Josh.  1825,  in  connection  with  the  borders


of  Gad.  In  2  S.  11  /  i  Ch.  20  we  have
an  account  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Rabbah  by  Joab
and  David.  In  the  oracles  against  Ammon  by  Amos,
Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel,  Rabbah  represents  Ammon,  as
being  its  one  important  city.  Jer.  494  refers  to  the
treasures  and  the  well-watered  valleys  of  Rabbah,  and
Ezek.  25s  Amos  1 14  to  its  palaces.  These  oracles
announce  the  ruin  of  Rabbah  as  part  of  the  punishment
of  Ammon.  In  Ezek.  21  20  Nebuchadrezzar  hesitates
whether  to  march  against  Jerusalem  or  Rabbah,  but
decides  for  Jerusalem  by  casting  lots.  Thus  Kabbah
was  the  capital  of  Ammon  during  the  whole  period  of
the  history  of  the  Ammonites,  and  shared  their  fortunes
throughout  (see  AMMON).  It  has  been  suggested  that
Rabbah  may  be  the  Ham  (see  HAM,  2)  of  Gen.  14s-

Rabbah  continued  an  important  city  in  post-exilic
times.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  OT  in  connection
with  the  Jewish  history  of  the  period  ;  but  the  Ammon
ites  are  referred  to  in  Nehemiah,  i  Maccabees,  and
Judith,  and  doubtless  Rabbath  remained  their  capital.
Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  285-247  B.C.,  gave  it  the  name
of  Philadelphia,  and  probably  by  erecting  buildings  and
introducing  settlers  gave  it  the  character  of  a  Greek
city  ;  it  became  one  of  the  most  important  cities  of
the  Decapolis,  Eus.  Onom.  'Pa/xa5  and  'Afj.fj.av.

In  218  B.C.  it  was  taken  from  Ptolemy  Philopator  by  Antiochus
Epiphanes,  Polyb.  5  17.  In  the  time  of  Hyrcanus  (135-107  B.C.)
we  readofaZenoCotyles,  tyrant  of  Philadelphia,  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  81
15  3.  According  to  a  conjecture  of  Clermont-Ganneau,  Rabbath
should  be  read  for  Nadabath  in  i  Mace.  937  ;  see  NADABATH.
In  63  B.C.  it  was  held  by  the  Arabs  (Jos.  BJ\.  63),  who  were
defeated  there  by  Herod,  30  B.C.  (i.  19s  and  6)-  The  extensive
Roman  remains  show  that  it  participated  in  the  prospeiity  of
Eastern  Palestine  in  the  second  and  third  centuries  A.D.  Later,
it  was  the  seat  of  a  Christian  bishopric.  The  city  is  said  by
Abulfeda  (Ritter,  Syr.  1158)  to  have  been  in  ruins  when  the
Moslems  conquered  Syria.

Rabbah  (the  mod.  'Amman}  was  situated  on  one  of

the  head-waters  of the Jabbok, about 22 m. E. of

„ _.. the Jordan. 2  S.  1226-28  apparently distin-

'  guished  between  '  the  royal  city '  or  '  the  city

of  waters,'  and  '  the  city.' The  '  waters'  referred  to  in

the  second  of  these  names  may  be  the  Xahr  'Amman,  a

stream  rich  in  fish,  which  takes  its  rise  at  the  site  of

Rabbah (so Buhl,  Pal. 260  [§  132]). In  that  case

1  In  Dan.  also  |'J3D  31,  248  (see  DEPUTY),  and  NT"Eain  31>
46  5  ii  (see  MAGIC,  §  20).

2  Compounds  of  31  and  *\iy  are  alike  rendered  in  (5  by  ap\t-.

3998


RABBAH


RAB-SARIS


the  first  two  names  belonged  to  a  lower  quarter  of  the  town
in  the  valley  (cp  §  4).  The  '  city '  may  be  a  designation
of  the  citadel,  which  was  situated  on  a  hill  N.  of  the
valley.  One  would  naturally  like  to  find  some  Ammon-
itish  ruins.  There  are  old  rock-hewn  tombs,  and  the
remains  of  the  outer  walls  of  the  citadel  seem  very  ancient,
being  formed  of  great  blocks  of  stone  without  any  cement.
What  is  left  of  the  city  walls  may  belong  to  the  time  of
the  Ptolemies.  Conder  even  thinks  that  the  remains  of
a  reservoir  and  aqueduct  may  belong  to  the  subterranean
passage  which  enabled  Antiochus  to  capture  the  citadel.
If  so,  they  may  carry  us  back  to  Ammonite  times,  and
show  how  the  ancient  citadel  was  supplied  with  water.
The  great  bulk  of  the  ruins— baths,  colonnades,  temples,
theatres,  and  tombs — are  Roman.  There  is  a  small
building,  which  Conder  regards  as  Sasanian  or  early
Arab;  and  ruins  of  a  Christian  cathedral  (sth  or  6th
cent.  ?)  and  two  chapels.  Rude  stone  monuments
(dolmens,  etc. )  have  also  been  found.

Conder,  Hetli  and  ftloab,  157-167,  Palestine,  175-7,  and  in
PEF  Survey  of  Eastern  Palestine,  1  19-64  (a  very  full  and

exact account of a thorough survey of
4.  Literature. 'Amman, with many fine illustrations) ;

PEFQ,  1882,  pp.  99-116  ;  G.  A.  Smith,  HG,

595-608;  L.  Gautier,  Au  delii  du  J onrdainft] ,  93  ff.  (1896).
[Cheyne  (Exp.T,  Nov.  1897  ;  Feb.  1899)  discusses  the  titles  of
Rabbah  in  2  S.  12  26^,  and  emends  both  naiSon  TV  and  Q'On
into  C3^D  TV ;  Wellhausen,  however,  emends  rt31?Drt  into
D'Ort-  See  TAHTIM-HODSHI,  §  2,  and  cp  Crit.  Bit.}

W.  H.  B.

RABBAH  (Hinn,  as  if  'the  Rabbah';  cooOHBA
[B],  ApeBBA.  I/^L,],  Arebba],  mentioned  with  Kirjath-
jearim  in  Josh.  15  60.  Read  most  probably  '  Kirjath-
Jerahmeel  the  great '  (Che. ).  See  SOLOMON,  §  3.

RABBI  (pABBei  [Ti.  WH],  many  MSS  pABBl  ;
Heb.  S3"1),  a  title  of  honour  and  respect  given  by  the
Jews  to  their  learned  doctors,  more  especially  to  their
ordained  teachers andspiritualheads(cpHAN*us  [LAYING
ON  OF]).  >3T  (lit.  'my  great  one,'-  with  the  suff.  as  in
Heb.  'JIN,  Syr.  «-»i^O  ;  cp  Fr.  monsieur,  etc.)  is

T -:  J

from  an  (see  RAB)  which  at  a  later  period  among  the
Jews  was  frequently  used  in  the  narrower  sense  not  only
of  a  master  as  opposed  to  a  servant,  but  of  a  teacher
as  opposed  to  a  pupil  (cp  Aboth,  16  and  Ber.  636
where  an  and  ToSn  are  used  of  Yahwe  and  Moses
respectively)  ;  see  DISCIPLE,  §  i.  Rab  (an  older
pronunciation  is  Rib)  was  especially  used  as  the  title
of  the  Babylonian  teachers,  and  designates  par  excellence
Abba  Areka,  a  noted  exegete  of  the  beginning  of  the
third  century  A.  D.  Rabbi,  on  the  other  hand,  was  the
title  given  to  Palestinian  teachers,1  and,  used  alone,
applies  to  Jehudah  Hannasi,  the  chief  editor  of  the
Mishna.

In  the  NT,  Rabbi  occurs  only  in  Mt. ,  Mk.,  and  Jn.
It  is  once  applied  by  his  followers  to  John  the  Baptist
(Jn.  826),  but  everywhere  else  is  used  in  addressing
Jesus  (Mt.  262549  Mk.95  Il2i  1445  Jn.  1 38  82  43i
625  92  11 8). 2  Lk.  and  Mk.  both  favour  the  use  of
8i8a.<TKa.\e  (see  DISCIPLE,  TEACHER),  which  in  Jn.  1  38
is  the  Gr.  translation  of  pa/3/3ei,  but  ew-to-rdra  occurs
only  in  Lk.  (e.g. ,  5s  845,  etc.).  Almost  synonymous
with  pa3j3ei  are  the  terms  Trarr/p  and  KaOrjyrjT^  (Mt.
28910)  which  are  probably  equivalent  to  the  Aramaic
N3N  and  (so  Wtinsche)  rn'io.3

T -  '

From  its  use  in  the  NT  it  is  evident  that  Rabbi  had
not  yet  come  to  be  employed  as  a  title,  but  was  merely

1  The  Targ.  on  2  K.  2  12  makes  Elisha  call  Elijah  Rabbi ;  cp
Tan;,  on  Ps.  55  14.

2  The  AV  frequently  has  MASTER  ;  cp  Mt.  262549  Mk.  I.e.,
Jn.  431  82  11 8. The Pesh. renders by »»») and in Jn.
1  38  3  26  4  31  6  25  9  2  11  8  by  +^9.

3  Against  this  see  Dalman,  Die  Worte  Jesu,  276,  278.77 N^N
as  a  term  of  address  seems  to  be  unknown  to  the  TargumisTs.
It  is  rather  a  title of  respect. (caftrjyijTr)*,  according to this
scholar  is  a Gr.  variant to  fiifiacrieaAos — v. 10  being  another
recension  of  v.  8.

3999


a  form  of  address  (cp  Dalman,  Der  Gottesname  Adonaj,
21),  whence  Mt.  2'67/.  appears  to  be  an  anachronism
(cp  Gratz,  Gesch.  4 500).  Ewald's  argument  (Gesch.  Is.
625  n.  2),  from  the  words  of  AbtaliOn  in  the  Pirke
Aboth,  1 16  (nuayriK  tub),  that  an  and  jan  must  have
been  in  use  for  a  long  time,  rests  on  an  erroneous  inter
pretation  of  rn:2T  (lit.  'lordship';  cp  Strack  '  herrschaft ' ).
A  fuller  form  is  Rabboni  (Mk.  10 51  Jn.  20 16,  pafi-
/3ovi>(i  [B],  papfiovl  [minusc.  ],  paftpuvei  [A  in  Mk.  and  D
in  Jn.]),  cp  the  Aram,  ribbon  (pan)  another  form  of
rabbdn  (jai),  but  with  the  retention  of  the  d  sound  in
the  first  syllable.1  pan  in  Aram,  is  used  by  a  slave  of
his  master,  or  a  worshipper  of  his  God,  and  is,  like
Rabbi,  explained  as  meaning  8i8dffKa\e  (Jn.  I.e.).
According  to  'Aruch  (s.  "ax),  a  jan  was  more  honourable
than  a  'an,  and  a  'an  than  a  an,  but  greatest  of  all  was
one  whose  name  alone  was  mentioned  (icjy  pin  ^vu).
The  title  jan  was  first  held  by  Gamaliel  I.  (see
GAMALIEL).

For  the  Jewish  use  of  these  various  titles,  see  EB(9\  s.v.
'  Rab,  Rabbi, 'and  for  NT  usage, "Dalman,  Die  H'ortejesu,  272^!

S.  A.  C.

RABBITH  (rvann ;  AABeipcoN  [B],  pABBooe  [AL]),
a  city  in  Issachar,  properly  ha-Rabbith,  Josh.  192o.f
Identified  with  Raba,  N.  of  Ibzik  (Buhl,  204).  C.
Niebuhr  (Gesch.  1367  ;  cp  ©B)  reads  rna-n,  DABERATH
[q.  v.]  ;  cp  Josh.  2128.  But  perhaps  the  true  reading  is
ni2fn.  and  P's  original  authority  related  to  the  Negeb
(cp  SHUNEM).  T.  K.  c.

RABBONI. See  RABBI,  end.

RAB-MAG  P0~in  ;  rab-mag),  a  title  applied  to
NERGAL-SHAREZER  [y.v.]  (Jer.  39s  ;  p^BAMAG  [B],
i  Na.mp  ~AK  L^J  •  "&F  L  cj'  P&  M&T  L^  J»  B<\M&T
[Nc-a?]  ;  v.  13  ppBOMOf  [Theod.  in  Q"'i?  ]
om.  (5) ;  see  RAB.  Older  critics  explain  'chief  Magian' ;
but  the  Magians  (MAfOl)  are  a  Median  tribe  according
to  Herodotus  (lioi),  and  have  no  place  in  Babylonia.
Rab-mugi  is  said  to  be  the  title  of  a  physician  referred
to  in  an  Assyrian  letter  (tablet  K  519)  respecting  a  sick
man  (Pinches  in  RP<W  2 182  ;  cp  Wi.  OLZ,  Feb.  1898,
col.  40).  Schrader  (KAT(->  417  /)  and  Hommel
(Hastings,  DD  1229  a),  however,  derive  mag  horn  emku,
emgu,  'wise,'  and  Frd.  Delitzsch  (Heb.  Lang.  13 /. )
from  mahhu  'prophet,  soothsayer'  (=esSepu,  ^N).
From  a  text-critical  point  of  view  these  suggestions
have  no  probability.  There  is  strong  reason  to  believe
that  iD'an  is  corrupt.  See  NERGAL-SHAREZER.

T.  K.  c.

The  Assyrian  term  referred  to  is  generally  rab  mugi,
also  rab  mugu.  There  is  nothing  in  K.  519  to  connect
2  Assyrian  l^'s  offlcer  even  rem°tely  with  a  physician  :
eauivalent  see  HarPcr's  -4ss.-Bab.  Letters,  97,  for
text,  and  Chr.  Johnston's  Epistolary
Literature  of  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  163,  for
transliteration  and  translation.  The  writer,  Ardi-Nana,
is  the  Court  Physician  (as  Johnston  shows).  The  rab
mugi  only  reports,  or  brings  the  report  of,  the  sick  man's
condition.  He  is  likely  to  have  been  an  express  mes
senger.  There  was  a  rab  mugi  of  the  bithalli  and
another  rab  mugi  of  the  narkabdti  (on  Rm.  619,  no.
1036,  see  Johns'  Assyrian  Deeds  and  Documents,  2,  no.
1036).  Hence  the  Rab-mag  may  have  had  to  do
primarily  with  chariots  and  horses,  and  been  the  master
of  the  horse  in  the  Assyrian  Court.

T.  K.  C.  , §  I  ; C.  H.  W.  J. , §  2.

RABSACES  (Ecclus.  48 18),  RV  RABSHAKEH.
RAB-SARIS  (Dnp'JI),  the  title  (so  RVm*.,  and  see
RAB)  of  (a)  an  officer  sent  by  the  king  of  Assyria  to

1  Pressel  in  PRF.  s.v.  '  Rabbinismus,'  explains  the  a  to  be  a
Galilean  provincialism;  cp  Kautzsch,  Grant.  Bibl.  Aram.  10.
The  change  of  d  and  /  is  similar  to  that  in  Syr.  pcska  and
Tra<T\a.

4000


BAB-SHAKEH

Hezekiah  (aKISi?;  pAcpeic  [B],  pABcApeic  [A],
pA4>eic  [L]  ;  rabsaris],  and  (b)  an  officer  present  at  the
capture  of  Jerusalem  (Jer.  39s,  NABoyCApeiC  [B],
-CAPIC  [N'Q].  -ceeic  [N*]  and  pABcApic  [Qmg-  it.
and  Theod.  in  v.  13  where  BNA  om. ;  rabsares).  In  both
passages,  however,  we  should  possibly  read  either  aij;
IIS'N,  'Arabia  of  Asshur '  (cp  TARSHISH)  or  D'zny  IB>,
'  the  prince  of  the  Arabians  '  (see  XERGAL-SHAREZER)  ;
indeed  in  the  case  of  Jer.  (I.e. )  the  probability  is  very
strong.  As  to  2  K.  (I.e. )  a  doubt  is  permissible  (cp
SENNACHERIB,  §  5),  and  we  therefore  offer  the  views
of  Rab-saris  which  are  possible  on  the  assumption  that
an  Assyrian  invasion  was  really  referred  to  in  the
original  narrative.  The  title  has  often  been  interpreted
'  chief  eunuch,'  and  Schrader  (A'A  T^i  319)  thinks  that
it  may  be  the  translation  of  a  corresponding  Assyrian
phrase  (so  Uillm.  -Kittel,  Jesaia,  312).  This,  at  any
rate,  is  not  very  probable.

Winckler  conjectured  (Untcrs.  138)  that  it  was  a  reproduction
of  an  artificial  Ass.  phrase  rab-sa-ris — a  learned  scribe's  inter
pretation  of  rat-sag-  (RAU-SHAKEH),  which  is  half  Sumerian ;
while,  according  to  Pinches  (letter  in  Acad.,  June  25,  1892),
rab-sa-resi,  'chief  of  the  heads'  was  the  title  of  the  special
officer  who  had  charge  of  the  royal  princes  (cp  Dan.  1 3).
Finally,  Del.  (Ass.  HIVB  694^)  registers  sa-ris  as  the  title  of  a
court-official  of  uncertain  meaning.  We  may  plausibly  hold  that
the  second  element  in  rab-saris  is  both  Hebrew  and  Assyrian,
but  primarily  Assyrian  (see  EUNUCH),  and  that  rab-saris  (=  Heb.
rab-salis)  means  chief  captain.  If  so,  it  hardly  differs  from  RAB*

SHAKEH  (y.7'.).

How  vo"iD  31  in  Dan.  1 3  (cp  v.  7)  is  to  be  understood,
is  not  quite  clear.  The  context  suggests  that  the  writer
misunderstood  the  phrase  which  he  found  already  cor
rupted  in  2  K.  1817  ;  for  eunuchs,  having  the  charge  of
royal  harems,  were  frequently  employed  in  superintend
ing  the  education  of  princes.  See  EUNUCH.  Even  if
the  story  of  Daniel  has  been  recast,  this  explanation  may,
at  any  rate,  serve  provisionally.  T.  K.  c.

RAB-SHAKEH  (HiX'-IT!;  PAyAKHc[BXAQrOCL];
ra&saces),  the  title  (so  RVms-  ;  see  RAB)  of  the  officer
sent  by  the  Assyrian  king  to  Hezekiah  (2  K.  18 17-! 9  ;
Is.  36  /,  and  in  the  Heb.  original  of  Ecclus.  48 18,  AV
RABSACES  ;  pABcAKNC,  Is.  862  [B]  41*  as  37  4  [BQw]
36 13  [Qm«-]  37  8  [B»  Q"1*-]).  In  its  Heb.  form  it  has  been
taken  to  mean  '  chief  cup-bearer ' ;  but  a  cup-bearer  would
not  have  been  intrusted  with  important  political  business.
The  word  is  the  exact  reproduction  of  the  Assyr.  rab-
fake  'chief  of  the  high  ones'  (i.e. ,  officers) — for  so  the
Pab  SAG  or  Rab  SAG/'-  of  the  inscriptions  should  be
read  (Del.  Ass.  H\VB,  685,?).  This  was  the  title  of  a
military  officer,  inferior  to  the  Tartan,  but  of  very  high
rank.  A  rab-sake  was  despatched  to  Tyre  by  Tiglath-
pileser  III.  to  arrange  about  tribute  (KB  223,  cp  Del.
I.e. ).  Just  so  the  Rab-shakeh  goes  (with  the  Tartan,
according  to  2  K. )  to  Jerusalem.  He  is  acquainted  both
with  Hebrew  ('  the  Jews'  language,1  2  K.  1826)  and  with
Aramaic  ;  such  a  leading  diplomatist  needed  no  drago
man.  Since  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  there  was
a  large  Aramrean  population  in  Assyria.  Cp  Schr.
KAT®  320  ;  ARAMAIC,  §  2.  If,  however,  the  original
narrative  referred  to  a  N.  Arabian  rather  than  an
Assyrian  incursion,  the  name  underlying  Rab-shakeh
may  very  possibly  be  'Arab-kfis,  '  Arabia  of  Cush.'  Cp
RAB-SARIS.  T.  K.  c.

RACA  (PAXA  [Ti.],  PAKA  [Treg.  WH]  ;  probably
an  abbreviated  form  of  the  Rabb.  xp'T  ;  cp  Kau.  Cram.
I'ibl.  Aram.  10  ;  Dalm.  Aram.  Grain.  138,  n.  2  ;  for
interchange  of  K  and  %  cp  Dalm.  ib.  304,  n.  2,  and  see
ACELDAMA,  §  i),a  term  of  abuse  in  the  time  of  Christ,
Mt.  5  22  f.  Whether  it  conveys  a  more  or  a  less  offensive
meaning  than  (j.upt  (EV,  'Thou  fool')  is  disputed;
indeed,  the  whole  passage,  as  it  stands,  is  obscure.
According  to  Holtzmann,  there  is  a  double  climax  in
the  clauses  introduced  by  '  But  I  say  to  you'  ;  (i)  from
wrath  in  the  heart  to  its  expression  in  a  word,  and  (2)
from  the  denial  of  the  intellectual  capacity  of  a  brother
to  that  of  his  moral  and  religious  character,  while  the

4001


RACHEL

punishments  referred  to  range  from  that  awarded  by  a
mere  local  court  ('  Beth-din  ')  to  that  by  the  Sanhedrin,
and  finally  to  that  of  the  fiery  Gehenna.  Holmnann,
however,  understates  the  offensiveness  of  Raca  and
exaggerates  that  of  pupt  Raca  (cp  Jn.  94)  involves
moral  more  than  intellectual  depreciation,  and  /xwpoy
nowhere  in  the  NT  bears  the  sense  of  '  impious '  (the
OT  Saj ;  see  FOOL).  Nor  is  it  at  all  probable  that
Jesus  would  have  recognised  the  provisional  institution
of  the  Sanhedrin  side  by  side  with  the  Messianic  punish
ment  of  Gehenna,  and  assigned  the  punishment  of  one
abusive  expression  to  the  former,  and  of  another  to  the
latter.  The  text  must  have  suffered  a 'slight  disarrange
ment  ;  the  clause  about  Raca  should  be  parallel  to  the
clause  about  murder.  Read  probably  thus,  '  Ye  have
heard  that  it  was  said  to  the  ancients,  Thou  shall  not
murder,  and  whosoever  murders  is  liable  to  the  judg
ment,  and  whosoever  says  '  Raca '  to  his  brother,  is
liable  to  the  Sanhedrin.  But  I  say  nnto  you,  Every  one
who  is  angry  with  his  brother  is  liable  to  the  (divine)
judgment,  and  whoever  says,  Thou  fool,  is  liable  to  the
fiery  Gehenna. '  The  Law  as  expounded  by  the  Rabbis
treated  libellous  expressions J  as  next  door  to  murder.
But  such  gross  offences  as  murder  and  calling  another
1  Raca '  could  never  occur  if  on  the  one  hand  anger  were
nipped  in  the  bud,  and  on  the  other  even  such  seemingly
harmless  expressions  as  '  thou  simpleton  '  (/txwp^)  were
scrupulously  avoided.  So  first  j.  P.  Peters  (JBL
10i3i/.  [1891];  16103  [1896]),  except  that  he  prefers
to  repeat  '  It  was  said,'  etc.,  and  '  But  I  say,'  avoiding
rearrangement.  See  FOOL.  T.  K.  c.

RACAL,  AV  RACHAL.

RACE,  RACE-COURSE.  See  generally  HELLEN
ISM,  §  5  (with  references),  WRESTLING.

'  Race  '  is  an  apt  rendering  of  (rrdSiov  in  i  Cor.  9  24  (RVmff.
'race-course')  and  of  aywv  (lit.  contest)  in  Heb.  \'2  i.  In  Ps.
195  RV  preferably  renders  'orah  (mf;)by  'course.'  In  Eccles.
9  ii,  ;/  frfs  (j"nc)  is  properly  an  abstracts'  running  '  (EV's  ren
dering  of  n^nD>  2  S.  18  27).

RACHAB  (Mtl5),  RV  RAHAB.

RACHAL,  RV,  RACAL.  For  '  in  Radial'  (V:n2)  in
I  S.  3029  we  ought,  probably,  following  ©BL  (EN
KApMHAco,  but  eisi  pAXHA  [A]),  to  read  'in  Carmel'
(7D132);  so  all  critics — '  A  necessary  emendation'  (Bu. ,
snOT).  See  CARMEL,  2,  col.  706"

RACHEL  (?rn,  'ewe,'  see  WRS  Kin.  219, 2  pA\HA
[BXADEQL]), the 'mother' of the tribes of Israel
settled  in  the  highlands  of  West  Palestine,


between  the  Canaanite  strips  of  territory


la.  No  mere

at  Esdraelon  and  Aijalon.  Rachel  died
when  Benjamin  or  Benoni  was  born  (Gen.  35 16^).
Was  there,  we  may  ask,  at  some  remote  period,  a  distinct
clan  with  the  ewe  '  Rahel '  as  its  totem,  and  the  '  mas-
sebah  of  Rachel's  grave'  (see  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE)
as  its  chief  sacred  spot  ?  The  members  of  such  a  clan
would  be  b'ne  Rahel.  They  all  lived  in  Kphraim  ;  but
in  time  some  came  to  be  banded  together,  as  Jeminites
(BENJAMIN,  §  i).  Then,  perhaps,  the  others  began
to  drop  the  name  b'ne  Rahel  in  favour  of  something
else(cp  JOSEPH  i. ,  §  2  ;  EPHRAIM,  §  5  ii.  ;  MANASSEH,
§  2).  Rachel,  certainly,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  was
no  mere  name,  as  in  historical  times  was  Leah.  In
Jer.  31 15  (cp  Mt.  2i8)  we  hear  of  Rachel  weeping  for

1  On  the  importance  attached  to  words  like  Raca,  cp  Koran,
1724,  'And  say  not  to  them,  Fie,' and  Ghazali's  description  of
the  weighing  of  a  man's  actions  ;  '  Hut  the  angel  bringeth  yet  a
K-af  which  he  casteth  into  the  scale  of  the  evil  actions. On  this
leaf  is  written  the  word  "  Fie  !  " Then  the  evil  actions  outweigh
the  good.  .  .  .  The  order  is  given  to  cast  this  man  into  hell.'
(La  fierleprecieuse  de  GAazdtf  [Gautier],  1878,  p.  80.)

2  Griineisen  {Ahnenculius,  257)  proposes  to  read  Aharhel  for
the  J-udalnte  name  AHARHEL,  comparing  ©HAL  a6eA</>ou  P»)\a0
(also  the  Benjamite  AHRAH,  mnx,  <B  ia^a»)A). [According  to
Cheyne  Rachel  may  be  a  fragment  of  SxDnT,  Jerahmeel ;  see
IACOB,  §  3,  SHAPHAN,  and  for  a  similiarly  doubtful  name,  sea
LEAH.]

4002


RACHEL

her  children  (although  there  is  no  explicit  indication
who  these  are  understood  to  be)  ;  and  at  a  later
date,  in  the  story  of  Ruth,  Rachel  and  Leah  are
the  builders  of  the  '  house  of  Israel'  (Ruth  4n).  Ac
cording  to  the  legend  as  we  know  it  (both  J  and  E)
Rachel  was  the  beloved  wife,  a  feature  that  it  is  natural
to  connect  with  the  acknowledged  superior  splendour
and  power  of  northern  Israel.  There  is  a  remarkable
passage  in  J,  however,  where  Jacob  seems  to  speak  as  if
he  had  had  only  two  sons  (Gen.  42 38).  The  question
therefore  arises  whether  there  may  not  have  been  an
older  form  of  the  story  where  Rachel  was  the  only  wife,
just  as  Rachel's  '  double,'  Rebecca,  was  the  only  wife  of
Isaac.  This  question  Steuernagel  answers  in  the  affirma
tive  (Einwanderung,  39).  He  also  makes  the  interesting
suggestion  that  there  may  be  a  monument  of  the
importance  of  Rachel  in  the  name  Israel.  As  the  men
of  the  Gad  tribe  were  called  Ish  Gad  (see  GAD,  §  i),
so,  Steurnagel  suggests,  the  men  of  the  Rachel  (or
Jacob,  or  Joseph)  tribe  were  perhaps  called  Is-Ra'-el
(on  s  see  SHIBBOI.KTH,  and  on  the  change  of  h  to  '  in
words  containing  a  liquid,  see  REUBEN,  col.  4092,
n.  9.

We  must  now  consider  Rachel's  relation  to  Bilhah.
Rebecca  has  no  such  attendant  (DEBORAH  \<j.v. ,  2]

, _,  L is  not  represented  as  a  concubine of

lb  .Relation  to  Isaac) Sarahj  however>  has  Hagar  .

otner  wives.  and  in  Sarah.s  as  in  Rachers  case,  the
son  of  the  wife  is  not  born  till  after  the  son  of  the  con
cubine.  This  is  obscure  (cp  MANASSEH,  §  3).  In
Rachel's  case  the  most  natural  conjecture  would  be  that
'  Joseph '  was  not  born  till  after  the  sons  of  Bilhah  were
settled  in  Canaan.  So  Guthe  (Gl-7  41).  Steuernagel
thinks  that  Rachel  (or  rather  Jacob- Rahel)  entered
Palestine  from  the  E.  just  in  the  rear  of  Bilhah  (Ein
wanderung,  98  ;  cp  Guthe,  GVl  42),  and  that  it  was
because  the  Bilhah  tribes  (Dan  and  Naphtali)  came  to
be  treated  as  '  brothers  '  of  Joseph  that  their  '  mother  '
Bilhah  came  to  be  called  a  concubine  of  Jacob.  Why
only  Rachel  was  a  full  wife  is  often  explained  by  the
importance  of  the  Rachel  tribes  in  historical  times.
There  may,  however,  have  been  religious  grounds  (so,
for  example,  Steuernagel,  Einwanderung,  45).  Of
what  race  her  maid  came  we  are  not  told  (on  the  state
ments  in  later  writings,  see  ZILPAH,  §  i);  but  Rachel
herself  was  a  daughter  of  Laban,  which  appears  to  point
t(  /  a  belief  in  the  presence  of  Aramaean  elements  in  N.
Israel  (differently,  LABAN,  REBEKAH).  If  Rachel  was
the  chosen  wife  of  Jacob,  she  was  not  the  only  one.  The
surreptitious  introduction  of  Leah  seems  an  important
feature  of  the  story.  Quite  as  difficult  of  clan-historical
interpretation  is  the  representation  of  Rachel  as  Leah's
sister.1  Are  we  to  infer  that  there  were  once  actually
two  tribes,  a  Ewe  tribe  and  a  Wild-cow  tribe,  living  in
association?  If  so,  where  and  when?  Or  is  it  that
when  the  northern  Ephraim  tribes  came  to  be  associated
with  the  southern  tribes  they  came  all  to  be  regarded  as
brothers,  and  therefore  as  having  a  common  father
though  different  mothers?  The  theory  is  attractive.
It  explains,  however,  why  Rachel  and  Leah  are  fellow-
wives,  hardly  why  they  are  sisters.2

The  points  that  remain  are  the  stealing  of  the  teraphim,
the  initial  barrenness,  and  the  story  of  the  duda'im.

ic Other ^e  steann&  °f  l^e  teraphim  by  a  woman

. , as  a  feature in this  quaint  story  tells  us

something  of  the  light  in  which  the  teraphim

came  to  be  viewed  (Gunkel  compares  the  case  of  Michal,

cp HPSm.  Sam. p.  xxxiv. ). It  is  through  the  initial

barrenness  that  Dan  and  Naphtali  come  to  be  older  than

Joseph  (see  NAPHTALI,  §  2). The  real  origin  of  the

1  In  Test.  xil.  Pair.,  Naph.  i,  etc.,  Bilhah  and  Zilpah  also
arc  sisters.  See  ZILPAH,  §  i.

-  Perhaps  they  were  sisters  simply  because  of  the  frequency
of  such  a  marriage  of  sisters  in  the  society  in  which  the  story
was  told  (see  MARRIAGE,  §  2,  (i)).  [For  a  different  view,  see
RFBEKAH.)

4003


RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE

story  of  the  duda'im  is  not  clear  (see  ISSACHAR,  §  2,
REUBEN,  §  3,  NAPHTALI,  §  2).  E  does  not  mention
them  ;  but  in  the  original  J  they  no  doubt  cured  Rachel's
barrenness.  This  is  now  obscured,  as  the  birth  of
Zebulun  precedes  that  of  Joseph.  According  to  the
dates  assigned  to  the  births  in  the  present  text  of
Jubilees,  28z3/.,  however,  Joseph  conies  immediately
after  Issachar,  before  Zebulun,  although  it  is  Joseph
and  Zebulun,  not  (as  it  ought  to  be)  Joseph  and  Issachar
that  are  born  in  the  same  year.  On  the  general
question  of  the  order  in  which  the  tribes  are  enumerated,
see  TRIBES.  H.  \v.  H.

The  death  of  Rachel  is  related  in  Gen.  35 16-20  (JE) ;

the  narrative  throws  much  light  on  the  earlier  phase  of

_ , ., the  tribal  traditions,  but  needs  perhaps  to

death.


be  studied  in  connection  with  a  compre
hensive  textual  criticism.


As  pointed  out  in  JACOB,  §  3,  the  phraseology  of  Gen.  29 1
suggests  that,  according  to  a  very  early  form  of  the  tradition,  the
home  of  Laban  was  among  the  Jerahmeelites  of  the  S.  Evidence
which  was  not  in  the  writer  s  hands  when  that  article  was
written,  or  at  least  was  not  fully  appreciated  by  him,  is  now
before  him  in  abundance,  showing  that  this  was  indeed  the  case
— i.e.,  that  Laban  was  indeed  originally  regarded  as  an  Aramaean
or  Jerahmeelite  (Q-IN  =  ^KCnT)  of  the  S.  Laban's  Haran  was,
however,  not  Hebron  but  a  district  of  the  Negeb  which  also
supplied  to  Sanballat  (?)  the  designation  <j-)n  (MT  Horoni),
'  Haranite  '  (see  SANBALLAT).  It  was  there  that  Rachel  and
Leah — a  distinction  without  a  difference,  if  jm  and  rm^  are  both
corrupt  fragments  of  Jerahmeel — dwelt,  according  to  the  early
tradition  and  the  '  Bethel,'  where  the  divinity  appeared  to  Jacob
was,  if  not,  strictly  speaking,  in  '  the  land  of  the  bne  Jerahme'el '
(29  i),  at  any  rate,  at  no  very  great  distance  from  it,  for,  like
Haran,  it  was  in  the  Negeb.  In  the  Negeb,  too,  was  the  Gilead
of  the  famous  story  of  the  compact  between  Jacob  and  Laban,
and  of  not  a  few  other  much  misunderstood  O T  passages,  and  in
the  Negeb  was  '  Shechem ' — i.e.,  Cusham  (see  SHECHEM,  2).  It
therefore  became  superfluous  to  emend  the  '  Ephrath '  of
Gen.  301619  into  '  Beeroth,'  a  change  which  on  a  more  con
servative  view  of  the  tribal  traditions  (see  EPHRATH,  i  ;
JOSEPH  i.,  §  3)  was  helpful,  and  indeed  necessary.  The
'  Ephrath '  of  the  story  of  Rachel's  death  is  the  Ephrath  of  the
Negeb  (in  Gen.  2  14  Jer.  \?>i,ff.  it  appears  to  be  called  Perath  ;
cp  PARADISE,  §  5;  SHIHOR);  its  other  name,  according  to  the
gloss  in  v.  19,  was  cn^'rVSj  a  popular  distortion  of  "?ncrw  n'3>
'  Beth-jerahmeel.'  See  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE.  Thus  '  Rachel '
(the  vocalisation  is  of  course  relatively  late,  and  not  authoritative
for  the  early  tradition) — i.e.,  Jerahmeel— was  fitly  enough  buried
at  one  of  the  leading  centres  of  the  Jerahmeelite  race  in  the
Negeb.  Before  her  death  she  gave  birth  to  a  son  variously


in  fact,  enough  to  warrant  the  surmise  that  Benjamin's  original
home  was  in  the  Negeb).  The  early  tradition  also  made  a
statement  respecting  the  distance  between  the  place  where
Rachel  died  and  Ephrath  or  Beth-jerahmeel.

There  was  but  kibrath  ha-ares  (["ixnrraj)  to  come  to
Ephrath  when  Rachel  travailed.  None  of  the  ex
planations  of  kibrath  in  Ges.  Thes.,  or  elsewhere  is
satisfactory,1  and  in  the  Psalter  px  and  rn«  have  a
tendency  to  get  confounded.  Probably  we  should  read
kim'at  hd-orah,  rnxn  cyps,  'a  trifle  (left)  of  the  way. '
See  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE.

H.  vv.  H.  ,  §  i  a-c  ;  T.  K.  c. ,  §  2.

RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE.  The  biblical  references
are  (a)  Gen.  35 19*  (JE),  (t)  487£  (R).  (c)  i  S.  10z/.
(d}  Jer.  31 15,  (e)  Mt.  2i6-i8.  It  is  generally  supposed
(see  Buhl,  Pal.  159,  and  Dillm.  on  Gen.  8019)  that
either  (i. )  there  was  a  double  tradition  with  reference
to  the  site  of  Rachel's  grave,  one  (a,  b,  e}  placing  it
near  Bethlehem  in  Judah,  another  (c,  d)  '  in  the  border
of  Benjamin  '  towards  Ramah  (so  Nold. .  Del.  <*>,  Dillm. ) ;
or  (ii. )  the  gloss  '  that  is  Bethlehem  '  in  (a)  and  (f>),  which
(e)  appears  to  follow,  is  based  upon  a  geographical  con
fusion  and  is  to  be  disregarded  (so  Holzinger,  Gunkel,
and  Ox/.  Hex. ).  The  weak  point  in  i.  is  thought  to  be

1  IVOD  is  conventionally  regarded  as  a  measure  (&  imroSpofios  ;
Pesh.  a  parasang).  Of  course,  the  Ass.  kibrati,  '  a  quarter  of
the  world,'  can  hardly,  by  any  ingenuity,  be  made  illustrative.
It  is  clear  that  the  text  is  corrupt.  So  also  in  2  K.  5  19  pj«  ni33
(no  article  before  JHK)  is  shown  by  the  context  to  be  corrupt  (sec
NAAMAN).

4004


RADDAI

that  Rachel  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  S.  kingdom,  and
the  weak  point  in  ii.  certainly  is  that  a  N.  Ephrath  is
undiscoverable.  Before  proceeding  further  we  must
criticise  the  text  (see  Crit.  Bib. ).

(a)  and  (6)  cnSvi'3  |s  a  popular  corruption  of  ^NCnV  JV3-
'  Ephrath  '  and  '  Beth-jerahmeel '  are  both  place-names  of  the
Negeb.  We  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  gloss  in  Gen.  35  196
and  48  7<*  is  correct,  and  that  Beth-jerahmeel  either  had  Ephrath
as  its  second  name,  or  was  in  the  district  called  Ephrath.  We
must  remember  that  Ephrath  was  traditionally  the  wife  of  Caleb
(iCh.  2j9).

(c)  The  geographical  description  has  suffered  serious  corrup
tion.  The  text  should  run,  '  When  thou  departest  from  me
to-day,  thou  shall  find  two  men  by  Beth-jerahmeel  in  Shalishah.'
See  SHALISHA,  ZELZAH.

(rf)Jer.  31  being  most  probably  of  late  origin,  we  could  not  be
surprised  if  it  contained  a  statement  based  on  a  misunderstanding
of  the  Rachel  tradition.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  the
Ramah  spoken  of  is  the  same  that  is  meant  in  the  underlying
original  of  Jer.  Wijf.,  which  probably  referred  to  a  Ramah
(  =  Jerahmeel)  in  the  Negeb,  which  was  the  starting-point  of  the
captives  who  went  to  a  N.  Arabian  exile.  If  so,  the  writer  may
also  conceivably  have  known  of  Rachel  as  having  died  and  been
buried  in  the  Negeb.  Taking,  as  was  supposed,  a  profound
interest  in  the  fortunes  of  her  descendants,  Rachel  had  never
ceased  to  grieve  over  the  tribe  of  Joseph,  which  had  gone  into
exile  with  other  N.  Israelites  in  N.  Arabia  (see  Crit.  Bib.  on
2  K.  17  61).  When,  however,  the  Jerahmeelite  setting  of  the
early  Israelite  legends,  and  the  N.  Arabian  exile  of  the  two
sections  of  the  Israelite  race,  had  passed  into  oblivion  (partly
through  corruption  of  the  texts),  it  was  natural  that  the  sepulchre
of  Rachel  should  be  transferred  to  the  N.,  in  spite  of  the  fact
that  no  Ephrath  was  in  existence  to  impart  to  this  transference
a  superficial  plausibility.

According  to  JE,  the  site  of  Rachel's  tomb  was  marked
by  a  sacred  pillar  (see  MASSEBAH),  which  existed  in  the
writer's  time  (Gen.  35 20).  The  tomb  known  in  our  own
day  as  Rachel's  has  plainly  been  restored,  though  the
tradition  has  attached  to  the  same  spot  throughout  the
Christian  period.  It  is  a  short  distance  from  Bethlehem,
on  the  road  to  Jerusalem.  According  to  Clermont-
Ganneau,2  it  may  perhaps  be  the  tomb  (cenotaph)  of  the
Jewish  king  Archelaus  (cp  HEROD,  §  8)  referred  to  by
Jerome  (OS  101  12).  T.  K.  c.

RADDAI  (''Tl),  son  of  Jesse,  and  brother  of  DAVID
\q.v.  §  i«,  n.]  (i  Ch.2i4t;  ZA.AAAI  [B],  ZA.BA.  [Bab],
p&AA&l  [A],  peA&l  [L])-  Ewald  identifies  with  him  the
corrupt  'jn  (Rei)  of  i  K.  18,  see  SHIMEI  2.  The  name
is  more  probably  a  corruption  of  nai  (see  Marq.  Fund.
25  cp  ©  Bah)  ;  see  ZABDI.

RAFTS  (n'n;n),  i  K.  423[59]. See  SHIP,  §  i.

RAGAU. i.  See  RAGES.

2.  (payav  [Ti.WH]),  Lk.  3  35,  RV  REU.  See  GENEALOGIES,
ii.  §  3.

RAGES  (PAP-AC,  TOON,  TOIC  [TH  TH  BA6iois
uncertain  ;  in  Tob.  4 20  N  Appoic].  rages  [Vg.  ],  rdgd
[Syr.]),  an  important  city  in  NE.  Media,  situated  in  the
province  of  Rhagiana,  near  the  celebrated  Caspian  Gates,
and  hence  a  place  of  great  strategical  importance.  It  is
frequently  mentioned  in  the  above  form  in  the  Book  of
Tobit  (1 14  4 1 20  5s  613  92).  In  Judith  (1515)  the  name
appears  as  Ragau  (payav,  ragau  [Vg.  ],  '  plain  of  Dura, ' 3
and  rfgii  [Syr.]),  which  is  apparently  identical  with
REU  [q.v.~\.

This  city,  which  is  frequently  mentioned  by  classical
writers,  occurs  as  Rhaga  in  the  Avesta  (Vend.  ch.  1),
and  also  in  the  Behistun  Inscription  of  Darius  Hystaspis
2  13).  After  suffering  various  changes,  it  fell  into  decay ;
but  the  name  may  perhaps  survive  in  the  huge  ruins
of  Rhey,  situated  some  5  m.  SE.  of  Teheran.  See
Rawlinson,  Monarchies,  2  272  / ;  Curzon,  Persia,
1345-352;  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Geog. ,  s.v.

RAGUEL  (Wuiri).  (i)  RV  REUEL.  See  JETHRO,
REUEL.  (2)  a  man  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali  (Tob.  6 12  ;
cp  1 1  74),  related  to  Tobias  ;  husband  of  Edna,  whose

1  It  is  there  shown  that  there  has  been  a  confusion  between
two  captivities  of  N.  Israel,  an  Assyrian  and  a  N.  Arabian.

2  R ecueil  d archeol.  orientate,  2  134  jf.

3  Cp  jnn  nyp3  Dan.  3  i,  and  see  DURA. Duru  was  not  an
uncommon  Babylonian  name.

4005


BAHAB

only  daughter  Sara  became  the  wife  of  Tobias
RAfOYHA.  3717;  -HAoc)-

In  Enoch  204  Raguel  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  archangels.
Perhaps  this  was  suggested  by  Tob.  3 17,  where  the  name
Raguel  occurs  in  connection  with  Raphael  (both  names  may
have  a  similar  origin  ;  see  REUEL,  RAPHAEL).  That  the
name  has  any  reference  to  this  angel's  role  as  a  'chastiser'
(Charles  on  Enoch  20  4)  is  hardly  probable.  T.  K.  C.

RAHAB  (2rn),  a  synonymous  term  for  the  DRAGON
(q.v. )  in  post-exilic  writings,  sometimes  also  applied  to
Egypt  (or,  as  may  plausibly  be  held,  to  Misrim,  the  N.
Arabian  foe  of  Israel;  see  MIZRAIM,  §  zb),  Job9i3
(K-rfrri  TO.  VTT'  ovpav6i>),  26 12  (r6  K^TOS),  Ps.  89io[n]
(vTrfprjipavov),  Is.  51 9  (LXX  om. ),  30?  (dirt  fj-arala  -f]
Trapa.K\r)cri.s  vfj.Cov  airrr;),  Ps.  8?4t  (paa/H).1

From  Job  9 13  26 12  we  perhaps  learn  that  Rahab  was
another  name  for  Tiamat,  the  dragon  of  darkness  and

1  References chaos' 'God''  says  Job  in  his  de~
spondency,  '  will  not  turn  back  his  fur)' ;

[even]  the  helpers  of  Rahab  bowed  beneath  him.'  On
the  '  helpers  of  Tiamat,'  see  DRAGON,  §  5.  Later,  Job
again  refers  to  the  fate  of  Rahab  (or  is  it  Bildad,
following  out  Job's  suggestions  in  his  unoriginal,  way?).

By  his  power  he  threatened  ("U's)  the  sea,
And  by  his  skill  he  shattered  Rahab.

Here  'sea'  and  'Rahab'  are  coupled,  as  'sea'  and
'  Leviathan,'  probably,  in  Job  38  (see  LEVIATHAN),  and
in  v.  13  the  '  dragon  '  is  referred  to.  In  Ps.  89 9/^  t10./-]
the  same  parallelism  is  observable,  and  since  v.  n  proves
that  the  psalmist  has  the  creation  in  his  mind,  the  view
that  Rahab  is  a  synonym  for  Leviathan  or  the  dragon
again  becomes  plausible.  The  passage  runs, —

Thou  (alone)  didst  crush  Rahab  as  a  dishonoured  corpse  ;
With  thy  strong  arm  thou  didst  break  down  thine  enemies.

The  invocation  to  the  arm  of  Yahwe  in  Is.  51 9  also
refers  to  Rahab.  Here,  however,  though  the  allusion
to  the  Dragon-myth  is  obvious,  there  is  also  a  special
reference  to  nnaa  (see  DRAGON),  or  perhaps  to  the
people  called  Misrim  in  N.  Arabia.  How  this  was
possible  we  seem  to  learn  from  Is.  30?  (on  the  text  see
SBOT,  ad  loc. ).  It  has  been  held  (cp  Duhm,  ad  loc. )
that  the  latter  half  of  the  verse  is  a  later  addition.
Living  in  an  age  when  the  mythological  interest  had
revived,  a  reader  was  struck  by  the  resemblance  between
the  characteristics  of  the  dragon  of  chaos  and  those  of
D'iso-  Both  were  pre-eminent  in  strength  ;  both  in
the  olden  time  had  rebelled  against  Yahwe  ;  for  D'lsc.
therefore,  as  well  as  for  the  dragon,  the  fate  of  abject
humiliation  (cp  Is.  19)  was  reserved.  In  Ps.  874  Rahab,
according  to  the  exegetical  tradition,  is  simply  a  synonym
for  Egypt  (as  the  Targum  already  explains  it),  though
even  here  this  is  not  beyond  critical  questioning.

Rahab  in  Hebrew  would  mean  'raging,'  'insolence.'
This  would  be  not  unsuitable  as  a  title  of  the  chaos-
„  „  .  dragon,  a  reference  to  which  is  plainly
*'  intended  in  all  the  above  passages  except
the  last.  It  would  not  be  strange,  however,  if  Rahab
were  a  Hebraised  form  of  some  Babylonian  mythic
name.  In  the  third  of  the  creation-stories  mentioned
elsewhere  (see  CREATION) — that  which  begins  'cities
sighed,  men  [groaned]  ' — the  dragon  is  repeatedly  called
by  a  name  which  Zimmern  and  Gunkel  would  like  to
read  rebbu  (for  *r-uhbu),  and  to  consider  the  Ass.  equiva
lent  of  Rahab.  The  name,  if  it  means  '  violence,'
would  be  specially  appropriate  in  the  story  of  the
tyranny  exercised  by  Tiamat.  Unfortunately  the  read
ing  is  uncertain.  The  polyphonous  character  of  the
Assyrian  script  allows  us  equally  to  read  kalbu,  '  dog,'
and  labbu,  '  lion  '  (Gunkel,  Schopf.  29 418).  For  another
theory  of  the  origin  and  precise  significance  of  the  title
Rahab  we  may  be  allowed  to  refer  to  Crit.  Bib.

T.  K.  C.

1  In  Job  9  13  26  12  Is.  51  9,  Symm.  has  aAa^oi/euj,  aAa<Jbi>eia»>,
in  Is.  51  o  SO?  Aq.  op/UTj^a,  Theod.  irAaros,  in  Is.  30,  Symm.  has
Topa^oi  or  -XT;,  in  Ps.  87  4  Aq.  has  op/urjfxaTOt,  Symm.  vircprfyaviav.

4006


EAHAB

RAHAB  (Urn;  PAAB),  Josh.  2i  3  617  23  25.  The
story  of  Rahab  must  not  be  taken  literally.  She  is
clearly  the  eponym  of  a  tribe,  and  the  circumstances  of
the  tribe  are  reflected  in  her  fortunes.  The  statements
in  Josh.  623  25  apply  to  no  tribe  known  to  us  so  well  as
to  the  Kenites,  who  were  admitted  among  the  Israelites
on  relatively  unfavourable  terms — as  sojourners  ;  hence
the  term  zdndk.  The  name  urn  is  best  accounted  for  as
the  equivalent  of  -^n,  '  Heber,'  the  second  name  of  the
tribe  of  the  Kenites. l  See  JKRICHO,  §  4  ;  RECHABITES.

In  Heb.  II  ji  Rahab  is  praised  as  an  example  of  faith.
This  is  suggested  by  the  edifying  speech  of  Rahab  in
Josh.  29-11,  of  which,  however,  only  v.  ga  is  recognised
by  critical  analysis  as  belonging  to  the  earlier  narrative
(see  Oxf.  Hex.  2391).  It  is  no  doubt  startling  that
Rahab  should  be  a  worshipper  of  Yahwe — if  Rahab  is
to  be  viewed  as  a  Canaanite.  If,  however,  Rahab  is  a
symbolic  term  for  the  Kenites,  all  becomes  plain,  for  the
Kenites  were  worshippers  of  Yahwe  (cp  KENITES).
The  attempts  of  (later)  Jewish  and  Christian  interpreters
to  explain  away  the  term  zCwah,  'harlot,'  as  'hostess,
innkeeper,'  also  now  prove  to  be  doubly  unnecessary
{see  above).  On  Rahab's  good  works  (James  225),  cp
the  Jewish  view  in  Weber,  Jiid.  Theol.  332.  The
mention  of  her  in  the  genealogy  of  Jesus  (Mt.  Is)  rests
on  the  assumption  that  she  became  the  wife  of  SALMON
[</.i'.].  No  less  a  man  than  Jeremiah  is  stated  in
Ategillah  14*  to  have  been  a  descendant  of  Rahab  on
his  mother's  side.  This  passed  for  an  edifying  belief.

T.  K.  C.

RAHAM  (DIT1),  son  of  SHEMA  b.  HEBRON,  b.
MARKSHAH,  and  father  of  JORKEAM  (qq.v. );  i  Ch.
244  (p&Mee  [B],  P&GM'  [A],  -&M  [L]).  See  REKEM.

RAHEL  (Jer.  31 15),  RV  RACHEL.

RAIN.  That  at  the  present  day  rain  is  considered
in  Palestine  as  one  of  God's  best  gifts,  is  undeniable.
1.  Conception  Moslems>  Christians,  and  Jews  can
of  rain  linite  "i  imploring  heaven  for  the
'showers  that  water  the  earth'  (Ps.
726).  But  it  is  a  question  whether  the  fertilising  opera
tion  of  the  Baalim  was  associated  in  early  times  with
the  rain  of  heaven,  or  only  with  springs,  streams,  and
underground  flow  (cp  BAAL,  §  i).  Robertson  Smith,
wh->  discusses  the  subject  fully  in  Rel.  Sem.  lect.  3,
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  originally  the  Baalim  were
•gods  of  the  streams  and  fountains,  but  that,  as
husbandry  spread,  the  '  gods  of  the  springs '  extended
their  domain  over  the  lands  watered  by  the  sky,  and
gradually  added  to  their  old  attributes  the  new  character
of  'lords  of  rain'  (p.  106).  Yahwe  in  the  OT  is
certainly  the  rain-giver;  Jer.  1422,  'Can  any  of  the
vanities  of  the  heathen  cause  rain?'  In  Ps.  Q5g[io],
according  to  the  traditional  text,  the  early  rain  is
called  '  the  river  of  God.'  The  word  used  (jSs)  is  re
markable.  Generally  it  occurs  in  the  plural  for  the
artificial  streams  used  in  irrigation  (Is.  8025  322  Ps.  13
119i36  Prov.  5i6  21 1  Lam.  848).  Here,  if  MT  is  right,
there  is  a  similar  conception.  The  rain  is  imagined
as  water  which  has  been  drawn  from  the  great  heavenly
reservoirs  (Gen.  7 it)  and  sent  down  on  earth  through
the  solid  dome  of  the  sky.  This  is  illustrated  by
Job  8825,  '  Who  has  cleft  a  channel  for  the  waterflood  '
{so  RY  ;  L'teph,  rgy,  'torrential  lain').  With  this  cp
T.  28,  where  the  '  rain '  (matar,  nan)  and  the  '  parted
streams  of  dew '  (read  SB  ^rj,  for  So  'Sjn  ;  see  DEW)
are  parallel  expressions.

Naturally,  rain  and  rain-mist  (fal,  SB)  are  prominent
in  poetic  benedictions.  In  Dt.  8813  the  '  precious  things
of  heaven  above'  (reading  Spo  for  Sec)2  are  the  rain,
the  rain-mist,  and  the  dew.  In  Gen.  27  28  the  fine  rain,
or  rain-mist,  of  heaven  stands  first  among  the  blessings

1  For  a  less  probable  view  see  C.  Niebuhr,  Gesch.  1  353^

2  Tg.,  Onk. and  Pesh.  combine  the  readings  Sya  and  Sea-
The  former  therefore  is  no  modern  conjecture.

4007


RAIN

called  down  upon  Jacob's  land  by  Isaac.  In  Dt.  28 12
Moses  promises  to  obedient  Israel  that  Yahwe  '  will
open  his  good  treasury,  the  heaven,  to  give  the  rain  in
its  season '  ;  to  this  treasury  the  Book  of  Enoch  refers
(60zo/.  6923)  ;  cp  DEW.  The  '  self-springing  plants  of
Yahwe'  in  Is.  4 a  (SBOT)  are  those  which  depend  on
the  moisture  which  God  sends  from  this  heavenly  store-
chamber.  Notice,  too,  that  in  Ps.  104 13  God  is  said  to
'  water  the  mountains  from  his  upper  chambers.'  It  is
a  slightly  different  mythic  symbol  which  a  poet  in  Job
uses — '  Who  (but  Yahwe)  can  tilt  the  bottles  of  heaven?'
(Job  8837).  To  be  able  to  bring  rain  through  prayer
was  one  of  the  greatest  proofs  of  eminent  piety.  Elijah
'  prayed  fervently  that  it  might  not  rain,  and  it  rained
not,'  etc.  (Jas.  617);  and  Josephus  (Ant.  xiv.  2i)
relates  that,  in  the  time  of  King  Aristobulus,  there  was
a  man  named  Onias,  '  righteous  and  beloved  of  God,"
who  by  his  prayers  could  bring  rain  to  the  parched
earth.  Cp  PRAYER.

Palestine  is  well  described  in  Deut.  Hit  (in  contra
distinction  to  Egypt)  as  '  a  land  of  hills  and  valleys,


2.  Former  and


which  drinks  water, when rain falls


'latter  rain.  Jr°™  heaven.'  Shortly  afterwards
(v.  14)  a  fuller  description  is  given.
See  also  Hos.  63  Joel  223  Zech.  10 1/  (see  Nowack),
Job  2923,  and  Ja.  5j  (wpHC^ov  Ka.1  Siij/ifjLOv  ;  BX  insert
\if.rbv,  giving  the  sense  rightly).  The  distribution  of
rain  is  very  unequal.  On  one  occasion  Thomson  found
the  ground  in  the  Jordan  valley  like  a  desert,  while  at
Tiberias  the  whole  country  was  '  a  paradise  of  herbs
and  flowers.'  Just  so  it  was  in  ancient  times.  'I
caused  it  to  rain  upon  one  city,  and  caused  it  not  to
rain  upon  another  city  :  one  piece  was  rained  upon,  and
the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not  withered'  (Am.  4?).
The  prophet  continues,  '  So  two  or  three  cities  wandered
unto  one  city  to  drink  water,  but  they  were  not  satis
fied,'  on  which  Thomson  remarks  that  this  is  'a  fact
often  repeated'  in  Palestine.1  The  variableness  of  the
climate  helps  to  account  for  the  frequent  failure  of  the
crops,  both  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times,  and  gives
point  to  the  promises  of  regularity  in  the  seasons  on
condition  of  obedience  to  the  divine  commands.2  The
former  or  autumnal  rains  (mr,  mio)  usually  begin  about
the  end  of  October.  In  Lebanon  they  may  begin  a
month  earlier  ;  but  no  dependence  can  be  placed  upon
this,  and  according  to  Thomson  (LB  90)  the  winter
rains  are  sometimes  delayed  till  January.  They  are
usually  accompanied  by  thunder  and  lightning  (Jer.
10 13).  The  next  four  months  may  be  called  the  rainy
season.  In  April  rain  (the  latter  rain,  E-ipSp  \/*"P^'  ' to
be  late')  falls  at  intervals;  in  May  the  showers  are
less  frequent  and  lighter,  and  at  the  close  of  that  month
they  cease  altogether.

It  appears  from  Glaisher's  observations  (PEFQ,  1899,  p.  71)
that  the  heaviest  monthly  rainfall  in  1897  was  11.21  in.,  in
January ;  the  next,  6.74  in.  in  December,  and  that  the  total  fall
for  the  year  was  27.72  in.  This  refers  to  Tiberias.  At  Jerusalem
the  total  fall  was  41.62  in.  At  Tiberias  no  rain  fell  from  May
25  to  Oct.  29,  making  a  period  of  156  consecutive  days  without
rain.  At  Jerusalem,  none  fell  from  May  z6th  to  Oct.  20,  making
a  period  of  146  consecutive  days  without  rain.

i. C&3,  gi'setn,  a  violent downpour, i  K.  1841 Ezek.  13  n;

continuous,  Ezra  10g  13  ;  such  as  the  early  or  latter  rain,  Lev.

2<>4  Jer.  5  24  Joel  '2  23  ;  accompanied  with  wind,

3.  Hebrew 2  K.  3 17  Prov.  25 14.

terms.  2-  "'??, tnHtiir,  a  more  general term,  e.g.,

'the  rain  ('c)  of  heaven,'  Dt.  HII.  A  tor
rential  rain  is  '  a  sweeping  rain  '  (Prov.  28  3) ;  or  the  two  words
C&1  and  ^j;O  may  be  combined,  Zech.  10  i  Job  37  6.

3.  D'lJ,  zfrem,  a  rain-storm,  Is.  25  4  28  2  32  2 Hab.  3  10  Job
24s;  sometimes  accompanied  by  hail,  Is.  2828030. The  sup
posed  occurrences  of  a  verb  denom.  (Ps.  77  18  90  5, MT)  are
probably  due  to  corruption.

4.  and  5. ,TVr,  yarch,  and  rniD,  mdreh,  the  former  rain,  nnd
B*ip7D,  nialkds,  the  latter  rain,  see  $  2.

6.  D-T3-I, rlblblm, EV 'showers,1  Jer.  3  3  14  22 V
Dt.  322  Psi65n[io]726t.


1 The  Land  and  the  Book,  395.
4008


2  Ibid.  90.


RAINBOW

7  D'P'DI,  restslm  (from  -y/DDl,  'sparsit,  stillavit'),  sprinkled
moisture.  In  Cant.  62!  (EV  'drops  of  the  night ')  of  the  night-
mist  (see  DEW),  but  probably  applicable  to  rain  in  general  (sec
C'3'3l)-  In  Dt.  322  Lagarde  and  Gratz  correct  D'T^t?  into
D'O'DI.  In  Ps.  104  13  also  Vp'pia  should  perhaps  be  read  for
Tj<fc>j;p  nsp.  T.  K.  c.

RAINBOW. i. nc*^, k&eth  (r6$ov). Gen. 9 13 /.

Ezek.  1  28  Ecclus.  43  n. On  Gen.  9  i-$ff.  see  DELUGE,  §  n.
2.  Ipis,  Rev.  43  10  i.

RAISINS, i.  trpiSi-,  simmukim,  see  FRUIT,  §  4.

2.  CT'C'K,  Hsisim,  Hos.  3  i,  RV. See  FRUIT,  §  5.

RAKEM  (D|TJ),  i  Ch.  7  16  EV,  pausal  form  for
REKEM,  4.

RAKKATH  (n|5"l,  'bank,'  an  Aramaic  word?
&AK69  [B],  peKK&e  [A],  p&.  [L]),  a  'fenced  city'
of  Naphtali,  mentioned  between  Hammath  (S.  of
Tiberias)  and  Chinnereth  (on  the  upper  part  of
the  E.  side  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee),  Josh.  1935.  Two
identifications  of  Rakkath  are  offered  in  the  Babylonian
Talmud  in  the  same  context  (Meg.  5^,  6u).  According
to  R.  Johanan,  Rakkath  was  the  important  city  of
Sepphoris.  But  the  etymological  midrash  attached  to
this  identification  is  such  as  entirely  to  discredit  it.
Raba,  on  the  other  hand,  refers  to  a  generally  received
•opinion  that  Rakkath  is  Tiberias,  and  according  to
Neubauer  (Gtog.  du  Talm.  209)  the  use  of  the  name
Rakkath  for  Tiberias  lasted  into  the  fourth  century  A.  D.
Certainly  the  position  of  Rakkath  in  the  list  of  cities
at  least  permits  this  view.  Only,  ( i )  we  must  not
suppose  that  Tiberias  stood  exactly  on  the  site  of
the  ancient  Rakkath.  For,  as  Josephus  informs  us
(Ant.  xviii.  2s),  the  land  upon  which  it  was  built  had
been  occupied  by  tombs,  which  implies  that  the  ancient
town  (however  it  was  named)  had  lain  at  a  short  distance
from  the  site  of  the  new  city.  And  (2)  it  is  possible
enough  that  npn  is  a  fragment  of  rrnp  (city  of),  and
should  be  prefixed  to  JVUD  (Chinnereth).  T.  K.  c.

RAKKON  (f'ljjn,  not  in  ©BA  .  ^L  HpeKKO)N),
Josh.  1946  (probably  a  vox  nihili}.  See  ME-JARKON.

RAM  (DT;  p&M  [BAL]).  i.  The  name  of  a
Judahite  family,  whose  eponym  is  variously  described
as  the  second  son  of  Hezron  the  grandson  of  Judah
(i  Ch.  2p  :  pa/j.  and  apa/j.  [BA],  apa/j.  [L]  ;  v.  10,  appav
[B,  cp  pi<  7'.  25],  apafj.  [AL]),  and  as  the  firstborn  son
of  Jerahmeel  the  firstborn  son  of  Hezron  (v.  25,  pav
[B]  ;  v.  27,  apa/j:  [B]).  The  same  supposed  person  is
also  named  in  the  (late)  genealogy  of  David,  as  the  son
of  Hezron,  Ruth4i9  (appav  [BA],  apafj.  [L]),  and  con
sequently  in  Mt.  1  3  4  (ARAM  [AV]  ;  Ram  [RV] ;  Apafj.
[BX  etc.]  :  see  also  AKNI,  Lk.  833).  Doubtless  Ram  is
a  shortened  form  of  some  well-known  name,  hardly
Jehoram  (NSld. )  or  Abiram  (Klost.  Gcsch.  112),  but
rather  the  name  from  which  both  these  names  probably
sprang — Jerahmeel  (Che. ).

2.  Name  of  the  supposed  family  of  the  Elihu  of  Job  (32  2  ;
PO.JJ.  [T?N] ;  pa/iia  [A] ;  apa/u.  [C]),  certainly  not  a  shortened  form
of  the  ethnic  name  Aram,  unless  there  was  a  southern  Aram.

RAM  (??$),  Gen.  157,  etc. See  SHEEP.

RAM,  BATTERING  (13).  Ezek.  4a21a7[2a].  See
SIEGE,  §  2/.

RAMA  (p&MA,  [Ti.WH]),  Mt.  2i8,  RV  RAM  AH.

RAMAH  (nrpn,  Jer.  31  15  Neh.  11 33,  elsewhere
'the  height';  usually  p&/v\A  [BAL];  gentilic,
Ramathite  ;  see  SHIMEI,  9).  i.  A  city  of  the
tribe  of  Benjamin,  Josh.  1825  Neh.  1133  (BN*Aom.),
incidentally  referred  to  in  Juclg.  19is  (om.  <5A)  Is.  1029
Hos.  58  (<T7rt  T&V  v^yXuv  [BAQ]),  Ezra226  (apa/j,  [B],
r?7S  paua  [AL]),  and  stated  in  i  K.  15 17  (paaua  [B],
pa/j.fj.av  [A],  po.ua,  [L])  to  have  been  fortified  by  Baasha
king  of  Israel  in  order  to  isolate  Jerusalem  (cp  ASA).
Near  it  lay  the  grave  of  Rachel,  according  to  Jer.  31 15
{rrj  v\f/r)\rj  [N*A]),  where  the  tribal  ancestor  is  poetically

4009


RAMATH-MIZPBH

represented  as  appearing  on  her  grave,  and  uttering  a
lamentation  for  the  exile  of  her  children.1  Near  it  was
also,  a  later  writer  believed,  the  palm  tree  of  the
prophetess  Deborah  (Judg.  4s,  TTJJ  /Sa/m  [B],  ta/ia  [A]).
This  Ramah  is  no  doubt  the  mod.  er-Kdm,  a  village
with  ancient  remains,  2600  ft.  above  the  sea-level,
5  m.  N.  from  Jerusalem.  Its  rediscovery  is  due  to
Robinson  (BR  1576).

2.  The  home  pf  Samuel  and  his  father  Elkanah  (  i  S.
1  19211  717841534  1613  19i8/:  25i  283),  also  called,
or  rather  miscalled,  in  EV  of  iS.  li,  RAMATHAIM-
ZOPHIM  [g.v.].  It  was  in  the  hill-country  of  Ephraim
and  more  particularly  in  the  land  of  Zurn  [q.v.  ].
According  to  Eus.  and  Jer.  who  tall  it  appaQcfj.  fffitpa
Armathem  Sophim  (OS  225  12;  9617)  it  was  near
Diospolis,  and  Jer.  adds  that  it  was  '  in  regione
Thamnitica.  '  This  addition  agrees  with  what  is  said
in  i  Mace.  11  34  of  RAMATHEM  [q.v.~\  as  having
originally  been  reckoned  to  Samaria,  and  suggests
identifying  Ramah  with  Beit-rim  a,  a  place  mentioned
in  the  Talmud  (Neub.  Gtlogr.  82),  situated  a  little
to  the  N.  of  Tibnah  (Thamna).  This  is  the  view
of  Buhl,  Pal.  170;  Kittel,  Hist.  2107.  It  accords
with  the  route  of  Saul  described  in  i  S.  9  1  ff.  ;  cp
Wellh.TTtfjo.  See  also  PEFMem.  812  149^  (On
<5's  readings,  see  RAMATHAIM-X.OPHIM.  )

3.  2  K.829:  pe/ujLi<o0  [B],  pa/jLiuO  [A],  po.ju.a0  yaAaaS  [L]. See

RAMOTH-GILEAD.

4.  RAMAH  [AV  RA.MATH]  OF  THE  SOUTH;  Josh.  198  (/3a^efl
KO.TO. Ai/3a [B], pa^ue [A?], la/ietf Kara Ai/3a [A?L]). See
RA.MATH  OF  THE  SOUTH.

5.  A  'fenced  city'  of  Naphtali  (Josh.  1936  ;  aparjA  [P,],  pa/ua
[AL]),  the  modern  Rameii.  1295  ft.  above  sea-level,  W.  of  Sa/eei,
on  the  southern  slope  of  the  ridge  (here  rising  to  a  htight  of
3480  ft.)  which  forms  the  boundary  between  Upper  and  Lower
Galilee. Cp  Guerin,  Gal.  1  453^

6.  A place mentioned in the delimitation of the
territory  of  Asher,  Josh.  1929. According  to  Robinson
beyond  all  doubt  to  be  identified  with the  village  of
Rameh,  (PEF  Survey  :  —  Ramia],  in  the  latitude  of  A'tis
en-Ndkfira,  situated  '  upon  an  isolated  hill,  in  the  midst
of  a  basin  with  green  fields,  surrounded  by  higher  hills  '
(BR 463). Buhl (Pal. 231)  accepts this identifica
tion, whilst  admitting  that  the  frequent  occurrence  of
the name  prevents a  final decision.* Apart  from the
name, indeed, one might prefer to locate Ramah a
little  way  to  the  W.  ,  at  or  near  the  ruins  of  Belat,  on  a
hill  which  commands  a  grand  prospect. The  language
of Josh.  1928/.  , however, does not seem to favour  _
either view. The  border of  Asher  is  traced  in  v.  28
from Hammon  (Hamul]  to  Kanah  (A'diiti)  and  thence
to  Sidon  ; then  in  v.  29  \ve  are  told  to  turn  back  south
ward to Ramah, and draw a line thence to Tyre
and  to Hosah  (near  Rds  el-'Ain]  ; somewhere  on  the
coast  to  the  S. of  Hosah (at the  mouth  of  the  river
SHIHOR-LIBNATH)  the  border  ends. Can  the  meaning
be  that  the  territory  within  the  first  of  these  lines  belongs
to  Tyre  and  Sidon  together,  and  that  within  both  lines
taken  together  (the  second  modifying  the  first)  to  Tyre,
both  territories  being  theoretically  possessed  by  Asher  ?
If  so,  Ramah  would  seem  to  be  not  very  far  from  Tyre  ;
indeed,  this  is  the  natural  inference  from  the  Hebrew  of
v.  zga. Its  true  site  may  perhaps  be  lost.

(Since  this  was  written,  an  abundance  of  similarly  perplexing
phenomena  have  been  noticed  by  the  present  writer,  which  can
only  be  explained  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  original  document
referred  to  districts  in  the  Negeb.  Cp  SHIHOR-LIBNATH;
TVRE  ;  ZEMARAIM,  last  par.)  T.  K.  C.


RAMATHITE  ("Tltt"}),  i  Ch.2/27.  See  SHIMEI,  9.
RAMATH-LEHI  (TV?  DKH),  Judg.  15  14.  See  LEHI.
RAMATH-MIZPEn(nsy»n  TOT;  Ap<\Ba>

THN  MACCH4>*.[B].  pAMto6  K.  T.  MAC(J)A  [A],
K.T.M.  [L]),  a  place  on  the  northern  border  of  the
Gadites,  Josh.  1326f.  Probably  the  same  as  MlZPEH
(4),  MIZPAH  (2).

1  On  the  discrepant  traditions  respecting  the  site  of  Rachel's
grave,  and  on  Mt.  2  18,  see  EPHRATH,  RACHEL.

4010


RAMATH  OF  THE  SOUTH

RAMATH  OF  THE  SOUTH  (3M  HOXT  ;  for  ©
see  RAMAH,  4),  and  (in  i  S. )  RAMOTH  OF  THE  SOUTH
(333  niDl ;  P&MA  [BL]-e  [A]  NOTOY-  RAMA  rrpoc
MBCHMBplAN  [-sym-]).  apparently  the  most  remote  of
the  Simeonite  towns  (Josh.  1K8)  ;  mentioned  also  among
the  towns  in  the  Negeb  to  which  David  sent  presents
from  ZIKLAG  (Halusah),  i  S.  3027.  The  full  name  was
Baalath-beer-rama(o)th-negeb,  i.e. ,  '  Baalah  of  the  well
of  Ramath  (Ramoth)  of  the  Negeb,'  or  '  Baalah  of  the
well,  Ramath  of  the  Negeb '  (see  BAALATH-BEER).  The
name,  however,  needs  correction  by  the  help  of  v.  6/.
and  Josh.  1632.  The  lists  of  the  Simeonite  and  Judahite
towns  are  disfigured  by  errata,  nor  do  they  agree  as
they  should.  The  opinion  of  the  present  writer  is  that
the  most  remote  of  these  towns  was  most  probably
called  Baalath-beer-ramah  (also  Baalath-en-rimmon), —
i.e.,  Baalah  of  the  well  (also,  fountain)  of  Raman  or
Rimmon, — and  that  both  Ramah  and  RIMMON  (q.v. )  are
popular  corruptions  of  'Jerahmeel.'  Consequently  in
i  S.  30  27  the  second  of  the  names  in  the  list  should  be
not  Ramoth-negeb,  but  Jerahmeel-negeb.  See  EN-
RIMMON,  TAMAR,  NEGEB.

In  Josh.  1632  Lebaoth  (pixa1?)  and  in  196  Beth-lebaoth
C'nva)  are  miswritten  for  n^l'3-  In  i  Ch.  4  33  '  Baalath-beer '
becomes  shortened  into  '  Baal.'  T.  K.  C.

KAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM  (D'QIX  DTIOVI  ;  &PMA-
6&IM  c(e)l(bA  [BL]  ;  &p.  cu>4>i/v\  [A]),  the  name  of
the  city  of  Elkanah  in  the  hill-country  of  Ephraim,  i  S.
1 1.  The  text,  however,  has  Ha-ramathaim-sophim,  the
article  being  prefixed  to  ramathaim.  The  difficulties  of
this  supposed  compound  form,  and  indeed  of  MT's
reading,  however  viewed,  are  well  set  forth  by  Driver
(  TBS  ad  loc. ),  who,  with  \Yellhausen  and  \V.  R.  Smith,
following  ©'s  ff(()i(pa,  reads  'BIS  'a  Zuphite,'  which  is
explained  by  a  reference  to  i  Ch.  62o[3s],  Kr.  as='a
member  of  the  clan  called  ZUPH  '  [q.v. ].  Haramathaim
is  also  plausibly  explained  by  Wellhausen  (TBS  34  f.)
as  the  later  form  of  the  name  Ha-ramah(see  RAMATHEM),
which  was  introduced  into  i  S.  1 1  from  a  tendency  to
modernisation,  and  stands  (ap/madaifj.),  in  ©,  not  only
here,  but  also  wherever  na~n  has  the  n  of  motion
attached  to  it.  With  the  form  ap/jLaGai/ut,  we  may  rightly
compare  the  apa/j.a0a  or  ap/ma0a  or  panada  of  Josephus
and  the  apLfj.affa.ia  of  the  NT.

The  name  Ha-ramah  in  the  Hebrew  text  almost  always
occurs  in  the  augmented  form  nncirt.  The  exceptions  are  i  S.
19  18-20  i  25 1  283.  Here  we  constantly  find  ^E^S  except  in
19  18  22,  where  '"ins^r  occurs.  ©A  accordingly  represents  the
former  word  by  tv  pajua,  the  latter  by  ei?  apfj.aOa.ifi — a  new
distinction  suggested  perhaps  by  the  occurrence  of  n  in  nnoin,
The  same  correction  has  penetrated  once  into  (B^  for  in  19  22,
where  nriDin  and  !TO"n  occur  at  different  points,  ©HL  gives  first
eis  ap/j-aOaifj.  and  then  tv  po^ia  (cp  v.  18  in  2).

The  objections  to  the  above  plausible  explanation  of
Ramathaim-zophim  are — (i)  that  Ha-ramathaim  occurs  nowhere
else  in  the  MT,  (2)  that  the  Chronicler  is  an  insufficient  authority
for  the  existence  of  a  clan  called  Zuph,  (3)  that  '  land  of  Zuph  '
occurs  in  a  passage  (i  8.95)  which  has  all  the  appearance  of
corruptness  (see  Zui'H),  and  (4)  that  i  S.  1  i  itself  is  obviously  no
longer  in  its  original  form.1  The  probability  is  that  -inN  E"N
(EV,  '  a  certain  man  ')  should  be  t'SxclnT  K"K,  a  Jerahmeelite,'
and  that  D'lBN  ino  O'BIS  DTOin  f D  should  be  ''JHsm'tnl  naOrt  JD
BN  "ina  nSsSD  so  that  the  whole  sentence  becomes  (omitting
the  superfluous  variant  ^KcnT  at  the  beginning  and  certain
variants  at  the  end),  'And  there  was  a  Jerahmeelite  of  the
family  of  the  Matrites,  whose  name  was  Elkanah.'  nB2(Matri),
however,  like  'Tamar'  and  'Ramath,'  is  only  a  corruption  of
'Sxsnv,  'Jerahmeelite,'  and  'mount  Ephraim'  is  in  southern
not  in  central  Palestine  (so  Judg.  17  i  19  i,  etc.).  See  Crit.  Bib.

The  ARIMATH^A  of  the  NT  is  identified  by  Eus.
(OS  225,  12)  with  the  city  of  Elkanah,  and  said  to  be
situated  near  Diospolis  (Lydda).  This  situation  is
beyond  question  suitable  for  the  Ramathaim  of  i  Mace.
1134,  and  perhaps  too  for  the  Arimathaea  of  the  NT.
See  JOSEPH,  col.  2595^  ;  RAMATHAIM  (on  meaning
of  form);  NICODEMUS,  §  3.  T.  K.  c.

1  See  Marq.  Fund,  nf.,  and  cp  other  corrupt  passages  in
i  S.  having  proper  names  (Crit.  Bio.).


RAMESES

RAMATHEM.RV  RAMATH  AIM  (pA.9A.M6  IN  [ANY]).
the  seat  of  one  of  the  governments  formerly  belonging
to  Samaria  which  were  transferred  to  Judasa  under
Jonathan  by  king  Demetrius,  i  Mace.  1134.  On  the
name,  see  NAMES,  §  107,  and  RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM.


RAMESES  (DpniTI;  PA.MecCH  [BAFL],  PA/v\eCH
[L],  Gen.  47  ii  ;  or  Raamses,  DDipjn,  Ex.  In,  pa^e<n)  [FL],
1237  Nu.  883,  pafitaauv  [BaA],  5  pa/ui«er<77)s  [Bab]  ;  also  Judith
Ip  [RAMESSE,  AV]  ;  see  also  Redpath  ;  R.lKf  ESSES).  For
kings  Rameses  I.  and  II.  see  also  EGYPT,  §  ^-jf.

In  Ex.  1  ii  Raamses  is  one  of  the  cities  built  by  the
Israelites  as  Egyptian  serfs  ;  in  1237  they  march  from
Raamses  (eastwards)  to  Succoth  (cp  also  Nu.  8835).
In  Gen.  47  ii  the  family  of  Jacob  receive  from  Joseph
'  a  possession  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  best  of  the
land,  in  the  land  of  Rameses,  as  Pharaoh  had  com
manded.'  The  land  of  Rameses  is,  according  to  vv.  46
etc.  ,  a  part  of  Goshen,  or,  more  probably,  is  synony
mous  with  Goshen.

In  4628  <B  has  indeed  for  the  Goshen  of  Heb.  'to  Heroopolis
(i.e.,  adding  PITHOM,  or  ETHAM  ty.z>.]),  into  the  land  of
Ramesse'  (ita.9'  'Hpiatav  no\tv  «I«  fffv  'Pafifcrcnri).  [For  various
views  of  this  passage,  with  discussion,  see  JOSEPH  (in  OT),  col.

2587,  n.  4.]

It  is  usually  assumed  that  the  land  has  its  name  from
the  town,  the  administrative  centre  of  that  province.

1  The  land rhe Present wr'ter would, however,

prefer to  understand Rameses  here  as
tinci  Liie • •  . .  . . .

town having preserved the original sense,

namely,  that  of  a  royal  name.  Goshen,
or  at  least  its  eastern  part,  still  recalled  by  its  name
that  the  great  Pharaoh  Rameses  II.  had  been  its  opener
and  coloniser  (see  GOSHEN).  In  the  name  of  the
town,  on  the  other  hand,  the  original  sense,  which
must  once  have  been  '  house,  place,  city  (or  similarly)
of  Rameses,'  seems  to  have  been  forgotten,  owing  to
the  popular  abbreviation  which  omitted  the  first  part.
It  is  not  necessary  to  derive  the  combination  '  land  of
Rameses,'  which  looks  very  archaic,  from  that  secondary
use

The  royal  name  which  the  Hebrew  has  preserved  here  was
Ra'-»t(e?)s-su,1  or,  following  more  the  later  pronunciation,  Ra'
(this  can,  of  course,  be  written  in  many  ways)-w«-(.')j-Xf  ),-  '  the
sun-god  Re'  has  borne  him.'  The  classic  transliterations  are
Pa/u.i/;7)5,  Pa/Aeo-ar/s  (in  varying  the  Manethonian  fragments,
etc.),  Ramses.  From  these  Greek  forms  the  Massoretic  scholars
seem  to  have  taken  their  vocalisation  ;  whether  the  Hebrew
consonants  are  intended  to  render  the  name  as  Ka'-ines-(e)s,  or
in  a  seemingly  more  archaic  form,  J\a.'-»u'st"-s  (the  verbal  root
was  originally  tttasy,  tcrtia  Jodli),  can,  therefore,  not  be  decided
from  the  biblical  punctuation.  In  the  rendering  of  the  con
sonants,  the  preservation  of  the  'Ain  deserves  mention  as  a  sign
of  antiquity.

The  Pharaoh  meant  is  the  famous  Rameses  II.,
called  also  Osymandyas  (this  is  the  official  name  ;

2  Pharaoh  User-ma'(tYri'} or Sesostris3 by the
P  Greeks,  also  Ram(p)ses  (etc.  ),  Meiamun

'  ('loving  Amon');  see  EGYPT,  §  58.
His  reign  of  nearly  sixty-seven  years  is  less  remarkable
for  his  military  achievements  in  Asia  (which  were  very
modest)  than  for  his  paramount  activity  as  a  builder.
For  his  great  work  of  irrigating  and  colonising  the
\Vady  Tumilat,  see  GOSHEN,  §  4.  This  enterprise  seems
to  have  been  completed  before  the  twenty-first  year  of
his  reign.  Gen.  47  might  anticipate  a  later  name
for  the  region  E.  of  Goshen  proper.  The  building  of
the  city  of  Rameses  (as  well  as  of  Pithom),  however
points  unmistakably  to  that  earlier  part  of  the  reign
of  Rameses  II.  —  i.e.  ,  to  the  end  of  the  fourteenth
century  B.C.


'C3ED.


3  On  the  reason  of  the  confusion  of  this  name  with  a  king  of
dyn.  12  in  Manetho,  different  opinions  prevail.  A  popular  (but
already  contemporaneous)  abbreviation  of  the  name  Rameses
seems  to  be  at  the  root  of  the  Greek  form.

4012


RAMESES


RAMOTH-GILEAD


It  must  be  accidental  that  the  expression  'land  of

Rameses  '  has  not  yet  been  read  on  the  Egyptian  monu-

_. .. ments,  although  we  find  allusions  to  the

3- inecity merits of Rameses II. as a coloniser

Kaamses.  (whjch  characteristically  are  wanting  with
other  kings).  A  city,  or  rather  cities,  bearing  the  name
of  this  king  are,  however,  mentioned  repeatedly.

In  the  twenty-first  year  (see  above)  of  his  reign,
Rameses  received  ambassadors  of  the  Hittite  king
bringing  the  treaty  of  peace  and  alliance  '  in  the  city  :
house  of  Ka'-mes-su,  Mey  (or  old  Mer)-amiin,  doing
the  commands  of  his  father  Amon,  of  Harmachis  and
Atum,  the  lord  of  Heliopolis,  the  Amon  of  Ra'-mes-su
Mey-amun,  the  Ptah  of  Ra'-mes-su  Mey-amun,  and
Set. '  This  list  gives  to  us  the  names  of  the  official
gods  of  the  new  city,  confirming  its  position  in  eastern
Goshen,  where  Atum  of  Heliopolis  was  the  chief  god.
LD  3  194  says  :  '  thou  hast  made  for  thyself  a  splendid
residence  to  fortify  the  frontier  of  the  country,  The
House  of  Ra'messu  Meyamun ;  .  .  .  a  royal  palace  is  in
it.'  Pap.  Anastasi  2i  46  gives  a  poetical  description  of
a  residence,1  'the  castle:  "Great  of  Victory  (or
Strength)  "  is  its  name,  between  Phoenicia  (!)  and  Egypt.'
The  local  gods  are  Amon,  associated  with  Set,  then
Astarte  and  Buto.  These  gods  and  the  name  do  not
agree  with  our  house  of  Rameses  mentioned  above  ;
indeed,  the  city  '  great  of  victori(es) '  (mentioned  also  in
the  great  text  of  Abydus,  in  Pap.  Leyden,  1348,  and  in
the  expedition  of  Sety  I.  against  the  Bedouins  (?)  does  not
seem  to  be  identical  (as  is  usually  supposed),  but  must  be
a  later  foundation  of  Rameses,  X.  of  Goshen.  Anast.
iii.  1 12  f.  '  the  house  of  Ra'messu  Meyamun '  appears  as
identical  with  the  place  '  Great  of  victori(es) '  (82  etc. ).
Its  description  seems  to  point  to  the  country  W.  of  Tanis,
not  very  far  from  the  sea.  Thus  a  monument  which
has  led  Brugsch  considerably  astray  becomes  intelligible.
In  Tanis  was  found  a  statue  of  a  priest  who  had  among
other  titles  that  of  a  '  prophet  of  Amon  of  Rameses  of
(the  city?)  House  of  Rameses  (and?)  Amon  (of  the  one)
great  of  strength."-  Brugsch  (Diet.  Geogr.  418,  etc.)
concluded  from  it  that  Rameses  and  Tanis-Zoan  were  one
and  the  same  city,  sought  consequently  for  Goshen  far
in  the  X. ,  and  came  thus  to  his  strange  Exodus-theory,
considering  the  Sirbonian  bog  as  the  '  sea '  through  which
the  Israelites  passed.  The  statue  furnishes  rather  the
confirmation  that  we  have  two  different  Rameses-cities.
Consequently,  we  have  to  be  very  careful  in  distinguish
ing  them  ;  LD  3 194  refers  possibly  to  the  later  founda
tion,3  as  it  dates  from  the  year  34  of  Rameses.

The  biblical  Rameses  can,  of  course,  be  only  a  city
in  or  near  Goshen. That  mentioned  in  the  treaty  with

the  Hittites  seems  to  be  identical,  if  we
4. Situation. may  judge  by  the ,ocal  gods  alluded

to.  Compare  the  granite  group  found  at  Tel(l)  el-
Maskhuta  which  represented  Rameses  II.  between  Atum
and  Harmachis,  the  principal  gods  of  that  district.
From  this  group  Lepsius  concluded  that  Tel(l)  el-
Maskhuta  was  the  biblical  Rameses  (see  PITHOM),  but
on  insufficient  grounds.  The  excavations  of  Naville
have  shown  that  the  names  Pithom  and  Succoth  are  to
be  associated  with  that  locality,  but  not  Rameses.  The
latter  city  remains  to  be  determined.  In  accordance
with  Ex.1237  Nu.  33ss  it  should  be  sought  for  in  the
western  part  of  Goshen,  E.  of  Pithom-Etham.  There
are  not  many  points  bearing  traces  of  ancient  cities  in
that  region  ;  Lepsius  described  the  place  (Tell)  Abu-
Soleiman  (or  Isleman),  as  showing  extensive  ruins,  and
thought  of  Pithom.  Naville  (Pithom,  (3>  36)  disputes
the  existence  of  town-ruins  at  that  spot.  He  marks

1  See  Erman,  Egypt,  chap.  9,  for  a  translation.

2  This  ('a-zr)  seems  to  be  synonymous  with  '  great  of  strength
(or  victory)  or  victories,'  'a-nht  or  'a-nhtw. If  not,  it  might
point  to  a  temple  (not  a  city)  of  Rameses  II. Has  a  '(loving)
Amon  '  been  mutilated  ?

3  There  may  be  more  Rameses-cities. It  seems  that  a  Nubian
colony  near  Abusimbel  was  one. Cp  (with  considerable  caution)
the  essay  of  Lepsius,  AZ,  1883,  p.  4  (on  Pithom  and  Rameses).

4013


Shugafieh  (in  which  he  believes  he  finds  the  Roman
garrison  place  Thohu  or  Thou)  and  Tell  Rotab  as  the
only  ruins,  W.  of  Pithom-Tel(l)  el-Maskhuta.  Both
localities  exhibit  extensive  ruins  of  the  Roman  age,  and
seem  to  have  been  Roman  military  stations  ;  it  is  not
improbable  that  they  were  settled  before  that  period.
If  so,  we  may  expect  the  settlements  to  go  back  to  the
time  of  Rameses'  colonisation  ;  but  nothing  certain  can
be  said  until  a  thorough  exploration  of  those  ruins  has
been  made.

For  the  various  attempted  identifications  of  Rameses,  see
Ebers,  art.  '  Ramses,'  ///K/?(2>,  12540;,  and  cp  Diirch  Gosen  zntn
Sinai,ft)  512^;  Naville,  Land  of  Goshen  (1887),  18,  20;
Brugsch,  Steinschrift  und  Bibehuort,  1891,  p.  154.  [The  ques
tion  of  identification  assumes  a  fresh  aspect  if  we  hold  that
primitive  tradition  represented  the  early  home  of  the  Israelites
as,  not  in  Mizraim,  but  in  Mizrim.  In  this  case  we  must  sup
pose  that  here  as  elsewhere  the  geographical  setting  of  the  story
has  been  transformed  on  the  basis,  probably,  of  corrupt  texts.
Possible  corrections  or  restorations  are  indicated  in  col.  3211,
n.  2.]  W.  M.  M.

BAMIAH  (i"l*P"l,  'Yahwe  is  high'?  or  rather  a
transformed  ethnic,  RamI  =  Jerahme'eli?  [Che.]),  a  lay
man  who  joined  in  the  league  against  foreign  marriages  ;
Ezral025t  (RAMIA  [BNA],  -ei&c  [L])=i  Esd.926

HlERMAS  (iep/v\A  [B], lepMAC  [A], p&MIAC  [L])-

RAMOTH  (JTlDn).  i.  i  K.  4i3.  See  RAMOTH-
GILEAD.

2.  Ezra  10  29,  Kn. See  JERIMOTH,  12.

RAMOTH  (ITOn;  A&BCOR  [B],  &MCOC  [?A],
P&MC00  [L];  i  Ch.073  [58]),  or  REMETII  (T\KT\;
peMMAC  [B],  P&MA6  [AL];  Josh.  192i),  also  called
JARMUTH  (D-1OT)  in  Josh.  2l29  (lepMCoS  [AL],  where
however  ©B  has  peMM&G).  a  Levitical  city  within  the
territory  of  Issachar.

RAMOTH-GILEAD  pi?1?;!  nb"1,  i.e.,  'heights  of
Gilead1),  otherwise  RAMOTH  IN  GILEAU  (Iwlia  DbfcO,

i OTRpfM-PnoPs H P<*M^e  eN  (™ or  I~H)  r*A-.

1.  OT  References.  Dt  ^  [pAMMOoe  A]t  Josh.  208

[&PHMCOT6 B] 2138 I Ch. 665 [80] [pAMMU)N B,

p<\/v\<\0  L]).  RAMOTH  (i  K.  413  [epe/v\d>e  B,  -ep/v\&6
L]),  but  more  correctly  RAMAH  (2  K.  829  [pe/v\M000
B,  pAMA6  L])  or  Ramath-Gilead  (cp  AHAB),  a  fortress
on  the  E.  of  Jordan,  the  administrative  centre  of  one
of  Solomon's  prefectures  (i  K.  4  13),  hotly  disputed  by
the  Israelites  and  the  Aramaeans  in  the  reigns  of  Ahab,
Ahaziah,  and  Joram  (i  K.  22 •$/.  [pe/v\M&6  BA,  pA/v\A9
L],  2  K.  828  9i4  [peMMO)0  B,  p<\/v\&6  L],  2  Ch.
183^-  [p&/v\MU>e  A,  p&M&e  L]-  22s/  [p&MA  B,
pe/v\M6oe  A,  p&MAG  L]) ;  also  one  of  the  so-called
'cities  of  refuge'  (Dt.  443  Josh.  208  2138,  where  it  is
assigned  to  Gad).  Largely  on  account  of  the  striking
narrative  in  i  K.  22,  the  name  of  Ramoth-  Gilead  is
extremely  familiar  to  readers  of  OT,  and  yet,  after  all  the
researches  of  scholars,  no  one  is  able  to  tell  exactly  where
the  place  was.  It  is  the  object  of  this  article  (i)  to
record  the  chief  opinions  which  have  been  held  as  to
the  site  of  Ramoth-Gilead,  and  (2)  to  offer  what,  in  the
opinion  of  the  present  writer,  looks  like  the  true  solution
of  the  problem.

Let  us  begin  with  the  Talmud, according  to  which

Ramoth-Gilead  lay  over  against  Shechem  (Xeub.  Giog.

55,  251),  while,  as  Eusebius  and  Jerome

2.  Sites  (a)-(fl).  tdl  us  (£528791  1453i),  it  was  known
to them as a  village, 15 R.m. W. of  Philadelphia
(Rabbath-Ammon). These views are irreconcilable.
Most scholars till lately preferred the authority of
Eusebius,  and  identified  Ramoth-Gilead  with  the  modern
es-Salt,1 10 m. S. of  the  Jabbok,  and  n  E.  of  the
Jordan. Cp  GILEAU,  §  7.

The  town  acquired  some  importance  during  the  Crusades,

1  The  name  is  a  corruption  of  Salton  Hieraticon,  which  occurs
in  the  Notitt. Vet.  Eccles. as  the  name  of  a  trans- Jordamc
episcopal  city  (Reland,  Pal.  315);  the  epithet  hieraticon  may
be  explained  by  the  TrdAu  <f>v\^  ya.8  Zepemioi  of  tus.  in  th
Onotn,

4014


RAMOTH-GILEAD

when  Saladin  fortified  it  with  other  towns  on  the  E.  of  the
Jordan ;  it  is  now  the  capital  of  the  Belkd,  but  cannot  claim  to
represent  Ramoth-Gilead.  The  place  could  not  be  approached
by  chariots  (see  i  K.  22  34.^).  It  '  hangs  on  the  steep  sides  of  a
narrow  gorge,  entirely  shut  in  on  the  N. ,  and  opening  out  on  a
narrow  flat  of  garden-land  at  the  other  end  ;  and  even  this  open
extremity  of  the  ravine  is  blocked  by  a  high  ridge  at  right  angles
to  the  town,  closing  up  the  only  outlet.'1  It  is  also  far  too
southerly  ;  a  place  easily  accessible  from  Jezreel  and  not  far  from
the  Aramaean  border  is  imperatively  required.

Ewald  (Gesch.  8500  note)  and  Conder  (Heth  and
Moab,  175;  Smith's  D£(->  IIIQI)  do  more  justice  to
the  biblical  narratives  by  fixing  the  site  of  Ramoth-
Gilead  at  Reimiin,  a  lofty  and  ancient  site  a  few  miles
W.  of  J crash  (Gerasa),  in  the  Jebel  'Ajlun.  The  place
was  quite  open  to  Aramrean  incursions,  and  could  be
reached  by  chariots  up  the  valley  of  the  Jabbok.  Sir
G.  Grove  (Smith's  Dtt^  2 1003)  and  Merrill  (East  of
the  Jordan,  zZ^ff.)  urge  the  claims  of  Jerash  itself;
Oliphant  too  (Land  of  Gilead,  213)  thinks  Ramoth-
Gilead  must  have  been  either  at  or  near  Jerash. a  This
view  is  supported  by  the  Arabic  Joshua  (208  21 38
Ramat  al-Jaras).  G.  A.  Smith,  however  (HG  588)  is
not  satisfied  with  any  of  these  identilications,  and  thinks
Ramoth-Gilead,  being  so  hotly  disputed  by  Aram  and
Israel,  must  have  been  farther  N. ,  near  the  N.  limit  of
Gilead — the  YarmCik  (so  G.  A.  Cooke,  I.e. ).  Irbid  and
Ramtheh  [er-Remthe],  he  remarks,  are  both  of  them
fairly  strong  sites.  Er-Remthe  has  been  very  recently
favoured  by  Smend  (7.ATW,  1902,  p.  153),  who  finds
in  the  name  er-Remthe  an  echo  of  an  Aramaic  form
Kro1]*.  Buhl  combines  Ramoth-Gilead  with  the  mod.
Jal'ud,  N.  of  es-Salt  (see  GILEAD,  2),  and  whilst  Smend
identifies  Ramoth-Gilead  with  Mizpeh- Gilead,  Buhl
inclines  to  distinguish  between  them.

To  get  beyond  Prof.  G.  A.  Smith's  acute  but  vague
conjecture,  we  must  look  at  the  Hebrew  of  iK.  413.

_..  ,  ,  Removing  the  accretions  on  the  original
''  text  we  find  it  stated  that  one  of  Solomon's
prefects  called  Ben-geber  (nothing  depends  on  the
correctness  of  this  reading)  was  over  the  region  of
Argob,  and  resided  in  Ramoth-Gilead.  Is  the  latter
circumstance  probable  ?  Surely  his  residence  must  have
been  in  Bashan,  unless  indeed  we  prefer  to  omit  the
statement  about  Argob  and  Bashan,  and  make  Ben-
geber  the  prefect  of  the  so-called  Havvoth-Jair,  which
Nu.  323941  places  in  Gilead.  Possibly  for  ij;Sj  nD"i,
'  Ramath-Gilead,'  we  ought  to  read  in1?*  npi,  'the
Ramah  of  Salhad.'  Salhad  is  probably  the  true  name
of  the  fortified  city  on  the  extreme  SE.  of  Bashan,  which
protected  that  fertile  land  from  the  invasions  of  the
nomads  ;  it  is  called  in  MT  SALECAH  [y.f.].  The
objections  raised  to  the  other  sites  certainly  do  not  apply
to  Salhad.  For  other  supposed  traces  of  the  name  see
GILEAD,  §  8,  SUCCOTH,  ZELOPHEHAD.

Salhad  is  situated  on  an  eminence  forming  one  of  the  southern
most  heights  of  the  Jebel  Hauran  (see  Driver,  Dt.  53).  That
the  district  to  the  N.  of  Edrei  (Der'at)  and  Salhad  fell  into  the
region  of  Argob,  will  hardly  be  doubted  (cp  Driver,  in  Hastings'
DR  I  147).  It  was  also  probably  Salhad  (Ramath-Salliad)  that
Benhadad  kept  back,  contrary  to  the  agreement  in  i  k.  2034,
and  the  Israelitish  kings  therefore  sought  to  recover  (i  K.  223,
etc.).  Holding  it,  the  Aramaean  kings  had  the  fertile  district  of
Argob  at  their  mercy.  The  harmonising  process  of  an  editor
corrected  inSs  n!D"l>  '  Ramath- Salhad,'  wherever  it  occurred,
into  ly1?!  noii  '  Ramoth-Gilead.'

It  is  probable  that  no  better  explanation  can  be  found

4 Site  (ft °n the  assumPt'on tnat tne current  view
'•'"  respecting the  Aramaeans  with whom the
kings  of  Israel  were  so  often  at  war,  and  respecting  the
region  of  the  legendary  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  is  correct.

The  assumption  in  question  is  at  first  sight  a  reasonably  safe
one,  and  it  receives  support  from  the  legend  of  the  meeting  of
Jacob  and  Lahan,  in  the  earlier  form  disclosed  to  us  by  textual
criticism  of  Gen.  31  17-54.  We  may  even  go  farther,  and
pronounce  it  not  improbable  that  Salhad  really  was  the  place
which  the  editor  of  the  Book  of  Kings  in  its  present  form  thought

1  G.  A.  Cooke,  in  Driver,  Dt.ft),  p.  xx.  ;  cp  L.  Gautier,  Au
dela  <iu  JourdainW  (1896),  30.

2  Schumacher  (Mitth.  DPV,  1897,  66)  places  Ramoth-Gilead
at  el-Maniira,  \V.  of  Jerash.

4015


RAPHAH

/

to  be  referred  to  in  the  account  of  the  Aramzan  wars.  But  it
was  not  the  place  which  was  meant  in  the  original  narratives
(see  PKOPHET,  §  7).  It  was  at  Cusham,  not  at  Damascus  (as
the  traditional  text  represents)  that  Ben-hadad,  or  Bir-dadda,
dwelt  (i  K.  13  18;  see  TAB-RIM.MON),  and  it  was  the  great
achievement  of  Jeroboam  II.  that  he  recovered  Cusham  and
Maachath-jerahmeel  for  Israel.  It  must  have  been  a  fortress  on
the  border  of  the  Negeb,  towards  Arabia,  that  the  Aramzans
(  =  Jerahmeelites)  and  the  Israelites  so  hotly  contested.  Ahab
fell  when  endeavouring  to  regain  it.  Joram  won  it  back  for  a
lime  from  the  N.  Arabian  king  Haza'ilu  (Hazael),  and  Jehu
(himself  of  Jerahmeelite  extraction  ')  was  serving  in  the  garrison
when  Klisha  (a  prophet  of  the  Negeb  ;  see  PROPHET,  §  7)  sent
to  anoint  him  king.  Both  '  Ramah  '  and  'Gilead  '  are,  when  S.
Palestine  and  the  Negeb  are  concerned,  corruptions  of  '  Jerah-
meel,'  but  while  '  Ramah  '  or  '  Ramath'  is  a  mere  popular  dis
tortion,  '  Gilead  '  seems  to  be  a  transcriptional  corruption  of  that
ethnic  name.  The  place  intended  is  probably  the  '  Tamar  '
("lOn  =  nm)  fortified  by  Solomon,  according  to  i  K.  9  18,  cp  2  Ch.
84.  Cp  TAMAK,  TADMOR.  T.  K.  c.

RAMOTH OF THE SOUTH. See RAMATH OF

THE  SOUTH.

RAMPART,  in  AV  sometimes,  and  in  RV  generally
the  rendering  of  ?T1, See  FORTRESS,  §  5,  col.  1557.


»n  pj3,  Josh.  65),  TRUMPETS  OF
',  Josh.  64  6  8  13). See


Ex.  25  5, etc. See


RAM'S  HORN  (
RAMS'  HORNS  (D^
Music,  §  5.

RAMS'  SKINS
TABERNACLE,  §  4.

RANGE  (Lev.  11  3S),  RVmff-  'Stewpan,'  see  COOK
ING  UTENSILS,  §  4.

RANSOM  (from  Lat.  redemftionem).

'• SN^I  g<fal. Cp  GOEL.

2.  1B3.  kipper.  Cp  ATONEMENT  (Ex.  21  30  RV,  AV  'sum  of
money';  Lev.  27  27  AV  'redeem,'  RV  'ransom';  Nu.  8531/1
AV  'satisfaction';  i  S.  12s,  AV  and  RVmg.  'bribe';  RV  and
AVmg.  '  ransom  '  ;  Ps.  C9  i&5  Job  36  is).

3- mS.  p<idiih,  Ex.  34  20,  etc.

RAPHA  (NEH). i.  See  RAPHAH,  2.

2.  In  genealogy  of  Benjamin  (<?.v.  §  9  ii.  a), i  Ch.  8  2  (pa<£yj
[BA1,  paifia  [L]);  but  the  name  may  be  corrupted,  e.g.,  from
Gera  (see  JQK  11  109,  §  8). Or  (if  correct)  cp  REPHAIAH  [4]
and  the  clan-name  BETH-RAPHA.

3.  See  REPHAIAH,  4.

RAPHAEL  (^N'D"I,  'God  heals';  the  name,  how
ever,  has  possibly  grown  out  of  something  very  differ
ent  ;  see  REPHAEL  [Che.  ]  ;  PANAMA),  one  of  the  most
sympathetic  figures  in  Jewish  narrative  literature,  is
introduced  to  us  in  the  Book  of  Tobit,  where  under  the
name  of  AZARIAS  ('  Yahwe  is  a  help')  he  accompanies
Tobias  in  his  adventurous  journey  and  conquers  the
demon  AsMOD^EUS  [</.v.]  (Tob.  817  82  9  1  1127).  He
is,  however,  a  disguised  visitor  from  heaven,  being
really  '  one  of  the  seven  2  angels  [archangels]  who
present  the  prayers  of  the  saints  and  enter  into  the
presence  of  the  glory  of  the  Holy  One  '  (12  15).  In  the
Book  of  Enoch  (100  20)  Rufael  (  =  Rafael)  is  called  '  the
angel  of  the  spirits  of  men  '  ;  it  is  his  function  to  '  heal
the  earth  which  the  angels  have  defiled,'  as  a  preliminary
!  to  which  he  has  to  place  AZAZEL  (q.v.  )  in  confinement.
!  This  view  of  the  essential  connection  between  a  name
I  and  the  person  bearing  it  is  thoroughly  antique  ;  it  has
I  strongly  coloured  the  story  of  TOBIT  (q.  v.  ),  and  is
endorsed  in  the  Midrash  (Bemidbar  rabb.,  par.  2),
according  to  which  Raphael  is  to  heal  the  iniquity  of
Ephraim  (i.e.,  the  ten  tribes).  The  later  Midrash  also
represents  him  as  the  angel  commissioned  to  put  down
the  evil  spirits  that  vexed  the  sons  of  Noah  with  plagues
and  sicknesses  after  the  flood,  and  as  the  instructor  of
men  in  the  use  of  simples  ;  he  it  was  who  was  the
promoter  of  the  'Book  of  Noah,'  the  earliest  treatise
on  materia  medica  (Ronsch,  Buck  der  Jubilden,  385
sq.  ).  See  ANGELS,  §  4,  note.

RAPHAH  (nan),  i.  AV  RAPHA  (i  Ch.8:7).  See
REPHAIAH  (4).

1  '  Jehoshaphat  '  is  probably  a  modification  of  Sephathi
(Zephathite)  and  '  Nimshi  '  of  Yis'me"eli  (Ishmaelite).

a  But  Syr.  and  Heb.  2  omit  '  seven.'  The  number  of  the  chief
angels  varied.  See  ANGEL,  §  4,  n.  i  ;  GABRIEL  ;  MICHAEL,  n.

4016


RAPHAIM

a.  Four  giants  are  described  in  2  S.  '21  16  18  20  22  (cp  i  Ch.
20  4  6  8)  as  descendants  of  '  the  Raphah  '  (E  V  '  the  giant  '  ;  RVnij,'.
RAPHAH  ;  AVme-  RAI>HA  ;  nsnrt,  in  Ch.  NB-n).  See  ISBI-
BENOB,  SAPH.  (®'s  readings  in  S.  Pa<j>a  [BA],  L  in  zi>.  16  18
.  .  .  yiyjitmtv,  v.  _  20  .  .  .  Tn-ai'os,  T>.  22  adds  the  words
...  TO)  OIKOI  Pa</>a,  in  Ch.  yiyavres  [BAL  ;  but  in  v.  8  also  patjia
BA,  pa.<t>au'  L]).  Is  nBl.T  correct?  The  sing,  form  occurs  only
here.  See  RBPHAIM.

RAPHAIM  (p<\cf)<MN  [A],  BNom.  ),  one  of  the  ances
tors  of  Judith  ;  Judith  81.

RAPHON  (pA<t>ooN  [AN],  p*(J>e\  [V°r']  :  i  Mace.
637  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  84),  an  unknown  city  mentioned  in
i  Mace.  037  as  'beyond  the  brook'  ;  it  was  besieged
by  Timotheus  and  relieved  by  Judas  the  Maccabee.
From  the  context  it  obviously  lay  not  very  far  from
Carnaim  (Ashteroth-Karnnim).  It  is  no  doubt  the
Raphana  mentioned  by  Pliny  (HN  v.  1874)  as  one  of
the  cities  of  the  Decapolis,  and  may  possibly  be  identical
with  the  Capitolias  of  Ptol.  (v.  1622),  16  m.  from  Edrei
(Der'at).  See  Schurer,  GJl'lg^,.


RAPHU  (X-ISn,  as  if  '  healed  '  ;  pa^oy  [BAF1  '•
pAcj>AY  [L]),  father  of  PALTI  (2)  (Nu.  13  gt).  On
origin  of  name  see  PALTI,  2  ;  REPHAEL.

RASSES,  CHILDREN  OF  (pACceic  [BA],  pAAC-
CeiC  [N]  ;  tharsis  [Vg.];  thiras  et  rasis  [Vet.  Lat.,
cod.  Sangerm.]  ;  .^.^xr>  >v  i  .  .  .  »ox.^i  [Syr.]),
a  people  mentioned  along  with  Put,  Lud,  and  the  children
of  Ishmael  (Judith  223).  That  pui(cr)<ros,  a  mountain
range  and  town  S.  from  Aniaims  on  the  gulf  of  Issus,
is  intended  is  improbable  ;  others  prefer  TARSUS  [</.  z\  ].
The  mention  of  a  town  ill  accords  with  the  enumera
tion  of  such  peoples  as  PUT  and  LUD,  and  the  name  is
possibly  a  corruption  of  TIKAS.  See  ROSH.


[BL], PA.0Yoc?  [Aa]),
i  Esd.2i6/:  =  Ezra48/.,  REHUM,  5.

RAVEN  p-fy,  from  air,  '  to  sink  '  [of  the  sun],  •  be
black';  KOP&5  ;  corvus).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the

1.  OT  References.  lilies  and  the  ravens Possess  the
same representative  character  in  a

famous  saying  of  Jesus,  at  least  according  to  the
version  in  Lk.  1224  (but  in  Mt.  626  TO.  wereivd)  ;  in  the
OT  too  they  are  referred  to  in  evidence  of  God's  provi
dential  care  (Job  38  4i  Ps.  1479).  In  Cant.  5n  their
glossy  black  plumage  (cp  deriv.  above)  is  referred  to.
In  Prov.  30  17  Is.  34  n  Zeph.  2i4x  (crit.  emend,  with
<gBNc-aAQr),  other  habits  of  the  raven  are  mentioned,
and  in  Gen.  8  7  the  raven  is  stated  to  have  been  the
first  bird  let  out  of  Noah's  ark.'2

[The  feeding  of  Elijah  by  the  ravens  (i  K.  17  4  6)  has  been
regarded  as  a  supernatural  feature  appropriate  to  the  circum
stances  of  the  prophet,  but  if,  as  Cheyne  suggests,  Elijah's
hiding-place  was  at  Rehoboth  in  the  extreme  S.  of  Palestine,  a
reference  to  '  Arabians  '  would  gain  considerably  in  plausibility,
nor  can  it  be  a  loss  to  edification  that  human  instruments  should
take  the  place  of  '  unclean  '  birds  like  the  ravens  (see  MIZRAIM,
§  2  [&]).  An  analogy  for  the  emendation  referred  to  is  offered  by
Jer.  82  in  (5  Pesh.,  which  give  'like  a  crow'  (3TJ.',  Kopwn;,
naba)  for  'like  an  Arabian'  Cr^V)-  T^'s  's  an  error>  but  in
Bar.  6  54  the  crow  is  no  doubt  mentioned.  The  gods  of  the-
Babylonians  are  there  likened  to  the  crows  («opwi<eu)  that  fly
between  heaven  and  earth.]

It  is  probable  that  the  Heb.  'orebh  included  all  the

members  of  the  family  CorvidT  —  i.e.  ,  the  crows,  choughs,

2 Srecie- roo^Si  Javs>  an<^  jackdaws,  as  well  as  the

true  raven. Tristram enumerates eight

species of Corvida; at present found in Palestine  ;

among  which  the  C. umbrinus  or  brown-necked  raven

may  be  specially  mentioned,  as  it  is  almost  ubiquitous.

They  feed to some extent  on  carrion, but will  also

attack  animals  of  some  size,  though  usually  only  when

these  are  weakly  or  injured.

1  A  comparison  of  Zeph.  I.e.  with  Is.  34  n  shows  that  3nn  in
the  famous  passage  should  be  2~y.

2  In  the  cuneiform  account  the  raven  is  the  last  ;  see  DELUGE,
J5  2,  17,  and  cp  Jastrow,  ReL  Bab.  and  Ats.  503.

4017


REBEKAH  or  REBECCA

The  raven  has  always  been  regarded  as  a  bird  of
omen,  and  excited  superstitious  awe  which  is  not  even
3.  Character  >'et  entirely  extinct.  To  the  ancients
it  was  one  of  that  class  of  living
creatures  which  were  at  once  venerated  and  shunned. 1
It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  find  the  raven  in  the
list  of  (so-called)  'unclean'  birds  (Dt.  14 14  ;  cp  CLEAN,
§  9).  Besides  the  Midianite  chieftain's  name  OKEB!
the  Ar.  clan-name  Gordb  indicates  that  the  bird  did  not
always  possess  an  ill-omened  character ;  and  it  is  a
significant  fact  that  Gorab  was  one  of  the  names  of
heathenism  which  Mohammad  made  its  bearer  change. a

A.  E.  s.— s.  A.  c.

RAZIS  (pAzfehc  [AV*»«i-]  raafas  [Vg.]),  'an  elder
of  Jerusalem, '  'called  Father  of  the  Jews  for  his  good
will  toward  them.'  His  story  is  told  in  2  Mace.  14 37^
The  name  is  possibly  from  an  original  *p=nn,  'to
be  lean."  The  Syr.,  however,  gives  his  name  nsr-f-tJk,

RAZOR  (TWjl,  etc.),  Nu.  65,  etc. See  BEARD.

REAIAH  (i"PN"l.  '  Yahwe  has  seen  '  ;  but  cp  JORAH).

1.  A  Calebite,  son  of  SHOBAL  ;  i  Ch.  42  (pa&x  [B],  peia  [A],
peaa  [L]). Reaiah  ought  also,  perhaps,  to  be  read  for  HAROEH
(q.v.)  in  i  Ch.  252,  but  both  forms  may  be  corruptions.

2.  A  Reubenite; i  Ch.  5  5  (AV  REAIA  ; pjj^a [BA], paia

3.  The  family  name  of  a  company  of  (post-exilic)  Nethinim  :
Ezra247  (pojA  [B],  paia [A], ap.  [L])  ; Neh.  7  50  (pa*a  fBK],
paaia[AL])  =  i  Ksd.  5  31  (laetpos  [B],  laipoj  [A],  paia[LJ ;  AlKUS
[AV],  JAIRUS  [RV]).

REBA  (in~l,  probably  by  transposition  from  21T,
'Arabia,'  cp  R'EKEM  [Che.] ;  poBOK,  -Be  [B],  poBOK,
peBeK  [A],  poBeK,  -e  [L]),  one  of  the  five  chiefs  of
Midian,  slain  after  the  '  matter  of  Peor  '  ;  Nu.  31  8  Josh

1321.

REBEKAH  or  [NT]  REBECCA  (i1j5:n  ;  peBeKKA
[KADEL]  ;  Rebecca;  on  the  name,  see  below,  §  2),  sister

1.  Traditions  °f  Laban>  and  therefore  daughter  of
Nahor,  according  to  J  (see  Ui.  on
Gen.  24 15),  but  daughter  of  Bethuel,  according  to  P
(see  Gen.  2020).  For  the  idyllic  story  of  her  betrothal
and  marriage,  which  is  not  only  beautiful  in  itself,  but
a  valuable  record  of  Israelitish  sentiment  in  the  time  of
the  writer  or  writers,  it  is  enough  to  send  the  reader  to
the  original  narrative.  Gtinkel,  it  may  be  observed,
thinks  he  can  trace  a  double  thread  (Ja  and  J/')  in  this
narrative.  It  is  certainly  possible  that  more  than  one
hand  has  been  concerned  in  the  story  ;  at  the  same
time  the  narrative  would  hardly  gain  by  being  reduced
to  the  limits  of  the  assumed  ]a.  Another  critic  (Steuer-
nagel,  Einwanderung,  39)  draws  a  weighty  critical
inference  from  the  parallelism  between  Gen.  24  and  29.
Independently,  a  larger  inference  of  the  same  kind  is
drawn  in  §  2  of  the  present  article.

It  has  been  thought  that  there  is  a  discrepancy
between  J  and  P  as  regards  the  original  home  of
Rebekah.  J  brings  her  from  Aram-naharaim,  from
the  city  of  Nahor  (24  10) ;  P  from  Paddan-aram  (2520/. ;
cp  282/i).  The  discrepancy,  however,  did  not  always
exist,  i.  It  is  possible  to  hold  that  both  in  J  and  in  P
Rebekah  had  a  traditional  connection  with  the  northern
Jerahmeelites  of  Hauran  (for  CIN  most  probably  has  been
worn  down  from  ^KcnT,  and  iin:  may  have  come  from

1  Having  been  originally  worshipped,  they  were  honoured,
and  their  presence  was  considered  lucky ;  but  their  specific
'holy'  character  made  them  'taboo,'  and  as  such  they  were  to
be  avoided.  For  this  paradoxical  conception,  see  CLEAN,  §  7.

"  See  WRS,  Kin.  200,  301,  We.  Hcid.W  203.  The  raven
was  intimately  associated  with  Apollo  and  /Esculapius  ;  see
Frazer,  Pans.  3j2f.  Coronis  is  said  to  have  be«"ti  transformed
into  a  raven.  In  Rome,  a  flight  of  ravens  on  the  left  hand  was
considered  lucky,  on  the  right  hand  unlucky.  In  northern
Europe  one  is  reminded  of  the  ravens  of  Odin,  and  those  of
Fjokki,  by  whose  aid  he  discovered  Iceland.  Similarly  the
Vikings  are  said  to  have  carried  ravens  in  their  ships  to  be  able
to  find  the  bearing  of  the  nearest  land  (cp  CASTOK,  and  for  the
painting  or  carving  of  a  totem  on  a  boat,  Frazer,  Totemism.

4018


EECAH

mn,  while  JIB  may  be  miswritten  for  pn  —  i.e.  ,  pin).  See
LABAX,  NAHOR,  PADDAN-ARAM.  2.  It  is  also  plau
sible  to  hold  the  view  set  forth  in  JACOB,  §  3,  where  it
is  shown  that  there  was  possibly  a  still  earlier  tradition
which  put  Laban's  home  at  Hebron.  At  any  rate,  both
narrators  have  distinguished  themselves  in  the  delinea
tion  of  Rebekah's  character,  which  has  some  strong
points  of  affinity  to  that  of  her  son  Jacob.  She  was
accompanied,  according  to  MT,  to  Isaac's  home  at
Beer-lahai-roi  (i.e.,  Beer-jerahmeel)  by  her  nurse  (24  59),
who,  from  the  corrupt  text  of  358,  is  supposed  to  have
been  named  Deborah  (see  DINAH,  col.  1102,  n.  i).
Probably,  however,  the  '  nurse  '  is  not  referred  to,  but
the  '  precious  possessions'  (njijp,  cp  v.  53)  of  the  newly
won  bride.  In  the  view  of  the  present  writer  Laban
was  originally  a  southern  Jerahmeelite,  originally,  it
may  be,  placed  in  the  Negeb,  so  that  he  may  also
have  been  called  TUBAL  (q.u.  )—  a  name  which  seems  to
underlie  bxira  (Bethuel  !).  See,  further,  RACHEL,  §  2.
Possibly,  Rebekah  is  a  personification  alternately  of
the  southern  and  of  the  northern  Jerahmeelites.  She
has  been,  one  may  almost  say,  created  as  a  true  woman,
with  beating  heart  and  planning  brain,  by  J  and  E.

The  explanation  r!£3n,  'cord  '  (§  71)  is  linguistically  attractive  ;

cp  P?"]1?,  and  the  iroijieVio?  0vyan;p  of  one  of  the  Onomastica

f. .  (OS  204  29). But  we  cannot  get  to  the  bottom  of

2.  Ungin such  names  without  considering  the  tribal  relations

Of  name. °f.  the  patriarchs  ; wives  and  husbands  alike  are

tribal  personifications. It  isprobable  that  Abraham,

Rebekah,  and  Leah-Rachel  represent  a  tribal  name. Abraham

(from  Ab-raham)  means  probably  '  father  of  Jerahmeel  ';  Leah  and

Rachel  (doubles),  come  from  worn-down  forms  of  Jerahmeel.

Rebekah,  or  rather  Ribkah,  probably  also  comes  from  the  latter

name; crn=  3pn  =  p31,  cp,  perhaps,  the  clan-names  or  tribe-

names  Becher,  Heber,  and  the  local  name  Hebron.l Observe

that  Rebekah's  father  Bethuel  (perhaps  =  TUBAL  [g.v.])  is  the

son  of  Nahor—  i.e.,  the  southern  Haran,  by  Milcah  [Jerahmeel].

The  same  ethnographic  traditions  are  repeated  over  and  over

again  genealogically.  T K C


RECAH  (rni),  iCh.4i2  RV,  AV  RECHAH.

RECEIVER  (S"5b:),  Is.  33  18,  RV  'he  that  weighed
[the  tribute].'  Cp  SCRIBE  and  TAXATION.

RECHAB  (23~|,  'charioteer,'  perhaps  short  for  Ben-
rechab[-el]—  i.e.  ,  son  of  Rekabf'el]  ;  -  but  more  probably
an  ethnic  of  the  Xegeb  [Che.  ],  pH\AB  ;  but  in  i  Ch.  2  55,
PHXA,  [B],  and  in  Jer.  35  14  pHXoB  [N*].  On  pT,Xap  in
Judg.  1  19,  see  Moore's  note).

i.  One  of  the  murderers  of  Ishbosheth  (2  S.  4  2  Jf.  :  ptKva  [B
in  T.i>.  5f.  9]).  His  father  was  RIMMON  (q.v.).

z.  The  eponym  of  the  RF.CHABITES  (2  K.  10  15  Jer.  35  67?!).
A  son  of  Rechab  '  is  a  '  Rechabite'  ;  so  even  in  Neh.  3  14  (see
MALCHIJAH,  7).

RECHABITES  [HOUSE  OF  THE]  (D-grnn  JT2  ;
OIKOC  Apx&BeiN  [BN],  A.AXA.BeiN  or  x^p&BeiN  [A],
pd>X<*B[e]iN  [Q],  pHX&BiT<M  [Sym.]).  The  Rechabites
have  usually  been  considered  to  be  a  sort  of  religious
order,  analogous  to  the  NAZIRITES  [?.v.],  tracing  its
origin  to  the  Jehonadab  or  JONADAB,  son  of  Rechab,
who  lent  his  countenance  to  Jehu  in  the  violent  abolition
of  Baal-worship.  In  Jer.  35  we  meet  with  the  Rechabites
as  continuing  to  observe  the  rule  of  life  ordained  by
Jonadab  their  'father,'  abstaining  from  wine  and
dwelling  in  tents  in  the  land  of  Judah  till  the  Babylonian
invasion  forced  them  to  take  refuge  in  Jerusalem
(JEREMIAH  ii.,  §  17).  According  to  Ewald  (GI73  543),
Schrader  (££5  46),  and  Smend  (Rel.-gesch.M  93/1)
they  were  an  Israelitish  sect  which  represented  the
reaction  against  Canaanitish  civilisation,  and  took  the
Kenites  —  the  old  allies  of  Israel—  as  a  model.  In

1  A  connection  between  the  names  Hebron  and  Ribkah  has
been  already  suspected  by  G.  H.  Bateson  Wright  (H  'as  Israel
Ever  in  Egypt  ?, 180).

2  So, in the main, Hommel, Das  g)-apkische ,-j, p. 23.
Kar-rekab[el] was a royal name  at Sama'l in N. Syria;
Rekabel (or Rekub'el)  was probably a charioteer-god, the
TrapeSpy  of  the  sun  (cp  'chariots  of  the  sun,'  2  K.  23  11). See
G.  Hoffmann  (who  reads  Rakkab.'el),  ZA,  1896,  p.  252  ;  Sachau,

Aram.  Inschriften,'  inSBAU',  1896,  41.

4019


RECHABITES [HOUSE OF THE]

iCh.  2ss£,  however,  the  'house  of  Rechab'  is  represented
as  belonging  to  the  Kenites,  and  in  i  Ch.  4  12  (©BL)  the
&vdpts  prjxctp  (MT  ravtw.x,  <5A  A.  pr)<j>a,  RV  '  the  men
of  Recah')  including  TEHINNAH  (perhaps  Kinah  =
Kenite)  appear  among  the  descendants  of  Chelub1
(=  Caleb).  We  have  no  right  to  set  this  statement
aside  on  the  ground  of  the  late  date  of  the  Chronicler.
It  is  perfectly  credible  that  the  Kenites  who  dwelt  in
tents  among  the  Israelites  long  continued  to  feel  them
selves  the  special  guardians  of  the  pure  religion  of
Yahwe,  and  were  honoured  as  such  by  Jeremiah.  Budde
assumes  that  in  the  time  of  Jehu  a  Rechabite  named
Jonadab  formally  reimposed  the  old  obligations  on  his
fellow-clansmen,  at  the  same  time  perhaps  offering  the
privileges  of  fellowship  to  those  from  outside  who
accepted  the  Rechabite  rule  of  life,  and  thus  converting
it  to  some  extent  into  a  religious  order.2  This  is  a
plausible  hypothesis,  and  rests  upon  the  assumption
that  the  Jonadab  spoken  of  in  Jer.  356-ioi4  16  18  is  the
Jonadab  who  had  a  connection  with  Jehu.  It  is  possible,
however,  that  the  true  name  of  the  reputed  father  of  the
Kenites  was  not  Hobab  but  Jonadab  (see  HOBAB).
This  hypothesis  is,  at  any  rate,  simpler  than  the  other
for  the  Rechabite  laws  are  those  characteristic  of  nomad
races — e.g.,  the  Nabatasans  (Diod.  Sic.  1994) — and  we
cannot  help  expecting  the  legislator  of  the  Kenites  to
stand,  like  Moses,  at  the  head  of  the  history  of  his
people.

The  notice  in  i  Ch.  2  55^  is  therefore  most  probably
to  be  accepted,  except  in  so  far  as  the  corrupt  name
'  Hammath ' 3  there  given  to  the  '  father '  of  the
Rechabites  is  concerned.  Rechabites  and  Kenites  are
synonymous  terms.  No  doubt  this  second  name
'  Rechabites '  is  puzzling ;  nor  is  it  easy  to  believe
that  Yahwe,  the  God  of  the  Kenites,  had  Recab-el
(charioteer-god)  as  a  title.  It  is  a  question,  therefore,
whether  the  readings  D'nn  'Rechabites,'  and  ari  rra
'house  of  Rechab,'  ought  not  to  be  emended  in
accordance  with  many  analogies  elsewhere,  unless
indeed  we  assume  that  the  popular  speech,  which
uses  transposition  freely,  fluctuated.  In  Judg.
4  ii  we  meet  with  'Heber  the  Kenite,'  and  in  v.  17
with  'the  house  of  Heber  the  Kenite.'  It  is  highly
probable  that  331,  D'3:n  should  be  either  nan,  or  arn.
B'3rn.  In  the  former  case,  Jonadab  comes  before  us
anew  as  'a  son  of  Heber,'  and  the  Rechabites  become
'Heberites.'  In  the  latter  'Rechab'  gives  place  to
'Rehob'  (  =  REHOBOTH)  and  'Rechabites'  to  •  Reho-
bites'  ( =  Rehobothites).  Perhaps  the  former  view  is
preferable.  We  can  now  see  the  full  force  of  Judg.
4 ii,  'Now  Heber  the  Kenite  (the  eponym  of  the
"  Heberites,"  miscalled"  Rechabites  ")  had  severed  him
self  from  Kain,  even  from  the  b'ne  Hobab  (Jonadab?).
The  Heberites  (Rechabites)  of  Israel  are  a  branch  of
the  Heberites  (Rechabites)  of  N.  Arabia,  equally  with
whom  they  honoured  Jonadab  as  their  ancestor  and
legislator.

Possibly  aan  133  in  Judg.  4n  (cp  Nu.  1029)  should  rather  be
I?"  '.??—*•*•»  tne  Heberites.  Whether  '  Heber '  (cp  C'}rtD  -)3n,
Hos.  6  9)  had  originally  a  religious  sense,  and  marked  out  the
Kenites  as  a  priestly  tribe  (cp  Jer.  35  19,  and  see  MOSES,  §  17),
or  whether  it  is  connected  with  the  mysterious  Habiri  of  the
Amarna  Tablets  (see  HEBREW  LANGUAGE,  and  cp  "HEBER)  is  of
course  uncertain.  Another  form  which  the  second  name  of  the
Kenites  has  assumed  by  corruption  is  almost  certainly  the
RAHAB  [f.-'.]  of  legend.  Very  possibly,  too,  the  Danite  place-
name  BENE-BERAK  should  be  Bene-rechab— i.e.,  Bene-heber ;
indeed  the  famous  Barak  (Judg.  45)  was  perhaps  really  a
Heberite  (=  Heber  the  Kenite).  See  KENITES.

Later  Jewish  tradition  said  that  the  Rechabites  intermarried
with  the  Levites  and  so  entered  the  temple  service.  Hege-
sippus,  in  his  account  of  the  death  of  James  the  Just,  even
speaks  of  Rechabite  priests,  and  makes  one  of  them  protest

1  See  Meyer,  Entst.  147.

2  See  Budde,  'The  Nomadic  Ideal  in  the  NT,'  New  World,
Dec.  1895,  p._729,  not  overlooking  the  interesting  note  on  the
possible  Kenite  origin  of  Yahwism  ;  also  Religion  of  Israel  to
t/ie  Exile,  20,  44,  120  (1899).

3  Read  perhaps  ncn  (  =  southern  Maacath). Cp  HEMATH.


RBCHAH

against  the  crime  (Eus.  HE  1  23).  Recent  writers  have  tried  to
find  the  descendants  of  the  Rechabites  in  this  or  that  modern
tribe.  Such  attempts  could  not  but  be  illusory.  Cp  L.  Gautier,
'A  proposdes  Recabites,'  La  liberte  chretienne,  June  15,  1901.

T.  K.  C.

RECHAH,  RY  Recah  (H31),  i  Ch.  4  12  (PH(}><\  [A],
PHX&B  [BL]). See  CALEB,  §  4  ;  RECHABITES.
RECONCILE,  RECONCILIATION. The  words  are  :

1.  kipper, 123, efiAao-KOficu, Lev.  630 815 1620 Ezek.
45151720—  where  RV  always  has  'atone' 'make  atonement'
(cp ATONE); efi'Acuris Nu.  29nt, efiAaoyia, i  S.  12  3 Ps.
49;  (4S8)t,  e£iAao>i6«  Wisd.lS2i  Ecclus.Ss  IGii  1:29  18  13  30
(BNC  ; Heb.  n^D  twice).

2.  hithrassah,  nSPJin,  6i<xAAd<r<rojAai  i  8.294. In  2  S.  2423
'accept,' in Gen.  33  n (eiiAoyeti/) Mai.  18  (7rpo<r6e'xe<r0ai) 'be
pleased  with  '  ;  StaAAayrJ  (Ecclus.  2222  27  21).

3.  Inttc,  NEn,  e^iAao-KO/uai,  2  Ch.  2924,  AV  'make  reconcilia
tion,'  RV  'make  a  sin  offering.' See  SACRIFICE,  §§  28*1,  44^

The  NT  words  are  :

4.  5taAAa<7<re<r#ai  Mt.  624  (cp  2,  and  2  Mace.  8  29  [V]).

5.  (caraAAacro-eii'  Rom.  5  io(cp  2  Mace.  1  5  733  8  29  [A]),  KO.ra.K-
AayTj  Rom.  5  n  His  2  Cor.  5  1819  (cp  2  Mace.  620).

6.  aTroKdTaAAao-treii'  Eph.  2  16  Col.  1  2o_/Cf

7.  iAao-xeireai  Lk.l8i3  Heb.2i7,  RV  '  propitiation  '  (Ps.  663
[4],  etc.),  cp  iAacrjU.0?  i  Jn.22  4io  EV  '  propitiation'  ;  cp  Ecclus.
1820  [A]  35  3  [x*  ;  e£tA.  BNc.aA]  2  Mace.  3  33  ;  see  also  MERCY
SEAT. Deissmann  (Neue  Bibelstud.  52)  brings  forward  a  parallel
to the  construction iAdo-Keo-flcu a^aprias  (Heb.  217)  in  an  in
scription  relative  to  a  sanctuary  in  Asia  Minor,  fii>  (ajxapTiW)
oil  /J.T;  SVITJTCU  efeiAao-ao-Ocu  (s'f)- It  is  noteworthy,  as  regards
the  use  of  the  idiom, that  iAdo-icea-flat  is  employed  alternately
with  icaflapicr/u.bi'  TroieicrOai. in (0 to represent the conception
of  atonement. The  latter  phrase  regards  the  act  with  reference
to  its  effect  upon  men,  the  former  with  reference  to  its  signifi
cance  in  relation  to  God.


RECORD  On'),  RV  'he  that  voucheth  for  me,'
Job  16  igt.  See  WITNESS.

RECORDS  (Esth.  61  Ex.  17  14);  see  HISTORICAL
LITERATURE,  §  5.

RECORDER  (l^ft—i.e.  ,  '  one  who  brings  to  mind,'
'remembrancer'  ;  ANAMIMNHCKOON  [four  times  and
Is.  863  Qm£'],  YTTOMNHMATOrPACjJOC  [four  times],1

ern  TOON  YTTOMNHMATOON  [2  S.  816],  YTTOMIMNHC-
KOON  [2  S.  2024  [L]  i  K.  4s  (BL)]  ;  a.  commentariis),*
the  title  of  a  high  officer  (Jehoshaphat,  Joah  are  named)
in  the  court  of  the  kings  of  Judah  (2  S.  8  16  2024  i  K.  4s
2  K.  18i837  i  Ch.  18i5  2  Ch.  348  Is.  36322t).  RVms-
always  has  'chronicler';  AVm£-,  often,  'remembrancer'
or  '  writer  of  chronicles.'  The  sense  in  which  the  word
was  taken  by  (5  and  Vg.  is  obvious.  The  Hebrew  title
might  suggest  that  of  the  '  magister  memorise  '  at  the
Roman  Imperial  court  (Smith,  Diet.  Gr.  and  Rom.  Ant.,
s.v.  'Magister'),  or  that  of  the  king's  remembrancer,
whose  duty  formerly  was  to  remind  the  judges  of  the
Exchequer  Court  '  of  such  things  as  are  to  be  called
and  attended  to  for  the  benefit  of  the  crown  '  (Bouvier,
Law  Diet.,  s.v.].  But  the  office  of  the  mazkir  was
almost  certainly  much  more  responsible  than  either  of
these.  It  might  perhaps  more  aptly  be  compared  to
that  of  one  of  the  chief  advisers  of  the  crown  or  of  the
'keeper  of  the  king's  conscience.'  See  GOVERNMENT,
§  21  ;  cp  HISTORICAL  LITERATURE,  §  5.

On  the  'story  -writer,'  RVmg.  'recorder'  (CJ/C  7jn,  6  TO.
irpocrTriitrovTa,  cp  V.  21  (o)  •ypd^ior  TO.  irp.),  of  i  Esd.  2  17,  see
REHL-.M,  5,  where  'governor'  (lit.  'man  of  command')  is
suggested  as  a  more  likely  equivalent.

RED  (W3n)  ;  see  COLOURS,  §  8  (DIN,  MICHX,
fEn,  lOH),  and  for  Reddish  (Q-IOTX),  see  ib.,  §  10.

RED  CORAL  (D^J?),  Job28i8.  RVm&-  ;  see
CORAL.

1  According  to  Strabo  (797)  the  virOjinTjuaroypa^os  was  one
of  the Tour  native  officers  recognised  in  the  Roman  province
of  Egypt  —  the  others  being  the  f^TyjTj;?,  the  apxi<$Kcao"n;s,  and
the  j'uicTepU'bs  crTpanjyds.

2  The  senator  whose  duty  it  was  to  compile  the  acta  diurna
of  the Roman Senate  received  the title  ab  actis  [or  a  coin-
nit'ntariis}  sc'natus. Under  the  empire  the  office  was  usually
held  as  an  annual  one,  after  the  qua;storship,  but  before  the
praetorship  or  axlileship  (Smith,  Diet,  Gr.  and  Rom,  Ant.,  s.v.
!  Acta  ').

129  4021


RED  SEA

REDEEM, REDEEMER, REDEMPTION. See
GOKI..


RED  HEIFER  (HKn^  IT1S),  Nu.  \$i  jf.  [P2].
See  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEANS,  §  17  "and  SACRIFICE,  §  38.
On  the  symbolism  of  the  red  hue  see  CLEAN  AND
UNCLEAN,  §  16,  end.

RED  SEA.  At  Ras  Mohammad  the  Red  Sea,  '  one
of  the  most  remarkable  oceanic  gulfs  on  the  globe,'  is
divided  by  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  into  two  gulfs,  the
western  or  Gulf  of  Suez,  now  about  130  geographical
m.  in  length,  with  an  average  width  of  about  18,  and
the  eastern  or  Gulf  of  'Akabah,  about  90  m.  long,  and
of  proportionate  narrowness.  On  the  question  as  to
the  extent  of  the  Red  Sea  in  early  historic  times,  see
EXODUS  i.  ,  §  15.

Whether  by  the  statement  in  Ex.  10  19  that  the  W.  wind
'took  up  the  locusts  and  drove  them  into  the  "Red  Sea"
('pD'Hir,  eis  TV  tpvOpav  8a.\a<T<rav),  the  whole  of  what  is  known
to  geography  as  the  Red  Sea  is  meant,  or  only  the  Heroopolitan
gulf  (Gulf  of  Suez),  cannot  be  decided  from  this  passage  alone.
It  is  evident  that  the  western  gulf  is  meant  in  13  18  (the  way  of
the  wilderness  of  the  Red  Sea—  which  the  Israelites  followed
leaving  Egypt).  In  164,  Pharaoh's  captains  are  drowned  in
the  Red  Sea  (parallel:  'sea,'  the  expression  generally  used  in
the  chapters  on  the  passage  through  '  the  sea  ')  ,  in  v.  22  the
Israelites  leave  the  Red  Sea.  Similarly  Nu.  14  25  33  iof.  Dt.
1  i  (after  ©,  correctly  EV)  40  11  4  Josh.  2  10  4  23  246  Judg.  11  16,
etc.,  mean  the  Arabian  gulf  of  the  ancients,  the  modern  Gulf  of
Suez.  The  eastern  gulf,  the  sinus  sElaniticus  or  Gulf  of
'Akabah,  seems  to  be  meant  in  Ex.  2831  (?)  (frontier  of  Israel)
Nu.  21  4  (S.  of  the  territory  of  Edom)  Dt.  2  i  (to  the  S.  of  Mt.
Seir)  i  K.  9  26  (ships  built  at  Ezion-geber,  on  the  Red  Sea)
Jer.  492i  (adjoining  the  Edomites).  Consequently,  the  name
seems  to  apply  to  the  Red  Sea  in  general.

The  rendering  of  the  English  version  goes  back
through  the  Vulgate  to  the  "EpvOpa.  #dXa<nra  of  <@»AL

1  «pv0pa  (where  only  Judg.  11  16  has  6d\a<r(ra  2t<£).
0<iXa a Ihe exPression 's common to classical

(^Eschylus,  Pindar,  Herodotus)  and  biblical
Greek  (i  Mace.  49  Wisd.  10  18  19?  Acts  7  36  Heb.  11  29).
The  original  meaning  of  the  name  was  a  subject  of
discussion  with  the  Greeks.  They  thought  of  a  source
with  reddish  water,  or  of  the  alleged  reddish  colour  of
the  sea  itself,  or  of  that  of  the  mountains  surrounding
it;  or  they  invented  a  king  Erythras.1  Egyptologists
have  compared  the  name  dosret,  'red  land,'  given  by
the  ancient  Egyptians  to  the  desert  in  contrast  to  the
kemet,  'black  land'  —  i.e.  ,  cultivable  ground  or  Egypt
proper  (see  EGYPT,  §  i  )  ;  also  the  Edomites  as  alleged
'  red  men,'  or  the  'apury  around  Goshen  (§  6i).a  Un
fortunately,  none  of  these  names  is  ever  found  connected
with  the  Red  Sea;  on  the  Egyptian  name  'water  '(or
sea)  'of  the  circle'  (or  circuit?)  and  the  hypothetical
explanation  of  this  expression,  cp  WMM  As.  11.  Eur.
254.  Thus  the  origin  of  the  Greek  name  is  certainly  to
be  sought  for  not  in  Egypt,  but  among  the  Semites.
Some  misunderstanding  of  a  Palestinian  or  Syriac  ex
pression  by  the  Greeks  is  quite  likely.  It  must  be
recalled,  in  passing,  that  the  Greeks  used  the  name  in
a  much  wider  sense  than  we  do,  extending  it  over  the
whole  sea  between  Africa  and  India  (cp  Herod.  2  n,
etc.).8

The  Hebrew  name  yam  suph,  f]iD-D'  —  i-f->  sea  of  the
water-plant  sftph  —  is  also  mysterious.  The  suph  (see

2  Yam ^LAG> J) belongs specially  to Egypt  (cp


suph.


Ex.235 Is.  196) and the Nile; only in


Jon.  26  is  it  used  of  seaweeds,  probably  by
poetic  license.  The  word  seems  to  be  identical  with
the  Coptic  Aooy^1  Papyrus>  which  is  not  found  in
the  earlier  language  but  appears  as  tu-f'i  in  texts  of  the


1  See  Wiedemann's  Commentary  on  Herod.  2  n  (who  quotes
Strabo,  16779,  Mela,  38,  Nearchus,  30,  Eust.  Dion.  Perieg.  36)
The  statement  that  the  expression  is  found  in  an  Egyptian
inscription  is  incorrect.

-  Wiedemann,  I.e.

3  The  Persian  gulf  also  thus  belonged  to  it.  The  tradition
that  the  Phoenicians  came  originally  from  the  Red  Sea — i.e.,
Lower  Babylonia — has  been  strangely  misunderstood  by  scholars.

4022


BED  SEA


REED


nineteenth  dynasty.1 Whether  it  be  a  foreign  or  a
vernacular  word  cannot  be  determined  ; consequently
it  must  remain  an  open  question  whether  it  was  borrowed
from  Egyptian  by  the  Palestinians  or  vice  versa. It  is
remarkable that the  Coptic version,  which otherwise
strictly  follows  (5,  in  Kxodus  renders  '  Sea  of  fart '  which
seems to  be  sari, ffa.pi — according  to  Theophrastus,
Pliny,  and  Hesychius,  the  name  of  an  Egyptian  water-
plant (see Peyron, Lex. Copt. 304, who, however,
prefers  an  impossible  etymology).2 It  would  therefore
seem that the Coptic translator here consulted the
Hebrew, rendering 'sea of papyrus-plants' (Luther
renders  Schilfmeer). These  aquatic  plants,  of  course,
never  grew  in  the  salt  water  of  the  Red  Sea  ;  modern
travellers have found, not without difficulty, some
clumps  of  reeds  on  spots  not  far  from  Suez  where  fresh
water  mixes  with  the  Red  Sea  (see  Knobel-Dillmann,
on Ex.  13 18); but the derivation  of  the  name from
these  would  be  more than  improbable. Others  have
thought  (after  Jon.  2i6)  of  seaweeds  which  are  said  to
be plentiful in  some parts of  the Reel  Sea  ; but  the
common,  early  use  of  the  word  si'iph  is  against this.
We  can understand  how  Brugsch ( /'  Exode, 1 1 ,  etc. )
was led by these freshwater plants to assume the
swamps  of  NE.  Egypt  as  the  locality  of  the  Exodus  ;
he quite forgot, however, that the name  yam suph
applies also to the  yElanitic gulf.3 The freshwater
Timsah-lake  %vith  its  large  marshes  full  of  reeds,  ex
actly  at  the  entrance  of  Goshen, would  fulfil  all  con
ditions  for  the  Exodus  and  for  the  Hebrew  name  (see
Exouus  i. ,  §  16). The  word  '  sea'  is  used  of  lakes  in
most  oriental  languages,  especially  in  Hebrew  (cp  Nu.
31  ii, 'Sea  of Chinnereth,' etc.). Still, it would be
very  strange  if  the  Crocodile  Lake,  or  other  swamps  on
the frontier of  NE. Egypt, should have furnished a
name  to the whole Red  Sea, including  the  yElanitic
gulf  which  was  nearer  to  most  Palestinians  than  the
Egyptian  lakes. On  the  connection  between  the  present
bitter  lakes  and  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  which  most  scholars
assume  for  biblical  times,  see  EXODUS  i. ,  §  15. In  the
opinion  of  the  present  writer  this  theory  must  be  re
jected,  and  thus  the  Hebrew  name  remains  obscure.

\v.  M.  M.

With  wonted  precision  and  discriminating  use  of  authorities

BDB's  Lexicon(s.i',  P.^Q)  gives  the  following,  on  which  it  is  not

superfluous  to  comment,  because  it  is  one  of  the

3.  Is  the objects  of  the  present  work  to  intermix  the  old  and

Solution tne  new>  am' by  a  junction  of  the  forces  of  all

Vin plps<5  9  critical  students,  to  make  definite  advances  where-

ever  this  is  possible. '  fjID'Q' probably  =  sea  of

rushes  or  reeds  (less  probably  sea  #/"[city]  Supli),  which  Greek

includes  in  wider  name  0oA.  epv9pd,  Red  Sea  (cp  Di.  Ex.  13  18

and  especially  \VM.M  As.  it.  Kn>:  42_/C,  who  explains  as  name

originally  given  to  upper  end  of  Gulf  of  Suez,  extending  into

Hitter Lakes, shallow and marshy, whence reeds [probably

also  reddish  colour));  name  applied  only  to  arms  of  Red  Sea,'

most  often  to  Gulf  of  Suez,  sometimes  to  Gulf  of 'Akaba. It  is

noted  also  that  *]lD"C_*p  should  possibly  be  read  for  'o  VlO  in

Dt.  1  i. BDB  also  points  out  (s.v. CT)  that  in  Ex.142  (bis)  9

Is.  51  10  (I' is)  63  n,  etc. C'H,  and  in  Is.  11  15  probably  C'T»'2"C'

=  the  'Red  Sea.' In  the  latter  statement,  however,  'probably'

seems  to  be  an  exaggeration. '  The  tongue  (bay  ?)  of  the  sea  of

Egypt'  is  a  strange  circumlocution  for  'j'D'C'  ;  indeed,  to  render

D'lSOi  'Egypt'  in  w.  n  13  is  only  plausible  if  -ivj'X  may  be
rendered  '  Syria '  (cp  Stade,  ZA  7"/f"220i).  That  there  are  error
in  the  text  of  11  11-16,  is  certain  ;  that  pc'7  is  sometimes  a  cor
ruption  of  ^NJ,VDC"  (CP  Ps.W  on  Ps.  1203),  may  also  be  assumed  ;
that  T);?N  sometimes  stands  for  tine'N  (Ashhur),  a  synonym  of
SxSnV  (Jerahmeel),  is  also  difficult  to  gainsay.  Methodica
criticism,  therefore  justifies  us  in  reading,  D'Sxype*'  ''  C'lnn
[Q'TipJ,  'And  Yahwe  shall  place  a  ban  upon  the  Ishmaelites  '
(cp  r'.  14);  n'lSO  is  an  archaising  gloss.  Even  alone,  this


1  See  WMM  As.  u.  Eur. 101. Sebe(f),  'reed,'  which wa
formerly  compared  with  P.ID,  is  different.

2  Ebers,  Dttrck  Gosen,  519,  makes  it  probable  that  this  word
is  s'r  in hieroglyphics. This, however, could not well be
identical  with  the  above  Coptic  word.

3  The  Sirbonian  bog  would, however,  justify  the  name
little  as  the  Gulf  of  Suez.

4023


would  suggest  the  view  that  r|'D"C'  may  be an  early  textual
corruption,  nor  could  it  be  said  that  '  Sea  of  Suph  '  was  improb
able,  except  on  the  ground  that  the  correctness  of  the  supposed
place-name  '  Suph '  in  Dt.  1  i  was  open  to  question. Hut  when
we  have  recognised  that rnsn, ^ ' en- "  57i 's  a  corruption  of
nfl"is— /'.*.,  Zarephath in  the Negeb  (see  SOPHERETH)—  it  at
once  becomes  a  plausible  view  that  -fin  or  P,Q  in  the  MT  are
sometimes  corrupt  abbreviations  of  the  same  place-name  Zare
phath  (Sarephath^). Just  as  the  '  Dead  Sea  '  was  called  rp&n  C'>
popular  corruption  (as  many  text-critical  considerations  suggest)
f  ^N3rn'  D'i  so  rilD"D'i  as  a  name  for  the  Gulf  of 'Akabah,  maybe
a  corrupt  abbreviation  of  nfi"ii~G^,  where X  is  to  be  taken  as  a
race-name  =  the Zarephathites  (see ZAREPHATH). A similar
explanation  may  be  given  of  Sui'K  and  SuriiAH. Prof.  Sayce
(frit.  Man.  255^)  is  of  opinion  that  Yam  Suph,  wherever  the
phrase occurs,  means  the  Gulf  of  'Akabah. This,  however,
involves  the  further  statement  that  the  identification  of  the  sea
crossed  by  the  Israelites  with  the  Yam  Suph  (Ex.  154  22)  is  in
correct. This  is  surely  too  bold. In  Ex.  15  4  22,  as  elsewhere,
the best  course is  to  read riSTi  D'  (cp MOSES,  §  12),  unless,
indeed,  we  prefer  to  read  ri£n^  'p>. All  difficulties  are  obviated,
if  we  adopt  the  view  of  the  primitive  tradition  respecting  Israel
advocated  in  col.  3208^,  and  suppose  that  the  place  of  sojourn
of  the  primitive  Israelites  was  in  the  land  of  IMizrim,  adjoining
the  land  of  Jerahmeel,  on  the  border  of  the  Negeb  (see  NEGEH).
It  is  possible  that  the  legend  spoke  of  a  great  deliverance  of  the
Israelites in nBtX  JD'. where jo' (sometimes corrupted into
p  ',  '  Javan  ')  represents  SiXCriT  (Jerahmeel). Quite  early,  the
mark  of  abbreviation  in  'o'  may  have  been  lost,  and  \  have
become  corrupted  into  1210  and  n-0. Then,  floating  mythic
stories  may  have  led  to  an  alteration  of  the  old  legend. One
such possible story is referred to  elsewhere (MosES,  §  10).
Another  may  now  be  added. We  know  that  c'"ljE3  (Mizrim  ?  or
Mizraim?)  was  regarded  as  the  antitype  of  the  primitive  J'JR
or  '  dragon '  (see  DRAGON,  §  4). There  was  also,  in  the  Creation-
story,  a  statement  of  the  production  of  the  dry  land  by  the  with
drawal  of  the  water  from  a  part  of  the  ocean's  bed  (Gen.  1  9).
This  may  very  well  have  been  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  deliver
ance  of  the  Israelites,  the  story  of  which  (so  soon  as textual
corruption  made  this  possible)  was  adjusted  so  as  to  fit  this  in
tuition. On  Jon.  26  (' sftfiJt,  was  bound  about  my  head'),  see
Crit.  Bib. On  the  whole,  the  closing  sentence  of  8  2  seems  to
the  present  writer  to  be  perfectly  correct ;  but  a  special  biblical
scholar  ought  hardly  to  rest  without  trying  some  fresh  avenue
to  the  truth.  \y.  M.  M.  ,§!/.; T.  K.  C. ,  §  3.

REED.  i.  n:j?,  kaneh,  i  K.  14 15  K&\A.MOC  (2  K.
1821  Is.  366,  etc.,  Mt.  11?  1220,  etc.),  is  a  word  which
is  common  to  Heb. ,  Syr. ,  Arab.,  and  Ass.,  and
has  passed  into  Gr.  and  Lat.  as  K&NN& — fauna,
and  into  Eng.  as  'cane.'  The  name  is  probably  of
Semitic  origin  ( Lag.  Uebers.  50  ;  Barth,  Nominalb.  §  9  c) ;
but  the  nature  of  its  connection  with  the  root  mp  is
obscure.1  Besides  the  general  meaning  'stalk'  (Gen.
41522)  or  'shaft'  (Ex.  37 17,  etc.),2  nag  is  used  more
specifically  of  (a)  reedgrass,  (/>)  sweet  or  aromatic  cane(?).

(a)  Reedgrass  is  frequently  mentioned,  though  there
is  little  to  help  in  determining  the  particular  species
intended.  It  was  distinct  from  suph.  (see  FLAG)  and
gCnne  (see  RUSH),  but  like  these  grew  by  the  banks
of  rivers  (e.g. ,  the  Nile,  Is.  196)  and  pools  (Is.  35?).
It  appears  to  have  been  somewhat  tall  (Job  40  21)  and
thick  (to  justify  the  metaphor  in  Job  3122;  EV
'  bone,'  AVIn*>'-  '  chanel-bone ')  ;  and  the  jointed  nature
of  the  stalk  appears  to  be  indicated  in  the  repeated
references  to  the  broken  or  bruised  reed  (2  K.  1821,
etc.).3  Perhaps  the  most  probable  identification
is  with  the  tall  Arundo  Donax,  L. ,  which  grows
abundantly  in  S.  Europe  :  though  other  species  may
have  been  included  under  the  name.4  In  Ps.  68[3o]3i
n:p  rt'n  certainly  cannot  be  rendered  '  the  company  of
spearmen  '  (as  AV) ;  such  a  phrase  can  only  be  rendered
'  the  wild  beast  of  the  reeds  '  (cp  AVm?-,  '  the  blasts  of
the  reeds  ').  The  animal  intended  may  be  the  crocodile

1  The  pp  (lance)  of  2  S.  21  16,  may  be  a  kindred  word,  though
the  correctness  of  the  text  is  very  questionable.

2  So  of  the  beam  of  a  balance  (Is.  466),  and  of  a  measuring
reed  or  rod  (Ezek.  403,  etc-)>  on  which  last  see  WEIGHTS  AND
MEASURES,  S  i.

3  With  these  references  cp  the  Talmudic  phrase  '  push  with  a
reed  ' — of  a  feeble  arguer  (Low,  344).

4  The  evidence  of  the  Syriac  lexicographers  is  somewhat  in
favour  of  Arundo  Phraginitfs,  L.  (Low.  341).

4024


REEDS,  WILD  BEAST  OP  THE

(cp  Ps.  74  14,  etc.),  or  the  hippopotamus  (cp  Job402i).
A  symbol  of  Egyptian  power  seems  to  be  required,  and
this  the  hippopotamus  nowhere  is.  See  CROCODILE.

[It  is  not  surprising,  considering  the  obscurity  of  the  context
that  opinion  should  not  be  quite  unanimous.  Duhm  thinks
that  the  swine  is  meant  (cp  80  13  [14]),  as  the  symbol  of  a  Syrian
population.  Cheyne  (/V.(2))  reads  [B!n  \nj3  n»n,  'the  wild
beasts  of  pointed  horns.'

(t>)  By  the  kaneh  of  Cant.  4  14  Is.  43  24  Ezek.  27 19,  the
aiuri  W  of  Jer.  620,  and  the  era  njf>  of  Ex.  30 23  is
meant  some  aromatic  product.  It  formed  an  ingredient
in  the  holy  anointing  oil,  the  others  being  myrrh,
cinnamon,  cassia,  and  olive  oil.  It  came  to  the  Jews
1  from  a  far  country'  (Jer.  620,  cp  Ezek.  27 19),  and  was
costly  (Is.  4324).  The  more  general  use  of  kaneh  in
other  passages  suggests  that  this  '  fragrant  cane '  was  an
aromatic  reed  or  flag,  such  as  Axorus  Calamus,  L.  :
others,  however,  prefer  to  identify  the  substance  as
cassia  bark,  which  is  yielded  by  '  various  species  of  cin-
namomum  occurring  in  the  warm  countries  of  Asia  from
India  eastward'  (Fliick.  and  Hanb.f2)  527).

2.  rvny,  'a roth  (dxi  ;  Is.  197t),  which  is  in  AV
rendered  'paper  reeds,'  means  properly  'bare  places,'
and  (if  not  corrupt,  see  Che.  SHOT,  and  Marti,  ad  Inc. }
refers  to  the  uncultivated  and  treeless  meadows  along
the  banks  of  the  Nile.

3-  Q'BJN,  'agammhn,  which  generally  means  pools  or
marshes,  is  in  Jer.  51 32  (but  (5  has  crwr^ara  [BXA]
or  avffTrifj.a.Ta  [Ha?bQ]  though  Aq. ,  Sym.  translate  AT;)
applied  to  the  clumps  or  beds  of  reeds  (such  as  grow-
on  marshy  spots),  which  are  said  to  be  '  burned  with
fire'  (Gratz,  however,  would  read  c':biK,  'castles').
Cp  POOL,  i.

4.  inx,  'ti/ni,  is  twice  in  RV  text  (Gen.  41 218)  and
once  in  RVmSf-  (JobSn)  rendered  '  reed  -  grass ':  on
this  see  FLAG.

5-  H2N,  'i'fieh,  in  Job  9  z6f  (t'x"°*  65oC?)  is  rightly
rendered  '  reed  '  in  RV'"£-.  Cp  Ass.  abu  or  apu.  The
allusion  is  to  the  light  canoes  or  skiffs  of  reed  anciently,
and  still,  in  use  on  the  Nile;  cp  Is.  182  ('vessels  of
papyrus  ' )  and  SBO  T  ad  loc.

[It  is  not  strange  that  this  rendering  should  be  a  distinctly
modern  one.  The  explanation  of  ?beh  as  '  reed  '  only  goes  back
to  Killer  (ffieropkyticon,  1725)  and  Schultens  (1737).  Vg.
(following  Tg.)  gives  poma  portantes  (cp  3N) ;  Symm.  aiteu-
Sov<Tai  (AViiig-  '  ships  of  desire  ')  ;  Pesh.  and  over  40  MSS  read
rn\V,  '(ships  of)  hostility';  and  lastly  Olshausen  reads  H13N,
'(ships  of)  wings.'  See  OSPREY,  ad  fin.,  for  a  new  emendation.]

N.  M.

REEDS,  WILD  BEAST  OF  THE. See  above  i(a).

REELAIAH  or  rather,  Reeliah  (n^>in  ;  peeAeiA
[B],  peeAlAC  [AL]),  Ezra22  =  Neh.  "7,  RAAMIAH  =
i  Esd.  58  where  it  is  corruptly  REESAIAS  [AV],  RKSAIAS
[RV],  (pyaaiov  [BA],  oe/xton  [L  =  rrcyi  =  rrajn])  ;  the
form  REF.LIAS  [<?.v.],  however,  appears  elsewhere  in
the  same  verse.  Like  '  Raamiah '  it  may  represent
'  Jerahmeel ' ;  the  existence  of  N.  Arabian  elements
within  the  Jewish  community  can  hardly  be  denied
(Che.).  Cp  REGEM-MELECH.

REELIUS,  RV  Reelias  (BopoAeioy  [B],  peeAioy
[A]),  a  duplicate  of  the  name  of  the  fourth  in  the  post-
exilic  list  of  leaders  in  i  Esd.  58,  which  has  by  a  scribe's
error  been  substituted  for  BAfOl  (see  v-  J4  [A])  or
BA[-oy<M  [LL  *•*••  Bigvai  (see  Ezra  22  Neh.  7 7).

REESAIAS  (PHCAIOY  [BA]),  i  Esd.  58  =  Ezra 2 2,
REELAIAH.

REFINER (fjiyp), Mai.  82 /.f See FURNACE,

METALS.

REFUGE,  CITIES  OF  (t^Bil  ntf),  Josh.  202.
See  ASYLUM,  §  5,  and  cp  §  6,  8  ;  LEVITES.

REGEM  (DTI; PAreM  [B],  pe.  [A],  perMA  [L]),
a  Calebite  name,  one  of  the  sons  of  Jahdai ; i  Ch.  247.
4025


REHOB

REGEM-MELECH cferDft  ;  &PBeceep  ,

-ceP  [Nc-n],  :cecep[A],  -Cee  [Q],  o  B<\ciAeyc;  see
below).  A  citizen  of  Jerusalem  concerned  in  a  deputa
tion  sent  to  the  prophet  Zechariah,  Zech.  7  2  (see
SIIAREZER,  2).  Most  probably  (as  Marquart  suggests)
he  is  to  be  identified  with  RAAMIAH,  one  of  the  twelve  (?)
leaders  of  the  Jews  (Ezra  2  2  and  parallel  passages).1
The  present  writer  suspects,  however,  that  both
'  Raamiah  '  and  '  Regem-melech  '  are  simply  corruptions
of  'Jerahmeel.'  The  Jew  spoken  of  would  be  (like  so
many  others)  partly  of  Jerahmeelite  extraction.  It
would  thus  become  unnecessary  to  explain  Regem  in
Regem-melech  by  the  Aram,  cn,  jaculari.

Marti  now  (1897)  reads,  for  '  Regem-melech  and  his  men,'
•fourteen  men,'  C'mN  -\K'y  njp-W,  a  trace  of  which  he  finds  in
©  s  apftea-eep  o  /SacriAev;.  This  accounts  rather  ingeniously  for
ap£ecr«p.  But  we  have  no  right  to  eliminate  -^Q  CJ"I-  op/3f  creep
may  represent  -ISNinj,'  (cp  Istnr)—  i.e.,  -\VR  y\y  (  =  Asshurite
Arabia).  Cp  SHARF.ZER,  2;  RAB-SHAKEH.  T.  K.  c.


REHABIAH  (mrParr),  'Yah  is  a  wide  place,'  cp
the  use  of  UPTl  in  Ps.  4  2  1837  [36]  or  quite  as  possibly
an  ethnic  =  ^IT},  '  Rehobite  '  (Che.);  PA&Bic\),  b.
Eliezer  b.  Moses  (i  Ch.  23  17  242i  :  A.BIA  [L]  ;  2625:
RABiAC  [B],  pA<v  [A],  A.BI&  [L]).  Cp  MOSES,  RECHA-
BITES,  RKHOBOAM.


REHOB  prri,  'broad  place'  ;  ROcoB  [BAL]).

1.  The northern limit of the 'spies,' apparently
Aramasan, and  in  the  direction  of  Hamath  (Nu.  132i
paa/3  [B],  powO  [F]  2  S.  108  poa/3  [A],  paiOpaafi  [L])  ;
see BETH-RKHOB. In  the  context  of  both passages,
however (see NEGKB, MAMRE, ZOBAH), there are
phenomena  which  suggest  that  both  '  Rehob  '  and  the
'  Beth-rehob  '  of  2  S.  106  are  incorrectly  or  imperfectly
written  for 'Rehoboth,' and  that this '  Rehoboth  ' is
the  place  of that  name  in  the  Negeb  (see  REHOBOTH).

'  Hamath  '  maybe  miswritten  for  Maacath  or  MAACAH
(q.v.  ),  not  improbably  the  southern  Maacah.  It  may
be  added  that,  from  this  point  of  view,  '  Aram  '  in  the
original  narrative  which  underlies  2  S.  10  meant  'Jer
ahmeel,'  a  still  shorter  form  of  which  is  RAM  (q.v.  )  ;  also
that  'ben  Rehob,'  the  designation  of  Hadad-ezer  in
2  S.  8312,  probably  means  'native  of  Rehoboth'  (see
ZOBAH).  T.  K.  c.

2.  and  3. The name of two unidentified Asherite
cities,  the  one  mentioned  between  Ebron  and  Hammon
(Josh.  1928,  pcta/3  [B]),  the  other  with  Accho  and  Aphek
(ib.  30,  paav  [B,  see  UMMAH],  paw/3  [A]  -o/J  [Conipl.],
apw/3  [L]). There  may  well  have  been  several  Rehobs  ;
but the mention of two in the Asherite list seems
due to an error. It is  only the  second one  which
we know to have existed. It is enumerated (with
Aphek  and  Accho)  in  Judg.  Iji  (epew  [B])  among  the
cities  of  Asher  in  which  the  Canaanites  remained  ; and
again  in  Josh.  21  31  (P, paa/3  [B]), i  Ch.  675  [60]  (om.
L) in  a post-exilic  list of  Levitical  cities  assigned  to
the  b'ne  Gershon.  2 A  possible  connection  with  rahn[bu  f\
in  an  Eg.  list,  may  be  mentioned  (cp  WMM  As.  u.  Eur.
394). Of  more  importance,  however,  is  the  occurrence
of  the  name  rahubu  (pap.  Anast.  )  between  Kiyna,  (see
HEHER,  i),  and  Bayti-&a'-a-ru  (perhaps  Beth-shean  ?),3
which  is  doubtless  the  same  as  the  Koob,  pooj/3  of  the
Onom.  ,  situated  near  Beth-shean  (O-S<2'  1452i  286  82/.).
Now  this  Rehob  in  OT  times  must  have  been  included
within  the  borders  of  Issachar. It  seems  not  improbable
that the name in Josh.  19  28 (see above) has been
accidentally transplanted from the list of cities of
Issachar  once  given by  E  in  w.  17-23.  4 See  BETH-
REHOB.  s.  A.  c.

1  Cp  Ahijah  (i  S.  143)  =  Ahimelech  (i  8.229-12).

2  The criticism of Josh.  19 is difficult. See JOSHUA,
§ 6,  Addis, Doc. He  x.  1  230  f.  2  467  f., and cp Oxf. Hex.
ad  loc.

3  WMM  As.  u.  Eur.  153  ;  cp  ruhaba  (Sosenk  list)  together
with  Hapurama  (see  HAI-HARAIM).

4  Of  the  older  document  only  v.  170.  has  survived. The  rest


REHOB

REHOB  phi).  i.  2  8.8312;  see  REHOB  i.  i;
BETH-REHOB  ;  HADADEZER.

2.  A  Levite  signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  EZRA  i.,  §  7);
Neh.  10  ii  [12]  (B  om.,  po<u/3  [AL],  poo/3  [Nc.a  mg.]).

EEHOBOAM  (Diprn,  as  if  '  the  clan  is  enlarged.' 1

But  rram.  REHABIAH,  favours  the  view  that  either  cj;  is  the
divine  name  'Amm  [cp  AMMI,  NAMES  IN],  or  [Che.]  the  name
is,  or  represents,  one  of  the  current  modifications  of  '  Jerahmeel.'
Possibly  the  true  form  was  Rehab'el,  just  as  the  true  form  of
JEROBOAM  [q.v.]  may  have  been  Jerubba'al ;  the  origin  of  both
names,  however,  may  be  suspected  to  have  been  'Jerahmeel.'
Cp,  however,  Gray  ///W,  59 ;  poftoa^  [BAL]).

Son  of  Solomon,  and  first  King  of  Judah  (about  930
B.C.  ?).  According  to  2  Ch.  12 13  the  queen-mother  was
'  Naamnh,  an  Ammonitess. '  This  supposed  half-
Ammonitish  origin  of  Rehoboam  would  be  important,
were  it  probable  (cp  the  -am  in  the  name).  But  we
have  no  reason  to  think  that  Solomon's  chief  wife  was
an  Ammonitess.  Much  more  probably  he  married  the
'companion'  of  David's  old  age,  by  an  error  (it  seems)
of  ©  and  MT  called  Abishag.  If  so,  micy  may  be  a
corruption  of  rrsw,  Sunammith,  and  Rehoboam's
mother  was  probably  Naamah  the  Shunamite  (cp  Cant.
612  [13]).  The  queen-mother,  however,  need  not  have
been  an  Issacharite  ;  the  Shunem  from  which  she  came
was  most  probably  in  the  Negeb  (see  SHUNAMMITE).
Had  it  been  otherwise,  Rehoboam  might  have  counted
on  the  support  of  the  tribesmen  of  Issachar.  But
Issacharites  were  certainly  not  among  '  the  young  men
that  had  grown  up  with  him  and  stood  before  him,'  of
whom  we  are  told  in  i  K.  128.

The  traditional  story  of  the  events  which  led  to  the  disruption
is  considered  elsewhere  (see  JEROBOAM,  i).  It  is  necessary,
however,  to  refer  to  it  again  in  connection  with  the  article
SOLOMON.  It  would  seem  that  in  spite  of  the  compulsory  (?)
cession  of  twenty  cities  to  the  king  of  Missur,  Solomon  succeeded
in  retaining  a  large  part  of  the  Negeb.  It  also  appears  that  as
late  as  the  time  of  Amos  (see  PKOI-HET,  §  35)  Israelites  from  the
N.  frequented  the  venerable  sanctuaries  of  the  Negeb — a  region
which  the  second  Jeroboam  had  recovered  for  Israel.  It  is
further  probable  that  the  place-name  which  appears  in  Genesis
(MT)  as  '  Shechem'  should  rather  be  Cusham,  and  that  a  place
in  the  Negeb,  on  the  border  of  the  N.  Arabian  Cush  is  intended.
See  SHECHEM.  Very  possibly  it  was  there  that  the  great
assembly  was  held,  which  issued  in  the  rejection  of  Rehoboam
by  the  larger  part  of  Israel.  That  the  story  given  in  i  K.  12  is
correct,  is  intrinsically  improbable.  We  dp  not  know  what  it
was  that  actually  kindled  the  spark  of  disaffection,  nor  is  it
necessary  that  we  should.  The  differences  of  N.  and  S.  were
reasons  enough  for  a  separation  ;  in  race  and  perhaps  even  in
matters  of  cultus  there  was  by  no  means  complete  unity  among
the  federated  clans  of  Israel.  Was  Rehoboam  really  forty-

one  years  old  at  his  accession?  We  may  doubt  it,  even  without
laying  stress  on  i  K.  1'2  8  ;  cp  2  Ch.  13  7.  So  far  as  we  can  see,
he  displayed  no  vigour,  even  in  the  feud  between  himself  and
Jeroboam  ;  the  historians  ascribe  this  partly  to  the  intervention
of  a  prophet  named  SHEMAIAH.  And  in  spite  of  the  cities  in
the  S.  which  Solomon  (and,  as  the  Chronicler  states,  Rehoboam
himself)  had  fortified,  he  could  not  hinder  the  successful  in
cursion  of  '  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,'  or  rather  '  Cushi,  king  of
Misrim'  (see  SHISHAK),  which  resulted  in  the  loss  of  the
treasures  which  Solomon  had  collected  for  the  temple.  This  is
the  one  great  event  recorded  of  his  reign.  See  ISRAEL,  §  28,
and  on  Rehoboam's  wives  (2  Ch.  11  1820),  MAACAH,  MAHALATH.

T.  K.  C.

REHOBOTH  (JYQrn;  eyPYX^P'A  [ADL]),  the
name  of  one  of  the  wells  dug  by  Isaac  (Gen.  2622).

1.  Identifier ^ee GKRAR- R6l?6both was really,
fa  however,  an  important  place,  to  which

great  kings  and  diviners  appear  to  have
traced  their  origin,  and  where  great  prophets  took
refuge,  and  received  messages  from  their  God  (see
below).  It  may  perhaps  be  the  city  of  Rubuta  men
tioned  in  the  Am.  Tab.  (182i3  183io),  and  once
called  apparently  Hubuti  (28947).  In  1838-io  we  read
that  the  warriors  of  Gazri,  Gimti,  and  Kilti  have  taken
the  region  of  Rubuti.  Gimti  is  Gimti-Kirmil,  i.e.,
Gath  of  JERAHMEEL  (q.v. ,  §  4  [/]),  Kilti  is  Keilah-
The  localities,  except  Gezer,  lie  pretty  near  together.
Presumably  the  site  is  that  of  the  mod.  Ruhaibeh,  8

has  been  rejected  in  favour  of  P's  account  of  the  tribal  limits  ;
see  Addis  (loc.  cit.).
1  Cp  the  play  on  the  name  in  Ecclus.  47  23  (Heb.  text).

4027


REHOBOTH

hours  SW.  of  Beersheba,  at  the  point  '  from  which  the
roads  across  the  desert,  after  having  been  all  united,
again  diverge  towards  Gaza  and  Hebron.'  Robinson,
who  visited  the  place,  hesitated  to  make  this  identifica
tion,  because  '  this  appears  to  have  been  nothing  but  a
well'  (#^1291).  Rowlands1  and  Palmer  saw  more
clearly.  In  the  Wady  itself  there  is  only  one  well ;  but
on  the  sloping  sides  of  the  side-valley,  in  which  the
ruins  are  situated,  are  many  wells,  reservoirs,  and
cisterns.  '  A  little  beyond  this  the  Wady  opens  out,
and  receives  the  name  of  Bahr  beta  mi  ( '  the  waterless
sea  [lake]'),  and  on  the  left  comes  in  a  small  valley
called  Sutnet  er-Ruhaibeh,  in  which  names  are  preserved
both  the  Sitnah  and  Rehoboth  of  the  Bible '  ( Palmer,
Desert  of  the  Exodus,  385).  Probably  Ruhaibeh  also
represents  the  'Rehoboth  by  the  River'  of  Gen.  8637
(irun  n'uirn  ;  poupwff  TTJS  wapa  irora.iJ.6v,  or  rov  TTOTO.IJLOV
[AL],  om.  B  ;  de  fluvio  Rohobotk,  or  de  R.  quce  juxta
amnem  sita  est  [Vg.]).  See  SAUL  (2),  PETHOR.  The
appended  description  distinguished  this  Rehoboth  from
other  places  of  the  same  name.  The  '  River '  is  the
River  of  Misrim  (see  MIZRAIM,  §  2  b  ;  EGYPT,  RIVER
OF).  For  passages  in  the  accounts  of  Bela,  Balaam,
and  Elijah,  in  which  Rehoboth  appears  under  disguises
due  to  corruption  in  the  text,  see  BELA,  CHERITH,
PETHOR  ;  also  MARCABOTH,  NEGEB,  §  2  c.

This,  however,  does  not  exhaust  the  list  of  probable
references  to  Rehoboth.  It  may  have  been  displaced

2.  Further  OT  Jy  ',I;I/ebronIl  in  Gen'23z  f 27.  ^
references  ll0  (see  KlRJATH-ARBA);  in  this
case,  it  was  at  Rehoboth,  not  at  Hebron,
that  the  famous  cave  of  '  the  MACHPELAH  '  (?  Jerahmeel,
Gen.  2817-20}  was  situated.  The  error  may  have  been
a  very  early  one  (perhaps  in  the  original  P).  No  doubt,
too,  '  B'ne  Heth  '  in  Gen.  283^  is  miswritten  for  '  B'ne
Rehoboth'  (nn  for  n[a]n[i])  ;  so  also  '  Hittite'  (wi)  in
Gen.  2634  and  862  should  be  '  Rehobothite '  (»narn),  and
'daughters  of  Heth'  (nn  man)  in  Gen.  27  46  should  be
'  daughters  of  Rehoboth'  (napnwja) ;  see  JACOB,  §  2.

The  Book  of  Ezekiel,  too,  yields  one  remarkable
reference  to  Rehoboth,  if  in  Ezek.  16345,  'thy  mother
was  a  Hittite, 'we  should  read'  Rehobothite'  (|| '  Amorite,'
or  rather  '  Arammite  '  =  '  Jerahmeelite  ').  On  the  prob
ability  that  the  early  population  of  Jerusalem  consisted
of  Jerahmeelites  or  Rehobothites,  see  ZION,  and  cp
Crit.  Bib.

Most  probably,  too,  '  URIAH  the  Hittite '  should  be
'  Uriah  the  Rehobothite,'  and  '  Haggith '  (the  name  of
Adonijah's  mother)  in  28.84  should  be  Rehobith
(n'nrn).  'Cherethite'  (TTQ),  too,  can  at  last  be  rightly
read;  it  should  be  'Rehobothite'  (Torn).  This,  in
fact,  is  a  necessary  inference  from  the  corruption  of
m^rri  into  n-u  in  i  K.  1X35  (see  CHERITH,  and  cp
PELETHITES,  ZAREPHATH).  Thus  David's  faithful
guards  were  not  Philistines,  but  men  of  S.  Palestine.
That  the  Rehobothites  and  Sarephathites,  however,
were  always  friendly  to  David  is  more  than  can  be
safely  stated.  Both  tribes  or  peoples  are  apparently
referred  to  as  hostile  to  David  in  28.  21 15-22.  '  Philis
tines'  should  be  'Sarephathites,'  and  'Gath'  (n:)  and
'  Gob  (^j)  are  probably  corrupt  fragments  of  '  Reho
both  '  (mm).  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Misrites
were  famous  for  their  tall  stature  (iCh.  1123;  cp  Is.
45 14?),  and  that  the  Anakim  are  connected  with
Kirjath-arba.  Now  Kirjath-arba  (y2"\n  n"ip),  or  per
haps  -'arab  ( 3-iy  'p)  is  at  any  rate  not  Hebron,  but  may
be  Rehoboth  (cp  SODOM).  These  conjectures  favour  the
view  that  Goliath,  David's  antagonist  in  the  legend,
was  of  Rehoboth,  not  of  Gath.

In  short,  it  would  appear  that  older  and  very  different  stories
underlie  the  narratives  in  MT  and  ©  of  i  S.  17  and  (especially)
2  S.  21  15-22  288-23  I  either  there  has  been  a  confusion  between

1  In  Williams,  Holy  City,  1  465.

2  '  Canaanites  '  here  should  be  '  Kenizzites  '  (as  in  some  other
parts  of  Judg.  1  and  elsewhere).

4028


REHOBOTH-IR

two  wars  of  David— one  with  the  '  Philistines  '  and  one  with  the
Sarephathites  and  Rehobothites,  or  there  has  throughout  the
life  of  David  been  a  great  error  of  the  scribes— DTIB-Stj  written
for  c'HSIS  and  OTTO  for  QTOrn-  If  so,  it  becomes  at  once
probable  that  Sarephath  and  Rehoboth  are  also  referred  to  in
28  517-25  and  6^i-ii  (see  ZAREPHATH,  ZIKLAG).  'OHED-
KDO.M  [y.v.]  the  Gittite'  should  be  'Arab-edom  the  Rchobo-
thite.'  Only  on  this  critical  conjecture  can  we  explain  the
action  ascribed  to  David  in  2  S.  6  10  (cp  ARK,  §  5).  This  may
be  taken  together  with  a  less  certain  but  not  unimportant  con
jecture  relative  to  Baal-perasim  and  Peres-uzza  (see  PERAZIM,
ZAREPHATH).  The  royal  city  of  Achish  (i  S.  27  5)  was  not
'Gath'  but  'Rehoboth.'  This  would  throw  a  light  on  the
story  of  Shimei's  journey  in  i  K.  2  39^  (see  SHIMEI).  Else
where  (SisERA)it  is  suggested  that  both  'Achish  '  and  '  Nahash  '
probably  come  from  'Ashhur'  (='Asshur,'  also= 'Geshur ')  so
tluit  'Sisera'  (  =  Asshur)  may  represent  the  Nahash,  king  of
Ammon  (rather  Jerahmeel),  of  i  S.  11  i  2  S.  10  2.

Other  disguised  references  to  Rehoboth  may  perhaps
be  found  in  18.1447  (where  <§L  presupposes  urn  rrs,
probably  a  corruption  of  rcrri)  and  in  28.  83  12  106  S.
In  i  S.  14  the  conquest  of  Rehoboth  is  ascribed  to
Saul;  in  28.,  more  correctly  to  David.  In  2  S.
Hi  1226-30  this  important  event  is  described;  the
phrases  '  the  royal  city '  and  the  '  city  of  waters  '  are
both  the  result  of  textual  corruption  (read  '  the  city  of
Jerahmeel, '  or  '  of  the  Jerahmeelites  ' ).  See  further  Crit.
Bib.,  and  cp  SAUL,  §  3  ;  URIAH.  See  also  MIZRAIM,
where  it  is  argued  that  Gen.  10 14  probably  refers  to
Rehoboth  (not  Caphtorim)  as  the  starting-point  of  the
Pelistim  (cp  2  S.  21  \%ff. ).  T.  K.  c.

REHOBOTH-IR  ("W  nhrn ;  pocoBwc  rroAiN
[AD]  ;  poooBoe  TT.  [£>a] ;  pocoBcoe  TT.  [EL])  or  '  the
1  Assvrioloffi  °ity  Rchoboth''  one  of  the  four  cities

cal inquiry  mentioned  in  Gen.  lOnf.  The  name
4  y'  cannot  be  identified  with  any  of  the
cities  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nineveh  and  Calah,  with
which  it  is  associated.  In  the  inscriptions  of  Sargon
and  Esarhaddon  mention  is  made  of  the  rebit  Nina,  as
a  place  in  which  was  situated  the  old  city  Maganuba,
on  the  site  of  which  Sargon  founded  his  city  of  Dur-
Sargon,  the  modern  Khorsabad.  Rehoboth-Ir  might
represent  Rebit-ali,  and  this  might  be  equivalent  to
Rebit-Nina,  and  be  a  popular  name  for  Dur-Sargon
(cp  Del.  Par.  i6of.  Calwer  Bib.-Lex.  723^).  The
word  rebitu  (from  rabatul]  denotes  primarily  the  out
skirts  of  a  city,  in  some  cases  the  fields  and  plantations
which  were  part  of  the  city  but  lay  outside  its  walls,
though  possibly  within  the  exterior  circumvallation.
Thus  it  was  in  the  rebit  of  Dur-ili  that  Sargon  fought
with  Humba-nigas  king  of  Elam,  at  the  commencement
of  his  reign  :  and  it  was  in  the  rebit  of  Nineveh  that
Esarhaddon  made  his  triumphal  entry  after  his  capture
of  Sidon,  AT?  2 126.  There  is  evidence  that  rebit  is  the
name  of  the  farm  or  estate  in  the  open  country  and  was
usually  followed  by  the  name  of  its  owner  ;  thus  Rebit
Rimani-ilu  denotes  the  estate  of  Rimani-ilu  (see  Assyrian
Doomsday  Book,  62).  This  would  suggest  that,  if  a
town-name,  Rehoboth  'Ir  implies  a  founder  'Ir.  No
such  town  name,  however,  has  come  down  to  us.1

The  failure  of  attempts  to  explain  Rehoboth-Ir  and
Resen  (not  to  add  Accad  and  Calneh)  from  Assyriology

2.  Text-critical  comPels  ^iblical  c;iticus  to.lo°k  at  the
solution  problem  from  a  fresh  point  of  view,
suggested  by  experience  of  the  con
fusions  and  misunderstandings  of  biblical  names  which
abound  in  the  traditional  text.  The  problem  thus  viewed
is  part  of  a  much  larger  one  which  affects  the  whole  of
the  Nimrod  passage,  and  indeed  the  context  in  which
that  passage  occurs.  It  is  far  from  unlikely  that
Nimrod  was  really  a  N.  Arabian  not  a  Babylonian  hero,
and  '  Rehoboth-Ir  and  Calah '  should  most  probably
give  place  to  '  Rehoboth  and  Jerahmeel. '  See  NIMROD,
REHOBOTH.  c.  H.  w.  j. ,  §  i  ;  T.  K.  c. ,  §  2.

REHUM  (D-irn as  if  'beloved,'  an  Aramaic  word

1  There  was  a  district  known  as  Rabiite,  near  Nineveh  (see
Assyrian  Deeds  and  Documents,  Nos.  278,  416) ;  but  this  was
probably  the  rabit  of  the  '  magnates,'  rabftte,  of  Nineveh.

4029


REINS

[§  56],  but  very  possibly  one  of  the  popular  transforma
tions  of 'Jerahmeel'; cp Harim, Rekem, Raamiah
and  see  SHIMSHAI  [Che.]).

1.  A  leader  (see  EZRA  ii. ,  §  8e)  in  the  great  post-exilic
list  (EzRAii.,  Jo)  EZra22(lpeoYM  [A],  peiOYM  [L],
B  om.)  ;  probably  the  same  as  (4)  below. That the
form  NEHUM  (mm  ;  vaovf*  [BNAL])  in  Neh.  77  is  in
correct is  shown by i  Esd.  58  (poeipov  [B]. po^tov
[Aa],  vaovn  [L],  EV  ROIMUS).

2.  b. Bani, a Levite, in list of  wall-builders (see
NEHEMIAH,  §  i/,  EzRAii.,  §§  16  [i]  15^)  Neh.  3i7
(Pavovd  [B],  paovfj.  [XA],  ptov/j.  [L]).

3.  Signatory  to  the  covenant  (EZRA  i.,  §  7)  • Neh
1025  [26]  (paovfj.  [BNA],  pe.  [L]).

4.  A  priest  in  Zerubbabel's  band  (EZRA  ii. ,  §  66),
Neh.  123,  miswritten  for  HAIUM  of  v.  15  (so  Guthe  in
SBOT ';  BNA  om.  ;  peovp.  [Xc-a  me-  SUP-L]).

5.  The  name  of  a  high  official  (CJ;D  <?j;a)  who  joined
with  Shimshai  the  scribe  and  others  in  making  repre
sentations  against  the  Jews  to  Artaxerxes  (Ezra489  17  23).
EV, following  the early Hebrew commentators, who
explain '^recorder,' calls him 'the chancellor'; 'the
governor '  would  perhaps  more  exactly  convey  the  force
of  cyy  tya  ('man  of  commands'),  which  is  either  the
translation  of  an  old  Persian  title  (Pahlavi/nzwa/W>—  so
Andreas  in  Marti,  Aram.  Cram.)  or  may  even  represent
a  Greek  title (e.g. , ewapxos). The latter alternative
assumes  that  the  writer  transported  the  political  relations
of  the  Greek  period into the  Persian  period to  which
documents used by him belonged (so Marquart,
Fund.  60). It is desirable, however, that Ezra  and
Nehemiah  should be  re-examined  in the  light  of  the
theory  that  the  underlying  original  narrative  related  to
the  N. Arabian,  not  to  the  Persian,  rule. This may
affect  our  conclusions  in  many  minor  points.

T.  K.  c.

The  versions  of  Ezra  leave  the  title  untranslated  (paouA
ftaSaranfv,  paouju.  |3aaA,  paou/i  j3aAya^i,  paovfi  [B],  peou/x  jSaaATa/oi
pfovfj.  [A],  peoi/fi  ^eAree/x  [L],  beclteem  [Vg.]).  In  i  Esd.  2  iGj/f.,
HATHUMUS  (pa0v/u.os)  called  the  'news-writer'  (v.  17,  o


.,

ruption  of  /3eeAT«,uo5,  ~:  16  p.  Kai  (3eeATeOFos  [D],  paOvo?  (cat
/3aeAT<:fy.os  [Aa],  pa<?v/xos  xa\  /3feATe,oios  [L],  'J.  25  [21]  .  .  .  oa0vM<o
™>  ypa.<t>oi'Ti  Ta  irpoo-n-in-TOi'Ta  Kal  /JeeATefyia,  .  .  „  [B]  .  .  "„  0eeA-
Te^wfl'  [A],  p.  yp.  T.  wp.  K.  jSeeArep-y  [L,  r-.'iS],  r.  doublet).

REI  ('IT)  ;  pncei  [BA],  also  a  Palm,  name  [Vogue,
Syr.  Cent,:  nos.  16,  22],  but  ©L  [K<M]  oi  GTAlpOl
AYTOY"  witn  reference  to  Shimei  ;  cp  Jos.  Ant.  vii.  144  :
'  Shimei  David's  friend'  and  see  Th. ),  coupled  with
SHIMEI  (q.v.  n. ),  among  those  who  did  not  favour
Adonijah  ( i  K 1  8).  Winckler  (Gesch.  2 241)  identifies  him
with  Ira,  the  Jairite,  who  was  a  '  priest  to  David  '(28.
2026) ;  he  argues  ingeniously  to  show  that  this  Ira  (or  Jair)
was  a  priest  of  Bethlehem.  But  for  |.-Q  we  should
possibly  read  jab  '  a  high  officer '  (cp  SHEBNA).  Ewald
reads  >-p  for  'jn  and  identifies  (not  plausibly)  with
David's  brother  RADDAI  [</.z'.].

REINS,  i.  (nV^S),  kflayoth;  Ne<J)pOI  [©and  Rev.
223f]  ;  renes],  properly  the  kidneys  (of  animals  offered
in  sacrifice,  except  in  Job  1613  Ps.  139i3  Lam.  813,
where  the  human  kidneys  are  referred  to).  '  A  not
less  important  seat  of  life  [than  the  blood],  according  to
Semitic  ideas,  lay  in  the  viscera,  especially  in  the
kidneys  and  liver,  which  in  the  Semitic  dialects  are
continually  named  as  the  seats  of  emotion,  or  more
broadly  in  the  fat  of  the  omentum  and  the  organs  that
lie  in  and  near  it'  (Rel.  Sem.M  379).  Consequently  P
represents  these  parts  as  Yahwe's  appointed  share  of  the
sacrifices  (cp  LIVER).  We  even  find  a  peculiar  sym
bolism  connected  with  kidney-fat  (see  FOOD,  §  i  a,  but
note  that  the  text  of  the  passages  is  doubted  ;  see  MILK,
§  i).  It  is  much  more  natural  to  find  the  'reins'  (as
EV  calls  the  'kidneys,'  when  used  metaphorically)
employed  as  a  term  for  the  organ,  not  only  of  the

4030


BEKEM


REPHAIAH


emotions  (see  Ps.  73  21  Job  1613  1927  [not  ©but  Theod.  ])
but  of  the  moral  sentiments  (see  Jer.  11  20  17 10  20 12
1's.  7  10  It)?  (?)  262).  '  Trier  of  the  reins  and  the  heart '
;s  the  characteristic  and  title  of  Yahwe,  not  only  in
the  OT,  but  also  in  the  Hebraistic  Book  of  Revelation
(Rev.  223).  In  Ps.  167,  however,  'yea,  my  reins  instruct
me  in  the  night  seasons '  can  hardly  be  right.  It  is
Yahwe,  not  the  'heart'  or  the  'reins,'  who  trains  and
disciplines  men  (see  Che.  /V.(-)  ad  loc.).

2.  D'aSn,  haliisiliiH,  is  in Is.  US rendered  'reins' by  EV
simply  for  want  of  a  synonym  for  '  loins.'

3.  The  AV'»tf.  of  Lev.  1  i  2  22  4  for  311,  z!>l>,  is  not  literal,  and
is  based  on  a  long-exploded  pathology  (cp  MEDICINE,  §  5).

REKEM  (Dp!)-  I-  Apparently  a  Benjamite  place-
name,  Josh.  1827  (N&K&N  [B?].  pe«eM  [A],  pe«6N
[L]),  but  most  probably  a  corruption  of  SNCHT,  Jerah-
meel,  and  equivalent  to  D'ina,  BAHURIM  (another  of  the
developments  of  JERAHMEEL).1

2.  A  king  of  Midian,  Nu.  318  (poKOfj,  [BAFL]). Cp

(3)-

3.  One of  the '  sons ' of Hebron mentioned with
TAPPUAH and  SHEMA [</</. v.]  in i  Ch.  243  ; in 244
[MT]  he  is  father  of  Shammai  father  of  A  fa  OH,  but  in
&  (peKo/J.  [15],  poKOfj.  [A],  puKTjfj,  [L])  it  is  Shema  who  is
ancestor of Shammai, the intermediate links being
RAHAM  and  JORKKAM  [<jc/. v. ]; Rekem, Raham, Jor-
keam, and Carmel are all probably corruptions of
JERAHMEEL. Cp  JOKUEAM.

4.  In  pause  RAKEM  (so  EV),  a  Manassite  ; i  Ch.  7i6
(BA  om.,  pa.Ka.fj.  [L]). Seemingly  there  was  a  strong
Jerahmeelite  element  in  the  population  of  the  Manassite
territory.

These  explanations  suggest  the  true  explanation  of  the  phrase
Clp  '33  !  see  EAST,  CHILDREN  OF,  where  the  reader  is  referred
to  the  present  article  for  textual  criticism  of  the  phrase.  One
plausible  view  of  the  original  form  of  the  story  of  GIDEON
(?.7'.,  §  i)  requires  us,  in  Judg.  0  3  33  7  12  to  read  cpl  '33  (see
Pesh.),  i.e.,  ^>xi2rlT  '33!  note  the  gloss  '  Amalekites.'  This
should  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  Targumic  use  of  cpl  for
Kadesh  ;  here  too  cpl  must  come  from  SxcnT  »  the  full  name  of
Kadesh  was  Kadesh-jerahmeel,  barnea'  and  'rekem'  having
the  same  origin.  See  SELA.  In  fact,  wherever  we  meet  with
phrases  like  '  the  sons '  or  '  the  land '  or  '  the  mountains  of
Keiicin '  we  may  safely  regard  Keiie»i  as  a  corruption  of  Rcketn,
i.i:.,  Jcrahtnecl,  with  the  doubtful  exception  of  Gen.  1030  (i.e.,
if  m2D  [EV  'toward  Sephar ']  does  not  come  from  riSlS,  cp
SEPHAKAD).  Cp  OPHIR.  See  Gen.  2.ri629i  Nu. '23  7  i  K.og
[430]  Is.  11  14  Jer.  4928  Ezek.  264  10  Jobl  3.  Similarly  in  Gen.
15  19  KADMONITES  must  be  a  corruption  of  'Jerahmeelites.'

T.  K.  C.

RELEASE,  YEAR  OF.  See  JUBILEE,  also  LAW
AND  JUSTICE,  §  15.

REMALIAH  (W^pl,  §  39  ;  po/v\eAiA[c]).  father
of  PEKAH  (q.v.},  2  K.  1525  etc.,  Is.  74/  86.  Prob
ably  a  corruption  of  Snsni',  Jerahmeel.  Pekah's  Gilead-
ites  may  really  have  come  from  the  Xegeb  (on  the
southern  ijfa,  see  Crit.  Bib.  on  Jer.  822  226  Am.  13).
Similarly,  Jehuw  as  not  improbably  an  Ishmaelite  (see
NIMSHI),  and  Joaba  Misrite  (see  ZERUIAH).  It  is  easy
to  understand  that  the  boldest  adventurers  might  be  of
N.  Arabian  extraction.  T.  K.  c.

REMEMBRANCE  (t'rDT)-  Is-  5?8- See  MEMORIAL.

REMEMBRANCER  (2  S.  20z4  etc.,  AVme-),  EV
'recorder,'  RV'ns-  'chronicler.'  See  RECORDER.

REMETH  (n»-1),  Josh.  192i. See  RAMOTH,  i.
REMMON  (pB"l),  Josh.  197  AV;  RV  RIMMON  (ii.,i).

REMMON-METHOAR  (IN'hrpn  pan),  Josh.  19 13.
See  RIMMON  ii. ,  3.

REMPHAN  (pe/wcbAN,  Stephens  with  i,  31  etc.;
cp  peM(t>AM  [D,  Vg.  Iren.]  ;  po/v\4>AN  [N*]  ;  po/v\(J>A
[B],  pe/v\4>A  [61,  Arm.]),  or  (M  being  intrusive,  as  in
NOAABA  beside  NOB&.  iS.  21i),as  RV,  REPHAN  (pechAN

1  3  dropped  out,  and  n  became  a  (for  the  reverse  process  see
H.  P.  Smith  on  i  S.  8 16).

4031


j  [CE,  Syrr.  ,  Memph.  Theb.  yEth.  ]  ;  cp  PAKJJAN,  [ANC]  ;
p&(bAN,  Just.  Dial.  22,  ex  Amos),  occurs,  with  the  prefix
'  the  star  of  the  god  '  (so  RV  with  BD,  Pesh.  ,  etc.  and
<5A0-*),  or  '  the  star  of  your  god  '  (so  AV,  with  ANCE,
Vg.  ,  Hard.  ,  etc.  ),  in  Acts  7  43.  in  a  quotation  from  Amos
626,  ©  (where  BA  pAl4>AN.  Q  p€(J)AN,  Complut.  pe/v\-
cj)&).  The  same  Jablonski  who  ventured  on  a  Coptic
explanation  of  BEHKMOTH  (q.v.  )  explained  Rempha  or
Rompha  from  the  Coptic,  as  'king  of  heaven,'  nullo
plane  apice  immutato  ('  Remphah,  ^Egyptiorum  Deus,'
in  Opitscula,  ed.  Te  Water,  2  [1806],  pp.  1-72).  But
1  king  of  heaven  '  in  Egyptian  would  be  su/en  em  pet.  *
Gloag  (Comm.  on  Acts\  249),  Lumby  (Acts,  in  Cambridge
Bible,  ad  loc.},  and  Merx  (Schenkel's  Rib.  -Lex.  1517)
suppose  Rephan  to  be  the  Egyptian  name  for  Saturn.
So  (besides  Spencer  and  Kircher)  Lepsius  the  Egypto
logist,  who  says  that  Seb  or  Saturn  is  called  repa-n-
neteru,  'the  youngest  of  the  gods,'  and  suggests  a
possible  connection  with  Rephan  (Die  Chron.  der  .-Eg.
93).  On  phonetic  and  other  grounds  this  view  is  not
more  acceptable  than  Jablonski's,  and  the  simple  ex
planation  is  that  pe<pa.v  should  rather  be  pa.Ltf>a.v  —  i.e.,
JS'I,  where  n  is  perhaps  a  corruption  of  3,  and  s  (soft)  a
phonetic  substitute  for  %  See  CHIUN.  T.  K.  c.

REPHAEL (^KQp, as if '  God  heals  '  ; cp  Aram.

^XB-1, foBT, NAMES, §30; PANAMA [BAL]), a
Korahite,  b.  Shemaiah  ; i  Ch.  26  7  1-

Probably  'God  heals'  is  a  late  popular  etymology,  devised
after  the  original  name  had  become  corrupted  ;  that  it  took  hold
of  the  imagination  we  see  from  the  RAPHAEL  of  Tobit  and
Enoch.  The  present  writer  suspects  that  Rephael,  Irpeel,  Raphu
[Beth-]rapha,  and  perhaps  even  REPHAIAH  (f.v.),  all  come
ultimately  from  an  ethnic.  See  PEDAH-ZUR  ;  REPHAIM.  Hommel
(Exp.  T  8  [1897]  p.  563)  compares  the  name  of  an  Arab,  temp.
Sargon,  in  a  text  transcribed  by  Winckler,  Ya-ra-pa,  also  the  S.
Arabian  name  Hi-rapa'a.  T.  K.  C.


REPHAH(nDT;  p^H  [BA],  pA(t>&[L]),  mentioned
in  the  list  of  the  B'ne  Ephraim  i  Ch.  725.  Both  Rephah
and  RESHEPH  (q.  v.  )  occur  nowhere  else  and  are  probably
corrupt.  Cp  EPHRAIM,  §  12.

REPHAIAH  (ITS'),  §§  30,  62,  as  if  '  Yahwe  heals  '  ;
pAcbAlA  [BAL]).  On  the  ultimate  origin  of  the  name
see  REPHAEL,  and  note  in  confirmation  that  in  Neh.  89
Rephaiah  (5)  is  a  'son  of  Hur'  —  i.e.  ,  most  probably,
of  Jerahmeel.  In  i  Ch.  2  19  Hur  is  the  son  of  Caleb
and  Ephrath.  Who  the  Calibbites  are,  we  know  [see
CALEB]  ;  Ephrath  is  probably  a  distorted  fragment  of
Zarephath.  Cp  PARADISE,  col.  3573,  n.  5.  See  below,
no.  5.  T.  K.  c.

1.  b.  Hananiah,  mentioned  in  the  genealogy  in  i  Ch.
821  (pa.<f>aX  [B]),  where,  for  '33  'sons  of,'  (&  and  Pesh.
four times  read 133 'his son.' So Kittel  ; Bertheau
follows  MT.

2.  A  Simeonite  chieftain  who  attacked  the  Amalekites
of  Mt.  Seir  (apparently  in  Hezekiah's  time),  i  Ch.  4  42/1
(pa.<f>aLas  [L]). See  ISHI,  SiMEOX.

3.  b. TOLA (q.v.): i Ch. 72 (paipapa [B])  ; cp
ISSACHAR,  §  7.

4.  b.  BINEA,  i  Ch.  943  (patpouoLV  [N],  apaxa  [L])  =
i  Ch.  837  (,isi,  RAPHAH  ;  pa<pa.i  [B],  apaxa  [L]). Cp
BENJAMIN,  §  9  ii.  p.

5.  b.  HUR  (4),  the  ruler  of  half  '  the  district  of  Jeru
salem,'  and  one  of  the  repairers  of  the  wall  (Neh.  89  ;
pa^atas  [L]).

[He  was  of  Jerahmeelite  origin  (see  above).  According  to
Meyer  (Entst.  119)  the  Calibbites  and  Jerahmeelites  did  not
become  universally  recognised  as  real  Jews  before  the  time  of  P.
The  study  of  proper  names  pursued  in  a  series  of  articles  in  the
present  work  confirms  this,  but  with  limitations.  In  Neh.3
Hur,  Malchijah,  Paseah,  Rephaiah.  Urijah  ;  in  Ezra  8  Elam,
Michael,  Jeliel,  Ariel  ;  in  Neh.  11  Mahalaleel,  Jeroham,  Mal-
chiah,  Micha  are  transparent  'Jerahmeelite'  names.  The  Jer
ahmeelites  became  so  prominent  that  the  genealogists  had  to  do
them  fuller  justice.  But  the  same  study  of  names  suggests  that
Jerahmeelite  clans  were  recognised  both  in  Judah  and  elsewhere
before  the  exile.  —  T.  K.  c.]

1  From  a  private  letter  of  Dr.  Budge.
4032


REPHAIM

REPHAIM  (D\XEf); pAd>&[e]iN  [or  -M],  and  [Gen.
14  Josh.  12  13,  and  i'Ch.],  pr^NTec  [BAEL]  ;  Josh.
1 OT ^'  ®"A  om')'  a  race  °f  reputed  giants,
references ^ount^  ^y  tne  Israelites  in  occupation  of
territory on both sides of  the  Jordan.
Before  attempting  any  linguistic  or  historical  explana
tion,  we  must  look  into  the  several  passages  where  the
traditional  text  recognises  the  name,  viz.,  Gen.  14s  1620
Dt.  2ii2o(/xi</>apaeij'[Fonce])3iii3  Josh.  124  13 12  17 15,
to which we may  add 2  S.  21  16  18  20  22,  cp i Ch.
'20  4  6  8 (children of Harapha). The geographical
phrase '  valley of Kephaim ' will be treated only
incidentally  here  (see  next  article).

1.  Gen.  14s. Chedorlaomer  and his  allies 'smote
the  Rephaim  in  Ashteroth-karnaim. '

No  stress  can  be  laid  on  this  passage.  In  its  present  form
Gen.  14  is  probably  later  even  than  the  archaeological  notices  in
1  )t.  '1  iof.,  and  the  names  at  present  found  in  Gen.  14  5  probably
come  from  a  very  late  editor  who  arbitrarily  '  corrected '  a  very
corrupt  text  (see  SODOM).

2.  Gen.  15  20. The list of Canaanite peoples in
Gen.  15 19-21  comes  apparently  from  a  late  redactor,  but
has  merely  suffered  from  ordinary  transcriptional  cor
ruption  ;  the  redactor  had  no  historical  theory  to  serve,
and reproduced, though  inaccurately, names  derived
from  earlier  sources.

The  order  of  the  names  is,  Kenites,  Kenizzites,  Kadmonites
(from  '  Jerahmeelites '?),  Hittites  (from  '  Rehobothites ' '!),  Periz-
zites(Zarephathites?),  Rephaim.  Amorites,  Canaanites,  Girgash-
ites(from  'Girshites' or  'Geshurites' ?),  Jebusites  (Ishmaelites?).'
We  may  infer  that,  according  to  tradition,  a  people  called
'  Kephaim  '  was  to  be  found  in  the  far  S.  of  Palestine.

3.  Dt.  2 ii  20  3 ii  13. A  'remnant  of  the  Rephaim,'
under their king  Og,  survived in Bashan,  which  was
therefore  called  '  the  land  of  the  Rephaim.' But  we  are
also  told  that  the  Emim  of  Moab  and  the  Anakim  (of
Hebron  ?  or  of  Rehoboth?)  were reckoned  among  the
Rephaim. The  passage  comes  from  a  late  editor  (D2),
and  '  Bashan  '  should  certainly  be  '  Cushan  '  (see  OG).1

If  DJ  (Gath)  in  2  S.  21  20  is  miswritten  for  rnim  (REHOBOTH),
this  statement  is  confirmed,  for  the  warriors  spoken  of  in  that
passage  were  Rephaites.  It  is  true,  in  Nu.  13  33  the  b'ne  'Anak
are  said  to  belong  to  the  Nephilnn  ;  but  we  shall  see  presently
that  the  '  Rephaim '  and  the  '  Nephilim  '  must  have  been  closely
connected — i.e.,  'Rephaim'  and  'Nephilim'  may  have  been
interchanged.

4.  Josh.  124  13 12  depend  on  Dt.  2n,  etc.; but  17  M/
has  its  own  peculiarities. When  purified  from  corrupt
repetitions  I/M/  states  that  the  tribe  of  Joseph  (b'ne
Joseph) complained  to  Joshua  that  it  was  too  large  to
have  but  one  lot  and  portion. Joshua's  reply  was,  '  If
thou  art  a  great  people,  go  up  to  the  forest-land,  and
clear  away  (space)  for  thyself  in  the  land  of  the  Perizzites
and  the  Rephaim. ' The  Josephites  objected  that  access
to  this  region  would  be  impeded  by  the  Canaanites  with
their  chariots  of  iron,  and  Joshua  rejoined  that  the  forest-
land  is  not  unattainable,  and  that  their  strength  is  equal  to
the  task  of  driving  out  the  Canaanites.2 Here  it  would
appear  that  the  forest-land  spoken  of  means  the  hill-
country  N. of  Shechem  ;  the  view  that  trans-Jordanic
territory  is  intended  is  not  plausible.3 But  room  must
be  left  for  the  possibility  that '  Shechem ' should be
'  Cusham,'  and  '  Canaanites  '  '  Kenizzites.' There  were
probably  b'ne  Ephraim  in  the  Xegeb  (see  C.rit.  Bib.}.

5.  In 2  S.  21 22 (cp 20) four champions of the
Philistines  are  said to  have been '  born  (H*?')  to  the
Rapha  (ranrrV)  in  Gath  '  (y.  22  ;  cp  v.  20),  while  of  two  of
them  it  is  said  that  they  were  '  of  the  descendants  of
the  Rapha  '  (HPSm.,  <T^V:  ;  cp  i  Ch.  204),  or  perhaps
rather  (cp  <5  in  v.  22)  '  of  the  Rephaim. ' 4

1  There  is  no  occasion  to  reject  the  second  C'pjj;^  as  an
erroneous  repetition  from  the  preceding  clause.

"  In  v.  16  read  ny»ri  Ki'S^K1?,  and  in  v.  18 JjV'rVrT  IV'n  '3-

3  See  Steuernagel,  ad  lac.

*  It  is  usual  to  take  rain  as  an  eponym  ;  but  the  art.  is
unfavourable  to  this  view.  ,-£•]  surely  conies  from  XB1,  which
originally  had  after  it  the  stroke  of  abbreviation  (/KSln  =  D%KBin)-
In  2  S.  2122  read  D'KBnj  JvaS  11^,  'were  born  to  the  (or,  a)

4033


REPHAIM

There  is,  however,  great  difficulty  in  the  text  as  it  now  stands,
Surely  the  Philistines  were  quite  formidable  enough  without
having  to  accept  the  assistance  of  the  remnant  of  the  Rephaim
Are  we  to  suppose  that  the  references  to  the  Rephaites  in  a  S.
21  1622  are  a  later  appendage  to  the  tradition,  suggested  by  a
reminiscence  of  the  tradition  respecting  Og?  Or  is  there  not
some  explanation  arising  out  of  a  somewhat  more  definite  view
ot  the  older  populations  of  Canaan  made  possible  by  textual
criticism?

It  would  be  tedious  to  sum  up  here  all  the  evidence
directly  or  indirectly  affecting  the  subject  in  hand
2  Origin  Provided  by  our  textual  criticism.  Two
of  name.  Passages'  however,  are  specially  important.
In  Josh.  17 15  it  is  evident  that  »ntn  and
C'KB-n  are  two  competing  readings,  and  that  the  former
is  more  probably  correct.  And  in  2  S.  5 18-20  it  is  plain
that  the  spot  called  D'infl-Sjra  is  in  the  valley  of  Rephaim.
Itismaintainedelsewhere(seePELETHiTES,ZAKE]>HATH)
that  the  tribe  whose  centre  on  the  S.  Palestinian  border
was  at  Zarephath  (  =ZEPHATH)  was  prominent  in  early
Israelitish  legend,  and  that  its  name  underwent  strange
mutilations  and  corruptions.  Among  these  transforma
tions  may  probably  be  included  Zelophehad,  Salhad,
names  connected  with  the  N. ;  and  Pelistim'1  and
Letusim,  names  connected  with  the  S.  That  '  Perizzi '
and  '  Pelisti '  are  connected  is  not  a  violent  supposition.
Both  are  most  probably  corruptions  of  Sarephathi  (Zare-
phathite),  and  it  is  hardly  less  plausible  to  conjecture
that  Repha'im  is  a  corruption  of  Perasim,  though  an
alternative  derivation  from  Jerahme'elim  is  equally
possible.  Thus — to  return  to  the  story  in  2  S.  5 18-20
—instead  of  '  Baal-perazim  '  in  the  '  valley  of  Rephaim,'
the  original  tradition  probably  spoke  of  '  Baal-sare-
phathim  in  the  valley  of  Jerahme'elim  (or  SarCphathim). '
That  such  long  names  were  early  corrupted,  and
that  the  corruption  took  different  forms  in  different
parts  of  Palestine,  can  easily  be  understood.

The  result  to  which  we  are  tending,  and  which  it
would  lead  us  into  too  many  digressions  to  justify  fully,
is  that  the  Sarephathim  or  Jerahme'elim  migrated  into
many  parts  both  of  eastern  and  of  western  Palestine.
They  started  from  the  S.  ;  it  is  not  a  random  statement
of  Gen.  106  that  PUT  (BIS  from  runs)  was  the  brother
of  (the  N.  Arabian)  dish  and  Mizraim  and  the  son  of
Ham  (Jerahmeel?),  and  of  Gen.  25 3  that  LK'H  SHIM
was  the  brother  of  Leummim  (Jerahmeelim  ?)  and  the
son  of  Declan  (i.e.,  S.  Kdom).  The  SarCphathim  were
in  fact  probably  a  branch  of  the  Jerahmeelites,  who,  as
our  textual  criticism  tends  to  show,  spread  over  many
parts  both  of  Western,  and  even  of  Eastern,  Palestine
(note  the  Phoenician  Zarephath,  and  cp  JEKAHMEEL  ;
EAST,  CHILDREN  OF).  The  Jerahmeelites  or  Sare-
phathites,  according  to  the  genealogies,  became  largely
fused  with  the  Israelites,  and"  how  much  truth  there
may  be  in  the  statement  that  OG  the  Rephaite  (Sare-
phathite  ?  or  Jerahmeelite  ?)  and  his  people  were  smitten,
till  there  were  no  survivors  (Nu.  2135),  it  is  impossible
to  say.

It  is  hardly  worth  while  to  discuss  the  question
whether  the  representation  of  the  Rephaim  —  ?'.<-.,
possibly  the  Jerahmeelites  of  Sarephath — as  giants  (cp
Am.  2g,  where  '  the  Amorite  '  is  thus  described)  is  purely
mythical.  Whether  the  Edomitish  race  (to  which  the
Jerahmeelites  belonged)  was  taller  than  the  later
Israelitish  race  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  the  instinctive
tendency  of  legend  (both  in  Europe  and  in  Asia)  to
picture  aboriginal  races  as  of  gigantic  stature  would
have  led  to  such  a  representation.  According  to
Robertson  Smith,"  '  the  giant-legends  arose  in  part

house  of  the  Rephaim '  (cp  L's  TO>  oi«u>).  [In  a  S.  21,  <B'1A  has
pa</>a  and  also  yryayrf?  with  pa</>a  in  r<.  22  :  tpl-  yi'yarrts  in  77'.
16,  18,  Tiravos  v.  20,  yiyavret  and  pafya.  v.  22,  whilst  in  i  Ch.  20
<S  has  •yi'yoiTts  in  vv.  4,  6,  CHA  poi^o,  ©L  pa.<j>aiv  and  also  <B
yiyavTef.]

l  The  'Philistines'  of  28.2115-22  were  really  the  Zare-
phathites;  'Gath'  should  be  'Rehoboth.'  See  PELETHITES,
REHOBOTH.

a  Note  communicated  to  Prof.  Driver,  Devi.  40.

4034


1  Prevalent


RBPHAIM,  VALLEY  OP

from  the  comtemplation  of  ancient  ruins  of  great  works
and  supposed  gigantic  tombs.'  This  may  very  well
have  been  the  case,  in  view  of  the  legends  attaching
to  huge  sarcophagi,  like  that  assigned  to  Og  in  Dt.  ,  at
the  present  day.  See  OG.

A  brief  reference  to  other  theories  of  the  origin  of  the  name
Rephaim  must  suffice.  The  view  that  it  is  connected  with  Ar.
rafa'a  'to  lift  up,'  and  means  'giants,'  is  not  at  all  plausible;
no  cognate  of  raja  a  can  be  pointed  to  in  Hebrew,  Aramaic,  or
Assyrian.  Stade  (Gl'Jl  116120)  was  the  first  to  connect  the
name  with  the  Rephaim  or  '  shades  '  (see  DEAD  and  DEATH).
This  has  been  taken  up  by  Schwally  (Das  Leben  nach  don
Tode,  64,  n.  i  [1892];  ZA  TH'  18  132  [1898]).  From  the  sense  of
'spirits  of  the  dead"  arose,  it  is  supposed,  that  of  'primeval
population.'  Schwally  confirms  this  by  a  legend  of  the  Hovas
in  Madagascar  (ZA  TIT,  I.e.).  This  is  surely  most  improbable.
The  transition  is  difficult,  even  if  we  do  not  hold,  with  Stade,
that  Q'NSl,  the  word  for  'the  shades,'  means  'the  weak.'  It  is
most  reasonable,  therefore,  to  hold  that,  like  a  large  proportion
of  ethnic  names,  Rephaim  has  been  worn  down  from  a  longer
form,  and  this  form  we  may  venture  to  trace  either  in  Jcrah-
me'elim  or  in  Sarephathim.

See  also  REPHAIM,  VALLEY  OF,  and  on  Job  26  3  see  DEAD.

T.  K.  C.

REPHAIM,  VALLEY  OF,  also  VALLEY  OF  THE
GIANTS  (C'NBVpDj;  ;  Josh.  158  18  16  2  S.  5  is  22  23  13  i  Ch.  11  15
14g  Is.  17s:TJs.  iv  cfxipayyi  orepeo  1  [B«AQr]  ;  Josh.  15,  -MJS
pa^aeija  [AL],  -v  [B],  Josh.  IS  e^eKpa^aeu'  [HL],  -p.  [A],  2  S.  5,
Tf\v  KOtAaSa  rail'  T[f]iTO.v<av  [BAL],  2  S.  23  rfj  KOiA.  pa^act/n  [B],
•v  [A],  nravtav  [L]  ;  i  Ch.  TQ  KOiAaSi  riav  yiyavrtav  [BNAL];
valtis  Raphaim  i\n&  gigantuai).

According  to  the  prevalent  theory,  which  supposes
the  same  locality  to  be  referred  to  in  all  the  passages,
^a"ey  °^  Rephaim  '  was  an  upland
Pla'n  near  Jerusalem  and  Bethlehem  (cp
2S-23'3/)  where  not  only  corn  and
olive  trees  flourished  (Is.  17s/),  but  the
so-called  Baca  trees  (see  MULBERRY)  grew.  At  its  N.
end  was  a  hill  over  which  ran  the  boundary  of  Judah
and  Benjamin  (Josh.  158  18  16).  The  plain  was  famous
as  the  scene  of  fights  between  David  and  the  Philistines,
(28.51822  23is;  cp  i  Ch.  14g  11  15).  Elsewhere,
however,  has  been  offered  the  theory  that  the  enemies
referred  to  in  2  S.  5  18  22  and  the  related  passages  were
not  the  Philistines  but  the  Zarephathites  (see  ZARE-
PHATH),  and  that  the  place  referred  to  in  28.  23  14
was  not  Bethlehem  but  Beth-jerahmeel  (thus  the  whole
scene  becomes  historically  and  geographically  more
plausible).  Elsewhere,  too  (see  REPHAIM)  we  have
urged  that  Rephaim,  the  name  of  an  early  population
of  Canaan,  is  probably  a  much  worn-down  form  either
of  SarSphathTm  (Zarephathites),  or  perhaps  more  prob
ably  of  Jerahme'ellm.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  in  28.51822,  etc.,  the
'valley  (upland  plain)  of  Rephaim  (Jerahme'ellm)'
2  David's  cannot  t>e  a  plain  near  Jerusalem,  and

vallev  of  that'  like  the  'gwe*  hd-*ldh  of  *  s-  172  (see
o-_»,.i_.  ELAH,  VALLEY  OF),  it  was  one  of  the
xvouUctim.  ,11  i

valleys  or  spaces  between  the  low  sloping

hills'  (Palmer)  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ruheibeh
(Rehoboth),  possibly  indeed  the  Wady  Ruheibeh  itself,
though  the  broad  Wady  el-Milh  may  also  come  into
consideration  (see  NEGEB).

In  the  case  of  Is.  17s,  when  we  consider  the  manifest
play  on  the  name  Ephraim  in  the  next  verse,  it  is  possible

to  suppose  (a)  that  D'NEi  (Rephaim)
3.  Two  other  ,11  u  u  /i-T  \  •  v

valleys  of should  rather  be °'.15»S  (Ephraim), and
Rephaim  ? to  identify  this  'tmek  with  a  part  of  the

Great  Plain  of  Es'draelon.  (b]  There
are,  however,  also  good  critical  arguments  for  identifying
this  'fmek  with  that  in  the  story  of  David.  The  ques
tion  is  subordinate  to  the  large  inquiry,  Does  Is.  l"i-n
predict  the  ruin  of  Syria  and  Ephraim,  or  of  the  kingdom
of  Jerahmeel  ?  .See  Crit.  Bib.  But  there  is  no  objec
tion  to  the  view  (c)  that  the  'emek  rtphatm  of  Josh.  158
18i6  really  did  derive  its  name  from  the  Jerahme'elim  ;
in  fact,  the  early  population  of  Jerusalem  was  probably
a  combination  of  Amorites  and  Jerahmeelites  (see

1 Cp  (P,  I  S.  4  8  Ttav  Seuiv  riav  (rrepeiav  rovriav  (*BL  sing.).
4035


REPHIDIM

REHOBOTH).  The  upland  plain  referred  to  seems  to
be  the  Beka'a,  which  stretches  from  the  8\V.  side  of
Jerusalem  southwards  as  far  as  Mar  Elyas  (3  hr.  from
Jerusalem),  which  may  indeed  be  the  'mountain'  re
ferred  to  in  Joshua.

Eus.  and  Jer.  (OS  288  22  1476)  place  the  '  Valley  of  Rephaim  '
on  the  N.  of  Jerusalem,  and  Kittel  (Gi'sch.  der  Hebr.  2131)
follows  them  on  grounds  derived  from  the  (surely  corrupt)  text
of  2  Sj522_^  Tobler's  main  objection1  to  the  ordinary  view  is
that  'emek  means  a  'valley,'  not  a  'plain.'  But  fmek  is  con
stantly  used  of  plains  shut  in  by  hills,  and  this  is  just  what  the
Beka'a  is,  'shut  in  on  all  sides  by  rocky  hill-tops  and  ridges'
(Porter).  T.  K.  c.

REPHAN  (pecpAisi),  Acts 7 43  RV,  AV  REMI-HAN.
REPHIDIM  (DH'En,  plain -country,  •  strata  '  ?  ?,-
p<Mj>lAeiN  [BAFL],  Ex.  17 18  192  Nu.  33i4/t),  a
place  where  the  Amalekites  attacked  the  Israelites  and
were  defeated  by  Joshua  with  the  aid  of  the  wonder
working  staff  of  Moses.  As  we  see  from  his  arrange
ment  of  the  passages  of  diverse  origin  which  he  has
brought  together,  R  considers  this  event  to  have  oc
curred  when,  according  to  P,  the  Israelites  encamped
at  Rephldim  immediately  before  entering  the  wilderness
of  Sinai.  He  also  thinks  that  the  spot  (spots?)  called
Massah  and  Meribah  was  (were?)  in  the  district  of
Rephidim,  which,  in  this  case,  must  have  extended  to,
or  perhaps  even  have  been  equivalent  to,  Horeb  (see
Ex.176,  'the  rock  in  Horeb').  On  the  analysis  of
sources,  see  EXODUS  (BOOK),  §  3.

The  existence  of  a  popular  tradition  of  a  war  waged
with  varying  fortunes  by  the  early  Israelites  against  the
1  Form  and  Ama'e^'tes  may  be  assumed  without
contents  of  fission  (see  AM  ALEK§  2  ;  MOSES
legend  §  I2)-  But  we  have  stl11  to  ask-  Did
tradition  connect  this  war,  or  an
episode  of  this  war,  with  Rephidim  ?  Some  scholars
(Ox/.  Hex.  107)  have  doubted  this  ;  according  to
them,  the  connection  of  the  battle  described  in  Ex.
178-i6  with  Rephidim  is  purely  editorial.  Textual
criticism  may  contribute  something  to  the  decision  of
this  point.  Among  the  names  of  the  stations  of  the
Israelites  there  are  only  two  which  end  in -im,  viz.,
Elim  and  Rephidim.  It  is  difficult  not  to  conjecture
that  both  these  names  are  corruptions  of  ethnics.  That
Elim  probably  comes  from  Jerahmeel  or  Jerahmeelim  has
been  suggested  already  (MOSES,  §  12).  We  have  also
conjectured  that  Marah  (the  reported  name  of  the  pre
ceding  station)  has  arisen  out  of  another  fragment  of
Jerahmeel,  viz.,  Marah  (from  Rehem  ;  cp  REKEM,
SELA).  It  may  now  be  added  that  Rephidim  is  prob
ably  a  corrupt  fragment  of  Jerahmeelim.

'  Rephidim  '  (G'TSI),  we  ma>'  suppose,  comes  from  '  Rephilim  '
(Dv'!n)i  which,  through  the  intermediate  stage  of  'Rephaelim'
(D'SxSn),  comes  from  '  Remaelim '  (c<(?NC"l)>  i.e.,  'Jerahmeelim'
(O' 7X0  n°v)  !  the  corruption  is  easier  and  not  less  certain  than  that
which  we  meet  with  sometimes,  of  Jerahmeel  into  Ephraim.

Bacon  (Ex.  88,  note  *)  has  acutely  conjectured  that
Ex.1526  (a  passage  usually  assigned  to  RD)  may  be
based  on  an  earlier  document  which  derived  the  name
Rephidim  from  rapha  (NSI),  '  to  heal.'  The  name  pre
supposed  in  the  early  tradition  may  have  been  not
Rephidim  but  Rephaelim  ;  SNEH  naturally  suggests  the
explanation,  'for  I  am  Yahwe  that  heals  thee. '2  In
short,  the  closing  words  of  v.  26  may  originally  have
stood  in  a  context  relative  to  the  name  Rephaelim.

From  this  point  of  view  we  cannot  question  the  fact
that  early  tradition  connected  the  battle  in  Ex.  178-i6
with  Rephidim,  the  name  of  which  place  (like  Meribah)
appears  to  be  a  distortion  of  the  ethnic  lerahmeelim.
The  truth  is  that  there  were  traditional  stories  in  circu
lation  respecting  two  fertile  spots  in  the  Jerahmeelite
country  occupied  by  the  migrating  Israelites.  One
appears  in  a  double  form  in  Ex.  1523-25^,  and  in  T.  27;
another  has  also  a  double  representation  in  Ex.

1  Drittc  Wanderung,  202.

2  See  RAPHAEL,  and  cp  Eth.  Enock,  107,  where  Raphael  is
commanded  to  proclaim  that  God  will  heal  the  earth.

4036


EEPHIDIM

17  T-b  2  4-7  (part)  and,  in  a  very  fragmentary  form,  n
vv.  3  7  (part).  The  second  certainly  refers  to  the  oasis
of 'Ain  Gadis  (the  fountain  of  the  Jerahmeelite  Kadesh)
And  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  hold  that  the  Anmlekite
attack  spoken  of  in  Ex.178  was  connected  in  the
original  tradition  with  this  fountain,  the  possession  o
which  was  naturally  grudged  by  the  Jerahmeelites
(now  become  unfriendly? — see  MOSES)  to  the  intrud
ing  Israelites.  (In  this  case,  the  'hill'  spoken  of  in
w,  9/.  may  be  one  of  the  earth-covered  limestone  hills
at  the  north  -  eastern  sweep  of  the  oasis  ;  cp  Truni-
bull,  Kadesh-barnea,  273. )  This,  at  any  rate,  is  the
view  suggested  by  the  text  of  Ex.  17  in  its  present
form  ;  but  even  if  we  reject  it,  there  is  strong  prob
ability  in  the  opinion  that  the  Amalekites  attacked  Israel
in  Rcphidim— i.e. ,  Jerahmeelim — because  we  have  ex
press  evidence  (Nu.  1829,  cp  Gen.  147)  that  the  Negeb,
including  Kadesh,  was  the  region  specially  occupied  by
the  Jerahmeelite  clans.

That  the  story  of  the  Amalekite  attack,  not  less  than
that  of  the  smitten  rock  (v.  6,  'the  rock  in  Horeb'},  is
placed  too  early  by  R,  seems  beyond  doubt.  The
Moses  who  stood  apart  from  the  fight,  holding  the  '  rod
of  Elohim,'  but  who  after  a  time  was  in  danger  of
letting  his  hand  sink,  and  who  committed  the  military
leadership  to  Joshua,  is  clearly  an  old  man  ;  we  are
placed  by  this  story  at  the  beginning  of  the  various
wars  which  tradition  referred  to  the  close  of  the  life  of
Moses.  See  MOSES  ;  and  cp  JEHOVAH-NISSI,  MASSAH
AND  MERIBAH,  WANDERINGS.

In  the  above  statement  we  have  been  compelled  to
assume  that  Horeb  or  Sinai  was  not  in  the  so-called

2 Earlier sinaitic  Peninsula, but  in  close  prox-
eeoeranhical imity to Kadesh- z'-^- «n the Jebel

theories Ma£rah'  on  the  SW- frontier  of  the
Negeb  (see  MOSES,  §§  5, 14). If,  how
ever,  we  suppose  that  Sinai is  either  Jebel  Serbal or
Jebel  Musa  (see  SINAI, §  18),  we may, with  several
modern geographers (Lepsius, Kbers, Ritter, A. P.
Stanley,  C.  W.  Wilson,  E.  H.  Palmer),  be  tempted  to
attach  ourselves  to  the  tradition,  recorded  especially  by
Kosmas Indicopleustes (535 A.D.  ) and Antoninus
Martyr (circa 600  A.D.  ), which identifies Rgphkllm
with  Feiran, the  ancient Pharan, the  ruins  of  which
stand at  the  junction  of  the  Wady  'Aleyat with the
Wady Feiran, about 4  m. N.  of Serbal. Antoninus
Martyr  speaks  of  an  '  oratorium,'  whose  altar  is  set  on
the  stones  which  were  put  under  Moses  while  he  was
praying. Evidently  he  refers  to  the  Jebel  et-Tahuneh,
on  the  right  bank  of  the  WTady  Feiran,  which  is  about
720  ft.  high,  and  is  covered  with  remains  of  Christian
tombs,  cells,  and  chapels. This  view  was  adopted  as  a
whole  by  the  members  of  the  Sinai  Expedition,  except
ing  F.  W.  Holland  (see  Ordnance  Survey  of  Penins.  of
Sinai, 153.^). More  plausible, if  the  connection  of
the  story  of  the  rock  and  that  of  the  battle  be  main
tained,  is  the  view  of  Ebers  (Durch  Gosen  zum  Sinai,
212; cp Lepsius, Briefe, 349/1) that the biblical
Rgphidim is to  be placed  in the dry, north-western
part  of  the  Wady  Feiran,  where  the  Amalekites  might
be  supposed  to  have  gathered  to  prevent  the  Israelites
from  entering  the  oasis. Robinson's  theory  (BK  1  179),
adopted by  F. W. Holland (Recovery of  Jerusalem,
534/K that Rgphldlm  is  in the  narrow gorge of  el-
Watiyeh  in  the  great  Wady  es-Sheikh— the  Wady  by
which, according  to this traveller, the Israelites  ap
proached Horeb— is less defensible, for  reasons  well
summed  up  by E.  H.  Palmer (Sinai,  202); cp also
Ritter (Palestine and  the Sinaitic  Peninsula, 1323).
All these theories  depend, as  we  have  seen, on the
correctness  of  the  traditional  theory  as  to  the  general


RESURRECTION

position  of  Horeb  or  Sinai,  which  is  open  to  much
question,  and  indeed  appears  to  some  scholars  hardly
defensible.  „,  ..  ,.

1  • i\  • \-.

RESAIAS  (PHCAIOY  [BA]),  i  Esd.  58  RV  =  Ezra22
REELAIAH.


RESEN  (|D-|  ;  A*ceM  [AZ)L]  ;  -£N  [E]  ;  Resen}  is
named  in  Gen.  10  12,  as  a  city  lying  between  Nineveh

1.  Assyrio-  and  Kalah- Menant  therefore  considered
logical U  to  te  rePresented  by  the  ruin-heaps  of

inquiry  Se'amiye.  Bochart  and  recently  Noldeke
have  connected  it  with  the  Larissa  of
Xenophon  (Anab.  iii.  4  7),  the  site  of  which,  however,  is
uncertain,  though  Frd.  Del.  (Calwer  Bib.  -Lex.  731)
suggests  identifying  it  with  Nimrud  (cp  CALAH).  In
the  inscriptions,  so  far  published,  no  city  of  any  im-
Portance  bears  a  name  like  Resen.  A  city  of  the  name
Rg-es-e-ni  (Res-e'ni)  appears  as  not  far  from  Nineveh,
in  the  Bavian  description  of  Sennacherib  (A7/2u6/.  ,
cp  Del.  Par.  188261)  ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that
it  was  an  ancient  foundation.  There  is  little  hope  of
its  identification  till  the  district  has  been  properly
explored.  c.  w.  H  ;

From  an  exegetical  point  of  view  the  matter  is  further
complicated  by  the  words  which  follow  Resen  —  '  the

2.  Text- Same  is  the  great  city'' Does  this  refer  to
critical Resen? No  one  would  have  doubted  this,

solution.  but  for  the.  silence  of  antiquity  as  to  any
important  city  near  Nineveh  with  a  name
resembling  Resen.  Res-eni—  i.e.  ,  '  fountain-head,  place
of  fountains,'  is  not  a  probable  name  at  all.  To  suppose
a  '  tetrapolis'  with  two  such  doubtful  names  as  Rehoboth-
Ir  and  Resen  is  a  desperate  expedient.  If,  however,
Nimrod  was  a  N.  Arabian,  not  a  Babylonian,  hero,  a
probable  identification  of  Resen  may  be  made,  rta
(misread  Calah)  is  in  the  view  of  the  present  writer  one
of  the  many  corruptions  of  VNCHT  (Jerahmeel)  ;  myj
(which  was  read  Nineveh)  not  improbably  comes  from
fvun  (Hebron);  and  n'rmrr  vyn  mn  is  certainly  a
corruption  of  ^ttDITV  Kin  (that  is,  Jerahmeel),  a  gloss
on  n^o-  '  Between  Hebron  and  Jerahmeel  '  appears
to  be  a  suitable  description  of  Beersheba,  the  name  of
which  is  sometimes  corrupted  into  \wy  -113  and  jrp.
See  NIMROD.  §  i,  c.  w.  H.  j.  •  '§  2,  T.  K.  c"

RESERVOIR  (Hipp,  Is.  22  n,  RV). See  CONDUITS
§  i  [5]-

RESHEPH  (t|Bn  ;  CAPA(}>  [B],  pACe<|>  [A],  P&CHcJ>
[L]),  a  'son'  of  Ephraim,  i  Ch.  725  (see  EPHRAIM,
§  12).  The  other  names  include  SHEERAH  (i.e.  ,
Ashhur?),  Ammihud  (i.e.  Jerahmeel?)  Elishama  (i.e.,
Ishmael?).  •  Resheph  '  therefore  should  perhaps  be  tps
(cp  ©I!),  and  mean  '  Zarephathite  '  ;  cp  '2-ixn  p,  Neh.
831  —  i.e.  ,  a  Zarephathite.  Clermont-Ganneau,  how
ever,  suggests  that  Arsiif  (  =  the  Apollonia  of  Jos.),
about  7  m.  N.  of  Jaffa,  may  correspond  to  an  ancient
town  Resheph.  Resheph  (identified  with  Apollo)  was
the  Phoenician  and  N.  Syrian  fire-god  and  war-god  (cp
CIS  1  n.  10,  and  Hadad-inscr.  from  Zenjirli,  //.  3,  u),
whose  cultus  was  introduced  into  Egypt  during  the
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  dynasties  (see  list  of  gods
on  altar  in  Turin  Museum,  TSBAS^g,  I.  67,  and
plate;  and  cp  E.  Meyer,  ZDMG  81719  73  8  /  ).J  Close
to  Arsiif  is  an  extraordinary  holy  place  —  a  Haram,
vhich,  under  Moslem  forms,  possibly  continues  a  primi-
ive  cultus  (Cl.-Ganneau,  Honts  et  saint  Georges,  17;
cp  Baed.W  239).  See,  further,  PHOENICIA,  §  12,  end.

T.  K.  c.
RESURRECTION. See  ESCHATOLOGY  (index).

1  For  further  references  see  Maspero,  Struggle  of  Nations,
156,  n.  i.


4037


4038


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


Narratives  examined  (§§  2-16).
Canonical  Gospels  (J  27^).
Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  (§  4).
Gospel  of  Peter  (§  5).
Coptic  account  (§  6).
Extra-canonical  details  (§  7).
Conclusion  of  Mk.  (§  8/1).
i  Cor.  15  i-n  (§8  10-15).
Accounts  of  ascension  (§  16).


CONTENTS

GENERAL,  §  i.

II. Determination  of  outward  facts

(§§  17-29)-

Nature  of  the  appearances  (§  17).
No  words  of  the  risen  Jesus  (§  18).
Galilee  the  place  (§  19).
The  sepulchre  (§  20 /.).
The  third  day  (§  22).
Number  of  appearances  (§  23).
Unhistorical elements due to  ten
dency  (§§  24-29).


III. Explanation  of  facts  (§§  30-38).

Nature of resurrection body of

Jesus  (8  30).
Resurrection only  of  the  Spirit  of

Jesus  (8  31).
Objective  visions  (§  32).
Apparent  death,  and  false  rumours

of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  (§  33).
Subjective  visions  (§§  34-38).
Literature  (§  39).


The  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  held  to  be  the  central
fact  upon  which  the  Christian  church  rests. Even  at  a
. _  . date so early as that of i  Cor. Paul

'  treats  it  as  such  in  an  elaborate  discussion
(i  Cor.  15 1-26).  In  particular  he  rests  upon  it  three
fundamental  thoughts  of  the  Christian  faith  :  ( i )  the  belief
that  the  death  of  Jesus  was  not — what  in  accordance
with  Dt.  2l2j  (Gal.  813)  it  must  have  seemed  to  be —
the  death  of  a  malefactor,  but  a  divine  appointment  for
the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  for  the  salvation  of  men
( i  Cor.  15 17  Rom.  425  64-7,  etc. ) ;  (2)  a  vindication  of  the
supremacy  of  the  exalted  Christ  over  the  Church  ( i  Cor.
1525/1  Rom.  142  Cor.  184,  etc.) ;  and  (3)  a  pledge  of
the  certainty  of  an  ultimate  resurrection  of  all  believers
to  a  life  of  everlasting  blessedness  (i  Cor.  15 18-20  614
Rom.  68  8 1 1,  etc.).

Whilst  the  second  and  the  third  of  these  points  were  so  held
at  all  times,  that  was  not  quite  the  case  with  the  first.  At  a
date  as  early  as  that  of  the  speeches  of  Peter  in  Acts  (see  ACTS,
§  14)  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  was  not  the  divine  confirmation
of  the  truth  that  the  death  of  Jesus  laid  the  foundations  of  the
salvation  of  mankind  ;  the  death  is  there  represented  rather  as  a
calamity  (3  13-15  5  30)  even  if  it  was  (according  to  '2  23  4  28)  fore
ordained  of  Clod.  Hut  the  significance  of  the  resurrect  ion  of  Jesus
does  not  become  on  that  account  the  less ;  on  the  contrary  it
figures  as  being  itself  the  act  with  which  the  forgiveness  of  sins
is  connected  (5  31,  cp  3  25).  Most  modern  schools  of  theology  in
like  manner  refrain  from  regarding  the  resurrection  as  an  event
without  which  the  theologian  wbuld  not  be  able  to  regard  Jesus'
death  as  a  divine  arrangement  for  the  salvation  of  men.

Such  theologians  also,  however,  do  not  on  that
account  attach  to  it  any  the  less  importance  ;  rather  do
they  see  in  it  the  divine  guarantee  for  the  truth  that  the
person  of  Jesus  and  the  cause  which  he  represented
could  not  remain  under  the  power  of  death,  but  must  of
necessity  at  last  gain  the  victory  over  all  enemies  in
spite  of  every  apparent  momentary  triumph.

It  seems  accordingly  in  logic  inevitable  that  if  at  any
time  it  should  come  to  be  recognised  that  the  resurrection
of  Jesus  never  happened,  the  Christian  faith  with  respect
to  all  the  points  just  mentioned  would  necessarily  come
to  an  end.

The  shock  to  which  the  Christian  religion  and  the  Christian
church  would  be  exposed  by  any  such  discovery  would  appear
to  be  all  the  heavier  when  it  is  reflected  that  only  two  other
propositions  can  be  named  which  would  place  it  in  equal  or
greater  danger  ;  the  one,  that  the  death  of  Jesus  did  not  procure
the.  salvation  of  mankind,  the  other  that  Jesus  never  existed  at
all.  The  first  of  these  two  theses  would  leave  many  schools  of
thought  within  the  limits  of  Christianity  comparatively  un
affected,  for  they  find  the  redeeming  work  of  Jesus  in  his  life,
not,  as  Paul  and  orthodox  theologians  generally,  in  his  death  ;
on  the  other  hand  their  faith  would  be  most  seriously  affected
if  they  found  themselves  constrained  to  recognise  that  Jesus
remained  under  the  power  of  death.

The  reason  for  dreading  all  these  dangers  is  that
upon  the  assumption  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  (as
also  upon  that  of  his  atoning  death  and  upon  that  of
his  existence  at  all)  are  based  propositions  which  are
fundamental  to  the  Christian  faith, — propositions  con
cerning  God  and  his  relation  to  men,  upon  the  truth
of  which  no  less  an  issue  depends  than  the  salvation  of
mankind.  The  question  concerns  things  of  priceless
value,  and  the  judgments  upon  which  all  interest  con
centrates  are  (to  use  the  language  of  modern  German

4039


theologians)  Werthurtheile  —  i.e.,  judgments  which
declare  that  to  be  able  to  believe  such  and  such  is  for
the  religious  man  a  thing  of  absolute  value  ;  unless  such
things  can  be  accepted  he  can  only  despair.  Thus  the
believing  man  can  cherish  no  more  urgent  desire  than
that  the  basis  upon  which  these  beliefs,  which  are  for
him  so  priceless,  rest  should  be  raised  securely  above  the
reach  of  doubt.

Yet  what  is  this  basis  ?  It  consists  in  an  affirmation
regarding  a  fact  in  history  which  is  known  to  us  only
through  tradition  and  accordingly  is  open  to  historical
criticism  just  as  any  other  fact  is.  Indeed,  whilst  the
very  existence  of  Jesus  and  the  fact  of  his  death  on  the
cross  have  been  questioned  by  only  a  very  few,1  and  on
the  other  hand  the  meaning  of  his  death,  as  soon  as  the
fact  has  been  admitted,  is  left  an  open  question  to  every
one,  we  find  that  the  resurrection  of  Jesus — as  is  not
surprising  in  view  of  its  supernatural  character — is  in
very  many  quarters  and  with  growing  distinctness
characterised  as  unhistorical,  and  that  not  merely  when
it  is  conceived  of  as  having  been  a  revivification  of  the
dead  body  of  Jesus,  but  also  when  it  is  defended  in
some  spiritualistic  form.

The  present  examination  of  the  subject  will  not  start
from  the  proposition  that  '  miracles  are  impossible.'

Such  a  proposition  rests  upon  a  theory  of  the  universe  (Welt
anschauung),  not  upon  exhaustive  examination  of  all  the  events
which  may  be  spoken  of  as  miracles.  Even  should  we  by  any
chance  find  ourselves  in  a  position  to  say  that  every  alleged
miraculous  occurrence  from  the  beginning  of  time  down  to  the
present  hour  had  been  duly  examined  and  found  non-miraculous,
we  should  not  thereby  be  secured  against  the  possibility  of
something  occurring  to-morrow  which  we  should  be  compelled
to  recognise  as  a  miracle.  Empirically,  only  so  much  as  this
stands  fast — and  no  more — that  as  regards  present -day  occur
rences  the  persons  who  reckon  with  the  possibility  of  a  miracle
(by  miracle  we  here  throughout  understand  an  occurrence  that
unquestionably  is  against  natural  law)  are  very  few,  and  that
present-day  occurrences  which  are  represented  as  miraculous
are  on  closer  examination  invariably  found  to  possess  no  such
character.

The  normal  procedure  of  the  historian  accordingly
in  dealing  with  the  events  of  the  past  will  be  in  the  first
instance  to  try  whether  a  non-miraculous  explanation
will  serve,  and  to  come  to  the  other  conclusion  only  on
the  strength  of  quite  unexceptionable  testimony.
Needless  to  say,  in  doing  so,  he  must  be  free  from  all
prepossession.  He  must  accordingly,  where  biblical
authors  are  concerned,  in  the  first  instance,  look  at
their  statements  in  the  light  of  their  own  presuppositions,
even  though  in  the  end  he  may  find  himself  shut  up  to
the  conclusion  that  not  only  the  statements  but  also  the
presuppositions  are  erroneous.

I.  NARRATIVES  EXAMINED
For  our  most  authentic  information  on  the  subject  of

1  Loman,  who  in  1881  altogether  denied  the  existence  of
Jesus,  affirmed  it  in  1884  and  still  more  distinctly  in  1887.
Amongst  those  who  have  most  recently  maintained  the  negative
may  be  named  Edwin  Tohnson,  the  author  of  Antigua  Mater
(anonymous;  1887)  and"  The  Rise  of  Christendom  (1890),  and
John  M.  Robertson,  Christianity  and  Mythology  (ioon)  and
A  Short  History  of  Christianity  (1902).

4040


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


the resurrection of Jesus we naturally look to the

_  Gospels  ;  these,  however,  exhibit  con-

-  tradictions of  the  most  glaring kind.

narratives  ot  ReimaruS|  vvhose  work  was  published

resurrection by Lessing as [Voifenbutteler Frag-

compared. mente>  enumerated  ten  contradictions  ;

but  in  reality  their  number  is much greater. (Mk.

169-20  is  not  taken  account  of  in  this  place  ; see  below,

§8.)

(a)  Of  the  watch  and  seal  set  upon  the  sepulchre,  and
of  the  bribing  of  the  soldiers  of  the  watch,  we  read  only
in Mt. (2762-6628411-15). In Mk. and Lk. these
features  are  not  only  not  mentioned  ; they  are  excluded
by the representation of  the  women as intending  to
anoint the body  and (in  Mk. at least) as foreseeing
difficulty  only  in the  weight  of  the  stone,  not in  the
presence  of  a  military  guard. In  Mt. the  women's
object  is  simply  to  see  the  sepulchre  (28  i)  ; they  have
therefore  heard  of  its  being  guarded, as in  fact they
very  easily  could.

(b)  According  to  Lk.  (23 54  56)  the  women  got  ready
the  spices  before  sunset  on  Friday  ;  according  to  Mk.
(16  i)  they  did  not  buy  them  till  after  sunset  on  Satur
day. In  Jn. the  incident  does not  occur  at  all, for
according to 19  38-40 Joseph of Arimathaea and
Nicodemus have  already  embalmed the  body  before
laying  it  in  the  grave,  whilst  according  to  Mk.  1546  =
Mt.  27 59  f.=L,k.  23  53 Joseph alone  (without Nico
demus)  simply  wrapped  it  in  a  fine  linen  cloth.

(c)  The  persons  who  come  to  the  sepulchre  on  the
morning  of the  resurrection  are  : according  to Mk.
(16 1), Mary  Magdalene, Mary  of  James  (cp  MARY,
§§  26  23),  and  Salome; according  to  Mt.  (28 1)  only
the two Marys (the designation '  the other Mary '
is  explained  by  27  56)  ; according to Lk. (24 10), in
addition  to  the  two  Marys, Joanna  (cp  83) 'and  the
other  women  with  them  '  ;  according  to  Jn.  (20 1) only
Mary  Magdalene,1  to  whom,  however,  are  added  Peter
and  the  beloved  disciple. In  agreement  with  this  last
we  have  only  the  notice  in Lk.  (24  24)  that  after  the
women  '  some  of  those  with  us  '  (TLV£S  TUIV  ffvv  ijfuv)  had
gone  to  the  sepulchre  and  had  found  the  report  of  the
women  to  be  true  ;  also  the  notice  in  24  12  (a  verse  not
found  in  the  'western'  MSS)  according  to  which  Peter
ran,  after  the  visit  of  the  women,  to  the  sepulchre,  and
stooping down beheld the linen clothes alone, and
wondering  departed. This  verse,  though  we  can  hardly
suppose  it to  have  come  from  Jn.  263-8,  is  still  open
to  the suspicion of being a later interpolation, — all
the more because the  mention of Peter alone does
not harmonise  with  the '  some ' (nvts)  of  v.  24, and
'them' (CLVTUV)  of  v.  13  connects  with  v.  n,  not  with
v.  12.

(d)  The time of the visit of the women to the
sepulchre  is  :  in  Mk.  (li}2\  '  when  the  sun  was  risen,'  in
Lk.  (24 1,  'at  early  dawn  ')  and  Jn.  (20i, •  early,  when
it  was  yet  dark  ')  before  sunrise,  but  in  Mt.  (28  i)  about
half  a  day  earlier.

'  Late  on  the  Sabbath  '  (oi^e  <ra/3j3aToj»')  means  unquestionably,
according  to  the  Jewish  division  of  the  day,  the  time  about  sunset,
and  the  words  immediately  following —  TTJ  eTuiicucrKOucrrj  €is  fj.iav
<raf}fidT<av,  '  as  the  light  shone  forth  towards  the  first  day  of  the
week '  (see  WEEK,  §  7>-Tare  elucidated  by  Lk.  23  54,  where  the
transition  from  the  Jewish  Friday  to  Saturday  (Sabbath)— in
other  words  the  time  of  sunset— is  indicated  by  the  expression
<ra/3j3o.TOi>  J7re'<£iocr<cei>,  'the  Sabbath  shone  forth.'  This_e.\pression
is  usually  explained  by  reference  to  the  custom  of  kindling  the
lights  somewhat  before  the  beginning  of  the  Sabbath  because  on
the  Sabbath  it  was  unlawful  to  do  so.  Keim,  however  (Gesch.
Jcsn  von  Nazara,  3  552/.;  ET  6303),  produces  evidence  of  the
same  usus  loqucndi  for  the  other  days  of  the  week  ;  and  this  will


1  It  must  not  be  inferred  from  the  plural,  'we  do  not  know'
(OVK  oi&afj.t v  :  20  2),  that  Jn.  thought  of  other  women  as  also
present.  The  inference  is  excluded  by  the  sing.  '  comes '
(epx«rai)  of  v.  i.  The  pi.  '  we  know  '  (oi&aijicv)  therefore  can  only
be  intended  to  express  Mary  Magdalene's  thought  that  other
Christians  in  whom  perhaps  some  knowledge  of  the  facts  might
be  presumed  did  not  actually  possess  it  any  more  than  herself —
if  it  is  not  an  unconscious  reminiscence  of  the  '  women  '  of  the
Synoptics.  In  20 13  we  find  correctly  the  singular  :  'Iknownot.'

4041


cover  the  case  of  its  employment  in  Mt.  The  word  'by  night,'
VVKTOS,  in  28  13  also  goes  to  show  that  Mt.  pictured  to  himself  the
journey  of  the  women  to  the  sepulchre  and  the  opening  of  the
sepulchre  of  the  earthquake  (or  the  angel)  as  having  happened  by
night.  Furthermore  it  is  conceivable  that  Mt.  should  have  been
brought  to  this  divergence  to  the  extent  of  half  a  day  from  the
account  by  the  other  evangelists  precisely  if  he  had  followed
Mk.  with  strict  precision.  For  in  point  of  fact  Mk.  indicates,
first  (1(5  i),  sunset  by  the  phrase  '  when  the  Sabbath  was  past '
(Siayevonevov  TOV  tTafipdrov)  and,  next  (16  2)  mentions  sunrise  ;
his  reference  to  sunset  is  in  connection  with  the  purchase  of
the  spices,  a  circumstance  which  Mt.  had  no  occasion  to  notice.
Thus  Mt.  might  come  to  look  upon  the  second  time-determination
as  synonymous  with  the  first,  inasmuch  as  the  actual  words
'  very  early  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  '  (AiW  npia'i  T/J  fiio  T«UV
<raj3/3dT<oi'),  if  the  Jewish  division  of  the  day  is  assumed,  does
not  absolutely  exclude  such  a  view.  Cp,  further,  §  26  a.

(e)  According  to  Mk.  (164),  Lk.  (242),  and  Jn.  (20i)
those  who  came  to  the  sepulchre  found  that  the  stone
at  the  door  had  already  been  rolled  away  ;  according  to
Mt.  (282)  it  was  rolled  back  in  the  presence  of  the
women  by  an  angel  who  in  a  great  earthquake  came
down  from  heaven.

(/)  In  Mk.  (165-7),  as  in  Mt.  (282-7),  there  is  only
one  angel;  in  Lk.  (244-7)  ^nrf  Jn-  (20ia/.)  there  are
two  (in  Lk.  called  'men,'  &v5pes,  but  'in  dazzling
apparel,'  ev  IffOrfTi  a.<rrpa.Trrovffri,  somewhat  as  in
Mt.  28  3  Mk.  16  5).

(g)  According  to  Mk.  this  one  angel,  according  to
Jn.  the  two,  sat  in  the  sepulchre  ;  according  to  Mt.
the  one  angel  sits  without  the  sepulchre  upon  the  stone  ;
according  to  Lk.  the  two  come  up  to  the  women,  to  all
appearance  not  until  these  have  already  left  the
sepulchre.

(h)  As  for  what  was  seen  in  the  sepulchre,  according
to  Mk.  (16s)  it  was  only  the  angel,  and  according  to
Lk.  (24s),  at  least  when  the  women  entered,  there  was
nothing.  According  to  Mt.  (282-5)  the  women  do  not
inform  themselves  as  to  the  condition  of  the  grave.
Similarly  Mary  Magdalene,  according  to  Jn.  20 1,  at  her
first  visit.  Thereafter  the  beloved  disciple  is  the  first  to
look  in,  when  he  sees  the  linen  clothes  (20s)  ;  next
Peter  enters  and  sees  besides  the  linen  clothes  the
napkin  wrapped  up  in  a  place  by  itself  (206/. ).  Finally,
Mary  looks  in  and  sees  the  two  angels.

(/)  The  explanations  given  by  the  angels  to  the
women  contain  the  one  point  in  the  whole  narrative  in
which  there  is,  at  least  in  the  synoptics,  complete
agreement  (v.  6)  :  'he  rose,  he  is  not  here  '  (r/yepBt),  of'K
taTiv  wSe).  To  this  in  Mk.  and  Mt.  there  is  the  pre
face  :  '  fear  ye  not '  ;  the  same  two  also  have  the  words
'  ye  seek  the  crucified  one'  (similarly  in  Lk. ).  In  Jn.
the  angels  say  merely  (20 13)  :  'Woman,  why  weepest
thou  ? '

(i')  The  discrepancies  in  the  instructions  given  to  the
women  are  among  the  most  violent  in  the  w  hole  account :
in  Mk.  and  Mt.  there  is  the  injunction  to  say  to  his
disciples  (Mk.  adds:  'and  to  Peter1)  that  Jesus  goes
before  them  to  Galilee  and  that  there  they  will  see  him
as  he  had  said  to  them  (in  Mt.  287  also  perhaps  ^we
ought  to  read,  '  behold,  he  said  to  you,'  i8ov  flirtv  vp.lv};
in  Lk.  on  the  other  hand  what  we  read  is  'remember
how  he  spake  before  of  his  death  and  resurrection  while
he  was  yet  in  Galilee.'  Here,  that  is  to  say,  still  the
word  Galilee,  but  the  sense  quite  opposite.  In  Lk.
strictly  there  is  no  injunction  at  all  (cp  under  ;•)  and  in
Jn.  we  find  no  words  which  could  even  seem  to  answer
to  the  command  in  Mk.  and  Mt.

(/)  No  less  marked  are  the  differences  as  to  the
announcements  made  by  the  women  to  the  disciples.
According  to  Lk.  (24  9)  they  report  their  discovery  ;
according  to  Mt.  (288)  they  intend  to  do  so,  and  v.  16
leaves  it  to  be  inferred  that  they  carried  out  their
intention  ;  according  to  Jn.  (20a  18)  Mary  Magdalene
reports,  in  the  first  instance  to  the  two  disciples,  and  in
the  second  to  the  disciples  at  large,  what  she  has  seen.
On  the  other  hand,  according  to  Mk.  168  the  women
out  of  fear  say  nothing  to  any  one.

(m)  As  regards  results  of"  the message, in  the  last
case of  course, that in Mk., where  the  women  say
4042


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


nothing,  there  can  be  no  immediate  consequence.
According  to  Mt.  (28 16)  the  message  issues  in
immediate  compliance  with  the  command  to  go  to
Galilee  ;  according  to  Jn.  (203-io)  Mary's  first  com
munication  leads  to  the  running  of  the  two  disciples  to
the  sepulchre,  whilst  her  second  ('20 18)  is  not  said  to
have  produced  any  effect.  In  Lk.  (24 n)  the  women's
statement  produces  merely  the  unbelief  of  the  disciples,
unless  we  are  to  regard  as  genuine  v.  12,  according
to  which  Peter  alone  of  the  whole  number  hastens  to
the  grave  (see  above,  c).

(n)  An  appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus  at  the  sepulchre
itself  is  reported  only  in  Jn.  (2014-17),  where  it  is  made
to  Mary  Magdalene  ;  an  appearance  on  the  way  back
from  the  sepulchre  to  the  city  only  in  Mt.  (28g/,),
where  it  is  made  to  the  two  Marys.  Whilst  in  this
last  case,  however,  the  women  embrace  Jesus'  feet,  in
Jn.  he  does  not  permit  Mary  Magdalene  to  touch  him.

(a)  The  injunction  received  from  Jesus  himself  is
according  to  Sit.  the  same  as  that  given  by  the  angels.
The  women  are  to  direct  the  disciples,  here  called
'brethren'  (ddf\(f>oi)  by  Jesus,  to  go  to  Galilee;
according  to  Jn.  Mary  Magdalene  is  simply  bidden  tell
his  '  brethren  '  (ddf\(f>oi)  that  he  is  ascending  to  heaven
(cp  above,  k).

(/)  An  appearance  of  Jesus  on  the  day  of  the  resur
rection  on  the  road  to  Emmaus  is  known  only  to  Lk.
(24i3-35).

(q]  An  appearance  to  Simon  Peter  before  the  evening
of  the  same  day  is  known  only  to  Lk.  (2434).

The  view  of  Origen  (for  the  passages  see  in  Resch,  TU  v.  4
423  and  x.  3  770-782),  that  the  third  evangelist  says,  and  rightly,
that  Simon  was  the  companion  of  Cleopas  on  the  walk  to
Emmaus,  is  quite  inadmissible.  As  in  Origen  the  name  is  con
stantly  used  without  any  addition,  it  is  evident  that  only  Peter
can  be  intended.  It  has  to  be  observed  on  the  other  hand,
however,  that  the  announcement  of  an  appearance  of  the  risen
Jesus  to  Simon  is  made,  and  made  by  the  eleven  (and  their
companions),  to  the  two  disciples  on  their  return  from  Emmaus.
For  this  reason,  therefore,  Resch  prefers  to  read  '  saying '  in  the
nominative  (Aeyorrts  for  Aeycwras)  with  cod.  D,  according  to
which  it  is  the  Emmaus  disciples  who  make  the  announcement.
To  this  it  has  to  be  remarked  that  neither  Lk.  nor  Origen,  in
view  of  24^1  35,  can  have  intended  to  say  that  Jesus  had
appeared  in  Emmaus  to  Peter  only  and  not  to  Cleopas  also.
If,  again,  by  the  Simon  in  Origen's  MSS  of  Lk.  we  ought  to
understand  some  disciple  other  than  Peter,  such  a  conjecture
would  be  quite  as  baseless  as  that  other  guess  of  Church  fathers
and  Scholiasts  (see  Tisch.  on  24 18)  that  the  companion  of
Cleopas  was  Nathanael,  or  the  evangelist  Luke,  or  a  certain
Am(m)aon,  whose  name  perhaps  comes  from  the  place-name
Emmaus. 1

(r)  An  appearance  on  the  same  evening  to  the  eleven
and  their  companions  (roi/s  evdfKO.  Kal  TOI)J  crvv  avTols),
at  which  Jesus  asks  the  disciples  to  touch  his  hands  and
feet,  and  eats  a  piece  of  a  broiled  fish,  is  recorded  by
Lk.  (2433  36-5!  )•  The  disciples  are  at  this  interview
enjoined  by  Jesus  to  remain  in  Jerusalem  till  Pentecost
(cp  above,  A).  Jn.  also  (2019-24)  assigns  an  appearance
before  the  '  disciples  '  to  the  same  evening,  and  we
must  presume,  therefore,  that  here  the  same  interview
is  intended  as  that  related  by  Lk.  The  circumstances,
however,  are  very  different.  In  Jn.  Thomas  is  ex
pressly  stated  not  to  have  been  with  the  eleven  ;  and
that  the  number  of  the  '  disciples  '  included  others  than
the  ten  apostles  as  we  read  in  Lk.  (oi  avi/  cu'rots)  is  not
to  be  supposed,  since  Jesus  solemnly  sends  them  forth
(TTf/jLTTu  upas)  and  imparts  to  them  not  only  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Spirit  (which  in  Lk.f.  49  he  holds  forth  as  a
promise  for  Pentecost)  but  also  the  authority  to  bestow
or  withhold  forgiveness  of  sins  (cp  MINISTRY,  §§  4,  34  <-).
Lk.  makes  no  reference  to  the  circumstance  that  the
doors  were  shut  when  Jesus  entered,  any  more  than  he
does  to  the  conferring  of  the  authority  just  mentioned  ;
Jn.  on  the  other  hand  knows  nothing  of  Jesus  having

1  The  Itala  codd.  b,  e,  ff2,  Ambrosiaster,  Ambrosius  (on  both
see  Souter,  Exp.T,  1901-1902,  p.  4297^)  in  v.  13  looking  forward
to  v.  18,  add  Cleopas  to  Ammaus  [  =  P^mmaus]  presumably
because,  reading  ovo/ian  (so  D,  it.,  vg.)  for  jj  ovofia.,  they  saw
in  '  Emmaus '  the  name  not  of  the  village  but  of  one  of  the  two
disciples  (so  Nestle,  Einfuhrung  in  das  griech.  N7  (2)  96,  ET

12-/.).

4043


eaten.  Besides  his  hands,  Jesus  shows  not  his  feet  but
his  side — the  piercing  of  which,  indeed,  is  mentioned
only  in  Jn.  19 34  ;  but  he  does  not  suffer  himself  to  be
touched,  yet  without  expressly  forbidding  this  as  he  had
done  in  the  case  of  Mary  Magdalene.

(s)  Jesus  first  suffers  his  hands  and  his  side  to  be
touched  eight  days  afterwards,  by  Thomas  in  presence
of  '  his  disciples  '  ;  but  this  is  mentioned  only  in  Jn.  (20
26-29)  and  after  he  has  again  entered  the  same  house
(TrdXtv  •fyaa.v  &ru>)  through  closed  doors.

(t)  'After  these  things'  (nerd  TO.VTO.),  but  only
according  to  Jn.  21,  Jesus  appears  once  more  by  the
lake  of  Galilee  to  Peter,  Thomas,  Nathanael,  the  sons
of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  disciples  who  are  not  named.

(u)  Galilee  also,  but  certainly  at  an  earlier  date,  was
the  scene  of  the  appearance,  recorded  only  in  Mt.
(28 16-20),  to  the  eleven  on  the  mountain  to  which
Jesus  had  directed  them  to  go  (when  and  where  he
made  the  appointment  is  nowhere  stated,  but  seems  to
have  been  recorded  in  a  source  that  was  used  at  this
point).  Jesus  here  enjoins  upon  them  the  mission  to
the  Gentiles  and  baptism  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity.
The  missionary  precept  is  in  substantial  agreement  with
Lk.  2449  and  also  with  Jn.  20  21  (see  above,  r).1

That  one  and  the  same  event  should  be  to  some
extent  differently  described  even  by  eye-witnesses  is

3 Extent  of intell'S'ble  enough,  as  also  that  some
discrepancies.  Particular incident connected with it
should  in  later  reminiscence  be  errone
ously  dissociated  from  it  and  attached  to  some  other
similar  event.

(a)  Thus  no  serious  importance  ought,  for  example,
to  be  given  to  the  circumstance  that  the  words  in  which
the  disciples  are  bidden  by  the  angel  to  betake  them
selves  to  Galilee,  do  not  exactly  agree  in  the  different
accounts,  and  that  one  narrator  assigns  the  missionary
precept  to  one  appearance,  another  to  another.  To
this,  however,  there  are  limits.

Whether  the  sepulchre  was  guarded  or  not  guarded,  how
many  women  went  to  the  sepulchre,  whether  or  not  the  disciples
were  bidden  go  to  Galilee,  whether  or  not  when  Jesus  appeared
Mary  Magdalene  was  alone,  whether  or  not  Thomas  was
present,  whether  or  not  Jesus  asked  for  food  and  then  actually
partook  of  it,  whether  or  not  he  allowed  himself  to  be  touched  ;
above  all,  whether  the  appearances  occurred  in  Jerusalem  or  in
Galilee,  and  whether  the  women  reported  what  they  had  seen
at  the  sepulchre  or  were  silent  about  it — these  and  many  other
points  are  matters  with  regard  to  which  the  eye-witnesses  or
those  who  had  their  information  directly  from  eye-witnesses,
could  not  possibly  have  been  in  the  least  uncertainty.  Vet,
what  differences  !  Differences,  too,  of  which  it  is  impossible  to
say  that  they  are  partly  explicable  by  the  fact  that  one  narrator
gives  one  occurrence  and  another  another  without  wishing
thereby  to  exclude  all  the  rest.  Lk.  enumerates  a  consecutive
series  of  appearances  and  brings  it  to  a  close  (2451)  with  the

1  The  harmonistic  attempt  to  dispose  of  this  appearance  in
Galilee  by  maintaining  that  Galilee  here  means  one  of  the  summits
of  the  Mount  of  Olives  near  Jerusalem— whether  the  summit  on
the  N.  or  that  called  in  2  K.  23  13  the  'mount  of  corruption'
(see  DESTRUCTION,  MOUNT  OF  ;  OLIVES,  MOUNT  OF,  §  5),
by  which  supposition  Mt.  28  16  is  brought  into  agreement  with
Lk.  24  50  Acts  1  12,  has  its  basis  only  on  assertions  of  mediaeval
pilgrims.  The  matter  is  not  improved  by  the  purely  conjectural
assumption  of  Resch  (TU  x.  2  381-389  x.  8765^)  that  in  Mt.
28  16  and  already  in  2632  28  7  10  =  Mk.  14  28  16;,  'Galilee'
(roAiAaia)  is  a  wrong  rendering  of  the  gelila  (il?'?;!)  in  the
original  Hebrew  gospel  postulated  by  him,  the  neighbourhood
of  Jerusalem  (n-ept'x«>pos  Mt. 85  Mk.  1  28,  etc.)  being  what  was
really  intended.  In  Tertullian's  (Apol.  21)  'cum  discipulis
quibusdam  apud  Galiteam  Judaeae  regionem  ad  quadraginta  dies
egit '  Resch  even  finds  Galilaea  used  as  the  name  of  this  district
(see,  against  this,  Schiirer,  TLZ,  1897,  p.  187  f.).  That,  further,
the  Mount  of  Olives  belonged  to  this  district  Resch  accepts
from  the  mediaeval  pilgrims ;  and  that  it  constituted  the  central
point  of  the  district,  so  that  the  disciples  could  at  once  under
stand  by  the  'district'  to  which  (according  to  Mk.  l&7  =  Mt.
287  10)  they  were  directed  the  Mount  of  Olives,  as  being  the
'  mountain  where  Jesus  had  appointed  them  '  (TO  opos  o{  eraf  aro
avrois  6  'I7)<rovs  :  28  16),  he  derives  from  his  own  authority.  The
Acta  Pilati  and  the  Gesta  Piiati,  finally,  which  place  the
ascension  of  Jesus  at  once  in  Galilee  and  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,
embody  no  true  geographical  recollection  but  only  a  quite  crude
harmonistic  attempt  (cp  the  passages  in  Zahn,  (iesch.  d.  Kanons,
2  937  ;  also  Thilo,  Cod.  Apocr.  NT  1  617-622).  See  also
MATTHIAS.

4044


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


express  statement  that  Jesus  parted  from  them  ;  and  all  these
occurrences  are  represented  as  having  happened  on  one  and  the
same  day.  In  Jn.,  on  the  other  hand,  the  events  of  the  twentieth
chapter  alone  require  eight  days.  Mt.  and  Mk.  know  of
appearances  to  disciples  only  in  Galilee,  Lk.  and  Jn.  20  only  of
appearances  in  Jerusalem  and  its  neighbourhood  (Emmaus),
neither  of  the  last-named  evangelists  taking  any  account  what
ever  of  any  appearances  in  Galilee — not  till  Jn.21  do  we  come
upon  one  of  this  description  ;  but  this  chapter  is  by  another  hand
(see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEUEDEE,  §  40).

(t>)  Refuge  is  often  sought  in  the  reflection  that  some
times  an  event  may,  after  all,  have  actually  happened,
even  if  the  accounts  of  it  are  quite  discrepant.  A
famous  illustration  often  quoted  in  this  connection  is
the  case  of  Hannibal,  who  quite  certainly  did  cross  the
Alps,  although  Livy's  account  of  the  route  taken  by  him
is  entirely  different  from  that  of  Polybius.  Most  as
suredly.  The  fact,  however,  that,  whatever  be  the
contradictions  of  chroniclers,  he  actually  did  cross  the
Alps  is  a  certainty  for  us,  only  because  we  know  for
certain  that  at  one  date  he  was  to  be  found  on  the
Gallic  side,  and  at  a  subsequent  date  on  the  Italian.
If  it  were  just  as  clearly  made  out  that  Jesus,  after  his
death,  came  back  again  to  this  life,  we  could,  indeed,
in  that  case,  with  an  easy  mind,  leave  the  differences
between  the  narratives  to  settle  themselves.  Here,
however,  the  position  of  matters  is  that  the  actuality  of
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  depends  for  its  establishment
upon  these  very  narratives  ;  and  in  such  a  case  unim
peachable  witnesses  are  naturally  demanded.

Livy  and  Polybius  lived  centuries  after  the  occurrence  which
they  relate,  and  they  were  dependent  for  their  facts  upon
written  sources  which  perhaps  were  wanting  in  accuracy,  and,
moreover,  were  themselves  in  turn  derived  from  inadequate
sources.  If  any  deficiency,  even  of  only  an  approximately
similar  character,  has  to  be  admitted  in  the  acquaintance  of  the
writers  of  the  gospels  with  the  circumstances  of  the  resurrection
of  Jesus,  there  is  little  prospect  of  anyone  being  induced  to
accept  it  as  a  fact,  on  the  strength  of  such  testimony,  unless  he
has  from  the  beginning  been  predisposed  to  do  so  without  any
testimony.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact  we  cannot  avoid  the  con
clusion  from  the  contradictions  between  the  gospels  that  the
writers  of  them  were  far  removed  from  the  event  they  describe.
If  we  possessed  only  one  gospel,  we  might  perhaps  be  inclined
to  accept  it  ;  but  how  far  astray  should  we  be  according  to  the
view  of  Lk.  if  we  relied,  let  us  say,  on  Mt.  alone,  or,  according
to  the  view  of  Jn.,  if  we  pinned  our  faith  to  Lk.  In  point  of  fact,
not  only  do  the  evangelists  each  follow  different  narratives  ;  they
also  each  have  distinct  theories  of  their  own  as  to  Galilee  or
Jerusalem  being  the  scene  of  the  appearances,  as  to  whether
Jesus  ate  and  was  touched,  and  so  forth  (cp  §  19  a,  27  c,  d).

Shall  we  then  betake  ourselves  to  extra-canonical
sources  ?  Of  these,  several  are  often  regarded  as
superior  to  the  canonical  in  antiquity  ;  so,
for  example,  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews.
_,  .  This  view,  however,  so  far  as  the  extant

'  fragments  at  least  are  concerned,  is  dis
tinctly  not  warranted  (see  GOSPELS,  §  155).

(a)  For  our  present  discussion  the  following  citation
by  Jerome  (  Vir.  ill.  2)  from  this  gospel  comes  into
consideration  : —

'  The  Lord  after  he  had  given  the  cloth  to  the  slave  of  the
priest,  went  to  James  and  appeared  to  him  ;  for  James  had  sworn
that  he  would  not  eat  bread  from  that  hour  in  which  he  had
drunk  the  cup  of  the  Lord  until  he  should  see  him  rising  again
from  them  that  sleep';  and  again  after  a  little:  'Bring,  says
the  Lord,  food  and  bread, 'and  immediately  there  is  added  :  'he
brought  bread  and  blessed  and  break  and  gave  to  James  the
Just  and  said  to  him :  My  brother,  eat  thy  bread,  because  the
son  of  man  has  risen  again  from  them  that  sleep.'  ('  Dominus
autem  cum  dedisset  sindonem  servo  sacerdotis,  ivit  ad  Jacobum
et  apparuit  ei ;  juraverat  enim  Jacobus  se  non  comesurum  panem
ab  ilia  hora  qua  biberat  calicem  domini  donee  videret  eum
resurgentemadormientibus' ;  rursusquepost  paululum  :  'afferte,
ait  dominus,  mensam  et  panem,'  statimque  additur :  '  tulit
panem  et  benedixit  ac  fregit  et  dedit  Jacobo  Justp  et  dixit  ei :
frater  mi,  comede  panem  tuum,  quia  resurrexit  filius  hominis  a
dormientibus.'

This  story  is,  to  begin  with,  untrustworthy,  because,
according  to  the  canonical  gospels,  James  was  not
present  at  all  at  the  last  supper  of  Jesus. 1

Lightfoot's  conjecture  (Gal.(*l  ^66  =  Dissert,  on  Apost.  Age,
p.  26)  that '  dominus '  ought  to  be  read  for  '  domini '  seems,  indeed,
to  be  supported  by  some  ecclesiastical  writers  (see  in  Handmann,

1  On  the  simple  statement,  '  he  appeared  to  James,'  i  Cor.
167,  see  §  tic.

4C-4S


4.  Gospel
of  the


TU\.  3  79-62)  who  reproduce  the  passage  in  this  sense  ;  but  it  is
by  no  means  certain.  '  The  Lord  had  drunk  the  cup '  (biberat
calicem  dominus)  would  then  have  reference  to  the  death  of
Jesus  ;  such  a  figurative  expression,  however,  is  little  in  keeping
with  the  simple  narrative  style  of  the  fragment.  Moreover,  the
bread  which  Jesus  'blesses  and  breaks '  clearly  answers  to  the
bread  of  the  eucharist,  and  this  is  to  the  point  if  James  had
eaten  nothing  since  being  present  at  the  last  supper.  Karlier
students  may  have  perceived  the  contradiction  between  the  read
ing  '  of  the  Lord  '  (domini)  and  the  canonical  narratives  just  as
easily  as  Lightfoot,  and  on  this  account  have  substituted  '  the
Lord  '  (dominus :  in  the  nom.).

(b}  Nor  is  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  wanting  at  other
points  in  equally  bold  contradictions  to  the  canonical
gospels.  Jesus  is  represented  as  having  given  his  linen
garment  to  the  servant  of  the  high  priest.  This  (apart
from  what  we  read  in  the  Gospel  of  Peter  ;  see  below,
§  5  b]  is  the  only  appearance,  anywhere  recorded,  of
Jesus  to  a  non-believer.  What  enormous  importance
would  it  not  possess,  were  it  only  historical  !  How
could  the  evangelists,  and  Paul,  possibly  have  suffered
it  to  escape  them  ?  It  is,  however,  only  too  easily  con
ceivable  that  they  knew  nothing  at  all  about  it.

In  order  to  reach  James  it  was  first  necessary  for  Jesus,  ac
cording  to  our  fragment,  to  walk  ;  but  it  was  not  so  in  the  case
of  the  servant  of  the  high  priest,  who  must,  accordingly,  be
thought  of  as  having  been  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
the  sepulchre.  What  was  he  doing  there?  The  most  likely
conjecture  will  be  that  he  was  taking  part  in  the  watching  of
the  sepulchre.  This,  however,  means  yet  another  step  beyond
the  already  unhistorical  canonical  account  (below,  g  20),  in  so  far
as  according  to  Mt.  27  62  66  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  took
part  only  in  the  sealing  of  the  stone  at  the  door  of  the  sepulchre,
and  has  its  parallel  in  the  part  taken  by  the  presbyters  in  the
watching  of  the  sepulchre  according  to  the  Gospel  of  Peter  (38),
which,  as  regards  this  part  of  the  narrative,  goes  still  another
step  farther  than  the  canonical  account  (see  below,  §  5  a).  It  has
further  to  be  remarked  that  the  linen  cloth  was  the  only  clothing
the  body  had  when  it  was  laid  in  the  tomb  (§  2  /')  ;  Jn.  1940  205-7,
which  speaks  of  several  cloths,  is  plainly  not  taken  into  account
in  the  gospel  of  the  Hebrews.  This  being  so  it  would  have  been
too  great  an  offence  against  decorum  that  Jesus  should  have  given
this  garment  to  the  servant  of  the  high  priest.  It  will  therefore
be  necessary  to  suppose  that  he  had  already  assumed  another
form.  In  that  case  also,  however,  the  handing  over  of  the
garment  to  the  servant  makes  an  advance  upon  the  canonical
account.  The  synoptists,  in  reporting  the  resurrection,  make  no
mention  of  the  cloth  at  all,  and  in  Jn.  the  clothes  are  all  found
lying  in  the  sepulchre,  which  at  all  events  better  accords  with
the  reserve  with  which  the  mystery  of  the  resurrection  is  treated
than  would  be  the  case  if  we  were  asked  to  believe  that  Jesus
had  brought  the  cloth  with  him  from  the  sepulchre  as  a  trophy
and  deposited  it  as  an  ultimate  proof  of  his  resurrection.  Lastly,
it  has  to  be  remembered  how  violently  the  gospel  of  the  Hebrews,
although  in  agreement  with  Paul  (i  Cor.  167)  as  regards  an
appearance  to  James,  also  conflicts  with  that  apostle  in  so  far
as  it  makes  out  this  appearance  to  have  been  the  first ;  also
how  natural  it  was  that  precisely  in  a  gospel  for  Hebrews  James,
the  head  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem,  should  be  glorified  by  means
of  some  such  narrative  as  this.

(c)  In  Ignatius  (ad  Smyrn.^,-2]  we  meet  with  the
following  passage  : — '  and  when  he  came  to  those  about
Peter  he  said  to  them,  Take,  handle  me  and  see  that  I
am  not  a  demon  without  a  body.  And  straightway
they  touched  him  and  believed'  (KCU  $re  Trpos  rovs  irepl
Herpov  ?f\6ev,  €<pTj  O.VTOIS'  \dj3erf  i^T/Xa^ijtraT^  /ue  /ecu
tdere  Sri  OVK  flf^l  dat/j.6vtov  dtrw/uaroy.  /cat  tvffvs  avrov
rf^avTo  Kal  ^TriffTfVffav).  Eusebius  (HE  iii.  36  u)
confesses  that  he  does  not  know  where  Ignatius  can
have  taken  this  from.  Jerome  (Vir.  ill.  16),  on  the
other  hand,  informs  us  that  it  comes  from  the  Gospel
of  the  Hebrews  (only  he  wrongly  names  the  Epistle  of
Ignatius  to  Polycarp,  not  that  to  the  Smyrnceans).

Brandt  (390-395  ;  see  below,  §  39)  plausibly  conjectures  that  the
quotation  belongs  to  the  passage,  quoted  above  under  a,  marked
by  Jerome  by  the  words  'again  after  a  little  '  ('  rursus  post  paul
ulum  ') :  Jesus  appeared  to  James,  then  went  with  him  to  Peter
and  his  companions,  permitted  himself  to  be  touched  there,  and
ordered  food  to  be  brought,  and  so  forth.  We  hear  of  the  invita
tion  to  touch  him  in  Lk.  24  39,  and  that  passage,  not  Jn.  20  27,
must  be  the  one  in  view  since  nothing  is  said  about  Thomas,  and  on
the  other  hand  '  bodiless  daemon '  (Saifioviov  a<r<apa.TOi')  agrees  with
the  '  spirit '  (trvevna)  of  Lk.  or  with  the  '  appearance  '  (^ai/rao-jita,
v.  37)  which  is  the  reading  of  D  and  of  Marcion,— of  Marcion
because  in  point  of  fact  he  really  regarded  the  risen  Jesus  as  a
spirit  (irvev^a).  This  second  fragment,  accordingly,  conveys
nothing  new.  Lk.  may  unhesitatingly  be  regarded  as  its  source.
See,  further,  below,  §  ga.

In  the  fragment  of  the  Gospel  of  Peter  discovered  in
4046


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


1892  various  scholars,  and  particularly  Harnack,  have

_  discerned  a  maximum of  really  ancient

VP? matter  ('  a  first-class  source').1 It  is  to

01  f  eter. be  observed>  however,  that,  («)  as  regards

the  watch  set on the sepulchre, the Peter  fragment

goes  still  further  beyond  the  canonical  account  than  the

Gospel  to  the  Hebrews  does  (see  §  4  b}.

Not  only  do  the  elders  of  the  Jews  keep  watch  along  with  the
Roman  soldiers  ;  the  writer  also  is  able  to  give  the  name  of  the
officer  in  command  of  the  guard  (Petronius)  and  to  inform  his
readers  that  the  stone  at  the  door  of  the  sepulchre  was  sealed
with  seven  seals,  and  that  a  booth  was  erected  for  the  use  of  the
guard.  What  is  still  more  surprising,  the  soldiers  report  the
occurrence  of  the  resurrection  not  to  the  chief  priests  but  to
Pilate, — precisely  the  person  from  whom,  according  to  Mt.  28  14,
all  knowledge  of  the  fact  ought  if  possible  to  have  been  with
held,— and  it  is  Pilate  who,  at  the  request  of  the  Jews,  enjoins
silence  on  the  soldiers  (28-49).

(b}  The  actual  resurrection  of  Jesus,  which  in  the
canonical  accounts  is,  with  noticeable  reserve,  always  only
indicated  as  having  occurred  already,  never  described,
is  here  represented  as  having  occurred  before  the  very
eyes  of  the  Roman  and  Jewish  watchers,  and,  indeed,
in  a  way  which  can  only  be  described  as  grotesque

(35-44)-

During  the  night  the  heavens  open,  two  men  (youths)  come
down  in  dazzling  splendour,  the  stone  rolls  away  of  its  own  ac
cord,  the  two  youths  enter  the  sepulchre,  three  men  re-emerge,
two  of  them  supporting  the  third,  the  heads  of  the  two  reach  to
the  sky,  that  of  the  third  goes  beyond  it  (cp  Wisd.  18  16) ;  a
cross  follows  them,  and  to  the  question  heard  from  heaven
'Hast  thou  preached  to  the  dead?'  it  answers  'Yea';  the
heavens  open  once  more,  a  man  comes  down  and  enters  the
sepulchre  (this  is  the  angel  whom  the  women  see  there  next
morning).  This,  however,  is  not  all  ;  in  v.  19  after  the  cry  of
Jesus  '  My  Strength,  my  Strength,  thou  hast  abandoned  me*
(17  Sih'ajiis  jiou,  T/  6iW|u.i's  jiiov,  KaTe'Aeii//as  ^e — thus,  in  all  prob
ability,  by  way  of  toning  down  the  expression  of  God-forsaken
ness)  we  find  the  words  '  and  when  he  had  spoken  he  was  taken
up  '  (icai  fl-Truiis  ai/eAij^Srj),  which  can  hardly  be  understood  other
wise  than  as  meaning  a  taking  up  into  heaven.2  This  last,
therefore,  is  twice  related  in  our  fragment ;  for  that  Jesus  goes
into  heaven  along  with  the  two  angels  is  made  clear  by  the  word
of  the  angel  to  the  women  (v.  56) :  '  he  is  risen  and  has  gone
thither  whence  he  was  sent '  (oWon}  icai  aTnijAOei/  i*el  o9ev
aJ7-f<rraA>7).

(c)  The  account  of  what  Mary  Magdalene  and  '  her
friends'  found  at  the  sepulchre  (50-57)  is  essentially  in
agreement  with  what  we  read  in  Mk. So,  also, the
statement that they  flee  filled with fear, without  our
being  told  that  they  related  to  any  one  what  had  oc
curred. On the closing  day  of the  paschal  festival
'  the  twelve  disciples  '  are  still  weeping  and  mourning
in  Jerusalem  (58/1).

(d)  On  this  closing  day  the  disciples  betake  themselves
each  to  his  home,  that  is  to  say,  to  Galilee. For  in  v.  60
the narrative proceeds  : '  but I, Simon Peter, and
Andrew  . . . went  (to  fish) to the  sea,  and  with  us
were  Levi  the  son  of  Alphreus  whom  the  Lord  ..."
(here  the  fragment  breaks  off). Plainly  the  continua
tion  related  an  appearance  of  Jesus  by  the  sea  of  Galilee,
such  as  we  meet  with  in  Jn.  21. Yet  in  Jn.  it  is  precisely
Andrew  and  Levi  who  are  not  mentioned.3

1  Bruchstiicke  dcs  Evans.  «•  der  Apokalypse  des  FeirusP),
1893;  ACL\\.  (  =  C~Vzr0«0/.)l624.

2  Cp  Acts  In Mk.  1(5 19. Ss  also,  which  in  Mk.  15  37  Lk.
2^46  rightly  says  '(Jesus)  expired  (or,  ended),'  has  in  Mt.  27  50
'  his  spirit  went  up ' ;  and  Origen  (Contni.  in.  ATt.  scries  [Lat.],
ed.  de  la  Rue,  8928^,  §  140)  '  statim  ut  clamavit ad  patrem
receptus  est.'

3  As  regards  Levi,  Resch  ( T U -x.  8829-832 x.  4  196)  tries to
controvert  this,  maintaining  Levi's  identity  with  Matthew  (Mk.
2  14  ||  Mt.  9g),  whom  in  turn,  on  account  of  the  like  meaning  of
the  two  names,  he  identifies  with  Nathanael  who  appears  in  Jn.
21  2. Of  these  two  identifications,  however,  even  that  of  Levi
with  Matthew  is  questioned,  and  complete  identity  in  the  mean
ings  of  two  names  can  never  be  held  to  prove  the  identity  of  the
bearers. Cp PHILIP, col. 3701, n. i  ; NATHANAEL. The
attempt  may  be  made,  without  such  identifications  of  different
names,  to  maintain  the  identity  of  the  fact recorded in the
Gospel  of  Peter  with  that  recorded  in  Jn.;  this  may  be  done  by
pointing  to  the  possibility  that  Andrew  and  Levi  may  be  in
tended by the two unnamed  disciples  in  Jn.  21  2. It is  an
attempt  which  would  to  a  certain  extent  be  plausible  but  only  if
a  fact might  really  be  assumed  which  both writers  wish  to
describe. But  Jn.  21 1-14  is  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being,  not
a  description  of  a  fact,  but  rather  the  clothing  of  an  idea  ;  and
we  may  suspect,  in  particular,  that  the  two  unnamed  disciples

4047


(e)  The  element  here  that  admits  of  being  regarded
as  especially  old  is  that  the  first  appearance  of  Jesus
occurs  in  Galilee  and  to  Peter.  Hardly,  however,  to
Peter  alone  as  is  stated  by  Paul  (i  Cor.  15s)  and  Lk.
(2434).  Furthermore,  it  might  seem  to  be  original  here
that  the  first  appearance  does  not  occur  until  more  than
eight  days  after  the  denth  of  Jesus.  Such,  however,
cannot  be  regarded  with  certainty  as  the  meaning  of  the
fragment.

Unquestionably  the  writer  is  in  error  if  he  thinks  that  on  the
last  day  of  the  paschal  festival  many  pilgrims,  and  also  the
apostles,  set  out  for  their  homes ;  for  this  day  fell  in  that  year
on  a  Sabbath,  and  even  if  that  had  not  been  so,  it  had  the
validity  of  a  Sabbath  and  thus  precluded  the  possibility  of
travelling.  Another  evidence  of  ignorance  or  carelessness  in
matters  of  chronology  is  seen  in  v.  27,  where,  after  describ
ing  the  burial  of  Jesus,  Peter  goes  on  to  say  :  '  we  fasted  and  sat
mourning  and  weeping  day  and  night  (fuicrbs  <cai  iffjitpa^)  until
tha  Sabbath,'  although  the  writer,  according  to  v.  30,  rightly
dates  the  death  of  Jesus  on  the  evening  of  triday.  If  this  be
so,  it  is  not  impossible  that  he  may  have  regarded  the  paschal
festival  as  one  not  of  eight  days'  duration,  but  of  only  two.
The  Sabbath  is  rightly  regarded  by  him  as  the  first  day  of  the
feast  ;  in  v.  50  he  mentions  the  Sunday  (xupiaioj)  as  the  day  on
which  the  women  visited  the  sepulchre  ;  and  immediately  after
the  words  '  the  women  fled  full  of  fear,'  he  proceeds  in  v.  58  to
add  :  '  and  it  was  the  last  of  the  days  of  unleavened  bread  '  (ty
o«  TeAeuTcu'a  ri/j.fpa  riav  a£v(i.u>v).  Although  the  possibility  is  not
excluded  that  these  words  transplant  us  to  a  later  date,  it  still
remains  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  the  form  of  expression
to  suppose  the  meaning  to  be  :  '  but  at  that  time  (when  the
women  fled)  it  ivas  the  last  of  the  days,'  etc.  Thus  it  is  impos
sible  at  least  to  be  quite  certain  that  an  interval  of  more  than
eight  days  between  the  resurrection  and  the  first  appearance  of
Jesus  is  intended.  Besides,  as  we  shall  afterwards  discover  (see
below,  §  22  tf),  it  has  not  the  smallest  inherent  probability.

(/)  On  the  whole,  then,  what  we  have  to  say  with
regard  to  the  gospel  of  Peter  must  be  that,  inasmuch  as
the  greater  part  of  its  contents  is  of  a  legendary  char
acter,  we  cannot  rely  upon  anything  we  find  in  it  merely
because  it  is  found  in  the  gospel  of  Peter.  If  the  reader
by  any  chance  finds  any  statements  contained  in  it  to
be  credible,  he  does  so  on  grounds  of  inherent  prob
ability  alone,  and  must  ask,  almost  in  astonishment,
how  by  any  possibility  a  statement  of  such  a  kind  could
have  found  its  way  hither.  Moreover,  the  data  which
come  most  nearly  under  this  category  are  already  known
to  us  from  canonical  sources  : — such  as  that  the  resurrec
tion  and  the  ascension  were  but  one  and  the  same  act
(§  i6e),  that  the  disciples  received  from  the  women  no
word  as  to  the  state  of  the  sepulchre,  and  that  the  first
appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus  was  in  Galilee  (Mk.  16 7  f.
Mt.  287  i6/).  The  sole  statement  worthy  of  credence
met  with  in  the  gospel  of  Peter  and  nowhere  else  is  that
found  in  v.  27  —  that  the  disciples  fasted  (cp  §  360).
In  Peter,  however,  we  can  have  no  certainty  that  the
author  is  drawing  upon  authentic  tradition  ;  he  may
very  easily  have  drawn  upon  his  own  imagination  for
this  realistic  touch.

There  remains  yet  one  other  extant  account  of  the

resurrection  by  a  writer  who  in  like  manner  did  not  feel

r ,. himself  bound to  follow the canonical

! accounts  ;  it  occurs  in  a  Coptic  book  of

* .  10n  anti-Gnostic  tendency,  found  at  Akhmim

narrative.  jn  Egypt|  and  described  by  Carl  Schmidt
(SBA  W,  1895,  pp.  705-711)  ;  the  conversation  of  the
risen  Jesus  with  his  disciples  contained  in  it  has  been
reproduced  and  discussed  by  Harnack  ( Theol.  Studien
fur  B.  Weiss,  1897,  pp.  1-8),  who  dates  it  somewhere
between  150  and  180  A.  D.

The  contents  are  as  follows  : — Mary,  Martha,  and  Mary  Mag
dalene  wish  to  anoint  the  body  of  Jesus,  but  find  the  sepulchre
empty.  Jesus  appears  to  them  and  says  :  '  I  am  he  whom  ye
seek,'  and  bids  that  one  of  them  go  to  their  brethren  and  say
'Come,  the  Master  is  risen.'  Martha  does  so,  but  meets  with
no  credence,  and  Mary,  whom  Jesus  sends  after  Martha  has
reported  her  failure,  has  no  better  success.  Finally  Jesus  him
self  goes  along  with  the  women,  calls  the  disciples  out,  and,  as


were  added  only  in  order  to  gain  the  complete  number  '  seven  '
(below,  $  29  c;  SIMON  PETER,  §  22  c).  Therefore,  to  identify
with  the  account  in  the  Gospel  of  Peter  (to  which  Gospel  the
idea  intended  in  Jn.  was  presumably  quite  foreign),  the  identi
fication  being  based  on  so  slender  a  foundation,  would  be  very
imprudent.

4048


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


they  still  continue  to  be  in  doubt,  bids  Peter,  Thomas,  and
Andrew  touch  his  hands,  his  side,  and  his  feet  respectively,
citing  also  Wisd.  18  17.  Then  they  confess  their  sins,  especially
their  unbelief.

This  narrative  contains  much  that  is  new,  but  nothing
that  could  claim  greater  credibility  than  the  canonical
gospels.  An  appearance  of  Jesus  occurs  at  the  sepulchre,
not,  however,  to  one  woman  or  two,  as  in  Jn.  and  Mt.
respectively,  but  to  three  ;  so  also  the  unbelief  of  the
disciples  dwelt  on  in  Lk.  241137(41)  reappears  in  intensi
fied  form,  and  in  addition  to  Thomas  two  other  disciples
are  bidden  touch  the  wounds  of  Jesus.

Other  isolated  details  also,  differing  from  those  com
monly  current,  have  come  down  to  us  from  a  time,  pre-
_  ,  .  ,  sumably,  in  which  older  traditions  still

extra  canonical  C0ntinued  tO  Produce  after-effects.
,anom  (a)  Cod.  Bobbiensis  (k)  has  this  inter-
11S>  polation  before  Mk.  164  (see  Old  Latin

Biblical  Texts,  2 22)  :  'Suddenly,  however,  at  the  third
hour,  darkness  came  on  by  day  throughout  the  whole
world  and  angels  came  down  from  heaven  and  will  rise
(read  :  and  rising)  in  the  brightness  of  the  living  God
went  up  with  him,  and  forthwith  it  was  light'  ('  subito
autem  ad  horam  tertiam  tenebrse  diei  factae  sunt  per  totum
orbem  terras  et  descenderunt  de  ccelis  angeli  et  surgent
(read:  surgentes)  in  claritate  vivi  dei  simul  ascenderunt
cum  eo  et  continuo  lux  facta  est ' ).  This  about  the  angels
agrees  with  the  Gospel  of  Peter  (see  above,  §  5  b],  except
that  there  the  event  occurs  during  the  night,  whilst  in
cod.  k  we  are  bidden  think  of  it  as  preceded  by  an  eclipse
and  therefore  as  happening  by  day — at  the  third  hour,  in
other  words  at  q  A.  M.

It  is,  however,  hard  to  believe  that  the  interpolator  actually
supposed  that  the  women  took  some  three  hours  (from  sunrise)
to  consider  who  should  roll  away  the  stone  (10  2).  Perhaps  the
time  datum  is  the  result  of  a  confusion.  This  would  be  all  the
easier  because  a  darkness  is  elsewhere  reported  as  having  oc
curred  at  the  crucifixion — although,  to  be  sure,  in  the  afternoon
from  twelve  till  three  (so  also  in  Gospel  of  Peter,  15,  22).

If  we  leave  the  darkness  out  of  account  and  understand  the
third  hour  according  to  Roman  and  modern  reckoning  as
three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  then  the  final  clause  '  continuo  lux
facta  est '  agrees  with  both  texts  of  the  Anaphora.  Pilati  (A,  9
=  B,  8,  in  Tischendorfs  Evang.  Apocr.C^)  440,  447),  according
to  which  at  this  hour  the  sun  rose,  manifestly  to  mark  the  time
of  the  resurrection.1  So  also  agrees  Lagarde's  reconstruction
of  the  Didaskalia,  5  14,  which  Resch  (TUx.3  756)  quotes  from
Bunsen's  An<ilecta  Anteniccena,  2  313  :  that  Jesus  slept  through
out  the  Sabbath  and  for  three  hours  over  and  above.  One  has
only  to  reckon  the  day  in  Roman  fashion  from  midnight  to
midnight.

(/>)  In  the  Didaskalia  (extant  in  Syriac),  which  came
into  existence  in  the  third  century,  based  upon  older
sources,  we  read  (ed.  Lagarde,  88  f. ,  according  to
Resch,  TY/x.  8761)  that  'during  the  night  before  the
dawn  of  the  first  day  of  the  week  Jesus  appeared  to
Mary  Magdalene  and  Mary  the  daughter  of  James,  and
in  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  the  week  he  entered  the
house  of  Levi,  and  then  he  appeared  also  to  us;  more
over  he  said  to  us  while  he  was  instructing  us  :  Where
fore  do  ye  fast  on  my  account  in  these  days  ? '  and  so
on.  Mention  is  made  of  Levi  in  the  Gospel  of  Peter
also  (above,  §  5  </),  but  in  a  wholly  different  connection.
The  fasting  is  also  mentioned  there  (§  5  [/]).  The
second  Mary  is  called  the  daughter  (not  the  mother)  of
James  in  Ss  also.

(c)  According to K, Syr.cur Syr. hieros,  Vg.  etc., in
Lk.  24.43  Jesus  gives  what  is  left  from  what  he  ate  (i.e. ,
according  to  TR  and  AV,  fish  and  an  honeycomb)  to
the  disciples.

(d)  In  Tatian's  Diatessaron  Capernaum  is  named  in
Mt.'28i6  instead  of  the  mountain in  Galilee. In  the
scene  by  the  open  sepulchre  which  Tatian  gives  after
Jn.  Mary  is  named  without  any  addition,  and  Ephrem
in  his  commentary  understands  this  of  Mary  the  mother
of  Jesus. This  is  indicated  also  by  the  fact  that  previ
ously  she  has  been  entrusted  by  the  crucified  Jesus  in
the  words  of  Jn.  1926/.  to  the  beloved  disciple. Never
theless  there  may  be  a  confusion  here,  as  the  Diatessaron

1  Apart  from  this  reference  we  leave  the  Anaph.  Pit.  out  of
consideration  as  being  a  late  and  highly  legendary  work.

4049


elsewhere undouCtedly makes use of the canonical
gospels.

(e)  A  Christian  section  of  the  Ascensio  Jesaice  (813-
4 18  ;  see  SIMON  PETER,  §  27)  presents  a  variation  on
the  Gospel  of  Peter. Upon  [the  watch  of]  those  who
watched  the  sepulchre  follows  '  the  descent  of  the  angel
of  the  church  which  is  in heaven'  (815  : T\  Kardpacris
TOV  ayytXov  TT?S  eKK\r/crias TT?S ev otpavtf), and '  the
angel of  the  Holy  Spirit  [Gabriel?],  and  Michael  the
chief  of  the  holy  angels  on  the  third  day  will  open  the
sepulchre  and  the  Beloved  sitting  on  their  shoulders  will
come  forth  '  (3i6/  : 6  &yye\os  TOV  Trv(i'i/j.a.TOS  TOV  ayiov
Kal Mixa?jX  dpxwv  TUV dyyeXuv T&V ayiu>i>  TTJ  Tpiry
i]/j.^pq.  avTov dvoi^ovcnv TO  nvrnj.oveiov Kal 6  dyawijTos
Katfiffas  lirl  roi)s  &fj.ovs  O.VT£.I>  e^eAeiWrat).

(f)  From  a  still  later  date  we  have  a  recent  notice  of
an  apocryphal  work,  in  a  Georgian  translation,  belonging
according  to  Harnack  to  the  fifth  or  the  sixth  century ;
it  relates  to  Joseph  of  Arimatha;a,  and  we  are  told  that
its  hero  is  expressly  spoken  of  as  the  first  to  whom  Jesus
appeared. He  had been thrown into  prison by  the
Jews  for  having  begged  the  body  of  Jesus  (SB A  W,  1901,
pp.  920-931,  and,  more  fully,  von Dobschiitz in Z.  f.
Kirchengesch.  23  1-27  [1902]).

In  any  event  all  these  notices  serve  to  show  how
busily  and  in  how  reckless  a  manner  the  accounts  of  the
resurrection  of  Jesus  continued  to  be  handed  on.

The  shorter  conclusion  of  Mk.  (that  headed  "AXAws
by  WH)  contents  itself  with  simply  saying  the  opposite


8.  Mk.  169-20.


of  the  statement  (that  the  women  said


nothing  to  anyone  of  what  they  had
seen  and  heard  at  the  grave)  in  168;  but  the  longer
conclusion  gives  a  variety  of  details.

(a)  A  brief  summary  of  its  most  important  points  has
been  given  already  (see  GOSPELS,  §  138^)  ; but  it  will
be  necessary  to  examine  more  closely  some  of  the  current
views  respecting  it.

Rohrbach  (see  below,  §  39),  in  his  hypothesis  based  upon
certain  indications  of  Harnack,  gives  his  adhesion  to  the  opinion
of  Conybeare  {Expos.  1893^,  pp.  241-254),  that  Mk.  169-20  is  the
work  of  the  presbyter  Aristion.  We  shall  discuss  this  thesis  in
the  form  in  which  it  has  been  adopted  by  Harnack  {ACL  ii.
[  =  Ch)-on.]\  695-700).  In  order  to  displace  the  genuine  con
clusion  of  Mk.  (see  below,  §  9)  in  favour  of  another  which  should
be  more  in  agreement  with  the  other  three  gospels,  and  at  the
same  time  be  the  work  of  an  authoritative  person,  the  presbyters
of  the  Johannine  circle  in  Asia  Minor  who  brought  together  the
four  gospels  into  a  unity  took  a  memorandum  by  the  presbyter
Aristion  who,  according  to  Papias,  had  beer,  a  personal  disciple
of  Jesus  (JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  4).

(b)  Harnack  and  Rohrbach,  in  order  to  maintain  the
literary  independence  of  Aristion,  find it necessary  to
den}'  that  Mk.  1 69-20  is  a  mere  excerpt  from  the  canonical
gospels and other  writings. In this, however, they
cannot  but  fail. The  borrowing,  indeed,  is  not  made
word for  word  ; in point of  fact, however, even the
smallest  departure  from  the  sources  admits  of  explana
tion  on  grounds  that  are  obvious. Verse  9  is  compounded
from  Jn.20i  11-17  and  Lk.  82  ; vv.  10  f.  from  Jn.20i8
and  Lk.  24  10  /'. ; v.  12  reproduces  Lk.  2413-32  and  v.  i^a
Lk.  243335. That  the  eleven  did  not  believe  the  disciples
from  Emmaus  (v.  136)  directly  contradicts  Lk.  2434  it  is
true  ; but  this  is  easily  explicable  from  the  view  of  the
author that unbelief  was the invariable effect of  the
accounts  as  to  appearances  of  the  risen  Jesus — a  view
which  (v.  14)  he  expressly  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Jesus
himself. Thus  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  postulate
an  independent  source  ;  all  that  is  needed  is  unity  in
the  fundamental  conception  of  the  matter.

(c)  Zahn  (Einl.  §  52  =  2227-240)  derives  vv.  14-18  from
Aristion,  but  declines  to  do  so  alike  in  the  case  of  vv.
9-13  and in  that  of  19  f. In 14-18  he  finds  not  mere
compilation but actual narrative, and that without
dependence  on  the  canonical  gospels. In  reality,  how
ever,  v.  14  simply  carries  further  what  is  found  in  Lk.
242538  Jn.2(>27;  v.  15  is  an  adaptation  of  -Mt.  2819  to
Pauline  and Catholic phraseology  ('world' [/cocrjuos],
'preach  the  gospel'  [KTjpva-ffeiv  TO  evayye\i.ov],  'creature'
[/cTiVts]),  and  if  baptism  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity  is

4050


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES
TABULAR  VIEW  OF  LEADING  PARTICULARS


PAUL

MK.

MT.

LK.

JN.

MK.
xvi.  9-20

GOSP.  HEB.

GOSP. PET.

COPT.

DIDASK.

Watch

soldiers

soldiers
(and  servant

soldiers  and

presbyter^

of  priest  ?)

Jesus  comes

in  the
night  ;  with

ort

2  angels  ;

stone  re

moves  itself

Time  when
women  come

after  sun
rise

evening  be
fore

before  sun
rise

before  sun
rise

(in  the
morning)

in  the
morning

night  be
fore

Stone  when
women  come

already  re
moved

is  removed
by  angel  :

already  re
moved

already  re
moved

already  re
moved

(already  re
moved)

earthquake

Angels  when

i

i

2

2

i

women  come

CHRB

Women

3  :  Mary"
Magd.;  M.
(m.)ofjames
(the less

2  :  Mary
Magd.jM.
mother of
James  and

M.  Magd.;
Joanna;  M.
of  James;
and  others

M.  Mr.gd.;

M.  Magd.
and  her
companions

Mary,
Martha,
M.  Magd.

•J

and  J  oses);

Joses

U

Salome

she  tells

cfl

Men

the  watchers  ! (Peter  ?)

Peter  and

the  watchers

t*

the  beloved

"*

disciple

In  sepulchre

the  angel

nothing

a  the  cloths

the  angel

nothing

b  the  angels

See  Jesus  at
sepulchre

the  2  women  ;
touch  Jesus'

M.  Magd.;
does not

the  watchers

the  3  women

feet

touch  J.

See  Jesus  (at

M.  Magd.

the  servant  ;

M.Magd.;

sepulchre  '!)

receives
Jesus'  gar

Mary

daughter

ment

of  James

Angel's  charge

to  send  dis

to  send  dis

ciples  to

ciples  to

Galilee

Galilee

Jesus'  charge

ditto

to  announce

ascension

WOMEN'S  REPORT:

not  made

(not  made)

to  whom

(the  dis

the ii and a  see  above

the  disciples

the  disciples

ciples)

others /;  the (ii)

twice

disciples

result

journey  to

unbelief

unbelief

unbelief

Galilee

i

Peter

Peter? .. Peter

James  ;

Levi

bread  for

him

2atEmmaus; .. 2  (at  Em-

OTHER

supper maus)

the  twelve

the  (ii)  dis
ciples?

the  ii  dis
ciples  ;

the  ii,  with the(io)dis-
others  ; ciples  ;

the  ii  ;

Peter  with
others  ;

Peter,  An
drew,  Levi

the  (ii)  dis
ciples  ;

the(n)
disciples

(&  others?)

closed

doors  ;

APPEARANCES

some  doubt; they  doubt  ;

Jesus J.  shows  his

Jesus

Jesus

-

touched  ; wounds  ;

touched

touched

eats  [var.  :

OF

with  discc.];

missionary

missionary (missionary

missionary

command  ;i command  ; command);

command

'  I  am  with Holy  Spirit Holy  Spirit

JESUS

youalway' promised given

over  500

James

(James,  see

above)

TO

all  the

the  ii  dis

apostles

cipies;

closed

doors  :

J.  touched

7  disciples  ;

bread  and

fish  for  them

PLACE  OF

(Galilee)

Galilee

Jerusalem

a  Jerusalem;

(Jerusalem?)  (Jerusalem?)

Sea  of  Gal.

(Jerusalem?)

..

APPEARANCES

lastly

ASCENSION

(at the

first  evening first morn- at a mea

a  at  death

resur
rection)

ACTS  . , ing (on  the  ist
after  40  days

b  at  the  re
surrection

RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


not  mentioned  that  becomes  very  intelligible  after  Cony-
beare's  demonstration  (ZNTW,  1901,  pp.  275-288  ;  cp
Hibb.  Journ.  i ,  p.  <)(>ff. )  that  even  Eusebius  down  to  325
A.D.  read  nothing  as  to  this  in  Mt.  (cp  MINISTRY,  §  5^).
Verse  16  is  the  most  elaborated  dogmatic  of  the  apostolic
and  post-apostolic  time  (Acts  1631  ;  MINISTRY,  §  26).
The  casting-out  of  devils  in  v.  17  rests  on  Mk.  6713  Mt.
10 1  Lk.  9 1  10 17,  the  speaking  with  new  tongues  (i.e.,
languages  of  foreign  peoples)  on  Acts  2 1-13  (cp  SPIRITUAL
GIFTS,  §  10)  ;  'they  shall  take  up  serpents'  (v.  18)  is
borrowed  partly  from  Acts  28  3-6  and  partly  from  the
express  promise  of  Jesus  in  Lk.  10  19  ;  the  gift  of  healing
of  diseases  by  laying-on  of  hands  from  Acts  28  8.  With
out  limitation  to  the  method  by  imposition  of  hands  such
a  gift  is  already  bestowed  upon  the  apostles  in  Mt.  10 1
Lk.  9 1,  and  is  exercised  by  them  in  Mk.  613  Lk.  96.

The  drinking  of  deadly  poison  with  impunity  is  the  only  thing
for  which  we  have  to  look  outside  of  the  NT  canon  ;  but  here
it  is  not  Aristion  that  we  encounter  but  the  daughters  of  Philip,
from  whom  Papias  claims  to  have  heard  of  such  a  thing  in  the


It  is  very  easily  explained  as  being  a  glos


(d)  The  conclusion  of  Mk.  betrays  no  acquaintance
with  Jn.  21  or  the  Gospel  of  Peter  ;  on  the  other  hand
we  cannot  say  with  confidence  that  the  author  had
occasion  to  use  them  even  had  he  known  them.  In  the
Gospel  of  Peter  (27)  the  disciples  are  spoken  of  as  in
Mk.  16 10  as  'mourning  and  weeping'  (Trevdovvres  /ecu
K\a.iovTfs).  But  this  collocation  of  words  is  quite
current  (Lk.  625  Jas.  4g  Rev.  18  n  15 19),  and  the  idea
conveyed  was  an  obvious  one  both  from  the  situation
itself  and  also  as  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  in  Jn.  1620,
and  thus  is  no  proof  of  literary  dependence.

(<?)  There  is  thus  no  particular  reason  why  we
should  assign  to  a  personal  disciple  of  Jesus  such  as
Aristion  the  authorship  of  so  meagre  an  excerpt  as
Mk.  169-20  from  which  absolutely  nothing  new  is  to  be
learned.

A  marginal  gloss — comparatively  late  it  may  be — in  an  Oxford
MS.  of  Rufinus  speaks  of  the  story  about  Justus  Barsabas  in
Eus.  HE  iii.  39  9  (see  above,  c)  as  a  communication  from  Aristion
(Expos.  1893,  b,  p.  246).  Should  this  happen  to  rest  upon  older
tradition,  it  conceivably  may  have  been  what  furnished  the
occasion  for  attributing  to  Aristion  first  the  allusion  to  the  same
thing  in  Mk.  10  18  and  afterwards  erroneously  the  whole  passage
ini.  9-20.

(_/")  Neither  is  there  much  greater  probability  in  the  conjecture
of  Resch  (TU-a.  2450-456)  that  in  Conybeare's  Armenian  Manu
script  by  the  presbyter  Ariston  is  meant  the  Jewish  Christian
Ariston  of  Pella  in  Peraja,  to  whom  the  Dialogue  between  Jason
and  Papiscus  is  attributed.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  specific
ally  Jewish-Christian  in  the  conclusion  of  Mk.  (see  above,  b,  c).
The  other  part  of  Resch's  hypothesis — that  it  was  this  Ariston
who  at  the  same  time  gathered  together  the  four  gospels  into
one  _whole— is  quite  inadmissible.  Resch  is  able  to  make  out  a
Jewish-Christian  character  for  this  grouping  only  insomuch  as
Mt.  is  assigned  the  first  place.

Even  apart,  however,  from  the  question  about  Ariston  and
Aristion  the  attempt  to  bring  into  close  connection  the  composi
tion  of  Mk.  16  9-20  and  the  grouping  of  the  four  gospels  as  sole
canonical  sources  for  the  life  of  Jesus  must  be  given  up.

If,  however,  there  be  even  merely  an  element  of  truth

1  Jer.  contr.  Pelag.  2  15  ;  ed.  Vallarsi,  Z758_f.  Zahn  (Gesch.
d.  NTlicken  Kanons,  2935-938;  EM.  §  52,  n.  7)  defends  the
reading  'sub  Satana  .  .  .  qui '  given  above  ;  the  usual  reading
is  '  substantia  .  .  .  qua;.'

-  Van  Kasteren  (Rev.  bibl.  internal.,  1902,  pp.  240-255)  seeks
to  defend  the  authenticity  of  this  appendix.  He  maintains,  be-
sides,_that  the  whole  passage  (16  9-20)  has  been  used  in  Hermas,
Sim.  ix.  252,  and  even  in  Heb.  1  1-4  23-5.  These  arguments
are  missing  in  Burgon,  Last  Twelve  Verses  of  Mk.  (1871),  and
rightly.  They  rest  only  on  vague  resemblances  which  would  be
quite  as  capable  of  supporting  the  posteriority  as  the  priority  of
Mk.  169-20,  if  they  necessarily  implied  literary  acquaintance.


130


4°S3


in  the  theory  that  the  genuine  conclusion  of  Mk.  was
9 Lost removed  on  account  of  its  inconsistency

conclusion  with  the  other  S05?615-  we  are  led  to  the
of  Mk  conjecture  that  what  it  stated  must  have
been  all  the  more  original  in  proportion
as  the  others  are  recent.

(a)  Harnack  and  Rohrbach  suppose  that  the  lost
conclusion  was  what  lay  at  the  foundation  of  the  Gospel
of  Peter  and  Jn.  21.

What  is  said,  they  think,  was  to  the  effect  that  as  the  women
said  nothing  about  what  had  occurred  at  the  sepulchre  (16s)  the
disciples  went  to  Galilee— not  at  the  command  of  Jesus  but  (as
in  the  Gospel  of  Peter)  of  their  own  motion  and  in  deep  depres
sion.  Here  Jesus  appeared  to  a  group  of  them  by  the  lake  as
they  were  fishing  (so  far  the  Gospel  of  Peter)  and  rehabilitated
Peter  who  had  been  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  his  guilt  in
denying  Jesus  (cp  Jn.  21  15-17).  The  saying  of  Jesus,  on  the
other  hand,  about  the  beloved  disciple  (20-24)  >s  an  addition  of
the  author  of  Jn.  21.  Apart  from  that  saying  Jn.  21  describes
the  first  appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus,  which  is  given  as  the
third  appearance  (21  14)  only  in  order  to  bring  Lk.  and  Jn.  into
agreement.  Rohrbach  seeks  to  discover  in  the  genuine  con
clusion  of  Mk.  also  an  appearance  of  Jesus  to  the  eleven,  and
brings  into  connection  with  this  the  fragment  in  Ignatius  spoken
of  above  (§  ^c)  which  Rohrbach  would  fain  detach  from  the
Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  and  claim  for  the  genuine  conclusion  of
Mk.

(b}  Of  such  hypotheses  we  may  admit  everything  that
can  be  based  upon  Mk.  167.  Even  if  the  women,  as
we  read  in  v.  8,  kept  silence  as  to  the  injunction  of  the
angel,  it  still  remains  the  fact  that,  according  to  the  view
of  the  author,  it  was  the  divine  will  that  '  the  disciples
and  Peter '  should  go  to  Galilee  and  there  see  the  risen
Jesus.  That  the  disciples  should  have  fulfilled  this  in
junction  without  being  acquainted  with  it  is  explained
in  the  Gospel  of  Peter  by  the  fact  that  the  festival
had  come  to  an  end  ;  according  to  GOSPELS,  §  138  a,
there  is  a  quite  different  explanation.  In  any  case  it
is  clear  that  it  cannot  have  been  Mk. 's  intention  to
close  his  gospel  at  168  ;  he  must  have  treated  also  the
Galilaean  events  for  which  he  had  prepared  his  readers.
From  the  remarkable  order  '  his  disciples  and  Peter  '
we  must  not  conclude  that  an  appearance  to  the  disciples
was  first  related  and  then  one  to  Peter  ;  for  it  is  not
said  that  his  disciples  and  Peter  will  see  him,  but  '  Tell
his  disciples  and  Peter.'  All  we  can  conjecture  with
any  confidence  is  that  Peter  in  some  way  or  other  played
a  special  part  in  the  lost  narrative.

(c]  What  we  find  in  Harnack  and  Rohrbach  going
beyond  this  is  quite  untenable.  That  the  Gospel  of
Peter  and  Jn.  21  have  no  common  source,  results  at  the
outset  from  the  fact  that  the  names  of  the  apostles  on
the  shore  of  the  lake  are  not  the  same  (cp  §  5^,  n. )
That  Jn.  21  originally  was  a  description  of  the  first
appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus,  is  in  itself  not  impossible  ;
but  there  is  nothing  that  directly  indicates  it.

The  reserve  of  the  disciples,  in  particular  (21  12),  in  virtue  of
which  none  of  them  durst  ask  the  Lord  who  he  was,  would  be
appropriate,  not  only  at  the  first,  but  at  any  appearance.  In
the  consummately  delicate  manner  in  which  it  is  referred  to  in
w.  15-17,  Peter's  denial  could  have  been  alluded  to  at  any  other
appearance  besides  the  first,  if  the  situation  presented  occasion
for  it ;  and  a  rehabilitation  of  Peter  which  one  cannot  help
expecting  at  the  first  appearance,  need  not  have  carried  with  it,
in  the  first  instance,  more  than  his  restoration  to  grace,  not  his
investiture  with  the  office  of  leader  of  the  church  (cp  §  371:).
This  installation  of  Peter,  however,  is  explained  much  more
readily  by  reference  to  a  later  ecclesiastical  situation.  The
Fourth  Gospel  at  its  first  publication  had  met  with  opposition,
and  in  the  circles  in  which  it  had  arisen  it  was  perceived  that  it
would  fail  to  meet  with  ecclesiastical  recognition  if  the  great
prominence  given  to  the  beloved  disciple  and  the  comparative
depreciation  of  Peter,  which  run  through  the  entire  book  (see
SIMON  PETER,  §  22),  were  to  be  continued.  It  was  determined,
therefore,  to  recognise  in  an  appendix  the  authority  of  Peter  to
some  extent  (MINISTRY,  §  36 a).  If  this  be  so,  however,  the
words  about  the  abiding  importance  of  the  beloved  disciple
(21 20-24),  as  also  about  the  death  of  Peter  (21 i8_/!).  which  would
certainly  be  inappropriate  at  a  first  appearance,  will  be  integral
parts,  not  merely  inorganically  attached  additions.  Vet  once
more,  the  thought  that  Jesus  instituted  a  substitute  for  the
Last  Supper  (in  21  13  the  reminiscence  of  this  is  quite  manifest)
is  not  appropriate  to  a  first  appearance  of  Jesus,  but  must  be
regarded  as  the  result  of  after  reflection  (see  §  29  c).

(d}  Harnack  and  Rohrbach  become  very  specially
involved  in  obscurities  when  they  maintain  that  the

4054


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


genuine  conclusion  of  Mk.  with  its  first  appearance  of
Jesus  was  at  the  same  time  in  agreement  with  the
account  in  i  Cor.  15s,  and  with  that  in  Lk.  2434,
according  to  which  Jesus  appeared  to  Peter.  The
expression  of  Paul,  and  in  like  manner  that  of  Lk. ,
unquestionably  mean  :  to  Peter  alone.  That,  however,
is  exactly  what  Jn.  21  does  not  say,  nor  yet  in  all
probability  did  the  Gospel  of  Peter.

In  Jn.  21  7  not  only  is  Peter  not  the  only  one  to  recognise
Tesus  ;  he  is  not  even  the  first  ;  the  first  is  the  beloved  disciple.
Kohrbach  has  recourse  to  the  conjecture  that,  in  the  genuine
conclusion  of  Mk.,  at  the  decisive  scene,  the  recognition  of  Jesus


nising  Jesus,  or  were  not  present  at  all,  and  that  this  scene  was
followed  by  another  separate  appearance  to  the  eleven  (above,
a).  Harnack,  to  judge  by  his  silence,  does  not  accept  this,  but
in  doing  so  leaves  it  all  the  more  unclear  how  far  the  appear
ance  to  several  disciples  is  to  be  held  the  same  as  an  appearance
to  Peter  (alone).

(e)  If  such  an  appearance  cannot  be  assumed  to  have
been  contained  in  the  lost  conclusion  of  Mk.  with  cer
tainty,  the  attempt  must  also  be  abandoned  to  invest
the  passage  with  the  nimbus  which  would  attach  to  it  if
it  had  really  contained  the  full  narrative  of  what  Paul
and  Lk.  (2434)  dismiss  with  a  single  word  as  the  earliest
of  the  occurrences  after  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  The
lost  conclusion  in  question  may  have  been  relatively
more  original  than  the  canonical  and  extra-canonical
accounts  which  have  come  down  to  us  ;  but  we  cannot
safely  venture  to  regard  it  as  having  been  absolutely  the
first.

If  now  it  has  been  made  out  that  the  extra-canonical
accounts  contain  nothing  of  any  consequence  which

,  _  ,  n  i-  goes  beyond  the  canonical — except
10.  1  Cor.  loi-n  f  ,  .  -;  ,

in  itself (ultimately)  the  existence  of  an  interval

, of  more  than  eight  days  between  the
considered.  , ,

resurrection of Jesus and his first

appearance  (§  5?) — and  that  the  canonical  gospels
are  at  irreconcilable  variance  with  each  other,  we  have
finally  to  turn  to  the  narrative  of  Paul.  It  has  fared
badly.  Reimarus  and  Lessing  completely  ignored  it.
The  entire  bod)'  of  conservative  theology  denies  it  any
decisive  importance,  and  the  most  advanced  critical
theology  in  rejecting  all  the  Pauline  epistles  of  course
rejects  this  also.  It  is  very  striking  to  observe,  how
ever,  how  slight  are  the  objections  that  can  be  brought
against  it.  Let  us  take,  in  the  first  place,  those  which
are  urged  against  the  account  in  itself  considered.

(a)  Steck  (Galater-br.,  i8S8,  pp. 180-191)  finds  at  the  very
outset that the word 'make known" (•yrwpuju : i Cor.  15 1)
shows  the  writer  to  have  been  aware  that  he  was  making  a
statement  which,  at  the time  of  his  making  it  (according to
Steck,  in  the  2nd  cent.),  was  new. The  answer  is  simple; a
writer  can  surely  quite  easily  say  of  a  thing  already  known
'  I  make  known  unto  you,'  if  he  wishes  to  call  attention  to  it  as
something  very  weighty,  or  desires  gently  to  reproach  or  rebuke
his  readers  for  not  having  kept  it  in  mind. The  remark  holds
good  here  as  well  as  in  \"i  3  ( lal.  In.

(b)  According  to  15  n  what  precedes  is  given  out  alike by
Paul and by the original apostles. Steck holds it to  be
artificially  composed  to  suit  such  a  purpose  ;  the  twelve  would
represent the narrower  circle of disciples destined for the
mission  to  the  Jews ; the  500  that  wider  circle,  hinted  at  in
Lk.  10  i,  for  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles. In  this  case,  however,
we  are  constrained  to  ask  why  the  author,  who  according  to
Steck had full  scope  for  his  fancy, should have chosen the
number  500,  not  70? And  why  does  he  cite  James  (surely  a
Jewish  Christian  !)  after,  not  before,  the  alleged  representatives
of  the  Gentile  mission,  and  afterwards,  over  and  above,  'all  the
apostles,'  whom  no  one  can  assert  to  have  belonged  distinctly
to  the  Jewish-Christian  or  to  the  Gentile-Christian  circle?

(c)  Whether  the  original  apostles  included  in  their  preaching
also  this,  that  Jesus  had  appeared  to  Paul,  may  be  regarded  as
questionable  in  view  of  their  strained  relations  with  Paul. At
an  earlier  date,  however,  when  the  churches  of  Judaea  glorified
God  in  Paul  (Gal.  1  23^)  they  certainly  proclaimed  it,  since  the
conversion  of  this  most  zealous  opponent  of  Christianity  cannot
but  have  seemed  to  them  to  be  the  greatest  triumph  of  the  new
religion. Accordingly,  Paul  might  very  well  assume  that  they
were  still  doing  so. Yet  it  must  not  by  any  means  be  positively
affirmed that he says so; for from i  Cor.  156  onwards the
verbs  no  longer  depend,  as  in  w.  3-5,  on  '  how  that '  (on) ;  the
sentences  are all independent propositions. Otherwise we
should  be  compelled  to  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  Paul  describes
the contents  of  v.  8  also — that  is,  the  appearance  of  Jesus  to

4055


himself— as  something  which  according  to  v.  3  he  has  received
(jrapeAa/Soi/).  Steck  does  not  shrink  from  drawing  this  infer
ence.  In  doing  so,  however,  he  does  the  writer  an  injustice.
For  when  the  writer  wrote  t'.  3,  his  intention  was  to  set  forth
what  he  had  received  ;  but  he  was  surely  not  thereby  precluded
from  adding  something  of  the  same  kind  with  regard  to  himself,
of  which  the  readers  would  be  able  to  see  for  themselves  that  he
had  not  'received'  it.  In  like  manner  also  he  must  not  be
debarred  from  saying  in  v.  1 1 ,  by  way  of  resvmt,  that  he  and
the  original  apostles  preach  in  the  manner  stated  in  the  pre
ceding  context,  although  certainly  TJ.  <jf.,  perhaps  also  v.  8,
do  not  form  part  of  the  preaching  of  the  original  apostles.

(if)  Van  >lanen  (J'aulus,  8,  1896,  pp.  67-71)  finds  15i-n  out
of  agreement  with  vt>.  12-58  ;  for  in  the  former  passage  the  hope
of  a  future  resurrection  of  the  Ixidy  is  made  to  depend  upon  the
fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  whilst  in  the  latter  it  is  held
upon  quite  different  grounds  into  which  this  fact  does  not  enter.
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  if  a  thing  rests  upon  more
grounds  than  one,  it  u  quite  fitting  that  these  should  be  set
forth  separately.  Besides,  in  point  of  fact,  the  resurrection  of
Jesus  is  returned  to  in  v.  20  as  having  a  bearing  upon  the
argument.

(if)  Another  point  made  by  Van  Manen  is  that  '  was  seen '
(i^)6hr))  is  repeated  inv.  6,  but  not  in  v.  $/>.  That,  however,  really
proves  nothing  against  either  the  genuineness  or  the  unity  of
the  section.  The  addition  in  v.  6  'of  whom  the  greater  part
remain  until  now,  but  some  are  fallen  asleep'  is  found  by  Van
Manen  too  copious  in  style  after  the  curt  expressions  in  ZT.  3-5  ;
and,  moreover,  he  considers  it  to  be  brought  in  too  late,  since,  if
such  an  observation  were  to  be  made  with  reference  to  the  500,
it  ought  also  to  have  been  mentioned  with  regard  to  the  12,
whether  they  were  still  alive  or  not.  But  here  again  it  may  be
replied  that  the  Corinthians  either  knew  or  could  have  informed
themselves  as  to  the  twelve,  whilst  the  case  was  different  with
the  500.  As  for  'all  the  apostles'  (TOIJ  an-ocrroAois  Tracru')  in
•!'.  7,  to  which  Van  Manen  takes  particular  exception  on  the
ground  that  they  are  identical  with  the  '  Peter  and  the  twelve"
in  7>.  5,  our  reply  must  simply  be  that  this  is  not  the  case ;  see
MINISTKV,  §  17.

(/)  Paul's  designation  of  himself  (15  9)  as  the  least  of  the
apostles,  is  regarded  by  Van  Manen  as  not  in  agreement  with
his  claim  to  apostolic  rank  and  authority  (1  i  4  i69  if.  11  16).  Vet
a  solution  of  the  apparent  contradiction  can  be  found  in  15  10  :
'not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God.'  Besides,  the  slight  against  Paul
would  be  unintelligible  on  the  part  of  an  admirer  of  his  in  the
second  century ;  it  is  intelligible  only  in  the  mouth  of  Paul
himself,  who  elsewhere  also  shows  himself  as  ready  to  humble
himself  in  the  sight  of  God  as  he  is  disinclined  to  do  so  before
men.

(g)  A  further  argument  of  Van  Manen  (p.  126)  is  that  in
158-10  the  life  of  the  apostle  is  looked  back  upon  as  already
completed.  Vet  Paul  might  also  look  back  upon  his  life  so  far
as  completed  and  say  quite  fairly,  as  he  does  say  :  '  I  laboured
more  abundantly  than  they  all.'

(k]  In  particular,  no  difficulty  ought  to  be  caused  by
the  words  :  '  last  of  all  he  appeared  to  me  also. '  Paul
could  quite  well  have  been  aware  that  since  the  appear
ance  of  Jesus  made  to  himself,  no  other  had  been
reported.  But  of  those  which  he  himself,  according
to  2  Cor.  12 1-4  46,  afterwards  lived  to  experience,  none
approached  to  that  of  Damascus  in  fundamental  import
ance  ;  thus  he  had  all  the  more  occasion  to  close  his
series  with  it,  because  his  first  vision  of  the  risen  Jesus
may  itself  have  occurred  a  considerable  time  after  the
other  appearances  (§  36  [/"]),  and  importance  attached
to  the  number  of  distinct  persons  who  had  seen  visions,
rather  than  to  the  number  of  visions  such  persons
had  had.

For  the  rest,  Brandt  (414^?)  gives  up  as  un-Pauline  only  one
expression  :  '  as  unto  the  one  born  out  of  due  season  '  (w<r;r«pti
TU>  eicrpuijicaTi),  which  he  considers  to  have  been  borrowed  by  a
glossator  from  the  Valentinian  gnosis  (cp  Straatman,  Krit.  Stud,
overt  Cor.,\o\.  2,  Groningen,  1865,  pp.  196-204).  Yet  no  stringent
necessity  for  this  is  apparent.  It  is  true  that  the  expression
(fKTp(afj.a)  does  not  literally  fit  Paul,  for  it  denotes  an  early  birth,
whereas  he  could  more  appropriately  have  been  called  a  late
birth.  There  is  some  difficulty,  therefore,  in  supposing  that
Paul  himself  can  have  actually  chosen  this  expression.  To
meet  this  difficulty  we  may  perhaps  suppose  that  Paul  is  taking
up  a  phrase  which  had  been  used  against  him  by  way  of
repronch,  because  after  all  it  has  some  applicability  to  his  case.
This  theory  would  also  best  explain  the  definite  article  (before
eKTpu>na.Tt),  which  is  reproduced  neither  in  AV  nor  in  RV  ('one
born ').

That  i  Cor.  15i-ii  is  dependent  on  the  Gospels  has
been  pronounced  impossible  even  by  Steck,  since  it
11  iCor  15i-n  conta'ns  appearances  of  Jesus  which

older  than  "  are  not  ^oun<^  there. It is  only  the

the  Gospels earlier  date  of  I  Con  that  St€K*  dis'
putes.

(a)  Steck  regards  it  as  certainly  historical that  the
4056


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


first  news  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  was  brought  by
the  women.  In  the  omission  of  this  point  from  i  Cor.
he  finds  an  artificial  touch  ;  the  more  naive  representa
tion  is  that  of  the  Gospels.

Even  if  it  be  granted  for  the  moment  that  the  narrative  about
the  women  at  the  sepulchre  is  historical,  the  attitude  of  con
servative  theology  itself  shows  that  the  priority  of  the  gospels
by  no  means  follows,  for  that  theology  attributes  to  the
historical  Paul,  who  wrote  his  epistles  before  the  gospels  were
composed,  a  deliberate  silence  about  the  women.  If,  however,
the  genuineness  of  the  Pauline  epistles  cannot  be  effectively
disputed  from  this  point  of  view,  the  question  whether  Paul  did
not  wish  to  say  anything  about  the  women,  or  whether  he  did
not  know  about  them,  remains  quite  open  (cp  §  15).

(t>)  Steck  conjectures  further  that  matters  in  which
i  Cor.  partially  agrees  with  the  Gospels,  had  been
drawn  by  both  from  a  common  source.  Thus  the
appearance  to  the  500  is  perhaps  a  modification  of  the
original  account  of  what  happened  at  Pentecost.  The
two  accounts  are,  however,  totally  different.  Steck
resorts  to  his  conjecture,  only  because  he  finds  the
application  of  the  vision -hypothesis  to  the  case  of
500  men  at  once  too  difficult.  As  to  this  see,  however,
§  36  e.

(c)  The  appearance  to  James  in  i  Cor.  is  considered
by  Steck  to  be  derived  from  the  source  of  the  Gospel
to  the  Hebrews,  or  from  that  Gospel  itself.  Here,
however,  the  question  arises  :  Which  is  the  more
original?  The  bare  statement  'he  appeared  to  James,'
or  the  incredible  fable  discussed  above  (§  417,  6)?  In
fact  the  question  conies  up  in  a  still  more  general  form  :
Which  is  the  more  original — the  bare  narrative  of  Paul
as  a  whole,  or  that  of  the  Gospels  ?  In  itself  considered,
a  narrative  so  brief  as  that  given  in  i  Cor.  15  could,
doubtless,  be  regarded  as  a  later  excerpt,  as  we  have
shown  to  be  the  case  with  Mk.  169-20  (§  86,  c}.  But
the  distinction  in  the  Mk.  appendix  is  just  this,  that  the
excerpt  is  characterised,  not  by  its  bareness,  but  by  its
embodying  the  most  legendary  features.  Its  freedom
from  such  features  will  always  speak  in  favour  of  the
priority  of  i  Cor.  15,  so  long  as  the  spuriousness  of  the
entire  epistle  remains  unproven.  As  to  this  last  cp
GALATIANS,  §§  1-9.  Indeed,  were  one  compelled  to
give  up  the  genuineness  of  the  epistle  as  a  whole,  it
would  still  be  necessary  to  affirm  with  Brandt  (415)
that  the  high  antiquity  of  15i-n  (before  the  Gospels
had  arisen)  stands  fast  quite  apart  from  the  question  of
its  belonging  to  i  Cor.  Nor  is  the  question  why  the
Gospels,  if  they  are  later,  have  passed  over  so  much
that  is  given  in  i  Cor.  15  unanswerable  (see  §  23^).

If  we may venture to  assume  the priority  of the

Pauline account to that of the Gospels, the main

_, . .  question  will  be  whether  or  no  Paul

.Complete  (  omitted  any  accounts  of  the  resurrec-
of  1  Oor.l5i-n.  tion  of  jesus  which  %vere  knowu  to

him.  Did  we  not  possess  the  Gospels,  the  idea  that  he
has  done  so  would  never  have  occurred  to  any  one.
For  Paul  nothing  less  than  the  truth  of  Christianity
rested  upon  the  actuality  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus
(i  Cor.  15 14/1  17-19).  Paul  himself  had  once  found  it
impossible  to  believe  ;  he  knew,  therefore,  how  strong
was  the  inclination  to  disbelief.  All  the  more  carefully,
therefore,  must  he  have  sought  to  inform  himself  of
everything  that  could  be  said  in  its  support.  During
his  fifteen  clays'  visit  to  Peter  and  James  (Gal.  Ii8/i),
he  had  the  best  opportunity  to  perfect  his  knowledge  on
the  subject  in  the  most  authentic  manner.  In  Corinth
the  future  resurrection  and,  along  with  it,  as  a  logical
consequence  according  to  the  argument  of  Paul  ( i  Cor.
15i2i6),  also  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  was  disputed,  and
the  entire  basis  of  the  Christian  church  called  in
question.  In  15 12-58  Paul  presents  every  possible
argument  wherewith  to  confute  the  deniers  of  the  resur
rection  ;  is  it  in  these  circumstances  conceivable  that  he
could  have  passed  over  any  proofs  of  the  resurrection  of
Jesus,  whilst  yet  holding  that  resurrection  to  be  the
first  and  most  important  fact  wherewith  to  silence  his
opponents  ?  But  indeed  his  very  manner  of  expressing

4057


himself  excludes  this  in  the  most  decisive  manner.  By
his  careful  enumeration  with  '  then  .  .  .  next  .  .  .
next  .  .  .  then  .  .  .  lastly'  (etra  .  .  .  ^Treira  .  .  .
^Tretra  .  .  .  elra  .  .  .  laxarov  ;  15s-8)  he  guarantees
not  only  chronological  order  but  also  completeness.

The only point  which  one  can  venture  along  with

Brandt  (415)  to  leave  open,  is  whether  Paul  here  is  only

P IB-  rePeatmS  a  fixed  number  of  appearances

. ' -  '  which- according  to  15  n  he  was in the

habit  of  bringing  forward  everywhere,  in

appearances.  agreement  wjth  tne  original  apostles,  in

his  preaching  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.

Now  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  from  such  an  enumeration
this  or  that  appearance  to  inconspicuous  persons,  which  seemed
not  to  be  attested  with  absolute  certainty,  or  not  to  be  of
sufficient  importance,  may  have  been  excluded,  just  as  we  find
that  of  those  received  by  Paul  himself,  only  the  first  is  related
(§  io//).  This  concession,  however,  in  no  way  alters  the  signific
ance  for  Gospel  criticism  of  the  Pauline  account  ;  for  to  this
category  of  accounts  which  Paul  might  conceivably  in  certain
circumstances  very  well  have  omitted,  that  to  the  two  disciples
at  Emmaus — a  singularly  characteristic  narrative — assuredly
does  not  belong ;  and  still  less  do  the  other  gospel  narratives
which  all  of  them  speak  of  appearances  of  Jesus  to  the  most
prominent  persons  known  to  ancient  Christianity,  and  in  circum
stances  of  the  most  significant  kind.

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  Paul  only  enumerates  the

appearances  of  Jesus  ;  he  does  not  describe  them. It

_  will therefore be illegitimate to argue

'  ' .  '  from  his  silence  that  he  rejects  or  knows

,  .  .  °  nothing  of  any  special  circumstances

Vi  r\  9 which may have been connected  with
toucned  . this  or  that  appeararice Stilli it cloes

not  by  any  means  follow  that  we  are  at  liberty  to  regard
such  important  facts  as  that  Jesus  ate,  or  permitted
himself  to  be  touched,  as  matters  which  Paul  knew  but
passed  over.  They  are  of  such  fundamental  import
ance,  and  go  so  far  beyond  the  mere  fact  of  his  having
been  seen,  that  Paul,  had  he  known  them,  could  not
but  have  mentioned  them,  unless  he  deliljerately  chose
to  let  slip  the  most  important  proofs  for  his  contention.

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  reply  that  Paul  knew  that  Jesus  had
eaten  and  been  touched,  but  passed  over  both  as  being  incon
sistent  with  his  doctrine  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the
kingdom  of  God  (i  Cor.  15  50).  When  this  is  said,  it  is  rightly
presupposed  indeed  that  Paul  regarded  the  risen  Christ  as
being  already  exalted  to  heaven  (cp  §  i6e).  This  doctrine,
however,  is  one  which  Paul  first  elaborated  for  himself  as  a
Christian  ;  as  a  Jew  he  knew  no  other  conception  of  the  resur
rection  than  that  which  thought  of  all  forms  of  life  in  the  future
world  as  exactly  reproducing  those  of  the  present  (cp  §  17  c).
If,  accordingly,  he  had  heard  from  eyewitnesses  that  Jesus  had
eaten  and  been  touched,  this  would  have  fitted  in  most  ex
cellently  with  the  idea  of  the  resurrection  which  he  entertained
at  the  time  of  his  conversion,  and  he  would  have  had  no
occasion  to  construct  another  in  an  opposite  sense,  i  Cor.  15  50
accordingly  does  not  prove  that  Paul  knew  that  Jesus  had
eaten  and  been  touched,  but  was  silent  because  he  did  not  like
to  think  this  true  :  it  shows,  on  the  contrar}-,  that  he  had  never
heard  anything  of  the  kind.

That  Paul  knew  of  the  empty  sepulchre,  also,  can  be

maintained only in conjunction with the assumption

that for particular reasons he kept

JM 1? silence  regarding  it. i
and  tne  empty ^  Most  perverse  of  all  would  it  be

sepulcnre.  to  seek  for  such  reasons  jn  t  <jor-  j434.
Even  on  the  assumption  that  in:  33^-35  are  genuine
(which,  in  view  of  the  inconsistency  with  lls  13  and  the
introduction  of  14  34 /  after  14  40  in  DEFG,  etc. ,  is  very
questionable)  the  words  are  directed  only  against  the
intervention  of  women  in  the  meeting  of  the  congre
gation  and  merely  on  grounds  of  decorum  ;  by  no
means  against  the  testimony  of  women  as  to  a  matter

1  It  is  quite  illegitimate  to  find  a  testimony  to  the  empty
sepulchre  in  Paul's  '  that  he  hath  been  raised  '  (OTL  e-jyyepTot  :
i  Cor.  15  4)  on  the  special  ground  that  he  connects  the  '  that  he
was  seen '  (on  ia^&rf)  by  means  of  '  and  '  (<cai)  and  thereby  seems
to  indicate  that  he  knows  of  an  independent  evidence  of  the
resurrection  of  Jesus  apart  from  the  fact  of  his  having  been  seen.
If  he  really  knew  of  any  such  evidence  it  was  his  interest  to
mention  it.  If,  however,  the  only  evidence  he  had  was  the  fact
that  Jesus  had  been  seen  he  still  was  under  necessity,  from  his
own  point  of  view,  to  regard  the  being  raised  up  as  a  separate
fact.  He  would  have  said  less  than  he  believed  himself  entitled
to  say  had  he  omitted  this.

4058


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


of  fact,  least  of  all  a  fact  of  such  importance  and  one
with  regard  to  which  they  alone  were  in  a  position  to
give  evidence.

(l>)  Not  less  wide  of  the  mark  is  the  other  explanation
of  Paul's  silence  upon  the  empty  sepulchre,  that  the
idea  of  a  reanimation  of  the  dead  body  did  not  fit  in
with  his  theology.  If  it  were  indeed  the  fact  that  his
theology  was  opposed  to  this,  it  is  nevertheless  true
that  this  theology  of  his  came  into  being  only  after  his
conversion  to  Christianity.  When  he  first  came  to
know  of  Jesus  as  risen  he  was  still  a  Jew  and  therefore
conceived  of  resurrection  at  all  in  no  other  way  than
as  reanimation  of  the  body  (§  17  e).  Since,  as  soon  as
he  had  become  a  believer,  he  certainly  held  what  had
been  imparted  to  him  about  Jesus  to  be  a  divine
arrangement,  he  had  no  occasion  whatever  to  alter  his
conception.  Thus  nothing  then  prevented  him  from
believing  that  the  grave  was  found  empty — on  the  sup
position  that  this  was  reported  to  him.  And  even  in
the  wording  of  i  Cor.  there  was  no  hindrance  to  his  so
believing.

That  Jesus  was  buried  and  that  'he  has  been  raised"  (i  Cor.
104)  cannot  be  affirmed  by  any  one  who  has  not  the  reanimation
of  the  body  in  mind.  It  is  correct  to  say  that  Paul  has  aban
doned  the  Jewish  conception  in  so  far  as  he  figures  to  himself  the
body  of  Jesus  as  being  like  the  dead  at  the  Last  Day,  who  'shall
be  raised  incorruptible,'  and  like  the  bodies  of  those  who  shall
then  be  alive  and  who  '  shall  be  changed  '  (i  Cor.  15  42-52).  The
risen  Jesus  therefore  was  incapable  of  eating  or  of  being  touched
(see  §§  14,  17*-)  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  was  to  rise  from  the
dead  his  body  must  needs  come  forth  from  the  grave,  otherwise
the  idea  of  resurrection  would  be  abandoned.  This  is  the  case
in  2  Cor.  5  1-8,  according  to  which  every  individual  immediately
on  his  death  passes  into  a  state  of  glory  with  Christ  ;  but  it  is
not  yet  so  in  i  Cor.

(c)  Relatively  the  most  reasonable  suggestion  is  that
Paul is silent regarding  the  empty  sepulchre  (though
acquainted with the fact) because he fears that an
appeal to the testimony  of  women will produce an
unfavourable impression. This, however, is to mis
judge  Paul. If  he  knew  and  believed  what  was  reported
about  the  empty  grave  he  must  of  course  have  regarded
the  participation  of  the  women  as  a  divine  appointment  ;
and  just as he refused  to  be  ashamed of  the  gospel
although  aware  that  in  so  many  quarters  it  was  regarded
as mere foolishness (Rom.  1 16 i  Cor.  123) so  also  he
would  have  refused  to  be  ashamed  of  an  appointment
of  God  whereby  women  were  made  the  chief  witnesses
to  the  truth  of  the  resurrection.

Before  proceeding  to  draw  our  final  conclusions,
however,  from  i  Cor.  15,  it  will  be  convenient  that  we

,  _ A  . should examine the accounts of the

16.  Ascension.

ascension.

(a)  The  view  which  is  found  in  all  books  of  doctrine
and  which  underlies  the  observance  of  the  ecclesiastical
feast  of  the  ascension,  that  Jesus  was  taken  up  into
heaven  forty  days  after  his  resurrection,  rests  solely
upon  Acts  139  (1831  is  not  so  exact),  and  thus  on  a
datum  which  did  not  become  known  to  the  compiler  of
Acts  till  late  in  life.

We  conjecture  it  to  have  been  first  made  plain  to  the  writer
of  Acts  by  the  consideration  that  the  disciples  seemed  still  to  be
in  need  of  much  instruction  at  the  hands  of  Jesus.  The  sug
gestion  that  the  number  forty  is  not  to  be  taken  literally
becomes  all  the  more  natural  in  proportion  to  the  lateness  of
its  appearing.  Moses  passes  forty  days  on  Mount  Sinai  with
God  when  receiving  the  law  (Ex.  34  28)  ;  according  to  4  Esd.
14233642-49  Ezra  spends  forty  days  in  dictating  afresh  the  OT
(which  had  been  lost  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  586)  and
seventy  books  of  prophecy,  and  is  thereafter  taken  up  into
heaven.1

(d)  In  his  gospel  the  author  of  Acts  has  assigned  the
ascension  to  a  time  late  in  the  evening  of  the  day  of  the
resurrection  (Lk.  24 132933 36 so/).

Brandt  (375-377)  thinks  Lk.  cannot  really  have  intended  to
represent  Jesus  as  having  ascended  at  night  and  therefore
supposes  the  scene  with  the  disciples  at  Emmaus  not  to  have
been  introduced  by  the  author  until  after  24  36-53  (appearance
to  the  disciples,  and  ascension)  had  been  written.  If  Brandt

1  According  to  the  Valentinians  and  Ophites  («/.  Iren.  i.  1  5
[3  2]  2S^  [3014])  Jesus  remained  on  earth  for  eighteen  months
after  his  resurrection  ;  so  also  Asc.  Isa.  9  16  in  the  Ethiopia
text  (545  days)  ;  according  to  Pistis  Sophia,  \,  eleven  years.

4059


is  right  we  may  suppose  Lk.  thought  of  the  ascension  as  having
occurred  some  hours  earlier.  The  words  '  and  was  carried  up
into  heaven  '  (icai  aveiftepeTO  eii  TOV  avpavov  '.  i>.  51)  are  wanting,
it  is  true,  in  x*D  and  some  Old  Latin  MSS.  But  even  if  the
shorter  form  should  be  the  more  original,  the  words  '  he  parted
from  them '  (Siea-rri  air'  avriuv),  which  all  authorities  have
(D  ajreVrr)),  would  convey  the  same  sense.  Without  some  definite


Jesus.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  words  'and  was  carried
up  into  heaven  '  (<eai  avf<f>epfTO  eis  TOV  ovpavov)  were  struck  out
at  a  very  early  period  by  a  reader  who  wished  to  remove  the
discrepancy  with  Acts  1  3-9.!

(c)  In  any  case  the  dating  of  the  ascension  as  having
happened  late  on  the  day  of  the  resurrection  is  con
firmed  by  Barn.  15g  :  'We  keep  holy  the  eighth  day
(i.e.,  Sunday)  ...  in  which  also  Jesus  rose  from  the
dead  and,  after  appearing,  went  up  to  heaven'  (&yojj.fv
TT]v  rifj^pav  TT]v  dydoijv  .  .  .  4v  7;  nai  6  'Itjaovs  avtcrTij
IK  vcKputv  Kal  <j>avfp<jjt)fi$  dv^/St)  els  ovpavovs),  as  also  by
Mk.  169-20,  where  the  order  of  the  events  in  Lk.  clearly
lies  at  the  foundation  ;  in  all  probability  also  by  Jn.
20 1722,  according  to  which  on  the  morning  of  the  resur
rection  Jesus  is  not  yet  ascended  and  in  the  evening
already  imparts  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  disciples.

According  to  7  39  the  Holy  Spirit  first  comes  into  being  after
Jesus  has  been  glorified,  in  other  words  after  his  exaltation  to
heaven  where  he  is  encompassed  by  glory  (Sofa).  That  Jesus
does  not  suffer  himself  to  be  touched  in  2017  is  not  formally
contradicted  by  what  is  said  of  the  evening  of  the  same  day
(in  '20  20  he  only  shows  the  disciples  his  wounds) ;  the  con
tradiction  does  not  emerge  till  eight  days  afterwards  (2027).
On  the  other  hand  it  perfectly  fits  in  with  the  theory  of  7  39
that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  called  (EV)  another  comforter  (aAAos
7rapa<cA>)Tos  :  14  16)  who  cannot  come  until  after  Jesus  has  gone
away  (Jesus  must  thus  be  thought  of  as  the  first  jrapoicArjTOS  and
in  point  of  fact  is  called  TrapaxAijTOs  in  i  Jn.  2  i,  although  there
he  is  thought  of  as  exalted)  and  that  Jesus  will  send  him  forth
from  the  father,  that  is,  from  heaven  (1526);  cp  further  167.

(</)  The  Fourth  Gospel  is  distinguished  from  Lk.,
Barn. ,  and  Mk.  169-20  by  this,  that  it  represents  Jesus  as
still  continuing  to  appear  on  earth  after  he  has  ascended.

When  Jesus  foretells  his  coming  again  in  Jn.  14  18  it  is  clear
from  the  connection  with  trv.  i6_/  that  he  means  the  coming  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  with  whom,  in  fact,  according  to  7  39,  2  Cor.
3  17  he  is  identical.  On  the  other  hand,  the  manner  in  which
the  same  thought  is  expressed  in  It)  16  19  ('  a  little  while  .  .  .  and
ye  shall  see  me ')  speaks  strongly  for  the  view  that  the  appear
ances  of  the  risen  Jesus  are  intended  ;  so  also  perhaps  in  14  19  21,
whilst  1428  Iti  22  admit  both  interpretations  and  perhaps  ought
to  receive  both.

(^)  The  original  conception  of  the  ascension  has  been
preserved  in  this,  that  the  appearances  of  the  risen
Jesus  occur  after  he  has  been  received  up  into  heaven  ;
resurrection  and  ascension  are  a  single  act,  Jesus  is
taken  up  directly  from  the  grave,  or  from  the  under
world,  into  heaven.'2  Any  direct  proof  for  this,  it  is  true,
can  hardl}'  be  adduced  apart  from  the  Gospel  of  Peter
(above,  §  5  b)  ;  the  proof  lies  in  the  silence  of  the  NT
writers  as  to  a  special  act  of  ascension.  In  particular,
it  ought  (if  known)  to  have  been  definitely  mentioned
in  i  Cor.  164-8,  since,  in  point  of  fact,  according  to
Lk. ,  the  appearances  to  Peter  and  the  apostles,  etc.
were  made  before  the  ascension,  whilst  those  to  Paul  on
the  other  hand  undoubtedly  occurred  after  that  event ;
and  yet  Paul  uses  with  reference  to  them  all  the  same
word  '  was  seen  '  (&<t>6r],  on  which  see  below,  §  17  a).

1  On  the  apologetic  side  there  is  often  an  inclination  to  make
use  of  the  well-known  fact  that  the  ancients  were  in  the  habit
of  employing  for  their  literary  work  ready-made  papyrus  rolls
of  a  fixed  length,  within  the  limits  of  which  they  were  wont  to
confine  themselves.  It  is  suggested  that  Lk.,  through  failure
of  his  space,  may  have  found  himself  compelled  to  report  the
ascension  so  very  briefly  and  inexactly,  that  it  was  possible  for
the  impression  to  arise  that  he  meant  to  assign  it  to  the
resurrection  day,  whereas  in  reality  he  meant  to  place  it  forty
days  later,  and  already  had  the  intention  of  setting  this  forth
more  precisely  in  his  later  work.  It  may  suffice,  in  answer  to
this,  to  say  that  Lk.  must  have  perceived  that  the  paper  was
coming  to  an  end  long  before  the  last  moment,  and  cannot  have
been  forced,  by  any  such  discovery,  into  giving  an  account  of
the  events  which  was  not  in  accordance  with  his  knowledge.

-  The  descent  into  the  underworld  is  originally  merely
another  expression  for  his  death  and  burial.  Whether'a  preach
ing  of  Jesus  in  the  underworld  is  connected  with  this  (so
MINISTRY,  §  26)  is  for  our  present  purpose  indifferent.

4060


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


So,  also,  Rom.  8  34,  Eph.  1 20  (and  with  reference  to  the
followers  of  Jesus  Eph.  '2  $/.)  place  the  sitting  at  the  right  hand
of  God  immediately  after  the  resurrection,  Heb.  1  3  10  12  122
immediately  after  the  death  of  Jesus ;  Eph.  4  9  f.  places  over
against  the  descent  (icaTa^rji'at)  into  Hades  only  the  ascent
(ava^r\vai)  that  raises  Jesus  above  all  heavens.  So  also  the
'  who  brought  up '  (ava.ya.yiav)  of  Heb.  13  20  means  direct
translation  from  Hades  to  Heaven  if  at  least  by  ev  ai/aem  we
are  to  understand  'with  blood,'  which  according  to  4  14  620  82
9  12  Jesus  must  offer  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  i  Pet.  81922
too,  and  indeed  also  Acts  2  32-35  Rev.  1  18,  admit  this  sense
without  violence,  and  equally  little  is  the  reader  compelled  by
the  expression  'goes  before  you  into  Galilee '  (irpodya  vfias  ei?
ri\v  TaAiAaiW),  Mk.  167  =  Mt.  28  7,  to  assume  that  Jesus  made
the  journey  from  the  sepulchre  to  Galilee  by  way  of  earth  ;  the
purpose  of  the  expression  is  simply  to  convey  that  Jesus  expects
his  disciples  in  Galilee  in  order  that  he  may  appear  to  them
there,  and  this  he  can  very  well  have  done  from  heaven.  For
Mt.  this  interpretation  is  directly  indicated  by  the  writer's
closing  his  book  without  any  ascension  ;  he  must  have  thought
of  it  as  inseparably  connected  with  the  resurrection.  Another
consideration  pointing  in  the  same  direction  rests  on  the  fact
that  in  28  18  Jesus  is  already  able  to  say  that  all  authority  has
been  given  him  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  As  regards  Mk.  we  can
say  nothing  positive  with  reference  to  this  point  ;  there  is,  how
ever,  not  the  least  probability  that  his  lost  conclusion  differed
from  Mt.  in  this  respect.  In  Clem.  Rom.,  Hermas,  Polycarp,
Ignatius  we  still  find  no  mention  of  an  ascension,  nor  yet  is  it
spoken  of  in  the  Didache  (this  last,  it  ought  to  be  added,  indeed,
does  not  even  mention  the  resurrection).  Justin,  Irenaeus,  and
Tertullian  continue  to  regard  both  events  as  two  parts  of  one
act  (see  Von  Schubert,  Camp,  tics  pseudopetrin.  Evangelien-
Jragments,  1893,  136-138);  the  Apology  of  Aristides  (Syriac  in
Robinson,  Texts  and  Studies,  i.  1  4  /.  jf. ;  Greek,  ibid.  1 10  /.  20  f.
[chap.  15],  German  in  Raabe,  TU  ix.  1  3,  §  2,  end)  says  similarly
that  after  three  days  he  rose  again  and  was  taken  up  into
heaven.1

II. — DETERMINATION  OF  OUTWARD  FACTS.

The  original  conception  of  the  ascension  as  set  forth

in  the  preceding  section will  supply  us  directly  with

_ 1 some guidance when we proceed to

x ' e^u the task of disentangling the real

nature  01  the  ,  •  . • ,  ,- .

historical  facts  regarding  the  resurrec-

appearances. {ion  from  tjie  muititude  of  the  accounts
which  have  come  down  to  us.

(a)  As  we  do  so  we  must  in  the  first  instance  take
Paul's  account  as  our  guide.  That  account  is  fitted  to
throw  light  upon  the  nature  of  the  appearances  made
not  only  to  Paul  himself  but  also  to  others,  for  he  would
not  have  employed  the  same  word  '  was  seen '  (&(pdr])  if
anything  had  been  known  to  him  by  which  the  appear
ance  made  to  himself  was  distinguished  from  those
which  others  had  received.

(l>)  Appearances  of  the  risen  Jesus  did  actually  occur  ;
that  is  to  say,  the  followers  of  Jesus  really  had  the  im
pression  of  having  seen  him.  The  historian  who  will
have  it  that  the  alleged  appearances  are  due  merely  to
legend  or  to  invention  must  deny  not  only  the  genuine
ness  of  the  Pauline  Epistles  but  also  the  historicity  of
Jesus  altogether.  The  great  difference  between  the
attestation  of  the  nativity  narratives  and  that  of  those
of  the  resurrection  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  earliest  accounts
of  the  resurrection  arose  simultaneously  with  the  occur
rences  to  which  they  relate.

(c)  The  idea  held  regarding  the  occurrences  was  that
Jesus  made  his  appearances  from  heaven  (§  16,  e). He
thus had the nature  of a  heavenly being. Broadly
speaking,  the  angels  were  the  most  familiar  type  of  this
order  of  being  —  the  angels  who  can  show  themselves
anywhere  and  again  disappear.

(d)  It  was  thought, as  matter  of  course, that  after
each appearance Jesus returned into heaven. So
regarded, each  appearance  ended with an  ascension.

1  The  order  in  i  Tim.  3  16  where  '  was  received  up  in  glory '
(ayeArj^Or)  ei>  Sofrj)  comes  after  '  was  preached  to  the  nations,
was  believed  on  in  the  world'  (eicripvxOr)  tv  Sfvtmv,  eiriarevOi]  fv
Kotr/no)),  accords  with  no  known  or  conceivable  position  of  the
ascension.  May  we  hazard  the  conjecture  that  the  author
perhaps  placed  it  at  the  close  of  his  enumeration  simply  in
order  to  close  with  a  concrete  fact  rather  than  a  somewhat
vague  and  indeterminate  proposition,  and  so  make  a  better
ending  for  his  poetical  piece,  and  that  in  doing  so  he  followed
perhaps  some  such  train  of  ideas  as  that  in  Mk.  16  i^f-  19,  only
giving  it  a  somewhat  different  turn  :  the  command  of  Jesus  that
his  disciples  should  preach  him  and  believe  in  him  was  fulfilled
and  he  was  raised  up  to  heaven?

4061


Precisely  for  this  reason,  however,  it  is  not  permissible
to  suppose  that  any  single  ascension  once  and  for  all
was  ever  observed  ;  on  such  a  supposition  Jesus  would
still  have  remained  a  denizen  of  earth  after  the  appear
ances  preceding  the  final  one.

(e)  That  the  risen  Jesus  ate  or  was  touched  was  never
observed. Not only  does Paul say nothing of  any
such  occurrence  ;  the  thing  would  also  be  contrary  to
the  nature  of  a  being  appearing  from  heaven. Flesh
and  bones,  which  are  attributed  to  Jesus  in  Lk.  24  39,
assuredly  he  had  not  ;  he  really  made  his  appearances,
although  it  is  expressly  denied  in  the  verse  just  cited,
as  spirit  (irveO/xa)  in  the  sense  in  which  the  angels  are
spirits  (irveviMTa.  : Heb.  1 14). On  this  point  the  Jewish
Christians  most  certainly  agreed  with  Paul  (§ 15^)50
far  as  the  person  of  Jesus  was  concerned.

It  is  indeed  the  case  that  in  Jewish-Christian  circles  there  was
current  a  conception  of  a  resurrection  with  a  new  earthly  body,
in  accordance  with  which  Jesus  was  taken  to  be  the  risen  Baptist,
or  Elijah  (Mk.  0  14-16).  This,  however,  was  not  the  only  con
ception  by  which  Christians  were  influenced.  On  the  contrary,
from  Jesus  himself  they  had  received  the  idea  that  in  the  resurrec
tion  men  shall  be  as  the  angels  of  God  (Mk.  1225  and  j().  And  if
there  was  any  case  in  which  more  than  in  another  they  had
occasion  to  apply  this  exalted  conception,  it  would  be  in  that  of
the  body  of  their  risen  Lord.  They  knew  indeed  his  prediction
that  one  day  he  would  come  again  on  the  clouds  of  heaven

$3ospELS,  §  145  [f]).  For  them  also,  as  for  Paul  (i  Cor.  15  20),
esus  was  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  sleep  ;  with  his  resurrection,
accordingly,  a  new  era  began.  Not  only  so  ;  it  is  extremely
probable  that  the  '  similitudes '  of  the  Book  of  Enoch  (chaps.
37-71  ;  cp  APOCALYPTIC,  §  30)  are  pre-Christian  :  and  there  an
existence  in  heaven  is  attributed  to  the  Messiah  and  Dan.  7  13
explained  as  referring  to  him.1  The  original  apostles  may  very
well  have  had  knowledge  of  this,  even  without  having  ever  read
the  book.  There  is,  therefore,  not  the  slightest  difficulty  in
attributing  to  them  the  conception  of  the  resurrection  body  of
Jesus  which  Paul  himself  had  and  imputed  to  them.  It  is  only
with  regard  to  the  future  resurrection  of  all  mankind  that  Paul
parts  company  with  them,  in  so  far  as  he  thinks  of  the  resurrec
tion  body  of  believers  as  being  as  heavenly  and  free  from  flesh
and  blood  as  was  the  resurrection  body  of  Jesus  (i  Cor.  1644-53),
a  consequence  drawn  neither  by  the  Jewish  Christians  nor  yet
by  the  later  Gentile  Christians  who  taught  the  resurrection  of
the  flesh  (syinbohtin  Romanutn,  see  MINISTRY,  §  27,  n.,  and,
later,  symbolum  apostolicunt ;  Hermas,  Sim.  v.  7  2  ;  Justin,  Dial.
80,  end  ;  2  Clem.  Rom.  9  i  14s,  etc.,  and  already  i  Clem.  26  3).
That  the  Pharisaic,  and  accordingly  also  the  primitive  Christian,
expectation  looked  for  a  rennimation  of  the  bod}'  appears  in  such
passages  as  2  Mace.  7  lof.  1446  Mt.  27  52  Acts  231  Rev.  20  13.
Josephus  also  states  this  correctly  in  Ant.  xviii.  1  3,  §  14,  BJ  iii.
§  S>  §  374  !  i'  's  only  'n  BJ  ii.  8  14,  §  163,  that  by  the  expression
'  remove  into  another  body'  (/uera/SaiVei!'  ei«  erepov  <ru)|U.a)  he  has
Hellenised  the  conception  and  thereby  misled  his  readers.

(f)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  fully  to  be  believed  that
men  had  the  impression  that they  saw  in  full  reality
(below,  §  34  b,  c,  d]  the  wounds  which  Jesus  had  received
on  the  cross,  or  perhaps  even  perceived  that  he  showed
them. The  form  which  men  beheld  must  of  course  show
the  most  complete  resemblance  to  that  which  Jesus  bore
upon  earth,  and  to  this,  after  the  crucifixion,  the  wounds
(not,  however,  the  wound  in  the  side,  the  spear-thrust
being  unhistorical,  see  JOHN,  SON  OK  ZEBEDEE,  §  23  d}
necessarily  belonged. As  the  form  of  the  risen  Jesus
at  the  same  time  appeared  in  heavenly  splendour  and
created  the  certainty  that  Jesus  had  vanquished  death
and  laid  aside  everything  that  was  earthly,  there  remains
a  possibility  that  in  the  case  of  many  to  whom  he  appeared
attention  was  not  fixed  upon  his  wounds. It  is  particu
larly  easy  to  suppose  this  in  the  case  of  Paul.

(g)  From  the  nature  of  the  appearances  as  described,
it  is  further  quite  possible  that  they  occurred  even  when
the  witnesses  found  themselves,  as  in  Jn.  20 19  26,  shut
in  with  closed  doors,  or  that,  as  we  read  in  Mk.  1614  19,
Jesus  was  taken  up  into  heaven  direct  from  the  apart
ment. Even  if  one  entertains  doubts  as  to  whether  the
authors  cited  had  enough  certain  information  to  enable
them  to  say  that  this  actually  was  so  in  the  cases  which
they  give,  it  still  has  to  be  acknowledged  that  the  state
ment  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the  appear
ances.

On  the  other  hand, there  is  to  be  drawn  from the

1  Muirhead,  Times  of  Christ  (1898),  pp.  140-150;  Schmiedel,
Prot.  Monatshefte,  1898,  pp.  255-257  ;  1901,  p.  339./C

4062


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


various  accounts  one  deduction  which  goes  very  deep  :
no words  were  heard from the  risen


Jesus, (a)  At  first  sight  the  hearing  of


18.  No  words

Heard.  vnrds  might  appear  not  to  l><-  <-\i -liidt-d

by  the  simple  '  was  seen  '  (w</>#7?)  of  Paul.  It  is  to  be
noted,  however,  that  where  Paul  speaks  of  having
received  messages  from  heaven,  he  expressly  specifies
'revelations'  (droxoXtty'etf)  as  well  as  'visions'  (dirraffiai :
2  Cor.  12i-4),  and  where  the  distinction  is  employed  it
is  clear  that  spoken  words  come  under  the  former  not
the  latter  category.

(/>)  As  against  this,  appeal  will  doubtless  be  made  to
the  reports  in  Acts  as  to  the  appearances  of  Jesus  to
Paul  on  the  journey  to  Damascus.  Not  successfully,
however ;  they  contradict  one  another  so  violently
(see  ACTS,  §  2)  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  it
could  ever  have  been  possible  for  an  author  to  take  them
up  into  his  book  in  their  present  forms,  not  to  speak  of
the  impossibility  of  accepting  them  in  points  where  they
are  unsupported  by  the  epistles  of  Paul.  In  these
epistles,  there  is  not  the  slightest  countenance  for  the
belief  that  Paul  heard  words,  although  he  had  the
strongest  motives  for  referring  to  them  had  he  been
in  a  position  to  do  so.  It  is  on  the  appearance  on  the
journey  to  Damascus  that  he  bases  his  claim  to  have
been  called  to  the  apostolate  by  Jesus  himself.  The
claim  was  hotly  denied  by  his  opponents  :  it  was  to  his
interest,  therefore,  to  bring  forward  everything  that  could
validly  be  adduced  in  its  support.  In  pressing  it  (i  Cor.
9 1,  'Am  I  not  an  apostle?')  he  assuredly  would  not
have  stopped  short  at  the  question,  '  Have  I  not  seen
Jesus  our  Lord  ? '  had  he  been  in  a  position  to  go  on
and  ask,  '  Has  he  not  himself  named  me  his  apostle?'
with  such  words  engraven  on  his  memory  as  those  we
read  in  Acts  96  22 10  or  (above  all)  2<5i6-i8.  The
analogy  of  the  angelic  appearances  cited  above  (§  17  c)
thus  no  longer  holds  good.  Words  are  heard  from
angels  ;  no  words  were  heard  from  Jesus.

(c)  What  holds  good  of  the  appearance  to  Paul  is  true
also  (see  §  17  a)  of  the  others  of  which  we  read.  If,  too,
we  apply  a  searching  examination  to  the  words  which
have  been  reported,  it  is  precisely  the  most  characteristic
of  them  that  we  shall  find  ourselves  most  irresistibly  con
strained  to  abandon.  The  request  for  food  and  the
invitation  to  touch  the  wounds  of  the  crucified  Jesus
(Lk.  213941  Jn.  2027)  are,  as  we  have  seen  in  §  17  f,
inadmissible.  So  also,  as  has  been  seen  in  §  i6e,  the
saying,  I  am  not  yet  ascended  unto  the  Father  (20  17).
The  power  to  forgive  sins  or  to  declare  them  unforgiven
(2023)  belongs  to  God  alone,  and  cannot  be  handed
over  by  Jesus  to  his  disciples  (see  MINISTRY,  §  4).  The
doctrine  that  the  passion  of  Jesus  was  necessary  in  virtue
of  a  divine  appointment  is  invariably  brought  forward
by  Paul  as  the  gospel  that  had  been  made  manifest  to
himself  alone  and  must  be  laboriously  maintained  in  the
face  of  its  gainsayers  ;  how  triumphantly  would  he  not
have  been  able  to  meet  them  had  he  only  heard  the  least
suggestion  that  the  men  of  the  primitive  church  had
heard  the  same  doctrine  from  the  mouth  of  Jesus  himself
in  the  manner  recorded  in  Lk.  2425-27  44-46!  Once
more,  how  could  the  original  apostles  have  been  able  to
call  themselves  disciples  of  Jesus  if,  after  having  been
sent  out  by  him  as  missionaries  to  the  Gentiles  (Lk.
2247/  Mk.  16 16  and  the  canonical  text  of  Mt.  2819),
they  actually  made  it  a  stipulation  at  the  council  of
Jerusalem  (Gal.  2g)  that  their  activity  was  to  be  confined
within  the  limits  of  Israel  ?  As  for  the  text  of  Mt.  28 19
on  baptism  and  the  trinitarian  formula,  see  MINISTRY,
§  5*,  cp  Hibb.  Journ.,  Oct.  1902,  pp.  102-108  ;  and
on  Jn.  21 15-22  see  above,  §  9  c.

_ .  An  equally  important  point is  that

,  . the first appearances happened in

tV|SC  Galilee. The  most  convincing  reasons

for  this  conclusion  have  already  been

appearances.  summarised  under  GOSPKI.S  (§  138  a).

(a) In  addition  to  what  is  said  there  special  emphasis

4063


may  be  laid  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  gospel  in  which
appearances  to  men  (not  women)  are  reported  as  having
been  made  both  in  Galilee  and  in  Jerusalem  ;  for  Jn.  21
is  an  appendix  by  another  hand.

It  is  only  Mt.  that,  besides  the  appearance  to  the  disciples  in
Galilee,  knows  of  that  made  to  the  women  on  the  return  from
the  sepulchre  (28  <)f.)',  this,  however,  will  be  regarded  by  very
many  as  unhistorical,  being  absent  from  Mk.  (which  neverthe
less  is  in  this  section  so  closely  followed  by  Mt.)  and  containing
nothing  more  than  a  repetition  of  the  injunction  already  given
by  the  angel  to  the  women,  to  bid  the  disciples  repair  to  Galilee.
Jn  any  case  the  appearance  comes  from  a  separate  source.  If
we  leave  Mt.  28  <)f.  out  of  account  it  becomes  perfectly  clear  that
no  one  gospel  from  the  first  reported  appearances  of  the  risen
Je*us  in  Galilee  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem.  The  gospels  in  fact
fall  exactly  into  two  classes  :  Mk.,  Mt.  and  the  Gospel  of  Peter
are  for  Galilee  ;  Lk.,  Jn.,  and  Mk.  lOq-zo  for  Jerusalem,  and
the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  also  does  not  indicate  in  any  way
that  it  looks  for  James  and  Peter  and  Peter's  companions  else
where  than  in  the  place  where  it  finds  the  servant  of  the  high
priest  (see  above,  $  4  a,  6),  viz.,  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  only  after
wards  that  the  writer  of  Jn.  21  sees  fit  to  change  this  'either,  or1
into  a  '  both,  and  '  ;  so  also  Mt.,  but  without  admitting  an  appear
ance  to  any  male  disciples  in  Jerusalem.

If,  however,  Galilee  and  Jerusalem  were  at  first
mutually  exclusive,  both  cannot  rest  upon  equally  valid
tradition  ;  there  must  have  been  some  reason  why  the
one  locality  was  changed  for  the  other.

(t>)  Such  a  reason  for  transferring  the  appearances
from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem  has  been  indicated  in  GOSPELS
(§  138(1).  Its  force  becomes  all  the  greater  when  it  is
realised  how  small  has  been  the  success  of  even  the  most
distinguished  critics  in  attempting  to  make  out  the
opposite.

All  that  Loofs  (see  below,  §  39)  has  to  say  is  (p.  25),  '  Those
narrators  who  represent  the  whole  life  of  Jesus,  with  the  ex
ception  of  the  last  eight  days,  as  having  been  passed  in  Galilee,
may  have  transferred  to  Galilee  also  the  appearances  of  the  risen
Jesus,  with  regard  to  which  they  were  very  defectively  informed  ;
they  may  have  done  so  all  the  more  easily  because  the  first
persons  of  whom  they  had  occasion  to  speak  in  connection  with
the  resurrection  were  women  from  Galilee.'  The  question  at
once  presents  itself:  What  has  the  circumstance  that  they  be
longed  to  Galilee  to  do  with  the  present  matter?  They  were  in
point  of  fact  in  Jerusalem.  What  is  the  relevancy  of  the  observa
tion  that  the  activity  of  Jesus,  apart  from  the  last  eight  days,
had  been  wholly  in  Galilee?  His  grave  at  any  rate  was  in
Jerusalem,  and  his  disciples  were  also  there,  according  to  the
testimony  of  Mk.,  Mt.,  and  the  Gospel  of  Peter,  at  least.  That
the  present  writer  holds  the  statement  as  to  the  presence  of  the
disciples  at  Jerusalem  to  be  unhistorical  does  not  affect  the  argu
ment  ;  for  the  point  is  that  Loofs  regards  precisely  that  state
ment  as  historical.  It  is  all  the  more  necessary  to  ask:  How
does  Loofs  know  that  Mk.  and  Mt.  were  very  defectively  informed
with  regard  to  the  appearances  of  the  risen  Jesus?

If  this  was  indeed  so,  if  Mk.  and  Mt.  had  to  fall  back
on  their  own  powers  of  conjecture,  where  else  were  they
to  look  for  appearances  if  not  in  Jerusalem  where  the
grave,  the  women,  and  the  disciples  were?  Thus  the
tradition  which  induced  them  to  place  the  appearances
in  Galilee  must  have  been  one  of  very  great  stability.

B.  Weiss  (to  pass  over  other  names),  in  the  interests  of  the
Jerusalem  tradition,  doubts  the  historicity  of  the  statement  that
the  women  received  from  the  angel  the  injunction  to  bid  the
disciples  proceed  to  Galilee,  especially  as  this  injunction  is
merely  a  reminiscence  of  Jesus  words  in  Gethsemane,  that  after
he  rose  from  the  dead  he  would  go  before  the  disciples  to  Galilee
(Mk.  14  28).  So  Lcl'cn  JesuM  2  590  (ET  3  393}.  On  p.  596  (ET
399/T),  however,  Weiss  says  that  that  command  of  the  angel  to  the
women  (to  direct  the  disciples  to  go  to  Galilee)  is  only  a  reminis
cence  of  the  command  of  the  same  character  which  the  risen
Jesus  himself  lays  upon  Mary  Magdalene,  according  to  Mt.  2§9_/C
(where,  according  to  Weiss,  only  the  second  Mary  is  errone
ously  conjoined  with  Mary  Magdalene  rightly  mentioned  by  the
eye-witness  John  [20  if.  11-18]).  Thus  what  Weiss  holds  to  be
an  error  (the  command  to  bid  the  disciples  go  to  Galilee)  must
be  held  (if  the  Jerusalem  tradition  is  to  be  maintained)  to  have
got  itself  clothed  in  a  very  remarkable  form  :  not  only  as  an
angelic  word  (Mt.  287  Mk.  167)  but  also  as  a  word  of  the  risen
Lord  himself  (Mt.  28 10),  in  the  account  of  an  appearance  that
is  guaranteed  by  an  eye-witness,

(c )  In  reality  the  error  lies  in  quite  another  direction  :
in  making  Jesus  appear  at  the  sepulchre  to  the  women,
or  Mary  Magdalene,  as  the  case  may  be.  On  the
account  in  Mt.  see  above  (a).  That  of  Jn.,  however,
is  open  to  just  as  serious  objections,  for  its  chief  saying,
'  I  am  not  yet  ascended  unto  the  Father,'  rests  on  a
theory  of  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  is  peculiar
to  the  Fourth  Gospel  (§  16,  c).  If,  however,  Jn. 's

4064


RESURRECTION.  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


account  can  lay  no  claim  to  authenticity  we  may  be  all
the  surer  that  it  is  a  transformation  of  the  account  of
Mt.  Of  its  being  so  there  are,  moreover,  several
indications.  In  Jn. ,  as  in  Mt. ,  one  of  Jesus'  sayings  is
only  a  repetition  of  a  word  of  the  angels:  'Woman,
why  weepest  thou  ? '  A  reminiscence  of  the  fact  that
when  the  women  met  Jesus  they  had  in  Mt.  already
retired  from  the  sepulchre  may  perhaps  be  recognised  in
'  she  turned  herself  back  '  (f<TTpd<f>i)  eis  ra  diricru)  in  Jn.
20 14.  Only  one  woman  appearing  at  the  grave  in  Jn.
is  perhaps  to  be  explained  by  the  observation  that  the
recognition-scene  becomes  more  dramatic  when  Jesus
has  no  need  to  utter  more  than  a  single  word  :  '  Mary.'
Cp,  further,  §  25,  c.

(</)  In  i  Cor.  15  Paul  mentions  no  place.  The
enumeration  he  gives  would  not  preclude  the  reader  from
supposing  that  the  various  appearances  had  occurred
in  quite  different  places — for  example,  most  of  them  in
Galilee,  even  if  that  to  James  were  to  be  thought  of  as
having  been  made  in  Jerusalem.  It  is,  however,  quite
improbable  that  James  was  in  Jerusalem  again  so  soon
(see  MINISTRY,  §  aid),  or  that  he  should  have  ex
perienced  the  appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus  at  so  late
a  time  that  it  might  nevertheless  be  supposed  that
James  had  already  removed  to  Jerusalem  (see  l>elow,
§  36  [/])-

The  sealing  and  watching  of  the  sepulchre  (Mt.  27  62-66
284  11-15)  is  now  very  generally  given  up  even  by  those
20  Watch  at  scno'ars  wno  st'^  hold  by  the  resurrec-
sepulchre  tio11  narratives  as  a  whole.  (a)  As
unhistorical.  ^dy  Pointed  out  above  (§  a«)  in
Mk.  it  is  not  only,  as  in  Lk.  and  Jn. ,
absent ;  it  is  absolutely  excluded  by  the  women's
question  :  they  have  no  apprehensions  about  the
watch,  only  about  the  stone.  (b)  Again,  it  is  ex
ceedingly  improbable  that  the  Jews  remembered  any
prophecy  of  Jesus  that  he  was  to  rise  again  in  three
days  (Mt.  2763).  According  to  the  Gospels  Jesus  made
prophecies  of  the  kind  only  to  the  innermost  circle  of
his  disciples  (Mk.  82731  930 /.  1032-34  and  ||).  Indeed
in  Mk.  and  Lk.  not  even  the  women  remember  the
prophecy,  otherwise  they  would  not  have  set  out  to
anoint  the  body,  (c)  Again,  the  explanation  which  the
high  priests  and  elders  suggest,  according  to  Mt.  2813,
is  untenable  ;  for  if  the  soldiers  were  asleep  at  the  time
they  could  not  testify  that  the  disciples  stole  the  body.
(d)  Not  less  unlikely  is  the  supposition  that  the  Jewish
authorities  actually  believed  the  account  of  the  soldiers
regarding  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  Surely
the  consequence  must  have  been,  as  with  Paul  at  a  later
date,  their  conversion  to  the  faith  of  Jesus.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  they  remained  unmoved,  they  must  also
have  believed  that,  however  perplexing  it  might  at  first
sight  appear,  the  affair  was  capable  of  explanation  other
wise  than  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  and  must  have
moved  Pilate  to  institute  a  strict  inquiry  into  the  conduct
of  the  soldiers,  rather  than  have  sought  to  bribe  the
soldiers,  (e)  Above  all,  the  soldiers  could  not  have
accepted  a  bribe,  least  of  all  if  they  had  nothing  better  to
say  by  way  of  ostensible  defence  than  that  they  had  fallen
asleep.  For  this  the  penalty  was  death.  According  to
Acts  12 19  we  actually  find  Agrippa  I.  putting  to  death  the
soldiers  who  had  allowed  Peter  to  escape  from  prison,
and  this  is  conclusive  as  to  the  nature  of  military  respon
sibilities,  even  if  in  point  of  fact  the  liberation  of  Peter  was
brought  about  through  no  fault  of  his  keepers  (cp  SIMON
I'KTKR,  §  3,  e).  Roman  soldiers  knew  only  too  well  the
strictness  with  which  discipline  was  administered,  and
the  promise  of  the  Jewish  authorities  to  obtain  immunity
for  them  from  Pilate,  if  needful  (Mt.  2814),  would  have
made  no  impression  on  them.  (/")  The  best  criticism
on  this  whole  feature  of  the  narrative  is  the  simple  fact
that  the  Gospel  of  Peter,  which  unquestionably  is  later
thnn  Mt. ,  avoids  it  altogether  and  concludes  quite  differ
ently  (above,  §  5(7).

That  Jesus  was  buried  in  a  usual  way,  not — as  is  con-

4065


jectured  by  Volkmar  (Religion  Jesti,  77 f.  257-259  [i8s7],

21 Empty Die El'anSeli(l1 [1870]  =  Marcus u.

sepulchre dic  sy"°Pse  tl876],  603)  on  the  basis

. , of  Is.  089  22i6-i8  Rev.  118/. — left  un-

unhistoncal. , • ,

buried,  or  at  most  cast  into  a  hole  and

covered  with  some  earth,  is  established  by  i  Cor.  164  (cp
Keim,  Gesck.  Jesu  von  Natara,  8525-527,  ET  6271-274).
liut  the  accounts  of  the  empty  sepulchre  are  none  of
them  admissible.  As  to  this  the  leading  points  have
already  been  summarised  in  GOSPELS  (§  138  e  f).  Some
further  considerations  may  be  added.

(a)  The  three  points  from  which  we  have  to  start  are
the  silence  of  Paul  (as  of  the  entire  NT  apart  from
the  Gospels;  see,  especially,  Acts 229-32) — a  silence
which  would  be  wholly  inexplicable  were  the  story  true
(§  15)  ;  next,  the  statement  in  Mk.  168  that  the  women
said  nothing  of  their  experiences  at  the  sepulchre — a
statement  which  has  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  that
Mk.  was  the  first  to  be  in  a  position  to  publish  the  facts  ;
in  other  words,  that  the  whole  story  is  a  very  late  pro
duction  ;  lastly,  if  (as  we  have  seen)  the  first  appearances
of  Jesus  were  in  Galilee,  the  tidings  of  them  must  have
arrived  at  Jerusalem  much  too  late  to  allow  of  examina
tion  of  the  sepulchre  with  any  satisfactory  results.  1  f  a
body  had  been  found  it  would  have  been  too  far  advanced
in  decay  to  allow  of  identification  ;  if  there  were  none,
this  could  be  accounted  for  very  easily  without  postulat
ing  a  resurrection.

(b}  The  attempt  to  explain  the  evangelical  reports
without  assuming  a  resurrection  is,  however,  the  line
taken  by  very  many  theologians  also  who  hold  by  what
is  said  as  to  the  empty  sepulchre  and  yet  assume  no
miracle.  In  the  first  place  they  postulate  a  removal  of
the  body  by  persons  whose  action  had  no  connection
with  the  question  of  a  resurrection.

On  account  of  the  approach  of  the  Sabbath  (they  hold)  the
body  had  in  any  case  to  be  laid  in  some  grave  or  other,  even
perhaps  without  leave  asked  of  the  owner.  It  was,  therefore,
necessary  that  it  should  be  removed  afterwards  to  a  more  suit
able  place  ;  or  the  owner  himself  may  have  removed  it.  A
reminiscence  of  this  is  even  discovered  in  Jn.  20  15.  Or,  if  the
sepulchre  belonged  to  Joseph  of  Arimatha;a,  even  he  may  not
have  desired  to  have  the  body  of  a  stranger  permanently  occupy
ing  a  place  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  family.  On  all  these  assump
tions  what  strikes  one  is  the  promptitude  with  which  the
transference  must  have  been  made.  To  do  so  on  the  Sabbath
before  sundown  was  unlawful  ;  yet  very  early  next  morning  the
transference  had  already  been  effected  (according  to  Mt.  even
immediately  after  the  sundown  which  marked  the  close  of  the
Sabbath  ;  see,  however,  §  zd).

(c}  Others  suggest  that  the  enemies  of  the  Christians
had  removed  the  body  of  Jesus  in  order  that  it  might
not  receive  the  veneration  of  his  followers.  The  sur
prising  thing  in  this  would  be,  not  so  much  that  such  a
policy  would  have  given  the  greatest  possible,  though
unintentional,  impetus  to  such  veneration,  as  rather  this,
that  such  action  would  presuppose  a  disposition  to
worship  the  dead  body  for  which  it  would  be  difficult  to
find  a  precedent  among  the  Jews,  for  whom  any  contact
with  a  corpse  meant  defilement.

(d]  For  a  long  time  the  favourite  view  was  that  the
disciples  themselves  actually  had  clone  what,  according
to  Alt.  2764,  the  Jewish  authorities  were  apprehensive
they  might  do,  and,  according  to  281315,  imputed  to
them  falsely,  namely,  that  they  had  stolen  the  body  in
order  that  they  might  afterwards  proclaim  that  Jesus
had  risen.

Renan  (Affitrcs,  4zf-<  ET  6gyC),  without  expressly  stating
this  purpose  of  the  disciples,  is  inclined  to  attribute  a  share  in  the
removal  of  the  body  to  Mary  Magdalene  (whose  predisposition
to  mental  malady  [Lk.  8  2]  he  accentuates),  because  only  a
woman's  hand  would  have  left  the  clothes  in  such  order  as  is
described  in  Jn.  207.  That  a  theft  of  this  kind  would  have  had
the  effect  of  convincing  gainsayers  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus
is  not  very  easy  to  believe.  On  the  other  hand,  it  could  in
certain  circumstances  have  made  some  impression  on  followers
of  Jesus.

The  question  forces  itself,  however  :  \Yho  was  there
to  set  the  plan  on  foot  ?  The  disciples  were  utterly
cast  down  ;  to  all  probable  seeming,  in  fact,  they  were
not  even  in  Jerusalem  at  all  (GOSPELS,  §  138  a).  The

4066


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


theory  thus  breaks  down  at  the  outset,  and  it  seems
superfluous  to  ask  whether  the  disciples  would  have
ventured  to  act  in  a  sense  contrary  to  the  ordinance  of
God  who  had  suffered  their  master  to  die.

(e)  We  mention,  lastly,  yet  another  theory,  which  is
most  clearly  a  mere  refuge  of  despair  —  the  theory,
namely,  that  the  earthquake  (mentioned  only  in  Mt.
28z)  opened  a  chasm  immediately  under  the  sepulchre,
into  which  the  body  of  Jesus  disappeared.

Not  only  this,  however,  but  also  all  the  other  hypo
theses  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  become
superfluous  on  the  adoption  of  the  view  that  the  state
ments  about  the  empty  sepulchre  are  unhistorical.

As  soon  as  his  approaching  death  came  to  be  foreseen
by  Jesus,  he  must  have  looked  forward  also  to  its  annul-
ment,  unless,  indeed,  he  at  the  same
had  abandoned  the  belief  that  he


_, ... ,
22.  ine  tmra


was  the  Messiah  ordained  by  God  to


establish  the  divine  kingdom  upon  earth.  (a)  As  is
said  elsewhere  (GOSPELS,  §  145  [/]),  it  is  not  probable
that  Jesus  foretold  simply  his  resurrection  ;  that  took
him  into  heaven,  whereas  the  work  of  the  Messiah  lay
upon  earth.  The  most  important  prediction  accord
ingly  was  that  of  his  coming  again  from  heaven.  The
time  fixed  by  him  is  variously  stated  in  the  Gospels  as
being  at  the  end  of  the  then  living  generation  (Mt.
IGzj  f.  ),  after  a  probably  shorter  interval  (1023),  and
in  the  immediate  future  (air'  dprt,  Mt.  2664).  The
most  certain  conclusion  that  can  be  deduced  from  this
variation  clearly  is  that  Jesus  never  gave  any  precise
date,  and  this  for  the  reason  that  he  himself  (see  Mk.
1332  =  Mt.  2436)  did  not  know  it;  yet  it  is  also  very
possible  that  he  used  the  expression  '  in  '  or  '  after  '
'  three  days  '  as  a  conventional  designation  for  a  very
short  interval  (Lk.  1832  Mk.  14s8  152g  and  parallels,  on
which  cp  MINISTRY,  §  2  a).

(fi)  As  soon  as  the  question  came  to  be  one  not  of  his
coming  again  from  heaven,  but  of  his  rising  again  from
the  dead,  the  expression  'after  three  days,'  in  itself  a
very  indefinite  one,  came  to  have  a  more  exact  meaning.
The  Jewish  belief  was  that  the  soul  lingered  for  three
days  only,  near  the  body  it  had  left,  in  the  hope  of
returning  to  it  ;  after  that  the  body  became  so  changed
that  a  reanimation  was  no  longer  possible  (see  JOHN,
SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  20  a;  and  Edersheim,  Life  and
Times  of  Jesus,  2324/1).  It  was  only  natural  that  in
thinking  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  this  limit  should  be
kept  in  mind  (Mk.  831  93i  If/34  and  !|  ;  Lk.  2472i46).
If  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  believe  that  Jesus  uttered
these  prophecies  so  early  (especially  in  connection  with
Peter's  confession  at  Csesarea  Philippi  ;  see  GOSPELS,
§  145  e),  and  with  such  exactitude  of  detail,  it  must
nevertheless  be  recognised  that  he  may  very  well,  at
one  time  or  another,  have  expressed  himself  in  some
such  sense.

(f  )  The  OT  texts  that  have  special  relevance  in  this
connection  are  2  K.  20s  and  Hos.  62  (in  both  of  which
the  interval  of  three  days  is  brought  into  connection
with  a  revivification,  if  not  after  death,  at  least  after  a
sickness  or  time  of  weakness)  ;  and  Jonah  2i  [1  17]  also
—  the  three  days'  sojourn  of  the  prophet  in  the  belly  of
the  whale  —  is  in  Mt.  12  40,  albeit  in  a  very  inappropriate
and  interrupting  way  (see  GOSPELS,  §  140*2),  inter
preted  with  reference  to  the  period  during  which  Jesus
was  to  remain  in  the  grave.  Paul  expressly  refers  to
the  Scriptures  in  i  Cor.  104.  A  forsaking  '  for  a  small
moment  '  is  spoken  of  also  in  Is.  54  7.

(d)  In  this  way  it  became  possible  for  the  resurrection
of  Jesus,  if  expected  at  all,  to  be  expected  exactly  after
three  days.  The  expectation,  however,  would  hardly
have  had  any  result  if  those  who  had  expected  had  not
also  had  the  consciousness  of  having  seen  him.  In
itself  considered  it  was  not  absolutely  imperative  that
the  first  appearances  should  coincide  with  the  precise
time  of  the  expected  resurrection.  But  if  they  had
occurred  much  later  the  belief  that  the  resurrection

4067


actually  had  happened  precisely  three  days  after  death
could  hardly  have  been  held  very  firmly.  As,  however,
we  find  it  in  point  of  fact  held  with  equal  firmness  by
Paul  (i  Cor.  164)  and  by  the  evangelists,  the  balance  of
probabilities  favours  the  view  that  the  first  appearances
happened  on  the  same  day  or  only  a  little  later.

With  this  it  fits  in  very  well  if  we  suppose  that  the
disciples  shortly  after  the  arrest  of  Jesus,  and  Peter
shortly  after  his  denial,  had  already  set  out  for  Galilee,
so  that  they  might  arrive  there  on  the  third  day  (cp  Jos.
Vit.  52,  §  269).  This  is,  moreover,  the  reason  why  the
Gospel  of  Peter,  in  spite  of  all  appearance,  has  no  prob
ability  in  its  favour  if  it  really  means  to  convey  that  the
disciples  did  not  set  out  on  their  return  journey  to
Galilee  until  the  eighth  or  rather  the  ninth  day  after  the
death  of  Jesus,  and  that  thus  at  least  eleven  days
elapsed  before  the  first  appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus
was  experienced  (see  above,  §  5  e).

(e)  According  to  the  Gospels  Jesus  remained  under
the  power  of  death  not  for  about  seventy-two  hours  but
only  for  somewhere  between  twenty-six  and  thirty-six
hours.  These,  however,  in  fact,  according  to  Jewish
reckoning,  are  distributed  between  Friday,  Saturday,
and  Sunday.  In  two  of  the  OT  passages  referred  to
above — 2  K.  20s  and  Hos  62 — we  read  not  '  after  three
days,'  but  'on  the  third  day.'  Thus  the  Gospel  tradi
tion  literally  satisfies  the  expression.

It  must  have  appeared  fitting  that  the  rising  of  Jesus  should
occur  at  as  early  a  moment  as  possible  after  the  third  day  had
begun.  From  the  same  sense  of  fitness  the  visit  of  the  women,
once  it  was  accepted  as  a  fact,  was  naturally  assigned  to  the
early  morning  hours.  Where  Mk.  has  'after  three  days'  Giera
rpets  T)jiepa? ;  831  931  1034),  the  parallel  passages  consistently
have  'on  the  third  day'  (777  Tpirr)  Tj/xe'pa :  Mt.  1621  17  23  20  19
Lk.  922  1833  as  also  24746,  cp  also  24  21  Acts  1040).  The  latter
expression  in  Mt.  and  Lk.  may  possibly  be  dependent  on  the
account  of  the  course  of  events  as  given  by  themselves,  and  thus
Mk.'s  phrase  might  seem  to  have  been  the  original  one.  Vet  we
must  not  imagine  that  the  two  phrases  were  for  the  evangelists
really  incompatible.  Matthew  himself  says  in  one  place  (2763_/^)
that  Jesus  foretold  his  resurrection  'after  three  days'  (/otera
rpeis  ^e'pas)  and  represents  the  Jews  as  basing  upon  this  their
petition  to  Pilate  that  the  sepulchre  may  be  guarded  '  till  the
third  day'  (s<o?  rijs  rpuT)s  i^/aepas).  Were  this  to  be  taken
literally  it  would  have  no  sense,  for  in  that  case  no  watch  would
have  been  asked  for  precisely  the  fourth  day,  which  was  the
critical  one.  From  this  it  follows  also  that  we  are  not  compelled
to  regard  Mt.  1240  (see  above,  c)  as  genuine  for  the  reason  that,
according  to  the  report  in  the  Gospels,  the  time  of  the  fulfilment
was  shorter  than  that  appointed  in  Jesus'  prophecy.  Jn.  2  19-21
Says  :  iv  rpiaiv  rjjue'pais.

As  for  the  number  of  the  appearances,  Paul  knows  of
more  than  we  find  in  any  one  Gospel — viz. ,  five,  over
and  above  that  made  to  himself.

(a)  It  is  not  possible, however, to  identify  each  of
even  the  few  Gospel  accounts  with  one  of  Paul's.

Let  one  example  suffice  in  illustration  of  the  kind  of  violence
in  dealing  with  texts  required  in  order  to  effect  identifications.

Resch  (TU\.  4421-426,  x.  2381-389,  x.  3  768-
23.  Number  Of  782  790-814  824-827)  identifies  the  appearance
appearances.  to  Peter  with  that  to  the  unnamed  disciple

at  Emmaus  (see  above,  §  217),  that  to  the
Twelve  with  Lk.  24  36-49  and  Jn.  20  19-24  (above,  §  2  r),  that  to
the  Five  Hundred  with  Lk.  245o_/C,  where,  nevertheless,  'them'
(avrovs)  denotes  precisely  the  same  persons  as  we  find  in  2433  36.
That  to  James  he  identities  with  that  to  Thomas  and  the  other
disciples  in  Jn.  20  26-29.  This  James  he  holds  to  be  identical  with
James  the  son  of  Alphaeus,  who  may  (Resch  says)  have  been
named  Thomas — i.e.,  twin — because  his  brother  Judas  of  James
is  called  Twin  in  Syriac  tradition  (Lips.  Apokr.  Ap.-Gesch.
i.  20  227,  ii.  2  154  173^).  Finally,  the  appearance  to  'all  the
apostles'  is,  according  to  Resch,  that  mentioned  in  Mt.  28  16-20
and  Actsl  4-12.

(b]  If  one  addresses  oneself  to  the  problems  with
out harmonistic prepossessions,  the  safest criteria  for
identifying  an  event  of  which  there  are  two  accounts
will  be  the  presence  of  characteristic  details  and  (next
in importance)  exact time- data. Unfortunately  Paul
supplies  us  with  no  details,  and  dates  are  gained  only
indirectly,  so  far  as  they  can  be  deduced  from  the  order
in  which  he  mentions  the  events. The  number  of  persons
said to  have  been  involved  in a  historical  event  is  a
secure  criterion of  its identity  only  if  the number is
small. As  soon  as  it  becomes  considerable,  an  error
within  moderate  limits  is  not  wholly  inconceivable.

4068


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


(c)  On these principles the  only identification  that
admits  of  being  made  without  question  is  that  of  the
appearance  to  Peter  in  i  Cor.  15s  with  the  appearance
mentioned  in  Lk.  2434. Next  in  Paul's  account  comes
an  appearance  to  the  Twelve. A  similar  appearance  is
recorded  by  Mt.  as  the  only  one  he  knows. In  Lk.  the
only  appearance  to  the  Eleven  (with  others)  is  in  24 33
36-51;  Jn.  2019-24  contains  the  first  appearance  to  ten
apostles  ;  but  we  must  identify  the  two  on  account  of
their  exactly  similar  date  (§  2  r). Cp  also  the  almost
identical words in Lk.  2436, 'stood in the midst of
them  '  (fffTt)  iv  fJL^ffq)  O.VT&V}  and  Jn.  20  19,  '  stood  in  the
midst '  (for?;  et'j  TO  ^aov}. The  diversity  of  the  special
features  mentioned  by  Lk.  and  Jn.  may  be  ignored  all
the  more  readily  if  we  find  ourselves  able  to  regard  them
merely as unhistorical embellishments. Both date
(evening  of  the  resurrection  day),  however,  and  place
(Jerusalem)  are  quite  irreconcilable  with  those  in  Mt.
Nevertheless  it  will  remain  open  to  us  to  recognise  as
kernel  common  to  all three accounts that after the
appearance  to  Peter  there  was  another  to  the  Eleven.
Here  also  belongs  the  second  fragment  of  the  Gospel
of  the  Hebrews  (above,  §  4^). This,  however,  is  the
only one of Resch's identifications that can stand
scrutiny,  and  even  so  Mt.  must  be  left  out.

(d)  The  appearance  to  the  500  has  no  parallels  (the
proposed parallel referred to in § 1 1  b cannot be
accepted), that to  James only  in the  Gospel  of the
Hebrews  (above,  §  4 a,  b}. As  parallel  to  that  to  'all
the  apostles ' on  the  other  hand  we  must  not  adduce
Acts  14-12. The  event  related  there  is,  in  the  intention
of  the  author,  not  the  sequel  to  the  only  appearance  in
the  Third  Gospel  (24  33  36-51)  to  about  the  same  number
of  persons  ; it  aims  at  correcting  that  part  (2444-51)  of
the  earlier  narrative  which  ends  with the  Ascension.
Jn.  2026-29  admits  of  being cited in this connection
merely  as  being  the  only  repetition  to  be  met  with  in
any  gospel,  of  an  appearance  to  a  company  of  disciples
approximating  this  number. Since,  however,  this  com
pany  is  in  Jn. supplemented  only  by  Thomas  and  in
Paul  by  quite  different  persons, we  have  no  assurance
that  even  so  much  as  a  reminiscence  of  one  and  the
same  occurrence  underlies  the  two  accounts. On  the
other  hand,  in  Paul  the  appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus
at  the  sepulchre  to  the  two  Marys  (Mt. ), or  to  Mary
Magdalene  alone  (Jn. ),  is  unmentioned,  as  also  that  to
the  two  disciples  at  Emmaus  and  that  reported  in  Jn.  21 ,
which  has  some  resemblance to  what  we  find in the
Gospel  of  Peter  (above,  §  5  d\

(e)  It  has  already  been shown at some  length (§§
15,  i8f)  that  Paul would  certainly  not have omitted
to  mention  at  least the  appearances at the  sepulchre
and  at  Emmaus  had  he  been  aware  of  them. To  meet
this  difficulty,  and  establish  the  priority  of  the  Gospel
narratives  to  Paul,  the  counter  question  has  been  asked  :
How  could the  evangelists possibly  have  allowed so
much  that  is  found  in  Paul  to  escape  them,  if  they  had
been acquainted with his narrative  or  even  with the
tradition  which  underlies  it? This  question,  however,
is  easily  answered. For  a  writer  who  could  report  an
instance  in  which  Jesus  had  partaken  of  food  (Lk. ),  or
in  which  his  wounds  had  been  touched  (Lk. ,  Jn. ),  or
who  could  speak of  the  empty  sepulchre  as  all  four
evangelists  do,  or  of  appearances  of  the  risen  Jesus  close
to  the  sepulchre  (Mt. ,  Jn. ) — for  such  a  writer  and  for
his  readers  an  accumulation  of  instances  in  which  Jesus
had merely  been seen no  longer possessed  any  very
great interest ; and a case even in which he had
appeared  to  five  hundred  brethren  at  once  would, at
the  time  when  the  Gospels  were  written,  hardly  have
been  considered  so  important  as  an  appearance  to  the
apostles, whose  place  in  the  reverence  of the  faithful
had  already  come  to  be  very  exalted  (see MINISTRY,
§ 34). Even the instance  in which Jesus  had been
merely  seen  (though)  by  Peter  is  only  touched  on  by
Lk.  (2434),  not  described,  plainly  because  the  narrative

130  a  4069


alongside of the others would be too devoid of
colour.

To  this  want  of  interest  in  mere  visual  appearances
of  the  risen  Jesus  we  can  add,  however,  in  the  case  of  the
evangelists  a  positive  interest, that  of


24.  Influence


of  tendency
on  Gospels.


serving  definite  purposes  by  their  narra


tives,  (a)  It  makes  for  confirmation
of  what  has  been  laid  down  in  preceding
sections  (§§  17-22)  as  to  the  elements  in  the  accounts  of
the  resurrection  which  alone  can  be  recognised  as  histori
cal,  if  we  are  in  a  position  to  show  that  everything  in  the
accounts  which  goes  beyond  such  indubitably  historical
elements  is  a  product  of  tendencies  \\hich  by  an  inherent
necessity  could  not  fail  to  lead  to  a  shaping  of  the
accounts  in  the  form  in  which  they  now  lie  before  us,
even  where  there  is  no  substratum  of  actual  fact.  In  so
far  as  these  tendencies  give  us  the  right  to  pronounce
unhistorical  everything  that  can  be  explained  by
their  means,  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  testimony  to
historical  fact,  they  may  be  appropriately  considered
now  in  the  course  of  the  investigation  as  to  objective
facts  in  the  resurrection-narratives  on  which  we  are  at
present  engaged.  It  will  appear  that  at  all  points  the
reference  to  tendencies  supplies  an  adequate  explanation
of  all  the  statements  which  we  have  been  unable  to
accept  as  historical.

(b)  As  regards  the  nature  of  these  tendencies  : — some
are directly apologetical, having for their object to
preclude  the possibility of  certain definite objections
against  the  actuality  of  the  resurrection. Others  are
apologetical  indirectly,  their  aim  being  to  round  off  the
picture  by  supplying  gaps  so  that no questions may
remain  open. Lastly,  some  have  in  view  the  needs  of
the  church  itself,  tracing  back,  as  they  do,  to  the  risen
Jesus  certain  instructions  which  were  not  found  in  the
reports  of  the  period  of  his  earthly  ministry  (§  28),  or
seeking  to  compensate  for  the  want  of  that  direct  assur
ance  of  the  continued  life  of  Jesus  which  later  genera
tions  were  no  longer  able  to  command  (§  29).

(c)  That  the  evangelical  narratives  as  a  whole  are  in
many  ways  influenced  by  tendency  has  been  shown  in
GOSPELS,  §§  108-114  a"d  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §§
17,  20  c,  23,  35  h,  and  elsewhere. How  close  at  hand
apologetic  interests  were  where  the  story  of  the  resurrec
tion  was  concerned is  seen  even in  the  fact that the
entire  statement  of  Paul is made with  an  apologetic
view — only,  in  his  case  there  is  no  justification  for  the
conjecture that the contents of his statement were
altered  by  this  consideration  (§§  io/. ). In  the  Gospels,
on  the  other  hand,  we  have  at  least  one  point  in  which
this  is  particularly  clear,  and  recognised  even  by  very
conservative  theologians.

In  Mt.  2815  it  is  expressly  said  that  the  report  of  the  theft  of
the  body  by  the  disciples  was  current  among  the  Jews  in  the
writer's  time.  The  writer  traces  it  back  to  the  false  testimony
of  the  guard  at  the  sepulchre  procured  by  bribery  on  the  part  of
the  Jewish  authorities.  If  we  find  ourselves  unable  to  regard
this  bribery,  or  indeed  any  part  of  the  story  as  to  the  watch  set
over  the  sepulchre,  as  historical,  we  are  shut  up  to  supposing
that  the  allegations  arose  from  the  desire  (or  tendency)  to  make
the  story  of  the  theft  of  the  body  by  the  disciples  seem  untenable.

(d)  It  must  at  the  same  time  be  expressly  emphasised
that  we  are  by  no  means compelled  to  think  of  this
tendency  as  operative  in  such  a  manner  that  an  author
would  produce  from  his  own  brain  a  quite  new  narrative
in  the  apologetic  direction. Precisely  the  same  result
— namely,  the  complete  unhistoricity  and  the  '  tendency  '
character  of  a  narrative — emerges  if  we  assume  that  the
narrative  has grown  up only  bit  by  bit, by the  co
operation  of  several,  and  has  reached  its present  form
under  the  influence  of  naive  and  artless  presuppositions
and  pardonable  misunderstandings,  in  some  such  manner
as we  have  sought to  render probable  elsewhere  for
a  series  of  narratives  found  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  (see

'•  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  35,  a-f).  A  special  reason
for  making  the  same  attempt  in  the  case  of  the  resurrec
tion  is  found  in  the  character  of  the  accounts  themselves.
If  they  were  pure  inventions  it  would  be  very  difficult  to

4070


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


understand  why,  for  example,  of  the  disciples  at
Kmmaus  one  is  nameless,  and  of  those  in  Jn.  '21  two
are  unnamed,  or  why  the  ap|)earances  to  Peter  as  being
the  first,  or  that  to  the  500  as  being  the  most  imposing,
should  not  have  received  detailed  adornment.  Cp,
further,  §§  igc,  2$c.

(e)  To  help  us  to  realise  how  such  a  narrative  could
come  into  existence  by  successive  steps,  let  us  take  the
example  referred  to  above — that  of  the  watch  set  on
the  sepulchre.

A  Christian  who  found  himself  confronted  for  the  first  time
with  the  assertion  that  the  disciples  had  stolen  the  body  of
Jesus  naturally  opposed  it  to  the  utmost.  As,  however,  at  the
same  time  (as  we  must  suppose,  if  we  believe  the  narrative  of
Mt.  to  be  unhistorical)  he  found  himself  unable  to  adduce  any
counter-evidence,  he  would  be  constrained  to  have  recourse  to
conjectures,  and  to  say  something  like  this  :  '  The  Jews,  we  may
be  quite  certain,  saw  to  the  watching  of  the  sepulchre  ;  they
could  very  well  have  known  that  Jesus  had  predicted  his  rising
again  for  the  third  day.'  A  somewhat  cnreless  Christian  by
stander  received  the  impression  that  in  these  suggestions  what
he  was  listening  to  was  not  mere  conjecture  but  statement  of
fact,  and  circulated  it  among  his  friends  as  such  ;  that  it  was
unhesitatingly  believed  by  Christians  is  not  astonishing.  Next,
let  us  suppose,  another  propounded  the  question  :  Did  then  the
men  of  the  guard  actually  see  what  happened  at  the  resurrection
of  Jesus?  Again  the  answer  could  only  be  a  conjecture;  but
just  as  certainly  it  must  have  run  as  follows  :  '  Unquestionably  ;
for  they  were  continuously  at  the  sepulchre,  and  Roman  soldiers
never  sleep  on  guard.'  As,  further,  at  the  time  we  are  at
present  supposing,  the  statement  that  the  women  had  found  the
stone  rolled  away  had  long  been  current,  conjecture  as  to  what
the  guards  had  observed  before  the  arrival  of  the  women  could
hardly  have  been  other  than  to  the  effect  that  there  had  been  an
earthquake  and  that  an  angel  had  come  down  from  heaven  and
rolled  away  the  stone.  That  this  conjecture  also  should  have
been  taken  up  as  a  statement  of  fact  is  easy  to  suppose.
Lastly,  a  listener  perhaps  would  ask  :  '  Why  then  did  not  the
soldiers  tell  what  had  happened,  and  why  have  we  been  left  in
ignorance  of  this  until  now  ? '  Once  more  the  answer — a  conjec
ture  merely,  yet  ready  to  be  accepted  as  a  fact — was  at  hand  :
The  Jewish  authorities  will  doubtless  have  bribed  them  to
suppress  the  truth  and  to  spread  instead  of  it  the  rumour  that
the  disciples  had  stolen  the  body.

Without  pursuing  this  line  of  explanation  further  in

details, let us now  endeavour to  see what were the

__ . - conscious or unconscious apologetic

, ',  •  i \  tendencies  at  work  which could  have

ttC^  1 r  given  rise  to  the  unhistorical  elements
on  accounts  of '• .,  ,  / \  T<-  T

,  ,  in  the  gospel  narratives. \a) If  Jesus

sepulchre.  . ,  •

was  risen, his  grave  must  have been

empty.  If  this  was  disputed,  the  Christians  asserted
it  as  a  fact,  and  that  with  the  very  best  intention  of
affirming  what  was  true.  Therefore,  no  hesitation  was
felt  iu  further  declaring  that  (according  to  all  reasonable
conjectured  the  women  who  had  witnessed  Jesus'  death
had  wished  to  anoint  his  body  and  thus  had  come  to
know  of  the  emptiness  of  the  grave.  In  the  fact  that
according  to  Mk.  and  Mt.  this  was  not  alleged  regard
ing  the  male  disciples  we  can  see  still  a  true  recollection
that  those  disciples  were  by  that  time  no  longer  in
Jerusalem  (see  GOSPELS,  §  138  a) ;  this  feature  was
not  first  added  by  our  canonical  evangelists  Mk.  and
Mt. ,  for  they  already  presuppose  the  presence  of  the
disciples  in  Jerusalem.

(6)  Why  then  should  not  these  disciples  themselves
have  gone  to  the  sepulchre  ?  In  an  earlier  phase  of  the
narratives  it  was,  no  doubt,  borne  in  mind  that  these
disciples,  if  in  Jerusalem  at  all,  had  to  remain  in  con
cealment,  and  even  a  writing  so  late  as  the  Gospel  of
Peter  (26)  knew  that  very  well.  Lk. ,  however  (2424),
ignores  it.  His  statement  that  'certain  '  (TLI>£S)  disciples
went  to  the  sepulchre  is  still  very  vague.  But  Jn.
forthwith  lays  hold  of  it  and  definitely  names  Peter  and
the  beloved  disciple,  and  reports  upon  their  rivalry  in  a
manner  that  betrays  a  conscious  tendency  much  more
strongly  than  most  of  the  other  narratives  (cp  SIMON
PKTER,  §  22  <M.

(c)  The  most  obvious  conjecture  must  necessarily
have  been  that  Jesus  was  seen  immediately  at  the
sepulchre  itself.  Here  also  may  be  distinguished  two
stages.  The  earlier  is  the  account  of  Mt.  ;  Jn.  recasts
it  (§  19  c).  If  Jn.  had  been  a  free  inventor  it  would

4071


p, ...
a  L  ee  or

3m>


be  hard  to  say  why  he  does  not  assign  the  appearance  of
Jesus  at  the  sepulchre  to  Peter  and  the  beloved  disciple,
both  of  whom  nevertheless  he  represents  as  examining
the  sepulchre.  Since  he  names  only  a  woman  as  re
ceiving  the  appearance  he  shows  himself  bound  by  the
representation  which  we  now  find  in  Mt.  ,  in  spite  of  all
the  comparative  freedom  with  which  he  departs  from  it.
So  also  the  Coptic  account,  and  the  Didaskalia  (above,
§§6,  7b}.

(d)  In  all  the  reports  hitherto  mentioned,  however,
Jesus  was  seen  only  after,  not  during,  his  resurrection.
The  possibility  of  filling  up  this  blank  was  offered  by
the  story  of  the  guard  at  the  sepulchre,  which  on  its
own  merits  has  already  been  discussed  (above,  §  24  e  ).
It  could  in  point  of  fact  fill  the  blank  in  an  (apologeti
cally)  extremely  effective  way,  inasmuch  as  it  was  by
unbelievers  that  the  actual  fact  of  the  resurrection  was
observed.

The  timidity  which  restrained  the  other  writers  from  touching
upon  this  incident  continued  to  be  still  operative  with  Mt.  in  so
far  that  he  does  not  say  that  the  person  of  Jesus  was  actually
seen,  and  adds  that  the  watchers  became  as  dead  men  (284).
The  Gospel  of  Peter  has  completely  overcome  this  timidity  ;  the
watchers  observe  accurately  each  of  the  successive  phases  of  the
resurrection  and  see  Jesus  himself  as  he  emerges  from  the  tomb.
The  codex  Bobbiensis  (above,  §  7  a)  relates  this  simply  as  a  fact
without  mention  of  the  witnesses.  The  statement  of  the  Gospel
of  the  Hebrews  —  that  Jesus  gave  the  linen  shroud  to  the  servant
of  the  high-priest—stands  upon  the  same  plane.

As  long  as  there  was  still  current  knowledge  that  the

first  appearances  of  the  risen  Jesus  were  in  Galilee,  the

,,, _ fact  could  be  reconciled  with  the  presence

,. . of the disciples in Jerusalem on the

p, ... ' morning  of  the  resurrection  only  (a)  on
{he assumptjon tj,at they were tnen

directed  to  go  to  Galilee.  The  natural
media  for  conveying  such  a  communication  must  have
seemed  to  be  the  angels  at  the  sepulchre  in  the  first
instance,  and  after  them  the  women.  So  Mk.  and
Mt.  So  far  as  Mt.  is  concerned  this  direction  to  be
given  to  the  disciples  was  perhaps  the  reason,  or  a
reason  in  addition  to  that  suggested  in  §  2  d,  why  the
women  should  be  made  to  go  to  the  grave  so  early  as
on  the  evening  ending  the  Sabbath,  so  that  the  disciples
might  still  in  the  course  of  the  night  have  time  to  set
out  and  if  possible  obtain  a.  sight  of  Jesus  within  three
days  after  his  crucifixion.

(i)  Yet  such  a  combination  as  this  was  altogether
too  strange.  Why  should  Jesus  not  have  appeared
forthwith  in  Jerusalem  to  the  disciples  ?  Accordingly
I>k.  and  Jn.  simply  suppressed  the  direction  to  go  to
Galilee,  finding  themselves  unable  to  accept  it,  and
transferred  the  appearances  to  Jerusalem.  Or,  it  was
not  our  canonical  evangelists  who  did  both  things  at
one  and  the  same  time,  but  there  had  sprung  up,
irrespective  of  Mk.  and  Mt.  ,  the  feeling  that  Jesus
must  in  any  case  have  already  appeared  to  the  disciples
in  Jerusalem  ;  it  presented  itself  to  Lk.  and  Jn.  with  a
certain  degree  of  authority,  and  these  writers  had  not
now  any  occasion  to  invent  but  simply  to  choose  what
seemed  to  them  the  more  probable  representation,  and
then,  when  in  the  preparation  of  their  respective  books
they  reached  the  order  to  go  to  Galilee,  merely  to  pass
over  it  or  get  round  it  (§  2  k],  as  no  longer  compatible
with  the  new  view.

As  against  all  assurances  that  the  risen  Jesus  had
been  seen,  it  was  always  possible  to  raise  the  objec-

27 tr\  O t'on  l^at  wnat  was  seen  ^at^  been  merely

sensible11 '  a  vision  '  (<t>dvTaffV-a)- One  g°od  wa>'
... , of meeting this  objection  was (<?) the

J  assurance that the eye-witnesses had

pp  ranees.  assurecj  themselves  of  the  contrary  with
all  the  more  care  and  circumspection  because  they  them
selves  had  at  first  shared  this  doubt.  It  is  thus  that
we  are  to  explain  the  care  with  which  the  disbelief  of
the  disciples  is  accentuated.

So  in  Mt.  28  17 ('but  some  doubted.'  oi  8«  t6i'<TTa<rar)l  Lk.

1  Should  Brandt  (355-357)  be  right  in  his  conjecture  that  these
three  words  are  a  gloss,  because,  in  the  words  immediately

4072


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


24  ii  37  41 — in  irv.  37  41  we  have  a  doubt  that  is  hardly  intelli
gible  in  the  present  connection,  since  all  those  present  have
already  in  v.  34  confessed  their  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus
(an  unevenness  that  would  be  removed  by  the  hypothesis  of
Brandt  spoken  of  in  §  16  b)— also  with  special  emphasis  in  Jn.
2025  Mk.  16  ii  I3./C  and  in  the  Coptic  account.  The  counter
part,  a  specially  strong  faith,  is  shown  by  James,  in  the  Gospel
of  the  Hebrews,  in  his  oath  that  he  would  fast  until  Jesus  had
risen  again.

(l>)  If  then  it  was  held  important  to  be  able  to  over
come  doubts,  it  was  always  possible  to  produce  some  im
pression  if  assurance  could  be  given  that  Jesus  had  been
not  only  seen  but  also  heard.  As  to  the  substance  of
what  he  said  something  will  be  found  in  the  next  section
(§  28)  ;  for  the  present,  all  that  comes  into  consideration
is  the  simple  fact  of  speech.  For  narrators  who  had
never  themselves  witnessed  an  appearance  of  Jesus  it
was  an  exceedingly  natural  thing  to  assume  that  Jesus
had  been  not  only  seen  but  also  heard,  and  it  was
equally  easy  for  their  hearers  to  take  their  conjecture
for  fact.  At  the  same  time,  since  it  was  not  impossible
also  to  hear  words,  as  Paul  reports  himself  to  have  done
(2  Cor.  124),  without  the  experience  being  more  than  an
ecstasy,  some  yet  stronger  proof  of  objectivity  still  re
mained  necessary.

(e)  In  §  17  [/]  stress  has  already  been  laid  on  the
fact  that  in  the  bodily  figure  of  Jesus  which  was  seen  the
marks  of  the  wounds  were  also  included  ;  nay  more,
that  spectators  even  perhaps  believed  themselves  to  see
that  he  was  showing  them.  Still,  a  real  guarantee  of
the  actuality  of  his  return  to  this  earth  had  not  been
received  until  the  wounds  had  been  touched.

Whilst,  however,  there  is  between  such  an  '  actual '  seeing  and
actual  touching  a  distinction  so  great  that  it  can  hardly  be  exag
gerated,  it  is  one  which  is  capable  of  being  almost  entirely  over
looked  by  people  who  neither  themselves_  had  witnessed  an
appearance  of  Jesus  nor  were  familiar  with  the  principles  of
psychology;  and  thus  it  would  not  be  impossible  for  them,
without  any  consciousness  of  inaccuracy,  still  less  of  deliberate
perversion  of  the  truth,  to  change  the  statement  which  eye
witnesses  had  actually  made  as  to  having  seen  the  wounds  into
the  different  statement  that  Jesus  had  invited  the  disciples  to
touch  them.  So  Lk.  2439  Jn.  2027  ;  also  the  Coptic  account  and
the  second  fragment  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  (§  4  c),  in  the
last-cited  case  with  the  express  addition  that  the  disciples  availed
themselves  of  the  invitation.  In  a  naive  way  a  touching  of
Jesus  by  the  women  is  mentioned  in  Mt.  28  9.

(d)  Lk.  goes  yet  another  step  further  in  his  statement
(2442^ )  that  Jesus  asked  for  food,  and  partook  of  it  in
the  presence  of  the  disciples. This  is  in  v.  41  expressly
characterised  as  a  still  stronger  proof  of  the  reality  of
his  resurrection  than  the  fact  that  he  had  been  touched.
Here, accordingly, the  popular conceptions  as  to  the
nature  of  the  resurrection  body  underlying  Mk.  614-16,
which  in  the  earliest  period  were  not  applied  to  Jesus
(§ 17  e), gain  influence. Jn. does  not  follow Lk. in
this  ; he  declines to  represent the  risen Jesus in  so
strongly  and frankly  sensuous a  manner.1 Yet even
Lk.'s  representation  is  surpassed  by  the  extra-canonical
addition to Lk.  2143 (§ 7 c] that  Jesus gave  to his
disciples  the  remainder  of  the  food  of  which  he  had  been
partaking. An  eating  in  their  presence  here  becomes  an
eating  with  them,  which  according  to  Acts  10 41  was,  in
fact,  continually  happening.2

(e)  It becomes  now  quite  easy  to  understand  how,
once  narrators  had  ceased  to  shrink  from  such  repre
sentations,  the  reporter  passed  over  that  particular  touch
in  the  accounts  actually  proceeding  from  eye-witnesses
according to which Jesus had vanished after each
appearance,  and  how  instead  of  this  it  was  unsuspectingly

following,  Jesus  passes  over  the  doubt  of  these  disciples  without
remark,  the  insertion  would  still  show  that  a  reader  of  the
oldest  period  found  it  fitting  to  presuppose  doubts  on  the  part  of
some  of  the  disciples.

1  The  question  in  Jn.  21  5,  quite  on  a  level  with  Lk.  2441
('aught  to  eat?'),  has  a  quite  different  significance;  in  Jn.
Jesus  does  not  intend  to  eat,  but  to  give  them  to  eat.  Neither
also  does  Lk.  243oyT(the  scene  at  Emmaus)  imply  a  represen
tation  of  Jesus  as  eating.  See  §  29,  /».

-  The  rendering  of  wvc&ifAfWQl  in  EV»'.?.  of  Acts  1  4  '  eat
ing  with  them  '  is,  however,  very  doubtful  (E  V  '  being  assembled
together  with  them').

4073


taken  for  granted  that  Jesus  had  still  remained  upon
earth  and  had  dealings  with  his  disciples  in  every  respect
as  a  man.  In  the  earliest  stage  of  this  way  of  represent
ing  matters,  such  a  condition  of  things  was  held  to  have
lasted  for  only  one  day ;  but  afterwards  the  time  was
extended  to  forty  days  (§  16  a,  6).

That  this  second  view  was  not  met  with  in  tradition  from  the
beginning,  but  owes  its  existence  to  a  transformation  of  the
earlier  view,  is  absolutely  certain  unless  we  assign  Acts  to
another  than  the  author  of  the  Third  Gospel.  The  cause  of  the
transformation  is  very  apparent  ;  the  disciples  were,  during  all
the  lifetime  of  Jesus,  very  weakly,  and  at  the  end  still  needed
much  instruction  '  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God '  (irept  TTJS
/SacriAei'as  roO  0eoO  :  Acts  1  3).

(f)  The  idea  of  a  continuous  presence  of  Jesus  upon
earth,  if  only  for  a  single  day,  necessarily  carried  with
it  the  consequence  that  this  condition  terminated  in  an
ascension.

No  one  needed  to  invent  the  idea ;  every  account  of  eye
witnesses  had  closed  with  the  more  or  less  definite  statement
that  Jesus  had  again  disappeared,  and  disappeared  into  heaven
(§  i7</).  At  the  same  time  the  tendency  to  adorn  a  plain  story
shows  itself  at  work  with  sufficient  clearness  if  we  compare  the
simple  '  he  parted  from  them  and  was  carried  up  into  heaven  '
(Sie'oTT)  air'  O.VTWV  Koi  ai'SiftepfTO  eis  T'OI>  ovpavov)  of  Lk.  24  51,  or
even  Mk.  1<5 19,  with  the  circumstantial  account  given  in  Acts
IQ-II.  The  original  limitation  of  the  period  during  which
appearances  of  (esus  occurred  to  a  single  day  will  have  co
operated  along  with  the  other  causes  mentioned  in  §  23  e  to  bring
about  the  exclusion  by  Lk.  of  the  appearance  to  the  500,  that  to
James,  and  that  to  '  all  the  apostles.'

The belief  once created that Jesus in  his  various

appearances  had  also  spoken,  the  door  lay  wide  open

,  ...  _.  for  all  kinds  of  conjecture  as  to  what

j  J?  j he  had  said, (a)  In  this  region  the

wor  srepo e .  most  ODVious  conjecture  was  that  Jesus

uttered  words  leading  up  to,  or  explaining,  the  alleged

facts  which  we  have  already  considered.

Thus  it  fits  the  situation  equally  that  in  Mt.  2S  10  Jesus  re
peats  to  the  women  the  injunction  of  the  angels  to  bid  the
disciples  repair  to  Galilee,  and  that  in  Lk.  24  49  and  Acts  1  4,
on  the  other  hand,  he  bids  them  remain  in  Jerusalem,  whilst  in
Jn.  20  17  he  merely  sends  them  word  that  he  is  ascending  to
heaven,  and  for  this  reason  does  not  suffer  Mary  Magdalene  to
touch  him.  It  is  still  in  accordance  with  the  same  principle
that  he  is  represented  as  at  a  later  date  making  the  request  that
his  disciples  should  touch  him,  and  asking  the  disciples  whether
they  have  anything  to  eat  (J5  27  c,  <f).

(b)  Other  words  of  Jesus  apply  to  situations  which  we
have  not  yet  discussed. Thus,  in  Lk.  24  38  and  in  the
Didaskalia  (§  7/'),  as  well  as  in  the  speech  to  James
in  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews,  the  purpose  is  to  prepare
the  way  for  a  joyful frame  of  heart  and  mind. The
words  in  Jn.  20 19  26,  '  Peace  be  unto  you,'  as  also  those
to  Saul,  'Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutes!  thou  me?'  (Acts
94,  etc.),  are  singularly  well  chosen.

(c)  What must have presented itself as the main
object  must  have  been  that  of  instructing  the  disciples,
before  the  final  departure  of  Jesus,  in  everything  which
was  still  necessary  for  their  future  tasks.

To  this  category  of  instruction  belongs  the  repeated  insistence
upon  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the  end  of  the  world  (Acts
1  7  ;  cp  Mk.  1832),  but  very  specially,  as  new  matter,  the  proof
that  the  passion  of  Jesus  had  been  appointed  by  God  and  fore
told  by  the  prophets  (Lk.  24  25-27  44-46).  If  Jesus  in  this
manner  established  a  correct  understanding  of  events  that  were
past,  it  was  natural,  indeed  inevitable,  to  think  that,  over  and
above  this,  he  had  given  all  the  new  directions  for  the  future
which  were  in  point  of  fact  followed  in  the  church  and  therefore
could  not  but  have  proceeded  from  its  founder.  Thus  (it  was
held)  it  must  necessarily  have  been  Jesus  who  told  the  disciples
that  '  all  authority  had  been  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  on
earth,'  and  that  he  was  with  them  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of
the  world  (Mt.  28  18  20);  he  it  was  who  must  have  instituted
the  mission  to  the  Gentiles  (Mt.  28  \f)f.  Lk.  24  47  Mk.  10  15),  as
also  baptism  (Mk.  1C  16,  and  the  canonical  text  of  Mt.  28  19 ;
but  cp  §  8  c),  and  he  too  it  must  have  been  who  promised  the
power  of  performing  miracles  (Mk.  16  I7./C),  yet  also  demanded
a  faith  that  believed  without  having  seen  (Jn.  2629), — this  in
view  of  the  fact  that  he  knew  of,  and  was  able  to  foretell,  the
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost  (Lk.  2449  Acts
1  4.A  8),  if  he  did  not  himself  impart  the  Spirit  as  in  Jn.  2022.

(d }  This  leads  us  to  the  significance  which  the  words
of  the  risen  Jesus  have,  especially  for  the  apostles  ;  for
it  is  only  to  them  that  in  Jn.  the  Spirit  is  imparted,  as
also  the  power  to  forgive  or  to  retain  sins  (2023)  or,
indeed,  a  formal  mission  of  any  kind  (20  21).  We  find,

4074


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


further,  that  in  the  missionary  precept  the  disciples
come  first  into  account,  just  as  in  Acts  (especially
26i6-i8)  it  is  Paul  who  does  so.  Jn.  2115-23  has  to  do
entirely  with  fixing  the  relative  rank  in  the  regard  of  the
church  between  Peter  on  the  one  hand  and  the  beloved
disciple  on  the  other  (§  9  c) ;  similarly  203-10  (cp  SIMON
PKTKR,  §  zzb).  The  gospel  tradition  has  therefore  made
use  of  its  accounts  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  in  a  very
decided  manner  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  back  to
Jesus  the  high  esteem  in  which  the  apostles  were  held
at  a  later  time.

With  other  reasons  (88  23  e  27  [/])  the  purpose  just  referred
to  may  have  co-operated  to  bring  it  about  that  the  evangelists
recorded  almost  exclusively  only  appearances  to  apostles  and
pass  over  in  silence  those  to  the  500  and  to  James, — indeed,  that
Ml.  contents  himself  with  recording  no  more  than  one  appear
ance  altogether,  an  appearance  in  which  B.  Weiss  even  discerns
a  free  fusion  of  all  that  Mt.  knew  by  tradition  regarding  the
appearances  of  Jesus.

At  last,  however,  the  emphasis  that  had  been  laid  on

the  literal  historical fact  of  the  resurrection of  Jesus

i  \  n Rave place to something different, (u)

*  a However  firmly  established  the  resurrec


tion  might  seem  to  be  historically,  however
little  open  to  any  shadow  of  doubt  in  the


substitute
for  vision  of
risen  Jesus.  minds  of  the  faitnful_  ils  value  for  them

was  nevertheless  small  :  it  was  nothing  more  than
an  event  of  past  time.  What  faith  demands  is  some
thing  present,  something  now  and  always  capable
of  being  experienced  afresh.  The  demand  for  a  faith
that  could  believe  without  having  seen  ( 111.202729
i  Pet.  1  8)  was  hard  to  satisfy.  Thus  there  came  to  be
felt  a  need  for  such  a  turn  being  given  to  the  resurrection-
narrative  as  should  make  the  continued  life  of  Jesus
capable  of  being  experienced  anew  at  all  times  ( Mt.  28  20 :
'  I  am  with  you  alway'),  and  thus  the  historical  state
ments  as  to  his  long-past  appearances — accounts  which
had  been  elaborated  with  such  care — in  great  measure
lost  their  importance.

(6)  Towards  this  result  Paul  had  already  contributed.
The  risen  Christ  is  for  him  identical  with  the  Holy
Spirit  (2  Cor.  817  Rom.  89-11,  and  often).  The  fourth
evangelist  followed  him  in  this  (§  16  c  ;  JOHN,  SON  OF
ZEBEDEE,  §  26  c).  Therefore  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  the
risen  Jesus  having  ascended  to  heaven  bestows  the  Holy
Spirit  already  on  the  very  day  of  the  resurrection.
Only  to  the  disciples,  indeed,  in  2022,  but  according  to
7  38/1  expressly  to  all  believers  ;  and  therefore  it  is  not
open  to  doubt  that  16?  13-15  14i8  28  1526,  etc.,  are  also
to  be  interpreted  in  the  latter  sense.  As  Holy  Spirit
Jesus  is  always  present.

(f)  A  somewhat  more  sensible  substitute  for  vision  of
the  risen  Jesus  is  the  observance  of  the  ordinance  of  the
Supper.  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  deeply  signifi
cant  narrative  of  the  disciples  at  Emmaus  (cp  CLEOPAS).

The  wish  of  Christianity—'  abide  with  us  ' — did  not  admit  of
being  fulfilled  in  a  literal  sense  ;  hut  in  every  act  of  communion
'  he  went  in  to  abide  with  them '  (Lk.  24  29).  Not  with  flesh  and
bones  as  in  the  case  of  the  primitive  disciples  (24  39),  but  '  in
another  form  '  (ev  erepct  fj-optftfi :  Mk.  16  12) ;  and  whilst  the  result
of  all  that  could  be  told  about  the  empty  grave  was  '  him  they
saw  not,'  he  is  now  presently  recognised  '  in  the  breaking  of  the
bread'  (Lk.  24  24  30  f.  34).  It  is  plain  that  the  knowledge
ascribed  to  the  two  disciples,  so  skilfully  embodied  in  this  nar
rative,  could  not  have  been  drawn  by  them  from  the  events  de
scribed  by  Lk.  even  if  they  had  literally  happened  to  them  on  the
resurrection  day  ;  it  is  naturally  the  product  of  a  long  growth,
and  that  too  in  Gentile-Christian  circles  in  which  the  corporeal
element  in  Jesus  was  neither  so  familiar  nor  so  important  as  in
the  primitive-apostolical.  It  is  clearly  a  reminiscence  of  a
celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  that  we  have  also  in  Jn.  21  13
and  in  the  giving  of  the  bread  to  James  in  the  Gospel  of  the
Hebrews ;  only,  in  Jn.  it  has  its  prototype  in  the  feeding  of  the
five  thousand  with  loaves  and  fishes  (Og  ti  =  21  9),  which,  how
ever,  in  turn  bears  the  most  express  marks  of  being  but  a  clothing
of  the  Supper  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZF.BEDEE,  §§  20  c,  23  i).
The  number  '  seven  '  as  applied  to  the  disciples  corresponds  to
the  number  of  baskets  which  in  the  second  '  feeding  '  in  the
Synoptists  (Mk.  88=  Mt.  15  37)  were  filled  with  the  fragments
that  remained  over;  whilst  in  Jn.  613,  in  agreement  with  the
tirst  'feeding  '  in  the  Synoptists  (Mk.  643  =  Mt.  142o  =  Lk.  9  17),
twelve  baskets  are  filled,  corresponding  to  the  number  '  twelve  '
as  applied  to  the  disciples.  The  mysterious  character  of  the
presence  of  the  risen  Jesus  at  the  Supper  appears  at  Emmaus

4075


30.  Nature  of
Jesus'  resur
rection-body.


in  his  disappearance  when  the  two  disciples  recognised  him
(Lk.  2431),  at  the  Sea  of  Galilee  in  no  one's  asking  him  who  he
was  (Jn.  21  12).

III.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FACTS.

The  last  problem  still  demanding  solution,  is  how  to
explain  the  only  fact  that  has  emerged  in  the  course  of
our  examination  —  the  fact  that  Jesus
was  seen,  as  we  read  in  i  Cor.  15s-8.
Any  attempted  explanation  presupposes
an  insight  into  subjective  experience
that  perhaps  can  never  be  completely  attained.  It
demands,  therefore,  the  greatest  caution.  It  cannot,
however,  be  left  unattempted.

(a)  The  investigator  who  holds  himself  bound  to
accept  and  make  intelligible  as  literal  fact  everything
recorded  in  the  resurrection  narratives,  even  of  the
canonical  gospels  merely,  cannot  fulfil  his  task  on  any
other  condition  than  that  he  assumes  a  revivification  of
the  buried  body  of  Jesus  to  a  new  period  of  earthly  life,
hardly  less  earthly  than  when  Jesus  was  taken  for  Elijah
or  the  Baptist  risen  from  the  dead  (Mk.  6 14-16  828  and  ||,
cp9n-i3  Mt.  1114).  It  only  remains  to  be  stipulated
that  he  who  does  so  shall  fully  realise  that  what  he  is
assuming  is  a  miracle  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word.
Many  theologians  are  strangely  wanting  in  clearness  as
to  this.  Even,  however,  after  one  has  clearly  under
stood  what  he  is  accepting,  it  is  impossible  to  stop  here  ;
for  such  a  view  does  justice  only  to  one  side — the
physical  and  sensuous — of  the  resurrection-narratives  ;
not  to  the  other,  according  to  which  Jesus  was  neverthe
less  exalted  to  heaven,  a  thing  impossible  for  flesh  and
blood  (i  Cor.  15 50).

(fi)  In  order  to  do  justice  to  this  second  side  also,
recourse  is  often  had  to  the  theory  of  a  gradual  sublima
tion  or  spiritualisation  of  the  resurrection-body  of  Jesus
— at  first  wholly  material — whereby  it  was  gradually
made  fit  for  its  ascension.  Again,  what  has  to  be
insisted  on  is  that  the  miracle  is  not  hereby  diminished  ;
on  the  contrary,  to  the  original  miracle  of  the  revivifi
cation  of  the  material  body  is  added  a  second— that  of
the  spiritualisation  of  the  material  body.  The  thing,
however,  is  also  quite  inconceivable  ;  how  is  one  to
represent  to  oneself  the  stages  of  the  transition  ?

A  body  which  is  already  capable  of  making  its  way  through
closed  doors  must  surely  have  ceased  to  be  tangible  (Jn.  20  26yi).
Moreover,  such  a  view  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  what  we  find
in  NT,  not  only  in  i  Cor.  15  50-53  but  also  in  the  gospels  ;  for
the  touching  there  referred  to  and  (in  Lk.  24  39-43)  the  eating
happen  precisely  at  the  last  appearance  of  Jesus  which  is
immediately  followed  by  the  ascension  ;  and  the  precept  not  to
touch  is  placed  in  Jn.  (20  17)  at  an  earlier  point.  So,  also,  we
read  that  Jesus  is  immediately  recognised  in  his  later  appear
ances,  but  precisely  in  the  earlier  ones  not  (Lk.  24  16  Jn.  20  14).

(c)  If  we  decide  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  task  of
explaining  what  we  take  to  be  the  simple  fact  according
to  i  Cor.  15,  we  must  not  suffer  ourselves  to  forget  that
Paul  thinks  of  the  future  resurrection-body  of  man —
which  he  regards  as  heavenly  and  pneumatic — as  con
formed  to  the  pattern  of  the  resurrection-body  of  Jesus
(so  i  Cor.  15 45-49). l  Jesus'  body  also,  then,  in  his  view
must  have  been  heavenly  and  pneumatic  ;  and  as  Paul
in  i  Cor.  has  not  yet  given  up  the  revivification  of
the  buried  body  (§  15^),  he  must  have  thought  of  the
pneumatic  attributes  possessed  by  it  as  having  arisen
through  metamorphosis,  such  as,  according  to  i  Cor.
15  51-53.  is  to  happen  also  to  the  bodies  of  those  men
and  women  who  shall  still  be  alive  at  the  last  day.
According  to  what  we  have  seen  in  §  17  e  the  original
apostles  also  agree  in  this.  Thus  the  explanation  of  the
facts  which  proceeds  on  the  belief  of  the  apostles  that  a
body  of  Jesus  was  really  seen  must  think  of  that  body  as
heavenly  and  pneumatic ;  not,  however,  in  such  a  sense
that  it  was  given  to  Jesus  at  his  resurrection  as  a  new

1  In  r.  49  the  future — 'we  shall  bear '  (ifropeVofiev) — is  to  be
read.  An  exhortation,  '  let  us  bear '  (<f>ope'o-co/ufi/ ;  so  Ti.  ^\  H),
is  meaningless,  for  the  resurrection-body  is  obtained  without
our  co-operation.  The  confusion  of  o  and  o>  with  copyists  is
very  common  ;  see  Gal.  6  10  12  i  Jn.  5  20  Rom.  5  i  14  9,  etc.

4076


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


body  whilst  the  old  body  remained  in  the  grave,  but  in
the  sense  that  it  came  into  existence  through  a  change
wrought  on  the  buried  body.  On  this  explanation  the
resurrection  has  as  much  an  entirely  miraculous  char
acter  as  it  has  on  either  of  the  other  two  theories  already
considered.

In  order  to  escape so  far  as  may  be  from  miracle

of  the  character described  in the preceding section,

_  and,  generally,  to  be  rid  of  the  question

31.'  Resurrec-  of  the  corporeity  of  the  risen Jesus,

tion  of  the recourse  is  often  had  to  tne  view  that

Spirit  only. it  was  on]y.  the  spirit  of  jesus  that  rose

and  appeared  to  his  followers.  Here  opinion  is  divided
as  to  whether  such  a  thing  is  possible  without  a  miracle
or  not.  Any  one  who  holds  appearances  of  the  spirits  of
the  departed  to  be  possible  in  the  natural  order  will  be
able  to  dispense  with  assuming  a  miracle  here.  The
majority,  however,  maintain  the  negative.  Moreover,
such  persons  declare  that  the  appearances  of  Jesus  to
his  disciples  differ  considerably  from  the  manner  in
which  the  spiritualism  of  the  present  day  holds  appear
ances  of  spirits  to  occur.  They  find  themselves  com
pelled  accordingly,  if  it  was  merely  the  spirit  of  Jesus
that  was  alive  and  manifested  itself,  to  postulate  a
miracle  whereby  it  was  made  visible.

It  is  to  be  observed,  moreover,  that  this  view — that
only  the  spirit  lives  on — is  in  no  respect  different  from
the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  except  in  this,
that  in  the  particular  case  in  question  the  continuance
of  the  life  of  the  spirit  begins  only  on  the  third  day
after  death.  This,  however,  is  a  collocation  of  quite
heterogeneous  ideas.  The  essence  of  the  doctrine  of
immortality  lies  in  this,  that  the  life  of  the  soul  is  never
interrupted,  and  thus  there  can  be  no  thought  at  all  of
revivification  after  remaining  for  a  time  in  a  state  of
death.  Revivification  can  occur  only  in  the  case  of  a
subject  that  is  capable  of  dying — in  other  words,  in  a
body.  This  is  a  Jewish  idea,  that  of  immortality  is
Greek.  The  latter  is  adopted  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom,
and  Paul  comes  near  it  in  2  Cor.  5  1-8  (§  15  b)  ;  for  the
original  apostles  it  is  from  the  outset  excluded  (§  171?).

It  is  discovered  to  be  necessary,  accordingly,  to  go  a
step  farther.  The  belief  that  the  risen  Jesus  actually

12 Obiective  did  appear  is  frankly  Siven  UP"

32.  ypject  ^  The  discipleS|  we  are  toid|  saw

Visions.  nothing  real :  neither  the  body  of  Jesus,
clothed  with  earthly  or  heavenly  attributes,  nor  the  spirit
of  Jesus  whether  in  true  spirit  form  or  in  some  kind  of
acquired  visibility.  What  they  believed  they  saw  was
in  reality  only  a  visionary  image,  without  any  real
appearance  of  Jesus  ;  but  this  visionary  image  was
produced  in  their  souls  immediately  by  God  in  order
that  they  might  be  assured  that  Jesus  was  risen.  For
this  reason  the  vision  is  called  objective.

(b)  The  belief  is  entertained  that  by  this  method  of
regarding the matter the assumption  of  a  miracle  is
made  superfluous  ; all that is  postulated is  merely  a
Divine  act  of  revelation. Keim  has  invented  for  this
view, which  he  also supports, the phrase  : telegram
from  heaven. This  act  of  revelation  itself,  however,  is
nothing  less  than  a  miracle. Were  it  not  miraculous
the  visionary  image  of  the  risen  Jesus  in  the  minds  of
the  disciples could  only  have  its  origin in  their  own
subjective  condition. This is  exactly  what  is denied
and  must  be  denied  ; otherwise  the  disciples  must  be
taken  to  have  had  their  faith  in  the  resurrection  within
themselves  and  needed  no  divine  revelation  of  it. The
subjective  condition  of  the  disciples  must  on  this  view
be  represented  as  one  of  the  greatest  prostration,  which
could  be  changed  into  its  opposite  only  by  a  revelation
really  coming  from  God.

(c)  It  has  to  be  remarked,  further,  that  according  to
this  view  Jesus'  continued  existence  must  be  regarded
as  miraculous  in  the  full  sense. If  the  presupposition
were  that  his  soul  was  immortal  like  the  soul  of  any
other man, his  continued life  would be  a  matter  of

4077


course  and  did  not  require  to  be  made  known  by  a
special  revelation.  But  what  is  aimed  at  in  putting
forward  this  view  is  much  rather  to  establish  the
complete  difference  between  Jesus  and  all  other  men
which  has  been  from  the  first  claimed  for  him  by  the
assertion  of  his  resurrection,  but  yet  to  be  able  to
dispense  with  miracle.  This  can  never  succeed.

If  a  really  non-miraculous  explanation  is  desired,  then
apart  from  subjective  visions  (of  which  more  hereafter)

„„ „  two  possibilities  present  themselves.

miraculous  ^  The  hyPothesis  that  Jesus  was  onl-v
explanations  aPParently  dead  found  man7  supporters

(excludin  the  days  °f  rationalisra-  and  h has

* .  . r* also  been  espoused  by  a  writer  so  modern
visions). ,, //t i. 7 o  ^ o \
as  Hase  (desert.  Jesn,  1876,  §  112).

That  cruciffed  persons  taken  down  from  the  cross  while  still
in  life  have  been  able  to  recover  is  testified  by  Herodotus  (7  194)
and  Josephus  (\'it.  75  end,  §  4207^).  In  a  case  of  seeming
death  indeed  it  is  hardly  credible,  and  to  call  to  one's  aid  the
wonderful  power  of  healing  which  Jesus  exercised  on  behalf  of
other  persons  is  in  this  connection  quite  fantastic.  More  than
this  :  had  Jesus  presented  himself  merely  as  one  who  had  all
but  died  on  the  cross  his  appearance  would  have  produced  the
impression  of  weakness  and  helplessness,  not  that  of  a  conqueror
of  death  and  the  grave,  which  nevertheless  was  the  character  he
required  to  present  if  he  was  to  inspire  his  followers  to  a  world-
conquering  faith.  Finally,  what  could  they  say,  if  he  neverthe
less  in  the  end  died  after  all?  To  escape  the  force  of  this
question  the  assumption  was  that  he  had  withdrawn  himself
into  solitude,  perhaps  into  some  cave  in  order  that  his  death
might  not  become  known.  It  is  obvious  that  the  theory  of  a
seeming  death  is  not  enough  ;  it  is  necessary  to  assume  also
various  machinations,  whether  on  the  part  of  Jesus  himself  or  on
the  part  of  his  disciples,  whether  at  the  time  of  his  leaving  the
sepulchre  or  with  a  view  to  covering  the  worst  signs  of  weak
ness  before  he  presented  himself  to  larger  circles  of  his  followers.
In  this  aspect  the  present  hypothesis  approximates —

(b)  The  hypothesis  that,  althongh  Jesus  did  not
recover,  the  disciples  spread  abroad,  and  found  credence
for,  the  rumour  that  he  was  alive.  Apart  from  all
other  difficulties,  such  a  hypothesis  is  from  the  outset
untenable  for  two  reasons  :  not  only  would  the  disciples
immediately  after  the  death  have  been  unable  to
summon  courage  for  so  gigantic  a  task  as  the  theory
implies,  but  also  at  a  later  date  they  would  not  have
had  courage  in  persecution  to  surrender  their  lives  for
such  a  faith.

Thus  subjective  visions  are  all that  remain  now  to

^ ,  be  dealt  with. Let  us  endeavour  first  of

-' ,  . all  to  determine  their  nature  in  general  bo

,. .•'. far  as this is practicable,  without  a  too

minute  discussion  of  the  conditions  implied

in  the  NT  narratives  and  statements.

(a)  In  contradistinction  from  the  so-called  objective
vision  (see  §  32  a),  the  image  that  is  seen  in  the  sub
jective  vision  is  a  product  of  the  mental  condition  of
the  seer.  The  presupposition  is,  accordingly,  that  he
is  not  only  in  a  high  degree  of  psychical  excitement
which  is  capable  of  producing  in  him  the  belief  that  he
is  seeing  something  which  in  point  of  fact  has  no
objective  existence,  but  also  that  all  the  elements  which
are  requisite  for  the  formation  of  a  visionary  image,
whether  it  be  views  or  ideas,  are  previously  present  in
his  mind  and  have  engaged  its  activities.  That  in  these
circumstances  the  seer  should  behold  an  image  for
which  there  is  no  corresponding  reality,  can  be  spoken
of  as  something  abnormal  only  in  so  far  as  the  occurrence
is  on  the  whole  a  rare  one  ;  as  soon  as  a  high  degree  of
mental  excitement  is  given,  the  existence  of  visions  is  by
the  laws  of  psychology  just  as  intelligible  and  natural
as,  in  a  lower  degree  of  mental  excitement,  is  the
occurrence  of  minor  disturbances  of  sense  perceptions,
such  as  the  hearing  of  noises  and  the  like.

(6)  The  view  that  a  subjective  vision  could  never
have  led  the  disciples  to  the  belief  that  Jesus  was  alive
because  they  were  able  to  distinguish  a  vision  from  a
real  experience  is  quite  a  mistake.1  It  is  not  in  the
least  necessary  that  we  should  raise  the  question  whether
they  were  always  able  to  do  so ;  let  it  be  at  once

1  On  this  point  Beyschlag  (Le&en  Jesu  1 422-440)  is  par
ticularly  instructive.

4078


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


assumed  that  they  could.  The  distinction  is  not  un
known  in  the  NT;  see,  for  example,  Acts  I2g  ;  indeed
we  may  lay  it  down  that  'was  seen'  (&tf>6r))  with  the
single  exception  of  Acts  7  26  always  stands  for  another
kind  of  seeing  than  that  of  ordinary  sense-perception
(e.g.,  Lk.  In  93i  2243  Acts23  723o35  817  133i  169
26 16  [i  Tim.  3i6?]  Rev.  11 19  12 1  3).  Nay,  this  is  our
warrant  for  calling  in  visions  to  our  aid  in  explaining
the  appearances  of  Jesus.  All  that  we  have  gained  by
this  concession,  however,  is  merely  that  the  seers  dis
tinguished  once  and  again  the  condition  in  which  they
were :  whether  ecstatic  or  normal ;  it  by  no  means
follows  as  matter  of  course  that  they  held  the  thing  seen
in  vision  to  be  unreal,  and  only  what  they  saw  when
in  their  ordinary  condition  to  be  real.  How  otherwise
could  the  very  conception  of  such  a  thing  as  an  objec
tive  vision  be  possible  ?

(c)  On the contrary, it pertains precisely to the
subjective  vision that  the  seer, if  he  is  not  a  person
thoroughly  instructed in psychology  and the natural
sciences,  is  compelled  to  hold  what  he  sees  in  his  vision
for  real  as  long  as  it  does  not  bring  before  him  some
thing  which  to  his  conception  is  impossible. Wherein
otherwise  would  consist  the  delusion,  which  nevertheless
every  one  knows  to  be  connected  with  subjective  vision,
if  not  in  this,  that  the  visionary  seeks  for  the  cause  of
what  he  has  seen  in  the  external  world,  not  in  his  own
mental  condition? And  indeed  the  visionaries  of  the
Bible  had  more  extended  powers  than  modern  visionaries
have for taking a visionary image as an objective
reality ; for, if  they were unable to attribute to the
image  they  saw  any  ordinary  mundane  reality  because
it  was  contrary  to  their  ideas  of  mundane  things, they
could  always  attribute  to  it  a  heavenly  reality,  and  it
was  only  if  it  was  contrary  to  their  conception  of  things
heavenly  that  they  came  to  recognise  it  as  a  product  of
their  own  fantasy.

(d)  We  have  therefore  to  distinguish  between  three
experiences which were regarded as possible by the
disciples  and  their  contemporaries  : (i)  the  seeing  of  an
earthly  person  by  the  use  of  the  ordinary  organs of
sight  : (2)  the  seeing  of  a  person  in  a.  real  yet  heavenly
corporeity, not by the bodily eyes but in a vision
(oirraffia  : Lk.  1  22 24  23 Acts  26 19 2  Cor.  12 1; or
Spattis  : Acts  2 17 Rev.  917; or 8pafj.o. : Acts  9 1012
10 3  17  19  lls  169/1  189),  in  a  state  of  ecstasy  (?Ktrra<m:
Acts  10 10  11$  22i?),  or,  it  may  be,  outside  of  the  seer's
own  body  (2  Cor.  12*/. ) ;  (3)  the  production  of  a  false
image  on  the  mind  without  any  corresponding  outward
reality. The  first  of  these  possibilities  (ordinary  seeing)
is  contemplated  only  by  those  evangelists  who  speak
of  Jesus  as  eating  and  as  being  touched,  and  who  never
themselves had been present at appearances of  the
risen  Jesus. The  second  possibility  (visionary  seeing  of
a  heavenly  corporeity)  is what the  witnesses  of  such
appearances  intended  and  what Paul  indicates  by  the
word 'was  seen' (ux^djf). With  the  third possibility
(false  image)  it  has  this  in  common  that  in  both  the
condition  of  the  participants  is  visionary  ;  with  the  first
(ordinary  seeing),  that  the  participants  hold  what  they
see to be  absolutely  real and to have an  existence
external  to  themselves  (but  not  with  a  mundane  reality).

(e)  It  was  the  mistake  of  many  critics  to  assume  that
by  the  use  of  '  was  seen '  ((ZfiOrj)  the  purely  subjective
origin  of  what  had  been  seen  was  conceded  by  Paul
himself. The  same  error,  however,  is  almost  entirely
shared  also  by  apologists  such  as  Beyschlag  when  they
suppose  that the participants, if  they  had  held their
condition  to  be  that  of  visionaries,  would  at  the  same
time  have  perceived  the  unreality  of  what  they  saw. This
hypothetically  enunciated statement  of  the  apologists
is  distinguished  from  the categorical assertion  of the
critics  in  only  one  point : the  apologists  will have  it
that  the  participant  need  not  necessarily  attribute  the
origin  of  what  he  sees  to  the  state  of  his  own  mind,  but
can  attribute  it  to  God — yet  without  the  result  that,  in

4079


the latter case, in his  view the  thing seen becomes
invested  with  reality.

Thus  Beyschlag  (as  above,  432-435)  is  of  opinion  that  Acts
169  does  not  make  Paul  believe  that  in.  reality  a  man  of
Macedonia  stood  before  him,  nor  10io-i6  make  Peter  think  that
in  reality  a  sheet  containing  real  animals  was  let  down  from
heaven — not  only  not  in  mundane  actuality  but  also  not  even  in
heavenly  actuality ;  on  the  contrary,  in  each  case  neither  had
taken  in  more  than  this,  that  God  was  seeking  to  give  them  to
understand  something  by  means  of  sensible  images.  This  way
of  looking  at  matters  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  beliefs  of
that  time.  If  it  is  God  who  sends  the  Macedonian  or  the  sheet
containing  the  beasts,  as  a  matter  of  course  it  is  believed  that
these  things  are  sent  really  (possessing  of  course  not  mundane
but  heavenly  actuality) ;  for  where  it  is  presupposed  that  God
can  if  he  chooses  send  them  really,  it  would  be  quite  unaccount
able  to  believe  that  he  has  nevertheless  not  done  so.  That  the
sending  is  not  done  for  its  own  sake  merely,  but  has  for  its
purpose  to  incite  Paul  or  Peter  to  a  particular  course  of  action,
is  indeed  true  ;  but  this  does  not  by  any  means  divest  the  thing
which  God  has  sent  of  its  reality.  Beyschlag  makes  it  seem  as
if  this  were  so  merely  by  a  reference  to  Acts  129:  '  he  knew  not
that  it  was  true  which  was  done  by  the  angel,  but  thought  he
saw  a  vision.'  It  is  correct  to  say  that  the  same  word  (opafj.a)
is  employed  here  as  is  used  in  16  9/1  10  17  19  11  5,  and  that  Peter
regards  this  vision  (opa/uo)  as  something  unreal.  Here  however
the  distinction  drawn  in  a  preceding  paragraph  (above,  c)  falls
to  be  applied  :  that  a  Macedonian  or  a  sheet  containing  beasts
endowed  with  a  heavenly  corporeality  could  be  sent  by  God
was  regarded  by  Paul  and  by  Peter  respectively  as  thoroughly
possible;  on  the  other  hand,  in  12 9  it  is  presupposed  that  the
liberation  of  Peter  when  it  was  '  not  true  but  a  vision  '  would
have  been  regarded  by  him  as  impossible.  In  like  manner,  if
'vision'  (opacrts)  in  Tobit  12 19  means  something  opposed  to
reality,  a  mere  appearance  (<j>a.vTa.<rfi.a),  that  meaning  is  secured
only  by  the  antithesis  in  the  sentence.  The  angel  Raphael,
who  has  accompanied  Tobias,  says  here  by  way  of  after-
explanation  of  what  his  real  nature  was  :  '  I  have  neither  eaten
nor  drunken,  but  ye  saw  only  an  appearance.'  The  identity
of  the  word  (opo/ma  or  opacris)  thus  by  no  means  proves  identity
of  judgment  upon  the  matter  here  in  question,  namely  the  reality
or  unreality  of  what  has  been  seen.

(/)  Equally  mistaken  would  it  be  to  maintain  that
visions  are  throughout  the  whole  OT  and  NT  regarded  as
an  inferior  form  of  divine  revelation.  Beyschlag  deduces
this  from  a  single  text  (Nu.  126-8):  to  a  prophet  I
reveal  myself  by  visions  or  dreams,  but  with  Moses  I
speak  face  to  face.  Not  Only  is  the  dream  placed  upon
a  level  with  the  vision,  an  equality  of  which  there  can
be  no  thought  in  connection  with  the  appearances  of
the  risen  Jesus,  but  also  in  antithesis  to  both  is  placed
God's  direct  speaking,  which  undoubtedly  makes  known
the  will  of  God  more  plainly  than  a  visual  image
can,  the  interpretation  of  which  rests  with  the  seer.  In
the  case  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  however,  the
situation  is  exactly  reversed.  If  God  had  announced  to
the  disciples  by  spoken  words  that  Jesus  was  alive,  even
if  they  fully  believed  these  words  to  have  been  received
immediately  from  God,  the  announcement  would  not
have  been  for  them  so  clear  and  impressive  as  when
they  were  themselves  permitted  to  look  upon  the  form
of  Jesus  as  of  one  who  was  alive.

(g]  After  what  has  been  said  in  three  preceding
paragraphs  (c,  d,  e)  the  decisive  question  comes  to  be  :
what  sort  of  appearances  of  a  person  risen  from  the  dead
were  regarded  by  the  disciples  as  possible  ?

To  this  the  answer  must  at  once  be :  Not  incorporeal  appear
ances  ;  for  the  idea  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  alone  was
utterly  strange  to  them  (§  lyt).  Next,  we  must  say:  they
looked  for  a  general  resurrection  of  the  terrestrial  body  to  a
terrestrial  life  on  the  last  day ;  but  in  exceptional  cases  they
regarded  it  as  happening  even  in  the  present  (Mk.  6  14-16 ;  cp
§  17  f).  And  as  they  would  have  felt  no  difficulty  in  regarding
Jesus  as  an  exceptional  instance  of  this  last  description,  they
would  have  regarded  an  appearance  of  Jesus  in  this  form  (with
a  terrestrial  body)  as  a  real  one.  This  case,  however,  does  not
come  into  consideration  ;  for  such  an  appearance  of  Jesus  does
not  come  within  the  range  of  what  is  historically  authenticated.

What  is  alone  authenticated  is  the  appearance  of
Jesus  in  heavenly  corporeality  ;  but  of  that  it  has  been
shown  in  §  1 7  e  that  it  corresponded  with  the  conceptions
of  Paul  and  likewise  with  those  of  the  original  apostles.

(h]  The  resultant  conclusion  then  must  be  that  when
the  disciples  experienced  an  appearance  of  Jesus  in
heavenly  corporeality  they  were  under  compulsion  to
regard  it  as  objectively  real,  and  therefore  to  believe
that  Jesus  was  risen  because  they  had  actually  seen  him.

4080


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


Consequently,  this  belief  of  theirs  does  not  prove  that
what  they  saw  was  objectively  real :  it  can  equally  well
have  been  merely  an  image  begotten  of  their  own
mental  condition.

Having  now,  we  believe,  shown  in  a  general  way  the
possibility  that  the  things  related  concerning  the  risen

es-+ +• Jesus  may  rest  upon  subjective  visions,
35.  olutlclulOU ,  f  •

f  p .  what  next  remains  for  us  to  inquire  is

whether  such  visions  have  any  prob
ability  in  view  of  the  known  situation  of  the  disciples.
This  question  admits  of  an  affirmative  answer,  very
particularly  in  the  case  of  Paul.

It  will  ever  remain  the  lasting  merit  of  Holsten  that  he  has
carried  out  this  research  on  all  sides  with  the  most  penetrating
analysis.  The  view  he  arrived  at  holds  its  ground  alike  in
presence  of  conservative  theology  and  in  presence  of  the  deniers
of  the  genuineness  of  all  the  Pauline  epistles,  who  find  the
change  from  Pharisee  to  apostle  of  Jesus  freed  from  the  law  too
sudden.  An  energetic  nature  could  only  pass  from  the  one
extreme  to  the  other,  and  could  not  possibly  hold  a  mediating
position.  1

(a)  Paul  persecuted  the  Christians  as  blasphemers,
because  they  proclaimed  as  the  Messiah  one  who  by  the
judgment  of  God  (Dt.  2123,  cp  Gal.  813)  had  been
plainly  marked  as  a  criminal,  (b]  If,  in  defending
their  position,  they  quoted  passages  of  the  OT  which  in
their  view  treated  of  the  Messiah,  Paul  could  not  gainsay
this  application  in  a  general  way  ;  all  that  he  denied
was  the  applicability  of  the  passages  to  one  who  had  been
crucified,  (c]  From  their  appeals  to  the  appearances  of
Jesus,  Paul  certainly  had  come  to  know  quite  well  the
form  in  which  they  would  have  it  that  they  had  seen
him.  (d)  Apart  from  this  blasphemy  of  theirs  Paul
cannot  but  have  recognised  their  honesty,  seriousness,
and  blamelessness  of  moral  character.  What  if  they
should  be  in  the  right  ?  We  may  be  certain  that,  when
he  entered  their  houses  and  haled  them  before  the
judgment-seat,  there  were  not  wanting  heart-rending
scenes,  which  in  the  case  of  a  man  not  wholly  hardened
could  not  fail  to  raise  ever  anew  the  recurring  question
whether  it  was  really  at  the  behest  of  God  that  he  had
to  show  all  this  cruelty.  He  repressed  his  scruples  ;
yet  the  goad  had  entered  his  soul.

(e)  In  his  own  inner  life  he  had  no  satisfaction.  What
ever  may  have  been  the  zeal  with  which  he  followed  the
precepts  of  the  fathers  (Gal.  1 14),  unlike  the  great  mass
of  morally  laxer  Pharisees  his  contemporaries,  he  per
ceived  the  impossibility  of  fulfilling  the  whole  of  the  law's
requirements.  And,  not  being  able  to  fulfil  them,  he
was  accursed  (Gal.  3io),  and  all  men  were  in  the  same
condemnation  with  himself.  In  Rom.  77-25  he  has
impressively  described  this  condition.  (f)  And  yet
God  in  the  OT  had  promised  a  time  of  salvation,  and
it  was  inconceivable  that  he  should  not  hold  to  his
word.  But  how  could  he,  if  the  universal  fulfilment  of
the  law — which  was  so  clearly  impossible — were  held  to
be  the  indispensable  condition?

(g)  Here  of  necessity  must  have  come  about  in  the
mind  of  Paul  a  combination  of  these  two  lines  of
thought  which  had  hitherto  remained  apart.  What  if
the  Christians  were  right  in  their  assertion  that  the
Crucified  One  really  was  the  Messiah,  through  whom  it
was  God's  will  to  bring  salvation  to  the  world  without
insisting  on  the  fulfilment  of  the  entire  law?  In  that
case  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  was  indeed  a
crime ;  but  Paul,  and  with  him  all  mankind,  was
nevertheless  delivered  from  the  anguish  of  soul  caused
by  daily  transgression  of  the  law  ;  mercy,  no  longer
wrath,  was  what  he  might  expect  from  God.  (h]  And
indeed,  this  being  so,  it  could  only  have  been  through
the  death  of  Jesus  that  God  had  willed  to  procure

1  Holsten,  ZH'T,  1861,  pp.  223-284  ;  Zutn  Eva.ng.  dts  Paulus
«.  dcs  I'ctrus,  1-237  (1868);  Pfleiderer,  Paulinisntus,  1873,  (2)
i8qo,  Einl.  On  the  other  side:  Beyschlag,  St.  A>.,  1864,  pp.
197-264;  1870,  pp.  7-50,  189-26^.  Specially  interesting  is  Scholz
(Deutsch-Evangtl.  Blatter,  1881,  pp.  816-841),  who  recognises
the  whole  psychological  preparation  for  the  conversion,  and
then  brings  in  the  supernatural  fact  of  the  risen  Jesus,  which
ms  previous  representation  has  enabled  him  to  dispense  with.

4081


salvation  for  men.  For  Saul,  the  Pharisee,  could  never
get  away  from  the  thought  that  some  kind  of  propitia
tion  had  to  be  made  for  the  sins  of  men,  trefore  God
could  bring  in  his  grace.  Perhaps  the  Christians  had
even  already  begun  to  quote  in  support  of  their  view
Is.  53,  which  Paul  in  all  probability  has  in  his  mind
when,  in  i  Cor.  15s,  he  says  that  he  has  received  by
tradition  the  doctrine  that  Christ,  according  to  the
Scriptures,  had  been  delivered  as  a  propitiation  for
our  sins.

(i)  Whether,  however,  all  this,  which  in  one- respect
promised  blessedness,  but  in  another  threatened  him
with  divine  punishment  as  a  persecutor  of  the  Christians,
was  really  true  or  not,  turned  for  Paul  upon  the  answer
to  the  question,  whether  in  actuality  Jesus  was  risen.
For,  in  addition  to  the  doctrine  of  propitiation,  Saul  the
Pharisee  was  indissolubly  wedded  to  the  thought  that
'  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree '  is  accursed,  unless
God  himself  has  unmistakably  pronounced  otherwise —
viz.  that  this  proposition  has  no  application  to  Jesus,
who  did  not  die  the  death  of  a  criminal,  but  the  death
of  a  divine  offering  for  sin.  Such  a  divine  declaration
was  involved,  according  to  the  Christians,  in  the  resur
rection  of  Jesus.

(k]  It  will  not  be  necessary  to  dwell  upon  the  deeply
agitating  effect  which  such  doubts  must  have  produced
in  Paul's  inmost  soul  ;  the  vividness  with  which
the  living  figure  so  often  described  to  him  by  Chris
tians  must,  time  and  again,  have  stood  before  him,
only  to  be  banished  as  often  by  the  opposition  of  his
intellect ;  until  finally,  only  too  easily,  there  came  a
time  when  the  image  of  fancy  refused  any  longer  to
yield  to  the  effort  of  thought.  All  that  need  be  pointed
out  further  is  that  on  his  own  testimony,  as  well  as  on
that  of  Acts,  Paul  was  very  prone  to  visions  and  other
ecstatic  conditions  (2  Cor.  12 1-4  i  Cor.  14  18  Acts  9  12
169  189  22i7  2723).  That  he  does  not  place  what  he
had  experienced  at  Damascus  on  a  level  with  those
visions  of  his,  but  speaks  of  it  as  the  last  appearance  of
the  risen  Jesus  (i  Cor.  158),  is  intelligible  enough  if  he
was  not  aware  of  any  further  appearances  having  been
made  to  other  persons  (see  §  10^);  but  it  in  no  way
shows  that  in  the  journey  to  Damascus  what  befell  was
not  a  vision,  but  an  actual  meeting  with  the  risen  Jesus.
The  possibility,  indeed  the  probability,  of  a  vision  here
has  been  pointed  out ;  it  is  for  each  reader  to  choose
between  this  and  a  miracle.

(/)  Let  it  be  clearly  understood,  however,  that  we  do  not  here
employ  the  word  '  was  seen '  (<o$0»j)  as  evidence  that  Paul
himself  concedes  the  subjective  origin  of  the  image  which  he
saw.  (To  the  contrary,  see  §  34^,  c.)  Neither  do  we  make  use
of  the  expression  in  Gal.  1  16,  where  Paul  speaks  of  God  as
having  revealed  his  son  '  in  me '  (ei>  e/u.oi),  to  prove  that  Paul
regarded  the  occurrence  at  Damascus  as  one  that  had  taken
place  solely  within  himself.  The  words  '  I  have  seen  '  (eopaKo.)
and  '  was  seen  '  (u><j>0n)  in  i  Cor.  9  i  15s  are  decisive  against  this,
for  by  them  the  apostle  means  to  say  that  he  has  really  seen
(although  not  in  earthly  but  in  heavenly  corporeality)  the  risen
Jesus  as  appearing  to  him  ab  c.vtra.  Yet  so  far  as  Gal.  1 15  f.
is  concerned,  neither  is  it  probable  that  '  to  reveal '  (a7ro«:aAvi//ai)
denotes  a  subsequent  inward  illumination  of  Paul,  since  '  but
when '  (ore  fie)  and  '  straightway '  (eiifle'ws)  mark  the  time
which  followed  immediately  upon  that  of  '  the  Jews'  religion  '
('Iov£ai<r]uid?)  (1  13  f.).  'In  me  '  (iv  e/not),  in  spite  of  the  refer
ence  of  '  to  reveal '  (a7ro/caAt5i//ai)  to  the  event  on  the  road  to
Damascus,  may  mean  'within  me,'  in  so  far  as  the  appearance
produced  effects  upon  the  spiritual  life  of  the  apostle  ;  but  it  can
easily  mean  also  'upon  me'  —  i.e.,  by  changing  the  persecutor
into  a  believer  (not,  however,  '  through  the  success  of  my  mis
sionary  labours,'  which  did  not  occur  till  later).

The  situation  of  the  earliest  disciples  very  readily
suggests  the  same  explanation  of  the  facts,  (a)  The
nlental  struggle  between  despair  and
hope  —  the  disaster  involved  in  the
death  of  Jesus,  and  the  hope  they  still
somehow  clung  to,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  might  still
be  established  by  Jesus  —  can  hardly  have  been  less
than  had  been  the  struggle  in  the  mind  of  Paul.
Perhaps  there  was  in  their  case  the  additional  circum
stance  that  they  were  fasting,  a  condition  highly  favour
able  to  the  seeing  of  visions.  Yet  such  a  conjecture

4082


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


is  by  no  means  indispensable,  and  we  need  not  lay
stress  on  the  indication  as  to  this  given  in  the  Gospel  of
Peter  and  in  the  Didaskalia  (above,  §§  5  [/],  7*).  All
these  psychological  elements,  however,  will  be  more  fully
considered  later  (§  37).

(b)  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  unable  to  attach
weight  to  the  view  that  the  disciples  were  gradually  led
by  a  study  of  the  OT  to  a  conviction  that  Jesus  was
alive,  and  that  thus  in  the  end  they  came  to  have
visions  in  which  they  beheld  his  form.

Visions  do  not  arise  by  processes  so  gradual  or  so  placid.  It
is  certainly  correct  to  suppose  that  certain  passages  of  the  OT
must  have  had  an  influence  on  the  thoughts  of  the  disciples  in
those  critical  days ;  but  not  that  they  were  then  discovered  for
the  first  time  as  a  result  of  study.  Rather  must  they  have  been
long  familiar,  when  suddenly,  under  the  impression  made  by  the
death  of  Jesus,  they  acquire  a  new  and  decisive  significance  as
convincing  the  bereaved  ones  that  the  continued  life  of  Jesus
was  made  assured  by  the  word  of  God.

(f)  From  our  list  of  such  passages  must  be  excluded  many
which  are  frequently  quoted  as  belonging  to  it  ;  for  example,
Is.  258  Ps.  133  i  3  Ezek.  185-9,  Ps.  27  (although  it  appears  to
be  cited  in  Acts  13  33  in  this  sense),  and,  in  particular,  Ps.  16  10,
although  this  is  cited  in  Acts  2  27  31  13  35.  What  is  said  in  the
Hebrew  text  is  that  God  will  not  suffer  his  pious  worshipper  to
die(cpz>.  9).  When  (S  by  a  false  etymology  (nnt9  =  l  to  destroy,'
instead  of  n'Bf  = '  to  sink ')  renders  sahath,  which,  as  the
parallelism  conclusively  shows,  means  'grave,1  by  'destruction1
(Sia.<j>9opii),  the  mistranslation  is  innocuous  as  long  as  this  word
is  taken  to  mean  'death,'  as  the  translators  certainly  took  it ;  it
becomes  misleading  only  on  the  Christian  interpretation  which
understands  the  bodily  corruption  that  follows  death.  Passages
of  the  OT  from  which  the  disciples  could  really  have  drawn
their  conviction  as  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  are  Ex.  36  (see
its  employment  by  Jesus  himself  in  Mk.  12a6./0  Is.  53oyC
Hos.  62  2  K.  20s,  perhaps  also  Ps.  11817  Job  10  25-27,  but
very  specially  Ps.  8613  110 1  (cp  Brandt,  498-504).  It  must
always  be  borne  in  mind,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say,  that
they  did  not  interpret  such  passages  in  a  critical  manner  and
with  reference  to  the  context,  but  simply  as  they  seemed  to
present  to  them  a  consoling  thought.

(it)  Xo  weight  can  be  given  to  the  objection  that  the  image  of
the  risen  Jesus  which  presented  itself  to  the  disciples  cannot
have  been  subjective  'because  at  first  they  did  not  recognise
it.  That  they  failed  to  do  so  is  stated  only  in  passages
which  must  be  regarded  as  unhistoric.il  (Lk.  24  16  Jn.  2014);
in  Lk.  24  37  41  it  is  not  even  said  that  he  was  not  recognised.

(e)  Another  objection,  that  though  perhaps  the  sub
jective  explanation  might  be  admissible  in  the  case  of  a
single  individual,  it  wholly  fails  in  the  case  of  appear
ances  to  several,  not  to  speak  of  the  case  of  500  at
once,  appears  at  first  sight  to  have  great  weight.  As
against  this  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  one  of  the  most
recent  upholders  of  an  objective  resurrection  of  Jesus,
Steude  (St.  A'r.  1887,  pp.  273-275),  quite  gives  up  this
argument.  In  point  of  fact  there  is  ample  evidence  to
prove  that  visions  have  been  seen  by  many,  in  the
cases  of  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  Savonarola,  the
Spanish  general  Pacchi,  several  crusaders — days  and
even  months  after  their  death — and  similar  occurrences
also  in  the  cases  of  800  French  soldiers,  the  Camisards
in  1686-1707,  the  followers  of  the  Roman  Catholic
priest  Poschl  in  Upper  Austria  in  1812-1818,  the
1  Preaching-sickness  '  and  '  Reading-sickness  '  in  Sweden
in  1841-1854,  and  so  forth.1  That  in  circumstances
of  general  excitement  and  highly  strung  expectation
visions  are  contagious,  and  that  others  easily  perceive
that  which  at  first  had  been  seen  by  only  one,  is,  in

1  E.  A.  Abbott,  St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  1898  ;  Hase,
Gesc.'t.Jesu,  1876,  pp.  595^,  and  Neue  Propheten,  333  =  (2)  2  ggf. ;
Renter,  Alexander  der  Dritte,  8110-112,  772-774  (1864);
Scholten,  Evang.  nach  Joh.  (Germ.),  329^  (1867);  Kenan,
Apdtres,  i6f.  22  (ET  517^  55);  Keim,  Gesch.  Jesu  von  Nazara,
8539-592  (1872),  ET  6,  348^);  Perty,  Mystische  Erschti-
nungenC2\  1  130- 133  (1872);  E.  Stein,  Psychische  Contagion,
•21  f.  (Erlangen,  1877);  Hohnbaum,  Psychischt  Gesundtieit,
38-41  (1845);  Leubuscher,  \\~ahnsinn  in.  den  4  letzten  Jakrkun-
dertcn,  222-249(1848);  Ideler,  Tkeorie  des  religiosen  U'ahn-
sinns  (1848-1850);  Emminghaus,  Allgem,  Psychopathologie,
§S  33/-  Ylf-  96,  113,  186  (1878),  with  the  literature  there  referred
to;  Allgent.  Ztschr.fftr  Psychiatric,  1849,  pp.  253-261;  1854,
pp.  115-125;  1856,  pp.  546-604;  1860,  pp.  565-719;  Wiedemann,
Die  relig.  Beiuegung  in  Oberoesterreich  u.  Salzburg  beim
Reginn  des  19  Jakrh.  (1890);  Die  Secte  der  PSschlianer  in
OberSstreich  in  demjahre  1817  (no  place  on  title-page,  1819);
Misson,  Theatre  Sacre  des  Cevennes,  London,  1707  ;  Blanc,
Inspiration  ties  Cainisards,  Paris,  1859.

4083


view  of  the  accumulated  evidence,  a  fact  not  to  be
denied.

(/)  The  attempt  has  been  made  to  argue  from  this,
on  the  contrary,  that  subjective  visions  cannot  be
thought  of  as  explaining  the  recorded  facts  of  the
resurrection,  inasmuch  as  in  that  case  we  should  be
entitled  to  expect  very  many  more  recorded  visions
than  are  enumerated  by  Paul.  That,  however,  would
depend  on  the  amount  of  predisposition  to  visions.  It
is  very  easily  conceivable  that  this  may  very  rapidly
have  diminished  when,  by  means  of  a  moderate  number
of  reported  appearances,  the  conviction  had  become
established  that  Jesus  had  risen.  On  this  account  it  is
also  best  to  presume  that  the  first  five  appearances
followed  one  another  very  quickly.  All  the  more
confidently  in  that  case  could  Paul  speak  of  that  which
he  had  himself  received  as  being  the  last  of  all  (§  10  h}.

The  consideration  which  above  all  others  causes  the
most  serious  misgivings,  is  the  state  of  deep  depression


37.  Situation
of  Peter.


in  which  the  disciples  were  left  by  the
death  of  Jesus. Is  it  conceivable  that


in  such  circumstances  subjective  visions
should  have  come  to  them  ?

(«)  This  question,  however,  is  essentially  simplified
by  what  has  been  pointed  out  above  (§  36  e),  if  we
suppose  in  addition  that  it  was  Peter  alone  who  re
ceived  the  first  vision.  Could  he  but  once  find  himself
able  to  say  that  he  had  seen  Jesus,  the  others  no
longer  needed  to  be  able  to  raise  themselves  out  of
their  state  of  prostration  by  their  own  strength  ;  what
had  happened  to  Peter  supplied  what  was  wanting  in
this  respect.  The  question  thus  narrows  itself  to  this  :
Is  the  possibility  of  a  subjective  vision  excluded  in  the
case  even  of  Peter  ?

(b}  Undoubtedly  an  unusually  strong  faith  was
needed,  if  in  Peter  the  thought  that  Jesus,  notwith
standing  his  death,  was  still  alive,  was  to  become  so
powerful  that  at  last  it  could  take  the  form  of  a  vision.
All  the  requisite  conditions,  however,  were  present.
We  do  not  at  all  lay  weight  upon  the  consideration,
that  with  the  return  to  Galilee  the  reminiscences  of
Jesus  associated  with  those  localities  would  again  take
the  upper  hand  over  the  impression  which  his  death
had  made  ;  for  indeed  this  impression  was  indelible.
But  alongside  of  this  impression  there  would  also  be
recollections  of  the  predictions  of  Jesus.  We  do  not
refer  here  primarily  to  the  predictions  of  his  resurrection
(see  §  22  a) ;  those  referring  to  his  coming  again  from
heaven  to  set  up  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  earth —
predictions  which  are  certainly  quite  historical  (see
GOSPELS,  §  145  [/])  —  are  much  more  important.
They  also,  it  is  true,  might  seem  to  have  been  decisively
falsified  by  the  death  of  Jesus  ;  for  with  Peter  also  it
was  an  infallible  word  of  God,  that  every  one  that
hangs  on  a  tree  is  cursed  (Dt.  2X23;  cp  Gal.  813).
Precisely  here,  however,  there  is  a  difference  between
the  cases  of  the  two  apostles  :  Paul  could  apply  this
thesis  to  Jesus  in  cold  blood,  because  he  had  never
personally  known  him  ( 2  Cor.  5 16,  when  rightly  inter
preted)  ;  Peter  could  not — he  owed  too  much  to  him.
To  speak  more  exactly,  the  reason  why  Peter,  even  after
the  crucifixion,  did  not  cease  wholly  to  have  faith  in  the
prediction  of  Jesus,  lay  partly  in  the  deep  impression  of
his  utter  trustworthiness  which  he  had  left  upon  his
disciple,  and  partly  also  in  the  religious  inheritance  which
Peter  felt  he  owed  him,  in  the  ineradicable  conviction  of
the  truth  of  his  cause.  From  this  conviction  of  the
truth  of  Jesus'  cause  the  conviction  of  his  continued
personal  life  was  inseparable  in  the  thought  of  that
age.  In  this  sense  Renan's  saying  (Apdtres,  44,  ET
70)  is  true  :  '  ce  qui  a  resuscit£  J6sus,  c'est  1" amour. '

(c)  There  is  yet  another  point,  which  for  the  most
part  is  utterly  overlooked  in  this  connection.  We  do
not  mean  the  lively  temperament  of  Peter  ;  for  whether
that  made  him  specially  susceptible  to  visions  cannot  be
said.  We  refer  to  the  fact  that  Peter  had  denied  his

4084


RESURRECTION-  AND  ASCENSION-NARRATIVES


Lord.  Even  if  the  circumstance,  mentioned  only  in
Lk.  (226i),  that  after  his  denial  his  eye  met  that  of  his
master,  be  hardly  historical  (cp  SIMON  PETER,  §  19^),
there  still  remains  a  delicate  suggestion  of  what  must
most  infallibly  have  happened  ;  the  form  of  him  whom
Peter  had  denied  must  have  come  up  before  him  with
ever  renewed  vividness,  however  he  may  have  struggled
to  escape  it.  Though  at  first  he  may  have  said  to  him
self  that  this  was  a  mere  creation  of  his  fancy,  it  is
certainly  not  too  bold  a  conjecture  that  a  moment  came
when  he  believed  he  saw  his  Lord  bodily  present  before
him,  whether  it  was  that  the  eye  was  turned  upon  him
with  reproach  and  rebuke,  or  whether  it  was  that  it
already  assured  him  of  that  forgiveness,  for  which
beyond  all  doubt  he  had  been  praying  with  all  the
energy  of  his  soul.

(d)  If  this  be  sound,  we  shall  find  in  the  denial  of
Peter  an  occasion  for  the  occurrence  of  a  vision  as  direct
as  we  have  found  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  by
Paul  to  have  been.  If  we  will,  we  shall  be  able  to
discern  in  these  acts  of  hostility  against  Jesus  or  his
followers  an  arrangement  in  the  providence  of  God,
whereby  chosen  vessels  were  prepared  for  the  further
ance  of  Christianity.  In  any  case  this  deed  of  Peter,
that  he  held  fast  his  faith  in  the  imperishability  of  the
cause  of  Jesus  and  therefore  also  of  the  person  of  Jesus,
will  remain  the  greatest  of  his  life,  greater  still  than  his
confession  at  Ccesarea  Philippi  (Mk.  829  and  ||),  and
would  make  to  be  true  those  two  words  even  though  in
the  mouth  of  Jesus  they  be  not  historical  :  '  thou  art
Peter  (i.e.  ,  a  rock)  and  upon  this  rock  will  I  build  my
church  '  (Mt.  16  18,  cp  MINISTRY,  §  4/.  ),  and  '  Do  thou,
when  once  thou  hast  turned  again,  stablish  thy  brethren  '
(Lk.  2232,  cp  SIMON  PETER,  §  15^).

For  all  that  has  been  said  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs
the  most  that  can  be  claimed  is  that  it  proves  the

.  Conclusion  P°ssibility-the  probability  if  you  will
—  of  the  explanation  from  subjective
f


38


, ,,
hypothesis.


bje
.  -  -,-.

visions, trom  the  very  nature  of  the

case  it  would  not  be  possible  to  prove


more,  for  the  visionary  character  of  the  appearances
could  not  be  established  for  us  by  the  visionaries  them
selves  —  on  the  contrary,  everything  constrained  them
to  regard  what  they  had  seen  as  objective  and  real  —  nor
yet  by  the  reporters,  who  simply  repeated  what  the
visionaries  had  related  to  them.  Only  scientifically
trained  reporters  could  have  assured  us  on  the  point,
and  such  reporters  did  not  then  exist.  Let  it  be
expressly  observed,  however,  that  in  the  vision-hypo
thesis  it  is  only  the  judgment  of  the  visionaries  as  to  the
objective  reality  of  what  they  had  seen  that  is  set  aside  ;
every  other  biblical  statement  of  fact,  unless  we  have
been  compelled  to  set  it  aside  as  inconsistent  with  some
other  biblical  statement,  remains  unaffected.  The
hypothesis,  furthermore,  attributes  no  want  of  upright
ness  either  to  the  visionary  or  to  the  reporter.  The
error  which  it  points  out  affects  merely  the  husk  —  -
namely  that  the  risen  Jesus  was  seen  in  objective
reality,  but  not  the  kernel  of  the  matter,  that  Jesus
lives  in  the  spiritual  sense  ;  thus  it  is  an  error,  only  in
the  same  relative  sense  as  is  the  dogma  that  the  Bible  is
inspired  in  every  letter  (a  dogma  without  the  temporary
ascendancy  of  which  the  church  of  to-day  would  hardly
have  existed),  or  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  anthro
pomorphic  view  of  God's  being  and  his  relation  to
nature  which  possesses  ever}'  child  is  an  error  —  an  error
but  for  which  the  number  of  grown-up  persons  of
unshaken  religious  conviction  would  indeed  be  small.

Reverting  now  once  more  to  §  i  and  the  ideas  on
account  of  which  it  is  held  that  the  belief  in  a  literal
resurrection  cannot  be  given  up,  we  remark  that  the
doctrine  of  the  government  of  the  church  by  Christ  is
one  that  can  give  place  without  any  religious  loss  to
that  of  the  leading  of  the  church  by  the  spirit  of  Christ,
or,  if  it  is  desired  to  put  it  in  a  more  personal  form,
that  of  the  government  of  the  church  by  God.  That

131  4085


the  cause  of  Jesus  did  not  die  with  him  on  the  cross  we
are  assured  by  history,  even  if  his  resurrection  did  not
occur  as  a  literal  fact.  It  is  undeniable  that  the  church
was  founded,  not  directly  upon  the  fact  of  the  resurrec
tion  of  Jesus,  but  upon  the  belief  in  his  resurrection  ;
and  this  faith  worked  with  equal  power  whether  the
resurrection  was  an  actual  fact  or  not.  The  view  of
Paul  that,  apart  from  the  literal  truth  of  the  resurrection
of  Jesus,  there  is  no  forgiveness  of  sins,  has  as  its
necessary  presupposition  the  dogma,  not  of  Paul  the
Christian  but  of  Paul  the  Pharisee,  that  every  crucified
person  without  exception  is  accursed  of  God  ;  as  soon
as  the  possibility  of  a  miscarriage  of  justice  either  in  the
synedrium  or  at  Pilate's  judgment  seat  is  conceded,  this
view  eo  ipso  falls  to  the  ground.  Finally,  the  view
that  unless  Jesus  actually  rose  again  the  hope  of  the
final  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  vain  would  be  a  sound
one  if  this  hope  had  consisted  in  the  expectation  that  all
men  were  to  rise  three  days  after  their  respective  deaths.
In  its  actual  form,  as  hope  of  the  resurrection  at  the  last
day,  it  would  come  to  be  denied,  in  so  far  as  an
event  happening  in  the  case  of  Jesus  is  concerned,  only
if  Jesus  himself  were  to  continue  in  the  state  of  death  at
the  last  day.  In  so  far,  however,  as  the  idea  of  the
immortality  of  the  soul  takes  the  place  of  the  hope  of  a
final  resurrection — as  in  modern  times  is  very  extensively
the  case — it  ceases  to  be  a  matter  of  fundamental
importance  whether  Jesus  rose  again  on  the  third  day,
or  not  ;  for  immortality  consists  only  in  a  continued
existence  of  the  soul,  and  that  from  the  moment  of  the
death  of  the  body  onwards,  and  is  just  as  incapable  of
being  confirmed  or  made  known  by  a  resurrection  of  the
body  as  of  being  called  in  question  by  the  absence  of  a
resurrection.  If  immortality  could  thus  be  confirmed  or
made  known,  that  must  have  been  possible  on  the  first
and  the  second  day  after  death,  for  immortality  was  then
present.  For  that  time,  however,  resurrection  is  ex
cluded  by  presupposition.

Prins, De realiteit van's Heercn upstanding, 1861, and

(against  Prins)  Straatman,  De  rcaliteit  Tan 's  Heeren  opstanding

.  .  .  en  hare  verdcdigcrs,  1862  ;  Paul,  Zll'T,

39.  Literature.  1863,  182-209,  279-311;  1864,  82-95,  396-408

and  (against  Paul)  Strauss,  ibid.  1863,  386-
400  ;  Gebhardt,  Die  Aufersteliung  Christi  und  Hire  iietiesten
Gtgner,  1864;  Steude,  Die  Auferstehung  Jesu,  1888,  and  with
more  scientific  thoroughness  in  St.  Kr.,  1887,  203-295  (see  above,
§  36  e)  ;  Rohrbach,  Der  Schluss  des  Marcusevangeliums,  1894,
and  Die  Berichte  liter  die  Auferstehung  Jesu,  1898;  Eck,
'  Bedeutung  der  Auferstehung  Jesu  fiir  die  Urgemeinde  u.  fur
uns'  in  Hcfte  ziir  Christlichen  ll'elt,  No.  32,  1898;  Loofs,
'Die  Auferstehungsberichte  u.  ihr  \Verth,'  ibid.  No.  33,  1898;
Bruckner,  '  Die  Berichte  tiber  die  Auferstehung  Jesu  '  in  Prot.
Monatshefte,  1899,  41-47,  96-110,  153-160.  Amongst  the  writings
on  the  life  of  Jesus  see  Strauss,  Keim,  Weiss,  Beyschlag  (vol.  i.)
and,  quite  specially,  Brandt,  Evang.  Gesch.,  1893,  305-446,
490-517.

[The  bulk  of  English  work  upon  this  subject  (of  which  the
more  useful  or  significant  portions  are  indicated  in  the  sub
joined  paragraphs  by  an  asterisk)  falls  into  one  or  other  of  two
classes  :  (a)  one  dealing  primarily  with  historical  and  theo
logical  appreciations  of  the  fact  or  truth  in  question  ;  (/>)  the
other  sensitive,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  features  of  the  record
and  the  historical  evidence.  Owing  to  the  backwardness  and
inefficiency  of  English  criticism  upon  the  synoptic  question,
and  the  consequent  paucity  of  scientific  work  upon  Mt.  and  Lk.
especially  (upon  Lk.  24  note  the  strangely  parallel  story  in
Plutarch  :  I'it.  Ron.  28),  the  latter  class  of  writings  is  as  yet  in
adequately  represented,  being  conspicuous  for  open-mindedness
(in  its  better  representatives)  rather  than  for  thoroughness,  and
more  successful  in  criticising  the  weak  points  of  opposing
theories  than  in  constructing  a  satisfactory  and  tenable  hypo
thesis  which  might  do  justice  to  the  complex  of  facts  under
review.  Cp  Fronde's  Short  Studies,  1  229^

(a)  The  conservative  side  is  represented  by  a  long  series  of
writings,  whose  weakness  consists  mainly  in  the  preponderance
of  the  dogmatic  over  the  historical  element  or  in  literalism.  Of
these  the  following  are  the  more  salient  : — F.  D.  Maurice's
Theol.  Essays  (8);  Westcott's  Introd.  to  Study  of  Gospels
((8)  1881),  333-341;  The  Gosp.  of  the  Resurr.,  The  Historic
Faith  (chap.  6),  and  The  Revelation  of  the  Risen  Lord;
*Milligan's  exhaustive  and  theological  The  Resurr.  of  our
Lord  ((•*)  1894),  and  The  Ascension  and  Heavenly  Priesthood
of  our  Lord,  1892;  *M'Cheyne  Edgar's  vigorous  Gosp.  of  the
Risen  Saviour,  1892,  pp.  21-135  >  C.  A.  Row's  The  Jesus  of
the  Evangelists,  1868,  pp.  262  f.  (critique  of  mythical  theories);
J.  Kennedy's  survey  in  The  Resurr.  of  our  Lord  an  historical
fact,  "with  examination  of  naturalistic  hypotheses,  1881  ;

4086


RBU

Latham's  curious  volume  The  Risen  Master,  1900 ;  and  Orr's
Christian  \'iew  of  God  and  the  World,  1893,  Lect.  0,  n.  C.
Similarly,  but  with  special  bearing  upon  the  narratives  as  part
of  the  biography  of  Jesus  : — *  !•  airbairn  s  Studies  in  the  Life  of
Christ,  1881,  chap.  IS  ;  G.  H.  Gilbert's  Students'  Life  of  Jesut,
1898,  pp.  38^-405  ;  besides  the  Lives  of  Christ  by  Farrar,  Eder-
sheim,  and  b.  J.  Andrews  (ed.  1892,  pp.  589^).  The  subject  is
competently  handled  also,  though  from  a  more  strictly  philo
sophical  and  doctrinal  standpoint,  by  *Newman  Smyth  (Old
Faiths  in  New  Light,  chap.  8);  *D.  W.  Forrest  (The  Christ
of  Hist,  and  Experience,  1897,  Lect.  4  critique  of  vision-
hypothesis);  R.  H.  Mutton  (Theol.  Essays,^  1888,  pp.
131 /);  K.  Griffith-Jones  (The  Ascent  through  Chrilt,W
1900,  pp.  337-359);  H.  G.  Weston  (ttiblioth.  Sacra,  1900,
pp.  356-362)  and  L.  S.  Potwin  (ibid.  1890,  pp.  177-190) ;  also
by  *Denney  (The  Death  of  Christ,  1902,  pp.  66  f.  76  f.  121-
123).

At  the  opposite  pole  of  radical  criticism,  the  most  noteworthy
works  along  this  line  are  *R.  W.  Macau's  The  Resurrection  of
Jesus  Christ,  the  contributions  of  Dr.  E.  A.  Abbott  (cp  J'hilo-
thristus,  Oneshnus,  and  Through  Nature  to  Christ.  1877,
chap.  21),  and  Martineau's  Scat  of  Authority  in  Religion
(('*>,  1890),  363_/C,  48i_/,  byif.  besides  the  writings  to  be  cited
below.

(/')  Examinations  of  early  Christian  evidence,  and  particularly
of  the  gospel  narratives  (with  that  of  the  ascension,  Acts  1  i-n),
from  a  f.iirly  free  but  reverent  standpoint  may  be  found  in
A.  B.  liruce's  Expos.  Gk.  Test.  vol.  i.  ((-),  1901),  330 f.,  d^f. ',
G.  L.  Cary's  scholarly  Synoptic  Gasp.  (Intermit.  Handbks.  to
NT,  vol.  i.,  1900),  §§  198-202;  J.  Estlin  Carpenter's  First
Three  Gasp.  ((81,  1890),  3i9/,  268./C ;  A.  C.  Mc<  iiffert's  Apost.
Age,  1897,  pp.  36-44,  55./,  and  J.  V.  Harriet's  Apost.  Age,
1900,  pp.  i-io;  see,  further,  Blair's  Apost.  Gosp.  (372-385)  on
the  conclusion  of  Mk.,  with  the  editions  by  S \vete  and  Allan
Menzies,  Mofifatt's  Hist.  New  Testament  (("-),  1901),  pp.  550-553
(on  Mk.  16  0-20),  647-649(00  Mt.  and  Lk.),  694-696  (on  Jn.  20-21),
and  A.  Reville's  article  in  New  \l~orld,  1894,  pp.  498-527.  The
distinctive  aim  of  such  contributions  is  to  investigate  not  simply
the  verbal  contents  of  the  narratives  in  question,  but  also  their
mental  and  religious  presuppositions;  to  get  behind  the  stories
into  the  world  of  their  first  hearers,  with  their  beliefs  and  hopes.
Extreme  forms  of  this  critical  hypothesis  are  variously  repre
sented  in  such  works  as  *W.  Mackintosh's  Nat.  Hist,  of  the
Christian  Religion,  1894,  pp.  257-328  (mythical  theory),  *Super-
natural  Religion,  3,  1877,  p.  398/1  (in  which,  as  in  the  follow
ing  book,  the  problem  is  handled  drastically,  but  uncritically
isolated),  The  Four  Gosp.  as  Historical  Records,  1895,  pp.  451,
and  O.  Cone,  The  Gosp.  ami  its  Earliest  Interpretations,  1893,
pp.  12  \f.,  2oo_/C,  none  of  which,  however,  can  be  pronounced
entirely  satisfactory,  either  in  method  or  in  results.  See
further  S.  Davidson's  NT  tntrod.C^  (1894)2  367  f.  The  opposite
side  is  pleasantly  but  ineffectively  advocated  by  writers  like
Purves  (Christianity  in  Apostolic  Afe,  1900,  9-15)  and  Sanday
(Hastings'  7)5-638-643),  while  it  is  defended  with  a  really
critical  grasp  of  the  problem  and  its  bearings  by  *Swete
(Apostles'  Creed,  1394,  p.  64_/7),  *A.  B.  Bruce  (Apologetics,
18^2,  pp.  383-397),  SchafT( //*.$•/.  of  Church,  1  172-186).  *Denney
(art.  'Ascension'  in  Hastings'  DB  1 161-162),  and  *Prof.  S.
McComb  (Expos. ^  4350-363,  a  critique  of  ET  of  Harnack's
ly^esen);  see  also  *Knowlmg :  The  Witness  of  the  Epistles,
1892,  pp.  365-396,  397-4 14 (ascension)  ;  A.  Hovey  (Auto:  Journ.
Theol.,  1900,  pp.  536-554,  a  critique  of  Stapfer)  ;  \V.  F.  Adeney
(Expos.(^}  8137-146,  a  critique  of  Weizsacker) ;  N.  J.  D.  White
('Appearances  of  Risen  Lord  to  Individuals,'  Expos.(^  1066-74),
and  E.  R.  Bernard  ('  The  Value  of  the  Ascension,'  Exp.  T,
1900-1901,  pp.  152-155,  and  in  Hastings'  Z>.Z>  4  234).  Despite
exaggerated  statements  upon  both  sides,  recent  English  discus
sions  display  a  growing  sense  that  there  is  a  serious  problem
to  be  faced  in  the  condition  of  the  historical  records,  and  that
exegesis  has  a  vivid  if  subsidiary  part  to  play  in  its  solution.
This  is  a  sign  of  health,  if  only  that  the  demands  of  the  public
are  becoming  more  exigent  ;  but  no  advance  can  be  looked  for
until  English  students  are  furnished  with  a  scientific  equipment
in  the  shape  of  thoroughly  critical  editions  of  the  gospels,  as
well  as  with  monographs  combining  historical  judgment  and
sound  scholarship  with  some  philosophic  and  religious  appreci
ation  of  the  subject. — J.' Mo.J  p.  VV.  S.

REU  (-lin  ;  p&r-&Y)'  D'  Pe'eg,  a  name  occurring  in
the  genealogical  table  connecting  Shem  and  Abraham
(Gen.  11x8-2!  [P],  i  Ch.  1  25  ;  cp  Lk.  835,  AV  Ragau).
An  Aramrean  tribe  bearing  the  name  Ru'ua  appear  in
S.  Babylonia  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (Schr.
KGF-iosf.;  KATW  117;  Del.  Par.  238^);  but
their  identification  with  Reu  is  denied  by  Schr.  (loc.  cit. ).
The  name,  in  common  with  the  others  in  the  same  list,
is  probably  Mesopotamian,  and  we  may  possibly  find
a  trace  of  it  in  C^in-^,  one  of  the  kings  of  Edessa,
which  is  doubtless  for  '  man  of  Re'u,'  a  formation
parallel  to  the  Heb.  Vhfiaa  (cp  Duval,  '  Hist,  d'ltdesse,'
Journ.  Asiat.,  1891,  18126).  Re'u  may  have  been  an
old  Mesopotamian  god  (Mez,  Gesch.  der  Stadt  Harnln,
23).  Cp  REUBEN,  §§  9  iii.,  10.  '  F.  B.

4087


REUBEN


REUBEN


Mention  (§  i).
A  lost  tribe  (§  2).
First-born  ($  3).
Bilhah,  Bohan  (8  4).
'  Altar  '  story  (§  5).


Other  stories  (§  6).
Name  (§§  7-9).
Meaning  of  stories  (S  10).
Genealogies  (§j!  11-13).
Lists  of  cities  (§  14).


Reuben  J  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Hexateuch
as  a  branch  of  Israel. It  is  often  associated  with  Gad,
__  and  is  known  to  each  of  the  documents

1.  mention.  underlying  the  Hexateuch.  The  reader
naturally  infers  that  the  writers  of  those  documents  had
knowledge  of  such  a  community.  He  may  indeed  think
it  prudent  to  test  the  legitimacy  of  that  inference,  when
he  misses  references  elsewhere  in  the  Hebrew  writings.
Still,  the  argument um  e silentio  must  be  used  with  great
care.2  The  facts  seem  to  be  these.  Outside  of  the  fixed
tribal  lists  (in  Chron. ,  Ezek. ,  and,  in  the  NT,  in  Rev.)
and  the  Chronicler's  genealogies,3  Reuben  is  known,
apart  from  an  at  best  anachronistic  gloss  in  2  K.  1033
(descriptive  of  the  district  harassed  by  Hazael),  through
the  mention  in  the  enumeration  in  Judg.  5  (v.  15  f.).
That  chapter  contains  very  old  material  and  few  will
question  its  authority  even  when  it  stands  alone.  Only,
however,  if  we  are  sure  that  the  passage  says  what  the
poet  meant  it  to  say.  That,  however,  does  not
appear  to  have  been  questioned,  so  far  as  the  mention
of  Reuben  is  concerned.*  Discussion  has  been  con
fined  to  the  question,  where  the  mention  appearing
after  15^  and  again,  in  a  slightly  variant  form,
after  i6<z  really  belongs.  Still,  is  not  the  simplest  ex
planation  of  the  double  occurrence,  that  the  clause  is
really  a  gloss  ?  Other  difficulties  would  thus  be  removed.
It  always  seemed  strange  that  so  remote  a  community
as  the  traditional  Reuben  should  be  mentioned  by  name.8
To  speak  of  Gilead  in  general,  on  the  other  hand,
without  naming  tribes,  would  be  natural.  Later,
Gilead  8  would  be  taken  to  mean  Gad,  whilst  Machir
was  perhaps  referred  to  'half-Manasseh,'  and  so  a
reference  of  some  kind  or  other  would  be  made  on  the
margin  to  Reuben.  If  it  be  thought  that  probability  is
in  favour  of  the  reference  in  Judg.  5  being  contemporary
evidence,7  the  problem  before  us  is  to  determine  where
Reuben  lived  and  to  explain  the  fact  that  in  historical
times  Reuben  had  no  significance.  If  the  other  view  is
taken,  the  problem  is  to  account  for  the  references  in
the  Hexateuch.

A  survey  of  the  references  (in  the  Hexateuch)  to
Reuben  suggests  that  the  solid  element  in  them  all  is
the  belief  that  there  once  was  an  important
community  called  Reuben  and  that  for  some
reason  it  had  lost  its  place  ;  it  was  a  sort  of
'Ad  or  Thainud.  It  is  usually  supposed  that  tradition
preserved  the  memory  of  a  more  or  less  definite  geo
graphical  district  occupied  by  Reubenites.  It  may  have
done  so.  The  evidences  of  such  a  tradition,  however,
are  far  from  copious.  Most  of  what  we  are  told  about
a  territory  of  Reuben  is  in  D  (Dt.  812  16  443  Josh.  13
S-I2)  and  P  (much  of  Nu.  32  Josh.  1815-23  208  2136/)
and  cannot  safely  be  used  for  the  present  purpose  (see
§  14).  There  seems  to  be  only  one  passage  (Nu.  32

1  On  the  name  see  below :  on  the  form,  §  8  ;  on  OT  explana
tions,  §  7  ;  on  real  meaning,  8  o-

2  Special  caution  is  needed  in  regard  to  questions  bearing  on
the  tribes.

3  On  the  statements  in  i  Ch.  5  see  §  13. On  i  Ch.  1142  see
§  13  (end).

4  Winckler  has  suggested  that  '  Asher  *  is  not  a  tribe  name
but a pronoun ("t^N), and that 'Dan' was not  mentioned
originally  ((7/2  134,  no.  26./T).

6  Of  course  Reuben  may  have  been  settled  in  West  Palestine
at  the  time  referred  to  (see  next  note) ;  but  the  pastoral  character
assigned  to  the  tribe  in  the  clause  probably  shows  that  its  author
thought  of  the  East  (cp  GAP,  §  n,  first  small  type  par.).

6  Steuernagel  suggests  (Einwanderung,  20)  that  the  mention
of  Gilead,  not  Reuben,  in  v.  ija  may  be  because  Reuben  was
still  seated  in  W.  Palestine  (see  below,  §  10).

7  It  would  not  decide  the  question  where  Reuben  lived  (see
' preceding  two  notes).

4088


2.  A  lost
tribe.


REUBEN

37/. )  which  can  perhaps  be  attributed  to  J  (see,  how
ever,  Oxf.  Hex. ).  All  it  has  to  say  is  that  certain  six
(Moabite)  towns  were,  in  the  Mosaic  age(?)  '  built'  by
the  sons  of  Reuben  (see  below,  §  14).  The  absence  of
any  reference  to  a  people  called  Reuben  in  the  Mesha
inscription  although  it  mentions  three  of  the  six  towns
and  refers  to  '  the  men  of  Gad  '  as  having  '  dwelt  in  the
land  of 'Ataroth  from  of  old  (nVyo) '  seems  to  require  us
to  suppose  that  the  statement  of  J,  if  not  unhistorical,
rests  on  a  memory  of  days  long  gone.  That  there  was
a  firm  belief  in  an  ancient  Reuben  is,  indeed,  clear.
The  point  is  that  it  need  not  imply  a  knowledge  of
where  it  had  been  settled.  In  Gen.  35 21  f.  J  seems  to
connect  Reuben  with  West  Palestine  (see  §  4),  and  even
in  P  there  seems  to  be  a  trace  of  a  belief  of  the  same
kind  (Josh.  156  18 if.  §  4),  which  may  be  represented
in  the  strange  story  of  the  '  altar  '  (§5),  and  in  the  idea
that  Reuben  crossed  into  West  Palestine  to  help  the
other  tribes  to  effect  a  settlement  (cp  GAD,  col.  1585).

Whatever  was  thought  of  the  place  where  Reuben
had  lived,  a  great  deal  of  interest  was  felt  in  his  fate

3  First  born  'CP  §  I0^'  Reuaen  's  everywhere  the
first-born  (see  end  of  §).  In  E  indeed
there  was  perhaps  an  interval  of  considerable  length
between  him  and  Leah's  other  sons  :  Naphtali  seems
to  be  for  E  Jacob's  third  son  (cp  NAPHTALI,  §  2).
Whether  this  was  so  in  the  original  J  we  cannot  say  :
it  would  account  for  Reuben's  being  the  finder  of  the
diidaim  (ib.  ),1  which  E  does  not  mention.  In  J  as  we
have  it,  however,  Reuben  has  three  own  brothers  when
he  finds  the  dudaim  which  lead  to  the  birth  of  Joseph  2
(cp  ZKBULUN).  The  only  tale  E  has  to  tell  about
Reuben  is  of  how  he  tried  to  deliver  Joseph3  (Gen.
3722  29),  and  reminded  his  brothers  of  the  fact  (4222  ;
see  below,  §  10,  end),  and  how  he  offered  his  own  two
sons  (cp  §  1 1 )  as  a  pledge  of  the  safe  return  of  Benjamin.
The  most  significant  point  in  all  this  is  that  Reuben  was
the  first-born.  On  that  point  there  seems  to  be  com
plete  agreement.  The  problem  is  discussed  in  i  Ch.
5 1  f.  The  view  of  the  writer  of  that  passage  is  that
Reuben  forfeited  his  right  (as  first-born)  to  the  special
blessing,  which  fell  to  Joseph,  who  thus  became  two
tribes,  although  his  rival  Judah  4  ultimately  outdid  him.5

The  rest  of  the  points  may  belong  to  the  decking  out
of  the  story  (see,  however,  below,  §  10,  end).

Not  so  in  the  case  of  what  J  has  to  tell  us  in  Gen.
3522.  No  doubt  the  story  was  once  told  with  more

4.  Bilhah,  Bohan.  «etail6vi Test:  Reub'  3>  f?*?  •/i(H/ees-
8  33,  show  how  it  could  be  done).7

This  story  seems  to  be  J's  explanation  of  how  Reuben
lost  his  rank.  What  Jacob  did  when  he  heard8  of

1  According  to  Stucken  ('  Ruben  im  Jakobssegen '  in  RIl'G
for  1902,  446-72,  which  appeared  after  this  article  was  in  type)
the  finding  of  the  dudatin  was  ascribed  to  Reuben  as  a  patri
archal  eponym  on  a  level  with  Jacob. Later  syncretism  made
him  Jacob's  son.

2  Steuernagel suggests (Einivanderung, 17) that in the
original  story  what  Reuben  did  was  not  to  make  over  the  dudazm
to  Leah  but  to  use  them  to  win  the  favour  of  Rachel,  or  rather
Bilhah,  whence  Bohan (cp NAPHTALI,  §  i/i). This is  very
ingenious, but does not explain the  obvious  relation  of  the
dudaiin  to  Issachar  and  Joseph. According  to  Stucken  (see
preceding  note)  Reuben's incest  was  with  Leah  herself,  who
may  at  one  time  have  been  called  Kilhah.

:i  It  is  probable  that  in  Gen.  37  21  (J)  '  Reuben  '  is  redactional
fur  Judah.  See  next  note.

4  In  the  Joseph  story  the  leader  is  Judah  in  J,  Reuben  in  E
(cp  preceding  footnote) ;  cp  Steuernagel,  Eimvandcrung;  34.

8  According  to  Guthe,  GVI  42,  Reuben's  hegemony  belonged
to  the  time  preceding  the  settlement'  of  the  Rachel  tribes  (cp
RACHEL,  §  i  /•)-  Those  tril$es  which  acknowledged  his  leader
ship  were  called  Leah  ;  the  later  (Rachel)  tribes  acknowledged
the  hegemony  of  Joseph.

6  Against  the  suggestion  of  Dillmann  and  Stade  (C/-Y1  151)
that  the  story  implies  more  primitive  morals  in  the  half-nomad
Reubenites,  see  Holzinger,  ad  loc.

7  Later  writers  refused to  believe  the  story  (cp  the  case  of
SIMEON  [got,  end;  see  also  §41). InTargum(Ps.-Jon.  ad  loc. \
Midrash  (Gen.  rabba  98  f.\  Talmud  (Stiabb.  55  />),  and  Bk.  of
Jashar,  Reuben  only  disturbed  a  couch  (cp  Charles,  Jubilees,
§  33,  n.  2  and  §  33  i  />).

*  Through  angels,  according  to  Test.  Reub.

4089


REUBEN

Reuben's  deed  has  been  suppressed  by  R.1  It  can  be
inferred,  however,  from  the  '  Blessing  of  Jacob'  :  2

Reuben  !  thou  wast  my  first-born

My  might  and  the  first-fruits  of  my  manhood  ;
Exceeding  in  impetuosity,3  exceeding  in  passion  1

Foaming  like  water  .  .  .  •*
For  thou  didst  ascend  thy  father's  couch.

Then  did  I  curse  the  bed5  he  ascended.8

Even  without  Gunkel's  emendation  of  the  last  line  it  is
plain  that  the  sequel  to  Gen.  3522  was  a  father's  curse,7
which  brought  doom  on  the  tribe  (cp  BLESSINGS  AND
CURSINGS).  The  effect  becomes  still  more  clear  in  the
1  Blessing  of  Moses  '  :

Let  Reuben  live  (on),  let  him  not  die  (out)  !

Still,  let  him8  become  a  (mere)  handful  of  men  !9

The  story  of  Bohan  the  son  of  Reuben  may  have
been  connected  with  the  same  legend  (cp  NAPHTALI,
col.  3330  foot).  We  ought  perhaps,  however,  to  trans
late  the  word  '  bohan. '  The  landmark  would  then  be
the  thumb-stone10  of  the  son  (or  sons  [<5liL  in  Josh.  18  17])
of  Reuben.  The  suggestion  made  elsewhere  (col.  535
n.  4),  however,  is  perhaps  better :  the  suggestion,  namely,
that  there  is  a  slight  corruption  of  the  text,  and  that  we
ought  to  read  :  stone  of  the  sons  of  Reuben  ('33  pN
pitn  :  reading  '33  for  p  pa,  as  jna  might  be  a  trans
posed  nj3  =  'ja)-

The  reading  of  (@BL  in  Josh.  1817  would  support  this
view.  In  its  favour  is  the  ease  with  which  it  could  be

K T~,,V,  on brought into connection with a story

O. JOSH. £•&  !• l_ •  il  •  1  rr^i

'  alt  '  wnicri  ls  otherwise  perplexing.  The  stone
(or  was  it  really  a  group  of  stones?)  in
question  was  near  '  Geliloth  '  (Josh.  1817  :  see  GILGAL,
§6^).  Now  it  was  at  the  'Geliloth'  of  the  Jordan
that,  we  are  told,  there  was  erected  a  sacred  object  to
which  was  given  a  name  that  has  been  lost  (see  ED,
GALEED,  2).  The  present  text  of  Josh.  22  leaves  it
uncertain  on  which  side  of  Jordan  the  sacred  erection
stood,  and  it  ascribes  the  building  to  Reuben  and  Gad
(and  half  Manasseh  !).  Perhaps  Gad  is  an  addition11
connected  with  the  view  that  the  stone  was  east  of  the
Jordan.  No  doubt  the  object  was  not  an  '  altar,'  but  a
massebah  or  a  circle  of  stones  (see  GILGAL,  §  i),  and
the  story12  may  be  connected  in  some  way  with  an
attempt  to  account  for  the  loss  of  Reuben's  status.13

The  suggestion  just  made  gains,  perhaps,  in  plausi
bility  from  the  fact  that  in  E,  and  probably  J,  there  is
another  story  that  may  have  served  the  same  purpose
(next  §).

In  the  older  parts  of  Nu.  16  the  leaders  of  Reuben

(see  below, § 10) dare  to challenge  the  authority  of

fi .-.,, Moses  and  thus  bring  divine  judgment  on

', . themselves. It  is  even  possible  that  there

was  still  another  story  of  the  same  kind  (see

below,  §  10  [i]). These  stories, as they attribute to

1  According to Stucken (above, col. 4089, n. i) various
analogies  suggest that Israel  castrated  Reuben  for  his  crime
('  eye  for  eye,  etc.'),  53.

2  On  this  passage  see  n.  5.

3  Read  perhaps  HNp'  with  Gunkel.

4  MT  "IJVn  S\',  obscure;  see  Stucken,  MlrG,  1902,  p.  171.

5  Read  perhaps  'JHS^  'fp'TD  with  Gunkel. For  some  interest
ing  suggestions  as  to  the  original  purport  of  the  passage  see
Stucken  (as  in  col.  4089,  n.  i),  46-52.

**  According  to  Jubilees.  §8879,  and  Test.  Reub.,  Kilhah
became  taboo  to  Jacob  henceforth.

?  Gunkel  compares  Iliad,  9  447^  (Amyntor's  curse  [455^]
on  his  son  Phoinix  for  a  deed  similar  to  Reuben's).

8  On  the  reference  of  this  to  Simeon  in  ©AL  see  SIMEON,  §  3.

9  Cp  Ball,  PSBA  IS  122  (1896) :  -isDD  TO.

ln  In  Assyrian  there  is  no  conscious  metaphor  in  the  use  of
abdnu  in  this  way.

11  Cp OS'2Wf>if. reAeiAoSS. TOJTOS  napa.  TOV  'lopSdvrii', evOa,
Bvaiaarrfpiov  eoTrjcrai'  oi  vioi  'Pou/SiV.

12  On  the  geographical  import  of  this  and  the  preceding  story
see  §  10.

13  Does  the  story  in  Josh.  22  contain  a  reference  to  the  name
Reuben  :  see  v.  28  HliT  rl2TO  rrparrriN  ?N1  (reu  .  .  .  [ta]bn[ith])

and  v.  10  rmiD1?  •  •  •  ^TTJ  H31D  1J3'1  ([wayyi]bnu  .  .  .
[l<Mna]r'e)?

4090


REUBEN


REUBEN


Reuben  an  importance  which  there  is  nothing  in  history
to  suggest,  may  be  due  to  a  tradition  of  conflict  between
some  representative  Israelitish  clan  and  a  Reubenite
community.  On  the  other  hand,  they  may  be  simply
popular  or  other  stories  designed  to  explain  the  sup
posed  collapse  of  a  Reuben  people.

The  real  cause  of  Reuben's  disappearance  may  have
been  the  inroad  of  Moab,  which  was  perhaps  not  so
early  as  to  prevent  a  vague  memory  of  what  had  pre
ceded  from  surviving  (see  GAD,  §  n,  col.  1585,  mid.  and
cp  MOAB,  §  14,  col.  3174,  foot).  On  the  other  hand,
there  is  the  possibility  that  Reuben's  abode  was  not
really  in  the  east.  We  have  found  several  hints  of  a
belief  that  Reuben  had  been  west  of  the  Jordan  (see
further,  below,  §  10),  to  which  we  shall  return  (§  10)  in
the  light  of  the  considerations  suggested  by  a  study  of
Reuben's  name.

The  meaning  of  the  name  Reuben  is  not  apparent.
There  seem  to  be  traces  of  more  than  one  explanation.

1 OTPxnlana l J (Gen-293^) takes it to mean
lna" '  Yahwe  looks at my  affliction  '  and

tions  of  name. finds  in  k  a  reference  to  what  Leah

had  had  to  bear  as  the  hated  wife  (nK»ir  ;  v.  33  :  see
Gunkel  ad  loc.  ).  ii.  E  (Gen.  2932*),  on  the  other  hand,
sees  a  reference  to  some  point  in  the  conduct  of  Jacob  :
'  my  husband  will  .  .  .  me."

MT  read*  'will  love  me';  but  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that
this  is  sound.  The  versions,  indeed,  agree  (ayamjcret,  ainabit  ;
nerha.ni  [Pesh.])  with  MT  ;  but  so  slight  a  change  would  make
the  word  chime  with  Reuben  ('jnnN'  :  |31Nl)  that  it  is  natural  to
suppose  that  it  must  have  done  so.*  Gunkel  suggests  as  the
original  a  word  cognate  with  the  Aramaic  aim,  'to  praise.'
The  Reubenites  are  in  the  traditions  so  hard  to  distinguish  from
the  Gadites  that  E  may  well  have  connected  with  the  name
Reuben  a  wish  like  that  expressed  in  Dt.  33  20  (ij  3»rno)  with
regard  to  Gad  :  '  he  will  make  me  spread  forth  '  ;  or,  since  the
subject  is  '  husband  '  not  '  Yahwe,'  might  we  give  the  word  its
Arabic  meaning  and  render  '  welcome  me  '  ?  2

iii.  Josephus  explains  Roubel,  Poi'/rfajAoj  (Ant.  i.  19?),
his  form  of  the  name  (see  §  8),  by  saying  that  Leah  felt
she  had  experienced  the  mercy  of  God  (5i6rt  KO.T  Z\(ov
avrfj  TOV  6fov  ytvoiro}.*

It  is  not  certain  what  the  last  consonant  of  the  name

Q Vft^YM

of  name  ThetraditionalformsareJSIXV,  pou/3i)v[BADEFL],
'  -peiv  [Gen.  42  22  37  E],  -/Sin  [L  in  2  K.  10  33  Ch.  ;  E
in  Gen.  30  14],  povfrv  i  Ch.  5  i  3  [L],  Joseph.  -/3i)Aoj,  4  7  3,  §  166
var.  povftt.fi  ;  Syr.  ri'ibtl  ;  Vg.  Ruben  ;  gentilic  Reutoenite
'33'tn,  in  ©  not  usually  distinguished  from  the  '  personal  '  form,
but  i  Ch.  11  42  poi>/3»)i/i  [L],  '26  32  pov/37]i<[e]i.  [BA],  Josh.  22  i  pov-
/Si/i'irai  [A]  ;  Josephus,  oi  povflr)viTa.i,  17  pou/37)Ais  ^>uArj.

The  explanations  adduced  already  (§  7)  imply  that
the  final  consonant  was  early  pronounced  as  n  ;  but
Hos.  4  15  58  10s  make  it  probable  that  in  the  case  of
Bethel  the  n  which  has  established  itself  in  the  modern
local  pronunciation  (Beitin]  took  the  place  of  /early.4

The  real  origin  of  the  name  is  unknown, i. On  the

view  that  the  final  letter  was  n, Baethgen  (Beitr.  59,

__ . 1888)  connects  with  the  Arabic  Ru'ba  =

mg'  Rubat-is  (CIL  8  2415),  comparing  the  end

ing  en  in  Yarden  (EV  'Jordan'),  and  so,  before  him,

Land  (De  Gids,  Oct. 1871, p. 21)  who  is  reminded  of

Arab, ra'ab. The inscription, Glaser 302, from

Hadakan,  speaks  of  a  tribe pNT5'33 (CIS  4  no. 37,

/.  5),  sons  of  R'bn',6  vowels  unknown. The  comparison

1  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  remember  that  the  old  etymo
logists  were  easily  content  (cp  Gunkel).

2  The  most  obvious  derivation  '  Behold  !  a  son'  is  passed  over  :
names with imperatives (Olshaus. Lehrb. 613), common in
Assyrian,  were  probably  not  in  use  among  the Hebrews  (cp
Gray,  HPN  65^). Gesen. thought of  '?«a  in the  sense  of
'  provided.' The  Glossie Colbcrtinte  gives  PovjSrji-, opo^  ulo?
(Lag.  OS&).

3  Did he think of ^>«3  'INI  (3  of  agent  : cp Targ. Jon.
'Ji3^y  "~Cnj3. '^?),  or  possibly  ^K  Dirn?

*  Cp  BartV,  F.ivm.  Stud.,  §  19.
8  Cp  D3N-I.  ZDMG  26425  TSBA  6199.

6  A  name  occurring  several  times  in  the  Turin  papyrus  as
borne  by  kings  of  the  thirteenth  Egyptian  dynasty,  a  resemblance

4091


of  the  en  in  Yarden  is  not  necessary.  Reuben  might  be
a  name  on  the  analogy  of  SIMEON  (§  8  i.  ),  GIDEON,  etc.
Reuben  would  then  be  a  case  of  the  kind  referred  to
by  Barth,  NB,  p.  xxix,  n.  i,  in  which  the  termination
instead  of  preserving  its  old  vowel  a  (as  in  Sulhdn  ;  not
sulhon,  to  avoid  concurrence  of  '  rounded  '  vowels)
changed  it  to  el  (cp  x1?^  instead  of  ri^,  for  earlier

*^).

ii.  Some  also  of  the  explanations  assuming  the  last
consonant  to  be  1  take  the  name  to  be  simple.  Ball
derives  it  from  the  root  r'ba  which  in  Arabic  means  to
repair,3  comparing  the  noun  ra'ub  which  is  applied
metaphorically  (Zamahsarl,  Asds  ace.  to  Lane,  but  not
in  Cairo  ed.  )  to  describe  one  as  a  rectifier  of  affairs.  *

Lagarde  suggested  (OSW  367  /.)  that  Reuben,  or
rather  Re'oben,  is  to  be  identified  with  Radbil  shortened
from  Radbil,  plural  of  Ri'bal,  a  lion  (or  wolf).5  Ac
cording  to  the  Taj  el-Arus  the  raydbil  of  the  Arabs
were  those  '  who  used  to  go  on  hostile  expeditions  upon
their  feet  [and  alone].'

According  to  Ibn  Sida  the  Andalusian  (\fohkam*)
'  some  say  that  ri'bal  means  also  one  who  is  the  only
offspring  of  his  mother7  [i.e.  opp.  of  twin  :  el-Bustani].  '8
Another  suggested  origin  is  '  Jerahmeel  '  (JUDAH,  §  3)  ;
cp  REU  [see  Crit.  Bib.}.

iii.  Others  hold  the  name  to  be  compound,  (a]  The
first  element  is  taken  by  older  writers  to  be  rS'u  in  the
sense  of  'face'  (Kohler,  Der  Segen  Jacobs,  27  [1867];
Kue.  Th.  7^5291  [1871]),  or  rfu  in  the  sense  of  '  flock  '
(Redslob,  Die  ATlichen  Namen,  etc.,  86  [1846])  ;  by
later  writers  to  be  r6'u9  in  the  sense  of  '  friend  '  (  Kerber,
Die  Rel.-gesch.  Bedeutung  der  Heb.-Eigennamen  des
AT,  70)  or  rather  as  a  divine  name10  (see  below,
§  10).  (b]  The  second  half  was  identified  by  Nestle
(Israel.  Eigennamen,  1876)  with  Bin  (  =  Bir,  Bur),  by
others  (Redslob,  1846;  Kohler,  1867;  Kue.,  1871;
Houtsma,  1876  ;  Wi.  ,  GI  1  120  n.  2)  with  Bel.

The  theory  that  Reubel  contains  the  names  Reu  and
Bel  seems  to  merit  consideration.  A  parallel  forma-
„  .  tion11  is  the  name  Reu-el.1'2  When  one
10.  caning  remembers  the  peculiar  mystification  that
has  occurred  in  connection  with  the  names
Hobal  ||  Jethro  [|  Reuel  one  is  led  to  ask,  May  not  there
be  some  connection  between  Reu-el  and  Reu-bel?1:t
There  is,  in  fact,  notwithstanding  the  difference  in  the
tone  of  the  narratives,  a  strange  parallelism  between  the
critical  attitude  adopted  towards  Moses  by  Reu-bel  in
the  earlier  story  in  Nu.  16  and  that  adopted  by  Moses'


to  which  has  been  noticed  (e.g.,  by  C.  Niebuhr,  Ebr.  Zeitgesch.
250  [1894],  and,  without  approval,  by  Ball,  SBOT  [1896]).  cannot
plausibly  be  connected  with  Reuben  :  it  is  of  course  a  personal
name,  and  is  doubtless  to  be  read  Wbn-re'  ('rising  of  Re"),  not
Ra-uben.

1  After  this  article  was  finished  the  writer  noticed  that  Barth
himself  makes  this  very  suggestion  {NB  320,  end  of  long  note)
with  the  same  examples.

2  Cp  the  personal  name  *?X3NT  in  the  inscription  from  Sud,
Hal.  353,  /.  i.

3  The  advent  of  Reuben  was  to  reconcile  Jacob  to  Leah.

4  It  is  to  ra'b,  not,  as  Ball  seems  to  imply,  to  ra'ub,  that  the
metaphorical  meaning  of  '  big,  bulky,  portly,  or  corpulent  chief
is  assigned  in  the  Kdtnfts  and  the  Taj  el-' A  rns.

8  He  compares  Aroer,  plural  of  'Ar'ar  (cp  above,  col.  317,  n.  i).
6  Quoted  by  Lane,  adz'oc.

I  man  taliduhu  umnnihu  uiahdahu.

8  Reuben  was  the  first-born  of  Leah. Rebecca  had  twins.

9  On  the  softening  of  gutturals  when  r  or  /  occurs  in  the  same
word  see  Wi.  AOfl  287,  Gf\  210  n.  4,  120,  n.  2.

1"  Cp  Duval,  Rev.  As.  8th  Ser.  18  126  [1891] ;  A.  Mez,  Gesch.
d.  Stadt  HarrAn  23  [1892].  Cp  the  male  proper  name  Ra-'-u
in  one  of  the  tablets  containing  deeds  of  sale,  barter,  and  lease
with  Phoenician  dockets  in  3  R.  46  14  d  (no.  8,  /.  n).  Ru-'-a  is
the  name  of  an  Aramaic  tribe  mentioned  in  the  clay  tablet
inscription  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  2  R.  67  7,  Ru-'-u-a  a  tribe
mentioned  twice  in  Sennacherib's  clay  prism  i  R.  37  44  4136.

II  Reu-bel  and Reu-el were  cited  as  similar  tribe-names  by
Houtsma,  '  Israel  en  Qain,'  Tk.  T  \Q^f.  (1876). Cp  Skipwith,
JO  R  11  247,  251  [1899].

12  Cp  Jehi-el  in i  Ch.  2*32  =  2  S.  23  8  Ish  [read  yes?:  Mar-
quart,  JQR  14  344  n.  i]  -baal.

13  The root  in'  (Jethro)  occurs  thrice  in  the  'blessing'  of
Reuben  in  Gen.  49  •$/.

4092


REUBEN

hothen  (jnn  ;  see  JETHRO,  second  paragraph)  in  Ex.  18  :

I  What  is  this  thing  that  thou  doest  to  the  people  ? Why
sittest  thou  thyself  alone,  and  all  the  people  stand  about
thee  from  morning  unto  evening  ?  . . . The  thing  that
thou  doest  is  not  good  '  (Ex.  1814  17).

Whatever  be  thought  of  the  particular  parallelism
just  referred  to  and  its  bearing  on  the  question  of  the
name  Reuben,  it  is  surely  suggestive  in  regard  to  the
general  Reuben-problem  that  \ve  should  have  a  com
munity  of  no  historical  importance,  but  held  to  be  the
first-born  of  Israel,  into  connection  with  which  it  is
possible  to  bring  a  whole  series  of  stories l  differing
altogether  in  details,  but  coinciding  in  the  fundamental
point  of  setting  Reuben  in  some  form  in  opposition  to
the  recognised  representatives  of  Israel : —

1.  the  criticism  of  Reuel  (Ex.  18)

2.  the  discontent  of  the  sons  of  Reubel  (Nu.  16)

3.  the stone[s] erected by Reubel  (Josh.  22) : cp stone  of

Bohan

4.  the  ambition  2  of  Reubel  (Gen.  35  22)

5.  the  sacrilegious  greed  of  Achar  (Achan),  if  he  was  really  a

Reubenite  (see  below,  §12)

6.  the  disagreement  between  Reuben  and  the  other  sons  of

Israel (at Dothan?),3 Gen.  42 22 [E] ['ye would not
listen  ').4

We  may  even  find  a  seventh  story  when  we  proceed
to  consider  the  Reubenite  genealogy  §  ( 1 1 ).

These  stories  seem  to  imply  a  widespread  conviction
of  the  occurrence  at  some  time  of  a  grave  event  or  series
of  events.5  Such  convictions  are  often  due  to  actual
reminiscence  of  fact.  It  is  possible  even  to  go  further
and  reconstruct  a  history  thus  : —

The  Nu.  16  story  (on  the  details  see  DATHAN)  implies,  for
example,  that  Reuben  disagreed  with  its  associates  at  Kadesh
and  led  its  party  northwards  into  Palestine.  The  attribution  of
Hezronand  Carmi  clans  both  to  Reuben  and  to  Judah(see  §  12)
means  that  Reuben  settled  W.  of  Jericho  in  contact  with  Judah.
The  Bilhah  story  (p  5)  means  that  the  Jacob-Rachel  tribe  spread
southwards  and  had  friendly  relations  with  Reuben,  but  as
Benjamin  branched  off,  absorbing  such  elements  as  Bilhah  had
lefv  (see  NAFHTALI,  §  i)  when  it  migrated  northwards,  the
relations  of  Reuben  towards  Bilhah  became  less  friendly,  which
brought  on  Reuben  a  curse.  The  'altar'  story  (Josh. 22)  means
that  the  Josephites  of  Shechem  took  umbrage  at  the  southern
Josephites  (half  Manasseh)  for  having  a  common  sanctuary  with
the  Reubenites,  and  this  anger  was  afterwards  supposed  to  have
been  against  Reuben.  The  Dathan  nnd  Abiram  story  means  that
the  Reubenites  on  their  part  rebelled  against  certain  pretensions
of  the  south-Josephite  priests.  Finally,  Reuben  crossed  Jordan
and  penetrated  as  a  wedge  into  Gadite  territory."  i  Ch.  2  21-23
means  that  the  Reubenite  clan  Hezron  subsequently  united  with
Gileadite  clans  to  produce  Segub  the  father  of  Jair  (cp
MANASSEH,  1  §  9,  last  small  type).

The  arguments  for  this  reconstruction  are  set  forth
with  skill  by  Steuernagel  (Ein-wanderung).  The  result
is  a  priori  plausible.  Is  there  adequate  warrant,  how
ever,  for  so  high  an  estimate  of  the  historical  character
of  the  legends  (cp  B.  Luther,  ZATW  19i/!  [1901]  ;
Wi.  OLZ2n7#,  KAT^  213,  etc.)?  The  questions
involved  are  far-reaching  and  intricate,  and  are  better
treated  comprehensively  than  in  relation  to  one  particular
tribe  (see  TRIBKS,  and  cp  NAPHTALI,  §  i,  begin.).
Here  we  may  be  content  with  the  general  conclusion  that
a  Reuben  of  some  importance  was  believed  to  have

1  The  fate  of  'Ad  and  Thamfid  seems  to  have  appealed  to  the
imagination  of  Mohammed. They  are  referred  to  in  the  Koran,
together  or  apart,  some  twenty-one  times. Cp  the  NT  references
to  Sodom.

2  Cp  the  cases  of  Abner,  Absalom,  and  Adonijah.

3  Steuernagel  supposes that some actual conflict between
Joseph  and  the  Leah  tribes  occurred  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Dothan  {Einiuandcrung,  97). If  so,  possibly  Reuben  sided  with
Joseph.

4  It  seems to  be  only  a further  illustration of  the extra
ordinary confusion in the stories  about Reuben  that in the
earlier  reference,  which  appears  also  to  be  in  E,  the  brothers  did
listen  (Gen.  37  22  f.).

5  Stucken  (above,  col.  4089,  n.  i)  finds  a  mythological  refer
ence  in  the  Reuben  saying in Gen.  49  3. Reuben  (  II  Adam

II  Behemoth)  was  a  being  who  once  had  world  power  but  lost  it.
He  compares  the  description  of  Behemoth  in  Job  40  16  (p.  51),
and  connects  him  with  the  sign  Aquarius  (p.  69). Otherwise
Wi.  (7/259.

8  On  the  question  when  this  might  have  occurred  see  the
suggestion  of  Steuernagel  (Eimvandcrung,  20)  that  it  may  be
connected  with  i  Ch.  5  10  (the  Hagrites,  temp.  Saul).

4°93


REUBEN

flourished  some  time,  and  the  judgment  that  the  belief
was  probably  justified.1

It  must  be  remembered  that  if  Reuben  really  lived
east  of  the  Jordan  there  may  have  been  many  traditions
which  failed  to  find  a  place  in  the  literature  of  Western
Palestine  (cp  GAD,  §  n).  On  the  other  hand,  it  will
not  be  surprising  if  additional  reasons  should  be  found
for  connecting  Reuben  with  the  southern  tribes  (cp
SIMEON,  §  8  iii. ).

Reuben  was  believed  to  have  had  two  sons.  In  the
Joseph  story  indeed  he  had  only  two  ('my  two  sons'
11.  Genealogies.  Gen.4237  [E])  ;  and  even  there  it  is
the  death  of  the  two  sons  that  is
thought  of.  In  Nu.  16  two  sons  of  Reuben  are  buried
alive  (1631  33<z,  J  ;  320  33^,  E).  They  are  called
Dathan  2  and  Abiram  3  (cp  Ps.  106 17  Dt.  116).  Dathan
is  a  strange  name4  (reminding  one  of  Dothan,  the  scene
of  Reuben's  argument  :  see  above,  §  10,  6)  ;  but  Abiram
we  know  as  a  first-born  son  who  was  said  to  have  been
buried  (alive?)  in  the  foundation  of  a  city.  He  is  said
to  have  been  a  son  of  HIEL  \_q.  v. ]  ''yun '3,  whereas  in
Nu.  16  Abiram  is  a  son  of  Eliab  a^jt  ;  but  these  (^Nn  'a
and  aN'^N  '2)  are  not  impossible  variants.  Abiram's
brother  is  called  Segub  in  MT  of  i  K.  1634  ;  but  in  i  Ch.
22i  f.  the  clan  called  Segub  ben  Hezron  in  MT  is  in
©B  called  Serug,  which  is  in  Gen.  11  20  a  son  of  Reu  (see
below,  §  12,  end).  The  mention  of  Hezron  brings  us
to  the  stock  genealogy  of  Reuben  :  Gen.  46  9  =  Nu.  266
T  _  =  Ex.  614=  i  Ch.  53.  In  it  there  is,  at  least
at  first  sight,  no  trace  of  the  famous  two  sons.
In  their  stead  we  find  four  names  :  Hanoch,  Pallu,
Hezron,  and  Carmi.  The  first  appears  as  a  Midianite
clan  in  Gen.  25  4  (cp  GAD,  §  n,  last  small  type  para
graph),  the  second  ((/>aXXoi'S  generally  ;  Jos.  </>aX[a]oi>s)
appears  in  Nu.  16 1  as  Peleth  (</>ctXe0  [BAF]),  which
:  suggests  the  Negeb  (see  PELETH)  ;  but  <SL  gives  0aXe« —
!  i.e. ,  Peleg.5  The  third  and  fourth  (Hezron  and  Carmi)
1  appear  also,  as  has  been  mentioned  (§  10),  in  a  gene
alogy  of  Judah.  In  the  case  of  Hezron  that  seems
certain  ;  although  whether  the  inferences  that  have  been
drawn  from  it  are  warranted  is  at  least  doubtful  (cp
MANASSEH,  §  9,  last  small  type,  and  above,  §  10,  end).
The  case  of  Carmi  is  less  secure.  In  i  Ch.  4  i  Carmi
maybe  a  mistake  for  Caleb  (We.  Benz.  ad  loc.),  and
26 f. ,  or  at  least  27,  is  surely  an  interpolation.  2 7  might
just  as  well  stand  after  03.  On  the  other  hand,  in  josh.  7,
although  v.  i  may  not  be  original,  it  is  difficult  to
account  for  Carmi  in  v.  18  unless  there  was  known  to  be
a  Carmi  in  Judah,  or  the  story  was  originally  told  of
Reuben,  not  Judah,  as  Steuernagel  suggests  (Eiii-man-
derung,  p.  19  [e]).

As  we  have  seen,  Dt.  lls  mentions  a  '  son  '  of  Reuben
of  the  name  of  Eliab,  who  in  Nu.  26  8 6  is  introduced
into  the  genealogy  as  a  son  of  Pallu.

1  On  the  possibility  of  a  connection  between  the  Leah  tribes
and  the  Habiri  see  NAPHTALI,  §  3  (sec.  par.),  SIMEON,  §  6  ii.
ZEBULUN.


Shalmaneser's  Black  obelisk  (/.  161)  mentions  receiving  tribute
from  a  certain  Da-ta-na,  of  Hubuskia  (towards  Urmia).

8  The  passage  in  Judg.  5  referred  to  above  (§  1)  accentuates  a
strange  parallelism  between  the  Reubenites  of  the  genealogies
and  the  Semites  of  Gen.  11 10  : —


Gen.  11
Eber  (-QJ;)
Peleg  O^s)
Reu  (ijn)
Serug

Abram


Reuben


Judg.  5


Reu-bel


Serug  b.  Hezron

(above,  §  n)
Abiram  (above,  §  1 1)


6  NEMUEL  (q.y.),  who  appears  in Nu.  26gt  as  a  third  son
(the  eldest)  of  Eliab,  may  come  by  mistake  from  ?'.  12,  where  he


is  the  eldest  son  of  Simeon.


4094


REUBEN


Nu.  26  5-9
Reuben

I
Pallu+3

Eliab

I


Dathan Abiram  Nemuel1 Dathan Abiram

This  (with  omission  of  Nemuel1)  seems  to  be  the
scheme  followed  in  Nu.  16 1,  as  we  have  it.2  It  appears
indeed  to  be  complicated  by  Eliab  and  Peleth  (for  Pallu)
being  treated  as  unconnected,  and  Peleth  being  given  a
son  ON  ['/.?'.]  ;  and  this  has  been  supposed  to  represent
the  version  of  J  (e.g.,  Oxf.  Hex.}.

Nu.  16  i  [as  in  MX]
Reuben


Peleth
On


Eliab


I
Dathan


I
Abiram


Josephus,  however,  says  nothing  of  On,  which  may
in  Nu.  16  1  be  due  to  a  marginal  variant3  :  the  variant
represented  by  ©  which  reads  as  usual  Abiron  for
Abir<7/#  (see,  however,  ON).

The Chronicler has attached to the Reubenite

genealogy  two  appendices,  one  tracing  the  pedigree  of  a

9 T i  nu certain BKERAH to an otherwise  un-

13.  In  1  Chron.  known  Joel4  (l Ch.54.6),  the  other

perhaps  a  variant  form  of  the  same  list  (v.  j  f.  )  :  thus


v.  4  Joel

Shemaiah
GoL  ._
Shimei

z>.  5  Micah
Reaiah
Baal  (>yn)

v.  6  Beerah


j'.  8  Joel
I'.  8  Shema
z'- 8  Azaz  (n


v. 8  Rela

v.  7  [Ze]chariah

v.  7  Jeiel


There  is  nothing  to  show  what  led  the  Chronicler  to
connect  these  lists  with  Reuben  (cp  Gray,  HPN  257/1  ),
unless  it  be  the  reference  to  Tiglath-pileser  (cp  2  K.
1629)  and  the  geographical  references  in  v.  9  f.

With  Shemaiah,  Shimei.  Shema,  and  Zechariah  may  be  com
pared  Shammua  ben  Zaccur,  the  name  given  to  the  Reubenite
'spy'  (Nu.  184),  and  Eliezer  ben  Zichri,  David's  ruler  (tiagld)
over  the  Reubenites  (i  Ch.  27  16).  On  the  natural  omission  of
a  representative  of  Reuben  from  the  list  of  dividers  of  western
Palestine,  cp  GAD,  1  §  13  (last  sentence).  On  the  list  containing
Adina3  ben  Shizat'(i  Ch.  1142)  see  Gray,  HPN  •zit)/.,  and  cp
DAVID,  §  it  (a)  ii.

Whether  or  not  there  was  also  a  theory  of  a  tribe
Reuben  which  entered  Palestine  by  way  of  the  Negeb,
14.  Geographical!;6  Prevailing  theory  of  the  present
,  P  .,  Hexateuch  and  related  passages  was

that  Reuben  arrived  in  E.  Palestine
from  abroad,  in  close  connection  with  Gad  (</.£'.  ,  §  n).
The  questions  bearing  on  the  real  character,7  origin,  and
history  of  the  population  of  E.  Palestine  are  best  con
sidered  elsewhere  (GAD,  §§  1-4).  All  that  is  necessary
here  is  to  supplement  what  is  said  there  (GAD,  §  12)
with  regard  to  the  geographical  details  given,  in
indifference  to  each  other,  by  the  various  Hexateuch
writers.

Of  the  nine  towns  asked  for  by  Gad  and  Reuben  in
Nu.  3'J3  we  are  told  in  32  yj  f.  that  the  men  of  Reuben
[re]built  the  last  five  :  HF.SHKON,  ELEALEH,  SIBMAH
(called  Sebam  in  v.  3),  NKBO,  and  BEON,  with  the

1  See  n.  6  on  previous  column.

2  Cp  Graf,  Die  Geschichtlicken  Biichfr,^  n.

3  'and -on  '  —  that is to  say, 'otherwise \\nrott.' Read:
Dathan  and  Abiram,  the  sons  of  Eliab  [and  -on\,  the  son  of
Faleth—  Pallu,  the  son[s]  of  Reuben.

•»  Kittel  (SHOT  [Heb.],  1895)  follows  Syr.  and  Arab,  in
reading  Carmi  ;  but  that  may  be  an  emendation  (so  Benzinger,
KHC,  ad  loc.\

8  Perhaps  late,  cp  ADIN  ;  but  cp  also  Jehoaddan.

6  Probably  corrupt  (©A  o-e^a). See  SHIZA.

'  Compare  col.  4089  n.  6.

4095


REZEPH

addition  of  KIRIATHAIM.  l  As  noticed  above  (§  2),  all
these  six  towns  are  Moabite  in  Is.  15,  Jer.  48.

This  list  is,  however,  ignored  by  P  in  his  enumeration  (Josh.
208;  cp  Dt.  443,  given  by  Moses)  of  the  'cities  of  refuge'  and
(Josh.  21  36/:  =  i  Ch.  078/  [63/])  the  '  levitical'  [Merari]  cities
'  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben  '  ('-\  nDCD)  :  BEZER  (city  of  refuge  ;
Bozrah  in  Jer.  4824),  JAHAZ  (Jahzah  in  Jer.  48  21),  K.EDEMOTH2
(perhaps  for  Kiriathaim  frPBTp  f°r  Cmpl  mentioned  in  Jer.
4823),  and  MEPHAATH  (Jer.  4»2i);  but  he  confines  himself  to
cities  assigned  to  Moab  in  Jer.  4S.

In  Josh.  1815-23  P  endeavours  to  define  the  territory
of  Reuben.

He  gives  him,  besides  the  levitical  cities  just  mentioned
(Jahaz,  Mephaath,  Kedemoth  =  Kiriathaim?),  two  cities  said  in
Nu.  3^34-36  to  have  been  built  by  Gad  (Aroer,  Dibon),  one
assigned  to  Gad  in  Josh.  2139,  i  Ch.  681  [66]  (Heshbon),  four
assigned  elsewhere  to  Moab  (MEDEBA,  BAMOTH-BAAL,  BETH-
BAAL-MEON,  BETH  -  JESHI.MOTH),  and  the  following  three:
ZERETH-SHAHAR  (only  here),  ASHDOTH-PISGAH  (also  Dt.),  and
BETH-PEOR  (the  burial-place  of  Moses,  and  scene  of  the  Dt.
discourses),  but  only  one  of  the  cities  said  in  Nu.  3-  37  f.  to
have  been  built  by  Reuben  (Sibmah).

The  contradictions  make  it  impossible  to  construct  a
map.  In  general  terms,  however,  what  is  claimed  for
Reuben  lies  within  what  is  claimed  for  GAD  (q.v.  §  3).
See  the  map  in  Stade,  GVl  1,  facing  p.  149.  Cp
Steuernagel,  Bin-wander  ung,  19  (/.  ).  H.  w.  H.


REUEL


;  p^royHA  [BADEL]). i.  The  per


sonification  of  a  clan  in  Edomite  and  Arabian  territory,
which,  according  to  Winckler  (GI  1210),  derived  its
name  from  a  divine  name  Re'u  (  =  <KT  in  <NT  SK,  Gen.
1613  and  INT  in  VaiJO.  Reubel3  [true  form  of  piKi,
Reuben?]).  This  explanation,  however,  is  incomplete;
both  <NT  Vx  and  VDINI  are,  judging  from  numerous
analogies  in  badly  transmitted  names,  corruptions  of
Sworn'  (Jerahme'el),  and  the  same  origin  naturally
suggests  itself  for  "jNijn  (Re'u'el).  See,  however,
NAMES,  §  47,  and  cp  REUBEN,  §  9.  In  the  genea
logical  system  Reuel  is  both  a  son  of  Esau  by
Basemath  (Gen.  864  10  13  17  i  Ch.  135  37)  and  the
father  of  Moses'  father-in-law  Hobab,  Nu.  1029  [J],
where  '  Midianite  '  should  perhaps  be  '  Kenite'4  (Judg.
1x6  4n).  In  Ex.  2i8  (<5AL  LoGop),  '  Reuel'  their  father
is  puzzling.  On  the  principles  of  literary  analysis  of
documents  we  assume  that  Reuel  is  a  harmonistic  inser
tion,  Reuel  being  here  represented  by  the  redactor  (R)
as  father  of  Zipporah,  in  order  that  HOBAB  [?.v.]  and
JETHRO  \_q.v.~\  may  both  be  brothers-in-law.  For
consistency's  sake  the  insertion  ought  also  to  have
been  made  in  v.  16,  where  originally  Hobab  (J's  name
for  the  father-in-law  of  Moses)  must  have  stood.8

2.  Father  of  ELIASAPH, a  Gadite  chief  (Nu.  2  14  [P]). In
Nu.  1  14  also,  @  has  />a-yoi>i)A  where  MX  has  ^WJTj  (DEUEL)  ;
so  too  in  7424710  20.

3.  A  Benjamite  (i  Ch.  9  8).  T.  K.  C.

REUMAH  (nplN-l;  peHpA  [A],  -MA  [Z>L]).  the
concubine  of  NAHOR  (q.v.  }  ;  Gen.  2224.

REVELATION,  BOOK  OF. See  APOCALYPSE.

REZEPH  (S]>*n  ;  in  Ki.  pA(heiC  [BL],  p^ec  [Bab],
-ee  [A],  in  Is.  pAr4)ee  [BQ"'«r-].  -eic  [A],  -ec  [NQ*]),
mentioned  by  Assyrian  envoys  (temp.  Hezekiah)  among
other  places  destroyed  by  Sennacherib's  predecessors,
(2  K.  19  12  Is.  37  12).  It  is  usually  identified  with  the
(mat]  Rasappa  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  cuneiform
inscriptions  (cp  Del.  Par.  297,  Schr.  A~AT&  327),
and  the  name  has  been  found  in  the  Amarna  Tablets
(B  10),  in  a  letter  from  Tarhundaraus  Arsapi  to  Anien-
hotep  III.  of  Egypt.  With  this  place  we  may  identify

1  Perhaps the lists did not originally  agree. Kiriathaim
having  in  v.  37  the  place  occupied  in  ?'.  3  by  Sebam,  Sibma  is
in  v.  38  simply  added  at  the  end  of  the  list.

2  Elsewhere  only  in  Dt.  2  26,  where  it  may  be  a  corruption  of
Kadesh  :  see  K.EDEMOTH.

3  Houtsma  (Theol. Tijdschr.  1092)  also  compares  Reubel.
Hommel,  however,  reports  a  S.  Arabian  personal  name  Sx1°in-

•*  So  Bit.,  comm.  on  Judg.  1  16^.,  who  assumes  the  harmonising
of  an  editor.

8  In  Gen.  25  3  <SAE  one  of  the  sons  of  Dedan  is  called  ReueL
0»  has  pacrou[i)A].

4096


BEZIA

the  pi)ffa.<t>a,  of  Ptol.  (615),  and  the  mod.  Rusafa,  3^  m.
SW.  of  Sura  on  the  Euphrates,  on  the  road  leading
to  Palmyra.  We  have  no  independent  notice  of  the
destruction  of  Reseph,  and  this,  together  with  certain
other  suspicious  phenomena,  has  led  the  present  writer
to  the  supposition  that,  as  most  probably  in  many
other  passages,  the  editor  has  been  busy  in  reconstruct
ing  the  geographical  and  historical  background;  i.e. ,
that  '  Gozan  '  has  been  put  for  '  Cushan  '  (the  N.  Arabian
Cush),  '  Reseph  '  for  '  Sarephath,'  '  Telassar  '  for  '  Tel-
a^shur  '  or  '  Tel-ashhur '  (cp  ASHHUK),  '  Arpad  '  for
'  Kphrath.'  Of  the  other  names,  '  Haran  '  (cp  i  Ch.
£46),  'Eden,'  '  Hamath  '  (probably  a  popular  distortion
of  'Maacath')  need  not  be  corrupt;  they  are  good
X.  Arabian  border- names,  familiar  by  tradition  to
Judahite  writers.  SEPHARVAIM  [q.v.~\  is  made  up  of
Sephar  (  =  Zarephath)  and  a  fragment  of  'and  Jerah-
meel '  ;  '  Hena '  and  '  Ivvah  '  also  probably  represent
the  place-name  'Jerahmeel,'  unless  Ivvah  has  been  mis-
written  for  rvN] ;  cp  (S1-,  2  K.  1834,  KO.I.  TTOV  (.TNI)  daiv

01  Oeol  TTJS  %ibpas 2a/xa/>et'as  ; /JLT]  e^fiXavro  rr\v  Zayu.
fK  xet/3os  /jLov  ;  see  SEPHARVAIM,  and  cp  Crit.  Bib.

The  ironical  remarks  of  Winckler  (A  T  Unt.  49)  and  Benzinger
(A"()'«.  182)  on  the  archaeological  learning  of  the  late  author  of

2  K.  19  i2_/^,  which  was,  however,  thrown  away  on  the  hearers
of  the  supposed  speech  of  the  Assyrian  envoys  to  Hezekiah,  are
natural  enough,  if  the  accuracy  of  MT  may  be  assumed. It  is
probable,  however,  that  even  at  a  late  date  the  people  of  Judah
would be  able  to  appreciate  historical references  bearing  on
places  much  nearer  to  them  than  Gozan,  and  Rezeph,  and  a
Alesopotamian  Tel-asshur.  T.  K.  C.

REZIA,  RV  Rizia  (&Oyi,  §  28  ;  '  Yahwe  is  gracious '
for  !"PX"1,  or  from  some  ethnic  ;  pA,c[e]l&  [BAL]),  in
a  genealogy  of  ASHER  (q.  v. ,  §  4,  ii. ),  i  Ch.  7  39.

REZIN  (J'V"?;  P&ACC60N,  paceiN  [B  in  Is.  7],
P&CCCON  [B  in  Is.  8],  PACIN  [Aq.,  Sym. ,  Th.  in  Qme-  in
Is.  8]  ;  Ass.  Ka-sitn -nu}.  If  we  take  the  MT  as  it
stands,  it  is  evident  that  Rezin,  king  of  Aram-damascus,
in  alliance  with  Pekah  of  Israel,  endeavoured  to  over
throw  Ahaz,  king  of  Judah,  and  to  enthrone  ben-Tab'el,
a  creature  of  their  own,  in  his  stead.  To  escape  from
this  danger,  they  applied  for  help  to  the  Assyrian  king
Tiglath-pileser  (a  K.  16s  7  ff.  Is.  7 1).

To  the  present  writer,  however,  it  appears  that  there  has
been  another  of  those  confusions  which  have  made  it  so  difficult
to  retrace  the  true  course  of  the  history  of  Israel  (see  TABEAL).
The  Aram  of  which  Rezin  was  king  was  possibly  not  the
northern  but  a  southern  country  of  that  name  (see  Crit.  Bib.).
Critics  have  duly  noticed  that  Is.  7  i  is  really  no  part  of  the
biography  of  Isaiah,  but  borrowed  from  2  K.  165,  and  have
conjectured  that  the  original  opening  of  chap.  T  had  become
illegible  (see  Intr.  Is.  31).  It  is  possible,  however,  that  it  was
omitted  because  it  contained  some  definite  historical  statements
respecting  the  invaders  which  the  redactor,  from  his  imperfect
historical  knowledge,  could  not  understand.  It  is  not  even
certain  that  the  king  who  is  mentioned  in  the  second  place  was
really  Pekah,  king  of  Israel.  The  present  writer  sees  some
reason  to  think  that  l>oth  kings  were  N.  Arabians,  and  that  the
second  king  was  confounded  with  Pekah,  partly  from  a  partial
resemblance  of  the  names  and  partly  because  the  traditional
father  of  each  of  them  was  called  '  Remaliah,'  which  is  a  corrupt
form  of  'Jerahmeel'  (Che.).  It  was,  however,  certainly  to
Tiglath-pileser  (not  to  be  confounded  with  PUL  \q.i>.\)  that
Rezin  applied  for  help.  In  Is.  84  we  should  probably  read,
'The  riches  of  Cushamand  the  spoil  of  Shimron  shall  be  carried
away  before  the  king  of  Assyria.'  In  2  K.  Ki6  there  is  no'
sufficient  cause  for  emending  'Aram'  into  '  Eclom.'  It  was  a
matter  of  great  importance  to  the  southern  '  Arammites '  to
obtain  command  of  a  harbour.  Hiram,  king  of  Misrim  (see
SOLOMON,  §  3^),  was  content  to  leave  Ezion-geber  nominally  in
the  hands  of  Solomon  ;  but  Rezin  was  not  inclined  to  put  any
trust  in  the  Judahites.

See  DAMASCUS,  §  10,  ISRAEL,  §  32,  and  cp  REZON.

T.  K.  c.

%REZIN  (PV1 :  P&CCON  [BA],  -A.A.CC-  [L]),  the  name
of  a  post-exilic  family  of  N'ethinim,  and  therefore  (see
NETHINIM),  according  to  Cheyne's  theory,  N.  Arabian
(cp  such  names  as  Shamlai  [Ishmael],  Giddel  [the
southern  Gilead],  Reaiah  [Jerahmeel])  ;  Ezra  248  =  Neh.

7  5°  (p*.eC6GN  [X],  PAA.C6GN  [L])  =  I  Ksd.  031  (A&IC&N

[B],  AecAN  [A],  PACOON  [L],  DAISAN,  EV).

REZON  (PH,  'prince?' cp  Sab.  fin,  JT1  and  jfl,
4097


RHEGIUM

•ruler'  [PRINCE,  13];  We.  Heid.W  59,  n.  i,  would
connect  the  name  with  the  Ar.  deity  Kndd  in  such
Palmyrene  compound  names  as  IVIDTI  [servant  of  K.]  ;
but  may  it  not  be  miswritten  for  ^W),  the  founder  of
a  dynasty  at  Damascus,  and  a  contemporary  of  Solomon
(i  K.  1123,  ecpCOM  [B],  om.  A,  cp  HEX.ION  ;  razon
[Vg-])-  Who  Rezon  was,  is  by  no  means  clear  from
our  text  (cp  DAMASCUS,  §  7).  Most  regard  him  as  a
northern  Aramaean.

Rezon  is  called,  however,  son  of  Eliada,  which  is  a  Hebrew
name,  and  Winckler's  way  of  accounting  for  this  (see  EI.IAUA,  3)
is  improbable.  Treating  the  subject  in  connection  with  ZOIIAH,
q.v.\,  we  may  venture  to  conjecture  that  he  was  probably  a
N.  Arabian,  and  that  his  father's  name,  like  'Jedi'a'el'  is  a
modification  of  '  Jerahme'el.'  It  was  from  the  king  not  of
Zobah  but  of  Missur  (Musri)  that  Rezon  fled,  and  the  capital  of
the  realm  which  he  founded  was  not  Damascus,  but  Cusham
(cp  PROPHET,  §  37).  We  may  presume  that  he  was  an  ally  of
Hadad,  who  was  also  an  '  adversary  '  to  Solomon,  and  appears
to  have  been  king,  not  of  Edom,  but  of  Aram — i.e.,  Jerahmeel.
The  geographical  boundaries  of  these  neighbouring  kingdoms
we  cannot  determine  ;  but  they  were  close  to  the  Negeb,  which
Solomon  (see  SOLOMON,  §  7)  appears  to  have  succeeded  in
retaining.  Probably  they  were  both  vassals  of  the  natural
overlord  of  that  region — the  king  of  Missur,  whose  daughter
became  Solomon's  wife.  Cp,  however,  Winckler,  (,'/ y  272,
A'A  7"(3)  240.  T.  K.  C.

RHEGIUM  (pHflON,  Acts28i3).  A  town  on  the
Italian  coast,  at  the  southern  entrance  of  the  straits  of
Afessina  (mod.  Keggio}.

The  name  (=' breach  ')  was  generally  supposed  to  bear  refer
ence  to  the  idea  that  earthquakes  or  the  long-continued  action
of  the  sea  had  broken  asunder  or  breached  the  land-bridge
between  Italy  and  Sicily  (Strabo,  258;  Diod.  Sic.  485).  The
Latin  form  of  the  name,  Regium,  gave  rise  to  an  absurd  alterna
tive  derivation  (Strabo,  I.e.).

The  town  was  an  offshoot  of  the  Chalcidians  settled
on  the  other  side  of  the  strait,  in  Messana  (for  a  sketch
of  its  early  history,  see  Strabo,  257/1 ).  Its  position  on
the  strait  made  it  very  important,  for  the  direct  distance
to  Messana  is  only  about  six  geographical  miles,  and
under  Anaxilas  (about  494  B.C.)  the  two  cities  were
united  under  one  sceptre.  Although  the  Syracusan
tyrant  Dionysius  I.  totally  destroyed  the  town,  so
important  a  site  could  not  long  lie  desolate,  and  it  was
repeopled  by  his  son  and  successor.  During  the
Hannibalic  war  Rhegium  remained  loyal  to  Rome  and
materially  contributed  to  Hannibal's  ultimate  defeat  In-
cutting  off  his  communications  with  Africa.  After  the
Social  war  it  became  a  Roman  municipium  like  the
other  Greek  cities  of  southern  Italy.  During  the  war
between  Octavian  and  Sextus  Pompeius  (38-36  B.C.),
Rhegium  was  often  the  headquarters  of  Octavian's  forces
(Dio  Cass.  4814) ;  and,  by  way  of  reward,  its  population
was  increased  by  the  addition  of  a  body  of  time-expired
marines  (Strabo,  259),  and  it  assumed  the  name  Rhegium
Julium  (Orell.  Inscr.  3838).  About  Paul's  time  it  was
a  populous  and  prosperous  place,  still  preserving  many
traces  of  its  Hellenic  origin  (Strabo,  253).  It  continued
to  exist  as  a  considerable  city  throughout  the  period  of
the  empire  (Plin.  36).  It  was  the  terminus  of  the  road
which  ran  from  Capua  to  the  straits  (the  Via  Popilia,
made  in  134  B.C.  ).

The  ship  in  which  Paul sailed  had some  difficulty
in  reaching  Rhegium  from  Syracuse  (Acts  28 13, 7re/j:-
e\66vTfs,1  '  by  tacking '; AV '  we  fetched  a  compass,'
RV, '  made  a  circuit ' ),  as  the  wind  did  not  lie  favour
ably. At  Rhegium  she  remained  one  day  waiting  for  a
wind  for  the  narrow  passage  through  which  for  want  of
sea-room  a  large  ship  could  not  easily  work  by  tacking.2
I The  run  with  the  S.  wind  northwards  to  Puteoli  (about
j 1 80  m.  distant)  would  take  about  twenty-six  hours  (cp
v.  13,  Sevrepaioi  •fjX&o/j.ev).

With  the  stages  of  Paul's  journey  as  given  here  we  may
compare  that  of  Titus,  afterwards  Emperor,  in  70  A. D.  (Suet.

1  So  to  be  read  in  preference  to  irtpif\6i'Tes  WH, 'casting
loose.'

2  For the difficulties  of  the  straits, see  Thuc.  4  24, poiu&rjs
oucra  eiKOTUis  \a\ejrrf  evonicrOr)  ; Pans.  v.  20  2,  ecrri  yap  6r)  17  Kara
TOi'TOf CaAacrtra TOV iropOfj.bi' OaAatrcrr)? Xn(UplMTf/rn Jra«rt)«,
where  also  he  gives  the  explanation  of  this  characteristic.

4098


RHESA

Tit.  5,  '  Quare  festinans  in  Italiam,  cum  Regium,  dein  Puteolos
oneraria  nave  appulisset,  Roman  inde  contendit ').

W:  J.  VV.

RHESA  (pHCA.  Ti.WH),  a  name  in  the  genealogy |
of  Jesus  ; Lk.  827. See  GENEALOGIES  ii. ,  §  3.

RHINOCEROT  (Is.  347,  AV"'K •). See  UNICORN.

RHODA  (poAH.  Ti.WH),  the  name1  of  the  maid
(TTAI^ICKH)  who  answered  the  door  when  Peter  knocked,
Acts  12 ist.  In  one  of  the  lists  of  'the  seventy'  it  is
stated  that  Mark  had  a  sister  called  Rhoda  (see  Lipsiu^,
Apokr.  Ap.-Gesch.,  Ergiinzungsheft,  22).

RHODES  (poAoc).  a  large  and  important  island,
lying  in  the  south-eastern  ^Egean  (the  part  called  the
Carpathian  Sea),  about  12  m.  distant  from  the  coast  of  (
Asia  Minor  ;  mentioned  only  incidently  in  the  NT  (Acts
21i).  After  leaving  Cos,  the  ship  in  which  Paul
voyaged  to  Palestine  from  Macedonia  touched  at
Rhodes,  which  was  apparently  her  last  port  of  call  before
Patara,  where  Paul  transhipped.  The  same  name  was  |
applied  both  to  the  island  and  its  capital  ;  but  probably
the  latter  is  meant  in  this  place.  It  stood  at  the
northern  extremity  of  the  island,  where  a  long  point
runs  out  towards  Caria.  The  city  possessed  two  chief  j
harbours,  both  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  promontory.
The  foundation  of  the  city  of  Rhodes  (408  B.C.)  was
due  to  the  joint  action  of  the  ancient  Rhodian  towns  of
Lindos,  lalysos,  and  Camiros  (Diod.  Sic.  1875).  'The
forces  which,  outwardly  at  least,  had  hitherto  been
divided,  were  now  concentrated,  and  the  good  effects  of
this  concentration  for  the  island,  as  well  as  for  Greece
in  general,  were  soon  to  appear1  (Holm,  Gk.  Hist.,  ET,
4  4S4).

The  great  political  importance  of  the  new  city  gradually
asserted  itself  during  the  fourth  century,  and  by  Alexander's
time  it  had  become  the  first  naval  power  in  the  Agean,  and  a
decisive  factor  (Diod.  Sic.  '20 81,  TrepijuaxrjTOS  rots  6ui>d<TTcus  icai.
/3acriAe{)<7ip  >}i>,  eKao-rou  <77reu6oi'TOs  eis  Trji'  avrov  <£HAi'ai>  7rpo<rAa/x-
/SayecrSai).  So  great  was  the  reputation  of  the  city  that
Alexander  chose  it  as  the  place  of  deposit  of  his  will.  The
commercial  importance  of  the  place  is  indicated  by  the  fact  of
the  introduction  of  a  new  (Rhodian)  standard  of  coinage  ;
Rhodian  coins  are  remarkable  for  their  beauty  (see  on  this
Holm,  op.  cit.  849,  and  Head,  Hist.  Numin.,  s.v.).

The  commercial  relations  of  Rhodes  were  principally
with  Egypt,  but  in  fact  the  central  position  of  the
island  in  the  mid-stream  of  maritime  traffic  between  the
E.  and  the  W.  assured  her  prosperity,  and  this,
combined  with  good  government  at  home  and  a  wise
foreign  policy,  lifted  her  to  a  position  analogous  to  that
of  Venice  in  later  times.  The  Rhodian  harbours
seemed  to  have  been  designed  by  Nature  to  attract  the
ships  of  Ionia,  Caria,  Egypt,  Cyprus,  and  Phoenicia
(Aristeid.  Rhod.  341);  and  the  consistent  policy  of
neutrality,  broken  only  by  vigorous  and  decisive  action
when  the  peace  and  freedom  of  the  seas  were  endangered,
attracted  foreign  merchants,  among  whom,  we  may  be
sure,  those  of  Jewish  nationality  were  conspicuous
( i  Mace.  15  23);  young  men  were  regularly  sent  to  Rhodes
to  learn  business  (Plaut.  Merc.,  prol.  n).  Rhodes  did
in  the  E.  what  Rome  did  in  the  W.  in  keeping  the  seas
clear  of  pirates  (Strabo,  652,  TO.  Xflcmjpto.  Ka6ei\e  ;  cp
Pol.  419).  Her  maritime  law  was  largely  adopted  by
the  Romans  (cp  Pand.  xiv.  2g)  ;  and  the  principle  of
'general  average,'  for  example,  is  Rhodian  in  origin,
with  probably  much  else  in  modern  naval  law  that
cannot  now  be  traced.

Rhodes  is  connected  with  two  passages  in  the  life  of
Herod  the  Great.  When  on  his  way  to  Italy  he
contributed  liberally  towards  the  restorations  rendered
necessary  to  repair  the  ravages  of  Cassius  in  42  B.C.
(App.  fiC  472;  Plut.  Brut.  30).  It  was  at  Rhodes
also  that  after  the  battle  of  Actium  (31  B.C.)  he  had
the  meeting  with  Augustus  upon  which  so  much
depended  for  him  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  66).  It  was  in  Rhodes

1  Another  form  of  the  name  in  classical  literature  is  Rhodos
(pdSos,  fern.).  It  was  borne  by  a  daughter  of  Poseidon,  and  by
one  of  the  Danaids(see  Smith,  Diet.  Gr.  and  Rom.  Biogr.,  s.v.).

4099


RIBLAH

that  Antiochus  VII.  Sidetes  (king  of  Syria,  138-128  B.C.),
son  of  Demetrius  I.,  heard  of  the  imprisonment  of  his
brother  (Demetrius  II.),  and  '  sent  letters  from  the  isles
of  the  sea  unto  Simon  the  priest  and  governor  of  the
Jews,'  as  told  in  i  Mace.  15 if.  (cp  App.  Syr.  68).

The  Rhodians  gained  a  privileged  position  as  allies  of  Rome
in  the  Macedonian  and  Mithridatic  wars,  but  were  deprived  of
their  political  freedom  by  Claudius  (44  A.D.)  for  the  crucifixion
of  Roman  citizens  (Dio  Cass.  Ix.  244).  In  56  A.D.  this  was
restored  to  them  (Tac.  Ann.  1258:  'reddita  Rhodiis  libertas,
adempta  saepe  aut  firmata,  prout  bellis  externis  meruerant  aut
domi  seditione  deliquerant ').  The  island  was  finally  reduced
to  a  province  (i.e.,  made  part  of  the  province  of  Asia)  by
Vespasian  (Suet.  Vesp.  8).  Its  great  importance  in  the  early
Empire  was  gained  through  its  schools  of  rhetoric,  as  that  of
Athens  through  her  schools  of  philosophy.

Literature. — C.  Newton,  Travels  and  Discoveries  in  the
Levant,  vol.  i  ;  C.  Torr,  Rhodes  in  Ancient  Times  (Camb.
1885);  Holm,  Gk.  Hist.,  ET,  4483^  (the  best  short  account  in
English)  ;  Mahaffy,  Greek  Life  and  Thought,  chap.  15  ;  Ross,
Reisen  u.  Studien  aufden  gr.  Inseln,  Sjof.  On  Rhodian  art,
see  Gardner,  Handbook  oj  Greek  Sculpture,  Itf&f.  Ancient
authority,  Strabo,  p.  652./C  \V.  J.  W.

RHODOCUS  (poAOKOC  [AV]),  a  Jew  who  betrayed
the  plans  of  Judas  the  Maccabee  to  Antiochus  Eupator
(2  Mace.  1821).  On  the  discovery  of  his  treachery  he
was  imprisoned.

RHODUS  (i  Mace.  15 23),  RV  RHODES.

RIBAI  ('3n),  the  father  of  ITTAI  (,j.v.)  (28.2829,
[B],  eplBA  [L]  om.  A;  i  Ch.  H3i,  peBie  [B],
]-  pHB&i  [A],  piB&T  [L]).  Comparing  6L
in  2  S.  we  may  with  Marquart  (Fund.  20)  restore
'3'Y  ;  see  JERIBAI.

RIBBAND  (S'nS),  used  in  Nu.  15s8  AV  of  the  'cord'
(so  RV)  of  blue  worn  upon  the  FRINGES  \q.v.\

For  other  usages  of  the  Heb.  pathll  see  BRACELETS,  2,  CORD,
RING.

RIBLAH  (1TXTI;  oftenest  AeBA&0&  [BN'AFQrL],
and  always  'Diblath'  in  Pesh.  ;  on  Nu.  34  n  see
below).  A  city  in  the  territory  of  Hamath  (2  K.  2833,
a/3Xaa  [B],  5e/3Xaa  [A];1  256  ifpSe^\aOav  [B],  as
5e/3Xa0a  [AL];  v.  21  />e/3Xa0a  [B]  ;  Jer.  39 5,  p.  [Theod.  ;
<5  om.  ]  and  v.  6  5.  [Theod. ;  ©  om.  ] ;  5'2.g  5f/3a0a  [N*]  ;
52 10  5e/3  .  .  6a  [F]).  It  is  hardly  possible  in  our  brief
space  to  give  the  reader  a  just  idea  of  the  new  problems
connected  with  the  name  of  Riblah.

Whether  the  foreign  king  who  dethroned  Jehoahaz  was  really
Necho,  king  of  Egypt,  has  become  rather  uncertain  (see  ZEDE-
KIAH).  For  D'lSD,  Mizraim  (i.e.,  Egypt),  we  should  perhaps
in  2  K.  23  34,  as  in  so  many  other  passages,  read  C"11B3,  Mizrim  ;
cp  MIZRAIM,  §  2  b.  It  was  possibly,  or  even  probably,  a  N.
Arabian  king  called  Pir'u,  not  an  Egyptian  Pharaoh,  who
brought  the  kingdom  of  Judah  into  vassalage.  If  so  'Riblah'
may  be  a  popular  corruption  of  'Jerahmeel.'  It  is  not  less
possible  or  probable  that  in  the  other  passages  where  rjTjTI
occurs  'Riblah'  should  be  emended  into  'Jerahmeel.'  The
accounts  of  geographical  boundaries  of  Canaan  in  the  OT  have
been,  it  would  seem,  systematically  corrected,  in  good  faith,
but  in  complete  misapprehension  of  the  documents.

If  we  assume,  however,  provisionally,  the  data  of  the
traditional  text,  how  shall  we  explain  them  ?  In  this
case,  '  Riblah  '  will  be  represented  by  the  poor  village
of  Ribleh,  on  the  E.  bank  of  the  Nahr  el- A  si
(Orontes),  35  m.  XE.  of  Baalbec.  It  was  here  that
Necho  put  Jehoahaz  in  chains  (2  K.  2833)  and  NEBU
CHADREZZAR  (q.v.}  some  twenty  years  later  made  his
headquarters  when  he  came  to  quell  the  Palestinian
revolt.2  Here  Zedekiah  saw  his  sons  slain  (2  K.  256  =
Jer.  39s  f.  =52gf. ),  and  certain  officers  and  people
from  Jerusalem  were  put  to  death  (2  K.  25zof.  =Jer.

1  $eft\ada  is  identified  by  a  scholiast  on  2  K.  25  20  in  cod.  243
with  Daphne  the  suburb  of  Antioch  in  Syria  ; cp  Jerome  on
Nu.34n.

2  An  inscription  of  Nebuchadrezzar  found  in  the  Wady  Brissa
(on  the  E.  of  Lebanon)  refers  to  the  devastation  wrought  among
the  cedars  of  Lebanon  by  a  foreign  foe,  and  the  flight  of  the
inhabitants. Nebuchadrezzar's  (second)  visit  to  Riblah  in  586,
if  historical,  was  to  repair  the  damage  done  and  to  encourage
the  population  of  Lebanon  which  probably  resisted  the  '  foreign
foe  '  and  suffered accordingly. The  '  foreign  foe '  must  have
been Necho  (Wi.  AOF  504^). This,  however,  must be ac
cepted  with  some  critical  reserve.

4100


RIDDLE

52 26 /I).  The  occurrences  of  Riblah  recognised  by
EV  need  some  revision  ;  the  name  should  certainly
be  inserted  in  Ezek.  614,  where  Riblah  (misread  in
MT  as  UIBLAH  :  AV  'Diblath'),  as  a  boundary,
takes  the  place  of  the  more  usual  'Hamath,'  and  it
should  as  certainly  be  omitted  in  Nu.  34  n.  Here,  as
most  scholars  suppose,  the  ideal  eastern  frontier  of
Canaan  is  described.  The  border,  we  are  told,  is  to
go  down  '  from  Shepham  HKBLH  on  the  E.  of  Ain. '  If
we  put  aside  the  prejudice  produced  by  the  pointing
(nS^-in),  it  seems  probable  that  'to  Harbel '  (rr^airi)  is
the  meaning  intended,  and  not  '  to  Riblah.'  The  right
vocalisation  was  still  known  to  the  (@  translator  (dTro
ffeir^afj.  apj3rj\a  ;  see  SHEPHAM),  and  also  to  Jerome  and
Eusebius,  who  speak  (OS,  866  214i72  23254)  of  Arbela
or  a(3r)\a  as  a  point  on  the  eastern  confines  of  Canaan.
The  Speaker  s  Comm.  finds  Harbel  (more  strictly  ^>ann)
in  the  Har-baal-hermon  of  Judg.  83,  and  supposes  the
border  to  pass  by  the  southern  end  of  Mt.  Hermon
near  the  two  best -known  sources  of  the  Jordan.  If
the  current  theory  of  the  reference  may  provisionally  be
accepted,  let  us  rather  say  that  Harbel  was  synonymous
with  Har-baal-gad,  since  '  Raal-gad  at  the  foot  of  Mt.
Hermon '  occurs  in  the  parallel  passage  Josh.  13s  instead
of  the  Har-baal-hermon  of  Judg.  83.  This  view  is  at
any  rate  more  plausible  than  van  Kasteren's  identifica
tion  of  Hariblah  with  Halibnah,  between  the  Yarmuk
and  the  Wddy  Samak  (Rev.  bibl. ,  1895,  P-  33)-  One
of  the  spurs  of  the  Jebel  esh-Shekh  (Mt.  Hermon)  is  in
fact  called  Jebel  Arbel.1  But  it  is  much  to  be  feared
that  the  identification  is  illusory.  T.  K.  c.

RIDDLE  occurs  nine  times  in  EV  (Judg.  14 12- 19,
TJpoBAHMA  ;  Ezek.  17 2,  AlHr"HV\&)  and  twice  in
EVmK-  (Prov.  16,  (MNIfMA,;  Hab.  26,  npoBAHMA)  as
the  rendering  of  Heb.  rTVn,  hldah.

The  word  nTTI)  usually  explained  as  '  something  twisted  or
knotty,'  but  more  probably  (see  Lag.  Grieck.  Uebersetz.  dcr
Prtni.  73)  'something  shut  up  '  (cp  Aram.  inN,  and  Bibl.-Aram.
rrvrtN))  occurs  seventeen  times  in  MT  and  and  once  in  Heb.
Ecclus.  47  17  ;  in  i  K.  10  i  2  Ch.  9  i  it  is  rendered  '  hard  question  '
(ai>/tyjua);  in  Ps.  41' 5  [4]  78  3  [2]  'dark  saying  '  (TrpojSArjjixa)  ;  in
Prov.  16  'dark  saying'  (aii/iy^a)  ;  in  Hab.  26  'proverb'  (n-po-
(3Arj/j.a)  ;  in  Nu.  12  8  '  dark  speech  '  (ali>iy/j.a) ;  in  Dan.  8  23  '  dark
sentence'  (aiviy^a,  7rpd£A7]|u.a  [Th.  ])  and  in  Ecclus.  47  17
'  parable  '  (TrapajSoArj)  ;  ainyju.a  also  occurs  in  Wisd.  8  8  ('  dark
saying'),  Ecclus.  893  (A  V  '  dark  parables,'  RV  'dark  sayings  of
parables '),  47  1 5  ( EV  '  dark  parables, '  R Vmtr-  '  parables  of  riddles ,'
Heb.  differs).

Thanks  to  its  frequent  parallelism  with  the  word
mdsdl  (see  PROVERB),  hidah  has  acquired  a  considerable
range  of  meaning.  Thus  it  denotes  (i)  a  riddle  as  we
understand  the  word — e.g.  that  propounded  by  Samson
to  the  Philistines,  Judg.  14 12^,  or  those  with  which
the  Queen  of  Sheba  is  said  to  have  proved  Solomon,
i  K.  10i  2  Ch.  9  i  ;  (2)  a  sententious  maxim  (Prov.
30  is/. ,  etc.)  still  affecting  to  preserve  the  form  of  a
riddle  but  wanting  its  essentials — viz. ,  the  adequate
characterisation  of  the  object,  and  the  pause  before
reply.  Even  the  riddle  form  may  be  dispensed  with,
hidah,  as  in  Prov.  16,  denoting  simply  any  sententious
maxim,  or  as  in  Ps.  49s  (where,  however,  there  are
textual  difficulties)  the  statement  of  a  moral  problem.
(3)  A  parable — as  in  Ezek. ITs-io,  though  the  passage
is  not  pure  parable,  but  partakes  of  the  characteristics
of  riddle  and  allegory  as  well.  On  account  of  the
allusive  and  figurative  character  of  many  of  the  satirical
lays  of  popular  history  (e.g. ,  Nu.  21  27  j/f  i  S.  IS?,  cp
POETICAL  LITERATURE,  §  4  iii. ),  the  term  hldah  is
not  inappropriately  used  to  designate  them  in  Hab.  26,
but  its  use  in  Ps.  "82  is  probably  only  due  to  the  poet's
needing  a  parallel  to  S^a.  (4)  Lastly,  htddh  is  used
quite  generally  to  denote  any  unusual  or  difficult  and
perhaps  esoteric  mode  of  expression,  Nu.  128  Dan.  823.

Bochart  has  discoursed learnedly  of  the  use  of  the

1  So  Furrer  in  Riehm's  HIVB;  cp  Ritter,  Erdkundc,  15  i,
pp.  159,  183.  In  ZDPV  5  29  a  different,  and  less  plausible,  iden
tification  was  proposed  (with  'Ariln,  5  kil.  NE.  of  Damascus).

4101


RIGHT, RIGHTEOUSNESS

riddle  by  the  Hebrews  at  feasts,1  and  we  could  easily
believe  that  if  our  sources  of  information  were  not  so
narrow,  we  should  find  that  the  Israelites  had  some
resemblance  in  this  department  to  the  Arabs,  with  whom
there  was  almost  a  separate  branch  of  enigmatic  litera
ture,  with  many  subdivisions.  Still,  we  have  only  one
example  of  the  riddle  in  the  OT — the  famous  one  of
Samson  (Judg.  14 14—' a  very  bad  riddle,'  G.  F.  Moore)  ;
of  those  referred  to  in  i  K.  10 13  the  narrator  has
favoured  us  with  no  specimen  ;  nor  did  Josephus  (Ant.
viii.  63)  find  in  the  Phoenician  history  of  Dius  any
details  of  the  riddles  said  to  have  been  sent  by  Solomon
to  Hiram  of  Tyre,  and  by  Hiram  to  Solomon  (Jos.  Ant.
viii.  63  [§  149]).  The  information  in  post-biblical
writings  like  the  Midrash  Mishle  or  the  2nd  Targum  to
Esther  is  certainly  more  curious  than  valuable.

In  the  NT  'riddle'  occurs  once,  i  Cor.  13 12,  where,
to  some  scholars,  the  combination  of  Si'  eabirrpov  and
ev  aiviy/j.a.Ti  appears  difficult.

"Ev  aiv.  (to  which  Origen,  c.  Cels.  7  50  and  elsewhere,  and  the
MSS  LP  prefix  xai  [in  Orig.  KO.L  alviy/j.a.To^])  may  no  doubt  be
illustrated  by  Nu.  128  (©),  ev  el'Sei  Kai  ou  SC  aiviyfioiTuiv,  which
may  perhaps  have  been  explained  '  in  a  well-defined  form  and
not  in  indistinct  blurred  outlines '  (for  this  use  of  alviyiJ.a.  see
Origen  on  Jn.  1  9).

We  do  not  want  the  additional  phrase  ev  ably  [tart,
which  appears  somewhat  to  mar  the  antithesis  ;  what
we  look  for  is  rather  '  for  now  we  see  with  the  help
of  a  mirror,  but  then  face  to  face.'  Preuschen  would
therefore  omit  4v  alviy^ari  as  due  to  a  later  hand
(ZA'TIV,  1900,  p.  i8o/,  cp  MIRROR).

RIE  occurs  twice  in  AV  (Ex.932  Is.  2825)  as  the
rendering  of  J"IJpE)3,  for  which  RV  has  rightly  '  spelt.'
See  FITCHES.  N.  M.

RIGHT, RIGHTEOUSNESS. The  Hebrew  words

for  righteousness  are  se"dek,  scddkd/i  (p"|.V,  HfTiy).  con-

„  , ,  nected  with  which  we  have  the  adjec-

1.  Men.  terms. [ive  ?addi^  (p--^)  •  righteous,'  and  the

verb  sddak  (pl.V)  to  be  in  the  right — in  Hiphil  and
Pi'el,  to  declare  a  person  in  the  right.  Probably  the
most  original  form  of  the  root  appears  in  the  noun
stdek,  from  which  the  verb,  appearing  first  in  the  Hiph.
form,  is  a  denominative.  It  is  not  easy  to  fix  precisely
the  primary  meaning  of  the  root.  Gesenius  takes  it  to
be  'straight';  Ryssel,  with  less  reason,  'hard.'  In
any  case  the  earliest  sense  which  can  be  traced  in  actual
use  appears  to  be  conformity  to  a  recognised  norm  or
standard.

Thus  Beidawi  on  Sur.  2  21  (quoted  by  Kautzsch)  rightly
explains  the  corresponding  form  in  Arabic,  viz.  sadk  as  mttt&bik
— i.e.,  'congruent,'  so  that  things  as  unlike  as  a  javelin  and  a
date  may  each  be  described  as  sadik,  if  they  are  as  they  should
be.  Nothing  fresh  can  be  learned  from  the  Syriac  usage,  which
simply  repeats  with  less  fulness  that  of  the  Hebrew  and  New
Hebrew.  (P  has  used  great  freedom  in  translating  scdek
and  its  derivatives.  Si'icaiot,  fiixaioo-vi'r),  Si/caioOi/  are  their
commonest  renderings;  but  we  also  find,  e.g. ,  srdakah  repre
sented  by  SiKaiia/j.0.,  eAer)fio<rv'n)  (9  times),  e'Aeos  (3  times),  and
even  by  ev<J>po<rHi>ij(Is.  61  10),  saddtk,  by  aAi)#>js,  eu<re/3ijs,  TTKTTOS.
On  the  other  hand  Stxaio?,  SIKCUOOTHT),  Sucaiovv  stand  in  ©
for  many  Hebrew  words  unconnected  etymologically  with  the

root  pix—e.g-.,  for  rex,  ion,  nine,  -isr,  N'pa,  3'i3,  DW,  'ns,

etc.

It  will  be  well  before  examining  the  history  of  the
words  in  the  OT,  to  mention  two  facts  which  should
be  borne  in  mind  throughout,  in  tracing  the  idea  of
righteousness  as  the  Hebrews  understood  it.  In  the
first  place,  sMek  and  its  derivatives  seldom  occur  in  the
older  documents.  They  are  pretty  common  in  the
literary  prophets  ;  they  are  exceedingly  frequent  in  the
wisdom  literature  and  in  the  Psalms.  Next,  the  meaning
of  these  words  becomes  gradually  wider,  and  assumes  a
more  strictly  ethical  and  religious  signification.  We
may  compare  the  use  of  diKaiocrvvTi  which  is  unknown  to
Homer  and  Hesiod,  and  also  the  expansion  of  meaning

1  Hiero?..  383  /.,  ed.  Rosenmiiller.  Cp  Wiinsche,  'Die
Rathselweisheit  bei  den  Hebraern,'  JPT,  1883,  and  cp  for
examples  Krafft,  Jiidische  Sag-en  iind  Dichtungen.

4102


BIGHT,  RIGHTEOUSNESS

in  Siicr),  SIKCUOS  from  '  custom,'  '  observant  of  recognised
usage,'1  till  they  stood  for  absolute  justice  and  the  man
of  ideal  virtue.  Similar  analogies  obviously  appear  in
the  Latin  Justus,  and  in  our  own  terms  'right,'
'  righteous,'  etc.

It  is  doubtful  whether  real  instances  of  the  primitive
use — viz. ,  agreement  with  a  physical  norm — still  survive

_  .  .in  Hebrew.  Lev.  19  36  Ezek.  45io,

'  ,  ":  '  exact  balances,'  '  exact  weights,'  etc. ,

[  °'  are  commonly  quoted  as  cases  in  point.
The  passages,  however,  are  late,  and  as  the  contrasted
notion  of  iniquity  occurs  in  the  immediate  context,  it
is  by  no  means  clear  that  we  should  not  translate
'  righteous  balances,'  etc.  Similarly  '  paths  of  st!Jek  '  in
Ps.  23 3  may  mean  '  paths  of  righteousness,'  not  simply
'straight  paths.'  Still  less  can  Joel  2  23  be  alleged  as
an  example  of  stddkdh  in  its  original — i.e..  physical —
signification,  for  the  translation  given  by  Kautzsch
'  early  rain  in  full  measure '  is  more  than  doubtful.
We  may  perhaps  acquiesce  in  the  translation  '  early
rain  for  your  justification' — i.e.,  in  proof  that  Yahwe
has  once  more  graciously  accepted  his  people  (so  Wellh.,
Nowack,  and  Smend,  AT  Rel.-gesch.  419^:).

Passing  from  the  idea  of  conformity  to  a  physical
standard,  we  have  to  note  the  use  of  the  plu.  stddkoth
(nipTj)  in  the  earliest  fragment  of  Hebrew  literature —
viz. ,  the  so-called  '  Song  of  Deborah. '  There  the  poet
describes  the  valiant  deeds  of  the  Hebrews  as  due  to
the  help  which  Yahwfe  gave,  and  might  as  the  tribal
God  be  fairly  expected  to  give,  his  people.  This  seems
to  be  his  conception  of  sfddkoth.  It  involves  little  or
no  ethical  element.  Yahwe  acted  in  accordance  with
the  natural  bond  between  his  worshippers  and  himself,
and  the  plural  form  indicates  the  various  occasions  on
which  he  did  so.

To  the  same  class  we  may  perhaps  refer  Dt.  33  21,  where  God
is  said  to  have  wrought  the  scdakAh  of  Yahwe,  because  he  was
the  instrument  of  the  divine  purpose  hy  repelling  the  foes  of
Israel.  In  the  same  poem  (the  'Blessing  of  Moses,'  Dt.  8819)
Zebulun  calls  the  tribes  to  some  sacred  mountain  that  they  may
offer  '  sacrifices  of  sedck,'  and  this  may  mean  no  more  than
sacrifices  offered  duly — i.e.,  according  to  the  recognised  form,
and  as  a  natural  return  for  benefits  conferred.  Here,  if  this
interpretation  lie  sound,  the  ethical  element  is  not  wholly
absent  ;  but  it  is  still  faint  and  rudimentary. 2

We  have  to  deal  next  with  the  many  cases  in  which
the  legal  signification  predominates.  In  the  '  Book
3  Le?al  or  °f  the  Covenant  '  (Ex.  23?)  we  read,
f/mimifn  '  Thou  sllalt  not  Put  to  death  him  who
is  innocent  and  saddfk,'  where  clearly
the  legislator  is  not  thinking  of  virtuous
character,  but  of  innocence  from  the  charge  brought
before  the  court.  This  restricted  use  always  continued
long  after  the  deeper  and  more  universal  meaning  had
become  familiar.

Isaiah,  for  example  (5  23)  speaks  of  p'TO  ripis — i.e.,  the  plea
of  a  man  who  has  a  good  case — and  in  Prov.  18  17  we  are  told
that  the  first  comer  is  right  (P^S) — i.e. ,  seems  to  be  right  in  his
contention  till  his  opponent  appears  and  puts  him  to  the  proof.
See  also  Dt.  25  i  Prov.  17  15  185  2424.  Here  it  is  necessary
to  note  the  significant  fact  that  no  feminine  form  of  pTi  is  found
anywhere  in  the  OT  :  indeed  the  vise  of  the  verb  rrpns  in  Gen.
38  26  (the  only  occurrence  of  Kal  in  the  Hexateuch)  may  fairly
be  accepted  as  proof  that  the  adjective  had  no  feminine  form.
This  may  be  naturally  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that  p'1_S
meant  originally  '  right  in  law,'  and  that  a  woman  was  not  a
'  person  '  with  legal  rights.

In  early  literature  the  use  of  the  verb  is  almost  wholly
confined  to  the  Hiphil,  and  the  meaning  of  the  verb
corresponds  to  that  of  the  adjective.  In  other  words,
the  Hiphil  verb  means  to  decide  in  favour  of  a  litigant,
by  declaring  him  to  be  in  the  right.  So,  for  example,

1  It  is  always  assumed  that  the  standard  is  external  and
recognised  as  correct.  Thus,  e.g.,  Homer  speaks  of  Autolycus
as  'good'  (i<rO\6r,  Od.  10394),  adding  that  he  excelled  all  men
'in  knavery  and  the  oath.'  He  would  not  have  called  him
SixaLov.  So  now  we  might  perhaps  speak  of  'a  good  thief,'
but  not  of  a  just  one.

-  The  use  of  COIKC,  eoixun  in  Homer  is  similar.

4103


forensic
sense.


RIGHT, RIGHTEOUSNESS

in  Ex.  23 7  (0)  after  a  warning  against  oppression  of
the  poor  by  corrupt  administration  of  justice,  the  general
principle  is  enunciated,  '  for  thou  shall  not  decide  in
favour  of  a  malefactor.'  A  slightly  different  shade  of
meaning  is  given  to  the  verb  in  Absalom's  exclamation
(2  S.  164),  '  O  that  they  would  make  me  a  judge  in  the
land  :  then  if  any  man  came  to  me  with  a  plea  and  a
case,  I  would  help  him  to  his  right '  (rnp^sni).1

Hy  an  easy  transition  the  idea  of  legal  right  is  extended  to
that  of  being  in  the,  right  on  some  particular  occasion  without
any  implication  as  to  general  moral  character.  No  more  is
implied  in  Judah's  admission  (Gen.  8626),  'She'  (Tamar)  'is
more  in  the  right  than  I  ('3213  npls),'  or  perhaps  'She  has  acted
within  her  rights  and  can  maintain  her  case  against  me.'  (For
this  use  of  |D,  cp  Job  32  2.)  Further,  sdeiaJjt  is  used  of  one  who
is  justified  in  his  statement.  This  meaning  is  evident  in  Job
33  12  where,  after  quoting  Job's  words,  Klihu  says,  '  Lo  !  in  this
[statement]  thou  art  not  justified  :  I  will  answer  thee.1  In  the
same  way  the  adjective  is  employed,  Is.  41  26,  '  Who  announced
this  from  the  beginning  that  we  might  know  it  ...  and  say
"Right  "'—i.e.,  'he  is  right'?  not,  'It  is  true,'  for  the  Hebrew
adjective  is  never  used  of  things.  Examples  of  this  meaning  in
noun,  adjective,  and  verb  are  numerous.  See  for  use  of  the
noun  (sedek)  Is.  59  4  Ps.  52  5  [3]  Prov.  88  1613,  of  the  verb  in
Hiph.  Job 27  3  and  in  Hithpa.  (perhaps),  Gen.  44  16.  In  Arab,
the  use  of  the  root  for  'truth-speaking,'  'sincere,'  is  much  more
advanced  and  definite.

We may now turn to the idea of righteousness

properly so called, of righteousness in its ethical

4 Ethical  s'gnmcat'on  ! and nere tne investigation

sense  in llas  its  Startmg-P°int  in tne  early  literary


prophets.


prophets. In  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.  a


capitalist  class  had  arisen  :  the  old  tribal
justice,  depending  on  the  bond  of  clan  and  still  well-
maintained  among  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,  was  \vell-
nigh  gone  in  Israel  (see GOVERNMENT,  §  12 ff. ;  LAW  AND
JUSTICE,  §  2).  Hence  the  passionate  cry  of  Amos  for
national  righteousness,  for  justice  in  the  gates— i.e.,  for
right  institutions  rightly  administered.  He  reiterates
his  protest  that  external  ritual  is  of  no  avail  without
justice,  'Take  away  from  me'  (Yahwe  speaks)  'the
tumult  of  thy  songs,  the  music  of  thy  lutes  I  will  not
hear.  But  let  justice  roll  in  like  a  river  and  righteous
ness  like  a  perennial  stream'  (023).  True,  Amos  also
uses  the  adjective  saddik  in  the  old  legal  sense  (26  612),
and  he  has  the  administration  of  justice  constantly  in
view.  In  his  view,  however,  legal  justice  springs  from
the  essential  nature  of  God,  who  demands  righteousness,
not  ritual  worship  from  his  people.  The  demand  is
made  to  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Unless  it  is  satisfied,
Israel  must  perish  utterly  and  there  is  no  room  left  for
difference  in  the  fate  of  the  righteous  and  the  un
righteous  individual.  Hosea  also  insists  on  national
righteousness  ;  but  his  conception  of  it  is  at  once  wider
and  deeper  than  that  of  his  predecessor.  It  is  wider,
for  righteousness,  as  Hosea  understood  it,  is  more  than
bare  justice.  It  includes  htsed — i.e.,  merciful  con
sideration  for  others.2  It  is  deeper,  for  Hosea  saw  that
outward  amendment  could  not  be  permanent  without  a
radical  change  of  mind.  '  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteous
ness  :  reap  according  to  lovingkindness  :  break  up  for
yourselves  fallw)  ground  :  for  it  is  time  to  seek  Yahwe,
that  the  fruit  of  righteousness  may  come  to  you'  (10i2,
cp  (5).  It  is  not  enough  to  sow  good  seed  :  the  ground
must  first  be  cleared  and  broken  up  :  in  short,  the
Israelites  must  become  new  men,  and  Yahwe's  will
must  rule  their  lives.  Yahwe  will  accept  no  superficial
conversion  (61-4):  the  only  remedy  is  a  new  birth  by
which  Israel  becomes  a  new  creature  (1813).

Isaiah  develops  the  principles  of  Amos  and  Hosea.

His  moral  code  is  much  the  same. '  Seek  out  justice  :

5 Isaiah set  r'^nt  tne  violent  man  :  do  justice  to  the

orphan  : plead  for the  widow' (1 16/.  07

102). He, no less than Hosea, makes religion a

1  So  KIKO.IOVV  in  classical  Greek  means  to  give  a  man  his  due,
but  always  in  a  bad  sense,  viz.,  to  condemn. It  is  only  in  (8  and
NT  that  it  means  '  to  declare  righteous.'

2  Cp TO «jri«iice's, which corrects the defects  of  law, and
is, therefore, Sixaiov  icat rifos fte\riov Sixatov, Arist. Etk.
A'icom.  5  8.

4104


RIGHT, RIGHTEOUSNESS

matter  of  the  heart  (29 13).  Righteousness  is  the
inexorable  rule  by  which  Yahwe  governs  the  world
(2S 17),  and  wickedness  by  its  own  nature  blasts  the
evildoer  (9i7[i8]).  Because  of  Israel's  sin  the  nation  as
a  whole  is  doomed  hopelessly  (6130:).  Still,  those  who
believe  in  Yahwe  as  the  eternal  principle  of  righteous
ness  can  stand  fast  in  the  crash  of  ruin  all  around
them  (7 9).  Meanwhile  the  prophet  was  educating  a
band  of  disciples  (816)  who  were  to  be  the  germ  of  a
1  remnant  that  was  to  be  converted,'  and  in  one  of  his
latest  prophecies  (1 21-26)  he  passes  from  an  ideal  picture
of  Jerusalem  in  Davidic  days  (the  idealisation  of  -the
past  separates  him  in  a  very  marked  manner  from
Hosea)  and  expresses  the  great  hope  of  better  times  to
come.  Judgment  will  have  done  its  cleansing  work  :
once  more  judges  will  give  impartial  decisions  and
Jerusalem  shall  be  known  as  '  the  fortress  of  righteous
ness,  the  faithful  city.'

A  century  later  Jeremiah  maintained  the  same  con
ception  of  righteousness.  In  223  ne  gives  what  almost

. , amounts  to  a  definition  of  righteousness:
6.  Jeremiah.  .  , •  r

it  consists  negatively  in  abstinence  from

murder  and  oppression  of  the  widows  and  orphans,
positively  in  securing  justice  for  those  who  were  power
less  to  help  themselves.  The  same  thought  appears  in
other  passages — e.g. ,  in  chap.  7,  though  the  word  'right
eousness  '  is  not  actually  used.  We  must  not,  however,
forget  that  Jeremiah  held  fast  to  his  belief  in  righteous
ness  at  the  cost  of  a  personal  struggle  more  searching
and  severe  than  that  which  any  of  his  precursors  had  to
face.  It  was  his  hard  fate  to  learn  that  even  a  law  like
that  of  Deuteronomy,  embodying  as  it  did  the  best
results  of  prophetic  teaching,  could  not  of  itself  change
the  hearts  of  the  very  men  who  in  form,  and  as  they
believed,  sincerely,  complied  with  its  requirements.
Moreover,  Jeremiah  had  to  contend  with  the  organised
priesthood  of  Jerusalem,  after  the  priests  of  the  high
places  had  been  removed  and  when  those  of  the  central
shrine  claimed,  on  grounds  which  Jeremiah  could  not
altogether  gainsay,  a  divine  sanction  for  their  authority.
Moreover  his  sensitive  nature  was  exposed  to  continual
suffering  from  the  enmity  of  his  contemporaries  and
from  the  national  ruin  which  he  saw  first  in  spiritual
vision  and  then  with  the  bodily  eye.  Because  of  all
this,  Jeremiah's  faith  in  the  divine  righteousness  had  to
draw  its  strength  from  the  very  doubt  which  threatened
to  destroy  it.  '  Thou  art  in  the  right  (saddft)  O  Yahwe,
when  I  contend  with  thee  :  yet  would  I  reason  the  cause
with  thee  :  why  does  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper  ?  '
( 12 1 ).  He  knows  well  that  the  best  law  may  be  perverted
by  the  'lying  pen  of  the  scribes'  (88)  and  that  Yahwe
is  '  a  righteous  judge  (sophet  sMek)  proving  reins  and
heart '  (11 20).  More  explicitly  than  any  earlier  prophet
he  fuses  morality  and  religion  into  one  by  reducing  all
duty  to  the  one  supreme  duty  of  knowing  Yahwe's  will
as  revealed  in  his  government  of  the  world.

'Thus  saith  Yahwe,  Let  not  a  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,
neither  let  a  hero  glory  in  his  valour,  let  not  a  rich  man  glory  in
his  wealth.  Hut  in  this  let  him  that  glories  glory,  that  he  hns
understanding  and  knows  me,  [knows]  that  I  am  Yahwe,  who
do  lovingkindness,  judgment,  and  righteousness  on  the  earth  :
for  in  these  things  do  I  take  pleasure  ;  it  is  the  oracle  of  Yahwe
(9  22_/T[23^C]).'  Whereas  Isaiah  had  seen  that  the  people's  heart
was  not  in  their  worship,  Jeremiah  recognised  the  radical  evil  that
the  heart  of  man  is  weak  and  cannot  he  trusted  (17  9),  and  he
saw  the  hope  of  spiritual  religion,  not  in  amendment  on  man's
part,  but  in  the  grace  of  Yahwe  who  would  write  his  law  in
their  hearts  (31  33).

Finally,  the  expectation  of  a  Messianic  king,  or  line  of
Messianic  kings,  appears  probably  for  the  first  time  in
Jeremiah.  Yahwe  will  raise  from  the  family  of  David
'  a  righteous  branch.'  He  is  to  execute  true  justice  and
is  to  be  called  'Yahwe  is  our  righteousness'  (23  5/1).
The  context  interprets  this  name  of  the  Messiah.  By
restoring  Israel  to  its  own  land  Yahwe  the  judge  of  all
is  to  vindicate  the  just  cause  of  his  people  against  the
heathen.  '  In  his  (i.e. ,  the  Messiah's)  days  Judah  will
be  saved  '  (from  heathen  bondage)  '  and  Israel  will  dwell

4105


RIGHT,  RIGHTEOUSNESS

in  security.'  The  history  of  the  world  is  the  judgment
of  the  world.  Here,  however,  the  idea  of  righteousness
is  modified  by  fresh  associations,  and  with  the  consequent
change  in  the  application  of  the  word  we  shall  have  to
deal  presently.

We  have  already  given  from  the  earlier  documents
of  the  Hexateuch  instances  which  illustrate  the  more

7 Sedek restr'ctecl  ancl  primitive  use  of  the  root  pis.

svnonvm ^e  also  meet  tllere>  as  m'gnt  have  been
t  ,-, expected,  with  the  prophetic  use  in  which

of  morality. ..

it  is  co-extensive  with  moral  excellence.

Yahwe,  e.g. ,  declares  that  he  has  seen  how  righteous
Noah  is  (Gen.  7 1,  J)  :  he  knows  that  Abraham  will  teach
his  descendants  '  to  do  judgment  and  righteousness '
(Gen.  1819,  a  late  stratum  of  JE).  Only  one  passage
in  the  Hexateuch  calls  for  special  notice  here,  both  from
its  intrinsic  interest  and  from  the  famous  argument  drawn
from  it  by  Paul.  The  words  in  Gen.  156  (J  ?)  are
'  Abraham  trusted  in  Yahwe  and  he  reckoned  it  to
him  as  righteousness.'  Paul  identifies  the  faith  of
Abraham  with  justifying  faith  as  he  himself  under
stood  it.  It  would  be  an  anachronism  to  suppose  that
the  writer  of  the  words  in  Genesis  had  risen  to  an  idea
of  this  kind,  nor  is  any  such  exegesis  supported  by  the
context.  Abraham  believed,  not  in  God's  pardoning
grace,  but  in  Yahwe's  fidelity  to  his  promise.  In  fact
Abraham's  faith  or  trust  is  precisely  what  faith  as  Paul
conceives  it  is  not,  an  'opus  per  se  dignum.'  See
FAITH,  §  i.

From  the  ethical  we  may  now  pass  to  the  theocratic
sense  of  scddkdh  and  the  cognate  words.  We  have

8 Theocratic  already  had  a  ?lirnPse  of  this  meaning
in  the  Messianic  passage  quoted  from
sense

Jeremiah. It  became  prevalent from

the  time  of  Habakkuk.  It  must  be  remembered  that
Habakkuk,  like  Jeremiah,  lived  after  Josiah's  reform,  but
does  not,  like  Jeremiah,  attribute  the  partial  failure  of
that  reform  to  the  depravity  of  the  Judcean  people.  On
the  contrary,  he  believed  that  the  obstacle  to  strict  legal
observance  lay  in  the  oppression  of  Judah  by  the
Babylonians  (14);  for  it  was  very  hard  to  believe  in
Yahwe  or  his  law  while  the  Babylonian  oppressor  had
it  all  his  own  way.  The  people  of  Judah  were  at  least
better  than  their  oppressors  ;  hence  to  Habakkuk  '  the
righteous'  is  the  constant  description  of  the  Judaeans,
whilst  '  the  wicked  '  stands  for  the  heathen  conqueror.
This  terminology  was  adopted  by  subsequent  writers,
as  maybe  seen  from  Is.  26  10  Ps.  96  17  102  ff.  In  the
end,  as  Habakkuk  holds,  Yahwe  will  vindicate  the  cause
of  his  people,  and  'the  righteous  man' — i.e.,  the  man
of  Judah,  is  to  live  by  fidelity  to  his  God  and  confidence
in  the  ultimate  victory  of  the  good  cause.  Here  we
have  the  outline  of  the  picture  which  the  Second  Isaiah
(i.e.,  Is.  40-55)  fills  in  with  completer  detail  and  added
shades  of  meaning.1  Whereas  the  earlier  prophets
threatened,  the  unknown  prophet  of  the  Exile  makes  it
his  chief  endeavour  to  comfort  Israel.  No  doubt  the
nation  has  sinned  ;  but  it  has  also  been  punished  enough,
and  more  than  enough,  and  now  the  day  of  its  deliver
ance  is  at  hand.  '  For  the  sake  of  his  own  faithfulness
(sJdek]  Yahwe  has  been  pleased  to  give  great  and  glori
ous  revelation  '  of  his  character  (42  21 ).-  He  is  a  '  truth-
speaking'  GoA(saddik,  45 21).  He  has  stirred  up  Cyrus
'in  righteousness'  (45 13),  i.e. ,  as  Yahwe  ought  to  do,
and  therefore  must  do  ;  he  has  supported  him  with  '  his
trusty  right  hand  '  ('  right  hand  of  stdefc,'  41  10).  P-y  a
glorious  restoration  Yahwe  'justifies'  Israel — i.e. ,  decides
in  its  favour  (508).  Hence  in  a  multitude  of  cases  sidek
and  sfddkdh  mean  triumph  (so  the  verb  4525  :  cp  VIKO.V
in  Rom.  12ai)  'victory'  (41  2  4612),  'redress'  (518),

1  We  may  perhaps  compare  KaAol  Kaya&ot,  optitnates,  fnid-
bounties,  gittc  Manner,  used  of  the aristocracy  without any
ethical  meaning. Of  course  the  ethical  words  never  lost  their
ethical  sense  so  utterly.

2  There  is,  however,  some  doubt  both  as  to  the  reference  in
this  passage,  and  as  to  its  authenticity. See  Marti,  ad  'oc.

4106


RIGHT,  RIGHTEOUSNESS

'salvation'  (4613).  It  is  significant  that  when  sldakdh
retains  its  older  and  ethical  force,  it  is  used  of  a  right
eousness  which  comes  as  a  divine  grace  being  '  rained
down  from  above'  (458).  In  the  Second  Isaiah,  however,
this  purely  ethical  sense  is  rare,  occurring  only  two  or
three  times  out  of  some  twenty-five  in  which  the  Hebrew
root  is  used.

The  Second  Isaiah,  as  we  have  seen,  assumed  that
the  sufferings  inflicted  by  Babylon  had  sufficed  to  purify

«v T j- -j i Israel,  and  hailed  with  jov  the  restora-
9.  Individual  , .  ,  ,,


righteousness.


tion  of  a  righteous  people. However,


in  the  preceding  generation  Ezekiel  had
i;ivi-n  expression  to  a  very  different  view.  In  the  latter
period  of  his  work  he  was  a  pastor  of  souls,  a  preacher
addressing  individuals  rather  than  a  prophet  with  a
message  to  the  nation.  Naturally,  then,  he  insists  on
individual  righteousness.  Each  man  is  to  be  tried  on
his  own  merits  ;  however  righteous  he  may  lie,  he  can
secure  the  due  reward  for  himself  and  only  for  himself.
Nay,  even  with  the  individual  Yahwe  deals  according
to  his  present  actions,  admitting  no  appeal  to  the
righteousness  of  the  past,  and  on  the  other  hand  for
giving  iniquity  in  case  of  repentance  and  amendment
(Ezek.  18i  14i4/.  33i2/).  His  ideal  of  righteousness
in  the  individual  conforms  on  the  whole  to  the  prophetic
standard  of  individual  righteousness,  though  it  includes
a  larger  amount  of  ritual  observance  (see  esp.  186-8).
Now,  after  the  restoration,  the  view  of  the  Second  Isaiah
proved  untenable.  The  restoration  itself  lacked  the
external  glory  of  which  he  had  fondly  dreamt,  and  the
exile  had  failed  to  produce  that  righteousness  of  the
whole  nation  which  was  still  the  cherished  aim  of
religious  reformers  in  the  Jewish  Church,  How  was  it
to  be  accomplished?  Finally  and  completely  by  the
judgment  of  the  last  days,  which  is  to  fall  on  unfaithful
Jews  as  well  as  the  heathen.  This  is  the  favourite  theme
of  Apocalyptic  writers  (see  esp.  Is.  1022  which  is  a  late
insertion  :  Mai.  83  Zech.  9  9  126  13g  —  Joel  and  Daniel
passim).  Meanwhile  the  wisdom  literature  taught  with
Ezekiel  that  God  here  and  now,  though  not  immediately,
recompenses  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  according  to
their  deserts,  a  dogma  constantly  reiterated  in  Proverbs
and  Psalms.  Here  and  there  a  distinction  is  made
between  the  '  weightier  matters  of  the  law  '  and  such  as
are  merely  ritual,  since  Yahwe  loves  '  righteousness  and
judgment'  more  than  'sacrifice'  (Prov.  21  3,  cp,  e.g.  ,
Ps.  50).  But  more  and  more  the  'righteous  man'  is
one  who  studies  and  practises  the  whole  law  (Ps.  Is).
The  righteous  are  really  one  with  the  hasidim  :  these
are  to  be  found  as  a  rule  among  the  poor  and  afflicted
Israelites  (Zech.  9g  Ps.  56-59),  and  possibly  the  author
of  Ps.  94,  when  he  speaks  (-,'.  15)  of  legal  administration
returning  to  '  righteousness,'  may  be  looking  forward  to
the  triumph  of  the  Pharisaic  over  the  Sadducean  party.
Naturally  those  who  made  so  much  of  the  law  laid  great
stress  on  deeds  of  mercy.  But  s?ddkah  nowhere  admits,
as  in  Mishnic  Hebrew,  of  the  rendering  'alms,'  though
such  passages  as  Ps.  112  9  Dan.  424  [27]  are  not  far  re
moved  from  this  later  use.1

We  have  already,  in  discussing  the  various  senses  of
sfcidkdh, etc., answered by implication the question,
10 '  Rifht H°w  's  a man  justified  or accepted as
0 ,"  righteous  before  God  ? Something,  how-

ever' has to be added here on the
justification  of  sinners, the  change  from

divine  condemnation  to  divine  favour.  As  we  have  seen,
the  ancient  Hebrew  believed  that  God's  wrath  could  be
appeased  by  sacrifice  (  i  S.  26  19  3  14),  whereas  the  earliest
of  the  literary  prophets  insisted  that  national  amendment
was  the  only  way  of  escape  from  national  chastisement.
The  idea  that  sin  was  a  debt  incurred  and  that  payment
was  still  due,  however  sincere  the  conversion  might

1  In  Mt.Ci,  Ji»caio<rv'nji'  is  certainly  the  true  reading,  and
that  of  TR  eA.r>)|u.o<rvn)t'  is  a  gloss.  Whether  the  gloss  is  correct
is  another  question.  Weiss,  ad  loc.,  answers  this  question  in  the
affirmative;  Holtzmann,  XTl.  Theol.  2135,  in  the  negative.

4107


,

of  sinners
'


RIGHT,  RIGHTEOUSNESS

be,  is  altogether  strange  to  Amos  and  his  successors.
'  Cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well,'  is  the  remedy  which
Isaiah  proposes  ;  nor  does  he  doubt  its  efficacy  :  '  If  ye
be  willing  and  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the
land  '  (Is.  1 16-19).  Ezekiel,  in  a  passage  quoted  above,
proposes  the  same  rule  to  the  individual,  and  combats
the  delusion  that  the  merits  of  persons  exceptionally
righteous  could  atone  for  the  sins  of  their  neighbours  l
(see  also  Jer.  15 1  8129,  and  for  an  opposite  view  Gen.
18 1?/.).  On  the  whole  this  principle  ruled  in  later
Israel.  To  keep  the  law  is  righteousness  (Dt.  625),  and
the  man  or  church  that  does  so  receives  stdakdh — i.  e. ,  a
favourable  sentence  '  from  the  God  who  comes  to  his
help'  (Ps.  24s).  It  is  true  that  neither  the  individual
Jew  nor  the  Jewish  church  could  always  appeal  with  con
fidence  to  that  perfect  observance  of  the  law  which
justified  in  the  sight  of  God.  On  the  contrary,  the
Psalms  abound  in  acknowledgments  of  guilt  (e.g. ,  Pss.
884-6  40 13  696  [5]),  and  the  chief  motive  of  religion  was
to  secure  divine  pardon  :  '  There  is  forgiveness  with  thee
that  thou  mayest  be  feared'  (Ps.  1304).  ^'e  must  not,
however,  identify  such  misgivings  with  the  reproach  of
conscience,  with  the  sense  of  sin  as  Christians  under
stand  it.  The  Jews  believed  that  God  was  offended
with  them  because  he  withheld  the  rewards  of  righteous
ness  and  dealt  with  them  as  he  deals  with  the  wicked,
they  believed  restoration  to  prosperity  was  the  sure  sign
of  pardon  and  of  grace,  a  state  of  mind  which  finds  its
classical  expression  in  Ps.  32.  But  was  there  no  way  of
restoration  except  perfect  righteousness,  or,  failing  that,
supplication  to  the  divine  mercy  (as  in  Dan.  920)?
On  this  point  the  later  teaching  of  the  OT  is  not
consistent.

The  Priestly  Code  limits  the  efficacy  of  the  sin-offering
which  was  introduced  after  the  exile  to  venial  or  in
voluntary  transgression  (Xu.  1027-31),
and  the  mention  of  sacrifice  in  the
Book  of  Proverbs  (158  166  21327)  is
at  least  in  harmony  with  this  principle.
Still,  even  the  Priestly  Code  had  to  mitigate  the  strict
ness  of  its  theory.  On  the  day  of  Atonement  the  high
priest  laid  the  sins  of  Israel  on  the  head  of  the  goat
which  was  sent  into  the  desert  (Lev.  1620-22)  ;  the
dshdm  atoned  for  perjury  and  embezzlement  (Lev.  5 21  f.
[62/i]  Nu.  os/l )  when  preceded  by  restitution  to  the
person  wronged,  and  incense  could  appease  Yahwe  when
provoked  by  the  rebellion  of  his  people  (Nu.  \lnf.
[16  46 /•  ])•  At  a  still  later  period  it  was  thought  that  the
merits  of  the  Patriarchs  atoned  for  the  sins  of  Israel  (see
Weber,  Altsyn.  Theol.  280  f.  ;  and  the  essay  on  the
1  Merits  of  the  Fathers  '  in  Sanday  and  Headlam's  Com
mentary  on  Romans),  and  we  may  perhaps  find  the  germ
of  this  dogma  in  the  atoning  efficacy  which  the  OT
attributes  to  the  prayers  of  holy  men  (Ex.  327  f.  31/-
Nu.  14n/.  1622  17 10  Jos.  7  6/.  Jer.  7i6  11 14  15 1  Job5i
8823)  and  of  angels  (Zech.  1 12  Job5i  8823).  Very  natur
ally  the  doctrine  that  the  merits  of  the  Fathers  availed  for
the  justification  of  Israel  culminated  in  the  belief  that  the
guilt  of  Israel  was  purged  by  the  vicarious  sufferings  of
righteous  men.  This  no  doubt  was  the  teaching  of  the
Rabbis.  According  to  them,  Isaac  made  propitiation
for  Israel  by  the  willing  oblation  of  his  own  life.  God
smote  Ezekiel  that  Israel  might  go  free,  and  martyrdom
made  propitiation  for  sin  as  efficaciously  as  the  day  of
Atonement.2  The  OT,  however,  lends  no  real  support
to  such  a  theory  of  justification  by  vicarious  sacrifice.
The  famous  passage  (Is.  52i3-53i2)  which  describes  the
sufferings  of  Yahwe's  servant  is  treated  elsewhere
(SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD).  In  spite  of  the  corruption
of  the  text,  the  general  sense  seems  to  be  clear.8

1  Almsdeeds  also  were  regarded  as  a  powerful  means  of  atone
ment  for  past  sins.

2  Reff.  in  Holtzmann,  NT!.  Theol.  1  f>sf.

3  Verses  lo/T  are,  as  they  stand,  quite  out  of  place,  since  the
context  requires  a  reference  to  the  resurrection,  not  the  death
of  the  servant. See  Che.  Intr.  to  Is.  305,  n.  i,  and  Duhm  and
Marti,  ad  loc.  [also  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD,  §§  4(4)  5(4)].

4108


11.  Atone
ment  and
propitiation.


RIGHT,  RIGHTEOUSNESS

Israel,  the  servant  of  Yahwe,  does  indeed  suffer  for  the
'  peace '  and  '  healing '  of  the  nations.  This,  however,
takes  place  because  of  the  effect  produced  on  the  minds
of  the  heathen,  not  because  of  the  effect  produced  on
the  mind  of  God.  At  first  the  heathen  regard  Israel  as
afflicted  by  an  angry  God  :  they  shrink  from  him  as  men
shrink  from  a  leper.  But  God  reverses  the  tragic  doom
of  his  people  and  raises  up  the  nation  to  new  life.
Then  the  heathen  understand  the  divine  purpose.  They
recall  the  meekness  with  which  Israel  endured  its  punish
ment.  They  acknowledge  their  own  sinfulness  and  come
to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  who  has  scattered
Israel  abroad  for  a  season  that  he  may  make  it  the  light
of  nations  and  show  his  irresistible  power  in  its  glorious
restoration.

The  words  SJKCUOS,  SiKaiocrvv-rj,  which  scarcely  occur
in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  are  exceedingly  common  in  Mt.
T  ,  and  Lk. ,  and  serve  to  express  the  most
striking  and  characteristic  features  of
1  "  '  Jesus'  teaching.  Jesus  required  from
his  disciples  a  righteousness  better  than  that  of  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  told  them  that  otherwise
they  could  not  enter  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  (Mt.  620).
Generally,  it  may  be  said  that  Jesus  restored  the  pro
phetic  ideal  of  righteousness,  at  the  same  time  deepen
ing  and  extending  it.  The  popular  doctrine  understood,
by  righteousness,  not  so  much  an  honest  and  upright  life
as  scrupulous  attention  to  moral  and  ceremonial  rules,
conduct  legally  correct.  These  rules  were  contained  in
the  written  and  oral  law  ;  Jesus  declared  that  the
traditions  of  the  elders  nullified  the  central  purpose  of
the  law  (Mk.  71-13),  or  at  best  were  matters  of  indiffer
ence  (ib. ).  Moreover,  he  not  only  distinguished  between
the  more  important  and  less  important  precepts  of  the
Mosaic  law  (Mt.  2823)  ;  he  also  criticised  the  law  itself
and  set  its  most  solemn  commands  aside.

No  less  than  this  is  implied  in  words  such  as  these — '  Moses
because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts  suffered  you  to  divorce
your  wives'  (Mt.  19s=Mk.  10 5);  'The  Sabbath  was  made  for
man,  not  man  for  the  Sabbath  '  (Mk.  '2  27)  ;  '  Nothing  that  goeth
into  a  man  from  without  can  defile  a  man  '  (Mk.  7  15  =  Mt.  15 17^  ;
contrast  Lev.  11  Deut.  14).  Again,  the  righteousness  which
Jesus  taught  far  transcended  on  its  positive  side  that  of  the
Mosaic  law  :  among  his  disciples  the  lex  talionis  was  to  give
place  to  a  very  different  rule— viz.,  '  Do  not  resist  evil '  (Mt.  5  39)
—and  that  is  followed  by  a  kindred  command,  '  Love  your
enemies'  (Mt.  644).

More  clearly  and  more  consistently  than  any  previous
teacher,  Jesus  demanded  a  righteousness  of  the  heart,
and  forbade  malicious  and  impure  thoughts  as  sternly
as  the  deeds  of  murder  and  lust  to  which  they  naturally
tend  (Mt.  521-28).  He  went  deeper  still,  and  instead  of
reckoning  the  sum  of  good  deeds,  or  even  good  thoughts,
against  the  opposing  sum  of  evil  deeds  and  thoughts,
he  insisted  upon  righteousness  of  character,  a  righteous
ness  which  is  not  accidental  but  essential,  a  righteousness
which  is  one  and  indivisible,  various  as  its  manifesta
tions  may  be  :  'A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil
fruit,  neither  can  a  corrupt  bring  forth  good  fruit '
(Mt.  7i8).  No  sacrifice  was  to  be  counted  too  severe
when  personal  righteousness  was  in  peril  (Mt.f>29)  or
the  cause  of  righteousness  to  be  advanced  (Mt.  19 21
Mk.  102i  Lk.  1822).  On  the  one  hand,  all  was  to
be  done  with  a  single  eye  fixed  upon  God  and  his
approval  (Mt.  61  etc.);  on  the  other  hand,  the  service
of  God  consisted  in  the  service  of  man  for  God's  sake.
It  is  on  duty  to  man  that  the  '  Sermon  on  the  Mount'
dwells  throughout,  that  practical  love  for  man  of  which
God  himself  is  the  supreme  example,  and  hence  an
infinite  vista  opens  up  before  the  disciple,  who  can  never
feel  that  he  has  done  enough  since  he  is  to  be  perfect  as
his  Father  in  Heaven  is  perfect  (Mt.  648).  So,  too,
the  Jewish  notion  of  a  contract  with  God  who  repays
service  done  disappears  in  that  relation  of  son  to
father  which  Jesus  removed  from  the  circumference  and
set  in  the  centre  of  religion.  True,  God  rewards  those
who  do  not  reward  themselves  by  ostentation  and  self-
complacency.  But  the  quality  of  reward  is  the  same

4109


RIMMON

for  all  faithful  service,  long  or  short ;  it  consists  in  ad
mission  to  the  kingdom  in  which  the  ideal  of  righteous
ness  is  realised  (Mt.  20i-i6).  As  God  bestows  the
powers  to  be  used  in  his  service,  and  has  an  absolute
right  to  that  service,  no  room  is  left  for  merit  which
does  but  claim  its  due  :  '  When  ye  shall  have  done  all
these  things  which  are  commanded  you,  say,  We  are
unprofitable  servants'  (Lk.  17 10).

Jesus  opened  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to  those  who
hungered  and  thirsted  for  righteousness  such  as  this
(Mt.  56).  Whereas,  however,  prophets  and  apocalyptic
writers  had  looked  forward  to  a  final  separation  of  the
righteous  and  the  wicked,  Jesus  began  his  work  by
the  great  announcement  that  he  came  to  call  not  the
righteous,  but  sinners,  to  repentance  (Mt.  9i3  =  Mk.  217
=  Lk.  532).  He  declared  and  pronounced  the  forgive
ness  of  sins  ;  he  spoke  of  the  joy  in  heaven  over  one
sinner  who  repents  ;  he  taught  men  to  believe  in  God  by
first  teaching  them  to  believe  in  himself.  He  invited
men  to  believe  in  the  good  news  (Mk.  lis) — i.e. ,  to
have  faith  or  trust  in  God  as  their  Father,  and  to  make
this  trust  the  guiding  principle  of  their  lives.

It  would  be  impossible  within  the  limits  of  this  article
to discuss the righteousness of  faith  of  which Paul
TT f sPeaks or lhe connection of Christ's
g'/  death  with  justification. It  may  be  well,

however,  to  indicate  in  conclusion  the
various  uses  of  5i'/ccuos  and  the  cognate  words  in  the  NT
apart  from  righteousness  in  the  Pauline  sense  and  that
higher  righteousness  demanded  by  Jesus  from  his  dis
ciples  of  which  we  have  said  something  already.  The
adjective  dfccuos,  '  righteous,'  is  applied  to  God  especially
as  judge  of  all  (Rev.  16s),  or  to  Christ  (2  Tim.  48  Jn.
1725) ;  to  men  as  observant  of  the  Jewish  law  (Mt.  1 19). 1
It  also  is  equivalent  to  '  virtuous  '  in  the  widest  sense
(Mt.  645  9i3  =  Mk.  620=  Lk.  532,  etc.).  Once  Paul
distinguishes  the  righteous  man  who  fulfils  all  his
obligations  from  the  dyaOos  whose  character  is  more
genial  and  attractive  (Rom.  5 7).  '  Righteous  '  is  also  a
title  given  to  men  eminently  righteous  (Mt.  1817  Mk.2i7),
and  by  pre-eminence  to  Jesus  (Acts  3 14  7 52  22 14).  It
is  predicated,  as  the  corresponding  Hebrew  adjective
never  is,  of  things  (Mt.  204  I^k.  12 57  Acts  4  19  Rom.  7  12
Col.  4 1  Phil.  48  etc.).

The  noun  Si/caiocrvn)  means  'fair  dealing'  between  man  and
man  (passing  into  the  wider  sense  of  virtuous  conduct ;  Acts  1035
2425  Rom.  (5 13  14  17  iTim.fin  2Tim.222).  Lk.  uses  it  once
only,  viz.,  in  1  75  where  it  is  parallel  to  'holiness,'  i.e.,  piety.
Acceptance  of  John's  baptism  is  spoken  of  (Mt.  3  15)  as  included
in  the  'fulfilment  of  all  righteousness' — i.e.,  as  conformable  to  the
divine  will  which  the  Baptist  announced.  So,  too,  the  Baptist
is  said  to  have  come  'in  the  way  of  righteousness'  (Mt.  -132),
because  he  preached  that  course  of  conduct  which  righteousness
required.  The  verb  SIKO.IU>,  'justify,'  in  the  NT  always  means
to  pronounce  just,  never,  either  in  the  NT  or  in  profane  writers,
to  make  just  (the  apparent  exception,  Rev.  22  n,  in  the  received
text  arises  from  a  false  reading).  It  is  used  of  men  who  seek
to  prove  themselves  in  the  right  (Lk.  1029),  or  to  win  credit
for  righteousness  with  their  fellow-men  (Lk.  Ifiis).  Men  are
justified  before  God  when  they  obtain  his  approval  (Lk.  1814
Mt.  12  37  =  Lk.  7  35).  In  this  sense  Jesus,  after  his  resurrection,
was  'justified  in  the  Spirit '  (i  Tim.  3  16)  inasmuch  as  he  received
clear  tokens  of  divine  approval.  As  God  justifies  men,  so  men
may  justify  God,  by  confessing  his  righteousness  (Lk.72g  Ps.
5l6U]  as  quoted  in  Rom.34  ;  cp  Mt.llig),  an  application  of
the  verb  which  is  found  in  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  ("2  16  3  5).

See  Diestel,/Z>r5i73/:; Ortloph,  '  Begriff  von  p-,y,'  ZLT
1860, p. 4oi_/!  ; Ryssel, Synonyme des
14.  Literature, ll'ahrcn «. Guten in  den  sent. Sprachcn
(1872); Kautzsch, Derivate des  Stan/tiles


and  even  in  so  early  a  passage  as  Judg.  5  1 1  translates  fidkStk,
'  victories '  [of  Yah  we].  Wildeboer's  comparison  of  the  Syr.  zckha
to  be  pure,  to  conquer,  hdb  'to  be  guilty,'  'to  be  defeated'  is
interesting  and  suggestive.  W.  E.  A.

RIMMON  (pEH ;  PCMMAN  [BL]  -Q  [A]).  Accord
ing  to  the  traditional  text,  the  name  of  a  god  worshipped
at  Damascus  (2  K.  5i8);  apparently  it  enters  into  the

1  The  passage  is  difficult  ;  but  it  seems  to  mean  that  Joseph
was  too  strict  an  observer  to  marry  a  woman  who  had  proved
unfaithful,  and  too  kind  to  make  a  public  example  of  her.

4110


EIMMON

name  T.AB-RIMMON  [q.v.],  though,  as  we  shall  see,
another  view  of  the  phrase  in  i  K.  15  18  is  at  least
equally  possible.

A  more  correct  pronunciation  of  the  name  of  this
god  would  be  Ram  man.  Both  name  and  cultus  of

1.  Rimmon=  !his  deit,y,  were\  il  is  gener,all>r  hek}-
Ass.  Ramman.  Arrowed  from  Assyria,  and  certainly
Ramman  was  the  most  prevalent  name
of  the  god  of  thunder  and  lightning  (ideogram  I  VI)  who
plays  such  an  important  part  in  the  Babylonian  Deluge-
story,  and  is  often  represented  as  armed  with  the
thunderbolt.  The  etymological  meaning  is  '  the  roarer'
(ramdmu  ~  '  to  roar  ')  —  a  name  well  suited  to  a  thunder
god.  The  W.  Semites  appear  to  have  had  another
name  for  this  god,  viz.,  Addu  or  Daddu,  and  Oppert
(Z.I  9310^  [1894])  supposes  that  Adad  was  the  oldest
name  of  the  deity.  There  is  thought  to  be  a  remi
niscence  of  the  identity  of  Addu  (or  Adad)  and  Ramman
in  the  compound  form  Hadad-rimmon  (MT's  reading)
in  Zech.  12  n  ;  the  editor  of  Zechariah,  however,  will
in  this  case  be  responsible  for  the  strange  form  (but  see
Crit.  Bib.  ).  We  often  find  Ramman  associated  with
Samas  (the  sun-god),  like  whom  he  is  (in  an  inscription
of  the  Kassite  period)  called  'lord  of  justice.'  The
Massoretes  may  have  confounded  Ramman  with  rimmon
(see  POMEGRANATE)  ;  though  H.  Derenbourg  disputes
the  accuracy  of  this  representation,  Rimmon,  according
to  him,  being  the  divinised  pomegranate(  Kohut  Memorial
Studies,  120-125  [I^97]-

See  especially  Jastrow,  AY/.  of  '  Bal>.  and  Ass.,  156-161  ;  and
Amur.  Joitrn.  of  Son.  Languages,  12159-162;  also  Schrader,
'  Ramraan-Rimmon,'  St.  Kr.,  1874,  PP-  334$-  !  Sayce,  'the
god  Ramman,1  ZA  '2  ^if.  [',  Zimmern,  A'A  7"(3i  442-451].

According  to  Ohnetalsch-Richter  {Kypros,  Text,  115)  the  con
fusion  between  the  Hebrew  word  for  '  pomegranate  '  (P31,
rimnwn)  and  the  name  of  the  originally  Assyrian  god  Rammfm
is  older  than  MT,  and  goes  back  possibly  to  the  time  of  Ezekiel
(and  earlier).  In  this  connection  he  notes  that  pomegranates
were  attached  to  the  vestments  of  the  high-priest  and  to  the
columns  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  On  Carthaginian  stela;,
moreover,  we  find  the  seated  figure  of1  the  boy  Adonis  in  the
very  place  occupied  elsewhere  by  the  column  surmounted  by  a
pomegranate.  Ohnefalsch-Kichter  thinks  that  it  was  'an  easy
step  '  to  identify  this  tree-god  Tammuz,  to  whom  the  '  rimmSn  '
was  sacred,  with  the  storm-god  Ramman,  and  to  call  him
'  Rimmon.'

According  to  Jensen,  there  is  a  cylinder  in  the  Hermitage
at  St.  Petersburg  inscribed  with  two  divine  names,  the  one
Rammanum,  the  other  ASratum.  Taking  this  in  connection
with  Assyrian  texts  which  speak  of  the  god  Amurru  (i.e.,  the
god  of  the  land  Amurru,  the  Amorite  god)  as  the  consort  of
Asratu,  he  infers  that  the  Amorite  god  referred  to  is  Rammanu,
i.e.,  the  storm-god,  also  called  by  the  Assyrians  'the  Lord  of
the  Mountain,  '  =  p}1?  Sj.3>  'the  Baal  of  Lebanon.'  The  '  land
of  Amurru'  was  in  fact  originally  the  land  of  the  Lebanon  or
Antilibanus  (cp  \Vi.  GI  1  52).

The  present  writer,  however  (see  Crit.  Bib.},  suspects
much misunderstanding  in the traditional  text  of  the
narrat'ves  °f  tne  kings  of  Aram,  which

Is  *Pe,c!all>'  visible  in  names- '  Ben'
hadad, for instance, seems to be

equivalent  to  Bir-dadda,  and  Hazael  to  Haza'ilu,  which
are  attested  as  N.  Arabian  royal  names  in  Assyrian  in
scriptions  (KA  T(-~I,  148)  ;  '  Damascus  '  is  constantly  mis-
written  for  '  Cusham  '  ;  and  Rimmon,  or  rather  Ramman,
may  be  regarded  as  a  popular  corruption  of  that  famous
name  'Jerahmeel,'  which  was  not  only  an  ethnic  name,
but  also  in  all  probability  the  name  of  a  god  (see  Crit.
Bib.  on  2  K.  17  30  /.  ).  When,  therefore,  we  read  in  2  K.
5i8  of  Naaman's  accompanying  his  royal  master  to  the
house  of  Rimmon,  this  is  meant  (not  of  the  storm-god,
but)  of  the  national  god  of  Jerahmeel,  who  may  possibly
have  been  called  Jarham  or  Yarham  (i.e.,  rrr.  '  moon,'
with  the  Arabic  'mimation').  It  was  not  unnecessary
to  warn  the  Israelites  that  Naaman  was  only  by  a  special
indulgence  allowed  to  do  outward  honour  to  Jarham  or
Jerahmeel,  because  there  are  several  indications  that  the
worship  of  Jerahmeel  had  made  its  way  into  Judah  some
time  before  the  fall  of  the  state.  See,  e.g.  ,  Zeph.  ls£,
where  we  should  very  probably  read,  '(I  will  cut  off)
those  that  prostrate  themselves  before  the  moon,  that

411  c


2 Rimmon  =


RIMMON-PAREZ

swear  by  Jerahmeel. >l  It  now  becomes  doubtful  whether
'son  of  Tab-rimmon  '  in  I  K..  15 18  is  correct.  The
king  to  whom  Asa  sent  may  have  been,  not  '  Ben-hadad,
son  of  Tab-rimmon,  son  of  Hezion,  king  of  Syria,  that
dwelt  at  Damascus,'  but  'Ben-hadad  [  =  Bir-dadda],
native  of  Beth- Jerahmeel2  (or  Rabbath- Jerahmeel?),
king  of  Aram  (  =  Jerahmeel),  who  dwelt  at  (or,  in)
Cusham.'  It  should  also  be  noticed  here  that  Klisha,
who  had  such  close  relations  with  a  king  of  Aram  and
his  general,  was,  the  present  writer  suspects,  a  prophet
of  the  Negeb— i.e. ,  of  a  region  which  was  originally
Jerahmeelite.  T.  K.  c.

RIMMON  (pOT — i.e. ,  pomegranate? — see  NAMES,
§  69  ;  or  from  'Jerahmeel'  ? — see  RIMMON,  i. ,  §  2).

1.  Josh.  1032  19  7  [AV  REMMON],  i  Ch.  432  Zech.
1-1 10. See  EN-KIMMON,  and  cp  AIN,  i.

2.  The  name  of  a  rock  where  600  fugitive  Benjamites
found  shelter  for  four  months  (Judg.  2047,  [is-in,  ptfi.fj.iav

i [BAL]). There  was  a  village  of  this  name  15  R.  m.

i  N.  of  Jerusalem  (OS  146s  28798),  identified  by  Robinson
(2ns)  with  the  mod.  Rammon,  rather  more  than  3  m.
E.  of  Bethel,  '  on  and  around  the  summit  of  a  conical
chalky  hill  and  visible  in  all  directions.'  This  would
be  in  the  wilderness  of  Beth-aven  (Josh.  1812).  Birch

j  (PEFQ,  1879,  p.  128)  objects  that  there  are  only  a  few
small  caves  at  Rammon,  and  refers  to  Consul  Finn,  who
heard  of  a  vast  cavern  in  the  Wady  es-Suweinit  capable
of  holding  many  hundred  men.  Canon  Rawnsley  in

I consequence  visited  the  caverns  in  this  Wady,  which  he

I describes  in  PEFQ,  1879,  pp.  118-126. Birch,  follow-

j ing  Ges. Thes. 129^, identifies  the  Rimmon  of  Judg.

I  2647  with  the  Rimmon  'under'  which  Saul,  with  his
600  men,  tarried  (i  S.  14z).  The  latter  Rimmon  was
'at  the  limit  of  Geba '  (so  read  for  Gibeah).  See
MICRON.

3.  '  Rimmon  ' (rather '  Rimmonah, 'njie")), also
appears  in  RV  of  Josh.  19 13  (E.  boundary  of  Zebulun),
where AV again [see  i] gives '  Remmon,' with the
addition  of  '  -methoar,'  (RV  '  which  stretcheth  ')  as  if  a
compound  name. The  RV  at  any  rate  recognises  that
the  name  is  not  compound  ;  it  also  does  justice  to  the
article  in  iNhsn  (pffJ.fJ.uv a  afj.adap  aofa  [B]  ;  pefj.fj.diva.fj.,
fj,a0api/uL,  avvova  [A]  ; ewi  a.fj,a(>a.pi  vova  [L]). We  may
render,  with  Dillmann  and  Kau.  HS,  '  and  (their  border)
extends  to  Rimmonah  (rnisn),  and  turns  round  (iNni)  to
Neah  (?).' No  doubt  it  is  the Rimmono  (iyis-i, AV
Rimmon), or rather Rimmonah, of i Ch.  662  [77],
probably  also  the  DI.MNAH  (n:p^)  of  Josh.  2135,  corre
sponding  to  the  modern  Rummdneh  on  the  SE.  edge  of
the  plain  of  Battauf,  4  m. N. from  Gath-hepher,  and
7^  m.  N.  from  Chisloth-tabor.

4.  Possibly  MADMENAH  [q.v.]  in  Is.  1031  should  rather  be
'Rimmonah.'  T.  K.  C.

RIMMON  (|V3~1 ;  peMMCON  [BAL],  '  pomegranate  '
[so  NAMES,  §  69  ;  Del.  Prol.  205],  or  the  Ass.  divine
name  Ramman  [Lohr,  cp  KiSH?],  or  [Che.]  a  dis
tortion  of  the  ethnic  Jerahmeel),  a  Beerothite,  the  father
of  RECHAB  and  BAANAH  [</.r.~]  (2  S.  42  59).  Note  that
'Rechab'  maybe  also  from  'Jerahmeel,1  and  that,  as
the  story  of  SAUL  (q.v. )  shows,  there  was  a  strong
Jerahmeelite  element  in  Benjamin  (Che.).

RIMMONO  fmrri;  THN  pe/v\MO>N  [BAL];  i  Ch.
6  62  [77]).  Rather  Rimmonah.  See  RIMMON  ii.  3.

RIMMON-PAREZ,  RV  Rimmon-perez  (pS  fi»1),
a  stage  in  the  wandering  in  the  wilderness,  perhaps  =

1  G.  A.  Smith  renders  MT,  so  far  as  he  thinks  it  possible,
thus, 'and  those  who  .  .  .  swear  by  their  Melech,'  and  in  a
note  points  out  the  disorder  of  the  text. Wellh.  reads,  'those
who  bow  themselves  to  Yah  we  and  swear  by  Milcom.' But
C2^C,  like  -jSci  is  very  probably  one  of  the  current  distortions
of  SucnT- See  Crit.  Bib.

2  The  much-disputed  word  p<in  is  probably  a  corruption  of
pnT.  a  variant  to  ;iai,  and  nearer  to  the  original  form  ^x~ — .

4112


RING

Zarephath-jerahmeel [Che.]; Nu.  33  ig/. (peMMOON

[pAMMU)N,orpAMMCOe]4>Apec).  See  WANDERINGS,
§  12.

RING. The signet ring was called in Hebrew

hothdin  (Qmrn  from  its  use  (  x/  to  seal),  and  tabbd'ath,

(H1J3D) from its form ( ^/  to sink, As.

1.  Signet,  ^j .  algo  in  Bjbl  Aran,  v*V  (NpW)  Dan.

6i8[i7],  and  in  Targum  for  both  hotkdtn  and  tabbdath
(  N/to  cut,  engrave).1  See  ENGRAVE.  The  seal  was
worn,  as  it  is  still  by  some  Arabians,  on  a  cord,  pdth.il
(see  RIHBANU),  round  the  neck,  (Jen.  38 18  ;  later,  on  the
right  hand,  Jer.  2-24.  In  Cant.  86  both  customs  seem
i-Diiibined,  'on  thine  arm,  on  thy  heart.'  The  oldest
form  of  signet  worn  by  all  Babylonians  (Herod.  1195)
was  the  cylinder,  a  large  hole  being  bored  through  the
core  to  admit  a  soft  woollen  cord  for  suspension
round  wrist  or  neck.2  The  Egyptian  scarabaeus  3  had
a  smaller  hole  to  admit  a  fine  wire.  When  used,  the
seal  was  rolled  over  a  piece  of  pipeclay  which  was  laid
on  an  object  or  attached  by  a  ribbon  to  a  document
(King,  Antique  Gems,  140).  It  was  from  the  Egyptian
wire  that  the  more  convenient  finger-ring  was  evolved.
Such  rings  were  among  the  ornaments  worn  by  Hebrew
women  after  the  exile,  Is.  821  (vv.  18-23  being  an  interpo
lation).  The  word  gdlfl  'ring'  in  Cant.  5 14  EV,  for
which  RV'"£-  preferably  suggests  'cylinder,'  seems  to  be
used  as  a  simile  of  the  fingers  of  the  hand  (BOB,  Bu.
ad  loc. ).

The  transference  of  Judah's  signet  to  Tamar  had  no
special  significance — he  simply  gave  her  as  a  pledge  an
object  which  could  obviously  be  identified  with  him.4
On  the  signet  was  probably  a  precious  stone,  mostly
the  Sdham  (see  ONYX),  on  which  was  engraved  a  figure
or  inscription,  Ex.  28  n.  Hence  in  an  Oriental  court
the  conveyance  of  the  signet  attested  a  royal  message
(i  K.  21  8),  and  in  many  lands  was  a  mode  of  investing
officers  with  power  (Gen.  4142  Esth.  3io  i  Mace.  615
|os.  Ant.  xx.  22).  There  is  no  indication  that  the
wedding-ring  was  used  in  OT  times  ;  but  in  Egypt
some  such  custom  anciently  prevailed.  It  should  be
added  that  a  da.KTv\t.ov  was  placed  on  the  hand  of  the
prodigal  son  on  his  restoration  to  his  father's  house
[Lk.  15  as).

Ntisem  (en)  conveys  the  meanings  of  both  an  ear-ring

and  a  nose-ring,  though  usually  the  fuller  form  nifsem

„ . hd-dph  (r^n  nu)  is  used  for  the  nose-ring.

*>'  In  )udg.  824,  however,  where  the  singular
nose-rmsr. •  , • •

0 is  used,  it  is  probable  that  netem  alone

means  nose-ring.  The  whole  of  this  passage  is,  how
ever,  regarded  as  a  late  gloss  by  Wellhausen,  Moore,
Budde,  andothers.  Neither  nose-rings  nor  ear-rings  were
worn  by  males,  though  Pliny  (AT/  11  37  [50])  says  that
Oriental  men  wore  them,  and,  if  Judg.  824  be  genuine
Midianite  soldiers  did  so.5  The  nose-ring  was  put
through  the  nostril  and  hung  over  the  mouth.  Robertson
Smith  explains  that  all  such  ornaments  were  designed
as  amulets  and  protectors  to  the  orifices,  as  well  as
for  ornament  (cp  ./?S(2'  453,  and  n.  2).  The  ring  put
through  the  nose  of  beasts  (hah,  'hook')  is  sometimes
associated  with  ndzem  (Ex.  35 22,  AV  'bracelets,'  RV
'brooches');  cp  HOOK,  2.

Several  forms  of  ear-ring  are  noticed  in  the  OT.
The  Ifhdttm  of  Is.  820  were  perhaps  ear-rings  (see

1  IJotlifineth,  Gen.  38  2st  is  fern.  coll.  =  ' sealing  apparatus.'
Ball  suggests  reading  DCnnrt  or  rCRm  ;  Holzinger  partly
approves  this  suggestion.

-  Illustrations  in  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art  in  Ass.  2,  figs.  131^

3  The  earliest  dated  Egyptian  cylinder  is  as  old  as  3800  B.C.
(Flinders  Petrie,  Hist,  of  Egypt,  1  55).

•»  Wellhausen  (Ar.  //eir/.W,  i&4/.)  thinks  that  the  cord  from
which  the  signet  hung  was  also  an  amulet.  This  would  account
for  the  insistence  on  the  transference  of  the  cord  in  the  narrative
in  Genesis.

5  On  these  grounds  Moore  holds  that  ear-rings  are  probably
meant.  For  the  wearing  of  nose-rings  by  Indian  boys  in  order
to  pass  as  girls  and  avert  the  evil-eye,  see  Frazer,  Pansanias,
2266.


RITUAL

AMULETS),  to  which  some  symbolic  figure  was  attached.
Other  terms  for  ear-ring  were  derived  from  the  shape.
The  'dgil  C?'jy)  was  round  (Ezek,  16i2,  cp  Beitholet  on
Ezek.  17  Nu.  31  50).  Another  kind,  nlllfhoth  (riiB'BJ).
lit.  drops  (RV  pendants,  AV  collar),  were  probably
pearls  (Abulwalid  compares  Arab,  nafufat,  a  small,
clear  pearl),  or  single  beads  or  gems  attached  to  the
lobe  of  the  ear  (r^j,  to  drop),  Judg.  826  (arpayya\is
[B],  6pfj.i<?Koi  etxfruQ  [AL]),  Is.  819  (©  /cdfle/aa?)  worn  by
Midianite  men  and  Israelite  women.

The  ancient  versions  gave  other  explanations  ;  Tg.  K'7'72i
diadems,  chaplets.  Some  Jewish  interpreters  connected  m'tifkotli
with  natafh  (Ez.  30  34,  see  STACTE)  and  render  capsules  of  sweet-
smelling  gum.  See,  further,  OKNA.MENTS,  and  the  articles
there  referred  to.  I.  A.


RINGSTRAKED  ppl')  Gen.  3035^  ;  see  COLOURS,
§12.

RINNAH  (nn,  'shouting??'  §  74  ;  ANA  [B],  PAN-
NOON  [A],  peNNA  [I-]).  son  °f  the  Judahite  SHIMON
(</.?•.  );  i  Ch.  420.

RIPHATH  <nBn,  Gen.l03  [P],  picbAG  [AEL]  ep.
[£>];  Ch.  16,  Pan,  DIPHATH  [AV"*-  and  RV],  epei-
4>A6  [B],  picbAe  [A],  pid)A6  [L];  i"  both  places
RiPHATH  [Vg.j,  ^ft  .  *  1  .  one  of  the  'sons'  of  Gomer,
Gen.  10s  i  Ch.  I6f.  According  to  the  theory  which
finds  N.  Arabian  influence  and  interests  pervading  the
earlier  chapters  of  Genesis  (see  PARADISE,  §  6),  'Gomer'
represents  '  Jerahmeel,'  '  Ashkenaz'  conies  from  '  Kenaz  '
(or  Asshur-Kenaz),  '  Riphath  '  from  'Zarephath.'  The
transformation  has  been  systematic.  On  the  time-
honoured  theory,  however,  which  bases  itself  on  MT,  we
must  look  far  away  from  N.  Arabia.  Josephus  thought
of  Paphlagonia  ;  Bochart  and  Lagarde  of  the  Bithynian
river  prjfias  and  the  distant  prifHavria  on  the  Thracian
Bosporus.  But  if  TOGARMAH  [<?.v.  ]  is  really  Til-
garimmu,  on  the  border  of  Tabal,  Riphath  may  be
identified  with  Bit  Burutas  (or  Buritis),  a  district  —  men
tioned  several  times  with  Tabali  (see  Schr.  KGF  176)  —
whose  king  was  an  ally  of  Urartu  and  Musku.  The
syllable  -as  or  -i£  may  be  regarded  as  a  suffix  (so  first
Hal.  REJ,  17164).  The  transposition  of  b  (or/)  and
r  is  no  difficulty.  The  suggestion  is  plausible,  if  MT
may  safely  be  followed.  T.  K.  C.

RISSAH(nD-);  AeccA  [B],  P.  [AF],  Ap.  [L]).  a
stage  in  the  wandering  in  the  wilderness  ;  Nu.  33zi/.
See  WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OK.

RITHMAH  (niprn  named  from  the  DJ~n  or  juniper
tree,  §  103  ;  if  we  should  not  rather  read  Ramath,
PANAMA  [BAF],  PAMA0A  [I-]),  a  stage  in  the  wander
ing  in  the  wilderness  (Nu.  33  18/  ).  See  WANDERINGS.

RITUAL

[The  facts  and  theories  about  Hebrew  ritual  are  dealt
with  in  many  articles,  among  the  most  important  of
which  are  the  following  :  SACRIFICE,  TEMPLE  (§§  34^^,
NATURE  WORSHIP,  ALTAR,  MASSEHAII,  TABERNACLE,
ARK,  DISPERSION,  SYNAGOGUE.  On  the  ritual  of  the
nations  contemporary  with  Israel  the  reader  may  consult
ARAM,  ASSYRIA,  BABYLON,  EGYPT,  MOAB,  AMMON,
CANAAN,  PHOENICIA,  HITTITES,  SCYTHIANS,  ZOROAS-
TRIANISM,  etc.

Of  those  nations,  however,  so  great  an  influence  on
the  civilisation  of  the  whole  of  hither  Asia  was  exercised
by  one,  the  Babylonian,  that  the  facts  about  its  ritual
acquire  special  importance.  On  the  other  hand  the
amount  of  first-hand  information  on  the  subject  is
unique  and,  besides,  not  generally  accessible.  It  is  pro
posed,  accordingly,  to  give  here  some  account  of  the
nature,  and  ceremonial  institutions,  of  the  Babylonian
sacrificial  ritual.  In  doing  this  the  points  in  which  it
resembles,  or  differs  from,  the  ritual  of  the  OT  will  be
indicated,  and  a  brief  comparison  of  the  two  systems
given.]

4114


RITUAL

CONTENTS

Names  for  sacrifice  (8  i).  Performance  (§  6).

Objects  offered,  age,  etc.  (§  2/.). Idea,  purpose  (§  7 /.).
Time  and  place  (§  4).  Human  sacrifice  (§  9).

Antiquity  of  sacrifice  (§  5).  Lustration  (§  10).

Summary  (8  1 1).

ASSYRIO-BABYLONIAN RITUAL.

A  short  account  of  Babylonian  sacrifices  has  been
already  given  in  the  Supplement  to  Die  Cultus-tafel  von
Sippar  (Joh.  Jeremias,  Leipsic,  25-32  [1889]).  The
question  of  how  far  this  system  is  original  and  how  far
it  is  related  to  what  we  find  elsewhere  has  received  little
or  no  attention.  The  treatment  of  such  questions  in
the  difficult  sphere  of  religious  institutions  being  always
involved  in  uncertainty,  it  appears  to  be  more  than  ever
appropriate  in  regard  to  sacrifice,  as  an  institution
common  to  all  peoples,  to  explain  the  same  or  similar
ideas  not  as  borrowed  the  one  from  the  other,  but  as
both  drawn  from  the  same  source.  In  justification  of
the  common  designation  Assyrio-Babylonian  it  is  to  be
noted  that,  apart  from  a  few  modifications  in  their
Pantheon,  the  religion  of  the  Assyrians  agrees  through
out  with  that  of  the  Babylonians.  Of  this  agreement,
which  was  maintained  in  spite  of  all  political  strifes,  we
have  a  historical  attestation  in  the  fact  that  Asur-bani-pal
had  the  MSS  of  the  Babylonian  priestly  schools  collected,
supplied  with  an  Assyrian  interlinear  translation,  and
preserved  in  his  state  archives  (see  4  R).1

Sacrifices  were  called  kirbannu  or  kurbannu  (more
rarely  kurbdnu,  kitrubu ;  in  ordinary  usage,  '  back-

. sheesh, alms.' A much commoner
l.  flame  9  lor  wonj is nikj^ .  to be hent| show

sacnftce.  reverence,  offer  homage'  (cp  for  this
meaning  Del.  Assyr.  H\VB),  used  of  drink  offerings
(Deluge,  147 ;  cp  n'jSJJp  patera]  and  also  of  bloody

sacrifices.

The  root  of  niku  is  naktt  '  to  be  empty,'  II.  i  'to  pour  out.'  It
was  probably  the  pouring  out  of  the  blood  that  led  to _ the
transference  of  nikfi  from  its  original  application  '  drink  offering '
to  the  meaning  '  blood  offering.'  A  rarer  word  than  nikti  is  zibA
(Khars.  172),  Heb.  rni,  zcbah.  For  '  drink  offering  '  we  find  also
the  words  muhhuru,  mahhiiru  (in  contracts),  rainku.  To
mlnlmh  (rtnp),  'food  offering,'  corresponds surkinu (Del.  HW'B
surkinu),  a  word  formerly  incorrectly  rendered  'altar.'  The
regular  stated  offering  (ttlinut,  TSFl)  was  called  sattukku  (sat-
takain,  'constant')  or  ginti,  properly  'right.'  Roth  words
indicate  the  yearly,  monthly,  rarely  (Nabun.  1443)  daily,  con
tribution  to  the  temple  for  the  support  of  the  sacrifice  and  the
priests.  A  synonymous  word  is  gukku  or  gukkanu.  The  free
will  offering,  Heb.  ««/<?£«// (~3~I3),  is  called  nindabu  (nidbu).

For  '  to  sacrifice  '  the  commonest  word  is  nakfi.
For  the  sake  of  comparison  the  following  may  be  mentioned
from  the  many  other  expressions  in  use :  epi-su,  Heb.  7  rtb'J?  ;
sab&tu,  Heb.  Hjp? ;  tabiihu,  Heb.  rDB ;  riksa  rakasu,  '  to  pre
pare  an  offering.'  Of  special  importance,  moreover,  are  the
expressions  in  purification  texts:  karabu  (3'lpn  ;  often  used
of  pouring  water,  occurring  with  p  [notwithstanding  Del.
HIVB\,  in  Rassam2i68)  and  kaparu  (K  3245,  pass.)  '  to  wipe,'
then  '  to  clear,  purify,'  a  meaning  that  is  important  in  its  bearing
on  Heb.  kipper  (1S3).  Cp  //  'R  13  51  17  33  ;  Zimmern,  Beitrage
12226.  The  offerer  of  the  sacrifice  is  called  k&ribu  or  bel  nike:
(cp  Marseilles  Sacrificial  Table,  pni  SjQ)-

It  should  be  specially  noted  that  everything  that  the
land  produced  was  offered  to  the  gods  without  dis-

_.. , tinction. Whilst  in Israel  it  was  only  the

O DjectiS  procjuce  Of  a  people  devoted  to  cattle-rearing
' °  and  agriculture  that  was  offered  (cp  Di.
Lev.1^,  379) — and  this  was  still  further  narrowed  by  the
exclusion  of  fruit,  honey,  and  all  sweet  or  fermented
preparations  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  beasts  of  chase
and  fish  on  the  other — in  the  fruitful  lands  between  the
two  rivers  every  kind  of  produce  was  freely  offered  to  the

1  Abbreviations  used  in  this  article.  K  followed  by  a  number
=  some  one  of  the  tablets  of  the  Koyunjik  collection  m  the  Brit.
Mus. ;  Neb.  Nabun.  Cyr.  —  Babylonische  Texte,  Inschriften
des  Nebukadnezar,  Nabuna'id,  Cyrus,  published  by  T.  N.
Strassmaier  (Leipsic,  1887);  Menant,  PG^Les  fierres  gravees
de  la  Haute  Asie  (Paris,  1883).

4«S


RITUAL

gods.  Of  vegetable  products  we  find  frequent  mention
of  wine  (kardnu),  must  (kiirvnnu),  date  wine  (sikarn,
prepared  from  corn  and  dates  or  honey  and  dates,  cp
Neb.  1035,  Nabun  612,  871  ;  -mn,  cp  Nu.  28;),  honey
(dOSpu,  E>yn).  cream  (himetu,  nxon),  a  mixture  prepared
from  various  ingredients  and  containing  oil  and  fat
(invariably  written  GAR  Ni-De-A  ;  probably  mirsu  is
to  be  read  ;  cp  Nab.  912,  Cyr.  3276,  Arab,  marts,
'  date-stone'),  the  choice  produce  of  the  meadow  (simat
appari],  garlic  (fsummu,  c«y),  first-fruits  (releti  ;  n'tPNT  ;
Sank.  I6i  Kuj.  Ig).1  Food  specially  prepared  for  the
gods  was  called  akal  taknu  (4  R.  61,  620.),  with  which
should  be  compared  the  analogous  expression  crh
rc-iyan.  Upon  the  table  of  the  gods  were  laid  12,  or

3  x  12,  loaves  of  AS-AN,  that  is  to  say  wheaten  flour,  as
shewbread (cp  Zimmern, BeitrdgeS&H  104 138; Il-rR
5020^56230;  Craig,  Relig. Texts\(&; King, Magic
and  Sorcery  408)  ;  also  akal  mutki,  that  is  to  say,  un
leavened bread, is  several  times mentioned (cp  Lev.
24s). Special  abundance  and  splendour  characterised
the  vegetable  offerings  of  the  Neo-Babylonian  and  Neo-
Assyrian kings (cp Pognon, Inscriptions de Wddi
Brissa  ; Neb. Grot.  1  if>ff.  ; Neb. Grot.  2*6  /.  ; Neb.
Grot.%1/.; Schr.  KB27%}. They  were  in the  form
of the daily  sattukku, the  state  sacrifice, a  sort of
representation of  the  whole agriculture  of the  land.
Nebuchadrezzar lays on the table of Marduk and
Sarpanit  the  choicest  produce of  the meadow, fruit,
herbs, honey,  cream, milk, oil,  must,  date-wine,  wine
from different  vineyards. Still  more  abundant  is  the
offering  of  Sargon  (fCBZjZ],  a  king  who  offers  finally
not  to  the  gods  but  to  himself. His  splendid  offering
is  a  brilliant  display  of  his  royal  wealth,  at  which  even
the  gods  must  be  amazed.

The  commonest  bloody  sacrifice  mentioned  is  that  of
the  lamb  (written  Lu  niku  or  niku}.

The  expression  Lu  Nita,  often  occurring  in  contracts,  is  to  be
read  kalumu  or  su  (nt1)  and  to  be  rendered  'lamb,  kid.'  For
'goat'  we  find  the  words  bnhadu,  lapparu  (in  contracts),  urlzu
az(s)  lu  'an  old  mature  lamb.'  Of  other  quadrupeds  we  hear  of
sacrificial  oxen  (guwahhu  or  tilap  iitahhu),  bullocks  (parru,
~\B),  gazelles  (sabitu),  wild  kine  (littu,  ,1N^).  The  following
birds  were  used  for  sacrifice  ;  doves,  geese  (us-tut),  cocks  (kurkn,

4  R  26471?; Talm. N^IIU), peacocks (paspasu), pheasants
(?.pasnu;  Nabun.  672  I ;  Talm.  P'DS). Fish  (nun?)  are  always
mentioned  along  with  '  birds  of  heaven  '  (issiir  same).

For  a  bird  sacrifice  see  Botta,  Nineveh,  pi.  no  ;  for
fish  offerings  see  Menant  2  53.

No  special  prescriptions  as  to  age  are  known. Lu

niku  probably  always  indicates,  like  ya\adi]vd  (Herod.

1183), the young  sucking lamb. We

^f'  o6^  M  k»ow  from  the  contracts  that  victims  a
other  details.  year  old  were  preferred|  as  in  P  in

Leviticus  (apal  or  marat  satti,  like  n:c>  |3  or  'a  na  ;  of
Nabon.  196 1  265 1  2722  699 15  768 1).  Mention  is  also
made  of  victims  of  two,  three  (Neb.  399 1),  and  four
years  of  age  (Cyr.  1174)-

With  regard  to  the  condition  of  the  animals  the
requirements  were  stricter  :  faultless  growth  (tasrihtu),
large  size  (rabu},  fatness  (dusSu,  mart],  physical  purity
(ebbu,  ellu  ;  '  pure,  shining  '),  and  spotlessness  ("suklulu  ;
Herod.  TO,  rtXea  T&V  TrpojiaTwv).  Cp  Zimmern,
Beitriige\§§T2.  In  divination,  however,  the  use  of
unsound  victims  was  permitted  ;  in  the  prayers  to  the
sun-god  (ed.  Knudtzon,  73)  we  often  read :  izifr  sa
kalumu  ilutika  fa  ana  birl  baru  matu  hat it  :  'Grant
that  the  lamb  of  thy  divinity,  which  is  used  for
inspection,  may  be  imperfect  and  unsound.'  It

is  well  known  that  in  the  Israelitish  cultus,  thank-
offerings  need  not  be  faultless  (Lev.  2223).

The  victim  was  as  a  rule  a  male,  yet  females  also
were  used  (San A.  Bav.  33  Cyr.  1174  Cyr.  247 1).  It

1  The  incense  (kutru,  kutrinnu,  rrtap :  formerly  wrongly
read  tarrinnu,  was  made  from  precious  herbs  (sa'iltu  r)7nr)  and
odoriferous  woods.

4116


RITUAL

was  probably  always  female  victims  that  were  used  in
purification  ceremonies  :  sarat  buhatti  la  pitete,  '  the
skin  of  a  she-lamb  still  intact'  (4  R  25  35^: ;  cp  4  R  28
no.  311  5  R  51  51  ;  Nimr.  Ep.  44,  60).  Compare
with  this  the  prescription  of  a  she-goat  one  year  old  for
the  sin  offering  of  the  individual  (Nu.  1627).

The  victim  was  probably  seldom  placed  entire  (kdlil,
^»Sa)  on  the  altar.  To  begin  with,  the  remarkably
small  size  of  the  altars  that  have  been  found  shows  that
only  certain  parts  of  the  victims  were  offered.  The
altar  of  Sargon's  palace  is  32  inches  high ;  that
from  Nimrud,  actually  only  22  inches.1  That  the
flesh  was  boiled,  as  in  Israel  in  early  times,  is  shown
by  5  R6i,  15,  where  the  priest  receives,  along  with
other  shares,  a  large  pot  of  meat-broth  (dikdr  me  seri).

With  regard  to  the  details  of  sacrificial  ritual  and
practice  our  sources  tell  us  little  ;  the  sculptures  represent
as  a  rule  only  the  preparatory  steps  (cp  Menant  2  54  ;
Layard,  Monum.  of  Nineveh  2  24).  The  usual  form  of
offering  was  burning  by  fire  (ana  maklftti  aklu).  We
know  nothing  of  special  ceremonies  performed  with  the
blood  in  the  Babylonian  ritual,  such  as  were  usual  in
Israel  and  ancient  Arabia  (Wellh.  A r.  Heid.  113).  In  a
text  published  by  Zimmern  (Beitrdge,  126),  which
describes  the  purification  of  the  king's  palace,  the  lintels
of  the  palace  are  smeared  with  the  blood  of  a  lamb  (ina
ddrni  urizi  suatum]  ;  compare  for  this  interesting
passage  Ex.  12  7.  It  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that
we  learn  from  4  R  32  30  that  there  were  three  ways  of
preparing  the  victim  :  ser  sa  penti  baslu  sa  tumri,
'baked,  boiled,  smoked  flesh. '  The  offering  consisting
of  vegetable  food  was  probably  consumed  by  the
sacrificers.  A  drastic  exposure  of  this  pia  fraus  is
given  us  in  the  apocryphal  Bel  and  the  Dragon.

The  following  parts  are  expressly  mentioned  in  2  R
44,  14-18^  1-5  </:  head  (kakkadu],  neck  (kisadit),
3b  Parts  of  ^an^  (P<*tu],  breast  (irtu],  rib  (silfi],  loin
victim  used  (s"nu\<  tail  (sibbatu),  spine  (esen  seru),

V1LU1I11 USull. ,  i /  7'zz \ i_n  11 * \ •  .

heart  (hoou),  belly  (karsu),  intestines
(hase),  kidney  (kalitu),  knuckles  (kursinnati'}.  In  the
contracts  (cp  especially  the  important  texts,  Strassm.
Neb.  247  and  416  ;  also  Peiser,  Babylonische  Vertriige,
107)  many  parts  are  mentioned  that  are  still  etymo-
logically  obscure  (with  two  of  them,  ser  gabbu  and  ser
ganni  sili,  cp  Talm.  KZXZ  tail  ;  and  anu  flank).
Sacrificial  flesh  was  probably  not  taboo  as  amongst  the
Israelites  and  the  Phoenicians  (Movers,  Phon.  2n8) ;
according  to  a  late  statement  of  the  Epistle  of  Jeremiah
(v.  28  [Baruch  628])  the  Babylonian  priests  sold  the
sacrificial  flesh,  and  their  wives  also  cured  it.

No  definite  prescriptions  as  to  the  times  of  sacrifice
have  reached  us.  The  Zakmuku  or  New  Year's  feast,

4  Time  l^e  -^^"ltu  ^east  he'd  m  honour  of  Marduk
and  place.  ^Neb'  Bors'  48*'  were  si&nalised  bv  proces
sions  and  sacrifices.  Daily  sacrifices  are
often  mentioned  (Nt*.  Grot.  1 16  226)  ;  an  animal  sacri
fice,  in  Tigl.-pil.  7io  (cp  i  S.  206).  In  the  ritual  tablet
for  the  month  Ululu  (cp  Lotz,  Hisloria  Sabbati,  1  50^),
published  in  4  R  8233,  it  is  prescribed  that  the  daily
sacrifice,  consisting  of  n'oldfi  and  a  minhiih,  should  be
offered  once  at  each  rising  of  the  moon  and  appearance
of  the  dawn,  fourteen  times  by  night  and  fourteen  times
by  day  (cp  Ex.  29 38  Nu.  283).  A  morning  offering  is
mentioned  in  the  text  published  by  Zimmern,  Beitrdge
10069.  Sacrifice  as  a  free  expression  of  prayer  and  de
pendence  (thank-offerings,  todah,  can  hardly  have  been
known  to  the  Babylonians),  as  the  highest  product  of
the  religious  life,  is  not  severely  confined  to  definite
times.  On  the  contrary,  every  important  event  of
life  is  celebrated  by  a  spontaneous  offering  of  sacrifices
just  as  in  ancient  Israel.  If  the  king  of  the  Assyrians
returns  victorious  from  a  military  expedition,  if  in
repairing  a  temple  he  finds  an  ancient  foundation
stone,  if  he  dedicates  his  palace,  if  he  consecrates  his

1  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art  in  Chaldcea  and  Assyria,  1  256 f.
132  4117


RITUAL

weapons  for  the  fight  (kakke{a  nllil],  if  in  hunting
he  secures  his  prey,  if  he  formally  commemorates
his  ancestors — in  each  and  all  of  these  cases  he  offers
sacrifice  to  the  gods.  It  is  a  relief  amid  the  annals  of
cruelty  and  pride  of  Assyrian  rulers  when  we  read  in
their  boastful  accounts  :  ana  ildni  lu  nike  akki,  •  I
presented  to  the  gods  an  offering.'  For  innumerable
instances  of  this  kind  we  may  refer  generally  to  KB.

The  ordinary  place  of  sacrifice  was  the  temple.
Mountain  and  spring  also  were,  in  accordance  with  the
universal  Semitic  ideas  (cp  Baudissin,  Studien,  2143),
regarded  as  sacred  spots,  specially  suited  for  sacrifices.
After  the  flood  Xisuthros  offered  his  sacrifice  '  on  the
top  of  the  mountain '  (ina  zikkurat  sadi]  ;  and  so
Astir  -  bani  -  pal  (889)  on  the  mountain  Halman,  and
Shalmanassar  (Co.  103)  at  the  source  of  the  Euphrates.

The  origin  of  sacrifice  lies,  according  to  Babylonian
ideas,  beyond  the  limits  of  human  history  ;  it  existed

5  Antiquity  from  the  time  when  the  world  vvas  made
of  sacrificed  ^ultu  f<m  s-At  mdti}-  Gods  and  Senii
are  often  represented  as  sacrificing  (cp
Menant,  /"^  2  37  51  53).  Sin  is  called  the  founder  of
free-will  offerings  (nnikin  nindabe  ;  4  R  933)  ;  Adar,
the  god  of  offerings  and  drink  offerings  (ilu  mihri  it
ramkuti ;  2  R  7 35  2  R  67 67).  As  the  formation  of
the  earth  was  immediately  followed  by  the  institution  of
places  of  worship,  so  the  newly  created  man  was  charged
with  religious  duties  towards  the  deity  (Del.  Das  dab.
Weltschopfungsepos,  in).  Paldhu  damaku  ullad  niM
baldtu  fitar  u  taslitu  ami  .  .  .  '  the  fear  of  God  brings
grace,  sacrifice  enlarges  life  and  prayer  (frees  from)
sin.'  After  the  deluge  (147^)  Xisuthros  sacrifices  to
the  gods  ;  '  then  did  I  turn  to  the  four  winds,  poured
out  a  drink  offering,  offered  a  cereal  offering  on  the  top
of  the  mountain  ;  seven  incense  pans  I  set  forth,  and
spread  under  them  calamus,  cedar  wood,  and  rig  gir
(onycha?).'  In  the  old  Babylonian  Nimrod-epos  (446o)
we  read  in  the  account  of  the  Amores  J  'eneris  :  taramima
amelreasa  kanamma  ispukakki  umisamma  utabbahakki
iiniketi  ;  '  thou  hast  loved  the  shepherd  who  continually
brought  drink  offerings  to  thee,  daily  sacrificed  kids  to
thee. '

The  inscriptions  of  the  old  Babylonian  king  Gudea
already  contain  notices  about  sacrifices.  On  the  New
Year  festival  (see  Schr.  KB  82661)  he  offers  to  the
goddess  Ba'u  amongst  other  things  a  cow,  a  sheep,  six
lambs,  seven  baskets  of  dates,  a  pot  of  cream,  palm
pith  (?),  fifteen  chickens,  fishes,  cucumbers,  as  sattttkku
or  regular  sacrifice.  A  rich  source  of  information  upon
the  sacrificial  arrangements  in  the  later  Babylonian
period  is  to  be  found  in  the  thousands  of  Babylonian
contracts  in  which  bills  and  receipts  connected  with
temple  revenues  and  dues,  as  well  as  lists  relating  to
the  regular  sacrifices,  bulk  very  largely.1

Sacrifice  was  in  the  hands  of  the  priestly  caste,  who
were  held  in  the  highest  esteem  and  enjoyed  special

6.  Performance.  P™1^-'  So  great  indeed  was  the
esteem  in  which  they  were  held  in
Babylonia  in  earlier  times  that  even  the  king  needed
their  mediation  for  sacrifice  and  prayer  (cp  Menant,
PG  1 128  f. ).  In  Assyria,  however,  the  king  reserves
for  himself  the  supreme  priesthood,  calling  himself  the
exalted  high-priest  and  sacrificing  to  the  god  with  his  own
hand  (Per. -Chip.  Assyria,  41  -[Assyrie,  455];  Menant,
PG  2164).  Just  as  Ezekiel  in  his  ordering  of  the  priest
hood  assigns  to  the  king  in  the  public  worship  an  inde
pendent  and  important  position,  so  we  repeatedly  read  in
the  liturgical  tablets  preserved  in  4  R  3233  ;  re  u  nise
rabdti  nindabdsu  ukdn ;  '  the  shepherd  of  the  great
peoples  shall  bring  his  offering.'  In  the  contracts  there
is  frequent  mention  of  the  king's  offering  and  of  that  of
the  crown  prince  (sa  apal  sarri);  Nabon.  2658  332 2

1  A  good  index  to  the  relative  texts  is  provided  by  H.  L.
Tallquist,  Die  Sprache  tier  Contracts  Nabona'ids  (Helsingfors,
1890).  _

2  Diodorus  Siculus  (2  29)  has  given  us  a  vivid  and  adequate
account  of  their  functions.

4118


RITUAL

594ao.  As  in  Israel,  the  priests  had  assigned  to  them
definite  portions  of  the  offerings.  According  to  the  ritual
of  the  Sun-temple  at  Sippar  the  priests  received  the  loins,
the  skin,  the  ribs,  the  sinews,  the  belly,  the  chitterling,
the  knuckles  of  all  cattle  and  lambs  that  were  offered,
as  well  as  a  pot  of  sacrificial  broth  (5  R  61  col.  5).  In
the  contracts  minute  details  are  met  with  as  to  priestly
dues  (Neb.  247,  416;  Peiser,  Bab.  Vertr.  107).  It  is
interesting  to  observe  that  in  Babylonia  as  in  Israel
(see  Lev.  Z\if>/.)  rules  were  laid  down  respecting  the
freedom  from  bodily  blemish  that  was  required  in  priests.
In  a  priestly  catechism  of  Sippar  (K.  2486  +  4364,
published  by  Craig,  Religious  Texts,  Leipsic,  1895)
we  read  as  follows  :  —

UtntnAnit  tnudu  ndsir  fiiristi  iliini  rabut?  a/>il?u  so.  irammu
ina  tupfi  it  kail  tuf>f>i  ina.  nmhar  ilu  Samas  it  ilu  Raiinnan
utainiitasHiiia  usnhfjasu  fnitnin  af>il  amfl  l>a>H;  and  farther
on  :  anill  issakku  sa  zarusu  cllu  u  sit  ina.  kitti  u  minutisu
htkluht  ana  tnahar  ilu  Santas  u  ilu  Ramman'  asar  birA  fl
f-iirusf  tchi  abil  amtl  barf  la  zarusu  li\  ellu  it  sti  ina  kitti  ft
Hiinuti  su  IA  suklttlit  zaktu  fna  Mf>A  sinnt  ttagpi  ubtinu  ina
sefii  .  .  .  ntalS  issu/'ba  hisgallu  sttf>AkiIit  filpiutHU  .  .  .  la
nasif  farsf  sa  ilu  Santas  it  ilu  Ramman.

'  A  wise  man  who  guards  the  secrets  of  the  great  gods
shall  cause  his  son  whom  he  loves,  with  tablet  and  pen
to  take  oath  before  Samas  and  Ramman,  and  the  son
of  a  magician  shall  teach  him  when  to  do  so.  A  priest
who  is  noble  in  descent,  and  whose  clothing  (?)  and
measurement  (?)  are  perfect,  shall  present  himself  before
Samas  and  Ramman  in  the  place  of  augury  and  oracle.
The  son  of  a  priest  whose  descent  is  not  noble  and  who
is  not  perfect  in  clothing  (?)  and  in  measure,  who  has
squint  (?)  eyes,  broken  teeth,  bruised  thumbs,  boils  or
swellings  on  his  feet  .  .  .  shall  not  keep  the  temple  of
Santas  and  Ramman.'

Sacrifice  rests  ultimately  on  the  idea  that  it  gives
pleasure  to  the  deity  (cp  Di.  Lev.  376).  For  Israel,
the  conception  of  sacrifice  as  a  meal  for

Yahwe  is  reflected  in  such  expressions  as
Gen  g  2i  Dt  33  io  ^  ^ In  the  Raby.

Ionian  records,  the  gods  feast  in  heaven  (4  R  19  59:
Hani  rabiiti  issinu  kutrinnu  akal  same  ellu  kurunnu
damga  Sa  Id  ilpat  kali  ikkalu  ;  '  the  glorious  gods  smell
the  incense,  noble  food  of  heaven  ;  pure  wine,  which
no  hand  has  touched,  do  they  enjoy');  they  eat  the
offering  (4  R  17  56:  aka/ht  akul  nigasu  muhur;  'eat
his  food,  accept  his  sacrifice  ')  ;  they  inhale  with  physical
delight  the  savour  of  the  offering  (Deluge,  151  :  Hani
esinu  en'sa  Hani  esinu  erefa  taba  kima  zumbe  eli  bel
nikf  iptahrfl  ;  '  the  gods  scent  the  savour,  the  gods
scent  the  sweet  savour  ;  like  flies  do  they  gather  them
selves  together  about  the  offerer  '  ;  cp  the  analogous
expression  nrn  nn,  Gen.  821);  the  gods  love  the  offering
that  man  brings  (Asurn.  las  :  nadan  zcbilu  Hani  rabute
/<z  same  u  irsitim  iramu  ;  '  the  glorious  gods  of  heaven
and  earth  love  the  gift  of  his  sacrifice  ').  What  is  active
in  the  offering  is  the  voluntary  surrender  of  a  private
possession  (Tigl.  7?  :  ana  biblat  libbiia  akki  ;  '  I  sacri
ficed  as  my  heart  enjoined').  As  a  subject  into  the
presence  of  his  king,  so  does  man  come  into  the  presence
of  his  god  with  gift  and  tribute.  In  a  text,  printed  in
4  R  20,  which  describes  the  solemn  return  of  the  god
Marcluk  from  Elam  to  Babylon  and  the  sacrificial  feast
then  celebrated  in  his  honour,  the  imperial  sacrifice  is
described  in  the  following  terms  (rev.  22  f.)  :  Iam/2
hegalldsunu  irsitum  hisibsa  tdmtitm  mihirtasu  sadA
iribsu  kitrubassu  htt  Id  mahra  mala,  sunna  lisanu
kabitti  bilatsitnu  ndsu  ana  bilbilum.  Azlu  tubbuhu
tins';!!  alap  mahhe  zibu  sarruhu  seni  kutrinnu  armannu
nstefsi  erese  tabu  ;  '  the  heaven  pours  out  its  abundance,
the  earth  its  fulness,  the  sea  its  gifts,  the  mountains
their  produce  ;  their  incomparable  offerings,  everything
that  can  tie  named,  their  heavy  tribute  do  they  bring  to
the  lord  of  all  ;  lambs  are  slaughtered,  great  oxen
sacrificed  in  herds,  the  sacrifice  is  made  rich,  incense
is  prepared,  a  sweet  smelling  savour  mounts  up,
delicious  odour.'  Probably  the  step  from  the  concep-

4119


* i
mental  idea.


RITUAL

tion  of  the  offering  as  a  gift  and  a  meal  of  the  deity
to  that  of  a  finer  and,  so  to  speak,  spiritual,  apper
ception  of  that  which  was  brought  in  sacrifice  was
made  at  a  comparatively  early  period.  So  much'  is
indicated  by  the  fact  that  even  from  ancient  times  prayer
was  associated  with  sacrifice.  In  the  pictorial  repre
sentations  of  sacrificial  scenes  we  constantly  find  him
who  prays  in  close  association  with  him  who  offers.
The  gesture  of  prayer  was  threefold  :  nis  kdti,  lapdtu
kali,  labdnu  appi — lifting  up  of  the  hands,  folding  of
the  hands,  casting  down  of  the  countenance.

The  purpose  of  sacrifice  is,  invariably, to  influence
the  deity  in  favour  of  the  sacrifices Man  brings  gifts
_  to  the  gods  in order  that  they  may  be

moved  thereby  to  reciprocity — to  showing
a  favourable  disposition  in  return.1  When  the  kings
Esarhaddon  and  Asur-bani-pal  were  seriously  menaced
by  the  inroads  of  the  Giniirri  they  multiplied  their
offerings  and  prayer  (see  Knudtzon,  I.e.}.  In  the
liturgies  of  that  period  a  standing  expression  is  as
follows  : — ina  libbi  kalumi  anni  izzizamma  anna  kena
htknamma ;  '  because  of  this  lamb  offered  in  sacrifice
arise  thou  and  establish  faithfulness  and  mercy. '

So,  in  like  manner,  the  gods  are  represented  as  rejoic
ing  over  the  sacrificial  gifts  brought  them  by  their  human
'  worshippers  (K.  1547,  rev.  n  :  igdamrd  masfakkcia
azlcia  ina  tub  libbi  Hani  igdamru  ;  '  accomplished  are
my  cleansing  sacrifices,  to  the  gladdening  of  the
hearts  of  the  gods  are  my  sacrifices  of  lambs  accom
plished ').  The  feature  of  joy  and  gladness  which  so
markedly  characterised  the  sacrificial  meals  of  pre-exilic
Israel  ('•  «JBS  ncsr,  Dt.  12?  ;  SACRIFICE,  §  18)  is  by  no
means  absent  from  the  Babylonian  functions.  Thus  in

3  R  8662  we  read (akul  akdlu siti  kurunnu  ningutu
Jitkun  nu'id  ilfiti]  'eat  food,  drink  must,  make  music,
honour  my  god  '.  Predominant,  however,  over  this
joyous  note  which  finds  such  marked  expression  among
the  peoples  of  classical  antiquity  there  is  found  in  the
Babylonian ritual a  feature  which is  common to all
Semitic  religions — the  element  of  propitiation. Here,
of  course, we  must  divest  ourselves  of  all  theological
preconceptions,  and  put  aside  all  such  notions  as  that
of  an  atoning  efficacy  attaching  to  the  blood  as  the  seat
of  life,  or  of  a  divine  wrath  that  expends  itself  upon  the
sacrificial  animal,  or  even  of  a  ratio  vicaria,  when  we
speak  of  the  idea  of  propitiation as  underlying  Baby
lonian  sacrifices. The  similarity  of  the  words  and  forms
does  not  necessarily  involve  similarity  in  the  religious
conception. The Babylonians possessed the same
words  for  sin  (hittu],  grace  (annu),  propitiation  (piJu)
as  the  Hebrews  had  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  they  did  not
associate  with  the  words  the  same  thoughts. At  the
same  time  it  is  significant  and  by  no  means  accidental —
it  has  its  roots  firmly  planted  in  the  very  nature  of  the
religious  ideas  involved — that  every  offering  offered  with
the  object  of  averting  evil  of  any  kind  whatsoever  was
associated  with  the  notion  of  a  propitiatory,  cleansing,
purifying  efficacy. In a hymn to Samas we read
(4  R  1746  :  amelu  apil  ilisu  enun  arnam  emid  mefri-
tuSu  marsiX  ibsd  marsil  ina  mursi  ni'il  ilu  Samas  ana
nis  katiia  kftlamma  akalsu  akul  nigasu  muhurma  Ham.
Ilkat ana idisu Sukun ina kibitika enissu lippatir
aransu linnasih], 'man, the son of  his god  —  sin,
transgression  lies  upon  him. His  physical  strength  is
impaired,  he  languishes  in  disease. O  Samas,  behold
the  uplifting  of  my  hands,  eat  his  food,  accept  his  sacri
fice,  O  God. Take  off  his  fetters. At  thy  command
may  his  sins  be  taken  away,  his  transgressions  blotted
out.' Other passages  subjoined explain  themselves.

4  R  5447  : muhur kadraSu liki pidesu ina kakkar
hilme  mahraka  littallak ;  '  accept  the gift he brings,
receive  his  ransom  money  (j'vis)  ',  let  him  walk  before

1  Cp  King,  Babylon.  Mafic,  1728(1896):  asrukka  kutrinnu
irisu  tabu  kinis  naf>lisannima  simi  kaba-ai,  '  I  present  yi>u
with  incense,  agreeable  vapour  ;  look  at  me  truly,  hear  my
words.'

4120


EITUAL

them  on  the  ground  of  peace.'  4  R.  55,  obv.  2n  ;  ntf
katisu  ilisu  ana  mahari  u  nindabtfu  ana  rdmi  ildnifu
zenfit  iitiSu  ana  Sulmi  ;  'whereby  his  god  accepts  the
lifting  up  of  his  hands  and  takes  pleasure  in  his  free
will  offerings,  whereby  the  angry  gods  turn  themselves
propitiously  towards  him. '  4  R.  57  7  (akale  ii  nap-
salt  um  $a  ina  panika  kunnu  Hpsiisu  limnt'ia)  :  '  the  food
and  the  fatness  which  is  spread  out  before  thy  face,  may
it  take  away  mine  evil. ' x  The  following  remarkable
passage,  from  a  hymn  to  Marcluk,  stands  unfortunately
alone  (K.  246  ;  cp  2  R.  1853  :  amclu  muttaliku  ina
nik  rente  sulme  kima  k&  maffi  limmassis],  '  May  the
man  plagued  with  fever  be  purified  like  shining  metal
through  a  gracious  peace  offering.'  In  contracts  the
expression  alap  faptiri,  'redemption  ox'  (Neb.  132 12
2183)  often  occurs;  cp  with  this  Lev.  43  (manS  ns).
The  idea  of  atonement  in  the  OT  has  found  its  classical
expression  in  \htkappSreth  of  P  (see  MERCY-SEAT,  §  2).
In  this  connection  it  is  important  to  observe  that  the  root  133
is  attested  in  Babylonia  also,  kaftiru  in  the  rituals  meaning  '  to
cleanse,'  'to  purify."  4  R.  10 40:  amllu  muttalikn  mar  ilisu
kuppirma ;  '  Cleanse  (with  the  water  of  the  oath)  the  man

glagued  with  fever,  the  son  of  his  god.'  4  R.  2754  :  akala  If  i
i  amcirsiiatu  kupfirma;  'cleanse  the  unclean  foods'  (of  the
same).  In  K.  3245  the  precept  frequently  recurs  sarru  tukaf>par
— 'do  thou,  O  king,  purify,'  as  also  the  phrase  takpirtu  of  the
ceremony  of  purification  {kima  takfiriiti  tuktettfi — '  when  thou
hast  accomplished  the  rites  of  purification  ').  Whilst  the  phrase
already  alluded  to — nik  sulmfi  (corresponding  to  the  Heb.
selem,  which,  as  we  see  from  i  S.  13  9  28.2425  Ezek.  45  17,
denotes  a  purificatory  offering  :  cp  SACRIFICE,  §  n) — is  of  only
occasional  occurrence,  we  frequently  in  contracts  meet  with  the
word  sal&inu,  salamnfu,  which  in  accordance  with  the  primary
meaning  of  the  root  sal&mtt  may  be  rendered  '  turning  towards '
(on  the  part  of  the  deity),  and  taken  in  the  sense  of  a  propitiatory
sacrifice.  Cp  Nabun.  214  9  302  3  641  4  767  2,  Cyr.  229  3  with  the
sattukkit  named  in  Nabun.  799  1517.

A  few  words  must  be  said  on  the  subjects  of  human
sacrifice,  offerings  to  the  dead,  and  sacrifices  of  chastity.2

9 Human *l 's a  remar'ca^e  circumstance  that
hitherto  no  authentic  evidence  for  the
Scicrizice.  etc. , • c  ,  .,. 1 .

burning  of  human  sacrifices  has  been

met  with  in  any  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions.  It
would  be  unwise,  however,  to  base  much  upon  the
argumentum  e  silentio  here,  for  reticence  with  reference
to  such  a  sad  and  repulsive  practice  is  only  what  we
should  expect.  The  passage,  so  often  quoted  in  4  R.
266,  where  the  priest  is  bidden  to  offer  for  the  life  of  the
sick  man  a  kid  (uri'^u] — head,  neck,  breast  of  the  one
for  head,  neck,  breast  of  the  other — does  not  come  into
account  here.  The  text  is  a  description  of  a  magical
operation  such  as  may  be  compared  with  that  given  in

2  K.  434. The Babylonian sculptures, on the other
hand,  supply  traces  of  human  sacrifices  that  are  almost
unmistakable  (see  Menant,  PG\g^f.  97),  though  it  is
not  impossible  that  the  representations  in  question  are
intended  to  figure,  not  human  sacrifices,  but  ceremonies
connected  with  circumcision. In  the  wider  sense  of  the
term  the  Babylonian  ban  (see  BAN)  has  to  be  regarded
as  of  the  nature  of  human  sacrifice. That the  same
conception is not altogether absent from the Heb.
Mrem (against Di. Lev. 377) is proved by Is.  346,
where  the  destruction  of  Israel's  enemies  at  Bozrah  is
treated  as  a  '"V  rnr. Sennacherib  (650)  put  to  death
the  troops  of  Suzub  at  the  command  of  Asur  his  lord.
Shalmaneser  (^^o. Obv. 17)  burnt  the  young  men  and
maidens  in  his  band  of  captives. The  ban  pronounced
by  Asur-bani-pal  (6101)  over  his  enemies  extends  also
to  the  lower  animals  (cp  Judg.  2648). A  sacrificial  offer
ing  of  prisoners  (cp  i  S.  1533)  is  thus  recorded  by  Asur-
bani-pal  (470): 'the  remainder  of  the  people  I  put  to
death beside the great steer, where my  grandfather
Sennacherib  had  been  murdered, making  lamentation
for  him.' In  4  R.6340  Istar  figures  as  the  bloodthirsty
goddess who devours human flesh  : istanatti dami
nisbuti  sa  ameluti  ser  sa  Id  akdli  nerpaddu  fa  Id  karasi  :

J  Cp  King,  I.e.  5yr  76.

2  On  human sacrifice  cp  Lenormant,  Etudes  accadiennes,

3  112  ;  Sayce,  TSBAl?$  ;  Menant,  PG\  150.

4121


RITUAL

'she  (the  daughter  of  Anu)  has  drunk  the  satisfying
blood  of  men,  flesh  that  cannot  be  eaten,  bones  that
cannot  be  gnawed.'  The  probability  is  that  the  Baby
lonians  practised  human  sacrifice  secretly  without  form
ally  taking  it  up  into  the  recognised  worship.  In  the
older  period  (of  which  we  have  a  reminiscence  in  Gen.
22),  as  well  as  in  times  of  religious  declension  (2  K.
17  31)'  t*16  Israelites  doubtless  borrowed  the  practice  of
human  sacrifice  from  the  peoples  in  their  immediate
neighbourhood.

As  for  offerings  to  the  dead,  which  indeed  are
forbidden  in  the  OT  as  relics  of  heathenism  (Dt.
2614),  but  the  practice  of  which  was  not  unknown
even  at  a  late  date  (Jer.  16?),  evidence  of  their  use
among  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians  is  of  frequent
occurrence  (see  A.  Jeremias,  Vorstellungen  vom  Leben
tiach  dem  Tode,  53).  The  Descent  of  Istar  closes  with
the  charge  of  the  priest  to  the  necromancer  :  '  if  she
vouchsafe  not  liberation  to  thee,  then  turn  thy  face
towards  her  and  pour  out  pure  water  with  precious
balsam  before  Tammuz  the  husband  of  her  youth.'
Asur-bani-pal  (Lehmann,  Samassumukin,  223)  says:
adi  kispi  ndk  me  ana  ekimme  Sarrani  aliktit  mahri  Sa
subtulu  arkus :  '  for  the  lament  of  the  pourer  out  of
water  on  behalf  of  the  spirits  of  my  ancestors,  the  kings,
I  gave  orders  because  it  had  been  abolished.'  In  the
burying-places  of  Sirghula  and  Elhibba  were  discovered
traces  of  offerings  to  the  dead  :  calcined  date  stones,  bones
of  oxen,  sheep,  birds.  Representations  of  sacrifices  to
the  dead  are  given  in  Perrot,  I.e.  361,  and  Menant,  PC
254.  The  dirge  as  a  Babylonian  institution  is  attested
also  by  Ezek.  8 14.  The  sacrifice  of  chastity,  mentioned
by  Herodotus  (ligg),  is  bluntly  described  in  the  Epistle
of  Jeremiah  (v.  43  [  =  Baruch  643]).  Even  in  theNimrod-
epos,  Istar  the  goddess  of  love  already  appears  (49:)
surrounded  by  a  whole  troop  of  attendants  :  tiptahhir
iltu  Istar  kizireti  samhdti  ii  harimdli:  'there  assembled
the  goddess  Istar,  the  servants,  harlots,  and  concubines.'
In  the  period  of  religious  decay  the  worship  by  such
hieroduli  became  naturalised  in  Jerusalem  (2  K.  23?).

The  subject  of  lustrations  stands  in  close  connection
with  that  of  sacrifice  in  the  Hebrew  Torah,  and  has  a

10.  Lustrations.  !^ge  flafce  in,the  Babyloni<™  rit^'-
I  he texts relating to it are very

difficult,  especially  because  they  are  often  written  in
pure  ideograms.  At  the  foundation  of  these  purifica
tions  lies  the  conception  that  an  unclean  substance  can
be  removed  by  a  clean,  and  a  clean  be  taken  up  by  an
unclean.  That  which  is  unclean  has  a  contagious
character,  that  which  is  clean  has  a  sympathetic  power.
So  4  R.  162  :  me  suntiti  ana  karpati  terma  ana  ribiti
tubukma  marustu  /a  emAki  innastaru  ribltu  litbal
nt  turn  naditum  si  kima  me  littabik  kispi  sa  ina  ru'ti
naditi  bullulu  ana  arkati  litfiru :  '  this  water  pour
thou  into  a  pot,  then  pour  out  in  the  street  ;  let  the
Street  carry  off  the  sickness  which  deprives  of  strength,
and  let  the  poison  poured  into  it  be  washed  away  like
the  water,  let  the  spell  which  has  united  itself  with  the
poison  poured  in  be  averted."  The  spell  (from  which
the  sickness  proceeds)  is  transferred  to  the  poison,  the
poison  is  absorbed  by  the  water,  the  water  is  carried  off
by  the  street  ;  thus  the  sufferer  has  a  threefold  guarantee
that  he  will  be  healed  of  his  sickness.

As  ingredients  were  employed  such  things  as  from
their  external  appearance  or  internal  qualities  were
fitted  to  be  symbols  of  purity.  Water  is  mentioned
with  special  frequency.  In  lustrations  libations  of
water  are  offered  to  Samas.  Marcluk  and  Ea  the  gcds
of  pure  exorcism  are  honoured  with  libations  and
sacrifices  in  the  house  of  sprinkling  (Mt  rimki ;  5  R.
50si).  In  the  temple  was  a  laver  (agubbu).  In  an
oath  formula  (Alaqlu.  34,  47)  occurs  this  expression :
ana  Hani  fa  same  me  anamdin  kima  anaku  ana  kdsunu
ulallukun  flsi  attitnu  iasi  ullilainni  :  'I  offer  water  to
the  gods  of  heaven.  As  I  perform  your  purification  for
you,  so  do  ye  cleanse  me. '  The  waters  of  the  Euphrates

4122


RITUAL


RITUAL


and  the  Tigris  were  regarded  as  having  special  efficacy
(Nimr.  Ep.  49 19;  Zinimern,  Surpu,  4466,  ib.  77);  we
have  this  interesting  passage  :  '  By  Marduk's  command
be  the  bowl  with  thy  guilt,  thy  ban,  taken  away  like  the
unclean  water  from  thy  body  and  thy  hands  and
swallowed  up  by  the  earth.'

I  Sicilies  water,  frequent  mention  is  made  of  honey  (disfu),
wine  (karanu),  milk  (v/W>»),  cream  (hiinetii)',  further,  bright
minerals  such  as  salt  (ta/'tu),  alum  (sikkatu),  alkali  (t  vhulu)  ;
and,  from  the  vegetable  kingdom,  corn  («/««/«),  the  wood  of
various  trees,  such  as  cedar  (frinu),  cypress  (bur&su\  palm  (gi'I-
simarru),  calamus  (kttnu  t&bu;  cp  3^0?  njj?),  r^-^-/>(onycha?)
all  sorts  of  incense  (kutrinnu,  rTOfJ).

As  a  clean  place — afru  ellu,  exactly  corresponding
to  the  lino  Dipa  of  Nu.  19g — the  wilderness  is  frequently
named.1  4  R.843:  mamit  ana  scri  atri  elli  litest,
'  let  the  ban  depart  to  the  wilderness,  the  clean  place '
(cp  4  R.  14s),  4  R.  0651  :  ana  pan  namaSsi-  fa  si'ri
pdniki  hikni,  '  to  the  beasts  of  the  wilderness  turn  thy
face.'  It  is  on  a  similar  conception  of  the  wilderness  as
the  clean  place  that  the  Israelite  custom  of  sending  the
goat  for  Azazel  into  the  wilderness  on  the  day  of  Atone
ment  appears  to  rest  (but  see  AZAZEL).  Of  the  other
goat  also  which  had  to  be  burnt,  Josephus  remarks
(Ant.  iii.  10.-;)  that  before  the  burning  it  had  to  be
brought  to  a  very  clean  place — {eh  Ka.da.pura.Tov  \uplov).

Purity — physical  cleanliness — is  postulated  in  every
sacrificial  act,  as  in  every  exercise  of  religion  (4  R.  23 16:
kdtd  elleti  ikkd  mahharka  :  '  with  pure  hands  he  sacrifices
before  thee. '  4  R.  19  no.  2  :  katika  misi  katika  -ubbib,
'  wash  thy  hand,  purify  thy  hand.'  Maqlu  10869  :  itturu
Sent  misd  katcl  si'rumma  sent  misa  kdtd,  '  the  morning
dawn  is  past,  I  have  washed  my  hands  ;  the  morning
glow  has  shone,  I  have  washed  my  hands  ' ).  All  who
were  sick  or  who  associated  with  those  who  were  unclean
became  themselves  unclean.  (4  R.  6264  :  Id  ella  Id
ellita  ul  itamar,  '  the  unclean  man,  the  unclean  woman,
shall  he  not  look  upon  ').

That  contact  with  the  dead  defiled  may  be  assumed  as  matter
of  course;  of  sexual  defilement  this  is  expressly  stated  by
Herodotus(l  198);  cp4  R.  26  no.  5  :  sinnishtsa  ki'ttasa  Iii  dctiiika.
ultamkir  an/a/tt  sa  katAsa.  iA  itiisa  ittaplas:  'to  a  woman
whose  hand  is  not  pure,  he  has  joined  himself;  at  a  maid-servant
whose  hand  is  not  washed,  he  has  looked.'

Foods  also  were  distinguished  as  clean  and  unclean.
In  the  prayer  addressed  to  the  sun-god  we  often  meet
with  such  expressions  as  these  :  minima  lu  it  ikulu  istu
ipsitsu  ulappitit  ukabbisu,  '  if  he  perchance  has  eaten,
drunken,  anointed  with,  touched,  or  trodden  on,  aught
that  was  unclean."  In  the  calendar  given  in  5  R.  4849
occur  food  prohibitions.  For  the  gth  of  lyyar  fish  is
forbidden,  for  the  3Oth  of  Ab  swine  flesh  (ser  sahi'),  for
the  27th  of  Tisri  swine  flesh,  beef  (s,"r  alpi],  for  the  loth
of  Marhesvan  dates,  for  the  25th  of  lyyar,  29th  of
Kisleu,  and  6th  of  Tebet  contact  with  women.

The  Babylonian  ritual  of  purification  urgently  needs
systematic  exhibition,  especially  on  account  of  its  close
connection  with  OT  views.  N'owack  (HA  275)  re
marks  with  truth  that  the  biblical  ideas  of  clean  and
unclean  had  their  rise  elsewhere  than  on  the  soil  of
Vahwism  (cp  Smend,  Rel.-gcsch.  334).  In  such  a  law
of  purification  as  that  which  we  find  in  Lev.  14  un
questionably  many  pre-Israelitic  representations  are
present.  The  cedar- wood  mentioned  in  Lev.  144  is  one
of  the  cleansing  media  of  the  Babylonian  ritual  also
(4  R.  1632  5  R.  51 15);  the  bird  which  in  Lev.  14  7  is
charged  with  carrying  off  the  leprosy  into  space  is  often
met  with  in  Babylonian  litanies  (4  R.  426  4  R.  592,
rev.  14  :  '  I  will  rend  asunder  my  wickedness,  let  the
bird  carry  it  away  up  to  the  sky').  The  sevenfold
sprinkling  of  the  person  to  be  cleansed  (Lev.  147)  recalls
such  passages  as  4  R.  26  32  :  adi  sibisu  suniur  ameli
luatu  pususma,  '  seven  times  anoint  the  body  of  that
man.'  The  besmearing  with  blood  on  the  tip  of  the
right  ear,  on  the  right  thumb,  on  the  great  toe  of  the

1  The  desert  is  perhaps  regarded  as  pure  because  it  receives
unpurified  and  dead  bodies  without  harm.

4123


right  foot,  prescribed  in  Lev.  14 14  has  its  analogies
in  many  magical  texts  (cp  ASA'TSl  52  :  abna  ella.
ina  kukani  /a  fnihi  ina  ubdnisu  sihirti  ina  Sumi'lisu
Sukun,  '  lay  the  shining  stone  on  the  lashes[?]  of  his
eyes,  on  his  little  finger,  on  his  left  side').  An
interesting  parallel  to  the  offering  of  purification  pre
scribed  for  the  poor,  which  follows  the  magical  operation
prescribed  in  Lev.  14  21,  occurs  in  K.  8380.  There  the
person  to  be  purified  is  bidden  take  hold  of  the  hands  of
the  sacrificer  who  pours  water  upon  the  hand  of  the
sufferer,  lays  incense  upon  the  dish,  and  solemnly  pre
pares  the  sacrificial  meal.  Then,  further,  we  read :
fumma  rubfi  M  tu  kil  issfiru  ana  makliite  ikalu  lurnma
muskinu  lu  libbi  lu'i  ikalu,  '  if  he  is  a  rich  man  he
shall  hand  over  a  dove  (?)  to  be  burned,  but  if  he  is
a  pauper  he  shall  cause  the  heart  of  a  sheep  to  be
burned.'

i. Points of  resemblance. — (a)  A large number of
expressions relating to  sacrifice  are  common  to  both
rituals — e.g. , kurbannu (;2np), zlbu
11.  Summary.  / ^ *  'i  L -\ j, 'Z /  , \

tabahu  (nan),  kapdru  (~\Bi).  (6)  In  bloody  sacrifices,
the  same  species  of  animals  are  employed  (ox,  sheep,
i  goat).  Animals  of  a  year  old  are  preferred,  sacrifices
!  of  a  more  advanced  age  are  rare.  Female  animals  are  in
the  one  case  used  for  purifications,  in  the  other  (Xu.  1027)
for  sin  offerings.  The  offering  of  defective  animals  was
in  the  one  case  allowed  for  purposes  of  augury,  in  the
other  for  free-will  offerings  (Lev.  2223).  Generally  speak
ing,  both  rituals  required  that  the  victim  should  be
without  blemish.  As  in  the  Babylonian  ritual  the
sattiikku — i.e. ,  the  regular  and  obligatory  sacrifices — lies
at  the  fciindation  of  the  worship,  so  also  in  P,  and  still
more  in  Ezekiel,  is  the  tdmid,  the  regular  daily  offering,
made  statutory  and  the  centre  of  the  whole  divine
service.  (c)  As  for  unbloody  sacrifices,  among  the
Babylonians  systematic  use  was  made  of  various
materials  of  which  the  employment  in  Israel  was  only
exceptional,  such  as  wine,  water,  oil.  The  incense
offering  (  kutrinnu]  was  unknown  to  early  Israel.  All
the  more  striking  is  the  frequent  and  important  place  it
takes  in  the  ritual  law  of  P  which  provides  a  special
altar  for  the  kttdreth.  Jeremiah  (620)  has  a  polemic
against  it  as  a  modern  and  outlandish  innovation.  The
unknown  author  of  Is.  65  3  names  Babylon  as  the  land
in  which  sacrifices  are  offered  in  gardens,  and  incense
offered  upon  bricks  (cp  Chors.  172  ;  Sarg.  Ann.  434  ;
4  R.  4953).  The  incense  offering  of  post-exilic  Israel
may  perhaps  have  been  borrowed  from  the  Babylonian
ritual.

ii.  Points  of  difference. — (a)  In  the  vegetable  offerings
of  the  Hebrew  Torah  only  those  products  figure  which
represent  a  right  of  private  ownership  acquired  by
labour  and  trouble.  Honey,  cream,  milk,  fruit  occur
frequently  as  Babylonian  offerings,  but  never  amongst
those  of  the  OT.  The  wine  libation  is  no  longer  an
independent  offering  in  P  (SACRIFICE,  §  35),  Ezekiel
prohibited  it  altogether— doubtless,  however,  only  on
account  of  abuses  connected  with  it  (i  S.  114).  (i>)  As
regards  bloody  sacrifices,  offerings  of  fish  and  game
were  excluded  from  the  Hebrew  ritual.  Both  are
inherently  the  property  of  Yahwe  and  thus  not  appro
priate  as  sacrificial  gifts.  The  fish  offering,  on  the
other  hand,  is  frequently  mentioned  in  Assyrian  and
late  Babylonian  inscriptions,  and  game  offerings  were  in
great  favour.  In  Tigl.  -pi  I.  l^ff-  we  read:  'herds  of
hinds,  stags,  chamois  (?),  wild  goats,  which  I  had  taken
in  hunting  in  large  numbers,  I  brought  together  like
sheep,  and  the  progeny  that  was  born  of  them  I  offered
as  my  heart  bade  me,  along  with  pure  sacrificial  lambs,
to  the  god  Asur.'

(c)  As  for  the  fundamental  idea  underlying  sacrifice,
the  Hebrew  sacrifice  in  its  older  form  gave  a  special
development  to  the  conception  of  a  sacral  communion
between  God  and  the  worshipper  as  represented  in  the

4124


RIVAL

act  of  offering  (cp  Wellh.  Heid.  114);  the  Babylonian
cultus,  on  the  other  hand,  affords  no  trace  of  this.  All
the  more  strongly  is  the  idea  of  the  purificatory  and
propitiatory  character  of  sacrifice  which  comes  into  the
foreground  in  P  and  Ezekiel  conspicuous  in  the  Baby
lonian  cultus.  Singular  to  say,  however,  that  shows  not
the  faintest  trace  of  dfdm  (SACRIFICE,  §  27),  hattdtk
(SACRIFICE,  §  28)  ;  we  may  assume  that  the  sin  and  the
trespass  offering  of  the  Hebrew  Torah,  although  all
that  we  know  of  their  technique  is  wholly  of  post-exilic
date,  were  entirely  of  Israelite  growth.  J.  J.

RIVAL  (!"ny),  i  S.  16  RV,  AV  ADVERSARY.

RIVER.  For  the  rivers  and  streams  mentioned  in
the  EV,  see,  generally,  GEOGRAPHY,  §  5  ;  PALESTINE,
§§  9,  13  ;  EGYPT,  §  6  ;  ASSYRIA,  §  4  ;  MOAB,  §  4/5
also  EUPHRATES,  JORDAN,  NILE,  etc.

The  regular  word  for  river  is  i.  niihar  (in3,  N.  Sem.,  Ar.
ttahr  is  probably  a  loan-word).  See  GEOGRAPHY,  §  5,  and  cp
AKAM-NAHARAIM.  Other  words  occasionally  so  rendered  are  :  —

2.  yfflr  (-|N<  ',  cp  CANAL,  GEOGRAPHY,  §  5  [ii.])  used  regu
larly  of  the  NILE  [g.v.]  or  of  its  arms,  once  of  a  mining-shaft
(Job  28  10),  and  in  Dan.  12  5-7  of  the  Tigris. The  last  mentioned
unrestricted  use  of  the  word  appears  again  in  later  Hebrew.

3.  ndhal  (Spu, N. Sem.)  corresponds  to  the  Ar.  ivady  or
torrent-valley;  see  GEOGRAPHY,  §  5[iv-]>  arul  CP  BROOK.

Two  terms  appear  to  designate  primarily  canals  or  conduits:  —

4.  yftbal  (^.V, A/flow, run), Jer.  17st (Ix/xa* [BNAQ]) of
which  'ilbal  (^[I]N  in  Dan.  8  2/1  6t  (see  ULAI)  seems  to  be  a
mere  phonetic  variation. Cp  the  form  yabal*  in  plu.  Is.  30  25
(EV  '  streams'),  444  (EV  '  watercourses').

5-  PfUg  (&S),  Ps-  46  4  [5]  65  9  [TO].  Cp  ficlaggoth.  Job  20  17
EV  '  river,'  in  Judg.  5  is/'.,  RV  '  watercourses'  (so  Moore  ;  cp,
however,  Bu.,  Now.).

For  the  sake  of  completeness  mention  may  here  be  made  of:  —

6.  'aphik  (p>sx),  see  BROOK.

7.  'fsed  (-\px),  Nu.  21  15,  AV  'stream';  on  the  meaning  see

ASHDOTH-PISGAH.

8.  ncizellvt  (nS'U!  lit-  '  flowing  '),  Ps.  78  16  Cant.  4  15,  'streams.

13. See EGYPT,


RIVER  OF EGYPT  (

BROOK  OF.

RIVER OF THE WILDERNESS

See  ARABAH,  BROOK  OF  THE.


RIZIA


i  Ch.  7  39  RV,  AV  REZIA.


RIZPAH  (nipyi  ;  §  71,  'pavement1  ;  pecd>«\[BAL),
daughter  of  AIAH  [<M'-],  Saul's  concubine,  2  S.  87
21  8  /.,  (pecb(bA,e  [A  in  v.  8]).  According  to  the  existing
tradition  '  Ishbosheth  '  was  angry  with  Abner  for  taking
possesssion  of  his  father's  concubine,  and  Abner
indignantly  repelled  the  accusation  (on  2  S.  38  see
NABAL).  Winckler,  however,  plausibly  holds  (G72ig6)
that  the  original  tradition  interpreted  this  fact  differently,
and  that  in  reality  Abner  had  dethroned  '  Ishbosheth,'
and  signified  his  assumption  of  Saul's  crown  by  taking
possession  of  Saul's  wife  (cp  12n  1622).  The  pathetic
story  of  Rizpah's  conduct  when  her  two  sons  ARMONI
(see  SAUL,  §  6)  and  MEPHIBOSHETH  [q.v.~\  and  the
five  sons  of  Michal  or  rather  MERAB  [q.v.]  had  been
put  to  death,  to  remove  the  blood-guiltiness  of  the  land,
is  also,  according  to  Winckler  ((7/2241),  unhistorical  ;
hesuspects  mythological  affinities,  and  compares  themyth
of  Niobe  (Preller,  Griech  Myth.Z^fx)}.  According  to
2  S.  21nJ£,  it  was  on  hearing  of  the  act  of  Rizpah,
that  David  sent  for  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan,
that  they  might  be  buried  together  in  the  sepulchre  of
Kish  at  Zela,  or  rather  Laish  (  =Shalishah).  See
ZELAH.

On  the  Rizpah-story  see  further  J\SP)  419^,  and  on  the
mode  of  execution  (J?pi  ,t)  see  HANGING,  2  b  ;  on  the  source  of
the  narrative,  see  SAMUEL  (BOOKS),  §§  i,ff.;  We.  CH  263  ;  Bu.
Ri.  Sa.  257  /;  T.  K.  C.

ROAST. See  COOKING,  §  6  ;  SACRIFICE,  §  6.

ROBE,  the  rendering  suggests  an  outer  garment  of
some  richness,  more  elaborate  and  elegant  than  an
ordinary  mantle.

4125


ROE

The  word  occurs  most  frequently  as  the  rendering  of  w/7/(see
MANTLE,  §  2  [6]),  occasionally,  too,  of  addereth,  Jon.  36,  and
(for  MT  fder)  Mi.  '1 8  (see  it.  5),  and  of  mahalasoth,  Is.  3  22  RV
(see  it.  7),  <TToA>/,  I,k.  1022  2046  Rev.  On  7 9  13 f.  (see  ib.  16),
and  \Ko.)i.\><;,  Mt.  27  28  (see  ib.  20).  It  is  applied  to  the  more
general  terms  beged  (i  K.  22  10  30  ||  2  Ch.  18929;  see  DRESS,
g  i  [i]),  and  eer0>/s  (Lk.  23  n,  RV  '  apparel '),  and  is  once  used  to
render  kuttoneth  (Is.  22  21),  on  which  see  TUNIC.  See  DRESS,
MANTLE,  and  cp  CLOTHING,  GARMENT.

ROBOAM  (Mt.  17),  RV  REHOBOAM.

ROCK. i.  "1-1 V,  sur. See  NAMES  OF  GOD,  §  15,

and  ZUR.  [Under  ZUK  thirty-five  places  are  cited  where  sur
seems  to  have  become  altogether  a  synonym  for  'God.'  In
twenty-one  of  these  ©  (from  a  dread  of  materialism?)  has  Seos,
in  four  (SotjSos,  in  four  (/>uAaf ;  icupios  (Is.  17  10),  jt'icaio?  (i  S.  2  2),
KTUTTTJS  (2  S.  22  32),  di'TiA.rjju.TrTiop  (Ps.  SO  27  [26])  each  occur  once  ;
and  in  Dt.  32  37  Hab.  1  12  (S  shows  a  different  text.]

2.  jta,  sda.  See  SELA.  [In  28.222  Ps.  183  [2],
31 4  [3]  42 10  [9],  sild  is  a  synomyn  of  stir,  and  a  divine
title.  Konig  (Stylistik,  100)  finds  st'ld  once  used  of  a
heathen  god,  but  iy'pp  (EV  'his  rock")  in  Is.  31 9,  if
correct,  is  parallel  to  vnt?  (EV  'his  princes').  See
Crit.  Bib.}

3-  ril'D,  made  (Judg.  626  RV),  cp  FORTRESS;  4.
EJ'cVn.  hallamis  (Job289),  CP  FLINT  ;  5.  fjs,  keph  (Ter.
429  Job 30 6) ;  cp  CEPHAS,  SIMON  PETER.

ROCKBADGER  (]D£:,  Lev.  11 5  RV"^-),  EV  CONEY.

ROD.  Of  the  following  words,  the  first  three  are
also  rendered  'staff'  ;  see  Is.  8(132  (the  staff  of  judg
ment);  Ps.  284  (oar,  II  n:ye'C,  see  STAFF,  i)  ;  Gen.  32 10
(Jacob's  staff);  for  a  very  special  sense  of  nan  and
oae',  see  SCEPTRE.

1.  HBD,  tiiatteh  (\XnBJ,  to  stretch  out)  :  of  the  staff  or  wand  of
the  traveller  (Gen.  38  18  25,  etc.),  shepherd  (Ex.  4  2,  etc.),  wonder
worker (Ex.  "912, etc.), warrior (18.142743), task-master
(Is.  9  3  [4],  etc.),  ruler  (Jer.  48  17,  etc.)  ;  an  implement  of  punish
ment  (Is.  3031),  used  also  in  beating  out  black  cummin  (kcsah,
Is.  2827). The  'rods'  in  Nu.  17  17  ff.  [17  iff.\  are  apparently
'shafts,'  i.e.,  arrows  or  spears. Matt  eh  is  also  rendered  'staft'
(the  staff  of  judgment),  Is.  8032. Cp  the  Ar.  naltiit,  Doughty,
Ar.  Des.  1  147,  379.

2.  a3!r,  scbet,  cp  Ass.  sa.ba.tu,  '  to  beat '  (whence  sibtu,  '  staff,
as  something  to  beat with,  but also 'massacre,' Frd. Del.)
(a)  As  an  implement of  punishment (Prov.  10  13  1824); the
bastinado  as  authorised  by  law  is  referred  to  in  Dt.  25  1-3,  and
(probably)  Dt.  22  18. See  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,  §  12. In  ©  the
verbs are ^acmyovv, TraiSfveu' ; pa/36tfeii> is used only of
threshing in agriculture, (b) As used for beating  cummin
(kammfm,  Is.  28  27). (c)  Of  the  shepherd's  staff,  or  club-stick
(Ar.  nabfit),  Ps.  23  4  Lev.  27  32  Ezek.  20  37. (if)  Of  the  ruler's
staff;  see  SCEPTRE, (f)  Of  a  weapon,  in  time  of  stress,  2  S.
23  21. Both  matteh  and  sebet  are  used  also  metaphorically  in
the  sense  of  '  tribe  '  (see  TKIBE).

3.  S?;:,  makkfl,  literally  a  shoot  or  wand  (Jer.  1  n  Gen.  30  37,
etc.); of  traveller's  staff, Gen.  32  n; of  the  shepherd's, i  S.
1740  43  Zech.  11  7  10  14  ;  once  perhaps  of  a  crutch,  see  STAFF,
3. Used  in  rhabdomancy,  Hos.  4  12  (see  DIVINATION,  §  2  [ij).

4.  n^n,  hSter,  used  only  metaphorically  (but  as  representing
its  literal  sense  of 'shoot.'  'scion'  or  '  twig '),  Is.  11  i  Prov.  143!.

5.  pa/3£o9, i  Cor.  42i Heb.  9  4 Rev.  227  Hi  125  ™  15, all,
except  i  Cor.  (I.e.)  and  Rev.  11  i,  influenced  by  OT.

The  'beating  with  rods'  (paj35i'£eii<)  in  Acts  16  22  2  Cor.
1125  is  the  Roman  punishment  inflicted  by  the  lictors  (EV
'  Serjeants,'  pa/36o{/xoc.  :  Acts  16  35  38).

RODANIM (D'rrn), iCh.l7 AVrae-, RV ; AV

DODANIM.

ROE.  The  rendering  of:  i.  slbi,  "2V  (Ar.  zaby,  Aram.

iatvd  [cp  TABITHA],  Ass.  sabt/fi;  Sopxds  (RNAL1)  in  EV  of
i  Ch.  128,  and  2  S.  2  18  ('  wild  roe,'  lit.  '  roe  that  is  in  the  field,'
cp  RVnig.),  and,  with  RV"'K-  'gazelle,'  in  EV  of  Cant.  2  7  (©
&VvdiUtnv)Q  and  17  (©  BopKiavi)  3  5  (<P  Svvdneo-iv)  8  14  ;  AV  only
in  Ecclus.  272o(RV  'gazelle');  also  the  rendering  of  the  fern,
form  scbiyyah,  rV3!£,  in  Cant.  4  5  7  3  [4]  RV  (RVmg.  'gazelle,'
not  in  AV).  When  mentioned  as  an  article  of  food  sebl  is
rendered  Eoebuck  (Dt.  121522  14s  1622  i  K.  4  23  [63],  AV  ;
RV  '  gazelle ').

2.  ya'aldh,  Fl^iF,  Prov.  5 19,  RV,  DOE  ;  cp  GOAT,  §  2.

3.  ''oplter,  1BJ?,  Cant.  4  5  7  3  [4],  AV  '  young  roe,'  RV  '  fawn,'
see  HAKT.

4.  yahmur, 'HBn'  (lit. '  red  '), Dt.  14  5 i  K.  4  23  [5  3] ; AV
FALLOW-DEER  03ou'/3aAos  [AJ,  in  Dt.];  B  in  Dt.,  and  BAL  in
Ki.  om.  ?).

4126


ROGELIM

Like  the  GAZELLE  and  HART,  the  roe  is  chiefly
alluded  to  for  its  swiftness,  and  partly  on  account  of
its  grace  and  beauty  is  a  favourite  image  of  female
charms.1  On  the  species  in  general  see  GOAT,  §  2,  and
note  that  the  name  yahmfir  (no.  4  above)  is  still  used
by  the  Arabs  for  the  true  Cervus  capreolus  (cp  Dr.
Deut.,  ad  loc.  and  see  ANTELOPE).  The  Capreolus
capra,  with  which  the  yahmfir  has  also  been  identified,
is  a  small  form  found  distributed  over  Euroj>e  and
W.  Asia,  and  still  occurs  in  Palestine  ;  specimens  of  it
were  seen  by  Tristram  on  Lebanon,  and  by  Conder
(Tent-Work,  91  [1887])  on  Mt.  Carmel.  The  fallow-
deer  (cp  AV),  Cervus  damn,  is  a  native  of  N.  Africa
and  of  the  countries  surrounding  the  Mediterranean,
whence  it  has  been  introduced  into  many  civilised
countries.  It  occurs  also  in  N.  Palestine,  but  is  said
to  be  scarce.  A  nearly  allied  species,  C.  mesopotamicus,
is  found  in  parts  of  W.  Persia.  A.  E.  s. — s.  A.  c.

ROGELIM  (D^l ;  Pa>reA[A]eiM  [BA],  pAKABeiN
[L])  ;  the  home  of  '  Barzillai  the  Gileadite'  (2  S.  1727
193i).  The  existence  of  such  a  place  is  questionable.
Probably  the  passages  relative  to  Barzillai  are  based  on
an  earlier  passage  respecting  MKI'HIHOSHETH  \_q.v.  §  2]
which  had  already  become  corrupt,  and  c'^JT  (Rogelim)
is  a  corruption  of  a'1?}  iva  Beth-gallim,  i.e.,  Beth-gilgal
(see  GAI.LIM  ;  SAUL,  §  4).

The  corruption  arose  from  a  scribe's  la/>sns  ocuti.  In  2  S.
1727_/C  the. true  text  probably  ran  (see  (&HAL  and  cp  YARN)

aas*?  'TOTO  niL-gy  c'3-ipp  trVrrrsa  "ij'^n '^pin. But

C'3*lpO  was  miswritten  Q'^pio ;  the  consequence  of  which  was
that  one  scribe  (followed  by  MT  and  <BHA)  wrote  C'SjISi  antl
another  (followed  by  ©L)  wrote  C'SplD,  instead  of  D'W"JV3p.
The  f\vfyica.v  of  ©HAL  represents  c'^MlpD  (CP  Jl'dg.  3  17  _/C).
2  S.  1031  was  harmonised,  as  to  the  name  of  Barzillai's  home,
with  2  S.  17  27  in  each  of  the  texts.  T.  K.  C.

ROHGAH  (ilinh  Kt.  ilSrn  Kr.),  a  name  in  a
genealogy  of  ASHER  (q.v.  §  4  ii. ).  In  i  Ch.  734  "  [Ahi]
and  Rohghah"  becomes  [&xi]oyiA  [B],  [AXIJOYP*  OfA
[A],  [Heif]  KAI  pAfOye  tL-]  ;  butrazfa/  Pesh.  om.
passage)  ;  cp  Am,  2.

ROIMUS  (poeiMoy  [B]),  i  Esd.  58  =  Ezra22,
REHUM,  i.

ROLL.  i.  rt^ja,  mfgill^h;  xapriov,  xaprijs,  Ke^aXis),
Jer.  3i>  2,  etc.  See  WRITING.

2- ir!*?>  Sillayon ,'  for  7113  'j 35 has TO^OV  jcatcov  /xeyaAou

[BXQ]  rofj.01'  vdprou  K.  ju.  [A]  ;  RV  '  tablet.'  A  tablet  of  wood  or
stone  is  probably  meant.  Is.  S  if.  For  the  gilyonim  of  Is.  3  23
cp  MIRROR,  end.

3.  13D,  s'fhar,  Ezra  6  i,  RV  'archive^.'  See  WRITING  and
cp  HISTORICAL  LITEKATUKK.

ROLLER  frinri;  MA\ArMA  [BAQF  ;  cp  Is.  16]),
Ezek.  302i,  one  of  the  few  references  to  surgical  practice
in  the  EV(see  MEDICINE).  Hit  tit  I  from  ^/entwine  (used
in  Kzek.  164  of  swaddling,  cp  derivative  in  Job  889)  is
properly  a  bandage  (cp  Toy's  rendering  in  SDOT)
rather  than  a  poultice  (as  <5).

ROMAMTI-EZER  (im  '•fiElpl,  §  23,  according  to
the  Chronicler  a  son  of  Heman  :  i  Ch.  20431
yioi  toA.  pOMGAxei  [B,  superscr.  co6  Ba-b],
e/v\9i  ezep,  poo/wee  Miezep  [A],  p&M&Giezep  [L],
romemthiezer  [Vg. ]),  but  see  HEMAN.

ROMANS (EPISTLE)

History  of  criticism  (p§  1-3). Conclusion  (§  19).
What Romans '  seems  to  be Author  (§§  20-22).

(§4)-  His  date  (§2-,).

Contents  (§  5)  Value  of  Work  (§  24).

Not  a  letter  (§§  6-8).  Defenders  of  authenticity  (§

Structure  (§§  0-13).  25).

Late  date  (§§  14-18).  Literature  (§  26).

Of  Epistles  to  the  Romans  Old-Christian  Literature
is  acquainted  with  two — that  of  Paul  and  that  of

'  If  these  animals  were  sacred  to  the  goddess  of  love  (see
GAZELLE),  another  plausible  origin  of  the  reference  might  be
sought  for.

4127


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

Ignatius.  As  regards  the  latter,  the  reader  is  referred
to  what  has  been  said  under  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERA
TURE  (§  28 /. ).  The  '  Kpistle  of  Paul  to  the  Romans'
has  come  down  to  us  from  antiquity  not  as  a  separate
work  but  as  one  of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  a
group — the  'epistles  of  Paul'  (fwtffTo\al  HavXov) — in
which  its  title  in  the  shortest  form,  followed  by  Ti.  WH
among  others  (after  NABC,  etc.),  is  '  to  Romans  '  (irpbs


From  the  beginning  (first  by  Marcion,  about  140  A.  D.  )
the work, as an integral part of the authoritative

'  ApOStle  ' (6 '  ATTOCTToXoj, TO dTTOffTO-


.  .

ditionalview  %vords  as  a  canomcal  writing,  was
r'  tacitly  recognised  as  the  work  of  the
apostle  Paul.  This  continued  without  a  break  till  1792.
Justin  took  no  notice  of  Paul  ;  Irenaeus  and  Tertullian
—  the  latter  with  a  scornful  '  ha;reticorum  apostolus  '
on  his  lips  —  laboured  to  raise  the  '  apostle  '  in  the
estimation  of  the  faithful  (cp  PAUL,  §  48)  ;  but  no  one
ever  thought  of  doubting  the  genuineness  of  the  letters
attributed  to  the  apostle  —  or  of  defending  it.  During
the  whole  of  that  period  the  question  did  not  so  much
as  exist.

There  is  indeed  a  very  old  discussion  —  perhaps  it  had
already  arisen  even in  the  second century  —  as  to  the
existence  of  the  epistle  in  two  forms,  a


2.  Theory  of


longer  and  a  shorter,  even  after  omis-


compositeness.  '.' >,'  "  ir VJt

sion  of  the  two  last  chapters  (15,  16).

Origen  taxes  Marcion  with  this  last  omission  ;  but  Origen's
older  contemporary  Tertullian  says  nothing  of  that,
though  he  several  times  reprimands  the  heretic  for  having
tampered  with  the  text  of  chaps.  1-14.  The  probability
is  that  Tertullian  had  no  acquaintance  with  chaps.  15/1
At  any  rate,  he  made  no  citation  from  them  in  his
polemic  against  Marcion  (adv.  Marc.  5 13-14),  although
in  its  course  he  leaves  none  of  the  previous  chapters
(1-14)  unreferred  to  and  speaks  of  one  expression —
'tribunal  Christi '  (14io) — as  written  'in  clausula '
[epistulrt:]  ;  cp  van  Manen,  Paulus,  2 101-118.

In  recent  times  the  tradition  of  the  text  as  regards
chaps.  15-16  has  frequently  come  under  discussion.
The  conclusion  is  not  only  that  the  chapters  in  question
were  unknown  to  Marcion  and  probably  also  to  other
ancient  witnesses,  including  Irenasus  and  Cyprian,  but
also  that  there  were  in  circulation  at  an  early  date  MSS.
in  which  the  doxology  Rom.  1625-27  either  occurred
alone  immediately  after  1423  or  was  entirely  wanting
(cp  Ti.  ;  Sanday-Headlam,  Comm.  (1895),  89/. ;  S.
Davidson,  Intr.W,  1894,  1120-123).

To  these  facts  were  added,  at  a  later  date,  considerations
based  on  the  contents  of  chaps.  15-1(5  tending  to  show  that  they
hardly  fitted  in  with  chaps.  1-14.  Semler  (Diss.  de  duplici
appendice  ef>.  Pauli  ad  Rom.  1767  ;  Paraphrases  ep.  ad
Romanes,  1769),  soon  afterwards  supported  by  Eichhorn  (/:>'«/.
in  das  NT),  held  chap.  15  f.  to  be  by  Paul  but  not  to  have
originally  belonged  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Baur(7'«'£.
Ztschr.,  1836,  Paulus,  1845,  cp  PaulusW,  1  [1866]  393-409),
followed,  in  the  main,  among  others  bv  Schwegler  (Nachap.
ZtitatU-r),Ze\\er(ACL\S.  Davidson  (Infract.  <3i,  1894, 1 123-131),
and  controverted  by  Kling  (St.Kr.,  1837),  l^6  Wette  and  others,
maintained  the  piece  to  be  spurious.  Since  Baur,  many  scholars
have  endeavoured  to  steer  a  middle  course  by  seeking — in  very
divergent  ways,  it  is  true — for  the  close  of  the  letter  supposed
lost,  in  chaps.  15,  16.  So  among  others,  Lucht  (Uebcr  die
I'cidcn  letztcn  Kaf>p.  dcs  Romerhricfs,  1871),  Volkmar  (Rotiier-
Mef,  1875),  Scholten  (Th.T,  1876),  Bruckner  (Reihenfoln,
iSgo),  Baljon  {Gesch.  v.  d.  Boeken  dcs  Nl's.  1901,  p.  95-6).  In
these  various  attempts  an  important  part  was  always  played  by
the  conjecture,  first  put  forth  by  Schtilz  (.9/.AV.,  1829),  that  in
Rom.  1(3 1-20  what  we  really  have  is  an  epistle  of  Paul  to  the
Ephesians.

In  this  direction — that  of  holding  more  Pauline
epistles  than  one  to  have  been  incorporated  with  each
other  or  amalgamated  together  to  form  the  canonical
epistle  to  the  Romans — the  way  had  already  been  led
(leaving  15,  16  out  of  account)  by  Heumann  in  1765.

He  argued,  according  to  Meyer  (AVww.i3)  [1859],  etc-),  f°r
the  _' strange  hypothesis'  that  a  new  Epistle  to  the  Romans
begins  at  chap.  12,  whilst  chap.  10  contains  two  postscripts  (ZT-.
1-24  and  25-27)  to  the  first.  Eichhorn  (Einl.M,  1827)  guessed
that  Paul  in  reading  over  the  epistle  after  it  had  been  written

4128


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

by  an  amanuensis  made  various  additions  with  his  own  hand.
C.  H.  Weisse  (P/ulos.  Dogm.  1855)  held  Rom.  9-11  to  be  a  later
insertion.  He  found  moreover  a  number  of  minor  insertions  in
the  Epistle,  and  finally  concluded  that  chaps.  9-10  +  ltii-i6,  2o/<,
probably  had  belonged  originally  to  an  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the
Ephesians  (cp  his  Beitr.  zur  Kritik  der  paul.  Br.  1867,  edited
by  Sulze).  Laurent  (Neutcst.  Studien,  1866)  supposed  Paul
to  have  written  with  his  own  hand  to  his  Epistle  to  the
Romans  a  number  of  notes  which  subsequently  by  accident
found  their  way  into  the  text.  Kenan  (St.  Pant)  was  of
opinion  that  Paul  had  published  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  in
several  forms—  t-.i--.,  chaps.  1-11  +  15;  chaps.  1-14  +  16  (part)  ;  out
of  these  forms  the  epistle  known  to  us  ultimately  grew.  Straat-
man  (Th.T,  1868,  38-57),  controverted  by  Rovers  (ib.  310-325),
came  to  the  conclusion  that  chaps.  12-14  do  not  fit  in  with  what
precedes  ;  that  these  chapters  along  with  chap.  10  belong  to  an
Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Ephesians;  and  that  the  close  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  properly  so  called,  is  found  in  chap.  15.
Spitta  (Zur  Gesch.  v.  Litt.  des  Urchristuntunts,  116-30,  1893)
contended,  and  at  a  later  date  (81-193,  Jy01)  reaffirmed,  though
with  some  modifications  of  minor  importance,  that  our  Epistle
to  the  Romans  is  the  result  of  a  fitting-together  of  two  epistles
written  by  Paul  at  separate  times,  one  before  and  one  after  his
visit  to  Rome,  and  addressed  to  the  Christians  there.  The  first
and  longer,  a  well  rounded  whole,  consisted  of  1  1-1136,  168-33,
1621-27  ;  the  second,  partly  worked  into  the  first,  has  not
reached  us  in  its  entirety  ;  we  recognise  with  certainty  only  the
portions  :  12i-lO7  and  16  1-20.

Pierson-Naber  (I'erisimilia,  1886),  controverted  by  Kuenen
(Th.T,  1886,  cp  van  Manen,  Byhlad  van  de  Hen'orming,  1887,
No.  4,  and  Bibl.  mod.  Theol.  1887),  point  to  a  number  of  joinings
and  sutures,  traces  of  manipulation  and  compilation,  in  the
traditional  text  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  with  a  view  to
proving  its  lact-ra  conditio.  Michelsen  (Th.T,  1886-7)  sought
to  distinguish  in  that  text  five  or  six  editions  o_f  Paul's  Epistle,
in  the  course  of  which  various  far-reaching  modifications  may  be
supposed  to  have  been  made.  Sulze  (Prot.  Kirckenztg.  1888,
no.  42)  pressed  still  further  for  the  recognition  of  additions  and
insertions.  Volter  repeated  his  '  Votum,  etc.'  (recorded  in  Th.  T,
1889)  in  a  separate  publication  (Die  Komposition  der  paulin.
Hauptbrivfc,\,  1890),  and  [sought  to  prove  again  that  our  canonical
Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  the  fruit  of  repeated  redaction  and
expansion  of  a  genuine  epistle  of  the  apostle.

Thus,  there  has  been  no  lack  of  effort  on  the  part  of
scholars  to  satisfy  themselves  and  each  other  of  the
composite  character  of  the  traditional  text.  Equally
decided,  however,  at  least  with  most  of  them,  is  the
opinion  that  nevertheless  the  text  is,  for  the  most  part,
and  in  the  main,  from  the  hand  of  Paul.  This  con
viction  was  for  a  long  time  tacitly  assumed,  rather  than
explicitly  expressed.  So  even  by  Baur,  Weisse,  and
Straatman,  whilst  it  was  brought  to  the  foreground,  with
friendly  yet  polemical  emphasis,  as  against  the  representa
tives  of  '  advanced  criticism,'  by  Spitta.  As  regards
the  others  mentioned  above,  most  hesitation  was  to  l>e
noticed  in  Pierson-Naber,  Michelsen,  and  Volter  ;  but
even  these,  one  and  all,  continued  to  speak  of  an  original
letter,  written  by  Paul  to  the  Romans.

Not  a  few  writers  continued  simply  to  maintain  the
prima  facie  character  of  the  canonical  epistle  or,  as
occasion  offered,  to  defend  it  in  their  notes  and  dis
cussions,  commentaries  and  introductions.

For  details,  pro  et  contra.,  and  some  guidance  through  the
extensive  literature,  the  student  may  consult  Holtzmann,  EinLW,
1892,  242-6;  Sanday-Headlam,  Comm.  1895,  pp.  85-98;  Zahn,
Einl.C^,  1900,  1  268-299  »  f°r  a  more  complete  though  not  always
accurate  account  of  the  doubts  regarding  the  unity  of  the  work,
Clemen,  Die  Einheitiichkeit  der  paulin.  Brief  e,  1894,  cp  Th.  T,
1895,  640^:

The  first  to  break  in  all  simplicity  with  the  axiom  of
the  genuineness  of  our  canonical  epistle  to  the  Romans,
p .. though  without saying so in so many
1 words,  was  E. Evanson. He  appended


, -
autnorsfcip

questioned.


Dissonance  Of  tke  four  generally
rgcejve(f Evangelists, 1792, some con


siderations  against  the  justice  of  the  received  view  which
regarded  Paul  as  author  of  the  epistle  —  considerations
based  upon  the  contents  themselves  and  a  comparison
between  them  and  Acts  (pp.  256-261).  Controverted
by  Priestley  and  others,  Evanson's  arguments  soon  fell
into  oblivion.

Sixty  years  afterwards  Bruno  Bauer  (Kritik  der
paulin.  Briefe,  1852,  847-76)  took  up  the  work  of
Evanson,  without,  so  far  as  appears,  being  acquainted
with  the  writings  of  that  scholar.  He  was  not  successful,
however,  in  gaining  a  hearing  —  not  at  least  until  after

4129


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

he  had  repeated  his  doubts  in  more  compendious  form
in  his  Chris/us  u.  die  Ccrsaren  (1877,  pp.  371-380).

Soon  afterwards  A.  D.  Loman  ( '  Qurcstiones  paulinas*
in  Th.  T,  1882)  developed  the  reasons  which  seemed  to
him  to  render  necessary  a  revision  of  the  criticism  of  the
epistles  of  Paul  which  was  then  current.  Without  going
into  details  as  regarded  Romans,  he  declared  all  the
epistles  to  be  the  productions  of  a  later  time.  Rud.
Steck  (Der  Galaterbrief  nach  seiner  Echtheit  untersucht,
nebst  kritischen  Be merkungen  zu  den paulinischen.  Haupt-
briefen,  1888)  came  to  the  same  conclusion  and  took
occasion  to  point  out  some  peculiarities  connected  with
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  The  same  investigation
was  more  fully  carried  out,  and  substantially  with  the
same  result,  by  W.  C.  van  Manen  (Paulus  II.  De  brief
aan  de  Konteitien,  1891  ;  cp  Handleidingvoorde  Oudfhr.
lettcrkunde,  1900,  ch.  3,  §§  10-19),  ar>d  Prof.  W.  H.
Smith  of  Tulane  University,  Louisiana,  has  recently
begun  independently  to  follow  the  same  path.  The
Outlook  (New  York)  of  Nov.  1900  contained  a  pre
liminary  article  by  him,  signed  '  Clericus  '  (a  misprint  for
'Criticus'),  and  in  the  Journal  of  Biblical  Literature,
1901,  a  series  of  articles  bearing  the  author's  own  name
was  begun — the  first  entitled  '  Address  and  Destination
of  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans,'  and  the  second
'  Unto  Romans  :  15  and  16.'

The  newer  criticism  has  made  itself  heard  and  goes
forward  on  its  path  in  spite  of  much  opposition  and
strife,  applauded  by  some,  rejected  by  many.  For  its
character  and  aims  see  PAUL,  §§  34-36,  and  cp  §§
37-48.  Its  desire  is  to  read  '  the  Epistle  of  Paul  to
the  Romans  '  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  canonical  books
without  any  fear  of  the  ban  that  lies  upon  aught  that
may  perchance  prove  to  be  contrary  to  tradition,  whether
ecclesiastical  or  scientific  ;  uninfluenced  by  any  ante
cedent  presumption  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  current
views  as  to  contents,  origin,  or  meaning  of  the  text  as  it
has  come  down  to  us,  however  highly  esteemed  be  the
quarter — Tubingen  or  any  other — from  which  they  have
reached  us  ;  free,  too,  from  the  dominion  of  any  con
viction,  received  by  faith  merely,  and  held  to  be  superior
to  any  test  of  examination,  as  to  the  epistle  being  in
dubitably  the  work  of  Paul  and  of  Paul  alone.  It  seeks
to  read  the  epistle  in  the  pure  light  of  history,  exactly
as  it  appears  after  repeated  examination  has  been  made
on  every  side,  as  it  at  last  presents  itself  to  the  student
who  really  wishes  to  take  knowledge  of  the  contents
with  as  little  prejudice  as  possible.

Coming  before  us,  as  it  does,  as  a  component  part  of
the  group  known  as  '  the  Epistles  of  Paul,'  handed  down

wvi  <  TJ  '  from  ancient  times,  Romans  appears
4.  Wnat  Kom.  indeed  to  be  ncjther  more  nor  less
seems  to  be.  than  an  epistle  of  the  ap0stle,  written
probably  at  Corinth  and  addressed  to  the  Christians  at
Rome,  whom  he  hopes  to  visit  ere  long  after  having  made
a  journey  to  Jerusalem.  Both  superscription  and  sub
scription,  as  well  as  tradition,  indicate  this,  even  if  we
leave  out  of  account  the  words  'in  Rome'  (tv  'Pti/ufl)  and
'  to  those  in  Rome'  (TO<S  iv  'Pti/ufl)  which  are  wanting  in
some  MSS  in  1?  15.  We  have  only,  in  connection  with
the  superscription  and  subscription,  to  look  at  the  manner
in  which  the  epistle  begins  and  ends  (li-is  15i4-lt>  27),
at  the  way  in  which  the  writer  throughout  addresses  his
readers  as  brethren  (113  ?M  812  10i  1125  12i  15  M/.
30  1617),  stirs  them  up,  admonishes  them  and  discusses
with  them,  as  persons  with  whom  he  stands  on  a  friendly
footing,  and  has  opened  a  correspondence  on  all  sorts
of  subjects.  The  appearance  of  Tertius  as  amanuensis
(1622)  need  cause  no  surprise,  it  being  assumed  that
perhaps  Paul  himself  may  not  have  been  very  ready  with
the  pen.

If  we  turn  for  a  little  from  a  consideration of  the

literary  form to  occupy  ourselves  more  with  the  con-

_  . tents,  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  is  the

5.  Contents.  conspicuousiv  methodical way  in  which

the  writer  has  set  forth  his  material. After  an  address

4130


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

and  benediction  (li-;),  an  introduction  (18-is),  and  a
statement  of  what  he  regards  as  the  essential  matter  as
regards  the  preaching  of  the  gospel — a  thing  not  to  be
ashamed  of  but  to  be  everywhere  preached  as  a  power
of  God  for  the  salvation  of  every  believer  whether  Jew
or  Greek  (li6_/I) — come  two  great  doctrinal  sections
followed  by  an  ethical  section.  The  first  doctrinal
section,  1 18-839,  's  devoted  to  the  elucidation  of  the  truth
that  the  gospel  is  the  means  for  the  salvation  of  Jews
and  Greeks,  Ixjcause  in  it  is  revealed  the  righteousness
of  God  from  faith  to  faith  ;  the  other,  9-11,  to  an  earnest
discussion  of  what  seems  to  be  a  complete  rejection  of
the  Jews  by  God  ;  the  third,  the  ethical  section  (12 1-
1613),  to  a  setting  forth  of  the  conduct  that  befits  the
Christian  both  towards  God  and  towards  man  in  general,
and  towards  the  weak  and  their  claims  in  particular.

In  substance  the  doctrine  is  as  follows.  Sin  has
alienated  all  men,  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike,  from  God,
so  that  neither  our  natural  knowledge  of  God  nor  the
law  is  able  to  help  us  ( 1 18-3  20).  A  new  way  of  salvation
is  opened  up,  '  God's  righteousness  has  been  manifested  '
(5iKaio<rvi>T)  6fou  irf<t>a.vfp<j)Ta<.)  for  all  men  without  dis
tinction,  by  faith  in  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  (821-31).  It
is  accordingly  of  no  importance  to  be  descended  from
Abraham  according  to  the  flesh  ;  Abraham  in  the  higher
sense  is  the  father  of  those  who  believe  ( 4 1.  Justified  by
faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  and  the  best  hopes  for
the  future  (5).  Let  no  one,  however,  suppose  that  the
doctrine  of  grace,  the  persuasion  that  we  are  under
grace,  not  under  the  law,  will  conduce  to  sin  or  bring
the  law  into  contempt.  Such  conclusions  can  and
must  be  peremptorily  set  aside  (6-7).  The  emancipated
life  of  the  Christian,  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death,
is  a  glorious  one  (8).  Israel,  the  ancient  people  of  the
promises  with  its  great  privileges,  appears  indeed  to  be
rejected,  yet  will  finally  be  gathered  in  (9-11).  The  life
of  Christians,  in  relation  to  God  and  man,  must  in  every
respect  give  evidence  of  complete  renewal  and  absolute
consecration  (12i-lf»i3).  Finally,  a  closing  word  as  to
the  apostle's  vocation  which  he  hopes  to  fulfil  in  Rome
also  ;  a  commendation  of  Phoebe,  greetings,  exhorta
tions,  benedictions,  and  an  ascription  of  praise  to  God
(15 14-1627).

If,  at  a  first  inspection,  the  work  presents  itself  to  us
as  an  epistle  written  by  Paul  to  the  Christians  at  Rome,

/.  -n-a:  ii-  on  closer  examination  it  becomes  cliffi-
6.  Difficulties :  ,.  .  ,,

cult  to  adhere  to  such  a  view. Diffi-
not  a  letter  • .  • •  . , _ .

ODeninz  and cuities  anse  on  every  Slde' To  begm
' . B  with  —  as regards the form that is

assumed.  We  are  acquainted  with  no
letters  of  antiquity  with  any  such  exordium  as  this  :
•  Paul,  bond-slave  of  Jesus  Christ,  called  an  apostle,
separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God  ...  to  all  those
who  are  in  Rome  .  .  .  grace  to  you  and  peace  from
God  our  father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ'  (IlaCXos
dovXos  'Irivov  Xpicrrov,  K\TJTOS  a7r6<TToXos  d<f>(i>picr/jL(vos
fis  fvayyf\iov  deov  .  .  .  irauiv  TO?S  o^fftv  ev  'Pw/j.ri

. . . X<*P'S VfJUV KO.I eip^"7? ttTTO OeOV TTCLTpOS T/yltWI' KO.I

Kvpiov  'Irfffov  XpicrToD)  ;  nor  with  any  conclusion  so
high-sounding  as  the  doxology  of  1625-27,  or  the  prayer
for  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  is  heard  in
1620  (or  1624).  In  every  other  case  the  epistles  of
antiquity  invariably  begin  plainly  and  simply.

Thus,  for  example,  in  the  collection  of  Oxyrhynchus  papyri
(1  181)  we  have  Eiprjvri  Taovvuxfrpei.  Kai  $iAb»>i  tvtyvvftv  .  .  .  and
at  the  close  ev  TrpdrTtre  ;  or  (1  1^3)  Xaipe'a?  Aioi'i'trioii  rioi  xvpt'on
d£<  Ai,'>u>  \aipfiv  and,  at  the  close,  (ppuicrlini  tre  ev\onai.

Greetings  are  indeed  conveyed  both  from  and  to
various  persons  ;  but  never  are  so  many  introduced  as
in  Rom.  163-16,  where  in  fact  at  the  end  all  the  churches
salute.  A  letter-writer  may,  at  the  outset,  seek  to  bring
himself  into  closer  relationship  with  his  reader  or  to  make
himself  known  more  exactly  ;  but  in  the  many  ex
amples  of  real  letters  that  have  come  down  to  us  from
ancient  times  we  nowhere  find  anything  even  approach
ing  the  amplitude  of  Rom.  1 2-6.  Nor  yet  does  any  real
letter,  whether  intended  for  few  or  for  many,  so  far  as

4131


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

we  are  in  a  position  to  judge,  ever  give  us  cause,  because
by  its length or  its  elaborate  method it resembles  a
treatise  arranged  in  orderly  sections,  to  regard  it  as  a
book,  as  our  canonical  epistle  to  the  Romans  does,  with
its  great  subdivisions  (already  taken  account  of  under  §  5).
We  may,  in  truth,  safely  dispense  with  further  com
parison  between  our  epistle  and  any  real  letters  from
_, . . ancient  times,  so  impossible  is  it  to  regard

it  as  an  actual  epistle,  to  whatever  date,
address.  ,  •

locality, or author we may assign it.

How  could  any  one  at  the  very  beginning  of  a  letter,  in
which,  too,  the  first  desire  he  writes  to  express  is  that
of  writing  solemnly,  earnestly,  directly,  allow  himself
to  expatiate,  as  this  writer  does,  in  such  a  parenthesis  ?
He  speaks  as  a  didactic  expounder  who,  for  the  most
part,  directly  and  as  concisely  as  possible,  deals  with  a
numl>er  of  disputed  points,  with  regard  to  which  the
reader  may  be  supposed  to  be  in  doubt  or  uncertainty
because  in  point  of  fact  they  have  gained  acceptance
within  certain  circles.  These  expositions  relate  to
nothing  more  or  less  than  such  points  as  the  relation
of  the  Pauline  Gospel  to  the  OT  (v.  2),  the  descent  of
the  Son  of  God  from  the  house  of  David  (v.  3),  the
evidence  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  derived  from  his
resurrection  (z'.  4),  the  origin  and  the  legitimacy  of  the
Pauline  preaching  (v.  5).  At  the  same  time  the  readers
(who  have  not  yet  been  named  and  are  first  addressed  in
•v.  7)  are  assured  that  they  belong  to  the  Gentiles  (Idvrj),
with  reference  to  whom  Paul  has  received  his  apostleship,
although,  according  to  1 10-13,  ne  has  never  as  yet  met
them  and  consequently  has  not  been  the  means  of  their
conversion.  All  this  within  a  single  parenthesis.  In
such  wise  no  letter  was  ever  begun.

The  writer  addresses  himself  to  '  all '  the  members  of  a
wide  circle — let  us  say  in  Rome  ;  even  if  the  words  '  in
Rome '  (ev  'Pupy)  and  '  those  who  are  in  Rome '  (TO??
^v  'PuiyUij,  1  7  15),  according  to  some  MS  authorities,  do
not  belong  to  the  original  text,  their  meaning  is  assured
by  the  superscription  '  to  Romans  '  (TT/OOS  'Pw/j.aiovs  ;  cp
1622-29)  and  by  the  unvarying  tradition  as  to  the  destina
tion  of  the  'epistle.'  The  Paul  whom  we  meet  here
addresses  his  discourse  to  a  wide  public,  and  utters  in  lofty
tones  such  words  as  these  :  '  O,  man,  whoever  thou  be
who  judgest,  etc.'  (uj  &vOpiaire  TTO.S  6  Kpivuv  K.T.\.,  2i),
'  O,  man,  who  judgest,  etc.'  (u>  HvOpuirt  6  Kpivuiv  K.T.\.,
23),  'If  thou  bearest  the  name  of  a  Jew,  etc.'  (ft  de  av
'lovSaios  firovo/jLa^r;  K.T.\.  ,  217),  'Nay  but,  O  man,
who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God?'  (w  dvOpuire,
fj.fi/ovvye  av  ris  el  6  dvTa.TTOKpii'bfj.fvos  rip  0ew,  9  20),  '  But
I  speak  to  you  that  are  Gentiles'  (V/MI>  5e  X^o;  TOIS
ZdvenLV,  11 13),  '  I  say  ...  to  every  man  that  is  among
you,  etc.1  (\eyii)  .  .  .  iravrl  r<p  OVTL  (v  vfuv  K.T.\.,
123),  'Whoart  thou  that  judgest  the  servant  of  another?"
(ffv  rt's  fl  6  Kpivdiv  d\\OTpiov  oiKfTTjif,  144),  '  But  thou,
why  dost  thou  judge  thy  brother?'  (crb  S(  T'I  Kpiveis  rbv
d5e\(p6v  crov,  14 10),  '  For  if  because  of  meat  thy  brother
is  grieved,  etc."  (et  yap  5ia  /3pui/ua  6  doeX^os  aov  Xi'irttrai
K.T.\.,  14  15),  etc.  Often  the  argument  proceeds  unin
terruptedly  for  a  long  time  without  any  indication  of  the
existence  of  a  definite  circle  of  persons  to  whom  it  is
addressed.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand  also,  the  abstract
argumentation  gives  place  to  direct  address,  the  word
of  admonition  or  exhortation  spoken  to  the  brethren
(d5e\<f>oi),  whether  named  or  unnamed — the  mention  of
whom,  however,  when  it  occurs,  is  a  purely  oratorical
form  and  no  natural  expression  of  the  existence  of  any
special  relation  between  the  writer  and  his  assumed
readers.  Of  the  passages  coming  within  the  scope  of
this  remark  (some  of  them,  already  noticed  in  §  4),  none
presents  any  peculiarity  in  this  respect.  On  the  con
trary,  every  one  of  them  produces  uniformly  the  same
impression  ;  in  this  manner  no  real  letter  is  ever  written.

The  last  chapter  has  nothing  of  the  character  of  a
postscript  to  a  letter  already  completed,  although  the
letter  appears  to  end  with  1530-33.  Strange,  in  the
sense  of  being  not  natural  but  artificial,  is  the  appearance

4132


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

in  1622  of  Tertius  ('  I,  Tertius,  who  write  the  epistle'  :
6  ypdifsas  TT)V  tiriaTO\-f)v),  the  secretary  of  Paul,  who,
however,  seems  himself  to  have  had  a  hand  in  the
letter,  since  we  find  him  saying  in  15 15,  'I  wrote  to
you'  (ZypaiJ/a.  vfj.iv).  Strange  especially  is  Tertius's
greeting  of  the  readers  in  his  own  name,  in  the  midst
of  the  greetings  which  Paul  seems  to  be  transmitting
through  him,  vv.  21  23.

The  contents  of  the  epistle,  largely  consisting  of
argument  and  discussions  on  doctrinal  theses,  differ  as
widely  as  possible  from  what  one  is  wont  to  expect  in  a
letter — so  widely  that  many  have  long  laboured  at  the
task  of  making  a  suitable  paraphrase  of  the  '  text-book  '
while  retaining  their  belief  in  its  epistolary  character.
(See,  for  example,  the  specimen  in  Holt/.mann,  JSiftl.^,
237;  cp  S.  Davidson,  Intr.  I3',  1 113-116. )

In  vain  do  we  make  the  attempt  in  some  degree  to
picture  to  ourselves  what  the  relation  was  between  the
supposed  author  and  his  readers.  Acts


8.  Supposed
readers.


supplies no  light. There  we  read  that


when  Paul  is  approaching  Rome  the
brethren  go  to  meet  him,  not  because  they  had  previously
had  a  letter  from  him,  but  because  they  have  heard
various  things  regarding  his  recent  fortunes  (28 14  /.).
As  for  the  Jews  of  the  metropolis,  they  have  heard
nothing  either  good  or  bad  concerning  him  (v.  21).
Tradition,  apart  from  the  NT,  has  equally  little  to  say
about  the  epistle,  whether  as  to  its  reception  or  as  to
what  impression  it  may  have  made.  The  document
itself  says  something,  but  only  what  adds  to  the  con
fusion.  The  truth  of  the  matter  seems  unattainable.
Scholars  lose  themselves  in  most  contradictory  con
jectures  as  to  the  occasion  and  purpose  of  the  writing.

See,  amongst  others,  Meyer-Weiss,  KOIIIIH.(^\  1899,  pp.  23-33  ;
Holtzmann,  £inl.&,  236-241  ;  Lipsius,  Co»i»i.(~i,  1892,  pp.  75-
76;  Sanday-Headlam,  Coiitin.,  1895,  chaps.  38-44;  van  Manen,
Pan/us,  2  20-23.

Who  the  supposed  readers  of  the  epistle  were  can
only  be  gathered  from  its  contents.  Rut  these  are  so
different  in  many  aspects  that  it  is  possible  to  say  with
equal  justice  that  the  church  in  Rome  was  Jewish-
Christian,  Gentile-Christian,  or  a  mixture  of  the  two.

Cp  the  various  conclusions  in  Meyer-Weiss,  19-22  ;  Holtz
mann,  232-236 ;  Lipsius,  70-73  ;  Steck,  Gal.  359-363  ;  Vcilter,
Th.  T,  1889,  pp.  270-272,  and  Kontp.  ?>f.  ;  van  Manen,  Paulus,
223-25).

It  may  be  added  here  that  the  work  is  throughout
addressed  to  '  brethren  '  of  all  kinds,  and  sometimes  it
seems  also  to  have  been  intended  for  Jews  and  Gentiles
who  stood  in  no  connection  whatever  with  Christianity.
Did  any  one  ever  give  to  a  particular  letter  an  aim  so
general,  without  realising  that  his  letter  had  ceased  to  be
a  letter  at  all  in  the  natural  meaning  of  the  word,
and  had  become  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  an
open  letter,  an  occasional  writing,  a  book?  Everything
leads  to  the  one  conclusion  ;  the  epistolary  form  is  not
real,  it  is  merely  assumed  ;  we  have  here  to  do,  not
with  an  actual  letter  of  Paul  to  the  Romans,  but  rather
with  a  treatise,  a  book,  that  with  the  outward  resem
blance  of  a  letter  is  nevertheless  something  quite
different.  Cp  EPISTOLARY  LITERATURE,  §  1-3  ;  OLD
CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,  §  i8/

The  same  conclusion  results  from  a  closer  examination

of  the  whole  as  it  lies  before  us,  whenever  we  direct  our

„. , , attention  to  the  connection  of  its  several

ma  01 parts The  reiative  unitv  Of  the  book

^'  there  is  no  reason  for  doubting.  It  is  not,
however,  unity  of  the  kind  we  are  accustomed  to  expect
in  a  book  written  after  more  or  less  careful  preparation,
in  accordance  with  a  more  or  less  carefully  considered
and  logically  developed  plan  ;  not  unity  such  as  is  the
outcome  of  a  free  elaboration  of  the  materials  after  these
have  been  more  or  less  diligently  collected,  and  fully
mastered  by  the  writer.  Least  of  all,  a  unity  such  as
we  look  for  in  a  letter,  whether  we  think  of  it  as  written
at  one  sitting  or  as  written  bit  by  bit  and  at  intervals.
It  is  rather  a  unity  of  such  a  sort  as  reminds  us  of  that

4133


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

of  a  synoptical  gospel,  with  regard  to  which  no  one
doubts  that  it  is  the  result  of  a  characteristic  process  of
redaction  and  remaniement,  curtailment,  correction,  and
supplementation  by  the  help  of  older  pieces  drawn  from
other  sources.  It  is  such  unity  as  we  find  in  reading
Acts,  although  we  do  not  hesitate  for  a  single  moment
to  realise  that  Lk.  has  made  an  often  very  palpable  use
of  written  sources.  There  is  unity  of  language  and  style,
of  thought,  of  feeling,  of  opinion  ;  but  at  the  same  time
there  are,  not  seldom,  great  diversities  in  all  these
respects.  The  result,  obviously,  of  the  unmistakable
circumstance  that  the  writer  of  the  canonical  epistle  has
made  continual  and  manifold  use  of  words,  forms  of
expression,  arguments,  derived  from  sources  known  to
him,  whether  retained  in  his  memory  or  lying  before
him  in  written  form.

Proof  of  the  justice  of  this  view  is  supplied  by  the

various  attempts  made  by  earlier  and  later  exegetes  to

p ..  expound the epistle as  a  completely

. ai  u 3 rouncjed  wnc,le  —  attempts  in  which  it

to  find  unitv.  . ,.

J is  found  necessary  at  every  turn  to  re

sort  to  the  assumption  of  all  sorts  of  conceivable  and
inconceivable  figures  and  forms  of  speech,  and  thus
conceal  the  existence  of  joints  and  sutures,  hiatuses,
and  unintelligible  transitions.  More  particularly  is  this
seen  in  the  scientific  line  taken  by  Heumann,  Semler,
Eichhorn,  Weisse,  Straatman,  Volter,  Michelsen,  Spitta,
and  so  many  others  (some  of  these  names  are  enumerated
in  §  2),  who  have  argued,  and  continue  to  argue,  for  the
view  that  more  than  one  epistle  of  Paul  lies  concealed
in  the  apparently  homogeneous  canonical  epistle,  or  for
the  view  that  there  have  been  interpolations,  more  or
less  numerous,  on  an  unusually  large  scale.  In  the  last
resort,  on  an  (as  far  as  possible)  unprejudiced  reading
of  the  text  which  has  come  down  to  us  —  a  reading  no
longer  under  the  dominion  of  a  foregone  conclusion,  to
be  maintained  at  all  hazards,  that  here  we  have  to  do
with  the  original  work  of  the  apostle  Paul,  sent  by  him
to  the  church  at  Rome  —  we  shall  find  that  what  lies
before  us  is  simply  a  writing  from  Christian  antiquity
presenting  itself  as  such  a  work,  which  we  must  try  to
interpret  as  best  we  can.

The  traces  of  additions  and  redactions  in  the  various
sections  and  subsections  of  the  epistle  are  innumerable.
„.  - It  would  be  superfluous,  even  if  space

.  Jaigns  allowed,  to  go  through  all  the  details  on


11.
compositeness.


examples  may  suffice_


Compared  with  the  first  part  (1  18-839),  ^le  second
(9-11),  although  now  an  integral  portion  of  the  work,
betrays  tokens  of  an  originally  different  source.  There
is  no  inherent  connection  between  them,  although  this
can,  if  desired,  be  sought  in  the  desire  to  set  forth  a
wholly  new  doctrinal  subject  in  a  wholly  new  manner.
In  the  second  we  no  longer  hear  of  the  doctrine  of
justification  by  faith  ;  the  treatment  of  the  subject
enunciated  in  176/1  is  no  longer  continued.  What
takes  its  place  is  something  quite  different  and  wholly
unconnected  with  it  ;  a  discussion,  namely,  of  the
doctrinal  question,  '  Why  is  it  that  the  Gentiles  are
admitted  and  Israel  excluded  from  salvation?'  This
discussion  is  directed  not,  like  the  contents  of  the  first
part,  ostensibly  to  Christian  Jews,  but  to  Gentiles.
There  is  nothing  in  the  first  part  that  anywhere  suggests
any  such  affection  for  Israel  as  is  everywhere  apparent
throughout  the  second  part,  and  especially  in  9  1-3  10  1
11  1  25-36  ;  nothing  that  comes  into  comparison  with
the  solemn  declaration  of  9i  in  which  the  writer  bears
witness  to  his  great  sorrow  and  unceasing  pain  of  heart
concerning  Israel.  This  exordium  points  to  a  quite
different  situation,  in  which  '  Paul  '  requires  to  be
cleared  of  the  reproach  of  not  concerning  himself  about
God's  ancient  people.  Hence  the  wish  expressed  by
him  that  he  might  become  anathema  from  Christ  (dirt>
rov  X/HcrToO)  for  his  brethren's  sake,  his  kinsmen  accord
ing  to  the  flesh  (ffvyyeveis  Kara  crdpna,  9  3).  Hence  his
zeal  here  and  in  Hi  to  declare  himself  an  Israelite,  of


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

thj  seed  of  Abraham,  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  Hence
also  the  summing-up  of  the  ancient  privilege  of  Israel,
'  whose  is  the  adoption  and  the  glory  and  the  covenants  '
(94/),  in  comparison  with  which  the  simple  statement
that  they  were  entrusted  with  the  oracles  of  God  (3  2)
sinks  into  insignificance.  In  the  first  part  a  quite
different  tone  is  assumed  towards  the  Jew  ('loi'Saios,
217),  with  whom  the  speaker  appears  to  have  nothing
in  common.  There  we  find  Jew  and  Greek  placed
exactly  on  an  equality  (Ii6  2g  f.  89)  ;  the  idea  of  the
Jews  that  as  such  they  could  have  any  advantage  over
the  heathen  is  in  set  terms  controverted  (2  11-821),  and
it  is  declared  that  descent  from  Abraham,  according  to
the  flesh,  is  of  no  value  (4).  Here,  on  the  other  hand
(9-11),  we  have  earnest  discussion  of  the  question  how
it  is  possible  to  reconcile  the  actual  position  of  Israel
in  comparison  with  the  Gentile  world  with  the  divine
purpose  and  the  promise  made  to  the  fathers.  Here,
too,  a  high-pitched  acknowledgment  of  the  privileges
of  Israel,  the  one  good  olive-tree,  the  stem  upon  which
the  wild  olive  branches  —  the  believing  Gentiles  —  are
grafted  ;  Israel  in  the  end  is  certain  to  be  wholly  saved,
being,  as  touching  the  election,  beloved  for  the  fathers'
sake  (»cara  TT\V  (K\<y^r\v  dycurriToi  dia  roi's  Trar^pas,  $$f.
31  102  lly  17  f.  26  28).  In  the  first  part,  a  sharp  repudia
tion  of  the  law  in  respect  of  its  powerlessness  to  work
anything  that  is  good  (820/1  27  4  15  OM  7s/.,  etc.)  ;  in
the  second  a  holding  up  of  the  giving  of  the  law  (co/no-
dfffia)  as  a  precious  gift  (84).  In  the  first  part  the
earnest  claim  to  justification  by  faith  (5  1),  to  being  under
grace  (614),  to  a  walk  in  newness  of  spirit  (76)  ;  in  the
second  the  assurance  that  '  if  thou  shall  confess  with  thy
mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  shall  believe  in  thy  heart
that  God  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shall  be  saved  '


Observe,  again,  the  difference  in  respect  of  language.
The  words  'just,'  'justify,'  'be  justified'  (dinaios,
SIKCUOUV,  diKaioOadai),  nowhere  occur  in  chaps.  9-11,  nor
yet  the  expression  '  both  Jews  and  Greeks  '  ('loi'S.  re  Kal
E\\.  ),  except  in  10  12  where  apparently  it  is  not  original,
or  at  least  has  no  meaning  after  the  words  '  for  there  is
no  distinction  '  (ov  yap  ZCFTIV  diacrroXr}).  The  words
1  Israelite'  and  '  Israel'  are  not  met  with  in  1-8,  whilst
in  9-11  the  first  occurs  thrice  and  the  second  eleven
times.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  '  Jew  '  nine  times
in  1-3,  but  only  twice  in  9-11,  and  in  both  cases  its
occurrence  seems  probably  due  to  the  redactor.  The
'  adoption'  (vlo0e<ria.),  which,  according  to  815  (cp  Gal.
4  5  Eph.  1  5)  is  a  privilege  of  all  Christians,  whether  Jews
or  Greeks,  recurs  in  94  in  connection  with  a  supposed
predestination  of  Israel  as  the  son  of  God  ;  the  word  is
the  same  but  it  sounds  quite  differently.  In  1-8  Christ
is  seven  times  called  the  son  of  God,  and  in  9-11  never.
On  the  other  hand,  he  is  probably  called  God  in  9s  but
nowhere  in  1-8.  Whilst  in  1-8  we  find  no  other  form
of  the  verb  'say'  (tpelv)  than  'shall  we  say'  (epoi>fj.tv},
in  9  197^  II  19  we  also  have  'thou  \\ilt  say'  (epeis)  and
'shall  the  thing  say?'  (#pe?).  If  the  occurrence  of  the
expression  '  what  then  shall  we  say  '  (rl  ovv  epovfj.fv)  in
91430,  as  well  as  in  4i  61  7  7  831,  points  to  oneness
of  language,  it  has  nevertheless  to  be  noted  that  in  1-8
it  never,  as  in  930,  is  followed  by  a  question,  but  always
by  a  categorical  answer.  A  speaker  who  says  that  Israel
'  following  after  a  law  of  righteousness  did  not  arrive  at
[that]  law'  (SiuKtiiv  vf>ij.ov  diKa.iocrvi'ris  fi'y  VO/JLOV  OVK
£<f>da.crtv,  931)  understands  by  'law'  (VJ/JLOS)  something
quite  different,  and  at  the  same  time  is  following  a  quite
different  use  of  language,  from  one  who  declares  that
the  Jew  sins  '  under  law  '  (twites  or  iv  i>6uy)  ;  shall  be
judged  '  by  law  '  (5id  »5/j.ov,  2  12)  ;  doeth  not  '  the  things
of  the  law  '  (TO,  rou  vjfj.o\>,  214),  is  not  justified  '  by  works
of  law'  (*'|  t-pywv  v6fj.ov),  comes  to  knowledge  of  sin
'through  law'  (Sid.  i>6fj.ov,  820)  and  lives  'under  law'
(virb  vbfj.ot>,  614).  Only  the  latter  is  thinking  of  the
Mosaic  law,  about  which  the  former  would  not  speak
so  depreciatingly.  In  chaps.  9-11,  as  Steck  (Gal.  362)

4I3S


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

justly  remarks,  a  much  more  superficial  use  is  made  of
the  proof  from  scripture,  '  and  the  whole  representation
and  language  is  somewhat  less  delicate,'

The  third  part  of  the  epistle  (12i-15i3)  seems  to  be
closely  connected  with  that  which  precedes.  Observe
12  Third  lhe  ' tnen  (°^*  :  12 1),  and  notice  how  the
writer  harks  back  to  9-11  in  his  declaration
(158)  that  Christ  has  been  made  a  minister
of  the  circumcision  with  reference  to  the  promise  of
God,  and  to  1  i6/I  or  118-839  in  the  same  declaration
supplemented  with  the  statement  (log)  that  Christ
appeared  also  that  the  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for
his  mercy.  But  the  connection  when  more  closely
examined  will  be  found  to  lie  only  mechanical.  There
is  no  real  inward  connection.  No  one  expects  a
hortatory  passage  such  as  this  after  1133-36.  Nor  yet,
where  some  would  fain  place  it,  after  ch.  8  or  ch.  6.
The  exhortations  and  instructions  given  in  12i-15i3,
however  we  put  the  different  parts  together,  stand  in  no
relation  to  the  preceding  argument ;  the  same  holds
good  of  the  exordium  12i^  Though  usual,  it  is  not
correct  to  say  that  Paul  first  develops  his  doctrinal
system  1 18-1136,  and  then  his  ethical  in  12i-15i3  ;  or
even  to  say  in  the  modified  form  of  the  statement  that
he  follows  up  the  doctrinal  with  an  ethical  section.
Exhortations  are  not  wanting  in  the  first  part,  nor
doctrines  in  the  last.  The  truth  is  that  in  1 18-1136
the  doctrinal  element  is  prominent,  just  as  the  horta
tory  is  in  12 1-15 13.  In  other  words,  the  two  pieces
are  of  different  character.  They  betray  difference  of
origin.  12i-15i3  is,  originally,  not  a  completion  of
1-11,  thought  out  and  committed  to  writing  by  the
same  person,  but  rather — at  least  substantially — an
independent  composition,  perhaps,  it  may  be,  as  some
have  conjectured,  brought  hither  from  another  context.
It  has  more  points  of  agreement  with  certain  portions  of
the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  than  with  Rom.  1-11.
Compare,  in  general,  the  manner  of  writing  and  the
nature  of  the  subjects  treated.

In  detail,  compare  such  expressions  as  'beseech  .  .  .  by'
(TrapaxaAu)  .  .  .  6ia),  1-  i,  with  I  Cor.  1 10  2  Cor.  10  i,  whereas
'  beseech  '  (irapa<coAeu'),  however  Pauline,  is  found  neither  in
Rom.  1-11  nor  in  Gal.  :  the  'mercies'  (oiKTipnoC)  of  God,  12  i,
with  the  '  mercies '  (oiKTip;iOi)  of  the  Father  in  2  Cor.  1  3,  but
nowhere  named  in  Rom.  1-11  ;  'this  age'  (o  aiiav  o5ro?)  122,
with  i  Cor.  1  20  268  3  is  2  Cor.  44,  but  not  found  in  Rom.  1-11  ;
the  representation  that  the  Christian  can  still  be  renewed  by  the
renewing  of  the  mind  (avaxaiixaa-tf  rov  fpos  :  122)  with  the
assurance  that  though  the  outer  man  perish,  '  that  which  is
within  us  is  renewed  day  by  day'  (6  eo-o>  lijjucui'  [drflpuirros]
a.va.Kau'ovTa.1  ^/u-epf  Kal  r)fj.fpq,  2  Cor.  4  16)  whereas  Rom.  1-11
knows  nothing  of  this  'renewal,'  and  could  hardly  have  intro
duced  it  alongside  of  its  doctrine  that  the  Christian  is  dead  so
far  as  sin  is  concerned  (t>  2)  so  that  he  now  stands  in  the  service
of  newness  of  spirit  (7  6).  Compare,  again,  the  assurance  that
God  gives  to  each  a  measure  of  faith  (exaa-ni)  fj.frpoi'  TriVrecos  :
123)  with  'only,  as  the  Lord  has  supplied  to  each  '(el  /JITJ  fxaima
tos  fjit^fpiKef,  i  Cor.  714),  'according  to  the  measure  of  the
province  (RVmg.,  or  limit)  which  God  apportioned  to  us  as  a
measure"  (icaTa  TO  fierpov  TOV  KO.VQVO<;,  ov  efifpurfv  rjjKCf  o  flebj
nerpov  '.  2  Cor.  10 13),  and  the  declaration  that  not  every  one
receives  faith  through  the  spirit  (i  Cor.  129),  as  also  that  there
is  a  still  more  excellent  way  than  that  implied  in  the  spiritual
gifts  of  which  faith  is  one, — namely,  love  (i  Cor.  12  31), — whereas
not  only  are  the  words  'apportion'  (/otepi'feu')  and  'measure'
(li(Tpoi')  unknown  to  Rom.  1-11,  but  so  also  is  'love'  (ayairrj)  in
the  sense  of  love  to  God  and  one's  neighbour,  and  (equally  so)
a  faith  (Trams)  which  is  not  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  a  new
life,  in  comparison  with  which  love  is  not  required  simply
because  that  and  everything  else  that  is  needed  is  already
possessed  where  faith  is  ;  the  distinction  between  various
spiritual  gifts  (12  6-8)compared  with  i  Cor.  124-11  and  28-30;  the
whole  attitude  towards  self-exaltation  (12  3-8)  compared  with
i  Cor.  4eyC  and  1212-30;  the  exhortations  to  the  practice  of
love,  zeal,  and  purity  (129-21  and  188-14)  compared  with  i  Cor.
13;  141-2039  1^58  5  ii  Cig-ii  16-20,  where,  amongst  other
things,  the  occurrence  of  '  cleave '  (icoAAacrflai)  in  Rom.  12  9  and
i  Cor.  6  i6_/T,  though  nowhere  else  to  be  found  in  the  Pauline
epistles,  is  to  be  noticed;  the  occurrence  also  of  'taking
thought  for  things  honourable  in  the  sight  of  all  men  '  (irpoi-oov-
juei'oi  KaAa  ti'iuiriov  TrdfTtav  avSpunnov  '.  Rom.  1'J  17)  as  compared
with  the  only  parallel  expression  'for  we  take  thought  for
things  honourable,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  also  in
the  sight  of  men  '  (jrporoov/itei'  vap  KaAa  ov  /uidi'or  evutirioi'  Kvpiov
aAAa  KOI  ii'umiov  arOptamar  '.  2  Cor.  821  ;  cp  Prov.  04);  fxf>ei\eiv
13s  used  several  times  also  in  i  and  2  Cor.  but  never  in  Rom.
1-11  ;  the  special  exhortations  to  subjection  to  authority  and  to

4136


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

due  discharge  of  one's  various  obligations  (13  1-7)  indicative  of  a
peaceful  environment  and  hardly  in  keeping  with  the  persecu
tions  suggested  by  the  closing  verses  of  chap.  8,  but  on  the
•other  hand  quite  in  accord  with  the  special  admonitions  and
exhortations  of  i  Cor.  1  loff.  i>  <>  i-n  11  2-15,  etc.  ;  what  is  said
in  chap.  14  regarding  the  use  of  certain  meats,  the  observance  of
sacred  days,  and  the  respect  for  the  weak,  with  regard  to  which
no  word  is  found  in  1-1),  but  which  reminds  us  throughout  of
i  Cor.  8-10,  not  only  by  reason  of  the  similarity  of  such  expres
sions  as  'eat'  (futiift-v),  'food'  (ftpiafia),  'cause  to  stumble"
(<Ticai'6aA(.'£eti'),  'a  stumbling-block  to  the  brother'  (7rpoaxoju.jiia
Tt3  a6eA<£>u>),  'not  to  eat  flesh'  (/u.»)  <f>ayeiv  Kpe'a),  etc.,  but  also
very  specially  by  reason  of  the  agreement  in  the  central  thought
that  to  the  fully  developed  Christian  all  things  are  allowed,  but
that  he  must  give  no  offence  to  the  weak  brother  and  therefore
ought  rather  to  act  as  if  he  were  still  in  bondage  to  ancient
customs  and  usages.

The  conclusion  of  the  canonical  epistle  15 14-!  6  27
must  be  accepted,  as  such,  notwithstanding  the  objec-
_,  IK/-  ti°ns  urged  by  Semler,  and  those  who
13.  Unap.  15/.  follow  him|  in  rejecting  chaps.  15  1(3  as
not  original  constituents  of  the  writing  sent  by  Paul  to
the  Romans.  It  nevertheless  shows  many  evidences  of
compilation  by  the  aid  of  various  pieces  at  the  redactor's
disposal,  a  process  to  which  reference  has  already  so
often  been  made  that  it  seems  superfluous  to  dwell  long
upon  it  now.  Let  the  reader  but  observe  the  discon
nected  character  of  the  five  pieces  of  which  ch.  16  con
sists,  each  of  which  either  has  no  relation  to  the
preceding,  or  is  in  contradiction  with  it.  The  recom
mendation  of  Phoebe  v.  i/i  hangs  in  the  air.  The
greetings  of  w.  3-16  presuppose  a  previous  residence
of  Paul  at  Rome  and  a  circle  of  acquaintances  formed
there,  notwithstanding  the  positive  statements  on  the
subject  in  18-13  and  1522/i  The  warning  against  false
teachers  in  vv.  17-20  finds  no  point  of  attachment  in
what  precedes.  The  greetings  of  others  in  vv.  21-23
raise  unanswered  questions,  not  the  least  of  these  being
those  which  arise  in  view  of  the  existence  of  the  already
complete  list  in  3-16,  and  the  mention  of  all  the  churches
at  the  close.  The  detached  character  of  the  doxology
in  vv.  25-27  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  many  MSS  it
occurs  after  1423.

The  examples  cited,  along  with  others  which  might

be adduced (cp  van Manen, Paulus,  234-101), show

.  , conclusively  that  the  'epistle'  has  been

JJV 5y "- compiled with  the  help  of  previously

« 7 1  *iT 1"  existing documents. There are also
tional  theory.

J  other  reasons,  however,  against  ac
cepting  the  voice  of  tradition  regarding  the  origin  of  the
work.  Xow  and  then  the  contents  themselves  reveal
quite  clearly  that  they  cannot  be  from  Paul  (ofr.  64  A.  n. ),
so  that  we  have  no  need  to  dwell  upon  the  improb
ability  of  supposing  that  Paul,  a  tentmaker  by  calling
and  personally  unknown  to  the  Christians  at  Rome,
addressed  to  that  place  an  epistle  so  broad  and  so  deep,
written  in  so  exalted  and  authoritative  a  tone  ;  nor
upon  the  question  as  to  how  it  was  possible  that  such
an  epistle  should,  so  far  as  appears,  have  failed  to  make
the  slightest  impression,  whether  good  or  bad,  at  the
time,  and  was  doomed  to  lie  for  more  than  half  a  century
buried  in  the  archives  of  the  Christian  church  at  Rome
in  impenetrable  obscurity,  until  suddenly  it  re-emerged
to  light,  honoured  and  quoted  as  an  authority  by — the
gnostics  !  Kvanson  long  ago  (1792)  pointed  to  the  fact
that  the  church  addressed  in  it  was  apparently  of  long
standing,  and  to  the  silent  assumption  in  lli2i52i/~.
that  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  70  A.n.  was  a
thing  of  the  past.  As  regards  the  first  of  these  points,
he  compared  what  is  said  in  Acts  and  called  attention
to  the  fact  that  nothing  is  there  said  of  any  project  of
Paul's  to  visit  Rome  before  he  had  been  compelled  by
Festus  to  make  appeal  to  the  emperor  (2f>  10-12),  nor
yet  anything  about  an  Epistle  to  the  Romans  or  about
any  Christian  community  of  any  kind  met  there  by  the
apostle  (2811-31).  Yet  even  if  we  leave  Acts  out  of
account  as  being  incomplete  and  not  in  all  respects
wholly  trustworthy,  what  the  epistle  itself  says  and
assumes  with  regard  to  the  Christian  church  at  Rome  is
assuredly  a  good  deal  more  than,  in  all  probability,

4137


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

could  have  been  alleged  about  it  at  so  early  a  date  as
59  A.  D. ,  tfie  year  in  which  it  is  usually  held  to  have
been  written  by  Paul.

The  faith  of  the  Roman  Church  is  supposed  to  be

known '  throughout the  whole  world '  ; and Paul is

15.  Reflection  filled  with  **'"•_ to  make  its  acquaint-

of  latPr  ae-P ance ln Order that so  he ma>' be  re-
:a&e' freshed  (18  12). The  faith  of  both  rests
on  the  same  foundation. The  Christians  of  Rome  are
Pauline  Christians.

Like  him  they  are  justified  by  faith  (5i);.  reconciled  with
God  (5  u)  ;  free  from  the  dominion  of  sin  and  now  in  the  unin
terrupted  service  of  God  (8  18-22) ;  no  longer  under  the  law  but
under  grace,  so  that  they  now  live  in  newnos  of  spirit  and  not
in  oldness  of  the  letter  (6157  6).  They  are  well  acquainted  with
Paulinism.  They  know  it  as  a  definite  form  of  doctrine  and
have  fully  and  freely  given  their  assent  to  it—'  Ye  were  servants
of  sin  but  ye  became  obedient  from  the  heart  to  that  form  of
teaching  whereunto  ye  were  delivered  '  (ijre  SoOAoi  rf/s  a^apTta?,
vm]KOv<TaTe  8f  ex  Kap6i'as  ets  oi'  TrapeSoSr/Tf  TVTTOV  SiSa^r;?  :  tj  17).
It  is  possible  to  speak  to  them  without  any  fear  of  misunder
standing,  about  'faith'  (TTUTTIS)  and  'grace'  (^opis),  'righteous
ness'  (6nccuocrui'T))  and  Move"  (ayaTrr)),  'believing'  (iricrreveti/)
and  '  being  justified  '  (SucaiovcrSai),  '  being  justified  by  faith  '
(&LKatov<r9ai  ex  Trt'oTetos)  and  '  by  works  of  law  '(e'£  epyiar  I'O^iou),
'sinning  without  law'  (i/j.apTavei.v  arofxcus)  and  'under  law'
(eri'O/xujs  or  (v  vofiw),  '  being  delivered  up '  (TrapafioSrji'ai)  and
'  dying  for  men  '  (anoOoLveiv  virep  ai'Opuimav),  '  redemption  '
(aTroAvTpiotris))  '  being  baptized  into  Christ '  (fia.imadi\va.i.  ets
Xptcrroi'),  '  being  crucified  with  [Christ] '  ((TV<TTavpova8a.i
[\pirrTfa])  ;  'living  after  the  flesh  '  (jJVji*  Kara  crdpica),  'after  the
spirit '  (Kara  7ri'eup.a),  '  to  God  '  (rta  0t<3),  '  in  Christ '  (ev  Xpicrrai) ;
to  use  such  expressions  as  :  '  for  there  is  no  distinction  '  (oi  yap
(<TTIV  6iaaToArj  :  3  22) ;  '  but  where  there  is  no  law  neither  is
there  transgression '  (ou  6e  OVK  f<mv  vo/j.o<;  ov&f  7rapd/3o.cris :
4  15)  ;  'but  where  sin  abounded,  grace  abounded  more  exceed
ingly  '  (oC  6e  eTr\(6va.<rev  r)  a^aprta,  VTT(pfnepicr<rfv<r(v  i]  \«pis  :
620);  'to  be  under  law,'  'under  grace'  (cipai  VTTO  voftov,  iiirb
\api.v '.  614);  'spirit  of  adoption,'  'Abba,  Father'  (nvevfj-a.
viotfecri'as,  'A/3(3a  6  wa-njp  :  8  15);  to  throw  out  such  questions  as
these  :  Whether  or  not  there  be  with  respect  to  Jews  and  Greeks
'respect  of  persons  with  God'  (7rpo<r(o7roArjnxi//ia  wapa  ©ea>  2n)?
Has  the  Jew  as  such  any  advantage  over  the  Greek,  when  both
have  sinned  (3  9-20)?  In  how  far  does  any  importance  at  all  still
attach  to  circumcision  (1225-29)?  \Vhat  value  has  the  law
(2  12-29  319-2227-31  7 1-6)?  Does  faith  ever  make  it  void
(831)?  In  what  sense  may  we  pride  ourselves  on  having
Abraham  to  our  father  (4)?  Must  we  not  think  that  the  doctrine
of  grace  leads  to  continuance  in  sin  (<5 1)?  Is  not  the  conviction
that  we  are  not  under  the  law  but  under  grace,  conducive  to  sin
(615)?  Can  the  law  be  held  responsible  for  sin  because  by
means  of  the  law  we  were  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  sin
(7  7)?

All  this  is  unthinkable  at  so  early  a  date  as  the  year

59  A.  D. There  is,  moreover,  the  one  great  simple  fact

A  rJ 1 «q  which  overrides  these  considerations,

ib.  A  aeveiopea  and  thrusts  them  so  to  speak  into  the

background — this,  namely,  that  the
Paulinism  with  which  we  are  made  acquainted  in  the
Pauline  Epistles,  and  particularly  in  that  to  the  Romans,
is  of  more  recent  date  than  the  historical  Paul.  Com
pared  with  what  the  first  disciples  of  Jesus  believed  and
professed,  it  is  not  merely  a  remarkable  divergence  ;  it
is  in  point  of  fact  a  new  and  higher  development
from  the  first  Christianity.  It  presupposes,  to  speak
with  Loman,  'a  richly  developed  stage  of  theological
thought. '  It  has  learned  to  break  with  Judaism  and  to
regard  the  standpoint  of  the  law  as  once  for  all  past
and  done  with,  substituting  in  its  place  that  of  grace  as
the  alone  true  and  valid  one.  The  new  life  '  under
grace  '  stands  in  sharp  antithesis  to  the  old  one  '  under
the  law'  (614).  It  knows,  and  it  is,  a  new  divine
revelation  ;  it  has  a  theology,  a  christology,  and  a
soteriology,  which  bear  witness  to  a  more  advanced
thinking  and  to  a  deeper  experience  of  life  than  could
possibly  have  been  looked  for  within  the  first  few  years
after  the  crucifixion.  It  is  a  remarkable  forward  step,  a
rich  and  far-reaching  reform  of  the  most  ancient  type  of
Christianity  ;  now,  a  man  does  not  become  at  one  and
the  same  moment  the  adherent  of  a  new  religion  and
its  great  reformer.  All  attempts  to  escape  the  difficulty
so  far  as  Paul  is  concerned  break  down  in  presence  of
the  obvious  meaning  of  Gal.  1 11-23  ;  as  was  shown
years  ago  by  Blom  against  Straatman  (Th.T,  1875,
1-44).  It  is  of  no  avail  continually  to  hark  back  to  the

4138


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

possibility — which,  in  fact,  no  one  denies — of  a  develop
ment  in  Paul's  mind  during  the  years  th'at  elapsed
between  his  conversion  and  the  writing  of  his  epistles.
The  Paulinism  of  the  epistles  in  question  is,  on  their
own  showing,  in  its  main  features  at  least  (with  which
we  are  here  concerned)  as  old  as  the  Christian  life  of
Paul  ;  but  such  a  Paulinism  is  even  for  thoughtful
believers  in  the  supernatural  inconceivable  as  having
come  into  existence  immediately  after  Paul  had  become
a  Christian.  Let  the  student  read  and  ponder  the  sketch
of  Paulinism  given  by  van  Manen  in  Paulus,  2126-140,
cp  211-217  !  and  in  PAUL,  §  40.

The  kinship  of  Paulinism  (especially  in  the  form  in

which it occurs in the  Epistle to  the  Romans)  with

_. ,  . gnosis,  which  has  been  recognised  and

/ '  * remarked  both  by  older  and  by  younger

Witn  gnosis. critics_amongst others by Basilides,

Marcion,  Valentinus,  Irenaeus,  Tertullian,  Holsten,
Hilgenfeld,  Scholten,  Heinrici,  Pfleiderer,  Weizsacker,
Harnack  (cp  van  Manen,  Paulus,  2154-166) — leads  also
to  the  same  conclusion  :  that  Paul  cannot  have  written
this  epistle.  As  to  the  precise  date  at  which  (Christian)
gnosis  first  made  its  appearance  there  may  be  some
measure  of  uncertainty  :  whether  in  the  last  years  of
Trajan  (ob.  117  A.D. ),  as  is  commonly  supposed,  or
perhaps  some  decades  earlier  ;  in  no  event  can  the  date
be  carried  back  very  far,  and  certainly  not  so  far  back
as  to  within  a  few  years  of  the  death  of  Jesus.  With
regard  to  this  it  is  not  legitimate  to  argue,  with  Baljon
(Gescft.  77),  that  in  the  Pauline  gnosis  '  no  doctrine  of  a
demiurge,  no  theory  of  aeons  is  found.'  It  is  years
since  Harnack  (/?(/(-)  1196-7)  rightly  showed  that  the
essence  of  the  matter  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  such
details  as  these.

In  addition  to  the  assumed  acquaintance  (already  re
marked  on)  of  the  readers  of  the  epistle  with  the  Pauline
_,,  .  gospel,  there  are  other  peculiarities  that
V  1  t  81£ns  indicate  the  church  addressed  as  one  of
01  later  age.  ]ong  stancjing.  it  is  acquainted  with
various  types  of  doctrine  (617).  It  can  look  back  upon
its  conversion  as  an  event  that  had  taken  place  a  con
siderable  time  ago  (13  n).  It  has  need  of  being  stirred
up  to  a  renewal  of  its  mind  (122)  and  of  many  other
exhortations  (12-14).  It  has  in  its  midst  high-minded
persons  whose  thoughts  exalt  themselves  above  the
measure  of  faith  given  them  (12s).  It  does  not  seem
superfluous  to  remind  them  that  each  belongs  to  the
other  as  members  of  one  body  endowed  with  differing
gifts.  There  are  prophets,  ministers,  teachers,  ex-
horters,  givers,  rulers,  and  those  who  show  mercy,  and
it  appears  to  be  necessary  that  each  should  be  reminded
of  what  he  ought  to  do  or  how  he  ought  to  behave.
The  prophet  must  keep  within  the  limits  of  the  faith
that  has  been  received,  and  be  careful  to  speak  according
to  the  proportion  of  that  faith  (/caret  TTJV  dvaXoyiav  rijs
iriareus,  126) ;  the  minister,  the  teacher,  and  the  exhorter
must  each  busy  himself  exclusively  with  the  work
entrusted  to  him  ;  the  giver  must  discharge  his  task
with  simplicity,  the  ruler  his  with  diligence  ;  he  that
shows  mercy  is  to  do  so  with  cheerfulness  (124-8).  The
mutual  relations  must  be  considered  anew  and  carefully
regulated,  both  in  general  (129-21  138-io),  and,  in
particular,  with  respect  to  the  special  '  necessities  of
the  saints,'  the  duty  of  hospitality,  the  attitude  to  be
maintained  towards  persecutors  (12 12 Jf.),  the  public
authority,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  duties  of  citizenship
(ISi-y).  A  vigorous  exhortation  to  vigilance  and  an
earnest  warning  against  revellings  and  drunkenness,
chambering  and  wantonness,  strife  and  envy,  are  not
superfluous  (1811-14).  There  are  weak  ones  in  the
faith,  who  avoid  the  use  of  wine  and  flesh  (14 if.  21);
others  who  hold  one  day  holy  above  others,  and  as
regards  their  food  consider  themselves  bound  by  obsolete
precepts  regarding  clean  and  unclean  (14s_/I  14 /.  20).
Others  again  who  regard  all  these  things  with  lofty
disdain,  making  no  distinction  between  clean  and

4139


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

unclean  food,  deeming  that  they  are  free  to  eat  and
drink  as  they  choose,  and  that  all  days  are  alike  ;  but
these,  just  because  of  the  freedom  they  rejoice  in,  give
offence  to  many  brethren  and  are  the  cause  of  their
moral  declension  (14s/.  131520-23).  These  divergent
practices  have  already  continued  for  so  long  that  the
writer,  so  far  as  the  first  two  (wine  and  flesh,  clean  and
unclean)  are  concerned,  is  in  perplexity  between  them
himself,  and  has  no  other  plan  than  to  raise  himself
above  them  all  in  order  to  urge  a  general  point  of
view — a  genuinely  '  catholic  '  one — of  '  give  and  take,"
in  which  the  principle  of  freedom  is  recommended  and
its  application  urged  in  the  fine  maxims :  let  no  one  give
offence,  let  each  one  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own
mind,  all  that  is  not  of  faith  is  sin  (14s  13  23).

The  church  is  exposed  to  persecution  ;  it  suffers  with
Christ.  It  has  need  of  comfort.  What  is  said  in  this
connection  cannot  be  explained  from  any  circumstances
at  Rome  known  to  us  before  Nero  and  the  time  of  the
great  fire  in  64.  It  points  rather  to  later  days  when
Christians  were  continually  exposed  to  bloody  persecu
tions.  See  5  3-5  817-39  12 12  14.

One  decisive  proof  that  in  our  epistle  we  are  listening
to  the  voice  of  one  who  lived  after  the  death  of  Paul  in
64  A.  D.  is  to  be  found  in  the  manner  in  which  the  question
of  the  rejection  of  Israel  is  handled  in  chaps.  9-11.  That
question  could  not  thus  occupy  the  foreground  or  bulk
so  largely  in  the  minds  of  Christian  writers  and  readers
as  long  as  Jerusalem  was  still  standing,  and  there  was
nothing  to  support  the  vague  expectation  of  its
approaching  overthrow  which  some  entertained.  The
allusions  to  the  great  events  of  the  year  70,  the  over
throw  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth,  and  the  expectations
which  connected  themselves  with  this  event  are  mani
fest.  Any  one  who  will  read  what  is  said,  particularly
in  11 11-22,  about  the  downfall  of  the  Jews  (rb  irapd-
wTwu.a  avru>v),  about  the  branches  that  have  been  broken
off  (e^€K\a.ff6-riffa.v  K\dSoi)  and  the  '  cutting  off'  (diroTOfiia)
which  has  come  upon  those  who  are  fallen  (^TTI  TOI)S
TrecnWas),  can  be  under  no  misapprehension  on  this
point.

If  we  now  sum  up  the  points  that  have  been  touched
on  in  §§  6-18,  we  need  have  no  hesitation  in  deciding
that  the  arguments  are  convincing :
our  canonical  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is
not  what  it  seems  to  be,  not  a  letter  written  by  the
apostle  and  sent  to  a  definite  church  ;  it  is  a  tractate,
a  book,  designed  to  be  read  aloud  at  Christian  meetings,
a  piece  to  be  read  in  Church  (kirchliches  Vorlesungs-
stiick),  or  homily,  as  Spitta  (Zur  Gesch.  3  59)  has
phrased  it.  It  is  a  book  written  in  the  form  of  a  letter,
not  written  after  the  kind  of  preparation  with  which  we
write  our  books,  but  compiled  rather  in  a  very  peculiar
manner  by  use  of  existing  written  materials  wherein  the
same  subjects  were  treated  in  a  similar  or  at  least  not
very  divergent  way.  We  can  best  form  some  conception
of  the  method  followed  here  by  studying  the  text  of  one
of  the  synoptical  gospels  with  an  eye  to  the  method  in
which  it  was  presumably  composed  ;  or  by  tracing  in
detail  the  manner  in  which  such  authors  as  the  writer  of
the  present  epistle  make  use  of  the  OT.  They  quote
from  its  words  alternately  verbatim  and  freely,  often,
too,  without  any  reference  to  the  OT  context,  so  that
we  can  trace  the  question  only  by  comparison  of  the
text  we  possess  which  has  been  wholly  or  partly
followed  (cp  van  Manen,  Paulus,  2217-9).

The  study  of  the  '  epistle  '  from  the  point  of  view  of  its
probable  composition,  enables  us  to  distinguish  what
treatises  or  portions  of  treatises  were  probably  made  use
of  before  the  text  came  into  existence  in  its  present  form.
In  this  way  the  work  as  a  whole  makes  us  acquainted
with  underlying  views  then  prevalent,  and  accepted  or
controverted  by  our  author — on  the  universality  of  sin
and  its  fatal  consequences  (1 18-820);  on  righteousness
by  faith  (821-31);  on  the  connection  between  this  and
Abraham  as  father  of  the  faithful  (4);  the  fruits  of

4140


19.  Conclusion.


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

justification  (5) ;  three  objections  against  Paulinism  (61-14
6 15-76  77-25);  the  glories  of  the  new  life  in  Christ  (8);
the  rejection  of  the  Jews  (9-11);  what  is  the  duty  of
Christians  towards  God  and  man  generally,  and  towards
the  weak  and  the  principles  held  by  them  in  particular
(12 1-15 13).  Such  views,  however  greatly  they  may
vary  in  purpose  and  scope,  all  belong  to  one  main
direction,  one  school  of  thought,  the  Pauline.  We
give  them  this  name  because  we  gain  our  best  and
most  comprehensive  acquaintance  with  the  school  from
the  'epistles  of  Paul,'  just  as  we  speak  of  the  Johan-
nine  School  and  the  Johannine  tendency,  although  we
know  nothing  about  the  connection  between  the  school
or  tendency  on  the  one  side,  and  the  well-known
apostolic  name  connected  with  it  on  the  other.  To
suppose  that  the  school  originated  from  the  historical
Paul,  as  was  formerly  maintained  by  Steck,  is  possible  ;
but  the  supposition  finds  no  support  in  any  historical
facts  with  which  we  are  acquainted  (cp  Paulus,  2  222-227).
What  is  certain,  at  any  rate,  is  that  the  canonical
epistle  is  not  by  Paul.  A  writing  that  is  so  called,  but
_,  ,,  on  closer  examination  is  seen  to  be  no

20.  1 e  aut  or.  epistle  j.,ut  rather a compilation, in

which,  moreover,  are  embedded  pieces  that  plainly
show  their  origin  in  a  later  time,  cannot  possibly  be
attributed  to  the  '^apostle  of  the  Gentiles.'  In  this
connection,  however,  it  is  inappropriate  to  speak  of
deception  or  forgery  or  pious  fraud.  There  is  not  the
slightest  reason  for  supposing  that  our  author  had  the
faintest  intention  of  misleading  his  readers,  whether
contemporaries  or  belonging  to  remote  posterity.  He
simply  did  what  so  many  others  did  in  his  day  ;  he
wrote  something  in  the  form  (freely  chosen)  of  a  tractate,
a  book,  or  an  epistle,  under  the  name  of  some  one
whom  he  esteemed  or  whose  name  he  could  most
conveniently  and  best  associate  with  his  work,  without
any  wrong  intention  or  bad  faith,  because  he  belonged
or  wished  to  be  thought  to  belong,  to  the  party  or
school  which  was  wont  to  rally  under  his  master's
standard.  His  own  name  remained  unknown  ;  but  his
nom  de  plume  was  preserved  and  passed  from  mouth  to
mouth  wherever  his  work  was  received  and  read.
What  reason  was  there  for  inquiring  and  searching
after  his  real  name  if  the  work  itself  was  read,  quoted,
copied,  and  circulated  with  general  approval  ?  The
work  might  bear  evidence  of  the  artist  so  far  as  con
cerned  person,  surroundings,  sufferings.  In  this  case,
according  to  the  epistle,  he  was  a  Christian,  one  of  the
Pauline  School,  a  polished  and  educated  man  with  a
heart  full  of  zeal  for  the  religious  needs  of  humanity  :  a

01 TT- *i.  j Paulinist,  however,  of  the  right  wing.

21.  His  method.  ,-. • ,• ,r , ., _,•«•

He  raises  himself  above  the  different

shades  of  opinion  which  he  knows  so  well  by  letting  them
find  alternate  expression,  by  letting  the  voice  now  of  the
one  and  now  of  the  other  be  heard.  He  gives  utterance
to  words  so  sharply  explicit  as  these  :  '  by  the  works  of
the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight '  (820);  'now
are  we  delivered  from  the  law  wherein  we  were  held  '
(76);  but  also  to  other  words,  so  friendly  in  their  tone
as  regards  the  very  same  law  :  '  not  the  hearers  .  .  .
but  the  doers  of  the  law  shall  be  justified'  (2  13) ;  '  the
law  is  holy,'  'spiritual'  (71214).  He  asseverates  that
there  is  no  distinction  between  Jew  and  Greek  (3  22);
that  there  is  with  God  no  acceptance  of  persons  (2n);
and  that  the  privileges  of  the  Jew  are  many  (3i/. );
that  Israel  is  in  a  very  special  way  the  people  of  God
(^4/.  11 1).  He  says  that  to  be  a  son  of  Abraham  after
the  flesh  signifies  nothing  (4  i_/!),  and  that  to  be  of  the
seed  of  Abraham  is  a  specially  great  privilege  (Hi).
He  recognises  at  one  time  that  the  wrath  of  God  is  now
manifest  upon  the  sins  of  men  (Ii8),  and  at  another
that  this  is  yet  to  come  (2  5-8).  He  speaks  of  it  as  a
matter  of  experience  that  the  Christian  has  broken  with
sin  for  good  and  has  become  a  wholly  new  creature
(5 1-7  6  and  8),  and  also  lays  down  a  quite  different
doctrine  to  the  effect  that  he  is  still  'sold  under  sin,'

4141


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

continually  doing  the  thing  he  would  not,  and  he  longs
for  emancipation  from  the  body  (7  7-25).  He  embraces
the  doctrine  of  a  redemption  of  man  from  a  power
hostile  to  God  on  the  ground  of  the  love  of  the  father
(824  5 1  8332),  and  with  this  he  associates  the  thought
of  an  atoning  sacrifice  on  behalf  of  the  sinner  offered  to
God  by  Christ  '  in  his  blood  '  (825).  Paul  is  to  him  the
called  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  (11513^.  15i6i8);  but
also  warmly  attached  to  the  Jews  and  ready  to  do
everything  for  them  (9  1-3  10  i  Hi);  in  possession  of
the  '  first  fruits  of  the  spirit,'  always  working  'in  the
power  of  God's  spirit,'  but  also  in  the  manner  of  the
original  apostles  '  in  the  power  of  signs  and  wonders '
(15 19).  He  recognises  Jesus  as  God's  son,  who  has
appeared  'in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  '  (83  32) ;  but  he
also  says  that  he  is  of  Israel  according  to  the  flesh  (9s),
and  that  he  was  first  exalted  to  the  dignity  of  divine
sonship  by  his  resurrection  (Is/.  1612).  He  speaks
with  the  same  facility  of  'Jesus,'  'Jesus  Christ,'  and
'  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ '  as  he  speaks  of  '  Christ '  and
'Christ  Jesus.'  For  him  all  distinction  in  the  use  of
these  various  designations  has  practically  disappeared.
Not  seldom  do  we  find  him  affirming  and  denying  on
the  same  page.  He  knows  how  to  give  and  take,  when
to  evade  arguments,  and  when  to  meet  them.  Already
we  perceive  in  him  something  of  the  '  catholic '  spirit
which  rises  above  the  strife  of  parties  ;  \vhich  serves  the
truth  and  promotes  the  unity  of  believers,  by  siding
now  with  the  right  wing,  now  with  the  left,  by  gliding
over  thorny  points,  and  boldly  thrusting  difficulties  aside.

As  for  origin,  he  was  probably  a  Greek.  He  thinks
in  Greek,  speaks  Greek,  and  seems  to  have  used  no
„,,  TT-  .  .  other  books  than  those  which  he  could
rlgm-  have  consulted  in  Greek  (cp  Paulus,
2186-190).  His  home  we  can  place  equally  well  in  the
E.  or  in  the  W.  In  the  E. ,  and  particularly  in
Antioch  or  elsewhere  in  Syria,  because  Paulinism
probably  had  its  origin  there.  The  catholic  strain,  on
the  other  hand,  within  the  limits  of  the  Pauline  move
ment,  seems  rather  to  have  proceeded  from  Rome.
The  possibility  is  not  excluded  that  the  main  portions
of  the  letter,  or  if  you  will,  of  a  letter,  to  the  Romans,
were  written  in  the  E. ,  and  that  the  last  touches  were
put  to  it  in  Rome  or  elsewhere  in  the  W.  ;  in  other
words,  that  it  was  there  that  the  epistle  took  the  final
form  in  which  we  now  know  it.  There  is  a  consider
able  number  of  writings  which  passed  over  from  the
hands  of  the  Gnostics  into  those  of  '  catholic  '-minded
Christians,  and  in  the  transition  were  here  and  there
revised  and  corrected,  brought  into  agreement,  some
what  more  than  appeared  in  their  original  form,  with
the  prevailing  type  of  what  was  held  to  be  orthodox
(cp  Lipsius,  Apokr.  Ap.-gesch.  1883-1887  ;  Usener,
Rel.-gesch.  Unters.  1,  1889;  van  Manen,  Paulus,
2227-230).

The  author  has  not  given  us  the  date  of  his  work,
and  we  can  guess  it  only  approximately.  Broadly

_. , speaking,  we  may  say,  not  earlier  than  the
.  iia  e.  end  of  {he  firs(.  nor  later  than  the  ^ddie

of  the  second  century.  Not  before  the  end  of  the
first  century,  because  after  the  death  of  Paul  (about
64  A.D. )  time  enough  must  be  allowed  to  admit  of
epistles  being  written  in  his  name  as  that  of  a  highly
placed  and  authoritative  exponent  of  Christianity,- — the
representative,  not  to  say  the  'father,'  of  Paulinism,  a
forward-reaching  spiritual  movement,  a  deeply  penetrat
ing  and  largely  framed  reform  of  that  oldest  Christianity
which  embodied  the  faith  and  expectations  of  the  first
disciples  of  Jesus  after  the  crucifixion.  Paulinism  in
this  sense  certainly  did  not  come  into  existence  until
after  the  downfall  of  the  Jewish  state  in  70  A.  D. ,  and
— if  we  consider  its  kinship  with  gnosticism,  and  various
other  features  which  it  shows — surely  not  before  the  end
of  the  first,  or  the  beginning  of  the  second,  century.
On  the  other  side,  we  may  venture  to  say,  not  later
than  the  middle  of  the  second  century.  Clement  of

4142


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

Alexandria,  Tertullian,  Irenreus,  use  thebook  towards  the
end  of  that  century,  and  we  may  be  sure  did  not  hold
it  for  a  recent  composition.  So  also  Theophilus  ad
Autolvcum,  814,  who  about  180  A.u.  cited  Rom.  13?/!
as  'divine  word'  (Oetoj  \&yos),  Basilides  (125),  and
Marcion,  who  made  his  appearance  at  Rome  in  138,
knew  the  epistle  as  an  authoritative  work  of  '  the  apostle. '
Aristides  (125-126),  James  (130),  i  Peter  (130-140)  in
like  manner  show  acquaintance  with  the  epistle.  Various
circumstances  combined  justify  the  supposition  that  it
was  written  probably  about  120  A.  D. ,  whilst  some
portions  of  it  in  their  original  form  may  be  regarded  as
somewhat  earlier  (cp  Paulas,  2296-303  8312-315).

If,  in  conclusion,  we  are  met  by  the  question,  '  What
is  the  value  of  the  writing  when  one  can  no  longer
_.  .  regard  it  as  an  epistle  of  Paul  to  the
.  a  ue.  Romans  ->  •  jt  must  never  be  forgotten
that  the  incisiveness  of  its  dialectic,  the  arresting
character  of  certain  of  its  passages,  the  singular  power
especially  of  some  of  its  briefer  utterances  and  out
pourings  of  the  heart,  the  edifying  nature  of  much  of
the  contents,  remain  as  they  were  before.  The  religious
and  ethical  value,  greater  at  all  times  than  the  testhetic,
is  not  diminished.  The  historical  value,  on  the  other
hand,  is  considerably  enhanced.  True,  we  no  longer
find  in  it,  what  we  were  formerly  supposed  to  find,
the  interesting  (though  in  large  measure  not  well
understood)  writing  of  the  apostle,  written,  in  the  days  of
his  activity  among  the  Gentiles,  to  a  church  which  was
personally  unknown  to  him.  But  what  have  we  in  its
place  ?  A  book  of  great  significance  for  our  knowledge
of  the  ancient  Christianity  that  almost  immediately
succeeded  the  apostolic  (the  Christianity  of  the  disciples
of  Jesus  in  the  years  that  followed  his  death).  There  is
no  work  from  Christian  antiquity  that  contributes  more
largely  to  our  knowledge  of  Paulinism  (whether  in  its
first  form — a  form  in  which  it  has  not  reached  us  in
any  deliberate  writing — or  in  its  subsequent  develop
ment)  in  its  strength  as  an  inspiring  directory  for
conduct,  and  in  the  richness  and  depth  of  its  religious
thought  and  experience.

NTo  serious  efforts  to  defend  the  genuineness  of  the
epistle  have  as  yet  ever  been  attempted.  Those  offered
25  Defenders  casuallv  and  in  Passing,  as  it  were,
Of  genuineness,  ^ly  (as  for  example  in  Meyer- Weiss,
Komm.W,  1899,  33-34,  and  in  S.  David
son,  Introd.^,  1894,  117-119,  150-2)  on  the  so-called
external  evidence.  That  is  to  say,  its  defenders  rely  on
what  is  excellent  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  epistle  at
the  time  when  it  was  cited,  or  what  clearly  presupposes
an  acquaintance  with  it,  but  is  of  no  significance  what
ever  when  the  question  is  whether  the  work  was  in
reality  written  by  the  individual  who  from  the  first  was
named  as  its  author.  This  the  Tubingen  school  have
long  perceived  ;  Baur  also  did  not  rely  on  such  argu
ments.  Instead  of  doing  so  he  thus  expressed  himself
(Paulus  1C-1,  1866,  276) :

'  Against  these  four  epistles  (Rom. ,  i  and  2  Cor. ,  Gal.)  not  only
has  even  the  slightest  suspicion  of  spuriousness  never  been
raised,  but  in  fact  they  bear  on  their  face  the  mark  of  Pauline
originality  so  uncontestably  that  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  by
what  right  any  critical  doubt  could  ever  possibly  assert  itself
regarding  them.'

The  utterance,  it  will  be  observed,  wholly  ignores
Evanson,  1792,  and  of  course  also  Bruno  Bauer,  who  did
not  publish  his  criticism  till  1851  ;  but  it  also  ignores
the  view  taken  by  so  many,  including  F.  C.  von  Baur
himself,  who  have  vied  with  one  another  in  the  dis
integration  of  the  epistle,  as  also  the  possibility  that
yet  others  at  a  later  date  might  perceive  what  Baur
himself  had  not  observed  ;  nor  yet  does  it  take  account
of  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  any  assertion  (however
plausible  it  may  sound)  as  to  the  '  originality'  of  Paul,
whom  after  all  we  know  only  by  means  of  the  picture
that  has  been  constructed  with  the  aid  of  those  very
epistles  with  regard  to  which  we  wish  to  inquire  whether
they  really  were  written  by  him.  Nothing  therefore  is

4H3


ROMANS  (EPISTLE)

added  to  the  argument  when  a  countless  host  of  others
since  Baur  are  never  weary  of  repeating  that  '  even  the
Tubingen  school '  have  raised  no  doubts  as  to  the
genuineness.  The  observation  is  correct,  it  is  true.
Only  they  forget  to  add  :  nor  yet  have  they  offered
proofs  that  it  is  genuine.

Meyer- Weiss,  S.  Davidson,  and  others  remain  equally
sparing  of  their  arguments  even  after  the  criticism  of  a
later  date  has  made  its  voice  heard.  They  put  it  aside
with  a  single  word.  Weiss,  with  a  reference  to  a
'  Parody,'  by  C.  Hesedamm,  Der  Romerbrief  beurtheilt
u.  geviertheilt,  1891.  Davidson,  with  the  observation
that  the  genuineness,  apart  from  the  conclusive  testi
mony  of  witnesses,  is  fully  guaranteed  by  internal
evidence.

'  The  internal  character  of  the  epistle  and  its  historical  allusions
coincide  with  the  external  evidence  in  proving  it  an  authentic
production  of  the  apostle.  It  bears  the  marks  of  his  vigorous
mind  ;  the  language  and  style  being  remarkably  characteristic.'

He  omits,  however,  to  tell  us  how  he  knows  that
anything  is  a  '  production,'  not  to  say  an  '  authentic
production  of  the  apostle '  ;  nor  yet  how  he  has  obtained
his  knowledge  of  the  mind  of  Paul ;  nor  yet  why  it  is
impossible  for  a  pseudonymous  author  to  have  any
characteristic  language  and  style.

Harnack  (ACL  ii.  1  [1897]  p.  vii)  considers  himself
absolved  from  going  into  the  investigation  until  the
representatives  of  the  newer  criticism  '  shall  have  rigor
ously  carried  out  the  task  incumbent  on  them  of  working
out  everything  pertaining  to  the  subject  afresh.'

Jiilicher  (Einl.,  1894,  p.  17,  igoi*'2),  p.  19)  once  and
again  resorted  to  a  severe  attack  on  '  hypercriticism  '  and
'  pseudocriticism,'  and  subsequently  proceeded,  in  deal
ing  with  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  as  if  nobody  had
ever  at  any  time  argued  against  its  genuineness.

Sanday  and  Headlam  (Comm. ,  1895,  pp.  85-98)
discuss  exhaustively  the  integrity  of  the  epistle,  especi
ally  as  regards  chaps.  15-16,  but  say  little  about  the
history  of  the  question  of  genuineness.  They  cursorily
dismiss  some  of  the  objections  without  showing  that
they  have  really  grasped  their  proper  significance.
Counter-arguments  are  practically  not  heard.  So  also
in  other  commentaries  whose  authors  had  heard  any
thing  about  the  newer  criticism  referred  to.  Holsten
( '  Krit.  Briefe  lib.  die  neueste  paulin.  Hypothese '  in
Prot.  Kirchenztg.,  1889),  Pfleiderer  (PaulinismusM,
1890),  Holtzmann  (Einl.W,  1892),  Lipsius  (//C<2),  1892,
pp.  83/1 ),  and  others,  made  some  general  observations  in
favour  of  the  genuineness  that  had  been  called  in  question.
But  these  discussions  were  little  more  than  insignificant
'  affairs  of  outposts '  ;  no  real  battle  was  delivered  nor
even  any  serious  attack  prepared.

Then  came  Zahn  (Einl.C^,  1900,  Is)  with  his  censure
on  his  comrades  in  arms  against  the  Tubingen  school  for
their  error  in  having  defended  indeed  the  genuineness  of
the  epistles  '  rejected '  by  Baur,  but  not  that  of  the
'principal  epistles,'  'although  Baur  and  his  disciples
had  never  so  much  as  even  attempted  any  proof  for  the
positive  part  of  their  results. '  Forthwith  he  addressed
himself  to  the  long  postponed  task.  He  gave  some  half-
dozen  general  observations  (pp.  112-116)  not  differing  in
substance  from  those  which  had  already  been  made  ;  re
ferred  to  the  various  particular  investigations  to  be  made
in  a  later  part  of  the  work,  including  the  detailed  treat
ment  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (pp.  251-310)' where
31  full  pages  are  devoted  to  the  subject  of  the  integrity
and  not  a  single  word  to  the  question  of  genuineness.

Baljon  ( Gesch. ,  1901)  perceived  that  something  more
than  this  was  necessary  to  put  the  newer  criticism  to
silence,  if  it  was  wrong.  But  what  he  wrote  with  this
end  in  view  was  neither  (as  might  have  been  expected)
a  confutation  of  the  objections  urged,  nor  yet  an  argu
ment  for  the  genuineness  at  least  as  solid  and  good  as
(in  intention  at  all  events)  that  made  on  behalf  of  Philip-
pians,  but  simply  a  couple  of  pages  (pp.  97-100)
devoted  to  the  history  of  the  newer  criticism  and  a  few
observations  upon  the  objections  urged  by  van  Manen.

4144


So  far  as  appears,  no  one  has  as  yet  addressed  him
self  to  the  task  of  an  orderly  scientific  discussion  of  the
arguments  on  the  other  side,  or  to  an  effective  setting
forth  of  the  arguments  on  behalf  of  the  genuineness.

Good  commentaries — though  all,  it  may  be  remarked,  written
from  the  point  of  view  of  an  undisputed  and  therefore

indisputable  genuineness — are  those  of  B.
26.  Literature.  Weiss  (6)  (=  Meyer- WeusW),  1899,  R.  A.

Lipsius  (//CC-'I,  1892),  W.  Sanday  and  A.  C.
Headlam  (Int.  Crit.  Comm.  1895).  They  all  take  account
of  their  important  predecessors  (see  Weiss  39-43,  Lipsius
vii-viii,  Sanday  xcviii-cix),  amongst  whom  are  Origen  (at.  254),
Chrysostom  (eb.  407),  Melanchthon  (1560),  Calvin  (1564),  Grotius
(1645),  Tholuck(i877),  Riickert  (1839)12),  j.  G.  Reiche  (1833-34),
C.  F.  A.  Fritzsche  (1836-43),  van  Hengel  (1854-59),  de  Wette
(i847)ctl  ;  as  also  of  the  works  of  H.  Alford  (ob.  1871),  B.  Jowett
(1855,  1859)121,  C.  A.  Vaughan  (i874)r»>,  W.  Kelly  (1873),  F.
Godet  (1879,  ET  1881),  G.  Volkmar  (1875).  Cp  H.  J.  Holtzmann,


P.  mi  die  Romer  (1901)  ;  A.  D.  Loman,  '  Quaest.  Paulinje,'  Th.  T
(1882) ;  R.  Steck,  Gal.  (1888),  154-161,  359-363,  374-382,  W.  C.
van  Manen,  I'aulus  II.  :  De  brief  aan  de  Rom.  (1891).

W.  C.  v.  M.

EOME  (CHURCH)

Not  founded  by  Peter  and  Paul  Age  (§§  10-12).

(§i/).  Character ;  (§§  13-16).

Not  by  Peter  alone  (§  3).  Constitution  and  government
Not  by  Paul  (§§  4-7).  (§  I7/.).

Origin among  Jews  in Rome  Influence and importance

(§  %/•)•  (8  I9.A

Bibliography  (§  21).

The  earliest  period  of  the  Christian community  in

Rome  is  wrapped  in  impenetrable  obscurity. Tradition

p  + Pi attributes its founding to the joint

* iCf  •  labours  of  the  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,

tradition, r^,  • ,•  •

This tradition, however, is  unworthy

of  our  confidence.  It  is  comparatively  recent.  The
oldest  traces  of  its  existence  do  not  go  back  farther
than  to  the  close  of  the  second  century.

According  to  a  notice  in  Eusebius  (HE  ii.  25  8),  '  Dionysius
of  Corinth,'  about  the  year  170  A.D. ,  or  somewhat  later  (see
OLD  CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,  §  31),  wrote  to  the  Romans  as
follows  :  '  So  also  by  this  so  weighty  admonition  [of  yours] — the
allusion  is  to  the  epistle  of  the  Romans  to  the  Corinthians
(=iClem.) — ye  have  brought  together  [anew]  that  planting
[aforetime]  made  by  Peter  and  Paul,  of  the  [churches  of  the]
Romans  and  of  the  Corinthians.  For,  indeed,  these  two  both
planted  us  in  our  Corinth  and  likewise  taught  us ;  in  like
manner  also  after  having  taught  together  in  Italy  they  suffered
martyrdom  about  the  same  time '  [not  necessarily,  of  course,  at
the  same  hour,  or  on  the  same  day,  the  same  month,  or  even  the
same  year]  (TO.VTO.  (tal  tr^teis  Sta.  TTJS  TOCTOVTTJS  i-ouflecri'as  TTJV  airb
TTeTpou  xai  llauAou  (fivreiav  ytvrjSeicrai'  'Vw^aiiav  re  /cal  Koptf-
Oiuiv  trvi'SKepdcraTf.  (tal  yap  aju.<?><"  (tal  el?  rr)t'  rfftfT^O-v  Kopn'dov

$UTfUCntl'TeS  Tfiia?  6/UOt'bJ?  eOLOOL^O.1'. OjUOUOS  6e  (fal  61?  T~I]V  'I'raAiai'

6/iotre  6i<5a£ai'Tes  e^iapTVprj<rai>  Kara  rov  avrov  (taipoi-).  Here  the
'planting'  or  founding  of  the  churches,  alike  of  Rome  and  of
Corinth,  is  clearly  recognised  to  have  been  the  work  of  the
apostles  Peter  and  Paul.  It  is  of  no  avail  to  say  with  Sanday
and  Headlam  (Comm.  p.  xxrx)  that  the  'planting'  referred  to
(4>vTfvav  ;  cp  i  Cor.  3  bffi  9  7)  is  not  to  be  taken  '  in  the  sense  of
first  foundation.'  We  are  not  responsible  for  what  'Dionysius'
says  ;  but  we  are  under  obligation  to  understand  it  in  the  sense
in  which  he  meant  it.

The  same  remark  holds  good  with  reference  to  Irenseus  when
he  speaks  of  the  church  at  Rome  as  having  been  '  founded  and
constituted  by  the  two  very  glorious  apostles  Peter  and  Paul"
('a  gloriosissimis  duobus  apostolis  Petro  et  Paulo  Romae
fundata  et  constituta,'  iii.  3  i).  These  two,  subsequently  spoken
of  as  'the  blessed  apostles,1  the  same  authority  (about  180  A.D.)
goes  on  to  state,  after  having  founded  and  built  up  the  church,
handed  over  the  government  to  Linus  (0ejueAiw<rai/Te?  our  (cat
otKoSofXTJcrarTes  ot  /uiaKaptoi  aTrooToAot  Tt]V  fKK\Y)o~ia.v  AtVa>  Tf]V
Trjs  f-n-KTKOTrfj';  \fiTovpyiaiV  ei'exei'picrai',  iii.  82  ;  Eus.  HEv.  6  i).
In  Eus.  HEv.  82  he  tells  us  that  Matthew  wrote  a  gospel  for
the  Hebrews  in  their  own  tongue  'whilst  Peter  and  Paul  were
preaching  the  Gospel  at  Rome  and  founding  the  church '  (TOU
TTeVpou  (cal  TOU  ITauAou  eu  'Pii/ar)  evayyeAicJbiu.eVtoi'  (tat  Oefie-

These  clear  testimonies,  however,  to  the  founding  of

the  church  of  Rome  by  Peter  and  Paul — however  un-

_ ., ,  hesitatingly  they  may  have  been  accepted

trustworthy. an^  bl?t  uPon  in  later.  timf  ~*\e  °ne
J and all quite  unworthy  of  credence.

Xot  only  are  they  relatively  recent  and  obviously  framed
in  accordance  with  a  settled  policy  of  glorifying  the

4H5


ROME  (CHURCH)

unity  of  the  church  as  having  been  manifest  even  in  its
oldest  communities  ;  what  is  more  to  the  point,  they
are  at  variance  with  older  representations,  whether  we
receive  these  with  absolute  confidence  or  not,  of  the
course  of  events  connected  with  the  founding  of  a
Christian  community  in  Rome.

'  Ignatius,"  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans  (4  3),  written  about  the
middle  of  the  second  century  (see  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,
§§  2&y.),  indeed  mentions  '  Peter  and  Paul '  as  known  and
influential  teachers  of  the  church  he  is  addressing,  but  says
nothing  as  to  their  having  founded  it.  The  church  of  Rome
itself  speaks  by  the  mouth  of  'Clement '  in  the  First  Epistle  to
the  Corinthians,  dating  from  about  the  year  140  A.D.  (see  OLD-
CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,  §§  23-26),  of  Peter  and  Paul  as  known
witnesses  to  the  truth  (i  Clem.  63-7),  but  not  as  founders  of  the
church.  Acts  is  not  aware  of  any  labours  of  Peter  and  Paul
carried  out  in  common  at  Rome.  From  2817-28  it  might  seem
to  be  a  possible  inference  that  Paul  was  the  first  to  speak  about
Christianity  to  the  leading  Jews  there  ;  but  of  Peter  there  is  no
word  in  this  connection.  Just  as  little  is  Peter  mentioned  in
the  canonical  epistle  to  the  Romans,  even  in  conjunction  with
'  Paul '  when  this  apostle  is  speaking  of  his  desire  to  become
acquainted  with  the  Christians  of  the  metropolis,  whose  faith  is
everywhere  spoken  of,  and  whom  he  hopes  ere  long  to  be  able
to  meet  (13-15  1622-2428^/7  10  19).  Indeed,  the  arrangements
between  Paul  on  the  one  hand,  and  James,  Cephas,  and  John
on  the  other,  according  to  Gal.  2  9,  'we  to  the  Gentiles  and  they
to  the  circumcision '  (^/ueis  eis  ra  eOn;,  avrol  £e  eis  Tt\v
wepirn/jirjf),  do  not  lead  us  to  expect  to  find  in  epistles  of  Paul
any  word  of  co-operation  between  Peter  and  Paul  in  the  found
ing  of  individual  churches.  What  is  related  as  to  this  at  a
later  date  with  regard  to  Rome  cannot  hold  good  in  presence  of
the  assurance  given  us  by  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  whether
by  Paul  himself  or  by  an  anonymous  author  using  his  name,
that  at  Rome  there  was  a  considerable  Christian  community
before  Paul  could  possibly  have  been  able  to  speak  a  single
word  there.

Matters  do  not  stand  much  better  with  the  belief —
held  absolutely  for  many  centuries,  called  in  question
„  _  .  —  ,  at  the  Reformation,  and  again  at

' tradition. I later  perio?  maintainfd  by  ™n>r
Protestants  also — according  to  which

the  church  of  Rome  was  founded  by  Peter  alone.  This
tradition  also  deserves  no  credence,  whether  in  the
form  which  represents  Peter  as  having  been  bishop  of
Rome  for  twenty-five  years  after  the  founding  of  the
church,  or  in  the  simpler  form  which  merely  conjectures
that  the  apostle  may  have  contributed  something  to  the
formation  and  extension  of  the  church,  or  at  least  in
later  years  may  have  visited  it  for  a  shorter  or  longer
period.  The  founding  of  the  church  by  Peter  is  ex
cluded  by  the  silence  of  Ignatius  and  Clement  on  the
subject,  and  still  more  by  the  evidence  of  Acts,  Gala-
tians,  and  Romans.  Not  only  do  they  say  nothing
positive  to  this  effect  ;  they  make  it  perfectly  clear  that
from  the  point  of  view  of  their  respective  authors  such
a  thing  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  Acts  closes  its  account
of  Peter  in  12 17  with  the  words,  '  and  he  departed,  and
went  to  another  place'  (/ecu  O-eXQ&v  eTropevOi)  els  'irepov
rliwov],  and  in  the  rest  of  the  book  Peter's  name  is
only  once  again  mentioned,  and  in  a  different  con
nection  (15  6-20),  where  he  is  represented  as  again  in
Jerusalem.  In  view  of  this  passage  12 17  cannot  be
understood  as  referring  to  a  journey  to  Rome  for  any
lengthened  period,  not  to  speak  of  a  period  of  five  and
twenty  years.  Neither,  however,  can  we  understand  a
visit  to  Rome  of  shorter  duration,  such  as  Harnack  (A  CL
2 1  [1897],  240-244,  704-710)  still,  with  many,  regards
as  probable,  not  even  with  the  aid  of  the  assumption
that  the  contents  of  Acts  15  were  taken  from  another
source  than  that  from  which  '  Luke '  derived  his  other
Statements  regarding  Peter  in  Acts  1-12.  The  words
quoted  do  not  '  of  course '  say  that  we  are  to  think  of  a
mere  visit  whether  to  Rome  or  to  any  other  place.
They  are  quite  clearly  intended  merely  to  indicate  that
the  author  does  not  propose  to  follow  the  fortunes  of
Peter  further  :  '  and  going  his  way,  he  journeyed  to
another  place.'  To  understand  Rome  as  intended
here  becomes  possible  only  after  one  has  learned  other
where,  rightly  or  wrongly,  to  speak  of  a  sojourn  of  the
apostle  in  the  metropolis.  Acts  says  nothing  of  this,
and  plainly  presupposes  rather  the  exact  opposite,  since

4146


ROME (CHURCH)

chap.  15  alluded  to  Peter  as  again  in  Jerusalem,  and
28  17-28,  speaking  of  Paul's  meeting  with  Jews  at  Rome,
leaves  no  room  for  the  supposition  that  Peter  had
preceded  him  there  as  a  preacher  of  Christianity.
Galatians  knows  no  residence  of  Peter  other  than
Antioch  ('2  11-21) — apart  from  Jerusalem  where,  accord
ing  to  1 18  '2  i-io,  he  seems  to  have  his  home,  an  agree
ment  that  he  is  to  address  himself  to  '  the  circumcision  '
being  expressly  mentioned.  Romans  knows  of  Chris
tians  in  Rome;  refers  to  their  conversion  from  Judaism
and  heathendom,  their  fidelity  to  the  Pauline  type  of
doctrine  once  received  (Oiy),  and  the  spiritual  bond
subsisting  between  them,  or  many  of  them,  and  Paul;
but  has  not  a  word  to  say  about  any  connection,  whether
of  long  or  short  duration,  between  them  and  the  apostle
Peter,  and  does  not  even  so  much  as  mention  his  name.
The  writer,  whoever  he  may  have  been,  it  has  been
rightly  remarked,  has  no  acquaintance  with  any  tradition
which  represented  Peter  as  having  been  the  founder  of
the  Roman  Church.  His  declaration  made  in  15  iof.
that  he,  '  Paul,'  would  not  build  upon  another  man's
foundation,  however  inconsistent  with  the  desire  ex
pressed  in  18-15  and  1022-2429,  wholly  excludes  it.
Especially  so  as  soon  as  by  the  word  '  another '  we  under
stand,  as  is  usually  the  case,  an  apostle — in  this  instance
Peter.

It  is,  in  fact,  improbable  that  Peter  ever  set  foot  in
Rome.  The  later  traditions  regarding  this,  including
those  handed  down  by  Eusebius,  have  no  claim  to  our
acceptance,  as  has  often  been  convincingly  shown  by
many  scholars  (and  recently  by  C.  Clemen,  Preuss.
Jahrb.,  1901,  pp.  404-417,  and  C.  Erbes,  '/.tschr.  f.  A'ir-
chengesch.,  1901,  pp.  1-47,  161-231).  They  possess  no
higher  value  than  those  relating  to  Thomas's  preaching
to  the  Parthians,  Andrew's  to  the  Scythians,  John's  in
Asia  Minor.  When  Eusebius,  immediately  afterwards
(iii.  3  2,  cp  ii.  25s),  gives  expression  to  the  conjecture
that  Peter  preached  to  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  in
Pontus,  Galatia,  Bithynia,  Cappadocia,  and  Asia,  before
his  crucifixion  (head  downwards)  at  Rome,  he  attributes
to  him,  obviously  with  his  eye  on  i  Pet.  1 1,  a  career
which  he  himself  could  not  possibly  reconcile  with  the
details  that  he  gives  elsewhere.  According  to  iii.  862,
Peter  was  for  some  time  bishop  of  Antioch  before  Igna
tius;  according  to  ii.  2.">  8  he  was,  along  with  Paul,
founder  of  the  churches  of  Corinth  and  Rome ;  accord
ing  to  ii.  146,  the  powerful  opponent  of  Simon  Magus
at  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  (41-54  A.n.)  ;  accord
ing  to  vi.  25  8,  the  rock  upon  which  the  church  of  Christ
is  built,  and  the  author  of  two  epistles.

A  reference  to  i  Pet.  1  i,  though  often  made  in  con
junction  with  5  13,  is  of  no  avail  to  support  the  view  that
Peter  at  some  time  or  other  had  indeed  made  a  stay,
longer  or  shorter,  in  Rome.  There  need,  indeed,  be  no
hesitation,  not  even  in  presence  of  the  objections  of
Erbes,1  to  see  in  'she  that  is  in  Babylon,  elect  together
with  [you]'  (TI  Iv  BafivXuvi  <rvv€K\eKr^,  i  Pet.  5  13)  an  allu
sion  to  the  church  in  Rome.  In  i  Pet.,  however,  it  is
not  Peter  himself  who  is  speaking,  but  an  unknown
author  writing  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century,

130-140 A.n. (OLD-CHRISTIAN LITERATURE, § 2O  ;

PETER,  EPISTLES  OF,  §§  5/1;  CHRISTIAN,  §  8).  He
is  the  exponent  of  a  tradition,  not  met  with  elsewhere,
regarding  Peter  as  apostle  in  a  portion  of  the  countries
of  Asia  Minor  where  Paul  also  had  laboured,  and  at  the
same  time  of  the  other  widely  spread  tradition  that  Peter
had  his  home  in  Rome.  Acts,  Galatians,  and  Romans,
so  far  as  we  can  see,  are  not  yet  acquainted  with  this
latest  tradition.  Even  i  Clem.,  written  professedly  by
the  church  of  Rome,  and  probably,  in  point  of  fact,
originating  there,  says  nothing  of  a  sojourn  of  Peter  in
Rome.  The  writer  assuredly  would  not  have  passed  it
over  in  silence  when  speaking  of  Peter's  glorious  past  in

1  Op  cit.,  below,  16-20.  Erbes  once  more  seeks  to  plead  for  a
sojourn  of  Peter  among  the  Jews  in  Babylon,  unless  perhaps
we  are  to  understand  Jerusalem.

4147


ROME (CHURCH)

chap.  5,  or  treating  of  the  life-work  of  the  '  apostles '  in
chaps.  42  and  44,  if  he  had  known  anything  of  it.
Hermas  and  Justin,  both  of  them  witnesses  belonging  to
the  Roman  circle,  are  similarly  silent  as  to  aught  that
Peter  may  be  supposed  to  have  done,  said,  or  endured
there.

There  are,  then,  as  regards  Peter's  going  to  Rome,
and  as  regards  his  journeyings  as  a  whole,  traditions
which,  in  part,  are  mutually  exclusive  and  in  no  case
admit  of  being  combined  together  into  one  consistent
whole.  The  older  ones  do  not  imply  the  supposed  fact
of  the  church  of  Rome  having  been  founded  by  Peter;
they  have  no  knowledge  of  it,  or  even  bear  witness
against  it  by  making  statements  which  cannot  be  har
monised  with  it.  Acts,  Galatians,  Romans,  i  Clem.,
undoubtedly  come  chiefly  into  consideration  here.  On
the  same  side  there  fall  to  be  grouped  other  NT  testi
monies  to  the  martyrdom  of  Peter,  and,  more  precisely,
his  crucifixion,  drawn  from  very  old,  if  not  the  oldest,
traditions  relating  to  the  careers  of  the  apostles,  though
without  mention  of  the  place  where  this  violent  death
occurred.  See  Jn.  21 18-22  (cp  1836)  Mt.  10  5/  16-18
22-33  283439  24  9 14  Mk.  189-13  Lk.  24  47  Acts  18.
Within  the  circle  of  these  ancient  witnesses  we  can  safely
say — apart,  if  you  will,  from  i  Pet.  1 1  513 — of  all  those
in  the  NT,  to  which  also  may  be  added  that  of  the  apos
tolic  fathers,  that  not  a  single  word  or  even  the  remotest
hint  is  found  in  them  as  to  a  sojourn,  whether  of  long  or
of  short  duration,  of  Peter  in  Rome,  whilst,  in  fact,  more
than  one  of  them,  by  implicit  or  explicit  declaration,  are
irreconcilably  at  variance  with  any  such  supposition.
Rather  does  everything  plead  for  the  view  that  Peter
never  visited  Rome,  but  worked  continuously  in  Pales
tine — occasionally,  perhaps,  outside  its  limits,  but  never
very  far  off — and  that  there,  it  may  well  have  been  in
Jerusalem,  somewhere  about  64  A.D.  under  Sabinus,1
or,  at  all  events,  some  years  before  the  destruction  of  the
temple  and  city  in  70  A.D.,  he  died  a  martyr's  death.
[See,  further,  SIMON  PETER.]

What  remains  of  the  late  tradition  as  to  the  founding

of  the  church  of  Rome by  Peter  and  Paul  conjointly

does  not  need  any  careful  scrutiny  after

*•.  . a . the  name  of  Peter  has  been  eliminated.

Atn: a  We  are  not'  in  that  event>  shut  up  to
the alternative : if not by  Peter and

Paul  together,  then  probably  by  Paul  alone.  This  is
nowhere  said  in  any  tradition  so  far  as  known  to  us.
Tradition  seems  rather  to  have  followed  this  course :
since  it  is  impossible  that  Paul  can  have  founded  the
church  along  with  Peter,  his  name  must  not  be  thought
of  in  connection  with  the  founding  at  all.  Acts  and
Pauline  Epistles,  writings  frequently  read  in  a  large  cir
cle,  indicated  this.

Acts  knows  of  no  Christian  church  at  Rome  at  a  date
prior  to  a  possible  foundation  by  Paul  after  he  had
proclaimed  the  glad  tidings  to  the  Jews  assembled  at
his  lodging  (28  17-31).  In  28  15,  indeed,  we  read  of
the  '  brethren '  who  came  from  Rome  to  Appii  Forum
and  the  Three  Taverns  to  meet  Paul,  and  it  is  no
doubt  usual  to  regard  these  as  having  been  Chris
tians,  but  on  no  adequate  grounds.  They  are,  to  judfe
from  w.  17-28,  Jews,  just  as  Roman  Jews  (v.  21)  call
their  kinsmen  in  Judaea  '  the  brethren.'  They  are
amazed  at  Paul's  plans,  and  declare  as  distinctly  as
possible  in  v.  22  that  up  to  that  hour  they  had  heard
nothing  of  '  this  sect  '—i.e.,  of  the  Christians— beyond
the  mere  name.  All  this  is  in  perfect  agreement  with
the  current  representation  in  Acts,  according  to  which
Paul  in  his  journeyings  invariably  first  addressed
himself  to  the  Jews  and  thereafter  to  the  Gentiles
with  a  view  to  proceeding  to  the  setting  up  of  a
Christian  community,  whether  composed  entirely  of
converted  Gentiles,  or  partly  also  of  former  Jews  (cp
13  46  and  13-28  passim).  '  The  view  that  by  the
'brethren*  of  Rome,  alluded  to  in  28  15,  as  also  by

1  So  Erbes,  212,  conjectures,  relying  upon  Jos.  Ant.  xx.  9  3.
4148


ROME  (CHURCH)

those  of  Puteoli  in  r.  14,  we  are  to  understand  Chris
tians,  rests  solely  upon  the  representation  in  Romans,
according  to  which  Christians  are  found  in  Rome  long
before  Paul  has  ever  visited  that  city.

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  the
opposite  representation  in  Acts  has  no  historical  authori-
tativeness,  being  inextricably  bound  up  with  the  tendency
of  that  book  which  has  been  already  referred  to.
Moreover,  in  Acts  28  30  f.  the  founding  of  a  Christian
church  at  Rome  by  Paul  is  rather  tacitly  assumed  than
asserted  in  so  many  words.  It  is  possible  that  in  the
'  Acts  of  Paul '  (which  were  worked  over  by  the  writer
of  our  canonical  Acts,  and  also  made  use  of  in  the
composition  of  the  Pauline  Epistles,  and  which  them
selves  in  turn  had  their  origin  in  a  redaction  and
expansion  of  the  recognised  We-source)  the  original
journey  record  (PAUL,  §  37  ;  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERA
TURE,  §  9)  may  have  given  a  somewhat  different
account  of  the  conditions  which  Paul  found  at  Rome
and  elsewhere  in  Italy.  It  may  be  that,  according  to
that  representation,  there  were  already  in  more  than
one  place  at  Rome  Christians,  '  brethren  '  in  another
and  higher  sense  than  that  of  mere  kinship,  and  that
their  figurative  designation  is  adopted  by  Acts  so  that
the  '  brethren  '  in  Puteoli  and  Rome,  according  to  Acts
28i4/i  to  be  understood  as  Jews  who  were  friendly
disposed  towards  Paul,  were  at  the  same  time  the
original  Christians  of  these  places.

However  that  may  be,  Acts  nowhere  contains  any
express  statement  as  to  the  founding  of  a  Christian
church  at  Rome  by  Paul  ;  and  as  little
does  the  epistle  to  the  Romans.  What
Romans  implies  is,  clearly,  rather  this — that  the  church
had  already  been  long  in  existence  when  Paul  was
cherishing  the  hope  that  he  might  have  an  opportunity
of  personally  visiting  it.  This  view  is  wont  to  be
accepted  on  all  hands  as  just  :  by  the  majority,  because
they  hold  it  to  come  from  the  apostle  Paul ;  by  others,
the  friends  of  advanced  criticism,  because,  however
fully  convinced  of  the  pseudepigraphical  character  of
the  epistle  (see  ROMANS),  they  have  no  reason  for
doubting  it.  These  have  this  advantage  over  the  others
that  they  are  not,  like  them,  sorely  per-


5.  In  Romans.


6.  Romans
versus


plexed  by  Acts  which  betrays  no  acquaint-
ciDuo  ance  with  the  epistle  held  to  have  been

addressed  to  the  church  of  Rome  by  Paul
at  least  two  years  before  he  himself  undertook  the  journey
thither  only  to  become  aware  on  his  arrival  in  the
metropolis  that  noone  therehad  ever  heard  anythingabout
him  or  even  about  Christianity  at  all  otherwise  than  by
report  merely.  They  set  down  the  divergent  representa
tions  in  '  Luke '  and  '  Paul '  simply  to  the  account  of  the
separate  writers,  and  as  regards  a  supposed  founding  of
the  church  at  Rome,  can  only  say  that  according  to
1  Luke  '  it  was  perhaps  the  work  of  Paul,  but  according  to
•Paul,'  certainly  not.  According  to  'Luke,'  perhaps
it  was,  since  we  must  interpret  in  accordance  with  the
general  tendency  of  his  '  historical '  work  ;  according  to
'  Paul,'  because  everyone  thought  so  in  those  days
nor  yet  had  any  one  any  knowledge  of  a  founding
of  the  church  in  Rome  by  Peter  and  Paul,  or  by
_  _,.  Peter  alone.  In  other  Pauline  epistles  also
.  ,.  there  is  no  trace  of  acquaintance  with
"  '  any  tradition  which  sought  to  represent

that  founding  as  having  been  brought  about  by  Paul.
In  Romans  there  is  no  hint,  of  the  kind  we  meet  with  in
i  Cor.  4 14  2  Cor.  613  12 14  Gal.  4 19,  that  'Paul'  can
regard  those  whom  he  addresses  as  his  '  children. '  There
is  no  suggestion  of  such  a  relation  of  Paul  to  Rome  even
in  Philippians,  Philemon,  or  i  Clem.  65-7,  where  there
was  such  ample  opportun'ty  to  call  to  mind  the  founding
of  the  Roman  Church  by  Paul  had  the  writer  been
minded  to  refer  to  it.  The  Pauline  literature  says
nothing  at  all  about  it,  nor  yet  do  the  kindred  writings,
I  Peter,  i  Clement,  Hermas,  Ignatius.  Rather  must
we  say  that  in  all  of  them  the  undisputed  and  indisput-

4149


ROME  (CHURCH)

able  presupposition  is  that  Rome  was  won  for  the  gospel
without  the  intervention  of  Paul,  either  by  his  epistles
or  by  his  later  personal  intercourse.

Whom  then  are  we  to  name  as  founder  of  the  Roman
church? 'Not any of the apostles,' as long ago
8 Founders  Ambros'aster  m  tne  so-called  commentary
,  of  Ambrosius  in  the  fourth  century  rightly

..  answers  (cp  Sanday  and Headlam, pp.

xxv,  ci).  We  could  almost  venture  to
guess  :  one  or  more  of  those  who  probably  at  a  quite
early  date,  spread  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  from
Jerusalem  westward.  There  was  abundant  oppor
tunity  in  the  constant  intercourse  between  Rome  and
the  east,  even  before  the  middle  of  the  first  century,  for
travellers  from  Palestine  to  return,  or  come  for  the  first
time,  to  the  banks  of  the  Tiber  and  there  to  discourse,
as  they  had  done  in  the  various  other  ports  and  cities
they  touched  on  their  route,  of  the  '  things  concerning
Jesus'  (TO.  irepl  TOV  'l-rjcrov  ;  Acts  1 8*5  282331),  '  the  king
dom  of  God  '  (17  /3a<nAeia  TOV  Otov  ;  Acts  1422  198  2025
282331),  'the  preaching  of  the  gospel'  (rb  ei'try-
yf\i^€ff&ai  ;  Acts  1832  14?  1521  15ss  16 10).  It  is  not
necessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  hardly  historical
account  of  the  first  appearance  of  the  apostles  at
Jerusalem  in  Acts  2,  where,  as  we  read  in  vv.  iof.,
Romans,  Jews  as  well  as  proselytes,  were  sojourning

(ot ^TTLSrl/ULOVVTfS 'Pdl/iCUOl, 'loi'^CUCH T€ KO.I TTpOCTr)\VTOl).

Such  Jews  living  in  Rome,  as  well  as  Gentiles  who  had

attached themselves to them and professed their

religion, may well have visited Jerusalem on other

occasions and become messengers, possibly very

capable  ones,  of  what  they  had  seen  and  heard  there

_ .  , to  their  brethren  in  the  metropolis. We

i,.  , shall  best  picture  to  ourselves  the  subse-

,  _  quent  course  of  events  if  we  suppose  that

at  Rome.

the preaching of the gospel and the

establishment  of  the  new  religion  made  its  way  amongst
'  Jews  and  proselytes  '  in  Rome.  Whoever  wishes  to
picture  to  himself  the  nature  of  the  field  in  which,  now
here,  now  there,  the  good  seed  was  scattered  by  un-*
known  sowers,  must  try  to  form  some  conception  of  the
Jewish  settlements  in  Rome  as  they  then  were.  Very
many  they  were,  ordinarily  confined  within  certain
precisely  defined  limits,  but  within  these  moving  with
social  freedom  bound  only  in  so  far  as  they  themselves
chose  to  be  so  by  the  customs  and  practices  received
from  their  fathers,  the  law  and  what  it  was  held  to
enjoin  on  the  faithful  children  of  Abraham  by  descent,
or  on  the  proselytes  who  had  joined  them.  Alternately
receiving  the  favours  of  the  great  and  bowed  down
under  the  heavy  burden  laid  upon  them  by  authorities
of  a  less  friendly  disposition  ;  constantly  exposed  to
risks  of  persecution,  scorn,  and  derision,  and  seldom
allowed  to  pass  altogether  without  notice  ;  engaged  in
the  pursuit  of  trade  and  dependent  on  this  for  their  daily
bread,  now  envied  for  their  wealth  and  now  plunged
into  the  depths  of  poverty  or  reduced  to  the  ranks  of
professional  beggars.  Such,  just  before  and  during  the
opening  decades  of  the  first  century,  was  the  manner  of
life  of  the  Jews  in  Rome  :  a  great  brotherhood,  we  may
call  it,  broken  up  into  a  number  of  smaller  communities  ;
a  band  of  aliens  who  know  how  to  maintain  their  old
manners  and  customs,  their  nationality,  and  their  religion,
in  spite  of  many  divergencies  and  divisions  among  them
selves,  in  the  midst  of  the  surrounding  Gentiles  amongst
whom  their  progenitors  had  settled.  At  first  they  had
come  to  pay  a  visit  there  because  commerce  and  political
reasons  had  brought  them  to  the  world-city  ;  so  it  had
been  already  in  the  days  of  the  Maccabees.  Others  again
had  been  brought  to  Rome  from  their  native  country  as
slaves,  but  on  closer  acquaintance  were  hardly  found
suitable  and  often  received  their  freedom  or  even  were
invested  with  the  privileges  of  Roman  citizens.  So,  in
particular,  shortly  after  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  by
Pompey  in  63  B.C.  By  Cassar  and  others  they  were
shown  great  favour.  Under  Tiberius  they  were  ex-

4150


ROME  (CHURCH)

pelled  from  Rome  in  the  year  19  A.D.  and  partly
employed  in  the  war  against  the  pirates  of  Sardinia.
Under  Claudius  about  49  A.D.  they  were  again
banished.  Under  Nero  it  would  seem  they  enjoyed  no
small  power  and  influence.  (For  details  see  Schtirer,
G/I'W,  1898,  828-36  and  specially  the  literature  referred
to  there  on  p.  28,  n.  70  ;  cp  EB^,  20727-730  [1886]).

On  this  Jewish  soil  the  earliest  Roman  Christianity,
we may  safely affirm, had already  come into being
before  the  middle  of  the  first  century. The


10.  Age.


oldest distinct trace  of its beginnings is


found  in  Suetonius  (Claud.  25),  where  he  says  of  the
emperor  Claudius  that  he  expelled  the  Jews  from  Rome
on  account  of  their  persistent  turbulence  under  the
instigation  of  Chrestus  ('Judreos  impulsore  Chresto
assidue  tumultuantes  Roma  expulit '  ;  cp  CHRISTIAN,
§  6  iii. ).  The  banishment  of  the  Jews  (Acts  182  and
Dio  Cassius  60  6),  although  probably  in  the  event  not
judged  expedient  or  perhaps  even  possible,  and  in  any
case  not  carried  out  on  any  large  scale,  had  its  occasion
in  troubles  and  disturbances  which  had  arisen  among
the  Jews  '  impulsore  Chresto' — i.e.,  at  the  instance  or
with  the  help  of  Chrestus.  This  Chrestus  was,  to  judge
by  the  manner  of  speech  of  those  days,  no  other  than
(Jesus)  Christ  ;  his  person  and  work,  the  views  and
expectations  connected  with  him,  and  his  cause  were
what  led  Claudius  to  seek  to  remove  the  Jews  who  had
thus  become  troublesome.  Now,  though  the  exact
year  in  which  this  resolution  was  come  to  by  the
emperor  is  uncertain,  if  we  remember  that  at  the
beginning  of  his  reign  (41-54  A.D.)  he  was,  according
to  Josephus  (Ant.  xix.  62-3),  favourably  inclined  to  the
Jews,  we  are  led  to  think  of  a  somewhat  later  date — let  us
say  with  Schiirer  (32/1)  and  others,  the  year  49  A.D.
In  that  case  the  movement  we  are  supposing,  and  its
procuring  cause,  the  first  systematic  preaching  of
Christianity  in  Rome,  can  have  begun  some  months
or  years  previously.  We  must  leave  open  the  question
as  to  whether  at  a  still  earlier  date  some  converts,
in  the  course  of  pilgrimages  to  Jerusalem  or  through
the  agency  of  third  parties  in  their  adopted  country,
may  not  have  been  won  for  the  new  confession  and
the  expectations  connected  with  it.  Rome  had  already
for  a  long  time  been  a  favourite  and  much  frequented
harbour  for  new  ideas  in  the  sphere  of  religion.

With  the  date  thus  arrived  at  for  the  founding  of  the
Christian  church  in  Rome  it  agrees  tolerably  well  that  a
11  Theorv  of  wr'ter  many  years  later,  in  Acts  28  17-28,
At'  d  R  could  still  speak  as  if  the  new  sect
'  were  known  only  by  name  in  the  world
capital  when  Paul  first  proclaimed  the  tidings  of
salvation  to  the  Jews  there,  and  that  another  writer — -
the  author  of  Romans — did  not  hesitate  to  assume
throughout  his  work  that  at  that  very  time  there  had
already  been  for  a  long  time  in  Rome  believers  belong
ing  to  various  schools  of  Christian  thought  and  practice.
When  these  books  were  written  the  days  of  the  first
founding  of  a  church  in  Rome  were  already  so  far
removed  that  in  different  circles  divergent  representa
tions  were  given  regarding  it,  though  there  was  some
danger  of  misrepresentation.  '  Luke '  is  wrong
because  he  does  not  take  account  of  the  existence  of
any  Christian  church  at  Rome  before  the  apostle  Paul
had  made  his  voice  heard  there.  The  Pauline  writer,
on  the  other  hand,  represents  the  apostle  of  the
Gentiles  as  knowing  that  before  his  arrival  among
them  the  faith  of  the  Roman  Christians  was  already
'proclaimed  throughout  the  whole  world'  (Rom.
18),  and  in  617  it  is  the  Pauline  form  of  doctrine
whereunto  they  have  been  delivered.  Both  the  one
view  and  the  other  may  well  be  questioned  as  strict
history.  Both  writers  make  it  manifest  that  they  no
longer  know  the  true  position  of  matters  so  far  as
details  are  concerned.  At  the  same  time  they  confirm,
each  in  his  own  way,  the  correctness  of  the  date  we  have
arrived  at  ;  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  century,  the


ROME  (CHURCH)

founding  of  the  church  at  Rome  belonged  to  a  con
siderably  remote  past  and  at  that  distance  of  time  could,
speaking  broadly,  be  connected  with  a  delineation  of  the
period  when  Paul  was  setting  out  for,  or  had  arrived  at,
the  metropolis  of  the  empire.

The  nearer  determination  of  the  date  is  to  be  sought
in  such  data  as  (i)  the  tradition  regarding  Paul's  plans
12  Further  W'th  reference  to  a  j°urney  to  Spain,  by
data  way  °^  ^ome'  wnere  a  Christian  church
no  longer  needed  to  be  founded  (Rom.
1528  /  cp  i  Clem.  05-7);  (2)  the  tradition  of  Paul's
death  at  Rome,  whether,  as  the  ordinary  reckoning
has  it,  in  64,  as  Erbes  thinks,  on  23rd  Feb.  63,  or
as  yet  others  judge,  at  some  date  that  cannot  be
more  exactly  determined,  shortly  before  or  in  con
nection  with  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  in  the
summer  of  64  ;  (3)  all  that  relates  to  the  fact  of  the
persecution  of  the  Christians  at  Rome  by  Nero  ;  (4)
the  appearance  of  the  '  Church  of  Rome '  as  the  writer
of  Clement's  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  ;  (5)  the
activity  of  Marcion  and  Valentinus  among  the  Christians
at  Rome  ;  (6)  all  that  tradition  tells  us  of  the  establish
ment  of  a  bishop's  see  at  Rome  by  the  apostles
Peter  and  Paul ; — a  very  large  series  of  testimonies
continuously  assuring  us,  each  in  its  own  way,  that  the
founding  of  a  Christian  church  at  Rome  goes  back  to
the  middle  of  the  first  century  of  our  era.

The  character  of  this  church  was,  to  begin  with,  no
other  than  was  to  be  expected  from  its  origin  within  the

13.  Character  ?hf e  of  '  Jews  and,  Prose]ytes>  (§  4)-
„ , , Ambrosiaster  in  speaking  of  Jews  alone

as  fathers  of  the  Christian  community
at  Rome  has  here  again  truly  said  that  those  who
believed  confessed  Christ  and  held  fast  by  the  law  ( '  ex
quibus  [Judaeis]  hi  qui  crecliderant,  tradiderunt  Romanis
ut  Christum  profitentes  legem  servarent ' ).  In  this
there  is  no  '  exaggeration '  as  Sanday  and  Headlam
(p.  25,  n.  3)  have  thought.  They  indeed  could  hardly
have  thought  otherwise  as  long  as  they  were  dominated
by  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.
Whoever  deems  himself  bound  to  maintain  that  belief
must  inevitably  assume  that  already,  before  Romans
was  written  by  Paul — on  the  ordinary  reckoning,  that  is
to  say,  before  59  A.D. — there  were  to  be  met  with  in
Rome  two  divergent  types  of  Christian  faith  and  profes
sion,  the  Jewish-Christian  and  the  Pauline.  Such  an
one  cannot  avoid  facing  the  question  :  What  was  the
church  of  Rome  at  that  time?  Jewish -Christian?
Pauline?  Mixed?  Yet  all  the  while  he  is  well  aware —
or  the  discovery  is  ever  anew  forced  upon  him — that  no
satisfactory  answer  to  the  question  can  be  given.  Some
texts  speak  very  clearly  for  the  view  that  the  church  in
question  consisted  of  former  gentiles,  whilst  others  say
the  exact  opposite— that  it  was  composed  of  former
Jews  (see  ROMANS,  §  8  ;  van  Manen,  Paulits,  2  23-25
166-7).  Yet  Nve  cannot  hold  with  Sanday -Headlam
(p.  xxvi)  and  others  the  theory  that  it  was  a  '  mixed  '
church.  To  such  a  theory  can  be  applied  to  the
full  what  these  scholars  remark  in  another  connec
tion  :  '  there  is  no  hint  of  such  a  state  of  things,'  which
moreover  would  compel  us,  contrary  to  the  manifest
intention  of  the  writer,  to  think  of  '  two  distinct  churches
in  Rome,  one  Jewish-Christian,  the  other  Gentile-
Christian,  and  that  St.  Paul  wrote  only  to  the  latter.'

Any  one  who,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  able  to  free
himself  from  the  axiom  of  the  genuineness  and  has
satisfied  himself  of  the  pseudepigraphical  character  of
this  writing  of  a  later  time  (see  ROMANS)  no  longer  feels
his  hands  tied  by  the  various  impossible  attempts  that
have  been  made  to  answer  the  questions  proposed.  He
is  no  longer  perplexed  by  that  other  troublesome
question  :  How  are  we  to  explain  the  fact  that  nowhere
in  history  has  there  remained  any  trace  of  the  existence
of  an  important  Pauline  community  in  Rome,  after  the
apostle's  epistle  had  been  sent  thither  ?  He  takes  no
notice  of  all  ideas  of  this  sort,  the  pictures  suggested

4152


ROME  (CHURCH)

in  the  epistle  of  the  outward  appearance  and  inward
semblance  of  the  Christian  church  in  Rome  in  the  days
before  Paul  could  possibly  have  preached  there  —  as
being  not  renderings  of  historical  actuality  but  pictures
of  a  past  that  never  had  been  real,  attempts  to  repre
sent  the  old-Christian  period  after  many  decades  had
passed.  Such  a  student  holds  fast  by  the  seemingly
insignificant  phrase,  which  yet  tells  us  so  much,  of  the
instigating  '  Chrestus '  by  whom  the  Jews  in  Rome,
according  to  Suetonius,  in  the  days  of  Claudius  (06.
49  A.  D.  )  were  troubled  ;  and  holds  by  the  pretty  generally
accepted  conception  as  to  a  Christian  Church  at  Rome
which  had  arisen  out  of  the  faith  and  life,  the  active
exertions,  of  '  Jews  and  proselytes  '  who  had  been  con
verted  to  Christ  ;  by  what  Ambrosiaster  has  said,  with
equal  sobriety  and  justice — that  Jews  living  in  Rome  in
the  days  of  the  apostles  had  taught  their  brethren  to
confess  Christ  and  to  hold  fast  by  the  law.

In  other  words,  the  church  in  Rome  was  originally
Jewish -Christian, and probably long remained so.
14 T '  h Gradually more liberal ideas crept in,
~, • ,  -  thanks  perhaps  to  the  influence  of  more

advanced  preachers  from  abroad  who  had
wholly  or  partially  outgrown  their  Judaism,  but  thanks
still  more  to  the  ease  with  which  in  every  sphere  of
thought  new  ideas  made  way  in  Rome.  Whether  Paul
may  have  had  any  active  share  in  this  work  we  are  not
now  in  a  position  to  say.  Acts  leaves  us  in  doubt.
Romans  testifies  to  good  intentions  but  not  to  any  work
actually  clone.  The  'epistle,' in  spiteof  theseemingabund-
ance  of  the  light  it  sheds  on  the  events  of  the  years  im
mediately  preceding  59  A.n.  in  Rome,  really  draws  over
them  all  an  almost  impenetrable  veil.  It  gives  surpris
ing  glimpses  into  the  history  of  the  development  of  the
church  in  the  direction  of  greater  freedom,  the  emanci
pation  of  Christianity  from  the  dominion  of  the  law,  but
all  from  a  remote  distance  in  space,  probably  from  the
East — Antioch  or  somewhere  else  in  Syria,  it  may  be,  or
perchance  Asia  Minor — at  all  events,  a  long  way  off
and  in  a  distinctly  later  time.  In  reality,  in  the
15  St  1  more  trustworthy  tradition  there  is  no

,.  _  ..  °.°  trace  of  all  this,  but  on  the  contrary,
*'  unmistakable  proof  that  Paulinism  at
Rome  though  (i. )  it  struggled  for  a  time  for  the  victory
in  the  days  of  Marcion  (ob.  140  A.  D. ).  (ii. )  never  really
took  permanent  root  there,  and  never  was  other  than  an
exotic.

i.  That  Paulinism  flourished  in  some  degree  at  Rome
is  very  certain,  as  we  may  safely  infer  :  (a)  from  the
way  in  which  it  is  throughout  presupposed  in  Romans
(written  probably  about  120  A. D.  ;  see  ROMANS,  §  23)
that,  before  his  first  visit  to  the  capital,  Paul  already  had
there  a  large  circle  of  friends  and  followers,  of  whom  a
whole  series  is  mentioned  by  name  in  163-15,  and
who  already  for  a  long  time  had  been  instructed
in  his  distinctive  type  of  doctrine  (617);  (t]  from
the  support  as  well  as  the  opposition,  which  Marcion
met  with  in  Rome,  in  various  capacities,  and  not  least
of  all  as  advocate  of  his  '  Apostle,'  the  Paul  of  the
epistles  ;  (c)  from  the  friendly  relation  between  Peter
and  Paul  presupposed  in  '  i  Peter,'  probably  written  at
Rome,  in  evidence  of  which  relation  we  point  not  only
to  the  Pauline  form  of  the  writing  and  to  the  mention,
at  the  end,  of  Silvanus  and  of  Mark(cp  2  Peter  3  is/. ),  but
also  and  chiefly  to  the  strongly  Pauline  character  of  the
contents  ;  (d)  from  the  liberal  spirit  of  the  gospel
according  to  Mark,  probably  also  written  at  Rome,
along  with  which  perhaps  that  according  to  Luke  may
also  be  named  ;  (e)  from  the  honour  with  which
'  Clement '  as  spokesman  of  the  church  at  Rome  writes
'  to  the  Corinthians  '  concerning  Paul  (i  Clem.  65-7  47  i),
and  more  than  once  declares  that  he  is  influenced  by
the  reading  of  his  '  epistles  '  ;  (/)  from  the  mention  of
Paul  along  with  Peter  as  a  teacher  of  authority  by
1  Ignatius'  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans  ('  I  do  not  com
mand  you  as  Peter  and  Paul  did,'  43)  ;  (g)  from  the

4153


ROME  (CHURCH)

wide  currency  of  the  later  tradition  of  the  founding  of
the  Christian  church  at  Rome  by  '  Peter  and  Paul.'

ii.  Paulinism  was,  however,  only  partially  successful,  as
is  no  less  clearly  evident :  (a)  from  the  way  in  which
in  Romans  Paul  now  admonishes  the  Jews  (chaps.  1-8,
passim,  and  especially  217-29)  and  now  shows  them
the  greatest  deference  (chaps.  9-11  passim,  especially
3 if.  9 1-5  10 1)  ;  (l>)  from  the  opposition  met  with  by
Marcion  in  Rome  which  ended  in  his  expulsion  from
the  new  religious  community ;  (c)  from  the  position
of  the  name  of  Paul  in  the  younger  tradition — already
in  'Clement'  and  'Ignatius'  —  after  that  of  Peter;

(</)  from  the  spirit  of  works  brought  out  at  Rome
and  extensively  read  there,  the  most  outstanding  of
which  is  the  so-called  first  Epistle  of  Clement  to
the  Corinthians.  The  spirit  there  breathed,  notwith
standing  the  reverence  expressed  for  '  Paul '  and
the  deference  occasionally  paid  to  the  principles
inaugurated  by  him,  is  much  more  of  a  Jewish-Christian
character  than  one  that  testifies  to  warm  sympathy  with
the  gospel  of  freedom  ;  rather  one  that  is  slowly  gravi
tating  toward  the  left  than  one  that  is  averse  to  the  right
in  principle  ;  a  conciliatory  and  advancing  spirit,  if  you
will,  yet  rather  in  many  respects  showing  lingering  attach
ment  to  the  old  than  still  standing  with  both  feet  upon
the  basis  of  the  law,  firmly  rooted  in  Judaism,  filled
with  the  rich  contents  of  the  Old  Testament  ;  in  a  word,
a  spirit  that  in  its  inmost  nature  is  becoming  Catholic.

The  Christian  Church  of  Rome,  in  its  beginnings  a
shoot  from  the  Jewish  stock,  in  the  course  of  years  took

IBP d i  UP an<^ assimilated elements that were
' ,  brought  to  it  from  other  quarters  : from

°  '  the  East,  and  particularly  from  Syria  and
Asia  Minor.  Its  power  of  adaptation  was  of  great  use
to  it  in  regard  to  those  elements  in  the  new  faith  which
were  originally  strange  in  it  and  were  at  home  rather  in
the  more  developed  circles  of  Paulinism,  but  in  adapting
itself  the  original  power  of  the  Pauline  spiritual  move
ment  was  in  many  respects  taken  away.  In  the  course
of  years — let  us  say,  in  round  numbers,  between  50  and
150  A.D. — the  character  of  the  church  at  Rome,  from
being  Jewish-Christian  with  occasional  deviations  towards
the  right  and  towards  the  left,  had  become,  we  shall  not
say  Pauline  or  Gentile-Christian,  but  Catholic.  At  the
later  date — i.e. ,  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century
— it  had  recently  been  the  scene  of  the  labours  of
Marcion,  who  was  excommunicated  afterwards,  Marcion
the  eager  and  serious  advocate  of  '  Paul '  who  had  already
probably  some  years  before  become  known  to  it  by  means
of  the  'epistles.'  It  had  at  the  same  time  come  into
touch  with,  among  others,  that  highly  gifted  teacher,  well
nigh  lost  in  broad  and  deep  speculations,  alternately
held  in  reverence  and  covered  with  scorn,  the  gnostic
Valentinus.  It  had  learned  to  listen  to  preachers  of
repentance  like  Hermas  who,  eminently  practical,
sought  to  win  it  before  all  things  else  to  the  urgent
duty  of  conversion.  But,  however  divergent  may  have
been  the  paths  by  which  it  was  so  dissimilarly  led  by
these  and  other  leaders  to  clearer  insight  on  many  sides,
and  deeper  experience  of  the  fruits  of  faith  as  that
translated  itself  into  a  genuine  Christian  life,  the
structure  as  carried  out  appeared  always,  in  spite  of
the  multifarious  and  manifold  additions,  to  rest  upon
the  old  foundation — destined,  as  it  would  seem,  never
to  become  obsolete — that  of  the  law  and  of  Judaism,  to
which,  as  a  new  and  indispensable  element,  confession
of  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  had  been  added.

How  this  Christian  community  at  Rome  was  originally

governed  and  organised  can  probably  be  best  conjectured,

p t-j. m  the  absence  of  all  positive  informa-

, . ' °nTS  1  .U" tion, by calling to mind once more
ouewisnwhat ^e  know  of  {he  spjrit  of  {hat

community.  religious  feiiowship  Of  the  Jews  out  of
which  it  arose.  Like  this  last  it  had  no  political  aims,
and  consequently  as  yet  knew  nothing  of  those  who  at
a  later  time  were  to  be  called  rulers  and  leaders,  charged

4154


ROME  (CHURCH)

with  the  care  of  the  outward  life  of  Christians  as  subjects
of  the  state.  The  Jewish  '  Church,'  although  it  can  be
so  called  in  respect  of  the  religious  confession  of  its
adherents,  formed  no  unity  placed  under  the  leadership
and  government  of  a  single  council  or  of  one  head.  It
was  made  up  rather  of  a  great  number  of  separate  and
independent  congregations  (yvvayuyal),  each  having
its  own  synagogue,  its  own  council  (ytpovffLa),  its  own
rulers  ({LpxovTes),  who  also  sometimes  at  least,  were
partly  called  'elders'  (ir/OT/Stfrepot),  and,  whether  for
life  (5ii  fiiov)  or  for  a  limited  period,  were  chosen  at
the  beginning  of  the  Jewish  civil  year  (in  September).
They  were  charged  with  the  general  leadership  of  the
community,  sometimes  also  with  the  task  associated
with  the  special  office  of  chief  of  the  synagogue
(dpx'°'1'1'<*"yct'7os)-  The  language  employed  was  Greek,
as  indeed  the  whole  constitution  with  rulers  (apxovrfs)
and  councils  (yepovffl<u),  so  far  as  form  was  con
cerned,  seems  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the  civil
organisation  usual  in  Greek  cities  (see  Schiirer,  Die
Gemeindeverfassungderjuden  in  Rom,  1879,  and  GJW\
3-  PP-  44-51  [1898]).

The  Christian  Church  also,  we  may  safely  take  for

granted,  very  soon  after  its  members  had  been  excom-

_  - municated,  or  had  voluntarily  withdrawn

_, .' . from the Jewish synagogues in Rome,

_, , had  their  own  centres,  with  a  government
Church.

proper to  themselves  (modelled  mainly,

so  far  as  form  was  concerned,  on  that  which  they  had
left  at  the  call  of  religious  principle  and  duty),  their
own  places  of  meeting  (ywayuyai),  their  own  rulers
(&pXOVTe<>),  who  are  often  called  elders  (irpecrfivTfpoi.).
This  was  what  happened  elsewhere  throughout  the  cities
of  the  Dispersion.  Why  not  also  in  Rome  ?  Acts  calls
the  rulers  'elders'  (wpecrfivrepoi)  in  llso  14z3  20ij',
whenever  Jerusalem  is  spoken  of,  where  the  apostles
are  regarded  as  having  lived  and  laboured,  we  read
of  'apostles  and  elders'  (1024623  164),  just  as  the
same  writer  elsewhere  when  referring  to  the  rulers
(dpxovres)  of  the  Jews  speaks  of  their  'elders'  (2 17
45823  612  2814  24i  25  15).  For  the  rest,  in  Acts  we
find  no  allusion  to  any  government  of  Christian  com
munities,  just  as,  in  fact,  of  the  community  that  arose
after  the  arrival  of  Paul  in  Rome  nothing  more  is  said
than  that  they  met  in  Paul's  own  house  (2830 /.).  In
Romans  there  is  no  evidence  as  to  the  terms  employed
in  this  connection  by  the  Christians  at  Rome,  except
in  a  single  passage  where  allusion  is  made  to  '  him  that
ruleth  '  (6  Trpoio-rd/xecos  :  128).

i  Clem. ,  the  '  epistle  '  of  the  '  church  of  God  '  at
Rome  to  that  of  Corinth,  has  more  to  say.  The  church
(r)  fKK\rjffia)  comes  before  us  as  a  unity  embracing  all
believers  within  the  boundaries  of  a  definite  locality  ;
so  in  the  opening  words  and  also  in  44s  476  (cp  2  Clem.
2 1  14 1  2  41).  We  are  not  precluded  from  thinking  that,
as  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  this  unity  was  made  up  of
various  circles  or  congregations  within  the  larger  whole
which  comprehended  the  whole  body  of  the  faithful.
The  supposition  finds  support  when  we  consider  the
manner  in  which  the  occurrence  of  divergent  ideas  and
practices  with  regard  to  the  choice  of  officials  is  spoken
of.  Some  consider  themselves  free  in  their  choice  ;  but
others,  including  the  writer,  hold  themselves  bound  to
tradition  and  obliged  to  adhere  to  the  ancient  holders
of  spiritual  offices  as  long  as  they  have  not  disqualified
themselves  by  misconduct  (cp  13  83  216  42  44  592).
True,  this  applies,  so  far  as  form  is  concerned,  in  the
first  instance  and  especially,  only  to  the  Corinthians
who  are  being  addressed,  but  yet  also  to  the  Romans
who  are  speaking  of  themselves  in  the  plural  number
(cp  7 1  ;  see  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,  §  24).
The  most  obvious  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the
supposition  that  the  divergent  views  and  practices
referred  to  were  found  in  the  different  circles  or  congre
gations  (4KK\r)fflai)  within  the  bounds  of  the  one  church
— 77  tKK\r)<rla — whether  that  of  Rome  or  that  of  Corinth.

4155


However  that  may  be,  '  the  church '  had  its  rulers  or
leaders  ( rjyoi>fj.evoi ;  1  3)  just  as  had  the  Jews  (322),  the
Egyptians  (51s),  and  others  (37s  55i  60i).  They  are
usually  called  'elders'  (irpffffitirepoi.  ;  1383  216  44s
476  54a  57  i,  cp  2  Clem.  17s5),  but  in  one  instance,
though  in  no  different  sense,  '  overseers '  (eiriffKotroi)
and  'deacons'  (diaKOvoi,  424/. ,  cp  44 1  50s),  charged
with  the  sacred  service  (XeiToi'/>7ia,  41 1  44 2/.  6).  They
were  'ministering'  (XeiTovpyovvres ;  463)  just  as  in
their  manner  were  the  Jews  (32-2  40),  Enoch  (92),
Aaron  (434),  the  angels  of  God  (34s/. ).  In  this  service
or  ministry  were  included,  or  at  least  came  under  their
superintendence,  ( i )  the  reading  of  scripture  (17  ypafiri
or  ai  if  pal  ypa<pai) — the  OT  as  we  now  know  it  and
whatever  other  writings  were  at  that  time  reckoned  as
belonging  to  it  ;  also  Christian  writings  such  as  Paul's
'  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians '  and  other  treatises,  including

1  and  2  Clem, (cp  2  Clem.  19i  15i 17s  i  Clem.  47 1
682  7 1,  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,  §§  2-4;  Herm.
Vis.  ii.  Is  4 1  Eus.  HE\\.  258  iii.  885)— (2)  exhortation
(cp  i Clem,  passim)  and (3)  prayer  (i Clem.  593-61

2  Clem.  22). All  of  these,  as  with  the  Jews,  at  least
down  to  near  the  end of  the second century, were
performed  in  Greek.

Of  a  monarchical  government  of  the  Church  there  is
as  yet  no  trace  in  i  and  2  Clem.  Neither  is  there  any
in  the  Shepherd  of  Hernias  which,  like  the  Epistles  of
Clement,  knows  only  of  elders  (  Vis.  ii.  4z  3  iii.  18)  and
overseers,  along  with  'teachers'  and  'deacons'  (I 'is.
iii.  5 1  Sim.  ix.  272).  The  oldest  traces  of  monarchical
church  government  in  Rome  are  met  with  in  the  seven
epistles  of  '  Ignatius  '  which  were  probably  written  there
about  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  and  in  the
earliest  lists  of  Roman  bishops- — little  trustworthy
though  these  are  in  their  substance,  and  put  together  in
the  interests  of  the  recognition  of  the  episcopate,  which
was  then  coming  into  being,  or  had  recently  come  to  be
important.  They  do  not  go  farther  back  than  to
Anicetus,  and  were  probably  drawn  up  under  his
successor  Soter,  about  170  A.D.  (see  Harnack,  ACL
ii.  1  1897,  pp.  70-231,  esp.  pp.  144-202.  See,  further,
MINISTRY).

If  the  question  be  asked,  finally,  as  to  the  influence
and  importance  of  the  Christian  church  at  Rome,  it  was
T  small  and  certainly  for  the  first  few

f  R°  nCe  decades'  not  to  be  compared  with  that
'  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  nor  y<H  with
that  of  other  churches  of  Palestine,  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor.
It  was  only  gradually  in  the  course  of  the  second
century  that  a  change  in  this  respect  came  about,  under
the  influence  of  great  historical  events  such  as  the  fall
of  Jerusalem  in  70  A.D. ,  the  rebuilding  of  that  city  as
/Elia  Capitolina  under  Hadrian  (see  JERUSALEM,
§§  33/-)>  and  tne  continual  process  by  which  the  West
manifested  its  preponderance  over  the  East.  In  all  this
there  made  itself  felt  the  favourable  situation  of  the
Christian  Church  at  Rome  in  the  centre  of  Grasco-
Roman  civilisation  ;  the  inborn  inclination,  and  the
corresponding  aptitude,  of  what  had  been  the  Gentile
element  in  the  new  church,  to  lead  and  soon  to  dominate
believers  who  had  their  homes  elsewhere,  as  well  as
unbelievers  ;  and  last,  certainly  not  least,  whatever  that
church  was  able  to  contribute  from  its  own  resources
towards  its  internal  growth  and  its  external  prestige.
In  this  connection  we  may  particularly  specify  :  the
accession  not  merely  of  slaves  and  people  of  the  lower
orders  but  also  of  rich  and  often  influential  persons,
sometimes  even  from  the  immediate  entourage  of  the
emperor  ;  the  courage  shown  by  martyrs  there  as  else
where  ;  the  zeal  of  outstanding  personalities  such  as
Valentinus  and  Marcion  ;  the  activity  of  efficient  nu-n
such  as  '  Clement '  and  '  Ignatius '  in  labouring  for  the
establishment  of  the  Catholic  Church ;  the  labour
expended  on  various  sides  to  advance  far  and  near  the
cause  of  knowledge,  of  Christian  practice,  of  edification,
of  consolation.

4156


ROME  (EMPIRE)

Marcion  laid  the  foundations  of  a  recognition  of  a

written norm  of  truth,  of  belief  (KCLVUV  TT)S  d\r)0fias,

9rt Phristian T^ ™reus), one gospel and ten

Hterature Pauline Epistles ^ EteryAtov Kal

11  UGl  tl  u  UI  U.  • • .  *  r i  '  A  -v ' "1 ;  1 ' 1

o  ATTOOTOAOS  [TO  ATrooToAi/coi'J),  which
the  church  as  it  grew  Catholic  soon  spread  far  and
wide  and  accepted — along  with  the  older  tradition — •
as  the  touchstone  of  truth.  Into  this  (ecclesiastical)
canon  Rome,  according  to  the  list  discovered  and
published  in  modern  times  by  Muratori,  introduced  a
larger  collection  of  Old-Christian  writings  differing  but
slightly  in  extent  from  the  NT  as  that  was  finally  fixed
by  well-nigh  the  whole  of  Christendom.  Marcion  also
wrote  an  orthodoxly  conceived  'Epistle'  and  'Antitheses'
or  'Separation  of  Law  and  Gospel'  (Antitheses  or
Scparatio  legis  et  evangelii)  ;  Valentinus  was  the  author
of  'Epistles,'  'Homilies,'  and  'Psalms.'  Some  un
known  writer  prepared  the  Gospel  according  to  Mark  ;
'Clement,'  two  'epistles'  to  the  Corinthians,  of  which
the  first  is  a  '  Treatise  concerning  Peace  and  Harmony'
((vrevi-ts  TTfpl  eiprivTjs  Kal  6/uocoias),  conceived,  according
to  its  own  description  of  itself  (682),  in  the  interests  of
peace  in  the  churches,  and  especially  in  the  matter  of
the  election  of  elders,  and  the  second  is  an  '  Exhortation
concerning  continence'  (2v/u/3oi>X/a  irepl  ^yKparfias,
15 1).  Hernias  wrote  his  Shepherd  to  stir  up  all  to
repentance;  'Ignatius'  composed  his  'Epistles'  upon
love  for  the  promotion  of  martyrdom  and  on  behalf  of
right  views  in  doctrine  and  in  life.  He  and  others
contributed  largely  to  the  upbuilding  of  their  own  as
well  as  other  churches,  where  their  epistles  were  diligently
read.  Thus  the  Roman  leaders  exercised  influence  in
ever-widening  circles,  and  opened  up  the  way,  often
quite  unconsciously,  for  the  spiritual  predominance  of
their  fellow-believers  abroad.  From  the  middle  of  the
second  century  another  element  that  had  no  small
influence  also  was  the  effort  after  a  one-man  government
of  the  church,  first  on  the  part  of  Rome  alone,  but
afterwards  also  on  that  of  others  who  afterwards
associated  themselves  with  it  in  this.  Polycarp  of
Smyrna,  seeking  for  comfort  at  the  hands  of  Anicetus
of  Rome  in  the  matter  of  orthodox  observance  of  Easter,
still  knows  how  to  maintain  his  freedom  of  thought  and
action  in  another  direction  than  that  prescribed  to  him.
But  one  of  his  successors  in  the  Asia  Minor  controversy
of  the  Quartodecimans,  Polycrates  of  Ephesus,  was
excommunicated  by  Victor  of  Rome  and  cut  off  from
the  fellowship  of  the  faithful  (see  Baur,  Das  Christenthutn
u.  d.  Christl.  Kirche  der  drei  Ersten  Jahrh.  1853,
pp.  141-157).  In  this  manner  the  preponderance  and
authoritativeness,  and  ultimately  the  supremacy,  of  the
church  of  Rome  had  already  come  to  be  recognised  in
the  East  before  the  end  of  the  second  century.

For  the  extensive  literature  dealing  with  our  subject  reference

may  be  made,  amongst  others,  to  such  studies  on  the  supposed

. sojourn  of  Peter  and  Paul  in  Rome  as  those  of

21.  BlbllO-  A."  Harnack,  ACL  ii.  1  1897,  pp.  240-244,  703-
graphy.  710  ;  C.  Clemen,  '  1st  Petrus  in  Rom  gewesen?'
in  Preuss.  Jahrb.  1901,  pp.  404-417;  C.  Erbes,
'  Petrus  nicht  in  Rom  sondern  in  Jerusalem  gestorben '  in
Brieger's  Ztschr.f.  Kirchen-gesch.  IQOI,  pp.  1-47  161-231  ;  on
the  Jews  in  Rome  in  Sanday  and  Headlam,  The  Ep.  to  the
Romans,  1895,  xviii-xxv ;  Berliner,  Gesch.  der  Juden  in  Rom,
1893  ;  E.  Schiirer,  Die  Genieincteverfassung  der  Jtiden  in  Rom,
1879  andGy/'(3),  iii.  1898,  pp.  28-36  44-56.  Also  to  the  comment
aries  on  Romans  such  as  those  of  Sanday -Headlam,  1895,
xviii-xliv ;  R.  A.  Lipsius  in  HC(~\,  1892,  pp.  70-78;  Meyer-
WeissW,  1890,  pp.  16-22:  to  theNTintroductionssuchasthoseof
S.  Davidson!3),  1804,  1105-113;  H.  J.  Holtzmannl3),  1892,  pp.
232-236;  Th.  Zahnf2!,  1900,  pp.  299-308  ;  J.  M.  S.  Baljon,  1901,
pp.  88-92.  See  also  '  Romans  (Epistle  to  the)'  in  Ency.  Brit.P),
26727-730  [1886],  and  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,  PAUL,
ROMANS,  SIMON  PETER,  in  the  present  work.  w.  C.  v.  M.

ROME  (EMPIRE).  The  Roman  Empire  has  been
supposed  to  be  alluded  to  in  Dan.  2  and  7,  but  the  interpretation
'  is  one  which  the  progress  of  history  has  shewn  to  be  untenable '
(Driver,  Daniel,  98  ;  see  the  whole  discussion,  94-102).  Rome
is  referred  to  by  name  in  biblical  writings  for  the  first  time  in
connection  with  Antiochus  Epiphanes ;  this  'sinful  root,"  we
are  told,  had  been  a  hostage  at  Rome  (i  Mace.  1  10,  os  rjc  6/mjpa
tv  Tifi  •PwniT)).

4157


ROME  (EMPIRE)

The  topography  and  history  of  Rome  and  of  the  Roman
Empire  is  so  vast  a  subject  and  is  so  fully  dealt  with  by  various
writers  and  in  easily  accessible  works  of  reference,  that  it  has  been
deemed  sufficient,  in  the  space  at  our  disposal,  simply  to  touch
upon  the  problem  of  the  relation  of  Rome  to  Judaism  and  to
early  Christianity.

Destined  to  play  such  an  important  part  in  the
political  and  religious  history  of  the  Jews,  the  Empire

1.  Rome  and  the  came  into  close  touch  with  them  for

Hasmoneans. the  first  tmie  in  the  eari>'  d*?s  of  the
revolt against the power  of  Syria.

About  the  year  161  B.C.  Judas  the  Maccabee  having
heard  of  the  great  fame  of  the  Romans,  sent  an  embassy
'  to  make  a  league  of  amity  and  confederacy  with  them,
and  that  they  should  take  the  yoke  from  them  ;  for  they
saw  that  the  kingdom  of  the  Greeks  did  keep  Israel  in
bondage'  (i  Mace.  8ijf.  ;  cp  2  Mace.  1134,  Jos.  Ant.
xii.  106  Justin 36 3).  The  mission  was  successful  ;  but
before  the  news  arrived  Judas  was  slain  (i  Mace.  9i-i8  ;
Jos.  Ant.  xii.  Hi).  In  143  B.C.  the  alliance  was
renewed  by  the  statesmanlike  Jonathan  (i  Mace.
12i-4  16  ;  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  58).  On  the  death  of  Jonathan,
Simon,  his  brother  and  successor,  like  his  predecessors,
also  sent  to  Rome  to  seek  a  renewal  of  friendship.
The  ambassador,  this  time  Numenius,  was  again
successful,  and  '  the  Romans  issued  a  decree  to  all  the
peoples  of  the  East,  announcing  that  they  had  entered
into  a  league  of  friendship  with  the  Jews '  (W.  D.
Morrison,  The  Jews  under  Roman  Rule,  13).  Hyrcanus,
again,  Simon's  son  and  successor,  after  the  death  of
Antiochus  (129  B.C.),  to  escape  paying  any  more  the
tribute  which  the  Syrian  had  exacted,  sent  yet  another
embassy  to  Rome,  and  again  '  in  accordance  with  the
settled  principle  of  Roman  policy  in  the  East,  the  Jewish
mission  was  received  in  a  friendly  manner,  their
grievances  were  attentively  heard,  and  a  decree  was
issued,  ordering  the  Syrians  to  relinquish  their  claims
to  tribute,  and  declaring  void  whatever  Antiochus  had
done  in  Judaea  in  opposition  to  previous  declarations
of  the  senate  [Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  92/i]'  (Morrison,  op.  cit.
16 f.].  After  this  several  causes  combined  to  weaken
the  power  of  the  Syrians,  so  that  the  Jews  no  longer
had  any  cause  to  fear  them.

Such  were  the  first  relations  of  the  Jews  with  the  Roman
Empire,  if  we  are  to  trust  tradition  ;  but  as  Morrison  again
observes  (19),  'some  of  these  supposed  alliances  rest  upon  very
slender  historical  foundations."  For  further  details  we  must
refer  the  reader  to  the  article  MACCABEES  (cp  ISKAEL).

While  the  Roman  Empire  was  becoming  more  and
more  imperialistic,  within  the  Jewish  nation  was  arising,
_  .  .  through  the  play  of  new  ideas,  that  spirit
L,  ...  of  faction  which  was  to  rend  it  asunder
"  •>  "  'even  in  the  face  of  a  common  foe  (see
SADDUCEES,  SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES  ;  cp  ISRAEL).
See  again  on  the  history  of  the  period  MACCABEES,
and  JANN^KUS.  The  disputes  between  Pharisees  and
Sadducees  did  not  end  with  words  ;  in  the  contest
between  the  soldiers  of  Alexander  and  the  Pharisees
much  blood  was  spilt.  The  struggle  went  on  through
out  the  reign  of  Alexander,  though  towards  the  end
he  was  able  to  subdue  the  Pharisees  and  their  allies
the  Syrians  ;  it  continued  during  the  reign  of  Salome
Alexandra  (78-69  B.C.),  in  which  John  Hyrcanus,  one
of  Alexander's  sons  was  content  to  act  as  high  priest ;
and  into  the  reign  of  Aristobulus  (69-63  B.C.),
Alexander's  other  son.  It  sapped  the  strength  of  the
nation  so  that  it  was  ready  to  fall  an  easy  prey  to  a
power  that  aimed  at  expansion.  When  the  Romans,
who  for  a  time  had  been  otherwise  occupied,  again
turned  their  attention  to  the  East,  having  been  roused  to
action  by  the  revolt  of  Mithridates,  king  of  Pontus,  in
88  B.C.,  and  when  success  had  attended  their  arms  in
the  very  neighbourhood  of  this  people  that  had  wantonly
reduced  itself  to  a.  state  of  miserable  weakness,  it  was
natural  and  inevitable  that  the  Roman  Empire  should
be  further  extended.  Another  civil  war  in  Palestine
(66  B.C.)  gave  Pompey  his  opportunity.  Hyrcanus,
influenced  by  the  schemer  Antipater,  had  plotted  to

4158


ROME  (EMPIRE)

overthrow  Aristobulus.  When,  however,  the  Pharisees,
assisted  by  the  Nabateans,  were  besieging  Aristobulus
in  the  temple,  Marcus  Scaurus,  one  of  Pompey's
lieutenants,  appeared  on  the  scene,  put  an  end  to  the
fight,  and  set  Aristobulus  on  the  throne 'for  a  time  at
least.  The  struggle  between  the  two  brothers  soon
broke  out  again.  This  time  Aristobulus,  having
offended  the  Romans,  was  besieged  by  them  in  Jeru
salem.  With  the  help  of  the  Sadducees,  and  in  spite
of  the  Pharisees,  he  was  able  to  hold  out  against  the
besiegers  ;  but  in  the  end  Pompey,  attacking  him  on  a
Sabbath  (63  B.C.),  broke  through  and  inflicted  severe
punishment  on  the  Jews.

Judnea  was  then  regarded  as  a  conquered  province.
We  may  venture  to  say  with  Morrison  that  the  new
arrangements  that  resulted  'were  on  the


3.  Closer


whole a blessing  to  the  peoples  of  the


°°fu1^  East'  who  were  rescued  from  chaos  and  in'

Wltn  Rome.  stability> and enabled, after years of

anarchy,  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  peace'  (41).  Graetz
(Hist.  267)  points  out  that  'the  Jud;tan  prisoners  that
had  been  dragged  to  Rome,  were  to  become  the  nucleus
of  a  community  destined  to  carry  on  a  new  kind  of
warfare  against  long -established  Roman  institutions,
ultimately  to  modify  or  partly  to  destroy  them.'
Certainly  the  war  between  the  new  and  old  ideas  was
to  go  on  uninterruptedly  until  some  adjustment  could
be  effected.  Under  the  Herods,  when  the  Jews  were
again  in  large  measure  allowed  to  govern  themselves,
the  adoption  of  Hellenic  culture  was  encouraged  by  the
rulers  to  such  an  extent  that  the  people  revolted  against
it.  The  Jews  determined  to  rid  themselves  of  their
half-Jewish  rulers.  At  the  request  of  the  people  them
selves  they  were  at  length  put  under  the  direct  govern
ment  of  Rome.  '  With  the  return  of  Judaea  to  a  Roman
administration  begins  the  prelude  of  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  people — perhaps  the  most
shocking  tragedy  known  to  the  history  of  the  world '
(Cornill,  Hist,  of  the  People  of  Israel,  259).  The
tragedy  was  due  to  the  refusal  of  a  large  section
amongst  the  people,  such  as  the  Pharisees,  the  Zealots,
and  the  Sicarii,  to  accept  the  inevitable — Roman  rule
and  the  spread  of  Graeco- Roman  ideas.

After  Pompey's  conquest  Jewish  and  Roman  history  are
closely  bound  up  together,  and  the  details  have  been  sufficiently
dealt  with  in  ISKAEL,  §§85-115,  HEKOD,  PILATE,  GOVERNMENT,
JERUSALEM,  SELEUCID/E,  TRADE,  and  other  special  articles.

One  of  the  problems  of  history  is  to  discover  the
precise  attitude  adopted  by  the  Romans  towards

-.  ,  Judaism,  on  the  one  hand,  and  towards

4  Kome  ana  Christianity  on  the  other  We  know

the  Gospel.

r that  important  concessions  were  made  to

the  Jews  and  that  on  the  whole  they  enjoyed  a  large
measure  of  religious  liberty.  Unfortunately,  however,
we  are  unable  to  treat  the  history  of  Josephus  or  the
narratives  of  the  XT  as  in  all  respects  historically
accurate.  As  to  Josephus,  '  his  persistent  endeavour
to  make  it  apparent  that  his  people  were  actually  friends
of  the  Romans,  and  in  reality  took  up  arms  against
them  unwillingly,  is  a  notable  example  of  hii  colouring
of  the  situation,  and  compels  the  acceptance  of  his
assertions  with  some  caution  '  ( Riggs,  Hist,  of  Jewish
People,  145  ;  cp  De  Quincey,  Works,  7 131^).  As  to
the  Gospels,  it  is  admitted  that  their  present  form  is
due  to  editorial  redaction.  Christianity  was  no  sudden
growth.  It  arose  gradually,  and  only  made  its  way  by
slow  degrees.  It  represents  the  result  of  that  inter
play  of  Eastern  and  Western  ideas  which  began  under
the  DISPERSION  (q.  v. ).  Judaism,  under  the  influence
of  Greek  thought,  had  undergone  during  the  disper
sion  a  striking  change.  Later,  the  transition  from
Grasco- Judaism  to  Christian  Judaism,  and  from  the
ideas  of  Philo  to  those  accredited  to  Jesus,  was  easy
and  natural.  Even  the  stricter  Judaism,  itself,  in  the
person  of  Hillel,  helped  to  promote  the  new  develop
ment.  The  process  was  accelerated  by  contact  with

4159


ROME  (EMPIRE)

Rome.  But  the  new  movement  at  first  met  with  no  very
great  success.  Christian  Judaism  appealed  neither  to
the  Jew  nor  to  the  Gentile.  The  Jew  refused  to  give
up  his  characteristic  rites  ;  the  Gentile  would  not
submit  to  purely  oriental  institutions.  Christian
Judaism  was  obliged  to  throw  off  more  of  its  oriental
trappings.  Hence  arose  the  purely  Christian  movement.
This  form  of  Christianity  was  probably  represented  by
the  primitive  gospel.  But  the  evolutionary  process  was
still  at  work.  The  struggle  of  ideas  was  now  going  on
with  renewed  vigour.  The  Roman  empire  had  become
a  world-empire ;  everything  was  tending  towards  a
world -religion.  'Christianity'  had  long  been  in  the
air,  or  in  other  words,  '  the  fulness  of  time  had  come.'

This  is  admitted  on  all  hands.  '  If  the  Empire  was  the
greatest  of  hindrances  to  the  gospel,  it  was  also  the  greatest  of
helps.  .  .  The  single  fact  that  the  Empire  was  universal  went
far  to  complete  the  fulness  of  time  for  Christ's  coming.  Rome
put  a  stop  to  the  wars  of  nations  and  the  great  sales  of  slaves
resulting  from  them,  to  the  civil  strife  of  cities  and  their
murderous  revolutions.  Henceforth  they  were  glad  to  live
quietly  beneath  the  shelter  of  the  Roman  peace.  Intercourse
and  trade  (witness  the  migratory  Jews)  were  easier  and  freer
than  ever  since  in  Europe  till  quite  recently.  .  .  This  was
her  [Rome's]  work  in  history — to  be  the  link  between  the
ancient  and  the  modern — between  the  heathen  city  states  of
the  ancient  world  and  the  Christian  nations  of  the  modern '  (H.
M.  Gwatkin,  '  Roman  Empire  '  in  Hastings'  BU).  Cp  Ramsay,
Church  in  the  Roman  Ktnpire,  chap.  t>,  §  6 ;  also  Seeley,
F.cce  Homo,  i  ;  T.  H.  Muirhead  in  The  Hibb.  Journ.  \  153
[Oct.  1902],  a  criticism  of  Kidd's  Principles  of  W.  Civilisation;
J.  M.  Robertson,  A  Short  Hist,  of  Christianity  (1902).

W'riting  of  the  state  of  the  world  towards  the  end  of
the  first  century,  Renan  shows  (see  the  references  in  his
notes)  that  '  expanded  ideas  of  universal  brotherhood
and  a  sympathy  with  humanity  at  large,  derived  for  the
most  part  from  the  Stoic  philosophy,  were  the  result  of
the  broader  system  of  authority  and  the  less  confined
education  which  had  now  assumed  control.  Men
dreamed  of  a  new  era  and  of  new  worlds.  .  .  Maxims
of  common  humanity  became  current,  and  the  Stoics
earnestly  taught  the  abstract  notions  of  equality  and
the  rights  of  men.  .  .  Love  for  the  poor,  sympathy
for  all,  and  charity,  became  virtues.'  But  at  the  same
time,  as  often  happens  during  a  period  of  transition,
'  on  the  whole,  the  middle  of  the  first  century  is  one  of
the  worst  epochs  of  ancient  history.'  Philosophers,
however,  were  doing  much  to  bring  about  a.  reforma
tion,  and  'there  was  as  much  grandeur  in  the  struggle
of  philosophy  in  the  first  century  as  in  that  of
Christianity'  (The  Apostles,  ch.  17).  But  it  was  not
merely  a  struggle  of  two  independent  forces  against  a
common  foe.  A  struggle  of  ideas  was  going  on  within
and  between  the  two  reforming  agencies,  and  between
both  and  the  popular  Roman  religion.  The  conflict
resulted  in  the  victory  of  neither  one  nor  the  other,  but
in  a  compromise,  in  the  evolution  of  a  religion  adapted
and  adaptable  to  its  surroundings — in  other  words  in  a
paganised  Christianity.

The  primitive  gospels  seem  to  have  been  edited  and
amplified  in  view  of  this  development.  We  have  in
.p  .  our  present  gospels,  apart  from  the

5.  Komans  in  fact  that  there  are  doubtless  .  gospeis '
ie  Uospels.  (GnostiC)  Ebionitic>  and  even  Essenic)
within  the  gospels,  on  the  whole  not  a  picture  of  what
really  took  place  at  the  rise  of  the  Christian  movement,
but  a  representation  coloured  and  suggested  by  the
ideas  of  a  later  age.  Although  therefore  they  may
contain  much  correct  information  as  to  Roman  ad
ministration  in  Palestine,  we  can  hardly  trust  them
as  to  the  general  conduct  of  the  Romans.  To  take
an  instance,  the  Gospels  suggest  that  the  Romans
were  interested  in  the  new  movement  from  the  start,
but  that  the  ruling  Jews  were  almost  persistently  hostile
to  it  (espec.  Lk.  [cp  also  Acts];  cp  Ramsay,  U'ns
Christ  born  at  Bethl.f  f>j  /.}.  But  the  movement  was
not  such  as  to  appeal  to  the  Roman  mind  in  the  first
instance,  and  the  name  of  its  founder  '  appears  only  in
profane  authors  of  a  hundred  years  later,  and  then  in

4160


ROPE

an  indirect  manner  ..."  (Renan,  Life  of  Jesus,  ch.  28).
Writings,  such  as  the  Gospels  and  the  Acts,  written  in
the  interest,  or  to  explain  the  rise,  of  a  religious  move
ment,  are  especially  liable  to  be  influenced  by  bias  or
tendency,  so  that  there  is  every  reason  to  treat  them
with  caution  and  critically  to  examine  their  statements
before  regarding  them  as  strictly  historical.  In  par
ticular,  the  accounts  of  the  betrayal,  trial,  and  execution
of  the  hero,  whether  we  consider  the  part  played  by
the  Jews  or  by  the  Romans,  are  very  difficult  to  under
stand.  We  might  naturally  suppose  that  Jesus  would
have  been  treated  by  the  Romans  as  a  political  offender.
Deliverers  kept  coming  forward,  we  may  be  sure,  in
answer  to  the  Jewish  expectations.  The  Romans  would
hardly  have  been  likely  to  discriminate  between  the  new
Messiah  and  other  agitators.  Each  and  all  would  be
regarded  equally  as  politically  dangerous  ;  the  career
of  each  and  all  would  be  abruptly  terminated  as  soon
as  the  outskirts  of  the  cities  were  abandoned  and  an
attempt  was  made  to  openly  preach  '  a  new  kingdom  '
in  the  market-place.  We  have  examples  later  of  the
treatment  which  these  prophets  received.

For  instance,  to  quote  Cornill's  graphic  description  (Hist.  260),
*a  certain  Theudas  .  .  .  had  summoned  the  people  to  the
Jordan  where  at  his  command  the  miracle  of  Joshua  was  to  be
repeated.  Fadus  sent  thither  a  company  of  cavalry,  who
simply  cut  the  people  down  and  brought  the  head  of  Theudas
to  Jerusalem.'  See  THEUUAS.

It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  Romans  behaved  as
they  are  reported  to  have  done  at  an  earlier  date,  even
when  it  is  admitted  that  the  circumstances  at  the  time
were  rather  different.  It  has  been  handed  down  again
that  the  Jews  themselves,  or  a  section  of  them,  actually
anticipated  Roman  action,  that  they  betrayed  the
author  of  the  new  movement  to  the  Romans  and  were
themselves  allowed  to  play  a  chief  part  in  carrying  out
his  death-sentence.  But  this  representation  of  the
Jewish  attitude,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Roman  pro
cedure,  looks  very  much  like  a  late  attempt  to  take  the
blame  as  far  as  possible  off  the  shoulders  of  the
Romans  and  lay  it  on  the  Jews.  The  pagan-Christian
movement,  and  the  widening  gap  between  Jews  and
Christians,  would  give  rise  to  a  tendency  to  say  as  little
as  possible  in  disparagement  of  the  Romans,  and  as
much  as  possible  to  bring  odium  on  the  Jews  ;  to
adapt  the  teaching  more  and  more  to  the  mind  of  the
Roman,  to  make  it  diverge  more  and  more  from  the
doctrines  and  practices  of  the  Jews.

Cp  GOSPELS.  On  the  representation  of  Roman  administration
given  in  Acts,  see  ACTS.  For  other  details  see  the  special
articles  on  the  Roman  places,  governors,  etc.,  mentioned  in
NT.  See  also  CHRISTIAN  (NAME  OF),  GOVERNMENT,  ROME
(CHURCH  OF),  ROMANS,  PAUL,  PILATE,  PROCURATOR,  PRO
VINCE,  QUIRINIUS.  M.  A.  C.

ROPE.  For  htbel,  'abofh,  and  nikpah,  see  CORD,
and  for  'agmon,  Job  41  2  [4026]  RV,  AV  'hook,'  see
RUSH,  2,  and  cp  FISH,  §  5,  n.  i,  col.  1529.


ROSE.  i.  (rnri;  ANeoc,  Cant.2i;  KRINON,
Is.  35  if)  is  now  usually  taken,  as  in  RV'"£-,  to  be  the
autumn  crocus,  Colchicum  autumnale,  L.  ,  or  some
kindred  species.  The  Heb.  word,  habasst<leth,  is  closely
akin  to  Syr.  ham.mlldythd,  the  meaning  of  which  is  well
assured  (Low,  174).

The  rendering  'rose,'  found  in  Kimhi  and  other  Jewish  writers,
seems  to  rest  on  mere  conjecture';  'lily'  stands  in  05,  Vg.,  Tg.
(but  only  once  in  each),  whilst  'narcissus'  is  in  Tg.  on  Cant.,
and  is  upheld  by  Celsius  (1  489  ff.~)  and  others.  Delitzsch  (Prol.
82  Jf-}  compares  Ass.  habasillatu,  'reed,'  and  argues  for  the
word  being  a  general  name  (cp  ©  and  Vg.  of  Cant.  2  i)  for  a
flower-stalk  or  a  flowering  plant.  As  Noldeke  (ZDMG  40  730)
and  Halevy  (/ijT/14  149)  urge,  however,  the  name  must  be
specific  (at  all  events  in  Cant.  2  1):  and  the  Aramaic  word
provides  a  satisfactory  parallel,  though,  of  course,  this  argument
is  not  decisive  against  an  Assyrian  connection.1  Various  species


1  [The  Ass.  comparison  is  accepted  by  Che.  (Profih.  fs.(3\  On
Is.'  I.e.)  after  discussion  ;  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  same  plant-
name  ofter^has  a  different  reference  in  different  countries. See
also  Ges.(13)  s.v. ,  who  recognises  the  connection.]

4161


RUBY

of  colchicum  found  in  Palestine  are  enumerated  by  Tristram
(FFP  425).

2.  The  podov  is  referred  to  in  Wisd.  28  (oTei/^etfa
pbSwv  KaXv^iv),  Ecclus.  24i4[i8]  3913(17),  and  508  (p3
'SJV2  ;  see  Schechter  and  Taylor).  What  is  commonly
called  the  '  Rose  of  Jericho, '  the  Anastatica  hieruntica,
is  certainly  not  meant  by  Ben  Sira,  when  he  speaks  of
the  'rose-plants  in  Jericho.'  In  all  these  passages  he
apparently  means  the  rhododendron  (Tristram,  NHB
477;  cp  Schick,  PEFQ,  1900,  pp.  63-65).  In  3  Mace.
7 17.  PTOLEMAIS  [q.v.]  is  called  podofiopov  [V],  or  poSo-
<pbvov  [A].  The  roses  of  Egypt  are  celebrated  by  the
Roman  poet  Martial.

Gratz  even  finds  the  Hebrew,  or  more  strictly,  New  Hebrew
word  for  roses  in  a  passage  of  Canticles  (4  13,  o'Tll  for  DTlj).
This  may  be  right  (see  col.  693)  ;  but  cp  Budde,  ad  Ice.  On
Til,  'rose,'  in  Mishna,  and  its  Syr.  and  Ar.  cognates,  see  Low,
Aram.  Pjiansennamen,  1317^  N,  M

ROSH  (B>an  ;  ptoc  [BAQ]),  according  to  most,  is
the  name  of  a  people  in  Asia  Minor,  which,  like  Meshech
and  Tubal  (confidently  identified  with  the  Moschi  and
the  Tibareni),  belonged  to  the  empire  of  GOG  [q.v.  ]
(Ezek.  38 2/.  39 1).  It  is  very  strange,  however,  that
all  the  names  of  peoples  in  Ezek.  38i-6,  except  Rosh
and  Paras  (v.  5),  should  occur  in  the  Table  of  Nations
in  Gen.  10,  and,  from  the  conjunction  of  Tiras  with
Meshech  and  Tubal  in  Gen.  102,  von  Hammer  long  ago
plausibly  conjectured  the  identity  of  Tiras  and  Rosh.
It  is  noteworthy  that  in  Judith  223  the  '  sons  of  RASSES  '
(q.v.,  and  cp  TIRAS)  are  mentioned  directly  after  Put
and  Lud,  and  it  is  natural  to  identify,  first,  Rasses  with
Rosh,  and  then,  on  the  ground  of  the  phenomena  of  the
Lat.  MSS.  ,x  Rasses  with  Tiras.  This  would  produce
the  reading  '  prince  of  Tiras. '  2

This  is  decidedly  better  than  explaining  c;Nn  'j,  '  chief
prince  (of  Meshech,  etc.),'  as  RV'tf-  and  Smend  (after
Tg. ,  Aq. ,  Jer. ).  But  the  whole  of  the  prophecy  of
Gog  appears  to  need  reconsideration  (see  PROPHET,
§  27).  If  it  is  true  that  the  prophet  foretells  a  great  N.
Arabian  invasion,  we  must  suppose  that  ran,  like  CTD  and
s5"EHn,  is  a  corruption  of  Assur  (-IIB'N),  the  name  of  one
of  the  peoples  in  N.  Arabia  bordering  on  the  old  Judahite
territory.  Cp  TARSHISH,  TIRAS.

Winckler  would  omit  x'b'J  as  a  gloss  on  p'NI  ('chief');  but
this  is  too  superficial  a  correction.  K'ij'j  is  specially  one  of
Ezek.'s  words  (cp  PRINCE,  2).  T.  K.  C.

ROSH  (t^XI ;  pooc  [ADL]),  a  Benjamite  family  name
(Gen.  4621).  In  the  corresponding  list  in  Nu.  26iSf.
for  Ehi  Rosh  Muppim  we  find  Ahiram  Shephupham,
and  the  three  names  probably  grew  out  of  the  two  either
by  a  simple  transposition  of  the  letters  M  and  Sh  (cp
C.  J.  Ball,  SHOT),  or  in  some  such  way  as  that  explained
by  Gray  (tf/W  35).

The  MT  in  Gen.,  indeed,  requires  Rosh  to  make  up  its  ten
'  sons  '  of  Benjamin  (i.e.,  fourteen  '  sons  '  of  Rachel  ;  v.  22)  ;  but
©AL,  although  naming  ten,  preserves  the  original  summation
nine  (i.e.,  eighteen  'sons'  of  Rachel).  <BB  is  lacking  at  this
point ;  but  <P»  sees  the  discrepancy  and,  since  it  retains  Rosh,
changes  the  eighteen  to  nineteen.

ROSIN, i.  nX,  sari,  Ezek.  27 17  AVm£- See  BALM,

§i.

2.  vd<j>0a;  Song  of  Three  Children,  23  (Dan.  (5  846)  AV,
RV  NAPHTHA.

RUBY. In  EV  'rubies'  represent  pSnimm,  D^JE,
1.  Biblical f times (Job  28x8 Lam.  4  7 Proves

references  5 I0' '  m  Lamentatlons  RV'"8

has '  corals  '  ; in  Job  it  has  '  red  coral '
and  '  pearls. '

1  Vet.  Lat.  reads  Thiras  ft  Rasis,  with  which  Pesh.  must
originally  have  agreed  : Thiras  and  Rasis  represent  different
readings  of  the  same  word.

2  DVn N'bJ, instead of  t^NT  'j  ; 'n, as  Herz  has  remarked,
might  easily  fall  out  after  N't?- Toy  (Ezek.  SJSOT)  has  also
combined  the  names  Rosh  and  Tiras. The  above  was  written,
however,  before  the  appearance  of  his  work.

4162


..-
2.  Identibca-


RUDIMENTS

The  renderings  of  ®  vary  and  (sometimes  at  least)  manifestly
represent  another  text  (in  Job,  icai  t^Kvoov  <ro<fiiau>  itncp  TO.
eVioTara  [BNC,  e<ru>Ta,  A];  Lam.,  iintp  \iOovs  ;  Prov.  815  811
31  10,  \iOtov  TToAvreAiij'  ;  Prov.  'JO  15,  wanting?);  V'g.  has  a
different  rendering  in  each  case  (Job,  irahitur  autem  tapitntia
fie  occultis  ;  Lam.,  ebore  antique;  Prov.  815,  cunctis  opifrus  ;
8  ii,  cunctisfretiositsimit;  20  15,  multitude  gemtnarumi  31  10,
de  ultimisjinil'us).

2.  In  Is.  54  12  (irpiWaXXoj),  Ezek.  27  16  (x<VX°P  [RQ]>
(copxopi'J  1AJ)  KV  has 'rubies,'  but  AV 'agate'  and
AV"«-  [Ezek.] 'chrysoprase,'  for 13-13, kadAod. See
AGATE,  CHRYSOPRASE.

3.  In Ex.  28i; Ezek.  2813 RV'"K- has 'ruby'  for
nix,  '<></?/».

The  question  whether  rubies  are  referred  to  in  the
OT  may  at  first  sight  appear  rather  complicated.  It  is
not  so,  however,  in  reality.  The  claims
Qf  ,  rubies  •  as  a  rendering  of  ptninim
have  long  since  passed  into  abeyance  ;
the  revisers  of  AV,  it  is  clear,  only  acquiesce  in  certain
cases  in  AV's  rendering  '  rubies  '  from  a  feeling  of  un
certainty  as  to  the  absolute  correctness  of  the  marginal
renderings  which  they  propose.  On  the  correctness  of
their  renderings  we  may  refer  to  CORAL,  PEARL,  and
with  regard  to  Lam.  4;  (where  the  strange  statement,
'  they  were  more  ruddy  in  body  than  rubies,'  is  ventured
upon  in  EV)  to  LAMENTATIONS  [BOOK],  §  5,  SAPPHIRE.
If  the  precious  stone  called  '6dem  is  really  from
V'CIN.  'to  be  red,'  and  not  rather  from  the  name  of
Edom,1  it  is  most  plausible  to  identify  it  with  the
carnelian  (see  SARDU'.s).  We  have,  therefore,  only
the  passages  Is.  54  12  Ezek.  27  16  to  deal  with.  Here
the  greatest  weight  is  due  to  Prof.  Kidgeway's  remark
(CARHUNCLK,  col.  702),  that  there  is  no  proof  that  the
ruby,  which  is  found  only  in  Ceylon  and  in  Burmah,'J
was  known  to  the  Hebrews  any  more  than  it  was  to  the
Greeks  till  after  the  time  of  Theophrastus.  If  the  nophek
is  the  mafkat-slone  of  the  Egyptians  (see  CARBUNCLE,
end),  the  kadktd  might  conceivably  be  the  garnet  ;  on
the  possible  root-meaning  (to  emit  fire,  as  a  fire-stick),
see  Ges.-Bu.  and  BUB.  We  must  not,  however,  ignore
the  possibility  (see  CHALCEDONY,  i,  end)  that  the  true
reading  of  the  word  is,  not  1312,  but  1312  (r  for  d).
Both  for  the  stone  called  'ddem  and  for  that  called  (as
we  now  assume)  1313,  the  name  of  a  country  may  be
surmised  as  the  origin  —  viz.,  in  the  case  of  'odem,
Edom,  and  in  that  of  1313,  jerahmeel  (such  corruptions
of  this  name  turn  out  to  be  common);3  the  stones
so  designated  may  in  fact  have  reached  the  Hebrews
from  N.  Arabia,  and  so  have  been  called  respectively
the  Edomite  and  the  Jerahmeelite  stone.  Cp  SARDIUS,
TOPAZ.

The  true  or  Oriental  ruby  is  a  red  variety  of  corundum  or
native  alumina  of  great  rarity  and  value,  and  to  be  distinguished
from  the  spinel  (an  aluminate  of  magnesium),  which  is  of  much
less  estimation  as  a  gem  stone.  The  phraseology  of  ancient
writers  was  even  more  confused  than  that  now  current,  for  they
appear  to  have  classed  together  under  a  common  name,  such  as
the  carbunculus  of  Pliny  or  the  arflpaf  of  Greek  writers,  not
only  (perhaps)  our  two  kinds  of  ruby,  but  also  garnets  and
other  inferior  stones  of  a  fiery  colour.  See  further  STONES

[PRECIOUS].  T. K.  C.

RUDIMENTS  (cTOixei&).  Col.  2  8  20  EV,  RV">e-
ELEMENTS  (f  •-'.).

RUE  (rTHfANON  [Ti.  WH])  is  once  mentioned  (Lk.
Il42t)  as  a  small  garden  herb  ;  in  the  parallel  passage
Mt.  2823  anise  and  cummin  are  mentioned  instead.

According  to  Tristram  (AV//>'  478)  Rnta  graveolens  is  at  this
day  cultivated  in  Palestine,  whilst  Ruta.  bracteosa  is  a  common
wild  plant.  Cp  Low,  no.  317.

RUFUS  (  poy<J>oc  [Ti.  WH])  occurs  several  times  in
Old-Christian  literature.

i.  Mk.  152i,  as  the  son  of  SIMON  OF  CYRENE  and
the  brother  of  ALEXANDER  (qq.-v.  ).  In  the  Apocryphal

1  See  TARSHISH  [STONE],  §  ^.

2  Cp  'The  Ruby  Mines  in  Upper  Burmah,'  CornhiU  Maga
zine,  Dec.  1001.

3  Cp,  for  instance,  'Calcol,'  i  K.  431  [5n].

4163


EUMAH

Acts  of  Peter  and  Andrew,  and  of  others,  Alexander
and  Rufus  are  mentioned  as  disciples  of  Andrew,  who
were  his  companions  in  the  country  of  the  barbarians  ;
cp  R.  A.  Lipsius,  Apokr.  Ap.-gesch.  Is33/-  617  621  ;  877
79  83,  E.  94  96.

2.  Rom.  1613,  as  a  Roman  Christian,  well  known  to
Paul  and  to  the  Christians  in  Rome  as  being  '  the  elect
(or  the  chosen)  in  the Lord.' We do  not  know  the
force of this expression. Weizsacker thinks that it
hints  at  some  special  circumstances  connected  with  his
conversion. B. Weiss, Sanday-Headlam interpret:
'eminent  as  a  Christian.' In  any  case  it  will  be  an
epithcton  omans  to  celebrate  the  friend of  Paul, the
supposed  author, who  goes  on  to  salute '  his mother
and  mine,'  as  if  the  Roman  wife  had  once  kindly  treated
him,  who  had  not  yet  been  in  Rome. The  list  of  greet
ings  in  Rom.  16  is  not  historical  ; the  names  and  the
additions  are  fanciful  ;  cp  ROMANS  (EPISTLE). Accord
ing  to  Epiphanius  this  Rufus  was  reckoned  among  the
seventy  'others'  (apostles),  Lk.  10  1. A  Spanish  local
tradition  makes  him  the  first  bishop  of  Tortosa,  conse
crated  by  Paul. Another  tells  us  that  he  was  conse
crated  bishop  of  the  Egyptian  Thebes  by  Peter. His
birthday  is  said  to  have  been  the  8th  or  the  igth  April  ;
cp  Lipsius,  2222  227,  E  242.

3.  Polycarp, Phil.  9  1; cp Eus.  HE\\\.  8613, as a
companion  of  the  martyrs  Ignatius  and  Zosimus,  com
memorated  every  year  on  i8th  Dec.  at  Philippi,  accord
ing  to  Martyrol.  Rom.

It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  these  three,  or  any  two
of  them,  originally  indicate  the  same  person.

w.  c.  v.  M.


RUG


b'),  Judg.  4i8  RVf  ;  see  col.  509,  n.  4.


RUHAMAH. See  LO-RUHAMAH.

RULE  (1[5),  Is.  44  13  AV,  RV  LINE  (q.v.  2).  Cp
HANDICRAFTS,  §  2.

RULER.  On  the  wide  use  of  general  terms  of  this
nature,  cp  what  has  been  said  under  the  headings
CAPTAIN,  GOVERNOR,  OFFICER.

The  different  Hebrew  and  Greek  terms  thus  rendered
are  as  follows  :  —

1.  sagtin,  see  DEPUTY,  i.

2.  sar,  see  PRINCE,  3,  and  cp  ARMY,  §  4,  GOVERNMENT,  §21,
KING.

3.  ndgid,  see  PRINCE,  i.

4.  magcn,  Hos.  4  18,  lit.  SHIELD  [y.v.]  —  the  text  is  not  certain.
j.  mcscl  (a  '  ruler  '  in  the general  sense,  Gen.  45  8  Prov.  6  7

Mi.  62  [i]),  see  GOVERNOR,  n.

6.  sallit,  see  GOVERNOR,  9.

7.  ap\(.<ruva.y(ayo<;,  Mk.  5  22,  see  SYNAGOGUE,  §  9.

8.  apxiTP'*^"'°s>  Jn.2s.yC,  see  MEAL,  §  n.

9.  TroAirapxis, Acts  17  6  8 (ruler of the city), see THES-

SALON  1C  A.

10.  €7rapxos, 2  Mace.  427 AV (RV 'governor'), see Sos-
TRATUS,  and

1  1  .  dpx«"',  the  most  widely-used  of  all  terms  both  in  LXX  and
NT,  applied,  e.g.,  to  rulers  of  nations  (Mt.  -025),  magistrates
and  judges  (Lk.  1^58  Rom.  183),  officers  and  members  of  the
Sanhedrin  (Mt.  9  18  23  Lk.  8  41  23  13  35  Jn.  3  i)  ;  to  Jesus  the
'ruler'  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  (Rev.  1  5),  and  to  Satan  the
'  prince  '  (so  EV)  of  devils  (Mt.  9  34).

RUMAH  (np-Vl),  the  birthplace  of  Zebidah  or
Zebudah,  Jehoiakim's  mother  (2  K.  2836  [GK]  KpoyMA

[B]. [6K]  "p- [A], [eK]AOBeNNA [L]  | Jos. Ant.  X.02,

65  ABOYMA.C  i-e.,  APOYM&C),  has  been  thought  (see
HWB^)  to  be  the  poyMA  of  Eusebius  (OS<2'288io,
poyMA  H  K&l  APIA,1  in  his  time  called  peM<{)ic).
with  which  he  identifies  Arimathaea,  unless  ||  2  Ch.  865
(@BA  not  MT)  be  correct  in  giving  Raman  for  Rumah
(so  Pesh.  in  2  K.).  It  is  the  modern  Rantieh  in  the
plain  N.  of  Diospolis  (Lydda).  There  were,  however,
several  places  called  Rumah.  Another  is  referred  to
in  the  Talmud  as  Ruma  and  once  as  Aruma  (Xeub.
Gtog.  du  Talm.  203);  this  seems  to  be  the  Galilean

1  See  above,  col.  297,  n.  2.
4164


RUNNERS

Ruma  of  Josephus  (BJ  iii.  72i),  which  may  be  the
mod.  Rumeh,  on  the  S.  edge  of  the  plain  of  Battauf,
about  6  m.  N.  of  Nazareth.

AKUMAH  [g.v.}  in  Judg.  041  is  at  first  sight  excluded  by  its
n. u  them  situation.  Probably,  however,  the  original  story  spoke
of  Abimelech  as  king  of  Cusham  in  the  Negeb  (see  SHECHEM).
If  so,  it  is  plausible  to  identify  Arumah  with  the  Rumah  of
2  K.,  because  of  the  matrimonial  connections  between  the  kings
of  Judah  and  the  Negeb.  Like  '  Ramah  '  (which,  indeed,  Pesh.
reads  in  2  K.  and  *BBA  \n  the  supplement  to  2  Ch.  36  5),  '  Rumah  '
and  'Arumah'  probably  come  from  '  Jerahmeel ' ;  the  place  so
designated  was  of  Jerahmeelite  origin.  T.  K.  C.

RUNNERS  (D^V?)-  See  CHARIOT,  §  10  ;  ARMY,
§  4  (col.  314).

RUSH,  RUSHES,  i.  K£>i  gome'  (Ex.  23  [Syro-
hex.,  Aid.,  15  TTiVTTYPOC  ;  so  Aq.1  Sym.,  @  om.],  Job
8n [rTATTYpoc].  Is.  182[erriCTO\AC  ByBAiNAc],  So?'2
[eAoc]t)  is  almost  certainly  the  papyrus  (cp  (5  Ex.
[?],  fob),  the  Hebrew  name  being  derived  from
Coptic  kam.  This  plant  (Cyperus  Papyrus,  L. ),  which
was  a  characteristic  growth  along  the  Nile  banks  in
ancient  Egypt,3  and  still  occurs  in  several  localities  in
Palestine,  rises  to  a  height  of  about  six  feet,  with  a
triangular  tapering  stem  ;  see  PAPYRI,  §  i.  Its  stem
supplied  material  for  the  making  of  boats,  sails,  mats,
cloth,  cords,  and,  above  all,  writing  material.  In
particular,  its  use  for  the  construction  of  light  Nile
boats  is  mentioned  by  Theophrastus,  Pliny,  and  other
ancient  writers  (cp  EGYPT,  §  8,  end),  and  explains  the
references  in  Ex.23  Is.  182,  and  probably  also  Job  926
(see  RV'ne-,  but  cp  REEDS,  OSPRAY).  •

2.  JiS3N,  'agmon  (Is.  9i4  [13]  19is4  58s  (K/H/COS),  Job
41 2  [4026,  Kp.~\  4l2o5[i2]t)  is  a  word  for  'marsh  reed,'
derived  from  'again,  C3N,  a  'marsh'  or  'pool'  (Earth,
XB  341),  and  very  probably  to  be  identified  with  Arundo
Donax,  ~L.  (cp  Tristram,  XHB  436/1).  In  Is.  9  14  [13]
19 15  the  'agmon  or  '  reed  '  is  contrasted  with  the  kappa  ft
(nss)  or  'palm-branch,'  the  latter  indicating  those  in
high  position  and  the  former  the  humbler  classes  in  the
State — so  ©  (below,  n.  4).  In  Is.  685  among  the
spurious  tokens  of  pretended  piety  is  mentioned  that
of  bowing  the  head  as  the  head  of  the  reed  is  bent  by
the  flow  of  the  stream  in  which  it  grows  ;  cp  i  K.  14 15
Mt.ll7.

In  Job  41  2  [4026]  the  name  is  transferred  to  the  rope  or  cord
(see  RV)  of  reed  used  to  noose  the  crocodile;  and  in  Job  41  20
[12]  the  hot  vaporous  breath  of  this  animal  is  compared  to  the
steam  of  '  a  seething  pot '  and  (see  RV)  the  smoke  of  '  (burning)
rushes.'  [In  both  passages  the  text  is  doubtful.  On  Job  41  2
see  FISH,  §  5,  and  n.  i,  where  DU,  'ring'  is  proposed  as  an
emendation,  and  on  Job  41  20  see  Budde,  who  (with  Bi.,  Du.,
Beer)  reads  DJNl,  'and  boiling.']  N.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

RUST.  i.  n«!pri,  JieVah;  ioc,  in  Ezek.  246n/.
of '  the  bloody_  city,  that  caldron  full  of  rust  [AV  '  scum  ]  where-
from  the  rust  is  not  yet  gone.

2.  jSpoxris,  in  Mt.  6  19  f.  of  '  moth  and  rust '  (CTTJ?  KCU  jSpdxris)
which  consume  'treasure.'

3.  ids,  in  Jas.  63,  spoken  of  rusting  gold  and  silver.


RUTH  (JVTl,  poy0.  *.ax»).  a  Moabitish  woman,
the  heroine  of  the  Book  of  Ruth.  Through  her  marriage
with  Mahlon,  and  subsequent  marriage -at -law  with
Boaz  (in  the  name  of  Mahlon),  she  became  an  ancestor
of  David,  who,  according  to  our  present  text,  was  a
native  of  Bethlehem  in  Judah.  Ruth's  noble  unselfish
ness  was  thus  rewarded  (cp  Ruth  2 12).  Her  sister,

1  Aq.  gives  Tram/pewy  for  rpo,  Ex.  2  5  ;  Vg.  papyrion.

2  AV  has  '  bulrushes  '  in  Ex.  2  3  (RVnig.  '  papyrus  '), Is.  18  2
(RV 'papyrus'),  'rush' in  JobSn (RVmg. 'papyrus'), and
'rushes'  m  Is.  Z5j.

s  It  is  said  to  be  now  extinct  in  Egypt — thus  Boissier  (/•'/.  Or.
5  375)  'olim  in  Egypto,  ubi  destructus  mine  esse  videtur.'
Tristram :  '  no  longer  found  in  Africa,  excepting  in  marshes  of
the  White  Nile  in  Nubia,  7°  N.  latitude  '  (NHB  433).

*  In  both  cases  ©  paraphrases,  fieyav  Kal  /jaxpov  and  apxyv


4165


RUTH,  BOOK  OP

whose  impulse  to  follow  Naomi  to  her  home  in  Judah
was  less  effectual  than  Ruth's,  was  named  Orpah,  a
name  which  suggests  the  meaning  '  obstinacy. '  Hence,
following  Pesh.,  it  is  usual  (cp  Geiger,  Urschr.  50)  to
explain  Ruth  as  a  contraction  of  RC'uth,  i.e. ,  'the
companion,'  'one  who  lovingly  attaches  herself. '  See,
however,  for  other  explanations,  RUTH  [BOOK],  §  5.
The  account  of  her  levirate- marriage  with  Boaz  is
given  with  archaeological  fulness  as  an  obsolete  custom.
Cp  SHOES  (e).

[By  old  Hebrew  law,  as  by  the  old  law  of  Arabia,  a  wife  who
had  been  brought  into  her  husband's  house  by  contract  and  pay
ment  of  a  price  to  her  father  was  not  set  free  by  the  death  of  her
husband  to  marry  again  at  will.  The  right  to  her  hand  lay  with
the  nearest  heir  of  the  dead.  Originally  we  must  suppose,
among  the  Hebrews  as  among  the  Arabs,  this  law  was  all  to  the
disadvantage  of  the  widow,  whose  hand  was  simply  part  of  the
dead  man's  estate  ;  but,  while  this  remained  so  in  Arabia  to  the
time  of  Mohammed,  among  the  Hebrews  the  law  early  took
quite  an  opposite  turn  ;  the  widow  of  a  man  who  died  childless
was  held  to  have  a  right  to  have  a  son  begotten  on  her  by  the
next  kinsman,  and  this  son  was  regarded  as  the  son  of  the  dead
and  succeeded  to  his  inheritance  so  that  his  name  might  not  be
cut  off  from  Israel.  The  duty  of  raising  up  a  son  to  the  dead
lay  upon  his  brother,  and  in  Dt.  25  5  is  restricted  to  the  case
when  brothers  live  together.  In  old  times,  as  appears  from
Gen.  38,  this  was  not  so,  and  the  law  as  put  in  the  book  of  Ruth
appears  to  be  that  the  nearest  kinsman  of  the  dead  in  general
had  a  right  to  'redeem  for  himself  the  dead  man's  estate,  but
at  the  same  time  was  bound  to  marry  the  widow.  The  son  of
this  marriage  was  reckoned  as  the  dead  man's  son  and  succeeded
to  his  property,  so  that  the  '  redeemer '  had  only  a  temporary
usufruct  in  it.  Naomi  was  too  old  to  be  married  in  this  w-ay,
but  she  had  certain  rights  over  her  husband's  estate  which  the
next  kinsman  had  to  buy  up  before  he  could  enter  on  the
property.  And  this  he  was  willing  to  do,  but  he  was  not  willing
also  to  marry  Ruth,  and  beget  on  her  a  son  who  would  take  the
name  and  estate  of  the  dead  and  leave  him  out  of  pocket.  He
therefore  withdraws  and  Boaz  comes  in  his  place.  That  this  is
the  sense  of  the  transaction  is  clear  ;  there  is,  however,  a  little
obscurity  in  45,  where  (see  Vg.,  Pesh.)  one  letter  has  fallen  out
and  we  must  (with  Cappellus,  Geiger,  Bertheau,  etc.)  read
niTPN  CJ1>  and  translate  '  What  day  thou  buyest  the  field  from
Naomi  thou  must  also  buy  Ruth,'  etc.  Cp  w.  qf. — w.  K.  s.]

The  notice  in  Ruth  4  7  has  caused  some  difficulty.
Kalisch  (Bible  Studies,  1  [1877]  61)  actually  suggests
that  c'JB1?  ( EV  '  in  former  time ' )  may  perhaps  mean
'from  olden  times.'  Driver  (Intr. (6'  455),  who  ap
parently  finds  4?  and  4 18-22  the  only  passages  which
may  indicate  a  late  date,  thinks  that,  while  418-22
'forms  no  integral  part  of  the  book,'  4?  'has  every
appearance  of  being  an  explanatory  gloss,'  and  com
pares  the  admitted  gloss  in  i  S.  9g,  which  begins  with
Ssotya  D^E1?-  This  is  a  perfectly  legitimate  view,
though  it  entails  an  alteration  of  the  text  in  v.  8.  But
we  may  ask  this  question  :  Supposing  that  the  custom
referred  to  in  4  7  had  become  antiquated,  was  not  such
an  explanatory  notice  called  for  ?  T.  K.  c.

RUTH,  BOOK  OF. The  story  of  RUTH  (q.v. )  forms

one  of  the  OT  Hagiographa,  usually  reckoned  as  the

-.  . . . second  of the  five Megilloth  or Festal

.1?ina Rolls. This  position  corresponds  to  the

P  0  .  ]evvjsa  practice  of  reading  the  book  at
the  Feast  of  Pentecost  ;  Spanish  MSS,  however,  place
Ruth  at  the  head  of  the  Megilloth  (see  CANTICLES)  ;
and  the  Talmud,  in  a  well-known  passage  of  Baba.
Bathra  (14^),  gives  it  the  first  place  among  all  the
Hagiographa.  On  the  other  hand,  <5  and  the  Vul
gate  make  Ruth  follow  Judges.  It  has  sometimes  been
held  (e.g. ,  by  Ewald,  Hist.  1 156  ;  Bertheau,  Kichtcr  u.
Ruth,^  292)  that  this  was  its  original  place  in  the
Hebrew  Bible  also,  or  rather  that  Ruth  was  originally
reckoned  as  an  appendix  to  Judges,  since  it  is  only  by
doing  this,  and  also  by  reckoning  Lamentations  to
Jeremiah,  that  all  the  books  of  the  Hebrew  canon  can
be  reduced  to  twenty-two,  the  number  assigned  by
Josephus  and  other  ancient  authorities.  It  has  been
shown  elsewhere  (CANON,  §§  11-14),  however,  that  the
argument  for  the  superior  antiquity  of  this  way  of
reckoning  breaks  down  on  closer  examination,  and,
whilst  it  was  very  natural  that  a  later  rearrangement
should  transfer  Ruth  from  the  Hagiographa  to  the

4166


2.  Date.


RUTH,  BOOK  OF

historical  books,  and  place  it  between  Judges  and
Samuel,  no  motive  can  be  suggested  for  the  opposite
change.  That  the  book  of  Ruth  did  not  originally
form  part  of  the  series  of  'Former  Prophets'  (Judges-
Kings)  is  further  probable  from  the  fact  that  it  is  quite
untouched  by  the  process  of  '  prophetic '  or  Deuterono-
mistic  editing,  which  gave  that  series  its  present  shape
at  a  time  soon  after  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  ;
the  narrative  has  no  affinity  with  the  point  of  view  which
looks  on  the  whole  history  of  Israel  as  a  series  of  ex
amples  of  divine  justice  and  mercy  in  the  successive
rebellions  and  repentances  of  the  people  of  God.  But
if  the  book  had  been  known  at  the  time  when  the
history  from  Judges  to  Kings  was  edited,  it  could
hardly  have  been  excluded  from  the  collection  ;  the
ancestry  of  David  was  of  greater  interest  than  that  of
Saul,  which  is  given  in  i  S.  9i,  whereas  the  old  history
names  no  ancestor  of  David  beyond  his  father
Jesse.

As  to  the  date.  A  very  early  period  is  clearly  impos
sible.  The  book  does  not  offer  itself  as  a  document
written  soon  after  the  period  to  which  it
refers ;  it  presents  itself  as  dealing  with  !
times  far  back,  and  takes  obvious  delight  in  depicting
details  of  antique  life  and  obsolete  usages  (on  Ruth  j
4 1-12,  see  RUTH);  it  views  the  rude  and  stormy  j
period  before  the  institution  of  the  kingship  through
the  softening  atmosphere,  of  time,  which  imparts  to
the  scene  a  gentle  sweetness  very  different  from  the
harsher  colours  of  the  old  narratives  of  the  book  of
Judges.  [We  cannot  therefore  very  well  say  with  Dr.
C.  H.  H.  Wright  (lutrod.  126)  that  the  book  'must
have  been  written  after  the  time  of  David,  and  long
prior  to  the  Exile.']  Indeed,  the  interest  taken  in
the  pedigree  of  David  points  to  a  time  when  '  David '
had  become  a  symbol  for  the  long-past  ideal  age.  In
the  language,  too,  as  we  shall  see  presently  (see  §  3),
there  is  a  good  deal  that  makes  for  and  nothing  that
makes  against  a  date  subsequent  to  the  captivity,  and
the  very  designation  of  a  period  of  Hebrew  history
as  'the  days  when  the  judges  judged'  (Ruthli)  is
based  on  the  Deuteronomistic  additions  to  the  book  of
Judges  (2i6/),  and  does  not  occur  till  the  period  of
the  Exile.

An  inferior  limit  for  the  date  of  the  book  cannot
be  assigned  with  precision.  Kuenen  formerly  argued
(Ond.(^\  [1861]  212214)  that,  as  the  author  seems
to  take  no  offence  at  the  marriage  of  Israelites  with
Moabite  women,  he  must  have  lived  before  the  time
of  Ezra  and  Xehemiah  (Ezra 9  Xeh.  13);  but  the
same  argument  would  prove  that  the  Book  of  Esther
was  written  before  Ezra,  and  indeed,  as  Wellhausen
(Bleek's  /;Y>//.(4',  205)  points  out,  the  singular  Talmudic
statements  respecting  the  descent  of  eminent  Jewish
teachers  from  supposed  heathen  proselytes  of  antiquity
(Sisera,  Sennacherib,  Nebuchadrezzar,  Haman  —  see
RAHAB)  appear  to  imply  a  theory  very  similar  to
that  of  the  Book  of  Ruth,  which  nevertheless  had
no  polemical  bearing  on  the  practical  exclusiveness  of
the  prevalent  custom.  We  cannot  therefore  assert
that  the  Book  of  Ruth  was  not  written  later  than
about  444  H.  C.

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  story
of  Ruth  was  written  before  the  living  impulses  of  Jewish
literature  had  been  choked  by  the  growing  influence  of
legalism.  As  Ewald  remarks,  '  we  have  here  a  narrator
of  a  perfectly  individual  character,'  who,  '  without
anxiously  concealing  by  his  language  all  traces  of  the
later  age  in  which  he  wrote,  had  obviously  read  himself
into  the  spirit  of  the  ancient  works  both  of  history  and
of  poetry,  and  thus  produces  a  very  striking  imitation
of  the  older  work  on  the  kings'  (Hist.\i^f.).  The
manner,  however,  in  which  he  tells  the  story  is  equally
remote  from  the  legal  pragmatism  of  Chronicles  and
from  the  prophetic  pragmatism  of  the  editor  of  the  older
histories.  His  work  has  therefore  some  advantage  over

4167


RUTH,  BOOK  OF

the  histories  just  mentioned,  an  advantage,  it  is  true,
of  which  the  Targum  (see  Is/  )  endeavours  to  deprive
it.  By  the  tone  of  simple  piety  and  graciousness  which
pervades  it,  and  by  its  freedom  from  the  pedantry  of
legal  orthodoxy,  the  book  reminds  us  of  the  prologue  to
the  colloquies  of  Job  and  the  older  poetical  wisdom.
Legalism,  then,  was  still  far  from  having  triumphed  in
the  field  of  literature  when  the  story  of  Ruth  was  written  ;
even  a  superficial  student  cannot  close  his  eyes  to  this
important  fact.

The  necessity  of  a  somewhat  late  date  will  appear  also
from  the  following  stylistic  and  linguistic  considerations.

_  .  ...  That  the  style  of  the  narrative  lacks  the
A  t  ""  freshness  and  popularity  which  distinguish
the  best  sections  of  the  Books  of  Sannn-1
must  be  apparent,  and  upon  examining  closely  the
linguistic  details,  we  shall  probably  become  convinced
that  a  pre-exilic  origin  is  impossible.  The  learned
Benedictine  Calmet  (Dictionnaire  historique  et  critique,
1722,  art.  'Ruth'),  indeed,  following  Babd  bathrd,
14^,  ascribes  the  composition  to  the  author  of  the
Books  of  Samuel,  a.  view  which  he  supports  by  re
ferring  to  the  phrases,  '  Yahwe  do  so  to  me  and  more
also,'  Ruth  1 17  (cp  i  S.  817,  and  ten  other  passages  in
Sam.  and  Kings),  '  to  uncover  the  ear,'  Ruth  4  4  (cp  i  S.
9  15,  and  six  other  passages  in  Sam. ).  Eor  other  points
of  contact  between  Ruth  and  Sam.  and  Kings,  see  4 15
and  iS.18  (joaie) ;  1 19  and  i  S.  4s  i  K.  145  (cnni)  ;  4i
and  i  S.  21  3  2  K.  68  (-^K  ':Se)  ;  2  3  and  i  S.  69  20  26
(mpD,  'accident'),  and  the  second  fern.  sing,  impcrf.
in  j",  28  21  8418  i  S.  1 14  (also  Is.  45 10  Jer.  31 22).  These
coincidences,  however,  are  outweighed,  not  only  by  the
difference  of  style  (in  the  more  general  sense)  between
Ruth  and  Sam. ,  but  also  by  certain  forms  and  expressions
found  in  Ruth  but  not  found  in  Sam. ,  some  of  which  at
least  point  distinctly  to  a  post-exilic  age.

The  following  forms  and  idioms  (to  which  add  the  second  fern,
sing,  imperf.  in  p-  ;  see  above)  are  post-classical  and  mostly  post-
exilic  or  exilic  in  use — the  second  fern.  sing.  perf.  in  -jr,  3  -$f.
(also  in  Jer.  [often],  Ezek.  16  Mic.  4  13  [hardly  Micah's]);

Nno  for  rnc,  Mara,  1  20  (cp  parallels  in  Ezek.  27  31  36  5  etc.) ;

J3J.',  '  to  shut  up,'  1  13  (Mishnic,  Jewish  Aram.,  Syriac,  but  cp
Dri  Jer) ;

trip,  'to  confirm,'  4  7  (also  Ezek.  136  Esth.  821  27  2931^  Ps.
119  28  106,  and  in  [Aram.]  Dan.  Os) ;

Tab',  '  to  hope,'  1  13  (Esth.  9  i  Ps.  119  166)  ;

HkVX  NSM,  'to  take  a  wife,'  14  (Ezra  9  2  12  Neh.  1825  I  Ch.
23  22  etc.,  but  not  Judg.  21  23  [Budde])  ;

[ns,  '  therefore,'  1  13  (as  in  Aram.  Dan.  26  etc.) ;  cp  Driver.

It  is  also  well  worth  noticing  that  the  divine  name  or
title  ns1  (exilic  and  post-exilic  in  use)  occurs  in  Ruth
1  20/1  (without  "?.x),  as  often  in  Job — Ewald  rightly  com
pares  Job  27  2,  and  (against  the  view  that  Ruth  is  written
in  a  pre-exilic  N.  Israelitish  dialect)  that  the  relative  is
always  -IC;N,  never  w  (cp  Konig,  F.inl.  286).

According  to  Konig  (Einl.  287),  the  book  in  its
present  form  belongs,  on  linguistic  grounds,  to  the
period  of  Jer.,  Ezek.,  and  the  Second  Isaiah,  whilst
marks  of  the  later  Hebrew  are  wanting.  Whatever
may  seem  to  point  to  an  earlier  period  (e.g. ,  the  use  of
the  older  form  oJN  seven  times,  and  of  ';«  only  twice)
this  eminent  linguistic  critic  regards  as  conscious  archaiz
ing.  It  should  be  remarked,  however,  that  portions  of
Jeremiah  can  be  shown  to  be  of  very  late  date,  and
that  the  unity  of  the  date  of  authorship  for  Is.  40 ••'
doubted  by  an  increasing  number  of  scholars.  KSnig's
dating,  then,  is  necessarily  subject  to  revision,  and  so,
still  more,  is  that  of  Driver  (Introd.W  455),  who  em
barrasses  himself  with  the  theory  that  Canticles  and
Ruth  (although  included  in  the  Hagiographa)  may  have
been  written  in  the  N.  kingdom,  and  preserve  words
current  there  dialectically.  The  book,  in  its  present

1  The  passage,  as  Ewald  (Hist.  1 154)  points  out,  is  highly
poetical.

4168


RUTH, BOOK  OF

form,  must  surely  on  linguistic  grounds  be  regarded  as
a  post-exilic  work,  and  \ve  shall  see  later  that,  even  if
it  is  to  some  extent  based  on  an  earlier  folk-story,  the
skill  of  the  artist  has  enabled  him  so  to  expand,  to
enrich,  and  to  fuse  his  material  that  it  is  virtually  all
his  own  work,  and  that  a  later  editor  has  only  touched
the  proper  names  and  appended  the  genealogy.

Wellhausen  is  of  opinion  that  the  most  important  sign
of  date  is  the  genealogy  of  David  (Ruth  4  iS-22,  cp  i  Ch.
_  .  210-17).  The  names  of  the  ancestors

nea  gy.  of  David  were  known  as  far  as  Boaz.
Then  memory  failed,  and  a  leap  was  made  in  i  Ch.  2n
Ruth  421  to  Salma  (in  Ruth,  Salmon),  who,  in  i  Ch.
2si,  is  called  'the  father  of  Bethlehem.'  But  Salma
belongs  to  the  same  group  as  Caleb,  Abi,  and  Hur,
and,  '  if  anything  is  certain,  it  is  this — that  in  the  olden
times  the  Calibbites  dwelt  in  the  S.  and  not  in  the  N.
of  Judah,  and  that  David  in  particular  by  his  birth
belonged,  not  to  them,  but  to  the  older  part  of  Israel,
which  gravitated  in  the  opposite  direction  to  Israel
proper,  and  stood  in  the  closest  connection  with  Ben
jamin.'  \Vellhausen  adds  that  'of  the  other  members
of  the  genealogy  Nahshon  and  Amminadab  are  princes
of  Judah  in  P,  whilst  Rain  is  the  firstborn  of  Hezron
(i  Ch.  225),  and  by  the  meaning  of  his  name  ('  the  high
one')  is,  like  Abram,  qualified  to  be  the  starting-point
of  the  princely  line.'  On  the  other  hand,  Sam.  only
knows  of  David's  father  Jesse. l

[The  argument  that  Salma  is  a  tribe  foreign  to  old  Judah,
which  was  not  '  father '  of  Bethlehem  till  after  the  Exile,  has
been  very  generally  admitted,  and  seemed  to  Robertson  Smith
in  1886  to  decide  the  post-exilic  origin  of  the  genealogy.  The
present  writer,  however,  cannot  see  his  way  to  follow  his  prede
cessor  in  this  particular ;  the  genealogy  is  no  doubt  post-exilic,
but  is  not  proved  to  be  so  by  Wellhausen's  criticism  of  the  proper
names,  all  of  which  appear  really  to  refer  to  Jerahmeelite — i.e.,
N.  Arabian — clans  and  localities.-  Hut  he  heartily  agrees  with
W.  R.  Smith  that  '  the  genealogy  in  i  Ch.  2  10  ff.  is  quite  in  the
manner  of  other  genealogies  in  the  same  book.']

That  the  genealogy  was  borrowed  from  Chronicles  and
added  to  Ruth  by  a  later  hand  seems  certain,  for  the
author  of  Ruth  clearly  recognises  that  '  Obed  was  legally
the  son  of  Mahlon,  not  of  Boaz  '  (4s  10).  [Driver,  too,
remarks  (Introd.^  455)  that  the  genealogy  'may  well
have  been  added  long  after  the  book  itself  was  written,'
and,  like  Konig  (287),  leaves  out  of  the  linguistic  data
for  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  age,  tolfdoth  and
holid,  which  are  characteristic  of  P  in  the  Pentateuch
(cp  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  i).  Bertheau,  Kuenen,  and
Budde  adhere  to  the  view  that  the  closing  section  is  an
integral  portion  of  the  book.  But  surely],  if  the  author
had  given  a  genealogy,  he  would  have  traced  it  through
Mahlon.  The  existence,  however,  ol  the  genealogy
suggests  the  possibility  that  two  views  of  the  descent  of
David  were  current,  one  of  which  traced  him  to  Perez
by  Mahlon,  and  the  other  to  the  same  Perez  by  Boaz.

[We  have  arrived  at  this  point  without  having  been
obliged  to  interfere  with  the  traditional  text.  It  is,  how-


5.  Proper
names.


ever,  necessary  to  take  that  step  if  we  would
obtain  a  more  complete  comprehension  of
the  narrative  and  of  its  historical  origin.
That  Ruth,  as  it  now  stands,  is  a  post-exilic  work  is
certain  ;  we  must  therefore  examine  the  text  in  connec
tion  with  that  of  other  not  less  certainly  post -exilic
works,  in  the  study  of  which  we  have  already  reached
results  which,  though  in  points  of  detail  subject  to
revision,  yet  on  the  whole  seem  to  throw  considerable
light  on  ancient  editorial  processes.  We  shall  thus
find  reason  to  suspect  that  the  personal  and  geo
graphical  names  in  the  Book  of  Ruth  (1 1-417)  were
not  altogether  originally  as  they  now  stand.

Bethlehem-judah,  as  in  the  strange  stories  appended  to  Judges,
is  a  corruption  or  distortion  of  Beth-jerahmeel,  the  name  of  some
place  in  the  region  called  Ephrath  in  the  south,  possibly,  but
by  no  means  probably,  the  same  as  the  place  known  as  Carmel.

1  Bleek's  F.inl.W  204  ./,  Prol.W  227  [ET  217 /];  cp  De
Gent.  i6f.  The  passage  in  Einl.(±)  is  mostly  reprinted  in  CH


357-359,  <3>  233-235.
2  We  reckon  the  N


egeb  as  the  N.  Arabian  borderland.
4169


RUTH,  BOOK  OP

1  Ephrath  '  itself  (like  the  '  Perath  '  of  Jer.  14  4-7)  is  possibly  a
mutilated  form  of  ZAKEPHATH  [q.v.],  and  '  Moab  may  be
a  substitute  for  'Missur'  (cp  MOAB,  §  14),  a  region  to  the
S.  of  the  country  called  Sarephathite  or  Ephrathite.  Elimelech,
Mahlon,  and  Chilion —  the  two  latter  of  which  have  been  so
fatally  misunderstood,  as  if  they  were  symbolical  names  —  are
no  doubt  clan-names  (or  different  forms  of  the  same  clan-
name)  derived  from  the  great  ethnic  name,  Jerahmeel.
'  Orpah  '  has  probably  arisen  by  '  metathesis  '  from  '  Ophrah '
— i.e.,  'Ephrath.'  Ruth  (Re'uth,  cp  Pesh.)  is  probably  the
fern,  of  Re'u  (Gen.  11  i8J^),  which  is  surely  equivalent  to
Re'uel  ;  now  Re'uel  appears  in  Gen.  3(5  4  as  a  son  of  Esau,  and
his  name  is  most  probably  a  distortion  of  Jerahmeel,  a  name
which  in  its  various  broken  forms  attached  itself  to  different  N.
Arabian  clans.  Naomi  (No'omi)  is  doubtless  connected  with  the
clan-names  Na'ami,  Na'amani.1  '  Boaz '  (ij,'3)  's  'ess  transparent ;
hence  Stucken  and  Winckler  do  not  hesitate  to  identify  the
original  Boaz  with  a  mythological  figure.  But  the  place  of  the
bearer  of  this  name  in  the  genealogy,  as  well  as  in  the  story  of
Ruth,  shows  that  he  too  must  have  a  clan-name,'-2  and  remember
ing  the  '  Ezbi '  ('3ix)  of  i  Ch.  11  37,  which  corresponds  to  '31N
(MT)  or  rather  ';HN  (cp  <SBA)  in  2  S.  23  35— i.e.,  to  'S^DHT,
'  Jerahme'eli,'  we  may  restore  as  the  original  name  y^y,  'Arab.
"OJ7,  '  Obed,'  too,  is  probably  by  metathesis  from  3^1?,  Arabia.3

The  statement  of  the  narrator  then,  if  the  present
writer's  conjectures  are  sound,  amounts  to  this — that  a
member  of  a  Jerahmeelite  clan  who  belonged  to  Beth-
jerahmeel  (in  the  Negeb)  removed  with  his  family,
under  the  pressure  of  famine,  into  the  land  of  Missur,
and  sojourned  there  for  about  ten  years.  This  agrees
with  the  original  form  of  the  story  in  Gen.  12io^i,
according  to  which  Abram  (  =  ' father  of  Jerahmeel')
removed  from  the  same  cause  from  the  Jerahmeelite
country  to  Missur  or  Misrim  (see  MiZKAlM,  §  zb}.

Another  parallel  story  is  that  of  the  Shunammite  woman  who
was  warned  by  Elisha  of  the  approach  of  a  famine  and  went  to
the  land  of  the  '  Philistines  '  (2  K.  8  1-3)  ;  the  original  story,  the
present  writer  thinks  (cp  SHUNEM),  represented  her  as  a  dweller
in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (still  in  Israelitish  occupation),  and
as  going  farther  S.  to  the  land  of  Sarephath  (in  a  wide  sense
of  the  phrase).

Nor  was  it  only  famine  that  drove  dwellers  in  the
Xegeb  to  the  neighbouring  land  of  Missur.  The  original
text  of  i  S.  223/.  seems  to  have  represented  David  as
placing  his  father  and  mother  under  the  protection  of
the  king  of  Missur  at  Sarephath  (see  MIZPKH,  3),  while
he  was  himself  a  wanderer  in  the  land  of  Jerahmeel,
and  there  is,  in  the  present  writer's  opinion,  hardly
room  for  doubt  that  David  lived  in,  or  close  to,  the
Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (see  NEGEB,  §  3,  and  note  3),  and
had  strong  Jerahmeelite  (and  Misrite)  affinities.  The
latter  passage  is  specially  important,  because  the  osten
sible  object  of  the  writer  of  Ruth  is  to  prove  the  descent
of  David  from  a  noble-minded  Misrite  woman.4  It
was  natural  to  represent  that  David's  ancestor  had  al
ready  set  the  example  of  taking  refuge  in  Missur.

We  are  not  expressly  told  that  '  Sarephath  ' — i.e. ,  that
portion  of  Missur  which  lay  nearest  to  and  included  the
city  of  Sarephath — was  the  locality  to  which  Elimelech
and  his  family  repaired.  But  the  connection  of  Sare
phath  with  Moses,  with  the  Levites,  and  apparently  with
the  prophets,  conjectured  by  the  present  writer  (see
MOSES,  §  4  ;  PROPHECY,  §  6),  makes  it  seem  to  him
not  improbable  that  the  narrator  had  this  place  or
district  in  his  mind,  and  in  4  12  the  kindly  wish  is  ex
pressed  that  the  house  of  Boaz  might  be  like  the  house
of  '  Peres  '  (from  '  Sarephath  '  ?)  whom  Tamar  (  =  Jerah-
meelith?)  bore  to  Judah.

1  Many  Benjamite  clan-names  appear  to  the  present  writer
to  be  demonstrably  of  N.  Arabian  origin.

"  Stucken's  connection  of  the  name  with  astral  mythology
(Astralntythen,  205,  note)  will  hardly  stand  examination.

3  'yi  (Jesse),  too,  very  possibly  comes  ultimately  from  «SNJ,'CC!'
(Ishmaefite),  a  term  which  did  not  originally  belong  exclusively
to  nomads.  The  names  of  the  ancestors  of  David  in  the  gene-
"alogyare,  as  suggested  above  (§  4),  exclusively  N.  Arabian  clan-
names.

•»  Budde  (ZATU'12  [1892]  44)  thinks  that  the  notice  in  i  S.
22  3  does  not  imply  a  race-connection  between  David  and  the
Moabite  (i.e.,  Misrite)  king  or  chieftain.  David,  he  thinks,  had
to  negotiate  with  the  king,  whereas  if  his  grandmother  had  been
a  Moabite,  this  would  have  been  unnecessary.  But  this  is  to
press  the  words  too  strongly  ;  and  indeed  (assuming  the  tradi
tion  to  be  historical)  tact  may  have  required  that  David  should
represent  the  desired  protection  as  a  favour.

4170


R


RUTH,  BOOK  OP

The  view  here  taken  renders  it  probable  that  the  story
of  Ruth  as  it  now  stands  is  not  of  very  early  post-exilic
origin.  For  the  feeling  of  bitterness  towards
^e  Misrites  and  their  neighbours,  on  account
of  their  long-continued  oppression  of  Israel,  apparently
persisted  till  close  on  the  Greek  period.  The  date  of
the  traditional  elements,  out  of  which,  with  imaginative
freedom,  the  present  story  of  Ruth  may  have  been
partly  composed,  is  quite  another  point.  As  in  the
case  of  Job  (see  JOB  [BOOK],  §  4)  and  Jonah  (see  JONAH
[BOOK],  §  4  f.  )  some  of  these  elements  may  have  been
derived  from  mythology  or  folk-lore  (cp  Wi.  AOF
366  /).  As  Stucken  points  out,1  'Ruth  corresponds
exactly  to  Tamar  ;  she  obtains  Boaz  by  taking  him
unawares  (Ruth  3),  as  Tamar  obtains  Judah  (Gen.  38).
A  dim  consciousness  of  this  connection  shows  itself  in
the  fact  that  the  pedigree  of  Boaz  is  traced  to  Perez.'
The  original  story  of  Ruth  probably  gave  her  two  sons
(corresponding  to  the  two  sons  of  Tamar),  only  one
of  whom  is  recorded  (simply  out  of  interest  in  David)
by  the  narrator.

The  '  altogether  peculiar  '  character  of  Ruth  among
the  historical  and  quasi-historical  narratives  has  been
pointed  out  by  Ewald,  who  is  '  led  to  conclude  that  this
story  is  only  one  taken  from  a  larger  series  of  similar
pieces  by  the  same  author,  and  that  through  mere
chance  this  is  the  only  one  preserved'  (f/isf.  1  155}.
More  definitely,  Budde  suggests  (ZA  T  IV12  43^  [1892])
that  the  story  of  Ruth  may  originally  have  formed  part
of  the  '  Midrash  of  the  Book  of  the  Kings  '  referred  to
in  2  Ch.  2427.  In  so  far  as  this  theory  is  based  on  the
language  of  the  genealogy  in  4  18-22  (in  connection  with
Wellhausen's  view  that  i  Ch.  2  10-17  is  a  later  insertion),
we  must  agree  with  Konig  (Einl.  289,  note)  that  it  is
unproven.  At  the  same  time,  Ewald's  impression  that
the  narrative  of  Ruth  did  not  always  stand  alone  seems
natural.

That  one  of  the  objects  of  Ruth  was  to  explain  the

traditional  descent  of  David  from  a  Misrite  woman,  has

_.  . , been  mentioned  already. It  was  true,  said

'  Je°  S  the  writer,  that  his  grandmother  was  a
'  Misrite  ;  but  what  a  noble  woman  she  was  !
how  obedient  to  those  fundamental  laws  of  morality
which  the  true  God  values  more  than  sacrifice  !  And
so  a  second  object  naturally  unveils  itself  —  viz.  ,  to
prepare  the  readers  of  the  book  to  arrive  at  a  more
favourable  opinion  of  the  moral  capacity  of  the  Misrites
than,  owing  to  the  cruel  oppression  of  Israel  by  the
Misrites,  previous  generations  had  been  able  to  form.

Many  critics  (e.g.  ,  besides  Winckler  and  most  com
mentators,  Umbreit,  St.  Kr.,  1834,  pp.  308^  ;  Geiger,
Urschr.  49  ff.  ;  and  especially  Kue.  Kel.  of  Isr.  2242/1,
and  0«<f.(2'  1523  527)  hold  that  the  narrator  was  one  of
those  who  protested  against  the  rigour  of  Ezra  in  the
matter  of  mixed  marriages.  It  is  not  clear,  however,
that  any  such  protest  would  have  been  detected  by  a
Jewish  reader  of  the  book.  The  great  point  with  the
narrator  is  not  the  marriage  of  Mahlon  but  the  next-of-
kin  marriage  of  Boaz.  It  cannot  be  shown  that,  when
married  to  Mahlon,  Ruth  became  in  the  full  sense  a
worshipper  of  Yahwe.  It  is  much  more  probable  that
the  statement  of  Mahlon's  marriage  to  a  Misrite  woman
is  simply  a  proof  that  the  writer  was  a  good  historical
scene  painter.  Like  the  Chronicler,  he  knows  that  in
early  times  there  was  a  great  mixture  of  clans,  and  that

1  Astralntytken,  no,  note.  We  may  add  that  we  take
'Tamar'  and  'Ruth'  to  be  ultimately  corruptions  of  'Jerah-
me'elith  '  (cp  JUDAH,  §  2).  Neither  Stucken  nor  Winckler
criticises  the  Hebrew  names.


RYE

Israelites  often  intermarried  with  Jerahmeelites  and
Misrites.  Besides,  in  order  to  produce  an  impression
on  the  Jews  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  dwelling  of
Boaz  to  have  been  in  Judah,  not  in  a  district  which
in  post-exilic  times  was  not  in  Jewish  occupation.  The
latest  editor  did  no  doubt  arrange  the  geographical
statements  accordingly  ;  but  the  author  himself,  as  we
have  seen,  placed  Boaz  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb.

Surely  no  one  who  thoroughly  appreciates  the  charm
of  this  book  will  be  satisfied  with  the  prevalent  theory
of  its  object.  There  is  no  '  tendency '  about  the  book  ;
it  represents  in  no  degree  any  party  programme.  And
even  if  the  writer  started  with  the  object  of  illustrating
the  life  of  David,  he  forgot  this  when  he  began  to
write,  and  only  thought  of  it  again  as  he  was  about  to
lay  down  the  pen.  Justly  does  Robertson  Smith  re
mark,  '  the  marriage  acquires  an  additional  interest
when  we  know  that  Ruth  was  David's  great-grand
mother,  but  the  main  interest  is  independent  of  that,
and  lies  in  the  happy  issue  of  Ruth  and  Xaomi  from
their  troubles  through  the  loyal  performance  of  the
kinsman's  part  by  Boaz.  Doubtless  the  writer  meant
his  story  to  be  an  example  to  his  own  age,  as  well  as
an  interesting  sketch  of  the  past  ;  but  this  is  effected
simply  by  describing  the  exemplary  conduct  of  Naomi,
Ruth,  Boaz,  and  even  Boaz's  harvesters.  All  these  act
as  simple,  kindly,  God-fearing  people  ought  to  act  in
Israel.'  [At  the  same  time,  the  writer  must  have  shared
the  religious  aspirations  of  his  time,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  was  probably  the  post-exilic  age — i.e.,  perhaps
that  quieter  period  which  followed  after  the  first  century
of  the  Greek  rule.  Now,  there  is  good  evidence  for  the
view  that  one  of  these  aspirations  was  for  a  cessation  of
the  bitter  feeling  between  Israel  and  Jerahmeel.  As
yet  the  sad  exclusion  of  Jerahmeelites  and  Misrites
from  the  religious  assembly  had  not  been  enacted,1  or,
if  enacted,  it  was  ignored  by  the  noblest  Jews,  who  held
that  the  N.  Arabian  peoples  were  not  incapable  of
repentance,  and  that  it  was  no  disgrace  to  David  that
his  pedigree  contained  the  name  of  a  Misrite  woman.
A  thorough  study  of  certain  psalms  and  prophecies
will,  it  is  believed,  strongly  confirm  this  view,  and  show
that  the  best  of  the  Jews  looked  forward  to  a  true
conversion  of  the  Misrites  to  the  religion  of  the  God  of
Israel  —  the  'Lord  of  the  whole  earth.'  Jerusalem
would  yet  be  thronged  by  the  children  of  Israel's  bitter
foes,  seeking  first  for  instruction  and  then  for  admission
into  the  religious  community,  and  it  is  possible  to  see  a
glance  at  this  hope  in  the  touching  words  of  Boaz,  '  and
how  thou  hast  left  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  and  the
land  of  thy  nativity,  and  art  come  unto  a  people  which
thou  knewest  not  heretofore'  (Ruth2n).  And  so,
ultimately,  the  book  becomes  (like  Jonah)  a  noble
record  of  the  catholic  tendency  of  the  early  Judaism.]

Among  other  commentaries  reference  may  be  made  to  J.  B.
Carpzov,  Collegium  rabbinico-biblicum  in  libelluin  Ruth,

Leipsic, 1703. [Among  recent  commentators,
Literature, the  works  of  Bertheau  (ed.  2,  1833),  Bertholet

(1898),  Nowack  (1901)  may  be  specially  men
tioned.  See  also  Wi.  A  OF  3  65-78,  and  references  in  the  course
of  this  article.]

(§§  i,  2,  partly  4  and  7)  \v.  K.  S.
(§§  3.  5.  6,  mostly  4  and  7)  T.  K.  c.
RYE  (HODS). See  RIE,  FITCHES.

1  In  Dt.  23  3-6  [4-7] — altogether  a  later  insertion — the  ethnics


very  incomplete. The  passage  must  be  later  than  the  fall  of
Jerusalem.


4171


4172


SABANNUS


SABBATH


S


SABANNUS  (CAB&NNOY)  [BA]),  iEsd.863  RV
=  Ezra  833  BINNUI,  2.

SABAOTH,  LORD  OF  (n'lN3X  mrp).  See  NAMES,
§  «3-

SABAT.  i.  RV  SAPHAT,  a  group  of  children  of
Solomon's  servants  (see  NETHINIM)  in  the  great  post-
exilic  list  (see  EZRA  ii.  ,  §  9,  §  8c),  one  of  eight  inserted

in  i  Esd.  634  (c&ct>&r  tB]'  C&4>AT  [A]>  om-  L)  after
Pochereth-hazzebaim  of  j|  Ezra  2  57  =  Neh.  7  59-

It  apparently  represents  the  form  SHAPHAT  =  Shephatiah
(in  Ezra257  =  Neh.  7s9=iEsd.  633  ©L,  AV  SAPHETH,  RV
SAPHUTHI).

2.  RV  SEBAT  (era/Sax  [AV]  <ra^ar  [N]),  the  month  of  that
name,  i  Mace.  1C  14.  See  MONTH,  §  5.

SABATEAS  (c&BB<vr<M&c  [A])  lEsd.  948  AV,
RV  Sabateus  =  Xeh.  87,  SHABBETHAI,  i.

SABATHUS  (cABAOoc [BA])  i  Esd.  9  28  RV,  AV
Ezral027,  ZABAD,  4.


SABBAN  (c&B&NNOY  LBA])  i  Esd.  8  62  =  Ezra  8  33.
BINNUI,  2.

SABBATEUS  (cABB<vr<MOC  [BA])  iEsd.9i4  RV
=  EzralOis,  SHABBETHAI,  i.

SABBATH  (D3C',  c&BB&TOisi),  the  day  of  sacred
rest  which  among  the  Hebrews  followed  six  days  of
labour  and  closed  the  week  ;  see  WEEK.

The  grammatical  inflexions  of  the  word  '  Sabbath  '
show  that  it  is  a  feminine  form,  properly  sabbat-t  for

_, .  sabbat-t, from nat? (Pi'  el conjug.  ).

i.  btymoiogy.  Thg  root  has  nothing  to  do  with  rest.

ing  in  the  sense  of  enjoying  repose  ;  in  transitive  forms
and  applications  it  means  '  to  sever,'  to  '  put  an  end  to,'
and  intransitively  it  means  to  '  desist,'  to  '  come  to  an
end.'  The  grammatical  form  of  sabbath  suggests
a  transitive  sense,  '  the  divider,'  and  apparently  indicates
the  Sabbath  as  dividing  the  month.  It  may  mean  the
day  which  puts  a  stop  to  the  week's  work  ;  but  that  is
less  likely.  It  certainly  cannot  be  translated  '  the  day
of  rest.  '  (Cp  Lag.  Uebers.  113  ;  K6.  Lehrg.  ii.  1  280  /".  ;
Hoffm.  Z.4TlV3i2i;  Wellh.  Prol.  [1883]  117,  n.  i;
Jastrow's  article  cited  in  §  8.)

[According  to  Jensen,  ZKF,  1887,  p.  278,  the  As
syrian  sa(p)bat(td)-tum=  '  penitential  prayer,'  and  hence
'day  of  penitence  and  prayer.'  Hirschfeld  (see  §  8),
however,  derives  nat?  from  nyyg.  Cp  Benz.  HA  202,
'perhaps  in  its  oldest  form  it  was  connected  with
gut?  (week).'  For  Jastrow's  view,  see  §  8.]

By  way  of  preface  to  the  present  historical  inquiry,
and  to  clear  away,  if  possible,  any  remnants  of  theo-
2  Jesus  and  lo§'ca^  PreJudice  against  criticism,  let
,."  „  ,,  ,,  us  consider  the  attitude  of  Jesus  towards
baDDatn.  Sabbath  observance.  It  is  not  too
bold  to  say  that  in  his  opposition  to  the  current  Rab
binical  views  he  is  in  harmony  with  the  main  result  of
modern  historical  criticism.  This  thesis  will  be  justified
at  a  subsequent  point.  The  well-known  and  probably
(see  col.  1888,  near  foot)  authentic  saying,  'Think  not
that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law'  (Mt.  617),  expresses
one  side  of  that  teaching.  Jesus  revered  the  Sabbath
as  he  revered  the  other  religious  traditions  of  his
people  ;  but  he  had  also  a  freedom  of  inspiration  which
put  a  new  life  into  his  interpretation  of  the  Sabbath
law.  That  he  was  in  the  habit  of  attending  the  syna
gogue  on  the  Sabbath,  we  know  from  Lk.  4i6  (cp  v.  31).
But  he  would  not  adhere  to  the  letter  of  the  law
where  works  of  necessity  or  of  mercy  claimed  to  be
performed  :  '  the  Sabbath  is  made  for  man,  and  not
man  for  the  Sabbath  ;  wherefore  the  Son  of  Man  is
Lord  also  of  the  Sabbath'  (Mk.  2z7/).  There  is  a

4T73


traditional  saying  of  Jesus  which  may  express  his  Janus-
like  habit  of  mind  as  regards  the  Sabbath.  It  ceased,
indeed,  to  be  understood  when  the  Christian  Sunday
had  become  an  institution,  and  so  was  thrust  out  of
the  canonical  Church  tradition  ;  but  it  certainly  gives
us  the  impression  of  being  an  ancient  and  a  genuine
tradition.1  It  is  the  well-known  addition  of  D  (Codex
Bezce,  ed.  Scrivener,  173)  after  Lk.  64:  '  On  the
same  day  when  he  saw  one  working  on  the  Sabbath  he
said  to  him  :  Man,  if  thou  knowest  what  thou  art  doing
thou  art  blessed  ;  but  if  thou  knowest  not,  thou  art
cursed  and  a  transgressor  of  the  law'  (rrj  avTy  rip.fpq.
6facrdfj.fi' 6s  Tiva,  fpyafo/Jifvov  rcjS  ffafi/Sdrtp  elirev  O.VT&'
tivdpuTTf,  ei  /a.ev  oldas  TL  woifis,  /ua/cdptos  er  el  Se  /ur;
oldas,  67r i  Kara  par os  Kal  irapaf3dTT)s  el  TOV  vbp.oi>).  The
sense  is  clear — it  is  what  we  find  in  Rom.  144  M  23-2
4  If  thou  knowest  what  thou  art  doing,' — in  other
words,  if  thou  art  doing  this  work  on  the  Sabbath
day  with  the  consciousness  that  it  is  a  work  of  necessity
— if  thy  conscience  justifies  thee  in  it — '  then  blessed
art  thou.'  '  But  if  thou  knowest  not ' — in  other  words,
if  thou  art  acting  against  thy  conscience,  with  a  lurking
fear  that  thou  art  doing  aught  amiss — '  then  art  thou
accursed,  and  a  transgressor  of  the  law.'  The  saying
in  the  Oxyrhynchus  papyrus  -  fragment  discovered  in
1 897,"  '  if  you  do  not  keep  the  Sabbath  you  will  not
see  the  Father  '  (edv  /J.TJ  <ra/3/3cm'<r?7Te  rb  ffdj3j3a.Tov  OVK
6\j/ea0f  TOV  irarepa.},  may  also  very  well  have  been
actually  spoken  by  Jesus  in  its  literal  sense,  as  the  ex
pression  of  the  same  conservative  temper  as  we  find  in
Mt.  517-19,  and  against  noisy  fanatics  who  thought  to  do
honour  to  their  master  by  showing  contempt  for  the
day.  It  is  more  probable,,  however,  in  view  of  the
parallel  clause,  '  If  you  do  not  fast  [to]  the  world  you
have  not  found  the  kingdom  of  God  '  (eav  p/rj  vrjcrrevar/Te
TOV  Kbap.ov  ov  JJ.TI  evprfre  rj]v  fiao iXeiav  TOV  deov),  that
the  saying  is  not  intended  to  be  understood  literally.

[This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  the  relation  of  the

Pauline  teaching  to  that  of  Jesus. Without  entering

_ . into  the  question  as  to  the  historical  origin

„(_.,. of  each  of  the  Pauline  epistles  referred  to,
Christian  ,.  , T^ ,  •

, , we  may  recall  that,  according  to  the  Pauline
attitudes. ,  .  • ,

teaching,  Jesus  was  sent  in  human  flesh  to

liberate  men  from  servitude  to  the  law  as  a  whole  and
in  every  particular.  The  conservative  side  of  the  teach
ing  of  Jesus  regarding  the  Sabbath  could  not,  there
fore,  be  reproduced  in  the  corresponding  teaching  of
Paul.]  It  is  clear  from  Rom.  14 $ff.  that  Paul  regarded
the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  as  essentially  an  d5td<popov
for  Christians  ;  it  is  possible  to  serve  the  Lord  by
observance  of  a  fixed  day,  and  equally  possible  to
serve  him  without  such  observance ;  the  important
thing  is  to  have  a  clean  conscience  (cp  also  w.  14
and  23).  The  Pauline  attitude  towards  the  Christians
of  Colossas  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  magnanimous
tolerance  here  expressed.  The  sharpness  of  Col.  2 16/.
(cp  Gal.  4g_/". )  is  due  to  the  situation  :  Paul  perceived
that  the  Judaising  false  teachers  had  raised  the  dSid-
<t>opov  into  an  dvajKcuov,  and  that  an  energetic  protest
against  the  imposition  of  any  such  yoke  was  urgently
required.  [There  is  no  definite  conflict  between  the
attitude  of  Paul  and  that  of  Jesus.  The  position  taken
up  by  Jesus  was  perfectly  natural  to  him,  as  a  son
of  a  pious  Jewish  family,  and  a  preacher  to  the  chosen

1  Ropes,  'Die  Spriiche  Jesu,'  in Texte  «.  Untersuchungen,
xiv.  2  126  (1896)  also  regards  this  as  possible.

2  It  is  more  probable  that  the  ideas  in  these  passages  rest
upon  an  utterance  of  Jesus  known  to  the  apostle  than  that  the
saying  attributed  to  Jesus  in  D  should  be  an  invention  resting
on  the  utterance  of  Paul.

3  Aoyia  'bjo-ou  (ed.  Grenfell  and  Hunt,  1897),  lof.

4174


SABBATH

people  of  God.  It  would  not  have  been  natural  to
Paul,  a  preacher  to  the  Gentiles  and  not  of  purely
Jewish  culture,  who  seems  to  have  felt  as  free  towards
the  earthly  life  of  Jesus  as  Jesus  himself  did  towards
the  letter  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  There  were  other
Christians,  however,  who  felt  and  acted  differently  from
Paul.]

That  the  earliest  Christians  in  Palestine  observed  the
Sabbath  is  nowhere  indeed  expressly  said,1  but  is
certainly  to  be  assumed.  The  silence  of  Acts  is  not
to  be  taken  as  a  proof  of  the  non-observance,  but  con
trariwise  as  a  proof  that  it  was  observed  as  matter  of
course.

[Eusebius  (ffE327)  remarks  that  the  Ebionites
observed  both  the  Sabbath  and  the  Lord's  Day  ;  and
this  practice  obtained  to  some  extent  in  much  wider
circles,  for  the  Apostolical  Constitutions  recommend  that
the  Sabbath  shall  be  kept  as  a  memorial  feast  of  the
creation,  and  the  Lord's  Day  as  a  memorial  of  the
resurrection.  — w.  R.  s.  ]

Was  the  Sabbath  observed  in  the  Christian  mission-churches
of  the  Dispersion?  This  is  not  an  inquiry  that  affects  our
main  subject,  and  only  a  glance  at  it  can  be  given.  We  may  be
certain  indeed  that  where  a  mission-church  consisted  essentially
of  those  who  had  formerly  been  Jews  or  <re/3<viecoi  (see  PROSE
LYTE)  the  observance  of  the  day  did  not  forthwith  cease.  It  is
instructive,  however,  to  note  that  in  the  decree  of  Jerusalem  (Acts
1623^)  Sabbath  observance  is  as  little  imposed  as  binding  on
Gentile  Christians  as  is  that  of  any  other  holy  day.2  In  estimat
ing  the  historical  bearing  of  this  testitnoniuin  e  stlentio  it  matters
little  whether  we  take  the  decree  as  actually  pronounced  by  a
council  of  apostles  at  Jerusalem  a  or  regard  it  as  a  later  finding  of
the  church  of  that  city  (cp  COUNCIL  UK  JERUSALEM).

We  now  return  to  the  thesis  with  which  this  article

opened,  viz.,  that  the  attitude  of  Jesus  towards  the  Rab-

. . , binical Sabbath (see Mt.  12 1-14 Mk.

r"B  2  27)  is  in  harmony  with  the  main  result

Of  Jesus, of  motlem criticism. In his  trenchant

resumed.  crit  jcjsm  Of  the  scribes  the  general  position
which  Jesus  takes  up  is  that  '  the  Sabbath  is  made  for
man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath,'  which  is  only  a
special  application  of  the  wider  principle  that  the  law  is
not  an  end  in  itself  but  a  help  towards  the  realisation  in
life  of  the  great  ideal  of  love  to  God  and  man,  which  is
the  sum  of  all  true  religion.  On  the  other  hand,  the
rules  of  the  scribes  enumerated  thirty-nine  main  kinds
of  work  forbidden  on  the  Sabbath,  and  each  of  these
prohibitions  gave  rise  to  new  subtilties.  Jesus'  disciples,
for  example,  who  plucked  ears  of  corn  "in  passing  through
a  field  on  the  holy  day,  had,  according  to  Rabbinical
casuistry,  violated  the  third  of  the  thirty-nine  rules,
which  forbade  harvesting ;  and  in  healing  the  sick,
Jesus  himself  broke  the  rule  that  a  sick  man  should  not
receive  medical  aid  on  the  Sabbath  unless  his  life  was
in  danger.4  .  In  fact,  as  Jesus  put  it,  the  Rabbinical
theory  seemed  to  be  that  the  Sabbath  was  not  made  for
man  but  man  for  the  Sabbath,  the  observance  of  which
was  so  much  an  end  in  itself  that  the  rules  prescribed
for  it  did  not  require  to  be  justified  by  appeal  to  any
larger  principle  of  religion  or  humanity.  The  precepts
of  the  law  were  valuable  in  the  eyes  of  the  scribes
because  they  were  the  seal  of  Jewish  particularism,  the
barrier  erected  between  the  world  at  large  and  the  ex
clusive  community  of  the  grace  of  Yah  we.  For  this
purpose  the  most  arbitrary  precepts  were  the  most  effec
tive,  and  none  were  more  so  than  the  complicated  rules

1  Zahn,  Gesch.  des  Sonntags,  etc.,  168,  353.
'*  Id.,  ut  supr.  173.

3  So  \Veizs;icker,  Apostolic  Age,  1 199  f.

4  [In  like  manner  the  length  of  journey  that  could  be  under
taken  witho-it  breach  of  the  Sabbath  came  to  be  also  strictly
defined  (cp  Mt.  24  20). For  by  the  thirty-ninth  rule  it  was  for
bidden to carry anything from one '  place ' to another — a
prohibition  plainly  based  on  Ex.  1629,  '  let  no  man  go  out  of  his
place  on  the  Sabbath  day ' — in  other  words,  '  let  every  one  stay
at  home.' A  definition  of 'place'  in  this  connection  was  found
in  the  measurement  of  the  '  suburbs '  of  a  Levitical  city  as  laid
down in Nu.  35i-8 — 2000 cubits square. This gave the
1  Sabbath limit '  (n2u"n  Cinn),  and  thus  the '  Sabbath  day's
journey'  (Acts  1  12  ;  cra/3/3aTOi>  6Ws)  was  fixed  at  2000  cubits  or
about  1000  yards.]

4175


SABBATH

of  Sabbath  observance.  The  ideal  of  the  Sabbath  which
all  these  rules  aimed  at  realising  was  absolute  rest  from
everything  that  could  be  called  work  ;  and  even  the
exercise  of  those  ofiices  of  humanity  which  the  strictest
Sabbatarians  regard  as  a  service  to  God,  and  therefore
as  specially  appropriate  to  his  day,  was  looked  on  as
work.  To  save  life  was  allowed,  but  only  because
danger  to  life  'superseded  the  Sabbath.'  In  like
manner  the  special  ritual  at  the  temple  prescribed  for
the  Sabbath  by  the  Pentateuchal  law  was  not  regarded
as  any  part  of  the  hallowing  of  the  sacred  day  ;  on  the
contrary,  the  rule  was  that,  in  this  regard,  'Sabbath
was  not  kept  in  the  sanctuary."  Strictly  speaking,
therefore,  the  Sabbath  was  neither  a  clay  of  relief  to
toiling  humanity  nor  a  day  appointed  for  public  wor
ship  ;  the  positive  duties  of  its  observance  were  to  wear
one's  best  clothes,  eat,  drink,  and  be  glad  (justified  from

Is.  58  13).

A  more  directly  religious  element,  it  is  true,  was  introduced
by  the  practice  of  attending  the  synagogue  service  ;  but  it  is  to
be  remembered  that  this  service  was  primarily  regarded  not  as
an  act  of  worship,  but  as  a  meeting  for  instruction  in  the  law.
So  far,  therefore,  as  the  Sabbath  existed  for  any  end  outside
it.self,  it  was  an  institution  to  help  every  Jew  to  learn  the  law,
and  from  this  point  of  view  it  is  regarded  by  Philo  and  Josephus,
who  are  accustomed  to  seek  a  philosophical  justification  for  the
peculiar  institutions  of  their  religion.  But  this  certainly  was
not  the  leading  point  of  view  with  the  mass  of  the  Rabbins.l

Such  was  the  position  of  the  scribes  ;  the  Sabbath  was
an  end  in  itself  —  a  mere  barrier  between  God's  people
and  the  world  at  large.  Jesus  maintains,  as  we  have
seen,  the  opposite  doctrine.  He  declares  too  that  his
view  of  the  law  as  a  whole,  and  the  interpretation  of  the
Sabbath  law  which  it  involves,  can  lie  historically  justi
fied  from  the  Old  Testament.  And  in  this  connection
he  introduces  two  of  the  main  methods  to  which  histori
cal  criticism  of  the  Old  Testament  has  recurred  in
modern  times  :  he  appeals  to  the  oldest  history  rather
than  to  the  Pentateuchal  code  as  proving  that  the  later
conception  of  the  law  was  unknown  in  ancient  times
(Mt.  12s  4),  and  to  the  exceptions  to  the  Sabbath  law
which  the  scribes  themselves  allowed  in  the  interests  of
worship  (v.  5)  or  humanity  (v.  n),  as  showing  that
the  Sabbath  must  originally  have  been  devoted  to
purposes  of  worship  and  humanity,  and  was  not  always
the  purposeless  arbitrary  thing  which  the  schoolmen
made  it  to  be.  Modern  criticism  of  the  history  of
Sabbath  observance  among  the  Hebrews  has  done
nothing  more  than  follow  out  these  arguments  in  detail,
and  show  that  the  result  is  in  agreement  with  what  is
known  as  to  the  dates  of  the  several  component  parts  of
the  Pentateuch.

The  historical  results  of  criticism  may  be  thus  sum
marised.  Of  the  legal  passages  that  speak  of  the
Sabbath  all  those  which  show  affinity
the  doctrine  of  the  scribes—  re-
garding  the  Sabbath  ^  an  arbitrary
sjgn  hetween  Yahwe  and  Israel,  enter
ing  into  details  as  to  particular  acts  that  are  forbidden,
and  enforcing  the  observance  by  several  penalties,  so
that  it  no  longer  has  any  religious  value,  but  appears  as
a  mere  legal  constraint  —  are  post-exilic  (Ex.  1623-30
31  12-17  35  1-3;  Nu.  1032-36);  the  older  laws  only
demand  such  cessation  from  daily  toil,  and  especially
from  agricultural  labour,  as  among  all  ancient  peoples
naturally  accompanied  a  day  set  apart  as  a  religious
festival,  and  in  particular  lay  weight  on  the  fact  that
the  Sabbath  is  a  humane  institution,  a  holiday  for  the  •
labouring  classes  (Ex.  23  12  Dt.  5  12-15).  As  it  stands
in  these  ancient  laws,  the  Sabbath  is  not  at  all  the
unique  thing  which  it  was  made  to  be  by  the  scribes.
'The  Greeks  and  the  barbarians,"  says  Strabo  (x.  89),
'  have  this  in  common,  that  they  accompany  their
sacred  rites  by  a  festal  remission  of  labour.'  So  it
was  in  old  Israel  :  the  Sabbath  [which  the  Israelites

1  See  the  Mishnah,  tract  '  Shabbath,'  and  Jubilees,  chap.  1  ;  nnd
compare  Schiirer,  (7/n:!l,  2428451  470-478,  where  the  rabbinical
Sabbath  is  well  explained  and  illustrated  in  detail.

4176


_ ...
5.  Pre-exilic

andpost-exilic
babbatn.


SABBATH

may  have  taken  from  the  Canaanites — an  agricultural
people  (see  WEEK)]  was  one  of  the  stated  religious
leasts,  like  the  new  moon  and  the  three  great  agri
cultural  sacrificial  celebrations  (Hos.  2n);  the  new
moons  and  the  Sabbaths  alike  called  men  to  the
sanctuary  to  do  sacrifice  (Is.  1 13)  ;  the  remission  of
ordinary  business  belonged  to  both  alike  (Am.  85),
and  for  precisely  the  same  reason.1  Hosea  even  takes
it  for  granted  that  in  captivity  the  Sabbath  will  be
suspended,  like  all  the  other  feasts,  because  in  his  day
a  feast  implied  a  sanctuary.

This  conception  of  the  Sabbath,  however,  necessarily
underwent  an  important  modification  in  the  seventh
century  B.C.,  when  the  local  sanctuaries  were  abolished,
and  those  sacrificial  rites  and  feasts  which  in  Hosea's
time  formed  the  essence  of  every  act  of  religion  were
limited  to  the  central  altar,  which  most  men  could  visit
only  at  rare  intervals.  From  that  time  forward  the  new
moons,  which  till  then  had  been  at  least  as  important
as  the  Sabbath,  and  were  celebrated  by  sacrificial  feasts
as  occasions  of  religious  gladness,  fell  into  insignifi
cance,  except  in  the  conservative  temple  ritual.  The
Sabbath  did  not  share  the  same  fate  ;  but  with  the  aboli
tion  of  local  sacrifices  it  became  for  most  Israelites  an
institution  of  humanity  divorced  from  ritual.  So  it
appears  in  the  deuteronomic  decalogue,  and  presumably
also  in  Jer.  17  19-27.  In  this  form  the  institution  was
able  to  survive  the  fall  of  the  state  and  the  temple,  and
the  seventh  day's  rest  was  clung  to  in  exile  as  one  of  the
few  outward  ordinances  by  which  the  Israelite  could
still  show  his  fidelity  to  Yahwe  and  mark  his  separation
from  the  heathen.  Hence  we  understand  the  impor
tance  attached  to  it  from  the  period  of  the  exile  onward
(Ezek.  20,2  228  2338  Jer.  17 19-27  Is.  5(5 1-7  58i3),  and
the  character  of  a  sign  between  Yahwe  and  Israel
ascribed  to  it  in  the  post-exilic  law.  This  attachment
to  the  Sabbath,  beautiful  and  touching  so  long  as  it
was  a  spontaneous  expression  of  continual  devotion  to
Yahwe,  acquired  a  less  pleasing  character  when,  after
the  exile,  it  came  to  be  enforced  by  the  civil  arm
(Neh.  13;  cp  Xeh.  10 3i),  and  when  the  later  law  even
declared  Sabbath-breaking  a  capital  offence.  It  is  just,
however,  to  remember  that  without  the  stern  discipline
of  the  law  the  community  of  the  second  temple  could
hardly  have  escaped  dissolution,  and  that  Judaism  alone
preserved  for  Christianity  the  hard-won  achievements
of  the  prophets.

As  the  Sabbath  was  originally  a  religious  feast,  the
question  of  the  origin  of  the  Sabbath  resolves  itself  into

6 Origin  of an inciuir>'  whv  and in vvhat circle  a

thp  Sahhath festal cyde of seven davs was first
Sabbath.  eslab]ished In  Gen 2  x_3  and  jn  Ex<

20  ii  the  Sabbath  is  declared  to  be  a  memorial  of  the
completion  of  the  work  of  creation  in  six  days.  It
appears  certain,  however,  that  the  decalogue  as  it  lay
before  the  deuteronomist  did  not  contain  any  allusion  to
the  creation  (see  DECALOGUE)  ,  and  it  is  generally  believed
that  this  reference  was  added  by  the  same  post-exilic
hand  that  wrote  Gen.  1 1-2  4  a.  The  older  account  of
the  creation  in  Gen.  2  4^-25  does  not  recognise  the
he.\a_'meron,  and  it  is  even  doubtful  whether  the  original
sketch  of  Gen.  1  distributed  creation  over  six  days.  The
connection,  therefore,  between  the  seven-days  week  and
the  work  of  creation  is  now  generally  recognised  as
secondary.  The  week  and  the  Sabbath  were  already
known  to  the  writer  of  Gen.  1,  and  he  used  them  to  give
the  framework  for  his  picture  of  the  creation,  which  in
the  nature  of  things  could  not  be  literal  and  required
some  framework.  At  the  same  time,  there  was  a
peculiar  appropriateness  in  associating  the  Sabbath  with
the  doctrine  that  Yahwe  is  the  Creator  of  all  things;


travelling  On  Sabbaths  and  feast-days  (cp  Mt.  L'-l  20  and  Jos.
Ant.  xiii.  s4:  OVK  ecmv  &k  rifj.iv  oure  ev  TOI?  vdpfiaaiv  oure  ii>
T»  60PT>?  odeveii/).— K.M.]

4177


SABBATH

for  we  see  from  Is.  40-55  that  this  doctrine  was  a  main
stay  of  Jewish  faith  in  those  very  days  of  exile  which
gave  the  Sabbath  a  new  importance  for  the  faithful.

But,  if  the  week  as  a  religious  cycle  is  older  than  the
idea  of  the  week  of  creation,  we  cannot  hope  to  find
more  than  probable  evidence  of  the  origin  of  the
Sabbath.  At  the  time  of  the  exile  the  Sabbath  was
already  an  institution  peculiarly  Jewish,  otherwise  it
could  not  have  served  as  a  mark  of  distinction  from
heathenism.  This,  however,  does  not  necessarily  imply
that  in  its  origin  it  was  specifically  Hebrew,  but  only
that  it  had  acquired  distinguishing  features  of  a  marked
kind.  What  is  certain  is  that  the  origin  of  the  Sabbath
must  be  sought  within  a  circle  that  used  the  week  as
a  division  of  time.  Here  again  we  must  distinguish
between  the  week  as  such  and  the  astrological  week,
?.£.,  the  week  in  which  the  seven  days  are  named  each
after  the  planet  which  is  held  to  preside  over  its  first
hour.

If  the  day  is  divided  into  twenty-four  hours  and  the  planets
preside  in  turn  over  each  hour  of  the  week  in  the  order  of  their
periodic  times  (Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Sun,  Venus,  Mercury,
Moon),  we  get  the  order  of  days  of  the  week  with  which  we  are
familiar.  For,  if  the  Sun  presides  over  the  first  hour  of  Sunday,
and  therefore  also  over  the  eighth,  the  fifteenth,  and  the  twenty-
second,  Venus  will  have  the  twenty-third  hour,  Mercury  the
twenty-fourth,  and  the  Moon,  as  the  third  in  order  from  the
Sun,  will  preside  over  the  first  hour  of  Monday.  Mars,  again,
as  third  from  the  Moon,  will  preside  over  Tuesday  (Dies  Martis',
Mardi),  and  so  forth.

This  astrological  week  became  widely  current  in  the
Roman  empire,  but  was  still  a  novelty  in  the  time  of
Dio  Cassius  (37  18).  That  writer  believed  that  it  came
from  Egypt ;  but  the  old  Egyptians  had  a  week  of  ten
(not  seven)  days,  and  the  original  home  of  astrology
and  of  the  division  of  the  day  into  twenty-four  hours
is  Chaldoea.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  there  is  a  long
step  between  the  astrological  assignation  of  each  hour  of
the  week  to  a  planet  and  the  recognition  of  the  week  as
an  ordinary  division  of  time  by  people  at  large.  Astro
logy  is  in  its  nature  an  occult  science,  and  there  is  not
the  slightest  trace  of  a  day  of  twenty-four  hours  among
the  ancient  Hebrews,  who  had  the  week  and  the
Sabbath  long  before  they  had  any  acquaintance  with
the  planetary  science  of  the  Babylonian  priests.  More
over,  it  is  quite  clear  from  extant  remains  of  Assyrian
calendars  that  our  astrological  week  did  not  prevail  in
civil  life  even  among  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians :
they  did  not  dedicate  each  day  in  turn  to  its  astrological
planet.  These  facts  make  it  safe  to  reject  one  often-
repeated  explanation  of  the  Sabbath,  viz.,  that  it  was  in
its  origin  what  it  is  in  the  astrological  week,  the  day
sacred  to  Saturn,  and  that  its  observance  is  to  be
derived  from  an  ancient  Hebrew  worship  of  that  planet.
In  truth,  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  worship  of  Saturn
among  the  oldest  Hebrews  (see  CHIUN  AND  SICCUTH).

The  week,  however,  is  found  in  various  parts  of  the
world  in  a  form  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  astrology
or  the  seven  planets,  and  with  such  a  distribution  as  to
make  it  pretty  certain  that  it  had  no  artificial  origin,  but
suggested  itself  independently,  and  for  natural  reasons,
to  different  races.  In  fact,  the  four  quarters  of  the  moon
supply  an  obvious  division  of  the  month  ;  and,  wherever
new  moon  and  full  moon  are  religious  occasions,  we  get
in  the  most  natural  way  a  sacred  cycle  of  fourteen  or
fifteen  days,  of  which  the  week  of  seven  or  eight  days
(determined  by  half-moon)  is  the  half.  Thus  the  old
Hindus  chose  the  new  and  the  full  moon  as  days  of
sacrifice ;  the  eve  of  the  sacrifice  was  called  upavasatha,
and  in  Buddhism  the  same  word  (uposathd)  has  come
to  denote  a  Sabbath  observed  on  the  full  moon,  on  the
day  when  there  is  no  moon,  and  on  the  two  days  which
are  eighth  from  the  full  and  the  new  moon  respectively,
with  fasting  and  other  religious  exercises.1

From  this  point  of  view  it  is  most  significant  that  in
the  older  parts  of  the  Hebrew  scriptures  the  new  moon

1  Childers,  Pali  Diet.  555;  Kern,  Budtihismiis  (Germ,
Transl.)  8;  MahAvagga,  ii.  i  i  ( ET  1  23g,  291).

4178


8 Recent


SABBATH

and the Sabbath are almost invariably mentioned '
together. The  month  is  beyond  question  an  old  sacred
division  of  time  common  to  all  the  Semites  ;  even  the
Arabs, who received  the week  at  quite  a  late  period j
from  the  Syrians  (Biruni, Chronology,  ET  58),  greeted
the new moon with  religious  acclamations. And  this
must  have  been  an  old Semitic usage,  for the word '
which  properly  means  '  to  greet  the  new  moon  '  (ahalla) j
is,  as  Lagarde  (Orientalia,  219)  has  shown,  etymologi- i
cally connected with the Hebrew  words  used  of  any i
festal joy. Among the Hebrews, or rather perhaps
among  the  Canaanites, whose  speech they  borrowed,
the  joy  at  the  new  moon  became  the  type  of  religious
festivity  in  general. Nor  are  other  traces  wanting  of
the connection of  sacrificial occasions  —  i.e.,  religious
feasts  —  with  the  phases  of  the  moon  among  the  Semites.
The  Harranians  had  four  sacrificial  days  in  every  month,
and,  of  these,  two  at  least  were  determined  by  the  con
junction  and  opposition  of  the  moon.1

That  full  moon  as  well  as  new  moon  had  a  religious  signi
ficance  among  the  ancient  Hebrews  seems  to  follow  from  the
fact  that,  when  the  great  agricultural  feasts  were  fixed  to  set
days,  the  full  moon  was  chosen.  In  older  times  these  feast-days
appear  to  have  been  Sabbaths  (Lev.  23  n  ;  cp  PASSOVER,  NEW
MOON).

A  week  determined  by  the  phases  of  the  moon  has  an  average
length  of  291-7-4  =  71!  days  —  i.e.,  three  weeks  out  of  eight  would
have  eight  days,  Hut  there  seems  to  be  in  i  Sam.  20  27,  com
pared  with  -T.  1824,  an  indication  that  in  old  times  the  feast  of
the  new  moon  lasted  two  days  —  a  very  natural  institution,  since
it  appears  that  the  feast  was  fixed  in  advance,  whilst  the  Hebrews
of  Saul's  time  cannot  have  been  good  enough  astronomers  to
know  beforehand  on  which  of  two  successive  days  the  new  moon
would  actually  be  observed.2  In  that  case  a  week  of  seven
working  days  would  occur  only  once  in  two  months.  We  cannot
tell  when  the  Sabbath  became  dissociated  from  the  month  ;  but
the  change  seems  to  have  been  made  before  the  Book  of  the
Covenant,  which  already  regards  the  Sabbath  simply  as  an
institution  of  humanity  and  ignores  the  new  moon.  In  both
points  it  is  followed  by  Deuteronomy.

The  word  'Sabbath'  (labattuv),  with  the  explanation

1  day  of  rest  of  the  heart,'  is  claimed  as  Assyrian  on  the

_ „,,  basis  of  a  textual  emendation  made  by

Babylonian  Fried.  Delitzsch  in  2  Rawl  32  x6.  The
,  /  .  value  of  this  isolated  and  uncertain
Sabbath  testimony  cannot  be  placed  very  high,
and  it  seems  to  prove  too  much,  for  it
is  practically  certain  that  the  Babylonians  at  the  time  of
the  Hebrew  exile  cannot  have  had  a  Sabbath  exactly
corresponding  in  conception  to  what  the  Hebrew  Sab
bath  had  become  under  very  special  historical  circum
stances.  What  we  do  know  from  a  calendar  of  the
intercalary  month  Elul  II.  is  that  in  that  month  the  yth,
I4th,  igth,  2ist,  and  28th  days  had  a  peculiar  char
acter,  and  that  on  them  certain  acts  were  forbidden  to
the  king  and  others.  There  is  the  greatest  uncertainty
as  to  the  details  (cp  the  very  divergent  renderings  in
RP,  7  i6o/.  ;  Schrader,  KA  T&  19  ;  Lotz,  Qu.  dehistoria
Sabbati,  39  /.  );  but  these  days,  which  are  taken  to  be
Assyrian  Sabbaths,  are  certainly  not  '  days  of  rest  of
the  heart,'  and  to  all  appearance  are  unlucky  days,  and
expressly  designated  as  such.3  If,  therefore,  they  are
'Assyrian  Sabbaths'  at  all,  they  are  exactly  opposite
in  character  to  the  Hebrew  Sabbath,  which  was  described
by  Hosea  as  a  day  of  gladness,  and  never  ceased  to  be
a  day  of  feasting  and  good  cheer.  [Cp  Jastrow,  in
the  article  mentioned  below.  ]

Besides  the  works  already  mentioned,  reference  should
be  made  to  W.  Lotz,  Qu&stionum  de  historia  Sabbati
Mri  duo  (1883),  which  takes  account  of

the  Assvriological  evidence. Hirschfeld's
. ,  T1  ,.  .,

'  Remarks  on  the  etymology  of  Sabbath

(JRAS.  April  1896,  pp.  353-359),  according  to  Jastrow,
misunderstands  and  misquotes  the  Babylonian  material.

1  The  others—  according  to  the  Fihrist,  319  14—  are  the  zyth
and  the  28th.

2  It  appears  from  Judith  86  that  even  in  later  times  there  were
two  days  at  the  new  moon  on  which  it  was  improper  to  fast.

3  Lotz  says  they  are_lucky  days  ;  but  the  expression  which  he
renders,  diesfaustus,  is  applied  to  every  day  in  the  calendar.
The  rest  of  his  book  does  not  rise  above  this  example  of  acumen.

4I7Q


SABBATICAL  YEAR

Nowack  (Hebr.  Arch.  ["1894]  2 140^)  gives  a  lucid  sketch
of  current  theories  and  their  grounds.  See  also  Jensen,
Sunday  School  Times  (Philadelphia),  Jan.  16,  1892,  and
Jastrow,  Amer.  J.  of  Theol.  1898,  pp.  315-352.
Jensen  is  cautious  and  reserved  on  the  question  of  a
Babylonian  origin  of  the  Sabbath,  which,  however,
Gunkel  (Schopf.  14)  and  Jastrow  (op.  cit.)  expressly
affirm.  The  bridge  which  Gunkel  fails  to  construct
between  the  Babylonian  atonement -Sabbath  and  the
Hebrew  rest-Sabbath,  Jastrow  endeavours  to  point  out.
He  remarks  that  the  Heb.  Sabbdthon  does  in  fact,  like
the  Bab.  sabattum,  convey  the  idea  of  propitiation  or
appeasement  of  the  divine  anger,  and  he  is  of  opinion
that  the  Hebrew  Sabbath  was  originally  a  Sabbathon —
i.e. ,  a  day  of  propitiation  and  appeasement,  marked  by
atoning  rites.  At  this  stage  of  development  it  was
celebrated  at  intervals  of  seven  days,  corresponding
with  changes  in  the  moon's  phases,  and  was  identical
in  character  with  the  four  days  in  each  month  (yth,  i.4th,
2ist,  and  28th)  that  the  Babylonians  regarded  as  days
which  had  to  be  converted  into  days  of  propitiation.
There  were  also,  however,  other  sabbathon  days,  such
as  the  New  Year's  Day,  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the
first  and  eighth  days  of  the  annual  pilgrimage  to  the
chief  sanctuary.

The  introduction,  in  consequence  of  profound  changes
in  religious  conceptions  among  the  Hebrews,  of  the
custom  of  celebrating  the  Sabbath  every  seventh  day,
irrespective  of  the  relationship  of  the  day  to  the  moon's
phases,  led  to  a  complete  separation  from  the  ancient
view  of  the  Sabbath,  whilst  the  introduction,  at  a  still
later  period,  of  the  doctrine  that  the  divine  work  of
creation  was  completed  in  six  days  removed  the  Hebrew
Sabbath  still  further  from  the  point  at  which  the  develop
ment  of  the  corresponding  Babylonian  institution  ceased.
Hence  the  position  of  the  Sabbath  in  the  Priestly  Code.
The  field,  however,  is  still  open  for  further  investigation.

Cp  also  Toy,  '  The  earliest  form  of  the  Sabbath,'
JBLlSigojf.  (1899);  and  C.  H.  W.  Johns,  Assyrian
Deeds  and  Documents  (who  finds  that  the  I9th  day  of
the  month  was  observed  by  abstinence  from  secular
business  ;  but  the  deeds  do  not  indicate  that  the  7th,
I4th,  2ist,  and  28th  days  were  Sabbaths).

W.  R.  S.  —  K.  M. — T.  K.  C.

SABBATH  DAY'S  JOURNEY. See SABBATH.

§4n.

SABBATHEUS  (c*BB<\T«MOC  [BA]).  iEsd.9i4  =
Ezra  10 15,  SHABBETHAI,  i.

SABBATICAL  YEAR.  The  Jews  under  the  second
temple  observed  every  seventh  year  as  a  Sabbath  accord
ing  to  the  (post-exilic)  law  of  Lev.  25 1-7.  It  was  a
year  in  which  all  agriculture  was  remitted,  in  which  the
fields  lay  unsown,  the  vines  grew  unpruned,  and  even
the  natural  produce  was  not  gathered  in.  That  this
law  was  not  observed  before  the  captivity  we  learn  from
Lev.  2634^  ;  indeed,  so  long  as  the  Hebrews  were  an
agricultural  people  with  little  trade,  in  9  land  often
ravaged  by  severe  famines,  such  a  law  could  not  have
been  observed.  Even  in  later  times  it  was  occasionally
productive  of  great  distress  (i  Mace.  64953  ;  Jos.  Ant.
xiv.  16z).  In  the  older  legislation,  however,  we  already
meet  with  a  seven  years'  period  in  more  than  one  con
nection.  The  release  of  a  Hebrew  servant  after  six
years'  labour  (Ex.  21  iff.  Dt.  15 12^:)  has  only  a
remote  analogy  to  the  Sabbatical  year.  But  in  F.x.
23  10  ff.  it  is  prescribed  that  the  crop  of  every  seventh
year  (apparently  the  self-sown  crop)  shall  be  left  for  the
poor,  and  after  them  for  the  beasts.  The  difference
between  this  and  the  later  law  is  that  the  seventh  year
is  not  called  a  Sabbath,  and  that  there  is  no  indication
that  all  land  was  to  lie  fallow  on  the  same  year.  In
this  form  a  law  prescribing  one  year's  fallow  in  seven
may  have  been  anciently  observed.  It  is  extended  in
v.  ii  to  the  vinevard  and  the  olive-vard  ;  but  here  the


SABBEUS

culture  necessary  to  keep  the  vines  and  olive-trees  in
order  is  not  forbidden  ;  the  precept  is  only  that  the
produce  is  to  be  left  to  the  poor.  In  Deuteronomy
this  law  is  not  repeated  ;  but  a  fixed  seven  years'  period
is  ordained  for  the  benefit  of  poor  debtors,  apparently
in  the  sense  that  in  the  seventh  year  no  interest  is  to  be
exacted  by  the  creditor  from  a  Hebrew,  or  that  no  pro
ceedings  are  to  be  taken  against  the  debtor  in  that  year
(Deut.  15  i  /.}.  W.  R.  s.

SABBEUS  (CABBAIAC  [BA])  i  Esd.  932  =  Ezral03i,

SilKMAIAII, 19.

SABEANS  occurs  four  times  in  AV,  representing
three  distinct  Hebrew  words  in  MT  ;  (i)  in  Job  1 15
(Nrii?,  RV"'£-  SHEBA)  and  Joel  38  (D\S1^,  RV  MEN
OF  SHEBA);  (2)  in  Is.  45 14  (D'X3D),  see  SEBA  ;  and
(3)  in  Ezek.  2842  (AVm£-  and  RV  'drunkards'),  where,
however,  it  is  no  part  of  the  original  text.  The  Kt.
c'xniD — i-f-,  D'KaiDi  'he  reading  for  which  the  Kre  sub
stitutes  Q'toD  with  the  same  meaning  (drunkards),  is
an  obvious  interpolation  due  simply  to  dittography  of
the  preceding  Q'X31D-  On  the  further  textual  corruption
of  the  verse  see  Cornill,  ad  loc. ,  and  Toy  (SBOT}.  Of
course  none  of  these  words  has  anything  to  do  with  any
of  the  religious  sects  that  have  at  one  time  or  another
been  called  Sabians — i.e.,  Baptists  (see  art.  SABIANS
in  Kncv.  Brit.  21 128) — a  name  which  is  etymologically
quite  distinct.

SABI. i. (c&Bei [A]), i  Esd.  628 RV=Ezra242,
SHODAI.
2.  ((7-a/3[e]oj  [HA])  i  Esd.  534  AV,  RV  Sable  =  Ezra  2  57; see

POCHERETH-HAZZEBAIM.

SABIAS  (c^BiAC  [BA])  zEsd.  19  RV=2Ch.359,
HASHABIAH,  6.

SABTA  (KPOD,  CABATA  [B],  CABA6A  [A],  ce.  [L],
iCh.  19),  or  Sabtab.  (fifOD,  CAB&9A  [ADEL],  Gen.
lO?),  one  of  the  sons  of  Cush.  See  GUSH.  If  '  Cush  '
here  means  the  N.  Arabian  region  of  that  name,  we  are
entitled  and  indeed  compelled  to  suppose  that  '  Sabtah  '
and  '  Raamah '  have  arisen  by  corruption  and  editorial
manipulation  from  the  names  of  places  near  the  S.
border  of  Canaan.  ND3D  will  probably  come  from  royo
'  Maacath '  (the  southern  Maacah),  which  is  also  the
original  of  SUCCOTH  in  the  earliest  story  of  Jacob  and
in  Ps.  608,  and  of  SOCOH  in  i  S.  17 1.  Cp  SHABBETHAI.
From  the  ordinary  point  of  view  Dillmann  finds  some
plausibility  in  Tuch's  suggestion  that  Sabta  =  2a/3/3a#a
(Peripl.  27  ;  also  Ptolemy,  Strabo),  the  Sabota  of  Pliny
(632  1232).  This  was  the  capital  of  the  ChatramotiUe
(see  HAZARMAVETH),  and  was  famous  as  the  centre  of
the  trade  in  incense.  The  name  is  the  Sab.  nut?-
According  to  Glaser,  Sabta  is  the2a<£0a  of  Ptol.  vi.  730,
and  is  to  be  placed  at  Sudeir  or  in  the  NE  of  Yemamah  ;
Sabta,  Raamah,  and  Sabteca  representing  the  districts
on  the  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf  (Skizze,  2252 /.).

T.  K.  c.

SABTECA  (KSJrpD,  CABALA  [ADE],  ceBe.  [L]
in  Gen.  ;  ceBeKA0A[BL],  -6AXA  [A]  in  Ch.  ;  ©there
fore  indicates  rather  SBKTHA),  one  of  the  sons  of  Cush
(Gen.  10  7  iCh.  I9f).  AV  has  Sabtechah  in  Gen.
and  Sabtecha  in  Ch.  Glaser.  following  Bochart,  con
nects  this  with  the  name  Samydake  in  Carmania,  on
the  E.  side  of  the  Persian  Gulf  (Skizze,  2252)  ;  but
Dillmann  calls  attention  to  the  phonetic  difference.
It  is  perhaps  really  a  dittographed  SABTA,  the  3  being
a  record  of  a  reading  Nroo  (cp  <S  in  Gen. ).  T.  K.  c.

SACAR  ("OB*).  Probably  an  ethnic  of  the  same
group  as  ISSACHAR,  ZICHRI.  The  name  has,  of  course,
no  connection  with  that  of  the  little  known  Egyptian
god  Sakar  (cp  ISSACHAR,  col.  2292,  n.  5).  i.  On
the  name  in  i  Ch.  llss,  see  SHARAR  and  ISSACHAR,
§  6  (end).

2.  A  son  of  OBED-EDOM  (q.v.),  i  Ch.  264
[B],  CAXAP  [L].  C&X"Ap[A]).
134  4181


SACKCLOTH

SACK.  The  wide  diffusion  of  this  word  throughout
the  European  languages  is  probably  due  in  the  first
instance  to  Phoenician  trade  and  commerce.1  The
word,  it  is  true,  does  not  happen  to  be  found  in  either
Phoenician  or  Punic;  but  it  is  vouched  for  in  Hebrew,
Syriac,  Ethiopic,  and  possibly  Assyrian.  See  SACK
CLOTH.

1.  sak, psy  (<roKKo? [hut judp(n7r;ro?, Gen.  44i_/C], saccus),
Gen.  42  25  35  (E);  inv.sja  it  is  due  to  R  (Holz.);  Lev.  1132
Josh.  94. See  SACKCLOTH.

2.  kali,  '73,  Gen.  42  250.  (ayyelov),  RV  '  vessel ' ;  cp  BAG.

3.  'amtdhath,  nnnDK  (v/spread out, cp Is.  4022), only  in
Gen.  41-42 J (422527/35  43 12  etc.). On E's term see (i)
above. (5  in  42  2-t if.  43  12  /xapo-iTrn-os.

4.  sikkalon,  ji^jWi  2  K.  442f  RV(AV,  RVmf.  'husk,'  AVmg.
'scrip,'  'garment'),  cp  FOOD,  col. 15315  "•  2- AV'ntJ-  gives  a
superficially  plausible  sense  (cp  SCRIP)— derived  from  an  anony
mous  Greek  translator's  Kojpvxof  (Field's  Hex.)',  but  v^ps  is
unknown.

[It  has  been  conjectured  elsewhere  (see  PROPHET,  §  7)  that
Elisha,  like  P^Iijah,  was  specially  a  prophet  of  the  Negeb,  and
that  *7Dn3  is  a  popular  corruption  of  S^cnT-  If  so,  u'rpsa
probably  comes  from  D'73"JV2,  '  Beth-gallim,'  where  D'^J  is

another  corruption  of  ^XDiTT-  Elisha  was  at  a  place  called
Keth-gallim,  or  (see  v.  38)  Beth-gilgal,  or  (since  Gallim  and
Gilgal  =  Jerahmeel)  Beth-jerahmeel,  in  the  Negeb  formerly  be
longing  to  the  Jerahmeelites.  But  Lagarde's  reading  nj?Sp.
'  wallet '(?),  suggested  by  the  /3aiceAAe0  of  ©A  and  Theod.  (see
BDB),  is  ingenious.— T.  K.  c.]

SACKBUT  (N3|b>),  Dan.  35  7  10  isf.  See  Music,
§6(10).

SACKCLOTH  (pb ;  c&KKOC  ;  saccus,  cilidum  -).  It
is  probable  that  the  Heb.  sak  was  originally  a  coarse
_T  textile  fabric  made  from  the  hair  of  the  camel  or
the  goat  (cp  the  meanings  of  crd/CKos,  a  borrowed
word).  Like  the  simlah  it  could  be  used  also  as  a  wrap
or  bag  (cp  MANTLE,  §  2  [i])  ;  see  SACK.  Referring
the  reader,  generally,  to  the  articles  DRESS  and  MOURN
ING  CUSTOMS,  we  propose  here  to  indicate  the  nature
of  the  garment  expressed  by  the  word  sak,  and  to
endeavour  to  ascertain  the  origin  of  the  custom  of
wearing  it.

The  usage  of  the  word  suggests  that  the  sak  was
nothing  more  than  a  loin-cloth,  similar,  no  doubt,  to
the  ihrdm3  of  Moslem  pilgrims  at  Mecca.  It  was  worn
as  a  token  of  grief  after  a  death  (Gen.  3734  2  S.  831
Joel  1  8),  more  commonly,  however,  in  times  of  trial,  to
remove  a  calamity,  or  as  a  means  of  propitiation.

Thus,  the  sak  is  worn  after  hearing  bad  news  (2  K.  6  30  19  i  Est.
4  1-4,  etc.),  to  avert  a  pestilence  (i  Ch.  21  IG),  when  one's  neigh
bour  lies  in  sickness  (Ps.  35  13),  or  as  a  sign  of  general  undefined
grief  (Ps.  30  ii  [12]  6i'n  [12]  Is.  22  12).  It  is  often  preceded  by
the  rending  of  the  clothes  (Gen.  37  34  i  K.  21  27  —  the  rending
alone  in  Job  1  20),  or  by  the  covering  of  one's  head  with  ashes
or  (Neh.  9  i  2  Mace.  10  25)  earth.4  Like  the  ihrdm,  the  sak  is
also  worn  by  women  (JoellS,  cp  Judith  8  5  163  2  Mace.  3  10).
In  Jon.  3  8  it  is  ordered  to  be  worn  by  both  man  and  beast
(bShlm&K)

The  passages  in  which  the  sak  is  mentioned  as  worn
next  the  skin  are  probably  not  exceptional  (i  K.212?
2K.  630  Is.  32n);  Doughty  has  re
marked  the  half-naked  appearance  of  the
wearers  of  the  ihrdm — 'like  bathing-


2.  A  sacred
garment.


1  Some  (e.g.,  Whitney,  in  the  Cent.  Diet)  have  supposed
this  diffusion  to  be  due  to  the  incident  in  the  story  of  Joseph,
where  the  cup  was  hidden  in  the  sack.  This  does  not  explain
the  various  meanings  of  <7<iKKO?,  saccus,  and,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  the  Heb.  sak  appears  only  thrice  in  the  story,  whilst  the
synonym  'amtdhath  occurs  no  fewer  than  fourteen  times
(see  SACK,  3).

a  Saccus  and  cilicium  are  about  evenly  distributed.  For
cilidum  (a  goat's-hair  cloth  used  for  tents),  see  CILICIA,  §  3
end,  and  cp  TENT,  §  3.

3  Sak  is  frequently  used  with  hagar, 'gird  on,' the  reverse
process being described by  pittah, 'loosen' (Ps.  30  n [12]
Is.  202). The ihrdm (on which cp Wellh. Heid.(\\ ii6f-
|2|  123)  is  a  loin-cloth  covering  the  knee,  one  lap  of  which  may
be  cast  over  the  shoulder  (Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  479  481). In
Eg.  sa-g,  with  the  determinative  '  hair,'  is  a  woollen  Palestinian
garment  of  the  poor  (W MM  OLZ,  i9oi,  col.  i9i).

4  Jastrow  JAOSt&iy)  suggests  that  in  Judith9i  (a-iroSov),
the  translator  mistook  apher  (see  TURBAN,  §  2)  for  epher,  like
his  predecessor  in  2  S.  13  19.

4182


SACKCLOTH


men'  (Ar.  Des.Zw/.  537),  and  the  dress  doubtless
resembled  the  prophet's  girdle  which,  in  Job  12  18,  is
worn  as  a  mark  of  humiliation  by  a  king.  See  GIRDLE.

The  sackcloth  of  the  OT,  therefore,  must  not  be
regarded  as  in  any  way  akin  to  a  sack  or  sackcloth  in
the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  and,  in  endeavouring  to
ascertain  the  origin  of  the  custom  of  wearing  such  a
garb,  we  must  not  be  led  away  by  the  early  Christian  or
the  later  ideas  with  which  it  is  associated.  *

That  conservatism  prevails  longest  in  matters  of  cult  is  a
familiar  experience,  and  Schwally,  Nowack,  and  Kittel  (//A'on
i  K..  21  27)  favour  the  view  that  the  sak  is  the  clothing  of  an
earlier  half-forgotten  time,  which,  though  it  may  long  have  coa-
tinued  to  be  worn—  e.g.  ,  by  slaves  and  the  poorer  people  —  was
nevertheless  adopted  exceptionally  by  the  ruling  classes  on
specific  occasions  (cp  DRESS,  §  2,  col.  1136,  n.  4).  Another
view  is  possible.

It  is  to  be  observed  (a)  that  the  corresponding
ihram  is  essentially  a  dress  for  a  sacred  occasion  ;  (b]
that  the  prophets  wore  a  garment  similar  to  the  sak  \
and  (c]  that  the  sacred  ephod  itself  was  probably  once  a
mere  loin-cloth  (see  EPHOD,  §  i,  and  cp  T.  C.  Foote,
JBL  21  41-44  [1902]).  On  these  grounds,  therefore,  it
seems  extremely  probable  that  the  sak  was  pre-eminently
a  sacred  garment,  and  it  agrees  with  this  interpretation
that  we  find  it  worn  by  people  of  all  classes  on  any
especially  solemn  occasion  (  i  Ch.  21  16  Joel  1  13  Dan.  93
i  Mace.  847  2  Mace.  10  25  etc.  ).

In  view  of  what  has  been  said  elsewhere  on  the  bear
ing  of  ideas  of  holiness  upon  such  a  matter  as  dress,2  a

„ TTTV-  plausible explanation of the custom

o vvliv  \^om

J  ' may be attempted. Garments that

have  come  in  contact  with  holy  things  are  unfit  for
common  use,  and  in  early  Arabia  certain  rites  were  per
formed  either  in  a  naked  state  or  in  clothes  reserved  for


SACRIFICE

the  purpose.  There  are  some  indications  that  this  held
good  among  the  ancient  Hebrews  ;  and  if  we  bear  in
mind  that  the  sak  is  worn  at  times  of  great  trouble,
when  Yahwe's  help  or  forgiveness  is  besought,  we  may
perhaps  surmise  that  such  occasions  were  formerly
accompanied  by  a  sacrificial  rite  when  a  special  garb  (if
we  may  judge  from  the  Arabian  evidence)  would  not  be
unnatural.  It  would  be  just  at  such  a  time  as  this  that
the  individual  would  feel  himself  brought  into  closest
contact  with  his  deity.  At  all  events,  ideas  connected
with  worship  of  the  dead  do  not  cover  the  whole
ground.

The  king  of  Nineveh  removes  his  royal  mantle  before  donning
the  sak  (jon.36),1  the  'holy'  occasion  requires  'holy'  clothes,
and  the  primary  object  of  the  rending  of  the  garments  is  prob
ably  to  put  oneself  m  a  state  of  nakedness  as  quickly  as  possible
(Schwally,  Frey).

That  the  use  of  this  special  garment  should  have  been
retained  long  after  the  (ex  hyp. )  ritual  died  out  is  not
without  analogy.  The  gradual  decay  is  further  illus
trated  by  the  fact  that  sometimes  even  it  was  the  custom
not  to  wear  the  iak  but  to  lie  upon  it  (2  S.  21 10  Is.  085),
and  that  in  later  Jewish  times  the  rending  of  the  gar
ments  was  confined  to  a  small  slit  (Nowack,  HA  1193).

See  the  literature  at  the  end  of  MOURNING  CUSTOMS  ;  also
Schwally,  Das  Leben  nach  d.  Tode  (1892),  n  ff.,  Frey,  Tod,
Seelenglaube,  etc.  (1898),  34  „#

On  sackcloth  and  nakedness,  cp  Jastrow,  2, 'AT *IVTI  117 ff.
(1902),  which  appeared  since  the  above  article  was  written.

S.  A.  C.

SACRAMENT  (sacramentum,  the  Vg.  rendering  of
fMcrr-fjpLov  in  Eph.  1 9  83  632  Col.  1  27  i  Tim.  3i6  Rev.

1 20  17  7). See  MYSTERY,  §  5.

SACRED  depoc)  i  Cor.  9 13  2  Tim.  3 15  RV.  See
CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  §  i,  8.


Introductory  (§  i).
Sacrifices  of  nomads  (§  2).
Firstlings  (§  3).
Spring  sacrifices  (§  ^/.).
Peculiar  rite  (§  6).
Protection  by  blood  (§  7).


SACRIFICE

CONTENTS

I. HISTORY  OF  SACRIFICE  IN  OT

Wild  animals  and  spoils  of  war  (§  8).
Israel  in  Canaan  :  sources  (§  9).
Agricultural  civilisation  (§  10).
Zcbah  and  'olah  (§  nf.).
Victims  and  oblations  (§  13^).
Seasons  and  occasions  of  sacrifice  (§  15).


Worship  (S  i(sff.\

Founding  of  kingdom  :  effect  (§  19).

Foreign  influence  (§  20).

Seventh  century  laws  ;  Ezek.  (§  21).

Destruction  of  temple  (§  22).


II. DESCRIPTION  OF  DEVELOPED  JEWISH  SYSTEM


Thank  offering  (§  29^).
Oblations  and  libations  (§§  3031*1).
Frankincense  ;  salt  (§  31  b\
ii.  Publica  :

Daily  holocausts  and  oblations  (§  32).
Sabbaths  and  festivals  (§  33).
Shewbread  (§  34  a).
Peculiar  oblations


Introductory  (§  23).
Offering  in  general  :  species  (§  24).
Sacra  publica  et  privata  (§  25).
1.  Prh'ata :

Burnt  and  trespass  offering  (§  26^)
Sin  offering  (§  28^).
Peculiar  piacula  (§  28^).
Peace  offerings  (§  29  a).


As  a  gift  to  God  (§  41).
Sacrificial  feasts  (§  42).
Blood  of  victim  (§  43).
Propitiation  and  expiation  (§  44).


Jewish  sacrifices  :  the  Gospels  (§  54)
Paul  (§  55).
Hebrews  (§  56).


i.  HISTORY  OF  SACRIFICE  IN  OT

The  term  '  sacrifice '  may  with  etymological  propriety

be  employed  of  all  offerings  to  God  ;  in  common  use

1.  Introductory. Denotes  specifically  that  class  of

' offerings  in  which  a  victim  is  slain,

corresponding  to  the  Heb.  zdbah  (lit. '  slaughter  ').3 In


III. BELIEFS  AND  IDEAS

Effect  of  sacrifice  (§  45).

Theory  of  blood  atonement  (§  46).

Efficacy  of  sacrifice  :  popular  belief  (§47).

The  prophets  (§  48).

Persian  and  Greek  periods  (§  49).


Libations  (§  35).

Incense  ;  salt  (§  36).

Public  piacula  (§  37).

Scapegoat;  red  heifer

Installation  of  priests  (§  39  a).

Consecration  of  altar  (§  39^).

Peace  offerings  in  sacra  publica  (§  40).


Sirach  ;  Philo  (§  50).
Schoolsoflaw:  e  fficacy  of  sacrifice  (§51).
Moral  and  religious  conditions  of  atone
ment  (§  52).
How  does  sacrifice  expiate?  (§  53).


Johannine  writings  (§  60).
Genesis  of  idea  (§  61).


1  Cp  Schwally, Leben  nach  d. Tode, 11  f. For  the  early
Christian  usages  see  Smith,  Diet.  Christ.  Ant.,  s.v.

2  See  Rcl.  Sem.W  451^,  DRESS,  §  8,  and  cp  generally  CLEAN
AND  UNCLEAN-.

3  See  WRS  ££(»),  21 132,  Rel.  Sem.^t,  *i3/.

4183


IV. SACRIFICES  IN  NT

Death  of  Christ  :  Pauline  Epistles  (§  57).
In  Hebrews  (§  58).
In  i  Pet.  (§  59).

Bibliography  (§  62).

the  present  article  the  word  will  be  used  in  this  more
restricted  sense,  whilst  offerings  of  grain,  meal,  bread,
oil,  and  the  like  (Heb.  minhah]  are  called  '  oblations.'
The  term  'offering*  will  be  employed  as  the  equivalent
of  the  comprehensive  korbdn,  as  well  as  in  such  phrases
as  'burnt  offering'  (oldh,  holocaust),  peace  offering
(stlem},  sin  offering  (hattdth},  trespass  offering  (dsdm).
For  convenience,  certain  species  of  offering  are  made


1  Cp  Wi.  AOFZzq,  where  the  Assyrian  king  tears  off  his
royal  garments,  and  clothes  his  body  in  the  '  baHAmn,  the  dress
of  the  penitent.  Wi.  (op  cit.  44)  points  out  that  basiimu  is
elsewhere  glossed  by  sakku  (  =  p'y).

4184


SACRIFICE

the  subject  of  special  articles  :  see  FIRSTBORN,  INCENSE,
TAXATION,  TITHE,  Vow,  VOTIVE  OFFERING.  Cp  also
ATONEMENT  [DAY  OF],  FEASTS,  PASSOVER,  PENTE
COST,  TABERNACLES  ;  and,  for  Babylonian  parallels,
RITUAL.  The  present  article  deals  in  its  first  part  (§§
1-22)  with  the  history  of  sacrifice  in  the  OT  ;  in  its
second  (§§  23-40)  with  the  developed  Jewish  system  ;
the  third  part  (§§  41-53)  discusses  beliefs  and  ideas
connected  with  sacrifice,  its  intent,  significance,  efficacy,
and  operation;  the  fourth  part  (§§  54-61)  treats  of
sacrifice  in  the  NT.

Before  the  invasion  of  Palestine  the  Israelite  tribes
were  nomads  ;  their  living  and  their  wealth  were  in  their

2.  Sacrifices flocks °f  sma11 cattle'1 These  also


of  nomads.


furnished the material of  their  sacri


fices.  Offerings  were  doubtless  made
also  of  the  spoils  of  war,  and  perhaps  of  animals  taken
in  the  chase  (see  below,  §  8).  Our  knowledge  of  the
character  of  these  sacrifices  is  derived  not  so  much
from  the  stories  of  the  patriarchs  in  JE  as  from  sur
vivals  in  later  custom  and  law.  The  nature  of  these
survivals,  together  with  the  permanent  conditions  of
nomadic  life  in  the  deserts  of  Syria  and  Arabia,  justify
us  in  supplementing  or  interpreting  our  scanty  material
by  what  is  known  of  Arab  sacrifice  in  pre-Islamic  times
and  among  the  modern  Bedouins.'''

The  occasions  of  sacrifice  are  many  and  various.
Among  the  modern  Arabs  sacrifices  are  offered  on  the
birth  of  a  son,  a  circumcision,  marriage,  the  coming  of
a  guest  ;  for  the  recovery  of  the  sick  or  for  the  health
of  flocks  and  herds  ;  on  the  inception  of  an  enterprise,
such  as  setting  out  for  a  foray,  breaking  ground  for
tillage,  opening  or  enlarging  a  well,  laying  the  founda
tion  of  a  building  ;  on  the  conclusion  of  a  compact  or
covenant  ;  the  return  from  a  successful  expedition  ;  on
the  anniversary  of  a  kinsman's  death,  and  the  like.

The  rites  of  sacrifice  are  of  primitive  simplicity.  The
owner  ordinarily  slaughters  his  own  victim.  The  blood
is  poured  upon  the  ground,  smeared  upon  the  sacred
stone,  upon  the  tent  ropes,  the  door-posts  of  houses,  or
upon  persons  or  animals.  The  flesh  makes  a  feast  for
the  owner,  his  family,  tribesmen,  and  guests.

A  species  of  sacrifice  which  in  all  probability  goes
back  to  the  nomadic  stage  is  the  offering  of  firstlings

3.  Firstlings  3  (blkdrdth<  SS-  msr]  of  animals,  that  is,
the  first  offspring  of  the  dam,  which
'opens  the  womb  '  (ptter  rthem,  Ex.  34 19  13 2  12  15  Nu.
1815;  cp  piter  st'ger  bthemdk,  Ex.  1812).  The  shepherd
Abel  makes  his  offering  '  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock
and  of  their  fat  portions'  (Gen.  44  J);  the  laws  in
sistently  claim  all  firstlings  as  God's  right  (Ex.  182  12-15
2229 /.  [28/]  34 19 /  Lev.  2227  2?26  Nu.  1815-17  Dt.
126i7  Idas  1019-23,  cp  Neh.  1036).  The  animal  was
primitively  sacrificed  shortly  after  its  birth  ;  the  oldest
rule  is  :  '  Seven  days  it  shall  be  with  its  dam  ;  on  the
eighth  day  thou  shall  give  it  to  me'  (Ex.  22so  [29]). 4
A  similar  custom  existed  among  the  heathen  Arabs  ;
the  first  birth  ( called  fard]  of  a  she-camel,  goat,  or  ewe
was  sacrificed,  frequently  while  still  so  young  that  its
flesh  was  gelatinous  and  stuck  to  the  skin.  This  offer
ing  of  firstlings  was  permitted  in  the  earliest  years  of
Islam,  Mohammed  advising,  however,  that  the  sacrifice
should  be  deferred  till  the  victim  was  a  year  or  two  old  ;
later  he  prohibited  the  fara  as  well  as  the  sacrifices  in
Rajab  (atlrah,  see  below,  §  4). 5

1  See  CATTLE,  GOAT,  SHEEP. The  nomadic  Semites  have  no
neat  cattle,  and  the  ancestors  of  the  Israelites  do  not  appear  to
have  been  among  the  tribes  that  possessed  camels  (see  CAMEL).

2  See  Wellh. Reste  altarab. Heidentuines ; Snouck-Hur-
gronje,  Het  mekkaansche  Feest ;  WRS  Rel.  Sem. ;  for  modern
Arab  customs,  Burckhardt,  Travels  in  Arabia,  1829,  Bedouins
and  Wakdbys,  1830;  Burton,  Pilgrimage  to  el-Medinah  and
Mecca/i, 1855; Palmer, Desert of  the Exodus; Doughty,
Arabia  Deserta;  Curtiss,  Primitive  Semitic  Religion,  etc.

3  See  FIRSTBORN,  PASSOVER,  §  8/1 ;  TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE,
§§  11-13.

4  On  the  later  modification  of  this  rule  see  below,  §  20.

5  See  the  two  traditions  in  Lisan  10  119  f. ;  WRS  Rel.  Setn.P),


SACRIFICE

The  sacrifice  of  firstlings,  like  the  offering  of  first-fruits,  with
which  it  is  sometimes  associated  (Neh.  1035^,  cp  Ex.  22  29/7
[28^];  note  also  the  connection  with  tithes,  etc.,  Dt.  12617
1423),  was  regarded  in  later  times  as  a  tribute  to  God  (Nu.
18  i^ff.  Neh.  10  35./T),  and  as  such  it  has  been  surmised  that  the
custom  of  devoting  firstlings  to  God  arose  after  the  settlement
in  Canaan  by  '  a  secondary  extension  of  the  practice  of  offering
the  fruits  of  the  field.'  (So  Benzinger,  PASSOVER,  §  8  end.)
The  existence  of  firstling  sacrifices  among  the  Arabs  shows  that
this  inference  is  unwarranted.  The  sacrifice  of  firstlings,  as  the


of  thtse  offerings  before  the  invasion  of  Canaan  is  not  a  suffi
cient  reason  for  doubting  their  antiquity.

In  the  history  of  the  exodus  Moses  asks  the  Egyptian
king  to  let  the  Israelites  go  into  the  desert  to  sacrifice

4  Surinc1  t0  l^e'r  ^0(*  ^ahwe,  '  ^est  he  fall  upon  us
'  •£  i  with  pestilence  or  with  the  sword'  (Ex.
53  J,  cp3i8  58  17;  5i  E);  the  presence
of  all  the  people,  young  and  old,  is  requisite  ;  and
they  must  take  with  them  their  flocks  and  herds  to
furnish  the  victims  (10925).  From  63  it  might  seem
that  the  sacrifice  in  the  wilderness  was  something
unusual,  demanded  on  this  occasion  by  an  oracle ;
5 1  (E)  and  lOg  (J),  however,  represent  it  as  an  estab
lished  institution,  'the  Jmg  of  Yahwe. '2  The  season
was  the  spring  of  the  year,  in  the  month  called  by  the
Canaanites  Abib  (Ex.  184),  corresponding  to  the  Syrian-
Babylonian  Nlsan.

It  is  natural  to  connect  this  hag  festival  with  the
spring  festivals  of  other  Semitic  peoples.  The  first  eight
days  of  the  month  Rajab,  which  in  the  old  calendar  fell
in  the  spring  (see  Wellh.  Prol.M,  viii.  ;  Heid.^,  94_/.),
was  a  great  sacrificial  season  among  the  heathen  Arabs.
The  poets  compare  the  carnage  of  battle  to  the  multi
tudes  of  victims  lying  around  the  sacred  stones. s  The
victim,  commonly  a  sheep,  was  called  'atirah  (pi.
'a(a'ir) ;  its  blood  was  poured  on  the  head  of  the  sacred
stone  (Nuwairi,  quoted  in  Ramussen,  Addit.  79),  the
flesh  consumed  in  a  feast.  Such  sacrifices  might  be
offered  at  home  ;  but  it  was  probably  more  common  to
take  them  to  some  more  famous  holy  place  (see  Wellh.
Hcid.  74,  94).  The  sacrifice,  like  Arab  sacrifices  in
general,  was  often  made  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow.  The
Rajab  sacrifices  were  at  first  kept  up  by  the  Moslems  ;
a  tradition  reports  Mohammed  to  have  said  :  '  Every
Moslem  is  bound  to  offer  each  year  an  'adhdh  (the
sacrifice  of  the  tenth  of  the  month  Dhu-1-Hijjah)  and  an
'atirah'  (in  Rajab  \Lisdn  vi.  211  \\f.  ]) ;  subsequently,
however,  he  prohibited  the  'atirah  as  well  as  the  fara'
(see  above,  §  3).  In  the  time  of  Mohammed  the  month
Dhu-1-Hijjah,  in  which  was  held  the  great  festival  in
the  vicinity  of  Mecca,  fell  at  the  beginning  of  spring
(Wellh.  Prol.^i,  105),  and  a  comparison  with  the
Passover  naturally  suggested  itself ; 4  but  further  studies
in  the  old  Arab  calendar  have  shown  that  this  coin
cidence  in  date  is  accidental.

Among  the  Syrians,  the  chief  feast  of  the  year  at
Hierapolis  was  in  the  spring  (Lucian,  Dea  Svria,  49)  ;
at  Harran  the  first  half  of  Nisan  was  a  season  of
special  sacrifices  (Fihrist,  322  ;  Chwolsohn,  Ssabier
225);  evidence  of  the  sacredness  of  Nisan  appears  in
the  Nabatsean  inscriptions  at  Madain  Salih;5  and  at
Palmyra  ; 6  the  great  festival  of  the  modern  Yezidls  falls
at  the  same  season.7

A closer connection between the Hebrew spring

1  See  PASSOVER,  FEASTS.

2  Hag-  is  a  religious  gathering  (No. Z/WC41  719). The
word  is  used not only  of the  Canaanite-Israelite agricultural
festivals,  but  also  of  Arab  (and  Saba;an)  festivals,  which  brought
multitudes  together. There  is  thus  no  ground  for  the  assump
tion  that  the  use  of  the  term  here  is  due  merely  to  the  later
association  of  the  Passover  and  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread
(liag  ha-massotli).

3  Cp modern  descriptions  of the  sacrifices at the Meccan
feast.

4  See  Snouck-Hurgronje,  Het  mekkaansche  Feest,  6$f.

5  Berger,  Comptes  Rendus  de  I'Acad.  des  Inscr.,  1884,  377^

6  WRS  EBW,  18  199,  n.  2.

7  Badger, Nestorians,  1  119 jf. Vernal festivals are, of
course,  not  peculiarly  Semitic.

4186


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


festival  ('  Passover')  and  the  Arab  Rajab  sacrifices  has
_. ...  been thought to be established by

.  ,,  °  evidence  that  both  were  primitively
3m-  offerings  of  firstlings.1  In  the  Penta
teuch,  laws  prescribing  the  dedication  of  firstlings
stand  in  juxtaposition  to  ordinances  for  the  Feast  of
Unleavened  Bread  or  the  Passover  (see  Ex.  34 18  f.
Dt.  1019-23  16i/.  Ex.  1243-50  1813-10  11-13  14-16);  the
slaying  of  the  firstborn  of  the  Egyptians  has  been
interpreted  as  a  reprisal  upon  them  for  withholding
from  Yahwe,  by  their  refusal  to  let  Israel  go,  the  first
lings  that  were  his  due  (see  Ex.  3i8  8120  \§v\ff.;
Wellh.  86).  It  has  been  shown,  however,  under
PASSOVER  (§  8),  that  the  passages  cited,  though  com
patible  with  such  a  theory  of  the  original  character  of
the  Passover,  by  no  means  require  it  ;  and  opposing
considerations  of  much  weight  are  to  be  drawn  from  the
peculiar  ritual  of  the  Passover  (see  below,  §  6),  in
which — to  name  but  a  single  point — one  victim  is  re
quired  for  each  household,  rich  or  poor,  whereas  the
number  of  firstlings  must  have  varied  with  the  owner's
possessions.

Nor  is  it  satisfactorily  established  that  the  Arab  Rajab
sacrifices  were  firstlings.  It  is  true  that  the  term
\itirah,  by  which  these  victims  are  usually  designated,
is  by  some  lexicographers  made  equivalent  to  fard,
firstling.2  This  is,  however,  nothing  more  than  the
confusion  which  frequently  occurs  in  their  accounts  of
the  religious  customs  of  'the  times  of  ignorance,'  and
over  against  it  must  be  put  the  fact  that  not  only  the
traditionists  3  but  also  the  lexicons  generally  distinguish
the  two  clearly  enough.

The  Passover  differed  conspicuously  from  all  other
Israelite  sacrifices,  and  preserved  to  the  last,  essentially
_  ..  unaltered,  its  primitive  peculiarities.  In
.CUliar  the  earliest  times,  the  carcass  of  the
victim  was  probably  roasted  whole,  either
over  an  open  fire  or  in  a  pit  in  the  earth  (as  by  the
modern  Samaritans),  and  the  flesh  sometimes  eaten  half
raw  or  merely  softened  by  fire.  Dt.  16?  prescribes  that
it  shall  be  boiled,  like  other  sacrifices.  This,  however,
did  not  prevail  ;  P  preserves  the  primitive  custom  while
guarding  against  abuse  :  the  Passover  is  neither  to  be
eaten  raw  nor  boiled  in  water,  but  roasted  in  the  fire
(Ex.  129),  with  head,  legs,  and  inwards.  The  sacrificial
feast  was  held  by  night  at  full  moon  ;  the  participants
were  in  their  everyday  garb,  not  in  ceremonial  apparel  ;
everything  was  done  with  haste  ;  the  whole  victim  was
devoured — including,  doubtless,  in  ancient  times  the
e.vta  which  in  later  sacrificial  ritual  were  offered  to  God
by  fire,  and  therefore  strictly  forbidden  as  food  ;  only
the  bones  must  not  be  broken  ;  4  the  flesh  must  all  be
consumed  before  daybreak  ;  if  aught  remained  it  was
to  be  burnt  up  at  once  ;  with  the  flesh  was  eaten — not
originally  unleavened  cakes,  but — a  salad  of  bitter  herbs
(Ex.  129/.,  cp  Nu.  9  n/,  also  Dt.  164£).5

With  this  singular  ritual  has  been  compared  the
description  given  by  Nilus  of  the  customs  of  the  Arabs  in
the  desert  S.  of  Palestine  and  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula
in  his  own  time — the  end  of  the  fourth  century  A.  ix
They  sacrificed  a  white  camel  to  Venus,  the  morning
star  ;  after  the  chief  or  priest  who  presided  at  the
sacrifice  had  slain  the  animal,  all  rushed  upon  the
carcass  with  knives,  hewed  it  to  pieces,  and  devoured
it  in  wild  haste,  hide,  inwards,  bones,  and  all,  that  not
a  scrap  of  it  might  be  left  for  the  rising  sun  to  look
upon.6

1  \VRS  Rel.  Sem.Vl,  227 ./.  n.  464  /;  Wellh.  Prol.W,  86;
Now.  HA  -2  147;  Benz.  HA  *&>/.

-  Lisa/I,  6210.  Note  also  the  identical  custom  described  in
the  Ltsiln  under  fara',  in  the  Taj  (3  308)  under  'atirah.

»  See  Bokhari,  ed.  Krehl,35i4y:

4  Contrast  the  Arab  sacrifice  of  Nilus,  below.  See  WRS
Rel.  Se»t.W,  345.

8  See  the  description  of  the  Passover  of  the  modern  Samari
tans,  Petermann,  Reistn,  1  2^5^

«  Migne,  Pair.  C,r.  796n,"cp  612  ;  WRS  Rel.  Son.ftt,  281  f.  ;
Wellh.  Heiii.^  iiQjf.

4187


In Ex.  1221-27 (ultimately from J) the elders are

bidden  to  take  sheep  or  goats,  one  for  each  clan  (mis-

7 Protection  PA^&h^  slaughter  them, and, dipping

h hi d a  bunch  °f  herbs  ChyssoP')  into  ll>e
Dy  D. oa. iJ]oocii  to  strike  it  upon  the  lintel  and

door-posts  ;  Yahwe  will  not  suffer  '  the  destroyer '  to
enter  a  house  on  which  he  sees  these  blood-marks.
This,  an  editor  adds,  is  the  historical  origin  and  ex
planation  of  a  custom  in  use  in  later  times  ;  with  it  he
connects  etymologically  the  name  'Passover'  (j>fsah},
because  Yahwe  '  passed  over '  (pdsah)  the  marked
houses  of  the  Israelites  (Ex.  1224-27).  The  object  of
the  rite  is  to  protect  the  inmates  of  the  house  from  '  the
destroyer";  that  is,  in  primitive  conception,  from  the
demons  of  disease  and  death.  Similar  customs  with
the  same  motive  are  found  among  many  peoples.1

Whether  this  rite  was  originally  connected  with  the
Hebrew  spring  feast  is  not  clear.  J,  who  prescribes
the  marking  of  the  houses,  says  nothing  about  a  feast,
and,  indeed,  repeatedly  insists  that  the  festival  of
Yahwe  cannot  be  celebrated  in  Egypt  (Ex.53  825-27);
P  orders  that  the  blood  of  the  lamb  slain  for  the  feast
be  applied  to  the  door  of  every  house  in  which  it  is
eaten  (Ex.  12?,  cp  13),  a  direction  which  Jewish  tradition
and  practice  regarded  as  applying  only  to  the  '  Egyptian
Passover '  ; 2  Dt.  makes  no  mention  of  this  use  of  the
blood  at  the  PASSOVER  (q.v. ,  §  i3).3  It  is  not  unlikely
that  a  rite  originally  occasional,  as  in  the  outbreak  of
an  epidemic,  came  to  be  practised  annually  for  the
protection  of  the  household  during  the  coming  year,
and  in  connection  with  the  old  spring  feast.4  The
name  phah  probably  belonged,  notwithstanding  J's
etymology,  to  the  feast  rather  than  to  the  blood
marking.

Some Semitic peoples, both nomadic and settled,
offered  in  sacrifice  animals  taken  in  the  chase. Gazelles
« W1H were offered by the Babylonians
animas- Oastrow< Rel- Bab. -Ass. 66 1) and
., , ' probablv  by  the  Phoenicians  (Sacrificial
spoils  of  war.  tariffs / 675  165 59  1675; cp  ISAAC,
§  4,  n.  2). Among  the  heathen  Arabs,  also,  gazelles
were  sacrificed,  but  were  regarded  as  an  inferior  offer
ing  ; men  who  had  vowed  sheep  or  goats  from  their
flocks  sometimes  substituted gazelles.5 The  nomadic
forefathers of the Israelites may have made similar
offerings  ; but  there  is  no  reminiscence  of  this  in  the
OT. The  requirement  that  the  blood  of  animals  taken
in  the  chase  be  poured  out  and  covered  with  earth  ( Lev.
17 13.  cp  Dt.  121624)  is  not  necessarily  an  attenuated
survival  of  a  sacrificial  rite  ; the  belief  that  the  soul  is
in  the  blood  (Lev.  17 14,  on  which  see  below,  §  46)  is  '.
reason  enough.6

Sacrifice  was  doubtless  offered  also  of  the  spoil  of
war,  as  in  later  times  (i  S.  15 15  21  cp  14s4  ;  see  also
Gen.  14  20).  Similarly  the  Arabs  on  their  return  from
a  foray  sacrificed  one  beast  of  those  they  had  taken  and
feasted  on  it  before  dividing  the  booty.7  The  Arabs  of
whom  Nilus  wrote  took  by  preference  a  human  victim.
a  fair  youth,  from  among  their  captives  ;  in  default  of
such,  they  offered  a  white  camel.8  The  Carthaginians,
after  a  victory,  sacrificed  the  fairest  of  their  captives
by  night  as  burnt  offerings  (Diodorus  Siculus,  206s)  ;

1  See,  e.f.,  Zimmern,  f>eitr.'2r\o.  26,  col.  3,  /.  vof.  ;  Palmer,
Des.  Kxod.  90  118,  etc.  ;  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1499432  2  100  etc. ;
Kingsley,  Travels  in  W'est  Africa.  444  451.  A  large  collection
of  material  is  found  in  Curtiss,  Primitive  Semitic  Religion
To-day,  chap.  \§ff.

-  So  also  the  modern  Samaritans  :  Petermann,  Rcisen,  1  237.
3  See  below,  §  20.

•*  A  very  similar  ceremony  at  a  great  annual  festival  in  Peru
is  described  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Comin.  Rcalfs.  ~  6.

5  Harith,  Mu'allakah,  69,  with  the  scholia;  al-Laith  in
Lisan  vi.  2119.

*  Cp  the  burying  of  blood  drawn  in  blood-letting,  or  from  a
nose-bleed,  e.g.,  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1492;  Kingsley,  Travels
in  II  't'st  Africa,  447.

7  WRS,  Rel.  Sem.Pl,  491,  and  the  Arab  authors  there  cited.

8  Migne,  Pair.  C,r.  796i2/  641  681 ;  see  WRS  Rel.  Se>:
362?.

4188


9.  In  Canaan :
sources.


10.  Agricultural
civilisation.


SACRIFICE

similar  instances  have  been  adduced  from  the  records
of  Assyrian  kings  (Shalmaneser,  Monolith,  obv.  17).
The  slaying  of  Agag,  whom  Samuel  hewed  in  pieces
before  Yahwe  in  Gilgal  (i  S.  loss),  has  sometimes  been
regarded  as  a  sacrifice  of  this  kind  ; *  but  it  is  doubtful
whether  this  interpretation  is  correct  (see  below,  §  13
end).

The  many  accounts  of  sacrifices  in  the  books  of
Samuel  and  Kings  are  in  large  part  taken  from  old
and  good  sources,  and  give  us  com
paratively  full  and  trustworthy  informa
tion  for  the  period  which  they  cover.
By  their  side  we  may  place  the  similar  descriptions  in
Judges,  and  in  the  patriarchal  story  as  narrated  by  J
and  E  (e.g. ,  Gen.  15?  ff.\  The  laws  in  the  same
sources  (especially  in  Ex.  34  and  21-23)  dealing  with
feasts  and  offerings,  with  the  other — not  inconsider
able — -remains  of  early  collections  of  law  preserved
in  Dt.  and  H,  represent  the  usage  of  Israelite  and
Judasan  sanctuaries  in  the  time  of  the  kings  ;  the  con
demnation  of  many  customs  in  the  reform  legislation
of  the  seventh  century  bears  witness  to  the  prevalence
of  the  practices  so  zealously  prohibited.  The  prophets,
finally,  paint  vivid  pictures  of  the  religion  of  their  con
temporaries,  with  all  its  abuses.

The  regions  E.  of  the  Jordan  first  occupied  by
Israelite  tribes  are  capable  of  supporting  enormous
flocks  upon  their  rich  and  extensive
pastures. 2  Much  of  the  land  is  very
fertile  and  abundantly  rewards  culti
vation  ;  but  the  conditions  do  not  constrain  nomadic
tribes  taking  possession  of  the  country  to  become
tillers  of  the  soil.  The  case  was  different  in  Western
Palestine.  In  the  S.  indeed,  in  the  Negeb  and  the
Wilderness  of  Judah,  the  new  comers  continued  to  be
chiefly  shepherds  even  after  they  adopted  fixed  habita
tions  ;  but  in  the  central  highlands  (Mt.  Ephraim)  and
in  the  N.  they  were  soon  compelled  to  get  most  of  their
living  from  the  soil.  They  learned  from  the  older
population  of  the  country  to  raise  crops  of  grain  and
pulse  and  to  cultivate  the  fig,  the  olive,  and  the  vine.
With  the  arts  of  agriculture  they  learned  also  the
religion  of  agriculture.  To  the  sacrifices  and  festivals
of  their  nomadic  forefathers  were  now  added  the  proper
offerings  for  the  bounty  of  the  land  and  the  season
feasts  of  the  husbandman's  year  (see  FEASTS,  §  4/.).
Animal  sacrifice  is  still  the  most  important  part  of
worship,  as  we  see  clearly  from  the  historical  books  ;
neat  cattle,  kept  as  plough -beasts,  are  added  to  the
victims  from  the  flock.3  First-fruits  or  tithes  of  grain
and  wine  and  oil  must  be  consecrated  in  their  season
according  to  an  established  ritual.  The  worship  was
offered  at  the  'high  places,'  that  is,  in  general,  the  old
Canaanite  holy  places  (see  HIGH  PLACE,  §§  2-4).

The most general term for offering, whether of
animals or of other things, is minhdh,  nmp, '  gift '

, n • (<5  Supov,  more  frequent! v  Ovcrla},  a  word

L.  Suedes  ,  •  •  A -, ,-

f fjfl . not  confined  to  religious  uses.4 In dis-

/,  ,  '  tinction  from  other  offerings  specifically
named — such  as  'oldh,  zibah — minhdh
sometimes  refers  particularly  to  oblations  of  bread,
meal,  oil,  and  the  like  (see  §  14). 5  Animal  sacrifices
fall  into  two  main  classes  :  'oldh,  EV  '  burnt  offering,'
in  which  the  victim  was  all  consumed  by  fire  ;  and
zffiah,  EV  ordinarily  'sacrifice,'  in  which,  after  the
exta  had  been  burnt  upon  the  altar,  the  flesh  was  eaten.
These  species  are  often  enumerated  together,  as  in  Jer.
1726:  '  they  shall  come  .  .  .  bringing  burnt  offerings

1  WRS,  Rel.  Sem.V),  363. Nowack  (HA  2205)  includes  in
the  same  class  the  killing  of  Zebah  and  Zalmunna,  Judg.  8  21.

2  GASm.  Hist.  Geog.  5237: ;  cp  Nu.  32  i  4  2  K.  3  4,  etc. See
also  CATTLE,  §  3.

"  On  changes  in  the  rites  of  sacrifice  see  below,  §  n.

4  In  the  technical  language  of  the  later  ritual  the  compre
hensive  term  is  korban  ',  see  below,  §  24.

_  5  On  the  more  restricted  technical  use  of  the  word  in  the  later
ritual  see  below,  §  24.

4189


SACRIFICE

and  sacrifices  and  oblations  and  frankincense  . . . unto
the  house  of  Yahwe. '

The  Heb.  zet>ak,  1137,  is  ordinarily  rendered  in  (P  by  Svaia,  the
corresponding  verb  by  Ovui,  less  frequently  flutria^w.  The  verb
means  properly  '  slaughter,' and  may  be  used  of  the  killing  of
domestic  animals  for  food  without  religious  rites  (e.g.,  Dt.
12  15  21)  ;  but  since  in  earlier  times  animals  were  seldom  if  ever
killed  thus,  it  ordinarily  imports  sacrificial  slaying.  The  place
to  which  animals  are  brought  to  be  killed  is  the  inizteoh,  literally
'  slaughter  place ' ;  in  Canaan  this  was  generally  the  stone  or
pile  of  stones  on  which  the  fat  was  burned,  whence  wizbfh
comes  to  be  equivalent  to  altar  (see  ALTAR,  MASSEBAH,  8  5).

The  occasions  of  sacrifice  were  of  different  kinds  (see
above,  §  2,  and  below,  §  15),  and  distinctive  names
for  some  of  them  were  probably  early  in  use  ;  peculiari
ties  of  ritual,  too,  no  doubt  belonged  to  certain  varieties
of  sacrifice,  as  to  the  Passover  or  the  covenant  sacrifice
(cp  Gen.  log  ff.  Jer.  34i8  f.},  but,  however  ancient
the  custom  itself  may  be,  our  knowledge  of  the  details
of  the  sacrificial  ritual  comes  chiefly  through  later
sources.  For  this  reason,  as  well  as  to  avoid  repetition,
the  species  of  sacrifice  and  their  characteristic  rites  will
be  considered  below  in  their  place  in  the  completed
system  (§  23^).

One  term  is,  however,  so  certainly  old  and  so  frequent  that  it
cannot  be  passed  over  here  ;  viz.  seletn,  D7£?  (Am.  5  22),  gener
ally  pi.  sclatnim  (EV  '  peace  offerings ').  In  many  passages
sflannm  are  coupled  with  'oloth  (burnt  offerings)  in  descrip
tions  of  greater  sacrificial  occasions,  precisely  as  'oloth  and
zebahiw  elsewhere  ;  see,  e.g.,  Ex.  2024  326  2  S.  6  ijf.  24  25  i  K.
815925  Ezek.  45  15  4827  46212  etc.  In  other  instances  we
have  the  phrases  C'0?w'  1137,  D'oSc*  'n37,  '  sacrifices  of  peace
offerings' — e.g. ,  i  S.  108  Jos.  22  23  Prov.  7  14.  The  sclainim
appear  to  have  been  by  far  the  most  common  kind  of  sacrifices,
so  that  when  the  word  zebalntn  was  used  without  qualification  it
would  be  understood  to  refer  to  selanrim ;  on  the  other  hand,
the  name  seldtinm  is  probably  shortened  from  zibhe  selannin.

The  original  significance  of  the  word  is  not  certain.  <B  trans
lates,  trwnjpia,  (Bveriai)  TOV  cra>r»)p<.'ov,  so  also  Philo,  DC  victimis,
§  4,  2245  Mangey  ;  ©  in  Samuel  and  Kings  (Ova-Cai)  elpriviKai  or
riav  eipjji'iKwj',  so  Aq.  Symm.  Theodot.  ;  Vg.  victima  facifica,
pacificuin  (sc.  sacrificiuiii) ;  hence  EV,  '  peace  offerings.'
These  interpreters  connect  the  Heb.  word  with  the  simple  stem
of  the  verb  c1?!!1,  'be  whole,  sound,  safe,' or  the  noun  salom,
Dl/ty,  '  peace. '1  Josephus,  who  renders  8v<rio.i  xaptuTxjpioi
(Ant.  iii.  9  2),  apparently  associates  it  with  the  meaning  of  the
intensive  stem,  siliam,  '  requite,  repay,  pay '  ;  so  that  these
sacrifices  would  be  a  return  to  God  for  benefits  received  from
him,  or  the  payment  of  an  obligation  to  him  ;  cp  Prov.  7  14  :  'I
had  &/«;«£>«•  sacrifices  to  make  ;  to-day  I  have  paid  (si!ta»iti)
my  vows.'  The  word  occurs  also,  as  the  name  of  a  species  of
sacrifice  (^3  cst'),  on  an  inscription  from  a  Phoenician  temple
at  Marseilles  (CIS  1663^).  It  is  perhaps  a  Canaanite  term
adopted  by  the  Israelites.  [On  Ass.  sulmu  see  RITUAL,  §  n,  \a.]
The  blood  of  the  victims  was  poured  or  smeared  upon
the  sacrificial  stone  as  had  been  done  by  their  nomadic
forefathers.  Besides  this,  portions  of  the  animal,
especially  of  the  internal  fat  (i  S.  2 is/. ),'-  were  now
burned  upon  a  raised  altar — monolith  or  heap  of  stones
or  earth — as  upon  a  hearth  ;  and  this  part  of  the  per
formance  was  so  essential  that  the  verb  '  burn,'  with  or
without  an  object  ('the  fat'),  becomes  equivalent  to
'  offer  sacrifice. '

In  older  times  the  intensive  stem  hitter,  IE;?,  '  make  smoke,
burn" — rarely  with  the  object  (3/pfl,  i  S.  2is_/) — is  used;  so
frequently  in  the  prophets,  of  the  heathenish  sacrifices  of  their
contemporaries.  In  later  texts  the  causative  hiktzr,  TBfjJl,
prevails.  See  We.  Prol.W,  di,f.,  n.  i.  The  burning  of  the
offering  is  probably  to  be  regarded  as  a  means  of  conveying  it
to  God  ;  the  fragrant  smoke  was,  at  least  in  later  times,  thought
of  as  containing  the  ethereal  substance  of  the  sacrifice.  (WRS,
Rel.  Sem.l?),  236  ;  see  also  below,  §  41.)

The  flesh  of  the  victim  was  boiled  (2  S.  2 is/,  i  K.
19 21),  and  furnished  a  feast  for  the  offerer  with  his
family,  friends,  and  guests  (i  S.  1  4  ff.  9 12  22^,  etc.).
In  Canaan,  bread,  wine,  and  oil,  the  products  of  agri
culture,  took  their  place  in  the  feast  beside  the  flesh  of
animals  from  the  flock  or  herd  (see  e.g.,  18.124);
these  again  were  in  part  obligatory  offerings — first-fruits,

1  See  also  the  etymological  explanations  in  Siphra  on  Lev.  3  i
(fol.  13 a,  ed.  Weiss).

'-  From  Judg.  $\gff.  it  has  sometimes  been  inferred  that  in
early  times  boiled  flesh  was  offered  (cp  also  Nu.  6  19) ;  but  the
evidence  is  insufficient  to  sustain  the  conclusion.

4190


SACRIFICE

tithes,  etc.  —  in  part  occasional  and  voluntary.  Of
them  also  a  part  was  given  to  (jod,  probably  upon  the
altar  by  fire  (see  Am.  4s).  The  bread  offered  was  that
which  the  participants  in  the  feast  themselves  ate  ;  that
is,  in  ordinary  cases  leavened  bread  ;  1  unleavened  cakes
when,  for  religious  reasons  (as  in  the  massotk  feast)  or  at
a  meal  hastily  prepared  for  an  unexpected  guest,  they
ate  their  own  bread  unleavened.  The  bread  offered
was  probably  moistened  with  oil  or  dipped  in  it,  as  was
the  bread  eaten  by  the  worshippers  (cp  the  later  rituals,
§  30).  Of  the  wine  a  libation  was  made  to  God  (Hos.
94).  See  below,  §§  14,  31  a.

The  peculiarity  of  the  'dldh  (rt^'y)  is  that  no  part  of
the  victim  was  used  for  food  ;  the  flesh  as  well  as  the


„ .
12.  Burnt


sacrificial  portions  of  the  inwards  and
fat  was


.  fat  was

ring,  Oian.  The  tefm  ig  derived  from  the  C0mmon
verb  'dldh  (nW),  'go  up,  ascend,'  and  signifies,  ac
cording  to  the  prevailing  interpretation,  the  sacrifice
which  (all)  'comes  up1  upon  the  altar  (Knob.,  Wellh.  ,
Nowack,  etc.  ),  or  that  which  '  goes  up  '  in  smoke  to  the
sky  (B;ihr,  Del.,  Dillmann,  etc.).  In  <5  generally
6\OKavTit)/j,a,  6\o/cairrw<ns,  Vg.  holocaustum.

Another  term  for  the  sacrifice  given  as  a  '  whole
offering  '  to  God  is  kali  I  ^3  (  Dt.  33  10  i  S.  7  9  Ps.
5l2i;  cp  Dt.  13  17  Judg.  2040),  which  appears  as  a
technical  term  in  Phoenician  also  ;  see  the  sacrificial
tariffs  of  Marseilles  and  Carthage,  C/Si.  16035,  etc.,

167s-

The  whole  burnt  offering  was  naturally  much  less
frequent  than  the  sacrifices  which  furnished  a  feast  for
the  worshippers  ;  it  is  seldom  mentioned  alone,  and
then  in  peculiar  circumstances.2  Ordinarily  the  burnt
offering  occurs  in  conjunction  with  other  sacrifices
(ztbiihim  or  sflanum};  e.g.,  2  S.  6i7/i  24  25  i  K.flas
2  K.  1024,  etc.  It  was  probably  originally  an  extra
ordinary  offering  made  by  great  persons  or  on  great
occasions  (We.  Prol.^,  70).  The  daily  burnt  offering
in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  (2  K.  Ids)  —  and  doubtless
at  other  royal  sanctuaries  —  was  the  king's  daily  sacrifice,
and  was  followed  by  many  ztbahim  for  the  court  and
by  private  persons.

The  ritual  of  the  burnt  offering  is  not  described  in
any  ancient  account  ;  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  blood
was  treated  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  the  other
sacrifices  ;  it  is  supposed  by  both  the  narratives  in  JE
and  by  the  laws  that  the  flesh  and  fat  of  the  holocaust
were  consumed  upon  the  altar.3  The  hide,  according
to  Lev.  78,  fell  to  the  priest,  and  this  is  not  improbably
an  ancient  rule  ;  it  was,  in  fact,  the  only  toll  he  could
take  for  his  services.4

It  is  possible  that  at  an  earlier  time  the  burnt  offering
was  burned  on  the  ground  or  in  a  pit,  rather  than  in  a
raised  altar  ;  this  is  said  to  have  been  done  for  a  special
reason  at  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple  (i  K.
864).8  The  analogy  of  the  human  sacrifices  at  the
Tophet  (see  Moi.ECH,  TOPHET  ;  cp,  however,  Gen.
2'29),  and  the  burning  of  the  carcass  of  certain  sin
offerings  without  the  sanctuary,  may  also  be  noted.  It
is  probable,  however,  that  the  burning  of  the  holocaust
upon  the  altar  was  the  Canaanite  custom,  adopted  by
the  Israelites."

Whether  the  burnt  offering  was  accompanied  by  an
oblation  of  bread  or  by  a  libation  is  uncertain.7  When

1  i  S.  103  Am.  4s  ;  leavened  bread  in  certain  sfldmim  even
in  Lev.  7  13,  cp  23  17.

2  Gen.  820  22  13 Nu.  23  \  ff. Judg.  626 (181623) i  8.614
i  K.  :J4  1838.

3  The  carcass  was  previously  cut  up  ;  i  K.  18  23  33.

4  So  in  the  sacrificial  tariff  of  Carthage  (CIS  1  167)  ;  in  that
of  Marseilles  the  priest  has  a  fee  in  money,  and  a  part  of  the
flesh,  whilst  the  hide  belongs  to  the  offerer.

*  So  also  at  Hierapolis  ;  Lucian,  Dta  Syria;  WRS,  Rcl.
Sem.W,  378.

6  An  argument  may  perhaps  be  drawn  from  the  size  of  the
Canaanite  rock-altars  that  have  been  discovered.

?  In  i  K.  864  the  words  'and  the  minhah  '  are  a  gloss.

4191


SACRIFICE

it  was  part  of  a  great  sacrificial  occasion  these  probably
went  with  the  other  sacrifices  (zfbdhim}.  The  regular
daily  burnt  offering  in  the  temple  may  have  had  such
an  accompaniment  ;  but  the  earlier  custom  seems  to
have  been  to  offer  the  minhah  daily  as  an  evening
oblation  corresponding  to  the  morning  'dldh  (see  below,
§§  19,  32).  In  the  passages  which  speak  of  the  burnt
offering  alone  (cited  above,  col.  4191,  n.  2),  there  is  no
mention  of  a  minhah.  Judg.  620^  13  19  ff.  cannot  be
alleged  ;  in  these  places  a  meal  prepared  for  a  guest  is
miraculously  consumed  by  fire  ;  this  may  be  called  an
'oldh,  but  obviously  no  inference  can  be  drawn  as  to  the
ordinary  ritual  of  burnt  offerings.

The  animals  sacrificed  were  neat  cattle,  sheep,  and
goats  ;  also,  at  least  in  certain  rites,  turtle  doves  and
_.  ..  pigeons,  clean  birds  easily  procured  by
Vic  m  .  dwellers  jn  towns  and  cities.  The  choice
of  victims  for  particular  sacrifices  or  occasions  was
doubtless  to  some  extent  regulated  by  custom  ;  in
ordinary  cases  it  was  left  to  the  worshipper  to  determine
what  his  offering  should  be,  in  accordance  with  his
means,  his  disposition,  and  his  motive,  or  his  previous
intention  or  vow.  It  is  very  likely  an  ancient  rule  that
the  burnt  offering  should  be  a  male  ;  though  i  S.  614
shows  that  it  was  not  always  so.  Sometimes  very
young  animals  were  offered  even  as  a  burnt  offering
(i  S.  7g,  sucking  lamb)  ;  but  ordinarily,  no  doubt,  a
mature  animal  was  chosen  for  this  sacrifice.1

That  the  offering  of  a  human  victim  as  a  holocaust
was  not  unknown  in  old  Israel  we  learn  from  the  story
of  Jephthah,  Judg.  llso/.  34-40.  The  narrator  repre
sents  this  sacrifice  as  extraordinary,  but  does  not  con
demn  it  as  abhorrent  to  the  religion  of  Yah  we.2  The
statement  in  i  K.  1634  to  the  effect  that  Hiel,  who  in
the  days  of  Ahab  rebuilt  Jericho,  '  laid  its  foundations
with  Abirarn  his  firstborn,  and  set  up  its  gates  with
Segub  his  youngest  son,'  hardly  admits  any  other  inter
pretation  than  that  he  offered  them  as  foundation
sacrifices,  in  accordance  with  a  widespread  and  persistent
custom.3

It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  human  sacrifices  were
frequent  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  Israelite  occupation  of
Canaan.  The  offering  by  parents  of  their  own  sons  and
daughters,  especially  the  firstborn,  about  which  there  is  so
much  in  the  prophets  and  laws  of  the  seventh  century,4  was  not
the  recrudescence  of  ancient  custom,  but  a  new  and  foreign  cult
(see  MOI.ECH,  §  4  ff^)-  The  lesson  of  Gen.  22  is  that  though
Yahwe  might  claim  even  an  only  son,  he  does  not  require  such
sacrifice  but  accepts  instead  a  victim  from  the  flock  ;  cp  Mi.  67.
The  expiation  of  Saul's  massacre  of  the  Gibeonites  by  the
execution  of  seven  of  his  sons  and  grandsons  '  before  Yahwe  '  at
the  famous  sanctuary  of  Gibeon  (2  S.  21  9),  important  as  the
story  is  for  the  idea  of  expiation  and  thus  for  sacrificial  concep
tions,  is  not  itself  to  be  considered  as  a  sacrifice.  Nor  is  the
devotion  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  conquered  city  —  or  an  Israelite
city  that  has  fallen  into  the  worship  of  other  go,ds  (Dt.  13  i^ff.)
—  to  the  deity  by  slaughter  and  burning  (herein,  see  BAN)
properly  regarded  as  a  form  of  human  sacrifice.

The  offerings  of  bread,  oil,  and  wine  which  formed
part  of  the  sacrificial  feast  have  been  spoken  of  above
l^at  connect'on  (§  JI)-  There  were
Q  independent  offerings  of  the  pro
ducts  of  agriculture.  The  deity  which  gave  the  increase
to  man's  labour  received  from  him  portions  of  all  ;  only
when  these  had  been  duly  rendered  could  the  rest  be
used  by  the  owner  (see  Frazer,  Golden  Bough*®,  Zii&jf.

459/0-

These  offerings,  which  fall  under  the  general  head  of
first-fruits,  were  called  by  various  names  :  first-fruits
(bikkurim,  Ex.3426  23  19),  tithes  (mdasfroth],  prime
portions  (rfSfth],  portions  set  apart  (tfrumdh),  and
others.  The  original  distinctions  are  not  always  clear  ;

1  Mi.  66  speaks  of  burnt offerings  of  yearling  calves; the
daily  burnt  offering  in  P  is  a  yearling  lamb.

2  JEPHTHAH,  §  6. Compare  Mesha's  sacrifice  of  his  son,
2  K.  3  27.

3  See  HIHI.. On these  sacrifices  cp  Tylor,  Prim.  Cutt.P],
1  lo+jF.  ;  Liebrecht,  Zurl'olkskumie,  284^  ;  especially  Sartori,
'  Das  Bauopfer,'  Zeitschr.f.  Ethnal.  30  iff.  (1898).

4  See  Jer.  7  31  Ezek.  20  26  23  36^:  Lev.  18  21  20  iff.  Dt.  18  10
etc.

4192


-.,. t'
.  UDia 0 .


SACRIFICE

the  definitions  of  P  and  the  Mishna  may  sometimes  be
suspected  of  making  systematic  discrimination  between
terms  once  loosely  equivalent.  The  tendency  of  the
ritual  development  was  to  reduce  to  rule  and  measure
what  was  once  more  free,  and  to  convert  into  a  tax,  for
the  support  of  the  clergy,  what  formerly,  as  a  gift  to
the  deity,  had  actually  fallen  in  whole  or  in  part  to  his
ministers.  Aparchre  were  offered  not  only  of  things
that  were  eaten,  but  also  of  flax  and  wool  ( Hos.  259  Dt.
184).  Inasmuch  as  these  offerings  have  a  history  of
their  own  it  has  seemed  best  to  treat  them  separately  ;
see  TAXATION,  TITHES.  Religious  dedications  of  a
different  character  are  the  'orlah  of  fruit-trees  in  the
first  three  years  of  bearing,  followed  in  the  fourth  by
the  consecration  of  the  crop  as  hillulfm  (Lev.  1923-25),
which  corresponds  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  firstlings  of
animals  ;  the  peak,  or  unreaped  corner  of  the  grain-
field  ;  the  gleanings  of  the  harvest-field,  orchard,  and
vineyard  (Lev.  19g/);  and  the  spontaneous  crops  of
the  fallow  year  (Ex.  23  io/  ).  (See  NATURE  WORSHIP,

§3-)

The  form  of  presentation  of  first-fruits  is  described
only  in  part.  In  Lev.  23io/!  14  (old  laws  in  H)  the
first  sheaf  of  barley  (originally  from  each  field,  or  from
each  village)  is  brought  and  'waved'  (henfph,  rpri,  a
gesture  of  throwing)  before  Yahwe  at  the  local  sanctuary  ;
until  this  is  done  the  new  crop  must  not  be  used  in  any
form  (v.  14)  ;  unleavened  cakes  (massoth)  of  the  new
barley  meal  are  eaten  for  seven  days  (see  FEASTS,
PASSOVER).  At  the  end  of  wheat  harvest  a  correspond
ing  ceremony  is  the  presentation  in  a  similar  way  of  two
loaves  of  leavened  bread  (originally  from  each  house
hold,  Lev.  2315-17200).  Cp  Frazer,  Golden  Bough*®,
2319.  Dt.  Ibiff.  prescribes  that  specimens  of  the
choicest  of  the  fruits  of  the  land  shall  be  brought  by
each  landowner  in  a  basket  and  set  down  before  the
altar  with  a  solemn  liturgy  of  thanksgiving  ;  the  pre
sentation  is  followed  by  a  feast  (see  below,  §  22).

Another  kind  of  oblation,  which,  though  of  much  less
primitive  character  than  the  kinds  just  mentioned,  can
be  traced  back  to  an  early  period  in  the  history  of  Israel
in  Canaan,  is  the  setting  before  the  deity  of  a  table
spread  with  food  and  drink  (sec,  further,  below,  §  34  a).
Such  was  the  custom  at  Nob  ( i  S.  21 4-6  [5-7])  as  well  as
at  Jerusalem  (iK.  748),  and  probably  wherever  God
had  a  house  or  temple.  On  this  table  stood  bread,
which  at  certain  intervals  was  exchanged  for  fresh  loaves
hot  from  the  oven  ;  the  loaves  that  were  removed  were
eaten  as  '  holy  bread '  by  the  priests,  and — under  ex
ceptional  circumstances — by  laymen  who  had  '  hallowed  '
themselves  (i  S.  214-6).  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that,
as  among  other  peoples,  wine  too,  in  cups  or  chalices,
was  placed  upon  the  table  ;  but  there  is  no  mention  of  it
in  the  OT.  (On  P  see  below,  §34 a.)  In  the  lecfi-
sternia  of  other  religions  flesh  also  was  thus  set  before
the  deity  ;  it  is  not  probable,  however,  that  such  was
ever  Israelite  custom.  Like  the  flesh  or  fat  of  animal
sacrifices  and  the  oblation  of  bread,  wine,  and  oil  with
them,  the  loaves  of  '  shew  bread '  were  '  the  food  of
God'  (D«rrSn  DrrV).

Offerings  of  wine  in  the  form  of  libations  were  made
at  the  sacrificial  feasts  (above,  §  n)  ;  a  libation  of
Kkar,  properly  any  fermented  drink  other  than  wine,  is
spoken  of  in  a  late  law  (Nu.  28?;  see  below,  §  35),
but  in  no  ancient  source  -  there  seems  to  be  no  reason
why  such  libations  should  not  have  been  made.  Honey
was  excluded  from  the  preparation  of  sacrificial  cakes
(Lev.  2n),  in  which  it  was  much  used  in  other  cults  ; 1
it  was  brought  with  the  other  choicest  products  of  the
land  in  the  ceremony  described  in  Dt.  26 1^,  but  did
not  come  upon  the  altar.  Milk,  often  offered  by  other
peoples  in  libations,2  was  not  so  used  by  the  Hebrews.

1  Libations  of  honey  in  antiquity,  Theophrastus  in  Porphyry,
De  abst.  2  20  /  ; reasons for the prohibition in  Jewish law,
fnilo,  De  sacrificantibns,  §6,2  255,  Mangey.

2  In Arabia, We.  Heid.Pl,  iiif. Milk in Abel's offering
(Jos.  Ant.  i.  2  i)  is  a  mistranslation  of  the  ambiguous  c

4193


SACRIFICE

That  independent  libations  of  oil  were  made  is  intrinsic
ally  not  improbable,  though  not  conclusively  established
by  reference  to  Gen.  28 18  Judg.  9g  Mic.  67.  (See  Now.
HA  2208  ;  cp  below,  §  31  a. )

Sacrifices  were  generally  offered  at  home  ;  every
village  had  its  altar  (inizbeah,  slaughter  place),  where

15  Seasons  the  victims  vvere  slain  and  feasts  he]d  ;
and  occasions  thither  the  firstlings  and  other  obli
gatory  offerings  were  brought  (see
HIGH  PLACE,  §  4).  There  were  more  famous  holy
places  to  which  men  resorted  in  numbers,  especially
at  the  autumn  festival  (see  FEASTS,  §  4).  The
times  of  sacrifice  were  in  part  fixed  by  custom,  in
part  dependent  on  the  occasion  or  on  the  will  of  the
worshipper.  To  the  former  class  belong  the  Passover
at  the  vernal  full  moon  (see  above,  §§  $ff.},  and  the
agricultural  season  feasts  at  the  beginning  and  end  of
the  grain  harvest,  and  at  the  close  of  the  vintage  (see
FEASTS).1  At  the  last  three  custom  required  every  man
to  'see  the  face  of  Yahwe,'  with  an  offering  (Ex.
2817).  The  new  moon  was  a  favourite  time  for  feasts  :
Saul  expects  all  his  court  to  be  present  on  such  an
occasion  (iS.  204 /. ,  cp  1824^);  the  annual  sacri
fice  of  David's  clan  at  Bethlehem  is  held  on  a  new  moon
(i  S.  20s/.  29).  See  NEW  MOON.  The  Sabbath,  appar
ently  in  a  lesser  degree,  enjoyed  the  same  preference.
When  a  regular  cultus  became  established  at  the  greater
sanctuaries,  more  numerous  victims  were  offered  on
these  days  (see  below,  §  33).  The  specific  occasions
of  sacrifice  were  manifold — the  circumcision  or  wean
ing  of  a  son,  marriage,  the  coming  of  a  traveller,  the
making  of  a  compact,  consultation  of  an  oracle,  the
mustering  of  a  clan  for  war  or  the  return  from  a
campaign,  the  accession  of  a  king,  the  dedication  of
a  temple,  the  staying  of  a  plague.  Many  sacrifices
were  offered  in  fulfilment  of  vows  for  the  obtaining
of  the  most  varied  objects  of  human  desire.  Men
sacrificed  alike  when  they  rejoiced  in  the  evidence  of
Yahwe's  favour,  when  they  besought  his  bounty  or
his  help,  and  when  they  had  need  to  propitiate  the
offended  God.  Man}'  kinds  of  uncleanness  required
purification  by  sacrifice.

The  companies  of  worshippers  for  whom  and  by
whom  sacrifices  were  brought  originally  corresponded

16.  Worshippers.  t0  l!ne  natural  groupings  of  the
people,  the  family  or  clan  for  itself
(e.g. ,  i  S.  206),  the  village  community  at  its  own  high
place  {e.g. ,  i  S.  9 12).  Even  at  the  greater  holy  places,
which  were  frequented  at  the  festival  seasons  by
multitudes  from  different  tribes,  these  groups  preserved
their  identity.  Deuteronomy  assumes  that  this  will  be
the  case  at  Jerusalem  when  all  bring  their  sacrifices
thither;  and  in  the  Passover  the  'household,'  even
when  casually  constituted,  continued  to  the  last,  and,
indeed,  still  continues,  to  be  a  distinct  sacral  group  ;
the  great  mass  of  worshippers  did  not  become  one  wor
shipping  community,  but  remained  many  companies.
The  only  body  of  worshippers  in  ancient  times  in  which
the  natural  groups  are  sunk  is  the  army  in  time  of  war.
How  far  the  persistence  of  the  family  as  a  society  of
worship  in  the  national  religion  is  to  be  attributed  to
the  survival  of  proper  family  cults,  the  worship  of
ancestors,  it  does  not  fall  within  the  province  of  this
article  to  discuss.2

The  worshippers  prepared  themselves  for  participa
tion  in  the  sacrifice  as  '  holy  '  by  '  hallowing  themselves  '
(hithkaddeX,  i  S.  16s  Nu.  Ili8,  cp  Ex.  19ioi4).  An
obligatory  part  of  this  '  hallowing  '  on  solemn  occasions
was  abstinence  for  a  time  previous  to  the  appearance
at  the  sacred  place  from  sexual  intercourse  (cp  i  S.
21s/.  Ex.  19  is);3  other  preparatory  ceremonies  were
purifications,  ablutions,  the  washing  of  garments.  Men
put  on  festal  attire,  garments  and  ornaments  not  of

1  Sheep-shearing  was  also  a  time  for  feasting,  i  S.  25  7.

2  See  FAMILY,  §  2;  Sta.  <7r/l3oo/?:

3  See  WRS  Kel.  Sem.P),  454^

4104


SACRIFICE

everyday wear (Ex.322 11 2/. 1235/. Hos.  2 13  [15]
Ezek.  16 12/.  J.1

For  the  ordinary  sacrifice  (stbah)  the  assistance  of  a
priest  was  unnecessary  ;  the  rites  were  simple  and  known
p  •  2  to  a"-  The  older  historical  books
17.  rnests.  abouncj  m  instances  of  sacrifices  by
laymen  of  all  ranks  ;  the  father  offered  sacrifice  for  his
household,  the  'elders'  for  the  clan  or  the  village  com
munity,  the  commander  for  the  army,  the  king  for  the
people.  The  offerer  slew  and  flayed  his  own  victim  —
as,  indeed,  continued  to  be  the  rule  to  the  latest  period  ;
doubtless  he  also  in  early  times  poured  the  blood  upon
the  sacred  stone  or  altar,  afterwards  a  specifically
priestly  act.  At  the  holy  places  which  had  a  resident
priesthood — -often  proprietary — the  priests  burnt  the  fat
upon  the  altar  ;  for  this  service  they  took  toll  ( i  S.
2i3^).  The  customary  right  of  the  priests  may  have
differed  at  different  places,  as  it  certainly  changed  in
course  of  time  (cp  i  S.  213^!  Dt.  183  Lev.  734>.3  The
priests  participated  also  by  guest-right  in  the  sacrificial
feasts.  The  most  important  functions  of  the  priesthood
were  not,  however,  direction  or  assistance  at  sacrifices,
but  the  custody  of  the  sanctuary,  the  consultation  of  the
oracle,  and  instruction  concerning  purifications,  piacular
rites,  and  the  like.

The  sacrificial  worship  of  ancient  Israel  had  a  pre
vailingly  joyous  character  ;  to  eat  and  drink  and  rejoice

_,  before  Yah  we  (Dt. )  is  a  description  of

is.  onaracter  k  whkh  hol(Js  good  to  the  end  of  the

)1  worship.  kingflom  The  stated  feasts  in  harvest-
time  and  vintage,  the  new  moon  and  sabbath,  were
all  seasons  of  rejoicing  ;  and  the  occasions  of  public
and  private  sacrifice  at  other  times  (see  above,  §  15)
were,  in  general,  of  a  joyful  nature.  The  banquet
was  accompanied  by  music  and  song  (Am.  623,  cp  65),
•not  always  of  what  we  should  call  a  religious  kind  ;
dances,  also,  were  customary  (Ex.  32 19  i  S.  186  Ex.
1520  Judg.  1134  21  igjf.}.  The  excesses  to  which  such
festivities  are  exposed  did  not  fail  to  occur  (iS.  Ii3^
222  Is.  287/.  Am.  27/  Hos.  4i4).

But  while  joyfulness  was  thus  the  predominant  note
of  worship,  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  ancient  religion
had  no  other  note.  In  times  of  private  distress  or
public  calamity  men  set  themselves  to  expiate  the
offence,  known  or  unknown,  that  had  provoked  God's
anger,  to  propitiate  him  by  gifts  and  recover  his  favour
(see  28.  21  if.  24i8/i  Dt.  21i/!  etc.).  Such  scenes
as  are  described  in  i  K.  1826^:  (the  priests  of  Baal  on
Carmel)  were  probably  not  without  parallel  among  the
Israelites  on  like  occasions.  Fasting  before  Yahwe,
wearing  the  garb  of  mourning,  was  an  ancient  and
common  means  of  appealing  to  his  mercy  (see  FASTING).
In  ordinary  cases  propitiatory  sacrifices  differed  from
common  sacrifices,  not  in  rite,  but  in  the  spirit  and
mood  of  the  worshippers.  When  God  was  manifestly
perilously  incensed  men  would  hardly  venture  to
approach  him  with  sacrifice  till  they  had  reason  to  hope
that  his  wrath  was  somewhat  appeased  (see,  e.g. ,
28.  24).

Like  other  ancient  monarchs,  the  kings  of  Judah  and
Israel  built  temples  at  old  holy  places,  such  as  Bethel,

in Ta i. e ar>d  in  their  capitals,  as  at  Jerusalem

19.  Effect  of ,  ,- . d' i.-

monarchy  Samaria,  Worship  at  these  royal

y'  sanctuaries  was  under  the  direction  of
the  sovereign  ;  on  great  occasions  the  king  in  person
offered  sacrifice  in  them  ( i  K.  8  5  64  ;  especially  9  25  2  K.
16 12 jf.);  the  priests  were  appointed  by  him.  It  was
probably  in  these  temples  that  the  custom  of  offering  a
daily  holocaust  grew  up.  This  sacrifice  was  made  early
in  the  morning  ;  in  the  late  afternoon  the  oblation  of

1  We.  /W.c»>,  71. See  DRESS,  §  8.

2  See  PRIEST,  %  4/

3  To  prevent  controversy  or  extortion,  tablets  on  which  the
legal  tariff  for  various  species  of  sacrifice  was  inscribed  were
sometimes  set  up  before  ancient  temples  (see  C/Sl  165  167  ;  C/L

««20).

4  See  FEASTS,  §  $/.

4195


SACRIFICE

bread  or  dough,  oil,  wine  (the  minhah]  was  presented
(see  i  K.  1829  36,  cp  Dan.  9 21  Ezra  94/.  ).*  The  animals
required  for  food  by  the  king's  great  household  were,  no
doubt,  slaughtered  at  the  temples  with  a  sacrificial  dedi
cation  ;  the  name  tabbdhim,  lit.  '  butchers,'  applied  to  the
palace  guard,  has  been  thought  to  bear  witness  to  this
custom  (WRS  Kel.  Sem.M,  396).  At  the  festivals  and
on  special  occasions  greater  numljers  of  sacrifices  were
offered  by  the  king  and  his  court,  as  well  as  by  the
people  who  came  together  to  celebrate  the  feast.
Foreign  luxuries,  such  as  incense,  came  into  use  at
these  sanctuaries.  The  support  of  the  regular  cultus
came  from  the  king's  treasury,  either  from  imposts
levied  in  natura  (2  K.  16is  Ezek.  45g^),  or  by  the
assignment  to  the  temple  of  the  revenues  of  a  district.
(See  TAXATION.  )

A  considerable  number  of  priests  must  have  been
attached  to  the  greater  temples,  and  the  necessity  of
order  and  authority  was  doubtless  early  felt.  In
Jerusalem  we  read  of  a  chief  priest  and  a  second  priest.
The  better  organisation  probably  in  part  recognised,  in
part  created,  a  differentiation  of  functions.  The  same
conditions  were  favourable  to  the  growth  of  the  ritual
in  elaborateness  and  splendour,  and  to  a  concomitant
estimate  of  its  importance.  In  a  word,  the  ritualistic
and  sacerdotal  tendencies  in  the  religion  of  Israel  had
their  seats  at  the  royal  temples,  especially  at  Jerusalem.
By  degrees  the  worship  at  Jerusalem  came  to  be  a  very
different  thing  from  that  at  the  country  high  places,
and  thus  things  were  preparing  both  for  the  deutero-
nomic  reforms  and  for  the  ritual  law.

The  greatest  change,  however,  which  followed  the
establishment  of  the  kingdom  was  the  institution  of  a
regular  public  cultus  maintained  by  the  king  for  himself
and  his  people.  Thus  a  national  religion  was  created.

When  Israel  took  its  place  among  the  nations,
political  and  commercial  intercourse  opened  the  way  for

20  Foreign  rel'K'ous  influence.  Solomon's  new
.  'fl  °  temple  was  built  by  a  Phoenician  archi
tect  after  Phoenician  models;  Ahaz
exchanged  the  altar  for  a  copy  of  one  he  had  seen  in
Damascus.  The  more  complete  apparatus  of  worship
— the  bronze  reservoir  and  portable  lavers,  the  many
utensils  provided  for  the  service  of  the  altar,  for  example
— suppose  corresponding  elaboration  in  the  ritual.  The
vestments  and  ceremonial  ornaments  of  the  priests  also
were  probably  patterned  after  those  in  use  in  Phoenician
temples.  The  influence  of  foreign  religions  was  much
deeper  in  the  seventh  century,  during  the  long  reign  of
Manasseh.  Not  only  were  many  new  cults,  especially  of
Assyrian  origin,  introduced  (see  QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN,
NATURE  WORSHIP,  §  s/.),  but  the  worship  of  Yahwe
was  enriched  by  new  rites  and  offerings  ;  the  burning  of
costly  gums  and  spices,  for  example,  is  first  heard  of  in
this  period.2  The  sacrifice  of  children  as  burnt  offer
ings,  with  peculiar  rites,  to  Yahwe  under  the  title
'  king  '  (liam-mtlek),  which  also  became  prevalent  in  this
age,  is  probably  a  foreign — Phoenician  or  Syrian — cult
adopted  by  worshippers  of  Yahwe  (see  MOLECH).

The  reforms  of  Josiah  not  only  suppressed  for  a  time

these  foreign  rites,  but  also  made  a  radical  change  in

_ ,  the  whole  sacrificial  system  by  destroy-

a. e  orm ^ {he ^.^ pjaceS| carrymg away

ana  reac  ion.  thejr  prjesth0ods,  and  forbidding  the

offering  of  sacrifice  at  any  place  in  the  kingdom  except

the temple in Jerusalem.3 A necessary corollary  of

this  restriction  of  sacrifice  to  one  altar  was  the  slaughter

of animals  for  food  at  home without  sacrificial rites

(Dt.  12 15  f.  20-25), contrary to the ancient rule (see

Lev.  17  3/).4

A  large part  of  the  occasional private  and family

1  On  the  later  custom,  see  below,  g  32.

2  See  INCENSE,  §  3. It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Ezekiel  4,-ives
it  no  place  in  his  reformed  cultus.

3  See  DEUTERONOMY,  ISRAEL,  §  yjf.',  JUSIAH,  §  i.

4  Disregarding  redactional  changes  ;  see  LEVITICUS,  §  28.

4196


SACRIFICE

sacrifices  thus  drop  out.  The  change  is  even  greater
on  the  other  side  ;  the  season  feasts  must  now  all  be
kept  at  Jerusalem  ;  thither  firstlings  and  tithes,  first-
fruits — in  a  word,  all  obligatory  offerings — must  be
brought,  there  all  vows  must  be  paid,  and  freewill  offer
ings  made.  Various  modifications  of  the  ancient  custom
became  necessary  ;  the  lustration  of  houses  with  blood
at  the  Passover  must  have  ceased  (see  above,  §  7)  ;  the
age  at  which  firstlings  should  be  offered  (eight  days,
Ex.223o  [29])  is  now  a  minimum  limit — they  may  be
brought  at  any  time  after  they  are  a  week  old  (Lev.
2227).  The  removal  to  Jerusalem  of  the  feasts  in  which
the  tithes  were  consumed,  besides  other  changes  (Dt.
1424^:),  deprived  the  poor  of  the  village  of  the  partici
pation  in  these  feasts  which  they  enjoyed  by  ancient
right  of  hospitality  ;  compensation  is  made  by  the  con
version  of  the  tithes  of  one  year  in  three  to  charity
(Dt.  1428/;  see  TAXATION,  §  10,  TITHES).  The
country  priests  who  were  transported  to  Jerusalem  were
net  allowed  to  offer  sacrifice  in  the  temple,  though  they
had  their  living  from  its  revenues  ;  an  inferior  order  of
ministry  was  thus,  in  fact,  established.

By  the  centralisation  of  worship  its  natural  connection
with  the  common  life  of  men  was  much  loosened.  The
Israelite  could  visit  the  holy  place  to  offer  his  sacrifices
at  most  but  thrice  a  year,  more  commonly,  perhaps,
but  once  or  twice.  At  other  times  he  knows  that  stated
sacrifices  are  offered  in  the  temple  daily,  and  with
greater  pomp  at  all  the  festivals.  The  possibility  of  a
cultus  carried  on  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not
present,  of  a  sacerdotal  religion  done  for  the  people  by
the  priests,  and  operative,  if  correctly  performed,  is
thus  prepared.  These  consequences  were  not  per
ceived,  much  less  realised,  in  the  few  remaining  years
of  Josiah's  reign,  nor,  in  their  full  effect,  for  many
generations  afterwards.

The  spirit  of  the  sacrificial  laws  in  Deuteronomy  is
that  of  the  older  time  ;  '  rejoice  before  Yahwe '  is  still
the  common  expression  for  worship.  The  increased
emphasis  on  the  olden  hospitality  of  the  sacrificial  feast
is  in  accord  with  the  prominence  of  motives  of  charity
and  humanity  in  the  deuteronomic  legislation,  but  is
doubtless  due  in  part,  as  has  been  already  suggested,
to  the  consciousness  that  the  transfer  of  these  feasts  to
a  distant  sanctuary  imperilled  this  feature  of  them.

In  the  disastrous  times  that  followed  the  defeat  at
Megiddo  and  death  of  Josiah,  in  the  reaction  from  the
deuteronomic  reforms  which  not  unnaturally  ensued
upon  the  disappointment  of  the  high  hopes  based  upon
them,  every  .trace  of  these  reforms  was  swept  away.
Not  only  were  the  old  altars  at  the  high  places  rebuilt
and  the  foreign  worship  restored,  but  men  sought  more
efficacious  means  of  expiating  guilt  and  securing  divine
protection  in  private  cults — in  part,  perhaps,  revivals  of
old  Israelite  practices,  in  part  of  foreign  origin,  such  as
are  described  in  Ezek.  8.  These  strange  rites  were
celebrated  as  mysteries  by  societies  of  initiates.  Their
sacramental  sacrifices  were  '  unclean '  beasts,  such  as
swine,  dogs,  mice.1  The  strong  taboo  of  the  flesh  of
these  animals  made  them  peculiarly  potent  piacula,  the
highest  grade  of  '  uncleanness  '  being  convertible  with
exceptional  'holiness.'

The  laws  in  Dt.  relative  to  sacrifice  and  offering
represent  older  custom  adapted  to  the  plan  of  reform
which  made  Jerusalem  the  sole  place  of  worship  (see
above,  §  20).

Species  of  offerings  :  Dt.  126,  cp  n  17,  see  also  27eyT  33  10  ;
prescribed  offerings  (firstlings,  tithes,  etc.)  are  kodasim,  'sacred  '

01 O  +1, (belonging  to  God  by  right),  in distinction

41.  oeventn from  votive  and  free-will  offerings,  and  from

Cent.  laws.  animals  slaughtered  for  food,  12  26;  victims
from  the  flock  and  herd  (bakar,  son  ;  siir,  se) ;
human  sacrifice  prohibited,  1231,  cp  18  10 ;'  victims  must  be
perfect,  17  i,  cp  15  21  ;  ritual  of  holocaust  and  sacrifice,  1227  ;
burning  of  fat,  libations,  cp  32  38  ;  offerings  at  the  feasts  and
itual,  16  iff.,  cp  26^  ;  priests'  dues,  181^  ;  tithes,  12  17

1  Is.  053^;  603  17  (late  post-exilic  rites  of  the  same  kind):  cp
Ezek.  8 9/  See  WRS,  Rcl.  Sem.V),  290^  343.

4197


SACRIFICE


14  23,  cp  12  6  ii ; in  the  third  year,  14  z9/.  ;  liturgy,  20  12  ff.  •
firstlings,  1  j  19^!

The  sacrificial  laws  in  H  are  of  the  same  age.1
Species: 'olah Lev.  22  18,  etc.,  'olah and  zebah  178,  zibht
selamtm  17  5  ly  =,,  ifiddh  22  zyf.,  nccier  and  nid&b&k  22  18  21 ';  2


sacrifice  forbidden,  1821  20  iff.  ;  victims  must  be  perfect,  22i8/f.
less  strict  rules  for  freewill  offerings,  22  23  ;  must  be  brought  to


be  eaten  on  the  day  they  are  offered  or  on  the  following  day,
195_^;  of  the  todah  on  the  day  of  sacrifice  itself,  22297:;
feasts,  offerings,  and  ritual,  23  (the  parts  of  the  chapter  derived
from  H).4

Contemporary  with  the  laws  in  H,  and  from  the
same  or  cognate  sources,  is  a  large  part  of  Lev.  11-15,
on  uncleanness  and  purification  (see  LEVITICUS,  §  24 f.};
cases  requiring  sacrifice  are  enumerated,  126/.  15 14/.
29 /.  14 1-7  (49-53)-

In  Lev.  1-7,  also,  the  older  sacrificial  toroth,  not
only  in  1  and  3,  but  also  in  parts  of  t>ff.,  represent
pre-exilic  usage  and  formulation  in  later  redaction.5

Another  source  from  which  knowledge  of  the  worship
in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  may  be  gained,  is  Ezekiel's

21a  Ezekiel  Pr°Sramme  for  a  restored  and  purified
cultus  in  40-48.  The  prophet's  pur
pose  was  not  to  create  a  new  system  of  sacrifices  and
rites,  but  to  introduce  such  safeguards  as  should  prevent
those  invasions  of  Yahwe' s  holiness  which  had  provoked
him  in  anger  to  destroy  his  desecrated  house  and  make
an  end  of  the  polluted  worship.  Knowing  as  we  do
the  characteristic  motives  of  Ezekiel's  reformatory  zeal,
and  having  from  other  sources  reasonably  good  informa
tion  about  the  temple  worship  in  the  last  half-century
before  the  fall  of  Judah,  we  should  not  find  it  difficult  to
distinguish  the  old  from  the  new  in  Ezekiel's  sketch,
and  thus  to  use  40-48  for  the  history  of  the  cultus.6
This  testimony  is  the  more  valuable  because  Ezekiel
had  a  priest's  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  ritual
and  affection  for  it.

In  comparing  Ezek.  40-48  with  the  sources  hitherto  examined,
it  is  important  to  observe  that  Ezek.  deals  almost  exclusively
with  sacra  fiublica?  the  others  with  private  sacrifices.  As  the
public  ceremonies  had,  doubtless,  in  all  ages,  a  more  solemn
ritual,  the  fuller  liturgical  details  in  Ezek.,  as  compared,  for
example,  with  Dt.,  signify  much  less  than  has  sometimes  been
made  of  them.  Besides  the  species  of  sacrifice  with  which  we
have  already  become  acquainted  ('olah,  zeba/i,  seldiinm),  Ezek.
repeatedly  names  two  others,  hattath  and  (isain(R\  sin  offering
and  trespass  offering— RV  guilt  offering),  4039  42  13  43  19  ff.
4427_29  45  IT #.  4(520  (see  below,  §§  277:).  The  minhah  is  an
offering  of  flour  and  oil  in  specified  quantities  (46  57*11,  etc.);
a  libation  (nesek)  is  also  provided  for  (45 17).  The  animals
sacrificed  are  the  same  as  in  the  other  sources  (birds  are  not
named).

The  public  sacrifices  are  provided  by  the  prince  from  the
proceeds  of  a  tax  levied  in  kind  (terumdh  45  13-17).  A  lamb  is
offered  every  morning,  the  regular  holocaust  ('olat/t  tdjitld),  with
an  accompanying  oblation  (minhah  46 13-15)  ;8  the  sabbath
burnt  offering  is  six  lambs  and  a  ram,  with  their  oblations
(46  4_/T)  ;9  on  the  new  moon,  the  victims  are  the  same,  with  the
addition  of  a  bullock  (466/7).  At  the  passover  a  bullock  is
offered  on  the  first  day  as  a  sin  offering  for  the  prince  and
people ;  during  the  seven  days  of  the  feast,  each  day  seven
bullocks  and  seven  rams  as  burnt  offerings,  and  a  he  goat  as  a
sin  offering  (45  23/7)  ;  the  feast  of  the  seventh  month  has  the  same
sacrifices  (45  25)  ;  there  is  no  summer  festival  (Pentecost).  At
the  great  festivals,  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  prince  also
provides  sclamltn  (45  17),  doubtless  as  a  feast  for  the  people.

1  Setting  aside  the  double  redaction. See  LEVITICUS,  §§  T.i,ff.

2  The  dsdm  in  19  21  is  from  Rp.

s  The  principle,  no  slaughter  without  sacrificial  rites,  is  re
affirmed  ;  see  LEVITICUS,  §§  15,  28.

4  Passover  is  not  named.

5  See  LEVITICUS,  §§  $f.  and,  on  dsant  and  hattath.  below.

§§27y:

6  The  custom  of  the  temple  after  the  restoration,  which  fre
quently  followed  the  older  usage,  rather  than  Ezekiel's  innova
tions,  furnishes  an  additional  criterion.

7  Even  the  selaiinm  at  the  feasts,  new  moons,  and  sabbaths,
are  to  be  provided  by  the  state,  45  17.

8  No  evening  tdmid  ;  see  below,  §  32.

9  The  general  rule  for  the  oblation  to  be  offered  with  each
kind  of  victim,  46  n,  cp  5  7  ;  the  quantity  of  wine  for  the  liba
tion  is  nowhere  fixed.

4198


SACRIFICE

The  number  of  these  victims  is  necessarily  left  undetermined.
A  table  (or  altar)  for  the  shewbread  stands  in  the  temple  (41  22);
but  no  rules  are  given  for  the  presentation  of  offerings  upon  it —
probably  the  old  custom  is  to  be  followed  without  change.1  An
elaborate  ritual  is  provided  for  the  consecration  of  the  altar
(48  18-27),  and  for  the  semi-annual  Macula  (on  the  first  of  the
first  and  seventh  months i  by  which  the  temple  and  altar  are
purified  (45  18-201. *  The  rites  of  sacrifice  are  given  in  some
detail:  the  slaying  and  dressing  of  the  victims  (4«  38-43,  cp  the
description  of  the  court  and  altar,  4(1  28^:  44  i^jff.\;  tlie  dash
ing  of  the  blood  upon  the  altar  (48  18),  or-of  the  sin  offering  in
consecration  and  purification  ceremonies — the  application  to  the
altar  and  other  parts  of  the  temple  and  court  (43  zo45  iq>.  The
fat  and  blood  of  sacrifices  are  the  food  of  God  (44  7).  The  flesh
of  public  sin  offerings  is  burned  (4:5  21);  that  of  private  sin
offerings  and  of  trespass  offerings  belongs  to  the  priests  (44  29);
there  are  kitchens  in  the  inner  court  where  they  boil  their  meat
and  bake  their  ntinkah  bread  (4(i  ig/ ),  and  chambers  in  which
they  eat  this  '  very  holy  '  food  (42  13).

Of  private  sacrifices  the  freewill  offerings  of  the  prince  ('olah
or  mSmtm)  are  sacrificed  by  the  priests  (4l>2);  the  private
sacrifices  of  the  people  are  slain  for  them  by  the  Levites  (de
graded  priests  of  the  old  high  places),  who  wait  upon  the  offerers
and  serve  them  (44  n);  the  flesh  is  boiled  in  kitchens  in  the
four  corners  of  the  outer  court  by  temple  servants  (4(1 21-24).
The  priests  are  supported  by  offerings:  the  flesh  of  the  (private)
sin  offerings  and  of  trespass  offerings,  the  oblations  of  flour  and
oil,  and  everything  that  is  devoted  to  Yahwe  fall  to  them;
besides  this  they  have  a  right  to  all  kinds  of  first-fruits  and
dedications  (4428^7".).

Ezckiel  supposes  that  his  readers  are  familiar  with
the  terms  lie  uses  and  their  significance ;  he  does  not
deem  it  necessary,  for  example,  to  define  the  nature  or
occasion  of  the  trespass  offering  (see  below,  §  27).
The  sacra  publica,  which  before  the  fall  of  Judah  had
been  maintained  at  the  king's  charges,  arc  to  be  pro
vided  for  by  the  prince  from  the  taxes.3  The  rules
prescribing  the  kinds  and  numbers  of  victims  to  be
offered  at  the  feasts,  and  the  proportion  of  flour  and
oil  with  each,  may  perhaps  make  new  requirements;
but  it  may  safely  be  assumed  that  there  had  been  similar
rules  fixed  by  the  custom  of  the  temple  under  the  kings.
The  periodical  expiation  of  inadvertences  or  mistakes
by  which  the  holiness  of  the  temple  might  have  been
sullied,  appears  to  be  an  innovation ;  *  but  the  rite  is
simple  and  old,  and  had  probably  been  practised  in
earlier  times  when  occasion  required.  In  general,  the
ritual  of  public  sacrifice  does  not  seem  to  be  much
changed  in  Ezekiel's  new  model  of  temple  worship.

The  consequences  of  Ezekiel's  system  would  doubtless
have  made  greater  changes  in  the  sphere  of  private  sacri
fices.  The  tax  to  be  paid  to  the  prince  and  the  assign
ment  of  all  first-fruits  to  the  priests  apparently  are  to  take
the  place  of  all  the  offerings  (firstlings,  first-fruits,  tithes,
sacrifice  for  appearance  at  the  holy  place,  and  the  like)'
which  in  former  times  the  Israelite  had  been  bound  to
bring  to  God.  Even  the  sacrificial  feasts  (selamlm)  at
the  great  festivals  were  provided  from  the  public  treasury.
There  would  remain  vows  and  freewill  offerings,  and
the  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  in  which,  as  it  appears,
no  change  was  intended.  In  the  ritual  of  private  sacri
fice  Ezc-kiel  proposed  a  very  radical  departure  from
immemorial  custom :  the  owner  was  henceforth  not  to
offer  his  own  victim,  but  to  look  on  while  one  of  the
inferior  ministry  of  the  temple  (Levites)  slaughtered  it
for  him.  This  innovation,  however,  did  not  prevail  ;
in  the  ritual  law  and  in  the  practice  of  the  Herodiari
temple,  the  worshipper  retained  his  old  right  (see
below,  §  26).

The  destruction  of  the  temple  in  Jerusalem  did  not
cause  a  long  interruption  in  sacrificial  worship  in  Judrea.

22  Cultua 'Not  only  were  there  other  ho|y  Places  in

after  586 theland  (seeHiGHPi.ACES,§9;  MIZI-AH,

i),  but  there  can  be no doubt  that  the

altar  in  Jerusalem was soon rebuilt  and  worship  re-

1  There  is  no  mention  of  incense  or  an  altar  of  incense,  of  a
candelabrum,  or  of  anointing  oil.

J  Observe  the  use  of  the  terms  kipper  and  hitta  ;  see  below
§45-

3  On  the  question  how  far  this  is  a change  of system see
TAXATION,  §  \^f.

4  It  did  not  establish  itself  in  the  restored  temple,  where  in
later  times  a  corresponding,  but  much  more  elaborate,  rite  was
celebrated  annually. See  ATONEMENT,  DAY  OF.

4199


SACRIFICE

established  (ISRAEL,  §  45),  with  survivors  of  the  old
priesthood  for  its  ministry.  Probably,  however,  the
public  sacrifices — the  daily  holocaust  and  the  offerings
on  Sabbaths  and  feast  days — which  had  been  supported
by  the  king,  ceased,  and  only  private  sacrifices  were
offered,  as  at  other  high  places.  With  the  appoint
ment  of  a  native  governor  and  the  rebuilding  of  the
temple,  the  public  services  were  doubtless  resumed  on
such  a  scale  as  the  poverty  of  the  community  permitted.
The  ritual,  also,  no  doubt,  conformed  to  the  ancient
custom  and  tradition  of  the  sanctuary  as  far  as  possible
under  these  conditions;  and  as  the  prosperity  of  the
Jews  increased,  and  Persian  kings  and  governors  from
time  to  time  made  contributions  to  the  support  of  the
temple,  it  recovered  something  of  its  ancient  splendour.
The  opinion  that  the  cultus  was  first  restored  by  priests
returning  from  the  exile,  and  afterwards  thoroughly
reformed  by  Ezra  in  accordance  with  the  prescriptions
of  a  liturgical  work  ('  Priest's  Code ')  which  he  brought
with  him  from  Babylonia,  rests  in  both  parts  on  the
same  late  testimony,  and  greatly  exaggerates  the  share
that  the  Babylonian  Jews  bore  in  the  development  of
Palestinian  Judaism  in  the  Persian  period.  Babylonian
influence  upon  the  terminology  of  the  later  ritual,  if  not
upon  the  rites  themselves,  is  indeed  manifest ;  but,  in
view  of  the  evidences  of  the  same  influence  in  other
Syrian  religions  in  the  Persian  and  Greek  period,  it  is
not  clear  that  we  must  look  to  the  exiled  priests  in
Babylonia  for  the  explanation.

An  important  landmark  in  the  history  of  the  ritual  is
the  description  of  a  typical  series  of  sacrifices — sin
offering,  burnt  offering,  peace  offerings — at  the  inaugura
tion  of  Aaron  in  Lev. !),  a  chapter  which  is  universally
assigned  to  the  original  History  of  the  Sacred  Institu
tions,  and  was  written  probably  in  the  fifth  century
n.c.  (see  HISTORICAL  LITERATURE,  §  9).  The  rites
agree  closely  with  the  older  sacrificial  toroth ;  many
refinements  of  the  later  laws  are  still  unknown  to  the
author,  in  particular  such  as  are  connected  with  the
inner  altar,  the  sprinkling  of  blood  in  consecrations  and
expiations,  and  the  like.

It  can  hardly  be  questioned  that  the  philhellenic
priests  of  the  Ptolemaic  and  Seleucid  times  introduced
22  a.  Later  various  ceremonies  in  imitation  of  the
cults  of  Syrian-Greek  temples,  some  of
which  were  preserved  till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.
The  procession  at  the  offering  of  first-fruits,  headed  by
an  ox  with  gilded  horns  and  crowned  with  an  olive
garland,  the  flute  player  making  music  before  them,
etc.,  is  an  example  in  point.  1  But  such  innovations
were  probably  in  matters  of  vestments,  processions,
and  the  like,  rather  than  in  the  ancient  rites  of  sacrifice
themselves.

The  two  features  in  which  the  sacrificial  cultus  of
later  times  differs  most  from  the  worship  of  old  Israel
are  the  enhanced  importance  of  the  sacra  publica  and
the  greater  prominence  of  expiatory  rites.  Both  are
natural  consequences  of  the  conditions  of  the  age.

The  Jews  were  a  widely  scattered  people;  most  of
them  could  visit  Jerusalem  only  at  long  intervals —
perhaps  but  once  or  twice  in  a  lifetime.  But  sacrifices
were  regularly  offered  for  them— the  daily  holocausts,
the  burnt  offerings  and  sin  offerings  on  the  sabbaths
and  new  moons  and  at  the  feasts.  These  sacrifices
were  now  maintained,  not  from  the  revenues  of  the
king  or  prince,  but  by  a  tax  collected  from  Jews  in  all
parts  of  the  world,  who  thus  became  participants  in  all
their  benefits.  The  cessation  of  the  daily  sacrifice  was  a
calamity  that  deeply  affected  the  whole  race  (Dan.  8  \\ff.
11  31  12  ii,  cp  Jos.  ~BJ  vi.  '1  2).

Piacula  of  various  kinds  were  doubtless  common  in
old  Israel,  as  in  other  religions  (see,  e.g.,  Dt.  21  1-9) ;
many  of  the  purifications — which  fall  under  the  same
head — are  unquestionably  ancient  customs  (e.g..  Lev.


1  M  Bikkurim.  83; Philo,  De  Festo  cophini. See  Spencer,
fgg-  ritual,  lib.  4,  cap.  10.

4200


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


14i^,  cp  Dt.  248  Nu.  19).  Solemn  public  piacula,
however,  seem  in  earlier  times  to  have  been  performed
only  on  occasions  when  some  calamity  warned  the
people  that  they  had  offended  God  (e.g. ,  28.  24i8^;
above,  §§  18,  20).  In  the  Persian  period,  they  became
an  established  institution.  We  have  seen  that  Ezekiel
provides  for  such  ceremonies  at  the  beginning  of  each
half  year  (above,  §  21) ;  the  oldest  stratum  of  P  in  Lev.
16  seems  to  have  had  in  mind  a  yearly  expiation  ; 1  the
1  ),i y  of  Atonement  was  in  later  times  the  most  solemn
of  the  year.  All  rites  of  consecration  and  inauguration
are  begun  by  piacular  sacrifices.  Not  infrequently,  as
in  Ezekiel,  the  whole  cultus  is  regarded  as  expiatory.
The  prevalence  of  such  a  conception  of  God's  holiness
as  we  find  in  Ezekiel,  inevitably  led  to  the  multiplication
of  expiatory  rites  ;  the  depressed  and  unhappy  state  of
the  Jews  in  Palestine  during  a  large  part  of  these
centuries  may  be  regarded  as  a  contributory  cause.

The  differences  between  the  sacrificial  worship  of
old  Israel  and  that,  say,  of  NT  times  must  not,
however,  be  exaggerated.  The  public  cultus  did  not
supersede  private  sacrifices.  The  Jews,  even  from  the
remoter  parts  of  Palestine,  frequented  Jerusalem  at  the
feasts  in  great  numbers,  bringing  the  prescribed  offerings
and  paying  their  vows  ;  the  population  of  the  city  itself
and  of  neighbouring  Judaea  alone  was  sufficient  with
their  sacrifices  to  give  employment  and  support  at
ordinary  times  to  a  great  number  of  priests.  Nor  must
it  l>e  thought  that  the  worshippers  were  habitually
oppressed  by  a  sense  of  sin,  or  that  the  expiatory  side
of  the  cultus  so  dominated  their  conception  of  sacrifice
as  to  exclude  all  others.  The  contrast  sometimes
drawn  between  Dt. ,  with  its  rejoicing  before  Yahwe,
and  P,  with  all  its  sin  offerings  and  trespass  offerings,
even  if  it  fairly  represented  the  spirit  of  two  legislations,
cannot  legitimately  be  taken  as  evidence  of  a  corre
sponding  difference  in  the  spirit  of  religion  in  two  ages.2
From  our  other  sources  it  is  easy  to  show  that  no  such
radical  difference  exists.

II. DEVELOPED  JEWISH  SYSTEM

It  is  proposed  in  the  following  paragraphs  briefly  to
•describe  the  Jewish  sacrificial  system  in  its  final  form,

„ T , ,  as it was in practice in the last

23.  Introductory.  r

J century before the destruction of

Jerusalem.  In  this  system  the  rules  and  rites  of  sacrifice
in  the  Pentateuch,  of  whatever  age  and  origin,  were
combined,  and  their  often  conflicting  requirements  in
some  fashion  harmonised.  There  was  also  a  traditional
usage,  not  wholly  dependent  upon  the  written  law,  and
at  all  events  much  more  detailed,  without  a  knowledge
of  which  we  should  often  be  hopelessly  at  a  loss  in  our
effort  to  reconstruct  the  ritual.3  Our  sources,  therefore,
include,  besides  the  Pentateuch,  the  descriptions  of  the
cultus  in  Jewish  authors — Sirach,  the  Epistle  of  Aristeas,
Philo,  the  NT,  Josephus,  etc. — and  the  school  tradition
embodied  in  the  legal  midrash  (Mekilfd,  Siphra,
Siplire],  the  Mishna,  and  the  Tosephta.4

The  comprehensive  name  for offerings  of  all  kinds,

...  ~.~  .  including  dotations  to  the  sanctuary,  is
24.  Offering  *  ,  (  ,/

in  general ;  •  Mf,'(f"

species etc.;  cp  also  Neh.  lOss  1831).

This  term,  which  is  found  only  in  technical
use,  first  appears  in  the  sixth  century  (Ezek.  20  28  40  43,  sacrificial
laws  in  Lev.  1  3),  and  is  probably  a  borrowed  word,  as  is  sug-

fested  also  by  the  unusual  form  of  the  noun ;  cp  Assyr.
.iirbanu  (RITUAL,  §§  i,  uia),  Aram.-Syr.  kurban.  The
technical  use  of  the  verb  hikr'ib  (^"Ipn),  '  present '  an  offering
to  God,  is  of  the  same  age.  <E>  renders  the  noun  by  Suipov,  Vg.
variously  and  often  freely  Tg.  and  Pesh.  kurban.

1  See  ATONEMENT,  DAY  OF,  §  2;  LEVITICUS,  §  12.

-  M:  ny  critics  appear  to  be  misled  by  the  word  '  sin  offering."
See  below,  §  28  a.

8  It  would  be  quite  impossible,  e.g.,  to  understand  the
ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  from  Lev.  10.

4  This  traditio_n  —  carefully  to  be  distinguished  from  the
scholastic  exegesis  and  casuistry  in  the  same  writings  —  goes
back  to  priests  who  had  served  in  the  temple.

4201


The  old  Hebrew  min/iah,  'gift,'  which  in  earlier
times  was  used  more  broadly  (see  above,  §  n),  is  in
the  ritual  laws  specifically  the  oblation  of  flour  and  oil
or  of  cakes  baked  therefrom.

The  species  of  sacrifice  are  the  same  as  in  Ezek.  :  burnt
offering  ('oldh),  trespass  offering  (dSdm),  sin  offering
(JiattdtM),  and  peace  offerings  (sUldmim)  ;  some  of  these
embrace  several  varieties.

The  public  sacrifices  are  either  stated  or  occasional.

„  The  stated  public  sacrifices  are  :

25. oacra l_  The  reguiar  ,]a;iy  ournt  offerings,  every
et morning  and  evening  (Ex.  2938-42  Nu.  28  3-8).
.1  2- lne additional burnt offerings on the

sabbaths  (Nu.  2S9_/C)  and  the  new  moons  (it.
11-14),  ar"d  at  the  annual  festivals,  viz.,  Passover  (ii>.  16-25),
Pentecost  (26-31),  New  Year  (29  i-b),  Day  of  Atonement  (7-11),
Tabernacles  (12-38).

3.  The  sin  offerings  at  the  new  moons  and  feasts  (Nu.  28  15  22  30
29  5  II  16  19  22  25  28  31  34  38).

4.  The  goat  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  16  15,  etc.).

Occasional  piacula  are  :

1.  The sin offering of  the  congregation  (Nu.  15  -2-2  ff.  Lev.
4  13^).

2.  The  sin  offering  of  the  'anointed priest,'  because  his  sin
brings  guilt  upon  the  people  (Lev.  ±-$ff.\  cp  Lev.  lt>6  n  14).

In  this  class  may  be  included  also  sacrifices  of  con
secration  for  the  temple  and  altar  (Lev.  &nf.  ',  cp
Ex.  40  1  ^)  ;  and  the  sacrifices  for  the  installation  of
priests,  especially  the  high  priest  (Ex.  29  Lev.  S).'2

Public  sacrifices  as  a  rule  are  either  burnt  offerings
or  sin  offerings  ;  the  trespass  offering  is  always  a  private
sacrifice,  and  the  only  public  peace  offerings  are  the
two  lambs  at  Pentecost  (Lev.  2819,  see  below,  §40);
the  consecration  ceremonies  also  include  sildmim.

Private  sacrifices  may  be  of  any  of  the  four  chief
species,  and  frequently  comprise  more  than  one  kind.
They  are  either  prescribed  or  voluntary.  The  prescribed
sacrifices  are  :

1.  Sin  offerings,  trespass  offerings,  and  purifications  of  various
kinds  according  to  the  occasion.

2.  The  sacrifices  obligatory  upon  those  who  appeared  at  the
temple  at  a  festival  season  ;  with  which  may  be  included  the
Passover.

Voluntary  private  sacrifices  were  brought  either  in
fulfilment  of  a  vow,  as  freewill  offerings,  or  as  expres
sions  of  gratitude  (nlder,  nlddidh,  tod  ah).

It  will  be  most  convenient  to  begin  with  private
sacrifices,  since  these  are  more  fully  described  in  the
Pentateuch,  and  afterwards  to  treat  of  the  public  cultus
in  the  temple,  for  the  details  of  which  \ve  are  mainly
dependent  upon  Jewish  tradition.

The  victim  might  be  from  the  flock  or  the  herd
(Lev.  1  2)  ;  a  turtle-dove  or  a  pigeon  was  also  accepted.3


26.  Burnt


If  a  quadruped,  it  must  be  a  male  without
_.  .  4  blemish,  a  bullock,  ram,  or  he  goat.  A

Ottering.  ]ist  of  twelve  defects  which  rendered  an
animal  unfit  for  sacrifice  is  given  in  Lev.  2222-25  ;  much
more  minute  rules  are  found  in  the  Talmud.5  If  the
dissection  of  the  victim  disclosed  abnormal  or  diseased
organs,  this  also  caused  its  rejection.  The  age  of  the
victim  is  sometimes  prescribed  ;  in  general,  animals  that
had  attained  their  full  growth  were  preferred  for  burnt
offerings.  The  offerer  brought  the  victim  to  the

court  of  the  temple,  rested  both  hands  heavily  upon  its
head,  slaughtered  and  flayed  it,  and  cut  up  the  carcass.
The  priest  received  the  blood  and  carried  it  to  the  altar,
and  afterwards  burnt  the  flesh  and  fat.

That  the  offerer  slew  his  own  victim  is  the  rule  in  Lev.  1511,


1  '  Publica  sacra,  quae  publicc.  sumptu  pro  populo_  fiunt  .  .  .
privata, quae  pro  singulis hominibus,  familiis,  gentibus  fiunt,'
Festus  ;  the  distinction  is  made  by  Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  y  i),  Philo
(t-.e.,  De  victimis  offer.  §  3),  and  in  the  Mishna.  .

2  The  installation  sacrifices  might  from  another  point  of  view
be  regarded  as  private  sacrifices,  and  are  in  fact  so  regarded
by  Jewish  tradition.

"3  The  offering  of  birds  as  burnt  offerings  is  permitted  as  the
only  kind  of  sacrifice  possible  to  the  poor  in  cities.

4  On  the  name  see  above,  §12.

5  See  M.  RekorPth  6,  Tos.  BckSrBth  4,  Bckoroth  zjaff.

4202


SACRIFICE

(o-^xzfouo-i),  and  is  naturally  followed  by  Philo,  De  victintis,
2241  Mangey:  but  their  interpretation  is  not  to  be  accepted.'
Ezekiel  would  nave  the  sacrifices  of  laymen  slain  by  Levites(see
above,  §  21);  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  this  ever  became  the
actual  practice.2  The  place  for  the  slaughter  of  the  burnt
offering  was  in  the  Court  of  the  Priests  (see  TEMPLE),  on  the
N.  side  of  the  great  altar  (Lev.  1  n),  where  also  the  sin  offer
ing  and  the  trespass  offering  were  slain  (peace  offerings  might
be  slain  in  any  part  of  the  court  ;  M.  Ztodhlni  5  iff-).  Here
were  rings  in  the  pavement  for  tying  the  victims,  posts  supporting
beams  with  hooks  to  hang  them  up  on,  and  low  marble  tables
for  dressing  the  large  cattle  (.)/.  Midddth  8562  M.  Tdtnid  3  5
M.  ShfkAllutf>\,  etc.).  The  blood  was  caught  by  a  priest  in  a
bason,  and  thrown  from  the  vessel  against  the  altar  in  such  a
way  that  some  of  the  blood  struck  each  of  the  four  faces  of  the
altar.  The  carcass  was  then  cut  up  according  to  a  certain
order  ;  the  inwards  and  shanks  (with  the  feet)  were  washed  ;  and
all  the  parts  of  the  animal,  except  the  hide3  and  the  contents  of
the  intestines,  were  borne  by  priests  to  the  sloping  ascent  of  the
altar,  where  they  were  salted  ;  finally  they  were  carried  up  to
the  top  of  the  altar,  flung  on  the  great  fire,4  and  burned.  In
later  times,  at  least,  an  oblation  was  offered  with  private  holo
causts  (Mu.  15  \ff.).

The  offering  of  a  bird  had  necessarily  a  different  ritual  (Lev.
114-17;  M.  Zcbdhlm'a^).  The  dove  or  pigeon,  which  might
be  of  either  sex,  was  taken  by  the  priest  to  the  altar  ;  ascending
the  ramp  and  standing  at  one  corner,  he  pinched  off  the  brrd]s
head  with  his  thumb-nail,  squeezed  out  the  blood  so  that  it
flowed  down  the  side  of  the  altar,  drew  out  the  crop  with  the
entrails  through  an  opening  in  the  breast,  and  threw  these,  with
the  feathers,  on  the  ash  heap  E.  of  the  altar.  Then  with  his
hands  he  rent  the  fowl  by  its  wings  without  actually  pulling  it
in  two,  rubbed  it  with  salt,  and  threw  it  upon  the  fire.

In  the  Pentateuch,  especially  in  Lev.  5,  there  is  some
confusion  between  trespass  offerings  and  sin  offerings

(see  LEVITICUS,  §  5)  ; the original  dis-
27 Trespass .  , .  •

~ .  v  5 tinction both in occasion and  ritual  is,

°'  however,  sufficiently  clear,  and  is  in
general  justly  observed  by  the  Jewish  tradition.  In  the
AsAm  the  victim  is  regularly  a  rani  (dyil,  ^x  Lev.  5  is/.
18  66  [025],  Nu.  58  Lev.  192i/".,  cp  EzralOig  ;  in  two
late  laws  ktbe's,  ^33,  Lev.  14 12  21  Nu.  6i2).6  The
animal,  according  to  the  Jewish  interpretation  of  Lev.
5  15,  must  lie  worth  at  least  two  shekels.  The  ritual  in
Lev.  1 1  ff.  prescribes  that  the  trespass  offering  shall  be
slain,  like  the  burnt  offering,  on  the  N.  side  of  the  great
altar  ;  "  the  blood  is  thrown  against  the  altar  precisely
as  in  the  burnt  offering  (§  26)  ;  when  the  animal  is  cut
up  certain  parts  are  taken  to  be  burned  upon  the  altar,
viz.,  the  fat  tail,  the  fat  that  covers  the  entrails
(omentum),  the  two  kidneys  with  the  fat  upon  them,
and  the  excrescence  on  the  liver.8  No  oblation  or
libation  accompanies  them.  The  flesh  of  the  animal
falls  to  the  priests  (according  to  Lev.  7  7,  to  the  officiat
ing  priest)  ;  it  is  '  very  holy,'  and  may  be  eaten  only
by  males  in  a  state  of  ceremonial  purity  and  in  a  holy
place.

In  the  ceremonies  for  the  purification  of  the  leper  prescribed
in  Lev.  14  9  fjf.,  which  have  a  striking — and  surely  not  accidental
— resemblance  to  the  consecration  of  priests  (Lev.  8),  the  he  lamb
with  whose  blood  the  leper's  right  ear,  thumb,  and  great  toe
were  anointed  is  called  an  fisain;  but  the  ritual — note  the
'  waving'  of  the  lamb,  the  accompaniment  of  oil,  the  anointing
with  blood  and  oil,  sprinkling  of  oil,  etc.  —  has  nothing  in
common  with  that  of  Lev.  7  (see  below,  §  28/>).

In  the  oldest  laws  about  the  AsAm  this  species  of
sacrifice  seems  to  have  been  required  only  in  expiation
of  the  unlawful  appropriation  of  the  property  of  another
(conversion),  or  of  the  tribute  due  to  Yahwe  (see  Lev.

1  A  man  might  have  his  sacrifice  offered  by  another ;  but  the
other  was  not  necessarily  a  priest.

2  The slaying  of  the paschal lambs by the priests  had a
particular  reason  in  the  urgent  need  of  expedition.

•*  The  hide  fell  to  the  priest  who  conducted  the  sacrifice  (Lev.
7 a);  a  different  rule  seems  to  have  prevailed  in  the  Herodian
temple  ;  see  Schiirer,  G/l'tty  2  248.

•*  E/>.  Art's/.,  eel.  Thackeray,  535^?,  admires  the  strength  as
well  as  the  skill  with  which  this  was  done.

5  Heb.  dsdin  (Cw'K),  35  TO  Trepi.  rrjs  irArjfi^ieAei'as,  17  7r\r)/u./u.6'Aeia,
Vg.  hostia.  pro  delicto. On  the  technical  meaning  of  the  term
see  col.  4204,  begin.

6  The  female  victim  in  Lev.  56  is  a  sin  offering. So  are  also
the  doves  and  the  offering  of  flour  allowed  to  be  substituted  by
the  poor,  Lev.  57-13  :  see  LEVITICUS,  §  8.

7  There  is  no  mention  of  the  imposition  of  hands.

8  The  same  parts  of  the  sheep  are  burned  when  it  is  a  sin
offering  or  a  peace  offering,  or  an  inauguration  sacrifice.

4203


SACRIFICE

61-7  [Siofl],  5i4-i6;  cp  Lev.  22i4-i6  and  Nu.  Ss-8).1
In  such  cases  restitution  of  the  property  with  the
addition  of  one-fifth  its  value  must  be  made,  and  a  ram
offered  r.'j  a  'trespass  offering."  The  term  AsAm  prob
ably  originally  signified  the  mulct  by  which  such  an
offence  was  punished  ;  the  application  to  the  sacrifice  is
secondary.  An  dsam  in  silver  is  named  in  2  K.  12 16
as  one  of  the  sources  of  the  priests'  income  ;  as  a
species  of  sacrifice  dsam  is  mentioned  first  in  Ezekiel,
but  in  a  way  which  implies  that  it  was  well  known.

In  the  redaction  of  the  laws  the  distinctive  character  of
the  dfdm  is  lost,  and  a  '  trespass  offering '  is  prescribed
in  many  cases  in  which  the  offence  is  of  a  different
nature  and  restitution  is  impossible  (see,  e.g. ,  Lev.
biff.  IT  ff-  192o_^);  the  confusion  with  the  sin  offering
remarked  above  thus  arises.

The  victims  required  by  the  laws  differ  in  different
cases — a  bullock,  he  goat,  she  goat,  ewe  lamb  or  kid,


283.  Sin
offering.


or a dove (see below). The animal is
2  brought  to  the  temple  court,  and  after  the


imposition  of  hands,  as  in  the  burnt  offering,
is  slain  by  the  offerer  (Lev.  429)  on  the  N.  side  of  the
altar.  The  distinctive  feature  of  the  ritual  is  that  the
priest,  instead  of  dashing  (p-\i)  the  blood  against  the
sides  of  the  altar  from  the  ground,  ascends  the  altar,
and,  dipping  his  finger  into  the  bason,  smears  (?ru,
'  put')  blood  upon  each  of  the  four  horns  of  the  altar
in  order  ;  the  rest  of  the  blood  is  poured  out  at  the
base  of  the  altar.  The  parts  offered  upon  the  altar  are
the  same  which  are  thus  consumed  in  the  peace  offerings
(§  29)  and  the  trespass  offering  (§  27).  The  flesh
belongs  to  the  priests  ;  it  is,  like  that  of  the  dsam,
'  very  holy,'  and  must  be  eaten  under  the  same  restric
tions.

The  holiness  of  the  hattdth  is  in  other  respects  more
intense  than  that  of  the  AsAm;  everything  which  comes
in  contact  with  the  flesh  becomes  'sacred'  (cp  Hag.
212),  that  is,  becomes  the  property  of  God — in  effect,
of  the  temple  ;  an  earthen  pot  in  which  the  flesh  is
boiled  must  be  broken,  a  metal  one  scoured  and  rinsed  ;
a  garment  upon  which  the  blood  has  accidentally  spirted
must  be  washed  in  a  '  holy'  place  (Lev.  627-29  [20-22]).
The  piacular  character  of  the  sacrifice  accounts  for  this
higher  degree  of  holiness.

In  offering  a  dove  as  a  sin  offering  the  priest  kills  it
with  his  thumb-nail  (as  in  the  burnt  offering),  but  does
not  completely  sever  the  head  from  the  body  ;  sprinkles
some  of  the  blood  upon  the  side  of  the  altar  (not  on  the
horns),  and  squeezes  out  the  rest  of  the  blood  at  the
base  ;  there  are  no  altar  portions  to  burn  ; 3  the  flesh
goes  to  the  priest  (Lev.  67-9  626  [19]).

In  cases  of  extreme  poverty  a  sin  offering  consisting
only  of  a  tenth  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour,  without  oil  or
frankincense,  was  accepted  ;  the  priest  burned  a  handful
of  it  upon  the  altar  and  took  the  rest  for  himself  as  in
other  oblations  (Lev.  611-13).

A  late  law  (Lev.  4  ;  see  LEVITICUS,  §  5)  establishes
a  sliding  scale  of  sin  offerings  according  to  the  station
of  the  offerer  :  the  common  man  has  to  bring  a  female
goat  or  sheep  (428  32),  as  was  doubtless  the  older  rule
(cp  Lev.  56  Nu.  1527). 4  If  too  poor  for  such  a  sacrifice,
he  is  allowed  to  substitute  two  doves  or  pigeons,  one
as  a  sin  offering  and  one  as  a  burnt  offering  ;  or,  in
extremity,  an  oblation  of  flour  (see  above)  ; 5  a  prince
(«':?:)  in  a  similar  case  must  offer  a  he  goat  ( Lev.  423/. ,
cp  Nu.  7i6,  etc.)  ;  the  'anointed  priest'  a  bullock  (see
below,  §  37 c].

The name '  sin offering ' suggests to the modern

1  Affinity  to  H  has  been  noted in  the  primary  stratum  of
these  toroth.

2  Heb.  hattdth  (nutsn),  05  TO  n-epl  rijs  a^apria?,  Vg.  hostia
pro  fcccato.

3  For  this  reason  a  second  bird  is  ordered  as  a  burnt  offering.
*  Female  victims  in  piacula,  see,  e.g.,  Schoemann,  2  226  ;  cp

also  Nu.  192  Dt.  213.

8  These  mitigations  are  not  understood  to  apply  to  those  sin
offerings  in  which  a  certain  victim  is  prescribed  for  all.

4204


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


reader  a  sacrifice  for  the  expiation  of  sin  in  our  sense
of  the  word,  and  it  is  often  imagined  that  the  Jewish
sacrificial  system  provides  and  requires  such  expiation
for  every  sin.  Both  these  notions  are  erroneous.  The
cases  in  which  a  hattdth  is  prescribed  fall  for  our  appre
hension  into  two  classes :  first,  the  ignorant  or  in
advertent  transgression  of  certain  prohibitions  ( '  taboos  '
— including  some  in  which  we  see  a  moral  character),
or  unintentional  failure  to  observe  the  prescriptions  of
the  law  (Nu.  1522 Jf.\  from  the  context  it  is  clear  that
religious  observances  are  primarily  meant)  ;  second,  in
purifications  of  various  kinds,  as  of  a  woman  after
childbirth,  a  leper,  etc. ,  or  of  things,  such  as  an  altar
(see  below,  §  45).  For  the  former  class  the  general
rule  in  the  Mishna  is  that  any  transgression  the  penalty
of  which,  if  wilful,  would  be  that  the  offender  be  cut  off,
requires,  if  comm.tted  in  .gnorance  or  through  inad
vertence,  a  hattath  (M.  Kirithoth  1  2)  ;  the  catalogue  of
these  transgressions  (t6.li)  ranges  from  incest  and
idolatry  to  eating  the  (internal)  fat  of  animals  and
imitating  the  composition  of  the  sacred  incense,  but
does  not  include  the  commonest  offences  against  morals.
In  the  second  class  (purifications)  fall  the  hattdth  of  a
woman  after  childbirth  (Lev.  126)  ;  of  a  man  who  has
suffered  from  gonorrhoea  (15 14 /I),  or  a  woman  from
menorrhagia  (1629  f. )  ',  of  a  Nazirite  accidentally
defiled  by  the  proximity  of  a  dead  body  (Nu.  6  io_/". ) — in
all  these  cases  the  victim  is  a  dove  or  pigeon  ;  of  a
leper  (Lev.  14io^;  a  ewe  lamb,  for  the  poor  a  dove  or
pigeon)  ; l  of  a  Nazirite  at  the  end  of  his  term  (Nu.  6 14  ;
ewe  lamb)  ;  a  man  defiled  by  contact  with  the  carcass
of  an  unclean  animal,  etc.  (Lev.  52/1,  ewe  lamb  or
she  goat,  v.  6).

In  connection  with  the  hattdth  brief  reference  may  be

made  to  certain  peculiar  ceremonies  of  similar  intent  and

OCA r> v effect. The  most  characteristic  of  these

ftoQ, tcClllltir - ,,  i i •* r *i  •  £:  c  »i

.  is  the  old  rite  for  the  purification  of  the

piacuia. leper  ^Ley  14  ^  .  a  clean  bird  js  kined

over  an  earthen  vessel  containing  fresh  water  in  such  a
manner  that  its  blood  mingles  with  the  water  ;  the  priest
dips  cedar  wood,  wool  dyed  crimson,  and  '  hyssop,'
together  with  the  living  bird,  into  the  vessel,  sprinkles
the  water  upon  the  leper,  and  lets  the  living  bird  fly
away.2  The  expiration  of  the  term  of  the  Nazirite's
vow  (Nu.  613-21)  is  celebrated  by  a  complete  series  of
sacrifices,  beginning  with  a  ewe  lamb  as  a  sin  offering,
a  he  lamb  as  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  ram  for  a  peace
offering  ;  the  oblation  consists  of  a  basket  of  different
kinds  of  cakes.  The  boiled  shoulder  (only  here)  of  the
ram  with  a  specimen  of  each  kind  of  cake  is  '  waved '
before  Yahwe  (see  §  zga],  and  then  belongs  to  the
priest.

The  Ordeal  of  Jealousy  has  been  described  elsewhere
(see  JEALOUSY,  ORDEAL  OF).

The  best  description  of  the  peace  offering  ritual  is  in
Lev.  3,  corresponding  to  that  of  the  burnt  offering  in  1  ;

29a  Peace  see  also  7l1-^  ^f-  ^^ff-<  Nu.  15i/:
,_'  .  .,  The  victim  may,  as  the  owner  pleases,  be
°  '  from  the  flock  or  the  herd,  either  male  or
female,  and  of  any  age  ;  it  is  required  only  that  it  be
without  blemish  (see  above,  §  26),  a  rule  that  is  relaxed
in  the  freewill  offering  alone.  The  presentation  and
imposition  of  hands  occur  precisely  as  in  the  burnt
offering  ;  but  whereas  'oldh,  hattdth,  and  dsdm  must  be
killed  on  the  N.  side  of  the  altar,  the  stldmlm  may  be
slain  in  any  part  of  the  court  —  obviously  because  at
certain  seasons  they  were  brought  in  such  numbers  that
the  space  on  the  N.  of  the  altar,  with  its  apparatus,  did
not  suffice.  The  slaughter  of  the  victim  and  the  dashing
of  the  blood  upon  the  altar,  again,  differ  in  no  respect
from  the  corresponding  acts  in  the  burnt  offering  or

1  The  later  law  ; cp  the  old purification, Lev.  14  1-8 ; see
below,  §  28  £,  LEVITICUS,  §  10.

2  See  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  §  16. On  the  later  ritual  (Lev.
14  i°ff-)  see  also  above,  §  27.

•*  On  the  term  silamlm  and  its  meaning  see  above,  §  n.

4205


the  trespass  offering  ;  the  sin  offering  alone  requires  a
peculiar  application  of  the  blood.  The  portions  con
sumed  upon  the  altar  are  the  fat  that  covers  the  entrails
(great  omentum)  and  all  the  fat  upon  the  entrails,  the
two  kidneys  with  the  mass  of  fat  upon  them,  and  the
excrescence  upon  the  liver,  which  is  to  be  separated
with  the  kidneys  ;  if  the  victim  was  a  sheep  there  was
added  to  these  the  whole  fat  tail,  removed  close  to  the
os  sacrum.

The precise meaning of the phrase 1221  hy  rOni'II, or

12271  mm1  (Lev.  8 16  9 19)  is  disputed.  (5  6  Ao/3os  6  erri  rov
rjn-aros,  6  Ao0b?  roil  rJTraTos,  Vg.  reticulum  jecoris,  etc.,  EV
'  the  caul  upon  the  liver.'1  According  to  Jewish  tradition  it
was  not  fat  (Tos.  Hullin  914)  ;  in  the  Mishna  it  is  called  V^sNi
'finger'  (M.  Tatind 4  3)  ;  Saad.  translates,  ziyadat  al-kabid,
an  Arabic  anatomical  term  which  etymologically  corresponds  to
Heb.  rnnV-  The  question  cannot  be  discussed  here  ;  the  view
of  the  present  writer  is  that  the  lobus  caudatus  is  meant,
which  lies  close  against  the  right  kidney.

Another  phrase  which  has  been  variously  rendered  is
nsyn  MttJ^,  Lev.  89.  The  nxy  is  not  the  'coccyx,' as  many
modern  writers  absurdly  say,  nor  the  vertebral  column,  but  the
os  sacrum.

These  parts  having  been  removed,  the  carcass  was
cut  up,  and  the  owner  proceeded  to  present  his  offering
to  God  by  taking  upon  his  two  hands  the  altar  portions
and  the  breast  and  '  waving'  them  before  Yahwe  (Lev.
729/1).  In  conformity  with  the  example  in  Ex.  2924,
the  priest,  in  later  times,  put  his  hands  beneath  those
of  the  offerer  and  moved  them  backward  and  forward,
up  and  down  ;  the  right  leg  was  also  added  to  the
breast  (cp  Lev.  9zi  Ex.  292/).  After  this  ceremony  the
priest  salted  the  altar  portions  and  burned  them  ;  the
breast  and  leg  went  to  the  priests  ;  the  rest  of  the  flesh
made  a  feast  for  the  maker  of  the  sacrifice  ;  women  as
well  as  men  might  partake  of  it,  if  only  they  were  in  a
state  of  ceremonial  purity  (Lev.  7 19-21).  (See  CLEAN
AND  UNCLEAN.  )  It  might  be  eaten  anywhere  in  Jeru
salem  on  the  day  on  which  it  was  offered  or  the  following
day  before  sunset ;  whatever  remained  after  that  time
must  be  burned  (Lev.  7i6-i8  19s-8).  One  species  of
slldmlm,  however,  the  toddh,  had  to  be  eaten  on  the
day  of  sacrifice  (see  §  29$  ;  also  §  390).

The  increase  of  the  tariff  in  V  32  appears  in  the  very  construc
tion  of  the  sentence.  In  Dt.  the  priest  receives  a  foreleg,  the
jowl,  and  the  stomach  (tripe)  ;  the  older  stratum  of  priestly  laws
gives  him  the  breast  (riTPI,  a-rrfivviov,  pcctusculum)  instead  (see
Ex.  29  26  Lev.  V  31)  ;  this  is  presented  to  God  ('  the  wave  breast ')
and  ceded  by  him  to  his  priest.  Lev.  "32  adds  the  right  leg  as
a  tax  (nonB)  paid  by  the  Israelites  to  the  priest  (cp  Nu.  620).
The  rules  of  Dt.  and  P  are  harmonised  in  the  Mishna  by  apply
ing  the  former  to  hullint,  the  latter  to  kodaslin  (M.  Hullin  10 1,
Sipkra  on  Lev.  i.e.).

The  priests'  portions  of  the  sPldmlm  were  not  subject
to  the  severe  restrictions  of  the  hattdth  and  the  dsdm  ;
the  flesh  might  be  eaten  by  the  priests  and  their  families,
including  slaves,  anywhere  in  Jerusalem.  The  same
rule  of  time  applies  to  the  priests'  part  of  the  flesh  as  to
the  offerers

The  ordinary  XlHamtm  described  in  the  last  section
were  offered  either  in  fulfilment  of  a  specific  vow  to
,  _,  .  sacrifice  such  and  such  victims  as  peace
290'  lnan  offerings  (»Mer),2  or  as  a  'freewill


offering.


offering' (iiMdbah}  —  that is to say, a


sacrifice  not  made  obligatory  by  the  law  or  by  the
owner's  engagement  (vow).  These  two  kinds  only  are
named  in  Dt.  12 17  Lev.  22  17  ff.  Nu.  I5i_f.  Lev.

7 11  ff-  (see  also  2229/1 )  joins  with  these  a  third  species
of  Slldmnn,  the  toddh  (AV  'sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,'
1  thank  offering  ';  on  the  name,  see  below,  begin,  of  next
col. ),  to  which  in  some  respects  different  rules  apply.

The  toddh  was  accompanied  by  a  prescribed  oblation
of  a  peculiar  kind,  in  which,  besides  various  kinds  of
sacrificial  cakes,  leavened  bread  is  included  (see  §  30).
The  flesh  of  the  victim  must  be  eaten  on  the  day  of  the
sacrifice,  'none  of  it  must  be  left  until  morning'  (7 15.

1  On  the  history  of  interpretation,  see  Dillmann-Ryssel  on
Lev.  3  4.

2  The  votive  offering  might  also  be  an  'olah,  §  26.

4206


SACRIFICE

2230  [H]).  The  cakes  and  bread  were  naturally  sub
jected  to  the  same  restriction  (ZfMAim,  36^).  The
limit  of  time  is  the  same  which  is  fixed  in  Ex.  '23 18  34  25
for  the  sacrifices  of  Yah  we 's  feast  (an),1  and  in  Ex.  12 10
(P)  for  the  Passover.  It  is  therefore  evidently  an  old
rule  for  at  least  some  sacrifices.

According  to  the  Talmud  (ZcbAh'ini,  jf>a) i  the  limit  applied  also
to  the  ilsilm  and  hatttltlt  the  flesh  of  which  was  eaten  by  the
priests,  and  to  the  peace  offerings  of  the  congregation  (Lev.
23  19)  and  the  peace  offering  of  the  Nazirite  (Nu.  6  17).

The  offering  of  leavened  bread,  also,  is  doubtless  an
old  custom  (see  above,  §  n)  ;  the  cakes  of  unleavened
bread  seem  to  be  an  accommodation  to  the  ordinary
rule,  Lev.  2  1 1.  There  seems,  therefore,  to  be  no  suffi
cient  reason  for  regarding  the  tdddh  as  a  late  develop
ment.

The  name  TVtn  signifies  '  praise,  thanksgiving '  (cp  &  Bvaia.
eui'eVews,  Lev.  "5,  \apn.oirvvi}';  2229,  Vg.  hostia  pro  gratiaruiit
actions) ;  its  use  in  connection  with  sacrifice  is  old  (Am.  4  5
rrYIH  j''-?'"'?  "ISp  [note  the  conjunction  with  nedilt>tih},  cp  Jer.
17  26  33  n),  and  the  law  in  Lev.  22  29  was  apparently  contained
in  H.  It  was  perhaps,  as  Jewish  scholars  explain,  a  sacrifice  of
gratitude  for  some  signal  manifestation  of  God's  goodness,  such
as  deliverance  from  a  great  peril.  The  apparent  conflict  in  the
laws  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  toddh  was  regarded
by  some  compilers  as  a  distinct  species  of  sacrifice,  by  others  as
a  variety  of  sclAmim.

To  the  class  of  the  SUl&mim  belongs  also  the  hagigAh,  to
which  a  bookof  the  Mishna  is  devoted — i.e. ,  the  sacrifices
made  by  pilgrims  at  the  feasts,  especially  in  the  spring.
The  animals  thus  offered  furnished  the  flesh  for  the
sacrificial  feasts  which  are  so  often  commended  in  Dt.
(e.g.  1'16/.,  1.1  f. ,  etc.);  they  might  be  purchased  with
the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  the  ('second')  tithe  (Dt.
1424^:),  or  be  taken  from  the  cattle  tithe  (Lev.  2732).
Besides  the  Jia^f^ifi  sMamim,  which  were  obligatory,
the  Rabbis  distinguish  saline  simhdh,  'joyous  sacrifices,'
at  the  feasts,  which  might  be  either  votive  or  freewill
offerings  ;  the  cattle  tithe  might  be  used  for  these  also.

The  oblation  (minhdh)  consists  of  flour  and  oil  either
merely  kneaded  in  a  mass  or  baked  or  fried  in  cakes  of

«  /-.vi  L-  o  various  kinds.  Salt  is  required  in  all,
30.  Oblations.2

and  a  portion  of  frankincense  accom
panies  many  of  these  oblations  ;  leaven,  and  honey,
which  in  other  countries  was  commonly  used  in  sacrifi
cial  cakes,  are  prohibited  (Lev.  2n).  The  minhdh  is
either  an  independent  offering — voluntary  or  prescribed
— or  the  obligatory  concomitant  of  certain  species  of
sacrifices.

The  rules  for  the  minhdh  as  an  offering  by  itself  are
found  in  Lev.  2,  which  corresponds  to  1  (burnt  offering),
and  3  (peace  offering).  The  following  varieties  are
recognised  :

(a)  The  oblation  of  fine  wheat  flour  (nV:,  cre/iuSaXtj),3
Lev.  2  1-3,  as  a  votive  or  freewill  offering.  The  quantity
is  for  the  giver  to  determine  ;  tradition  fixes  the  minimum
at  one  tenth  of  an  ephah.  For  each  tenth  of  an  ephah
one  log  of  oil  is  required.4  The  offerer  put  the  flour
and  part  of  the  oil  into  a  vessel  and  mixed  them  by
stirring,  transferred  the  mass  to  a  liturgical  vessel,
poured  the  rest  of  the  oil  over  it,  and  put  frankincense
on  top  of  it.5  The  priest  carries  it  to  the  altar,  takes
a  handful  of  the  mass  and  puts  it  in  another  vessel
with  all  the  frankincense,  ascends  the  altar,  puts  salt
upon  the  oblation,  and  places  it  upon  the  fire.  The
portion  thus  consumed  is  called  the  askdrdh  (Lev.  2 2,
'reminder,'  EV  'memorial');  the  rest  of  the  dough
goes  to  the  priests.  It  is  'very  holy,'  like  the  sin
offering  and  the  trespass  offering,  being  ceded  to  the
priesthood  from  the  '  offerings  of  Yah  we  made  by  fire  '  ;
it  may  not  be  leavened  (Lev.  6i6f.  [gf.]),  but  is  baked,

1  The  words  '  the  Passover '  in  the  second  passage  are  regarded
by  many  as  a  gloss.

2  See  above,  g  14.

3  On  the  preparation  of  the  wheat,  see  .!/.  MenahSth  65  ;  cp
FOOD,  §  i.

4  Preparation  of  the  oil,  M.  Mcnahfith  83.^  ;  see  On,.

5  This,  it  is  observed,  corresponds  to  the  slaying  and  dressing
of  a  victim  by  the  owner.

4207


SACRIFICE

and  eaten  by  the  males  of  priestly  families  within  the
temple  precincts.

(b)  The  oblation  of  cakes  baked  in  the  oven  (-nan),  Lev.
24 (see BAKEMEATS, BREAD). Of these the  law
describes  two  species — unleavened  cakes  (halloth]  mixed
with  oil,  and  unleavened  wafers  (rfklkim)  smeared  with
oil. Both  were  made  of  fine  flour  ; the  halluth  were
thicker  cakes  shortened  with  oil,  the  rlkikim  thin  w.itcr
bread  mixed  with  water  only  and  after  balcing  smeared
with  oil  (as  we  should  butter  it). These  cakes  were
baked  in  the  temple  ;  the  offerer  broke  them  into  pieces,
put  them  into  a  liturgical  vessel  with  the  quantum  of
frankincense, and  brought it to  the priest,  who  pro
ceeded  as  in  the  former  case.

(c)  Baked  on  a  griddle  or  fried  in  a  pan  (Lev.  2s/  iff.}.
Heb. rons.1 ^y nmp, ne'rno nn:0 respectively. The

utensils  are  described  in  SiphrA,  ati  loc.,  and  in  M.  Men,
5s  :  the  ma.hiiba.th  is  a  griddle  ;  the  marlicscth  a  somewhat  deep
pan  with  a  cover,  in  which  the  dough  fried  in  its  own  fat ;  see
COOKING,  §  7.

The  flour  and  part  of  the  oil  were  put  in  a  vessel  and
mixed  by  stirring,  the  mass  was  kneaded  with  lukewarm
water,  baked  on  the  griddle  or  fried  in  the  pan  as  the
offerer  chose  (or  as  he  had  vowed  to  do)  ;  the  cakes
were  then  broken  into  pieces,  the  rest  of  the  oil  poured
over  them  (Lev.  26),  and  frankincense  placed  upon
them.  The  priest  proceeded  as  in  the  previous  cases.
An  independent  oblation  is  prescribed  by  the
law  as  the  sin  offering  of  the  very  poor  (Lev.  611-13)  ;
it  consisted  of  one  tenth  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour  (sttteth),
without  oil  or  frankincense.  The  priest  burned  a  hand
ful  of  it  on  the  altar  as  an  azkardh,  and  took  the  rest
for  himself.  A  similar  offering  of  coarse  barley

meal,  without  oil  or  frankincense,  is  required  in  the
peculiar  ritual  of  the  ordeal  of  jealousy,  Nu.  5  nff.  (see
JEALOUSY,  ORDEAL  OF).  The  oblation  at  the  installa
tion  of  priests  and  the  daily  oblation  of  the  high  priest
will  be  treated  below  under  sacra  publica  (§  39#).

The  general  rule  for  the  oblation  accompanying
private  sacrifices  is  laid  down  in  Nu.  15i-i6.  Every
victim  from  the  flock  or  the  herd,1  offered  as  'oldh  or
ztbah,  whether  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow,  as  a  freewill
offering,  or  at  the  feasts,  must  be  accompanied  by  an
oblation  proportioned  to  the  value  of  the  animal :  2  with
a  lamb  or  kid,  one  tenth  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour
mixed  with  one  fourth  of  a  hin  of  oil  ;  with  a  ram,  two
tenths  of  flour,  one  third  of  a  hin  of  oil ;  with  neat
cattle,  three  tenths  of  flour  and  one  half  a  hin  of  oil  for
each  animal.  The  preparation  and  offering  of  the
oblation  are  the  same  as  in  the  independent  oblation  of
fine  flour  (above,  a).

The  following  oblations  are  prescribed  as  the  accom
paniment  of  certain  sacrifices  of  purification  :
(a)  In  the  (secondary)  ritual  for  the  purification  of  the
lepers  (Lev.  \±\o  ff.  21  ft),  with  the  animals  to  be
offered,  are  required  three  tenths  of  an  ephah  of  fine
flour  mixed  with  oil  and  one  log  of  oil  (i'.  10)  ;  in  case  of
poverty  the  flour  may  be  reduced  to  one  tenth,  but  the
quantity  of  oil  remains  the  same  (v.  21).  (6)  The

Nazirite,  on  the  completion  of  his  vow  (Nu.  615),  has  to
bring, with  his  three  victims,  a  basket  of  unleavened  bread
of  both  kinds  which  are  baked  in  the  oven  (viz.  cakes
mixed  with  oil  and  wafers  smeared  with  oil ;  above,  b  ;
according  to  the  Mishna,  ten  of  each  variety),  '  and
their  [the  victims']  oblation  and  libation' — i.e. ,  as
understood  by  Jewish  tradition,  in  addition  to  the  cakes,
the  oblation  of  fine  flour  and  oil  that  according  to  rule
should  accompany  every  burnt  offering  and  peace
offering.3  The  purification  of  a  woman  after

childbirth  required  a  lamb  as  a  burnt  offering  ( Lev.  126) ;
an  oblation  is  not  named  in  the  law,  but  the  case  was
brought  under  the  general  rule  of  Nu.  153-5.

1  Birds  are  not  offered  on  the  occasions  specified,  and  there
fore  are  not  mentioned  in  the  rule.

-  Sin  offerings  and  trespass  offerings  have  no  oblations.  The
Mishna  makes  an  exception  of  the  sin  offering  and  trespass
offering  of  the  leper,  Lev.  14  10  (  M.  Mendhoth  96).

3  This  is  perhaps  only  an  exegetical  oblation.

4208


SACRIFICE

Nu.  15i-i6 prescribes  with  the  oblation,  and  in  the

same  cases,  a  libation  of  wine  as  the  obligatory  accom-

T  .. ,  l  paniinent of private burnt offerings

3ia.  Libations. and  sacrifices  . with  a  lamb  or  kid

one  fourth  of  a  hin  ;  with  a  ram,  one  third  ;  with  a
victim  from  the  herd,  one  half.  No  libation  is  made
with  any  oblation  offered  by  itself  without  the  sacrifice
of  an  animal  (see  Lev.  2  6  19-23  [12-16]  Nu.  015);  nor
with  sin  offerings  or  trespass  offerings,  for  the  same
reason  that  these  sacrifices  have  no  oblation  ;  -  nor
with  birds.  A  libation  accompanies  the  peace  offering
at  the  release  of  the  Nazirite's  vow  (Nu.  615  17) ;  it  is
not  named  with  the  burnt  offering  and  oblation  of
the  cleansed  leper  (Lev.  14 10  20),  nor  with  that  of  the
fucrpcra  (Lev.  126/. ).  In  these  cases  also  Jewish
authorities  apply  the  rule  in  Nu.  15 iff.  No  ritual
directions  for  the  libation  are  found  in  the  OT  ;  see
below,  §  35.

Nothing  is  said  in  the  Pentateuch  about  an  independent
libation  ;  but  the  Mishna  recognises  a  votive  offering  or
freewill  offering  of  wine  (.17.  MUnahoth  12s,  cp  13s),
and  there  is  other  evidence  that  such  libations  were
made  (cp  Jubilees  7s);  the  quantity  is  fixed  at  three
logs,  all  of  which  was  thrown  upon  the  fire  (Zffidkim
gift,  cp  Jubilees,  I.e. ).  A  votive  offering  or

freewill  offering  of  oil  (without  flour)  is  also  recognised
by  the  Rabbis,  though  R.  'Akiba  does  not  allow  it
(M.  7Jbdhim  108)  ;  the  quantity  should  be  not  less
than  one  log  ;  a  handful  was  thrown  upon  the  fire,  the
rest  went  to  the  priests  for  food.

Frankincense  (see  INCENSE,  §  if.)  is  a  necessary
accompaniment  of  every  private  oblation  (Lev.  2 1  f.

,,(,  prankin  6l4^'  ^^'  excePl  of  the  P-™?61''3  sin
6LO.  jrranKin-  offering  of  fine  flour  and  jn  the  ordeal

:ense  ,  sa . of  jealousy  ;  the  offering  of  first-fruits  of

grain— roast  ears,  crushed  corn — also  requires  it  (Lev.
SM/  ).  The  quantity  was  fixed  :  one  handful  for  every
mhi/idh,  whether  great  or  small.  The  frankincense
was  put  on  the  dough  of  fine  flour  mixed  with  oil,  or
the  broken  pieces  of  the  sacrificial  cakes,  in  a  liturgical
vessel,  arid,  with  a  handful  of  the  dough  or  the  cakes,
was  thrown  upon  the  fire  on  the  great  altar  and  con
sumed.  Frankincense  might  also  be  given  by  itself  as
a  votive  or  freewill  offering.  Salt  was  used

with  all  sacrifices  and  oblations  (Lev.  2 13,  cp  Ezek.
4824  Mk.  949,  Jos.  Ani.m.  9i,  Mlnd/wth  20  a).  See
below,  §  36

The  custom  of offering  a  daily  burnt  offering and

oblation probably  originated  in the  royal temples of

_  judah  and  Israel. In  the  ninth  cen-

hl^0^ tury  l*le  burnt  offering  seems  to  have

P  , ., ' been  in  the  morning  and  the  oblation

holorfaifsts  in  the  evenin§  (above-  §  J9)-  Ezekiel
(46 13-15)  provides  for  both  holocaust
and  oblation  in  the  morning  only.  The  rule  in  Nu.
28 1-8  Ex.  2938-42  requires  holocaust  and  oblation  both
morning  and  evening,  and  such  was  the  practice  of
later  times  (Dan.  8 11-14).  Similar  sacrifices  once  or
twice  daily  were  frequent  in  antiquity  ;  Nebuchad
rezzar,  e.g. ,  is  said  to  have  offered  six  lambs  daily  ;
at  Hierapolis  there  were  regular  sacrifices  morning
and  evening,  etc.

The  technical  name  in  Hebrew  is  TCnri  (nj?j?,  nmp),  <&
oAoKaurw^a  ei/8eA.exicr|aoG,  Vg.  Iwlocaustitm  sempiternum,  liolo-
ca.iistuinjv.ge.

The  victims  were  yearling  lambs,  perfect  males  ;  the
accompanying  oblation  for  each  consisted  of  one  tenth
of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour  mixed  with  one  fourth  of  a
hin  of  fine  oil  ;  the  libation  was  one  fourth  of  a  hm  of
wine.  The  morning  sacrifice  was  offered  between  dawn
and  sunrise  (.17.  Tdmid  82)  ;  the  evening  sacrifice,
'  between  the  two  evenings'  (Ex.2939;  see  DAY,  §  2)
— i.e. ,  perhaps  originally  between  sunset  and  dark;

*  Heb. "JD3,  ©  OTTOI/ST;.

2  They  are  not  meant  to  be  pulckra.

4200


SACRIFICE

in  the  Herodian  temple,  however,  the  offering  was,  on
ordinary  days,  between  three  and  four  o'clock  in  the
afternoon  (M.  Pfsd/iim5i)  and  on  the  fourteenth  of
Nisan  even  earlier,  in  order  to  give  time  for  the  slaughter
of  the  paschal  lambs  after  the  Tamld.  The

lambs  for  the  daily  holocaust,  after  having  been  duly
examined,  were  kept  (never  less  than  six  at  a  time)  in  a
room  in  the  temple,  set  apart  for  this  purpose,  in  the
NW.  corner  of  the  priests'  court  (M.  Middoth  16)  ;
they  had  to  be  in  readiness  four  days  before  they  were
offered  ;  a  second  inspection  preceded  the  slaughter.1
No  peculiarities  in  the  ritual  of  these  sacrifices  are  in
dicated  in  the  laws  ;  in  the  Mishna  the  chief  difference
between  them  and  private  burnt  offerings  (above,  §  26)
is  the  participation  of  a  greater  number  of  priests.
In  addition  to  the  proper  oblation  for  the  holocaust,
there  was  offered  at  the  same  time  the  high  priest's
daily  oblation  of  cakes  (Lev.  619-23  [12-16]),  made  of
one  tenth  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour  baked  on  a  griddle,
broken  in  pieces,  and  soaked  in  oil.  These  were  made
fresh  every  morning  in  a  special  chamber  in  the  temple  ;
one  half  was  offered  in  the  morning,  half  in  the  evening.

In  the  Herodian  temple  the  daily  burnt  offering  formed  part
of  a  complex  and  minutely  regulated  service  of  which  only  a
brief  outline  can  be  given  here.

The  regular  duties  of  the  temple  service  were  distributed  daily
among  the  members  of  the  course  of  priests  on  duty  by  a  method
of  counting  out.  Four  such  drawings  were  held  in  succession
in  the  early  morning  ;  the  first  designated  the  priest  who  should
have  charge  of  the  removal  of  the  ashes  from  the  great  altar  and
the  rebuilding  of  two  fires  upon  it — the  third  fire  was  kept  burn
ing  night  and  day.  By  the  second  drawing  thirteen  priests  were
chosen  for  different  specified  parts  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  lamb
and  the  offering  of  the  oblations,  and  for  the  cleansing  of  the  altar
of  incense  and  the  lamps ;  the  third,  to  which  only  those  were
admitted  who  had  not  previously  enjoyed  the  honour,  deter
mined  who  should  burn  the  incense  in  the  temple  ;  the  fourth,
who  should  put  the  parts  of  the  victim  upon  the  fire.  As  soon
as  dawn  lighted  up  the  E.,  a  lamb  was  taken  from  the  pen,
inspected  by  torchlight,  given  a  drink  of  water,  and  led  to  the
place  of  slaughter  on  the  N.  side  of  the  altar.  The  two  priests
whose  duty  called  them  into  the  temple,  opened  the  great  door
of  the  temple,  gathered  into  a  vessel  the  ashes  from  the  altar  of
incense,  and  trimmed  and  refilled  the  lamps,  removing  the  old
wicks  and  oil.  The  lamb  was  laid  on  the  pavement  with  its
head  toward  the  S.,  its  face  to  the  W.  (i.e.,  toward  the  temple),
and  at  the  sound  of  the  opening  door  the  sacrificing  priest  slew
it ;  a  second  caught  the  blood  in  a  vessel,  carried  it  to  the  NE.
corner  of  the  great  altar,  and  standing  on  the  ground  threw
some  of  the  blood  against  the  angle  so  that  it  spread  on  both
faces,  repeated  the  ceremony  at  the  SW.  corner,  and  poured
out  the  rest  of  the  blood  at  the  base  of  the  altar  on  the  S.  side,
where  it  was  carried  off  by  a  drain.  The  carcass  was  then
hung  up,  skinned,  and  dissected  by  the  sacrificing  priest  in  a
particular  manner  and  order,  and  the  inwards  cleansed  and
washed.  Six  priests,  standing  in  order  before  him,  received  the
several  parts  of  the  victim  as  they  were  separated  ;  three  others
held  respectively  the  oblation  of  the  burnt  offering,  the  high
priest's  oblation  of  cakes,  and  the  wine  for  the  libation.  They
now  carried  all  these  to  the  ramp  of  the  altar,  laid  them  down
in  order  less  than  half  way  up  the  slope,  salted  them,  and
descended  to  the  marble  hall  (n'nri  nsti'1?)  for  the  morning
prayers.  The  offering  of  incense  on  the  inner  altar  followed,  as
described  under  INCENSE,  §  7.  After  this  the  priests  took  their
stand  on  the  steps  of  the  prostyle,  those  who  were  for  the  day
the  ministers  of  the  temple  at  the  S.  end  with  the  vessels  in
their  hands.  The  priest  to  whose  lot  this  service  had  fallen
carried  the  parts  of  the  victim  one  by  one  up  to  the  top  of  the
altar  and  threw  them  upon  the  great  fire  ;  the  priests  upon  the
steps  of  the  temple  intoned  the  benediction  ;  the  altar  priest
offered  the  oblation,  the  high  priest's  sacrificial  cakes,  and  last
of  all  the  wine.  At  the  moment  of  the  libation,  upon  a  signal
from  the  master  of  ceremonies,  the  cymbals  clashed,  two  priests
gave  a  blast  upon  their  trumpets,  and  the  chorus  of  Levites  set
up  the  song  of  the  day  ;  when  they  paused,  the  trumpeters  blew
another  blast,  and  all  who  were  in  the  court  prostrated  them
selves — nine  times  in  all.

The  same  ceremonies  were  repeated  in  the  evening  by  the
same  priests — no  fresh  drawings  were  held— except  the  removal
of  the  ashes  from  the  great  altar  and  the  renewing  of  the  fires,
which  took  place  only  in  the  morning.

As  the  daily  burnt  offering  was  made  for  the  people,
the  people  was  represented  at  it  each  morning  and
evening  by  a  deputation  appointed  for  the  purpose  (the
anse  ha-maamdd,  called  also  anse  kol-Isrd'cl}.^  There

1  On  the  blemishes  which  made  them  unfit,  see  above,  §  26.

2  M.  Ta'anlth  4  2,  Tos.  Ta'anith  42f. A  similar  delegation
of  twelve  laymen  appears  at  the  Samaritan  Passover  as  cele
brated  in  our  own  time  ;  see  Petermann,  Reisen,  \  236.

4210


SACRIFICE

was  such  a  delegation  of  the  laity  for  each  of  the  twenty-
four  weekly  courses  of  priests.  Any  members  of  a
deputation  who  were  not  present  with  their  fellows  in
the  temple  held  a  special  synagogue  service  at  home.
The  age  of  this  institution  is  not  known  ;  it  long  out
lived  the  destruction  of  the  temple.1

In  addition  to  the  daily  burnt  offerings  more  numerous

sacrifices  were  made  on  the  sabbaths  and  new  moons,

.  ,  ,.  . .  the  first  of  the  seventh  month  (civil  new

LC  *i! j voar),  the  three  season  feasts,  and  the

sabbaths  and  >Day> Q{  Atonement. Nu.  28/ ,  whlch

estivais. fixes the kmd and number  of the

victims  for  these  occasions,  is  late  (see  NUMBKRS,  §
10)  ;  but  the  multiplication  of  public  as  well  as  private
sacrifices  at  festivals  is  common,  and  doubtless  ancient
among  the  Israelites  as  well  as  other  peoples.3

On  the  Sabbath  the  additional  (pnusapH)  sacrifice  was  a  burnt
offering  of  two  yearling  he  lambs,  with  their  oblation  and
libation  according  to  rule  (two  tenths  of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour
with  one  half  a  bin  of  oil,  and  half  a  hfn  of  wine  ;  cp  Ex.  21*40
Nu.  154yC  etc.).  The  sacrifice — like  all  the  additional  sacrifices
— was  made  immediately  after  the  morning  holocaust,  by  the
same  priests,  and  with  the  same  rites.  The  priests  of  the  out
going  course  pronounced  at  the  proper  place  an  additional
benediction  on  those  of  the  incoming  course  (M.  Tdmld  5  i).
For  the  new  moon  are  prescribed  (Nu.  28  11-15)  *wo  bullocks,  a
ram,  and  seven  yearling  he  lambs  as  burnt  offerings,  with  the
oblation  and  libation  demanded  for  each  by  the  rule  in  Nu.
15i-i2,  with  the  regular  ritual;  further,  a  he  goat  as  a  sin
offering  for  the  people  (below,  §  37).  At  the  Passover,  from  the
first  (fifteenth  of  Nisan)  to  the  seventh  day  of  the  feast  inclusive,
were  offered  daily  the  same  additional  victims  as  on  the  new
moon  (Nu.  28  19-24)  ;  on  the  second  day  (sixteenth  of  Nisan),*
besides  these,  one  he  lamb  as  a  burnt  offering  in  connection
with  the  wave  sheaf  (Lev.  23  10-13  ;  see  below,  §34^).  At  Pente
cost,  the  same  additional  offerings  as  on  the  first  of  the  month,
the  oblation  from  the  new  flour  ("'  the  two  loaves,'  Lev.  23  15-21  ;
see  §34^),  and  with  this  bread,  one  bullock,  two  rams,  and
seven  he  lambs  as  burnt  offerings  and  a  he  goat  as  a  sin  offer
ing  ;5  finally,  two  he  lambs  as  peace  offerings  of  the  people  (see
below,  §  40).

The  first  of  the  seventh  month,  the  civil  new  year,  was  cele
brated  by  the  so-called  Feast  of  Trumpets.  Its  sacrifices  are,
first,  the  daily  holocaust ;  second,  the  offerings  for  the  new  moon  ;
and  third,  the  sacrifices  proper  to  the  season — viz.,  one  bullock,
one  ram,  and  seven  yearling  he  lambs  as  burnt  offerings,  with
their  oblations,  and  a  he  goat  for  a  sin  offering  (Nu.  2!>  1-6).
If  the  day  was  also  a  sabbath,  the  additional  victims  for  the
sabbath  were  offered  directly  after  the  daily  sacrifice.  The
order  of  victims  in  each  is — bullocks,  rams,  lambs,  goats  ;  which
is  to  be  noted,  because  by  general  rule  the  sin  offering  should
precede  burnt  offerings.  The  additional  offerings  of  the  Day  of
Atonement  (loth  of  the  seventh  month)  are  the  same  as  those
of  the  New  Year's  day  (Nu.  297-11)  ;  the  piacular  sacrifices  of
Lev.  10  are  distinct  (see  below,  §  37).  At  Tabernacles,  the
greatest  feast  of  the  year,  the  additional  sacrifices  are  multiplied
prodigiously  (Nu.  29  12 Jf.).  They  begin  on  the  first  day  (i5th)
with  thirteen  bullocks,  two  rams,  and  fourteen  lambs  as  burnt
offerings,  with  their  respective  oblations  and  libations  severally,
and  a  he  g\jat  as  a  sin  offering.  On  the  succeeding  days  the
number  of  bullocks  diminishes  by  one  each  day,  so  that  on  the
seventh  day  there  are  seven  bullocks,  the  other  victims  remain
ing  throughout  the  same.  On  the  eighth  day  the  sacrifice  con
sists  of  one  bullock,  one  rain,  and  seven  he  lambs  as  a  burnt
offering  with  their  oblations  and  libations,  and  a  he  goat  as  a
sin  offering  (Nu.  29  35-38).  At  this  feast  all  the  twenty-four
courses  of  priests  took  part,  in  a  fixed  order  (M.  Sukkahb6),
A  ceremony  peculiar  to  Tabernacles  was  the  libation  of  water  ;
see  below,  §  35.

Ex.  25  30  merely  prescribes  that  bread  shall  always
stand  on  the  table  before  Yahwe  ;  more  particular

•?4?  Shewbread6  directions are Siven in I-ev.  245-9

read' (see  LKVITICUS.  §  21). The  bread

was  made  of  fine  flour,  two  tenths  of  an  ephah  of  which

was  required  for  each  loaf. Twelve  such  loaves  were

1  See  Hamburger,  RE  2  887  f.

2  See  above,  §  21  (Ezekiel).

3  See,  e.g.,  for  the  Egyptians,  Erman,  Aegypten,  375./C ;  for
the  Greeks,  Stengel,  Kultusaltertiimcrft),  97.

*  See  Now.  HA  2  176^  ;  PASSOVER,  §  15.

5  This  duplication  results  from  taking  the  laws  in  Nu.  28  and
Lev.  23  as  independent  of  each  other  ;  see  R.  "Akiba  in  Klcnd-
hcith  45 b. It  is  possible  that  the  practice  was  not  so  lavish  as
this  exegesis  ;  cp  R.  Tarphon,  I.e.

6  See  above,  §  14. Heb.  C'JSri  cnS  (iS.  21e[7]  Ex.  25  30
35  13  3936),  cp  Babylonian  akal pdni;  also  n:nj?8rt 7,  from  its
arrangement  on  the  table  (i  Ch.  9  32  23  29  Neh.  10  34)  ;  TCRrt  >(7,
Nu.  47. ©  usually  aproi  TTJS  7rpo0e'<7«a>«  (so  in  NT),  Vg.  fanes
propositionis.

4211


4ft.  Peculiar
oblations.


SACRIFICE

baked  and  set  upon  the  table  in  two  piles  of  six  each  ;
frankincense  in  golden  urns  stood  beside  them.  The
bread  was  changed  every  sabbath  ;  the  loaves  that  were
removed  were  eaten  by  the  priests  within  the  precincts
('  in  a  holy  place  ').

Additional  details  are  derived  from  Josephus  and  the  Mishna.  1
The  loaves  were  unleavened  ;  the  dough  was  mixed  with  water
only  —  not,  like  other  oblations,  with  oil.  They  were,  as  we
should  infer  from  the  quantity  of  flour,  of  considerable  size  ;
according  to  the  Mishna,  shaped  like  a  brick,  ten  handbreadths
long,  five  wide,  and  seven  fingers  thick.  In  the  Chronicler's  time
the  loaves  were  made  by  a  family  of  Kohathite  Levites  (i  Ch.
9  32)  ;  in  the  first  century  of  our  era  by  a  family  of  priests  named
Garmo,  with  whom  the  art  was  a  secret.2  They  were  moulded
in  forms,  and  baked  in  a  chamber  on  the  N.  side  of  the  temple
court.  The  loaves  were  piled  on  two  salvers,  six  on  each.  On
the  sabbath  four  priests  of  the  outgoing  course  entered  the
temple  to  remove  the  old  loaves  and  frankincense,  followed  by
four  of  the  new  course,  two  bearing  the  salvers  with  the  new
bread,  and  two  the  urns  of  fresh  frankincense.  The  change  was
so  effected  that  there  was  no  moment  when  there  was  not  bread
upon  the  table.  The  last  week's  oblation  was  carried  out,  the
frankincense  burned  on  the  great  altar  (at  the  close  of  the
additional  sacrifices  of  the  sabbath),  and  the  loaves  equally
divided  between  the  incoming  and  the  outgoing  course  of
priests  ;  each  course  gave  some  of  its  loaves  to  the  high  priest.

Ex.  25  29  provides  vessels  for  wine  to  stand  upon  the  table,  as
well  as  for  the  bread  and  the  frankincense  ;  according  to  i  Mace.
1  22,  Antiochus  Epiphanes  carried  off  with  the  table  its  flagons
and  chalices.3  It  is  not  likely  that  empty  cups  were  set  before
Yahwe  ;  but  there  is  no  reference  in  the  OT  to  the  presentation
of  wine  with  the  shewbread,  and  neither  Josephus  nor  the
Mishna  mentions  it.*  See  §  35.

Two  interesting  survivals  of  ancient  agricultural  rites
are  the  presentation  of  the  sheaf  of  barley  at  the  Pass-

°ver  a"d  of  the  two  loaves  at  Pentecost

<  !f  '  2^-'4  I,5;2!-:  -f  r  LEVITIC^'  .«
20). 1  he  old  torah  (incorporated  in

H  )  required  in  the  case  of  the  Passover  that  at  the  be
ginning  of  harvest  a  first-fruit  sheaf  of  barley  should  be
brought  to  the  priest  (at  the  local  holy  place),  who  should
wave  it  before  Yahwe  ;  until  this  has  been  done  the  new
crop  may  not  be  used  in  any  way  —  in  bread,  parched
corn,  or  grits  (see  above,  §  14).  When  this  rite  was
made  part  of  the  public  cultus  of  the  temple  in  Jerusalem
its  character  was  greatly  changed.  The  reaping  of  the
barley  (on  the  night  preceding  the  sixteenth  of  Xisan)
became  a  liturgical  act  ;  the  sheaf  itself  was  not  waved,
but  the  grain  was  threshed,  winnowed,  cleansed,
roasted,  ground,  sifted,  etc.  ,  in  the  temple  precincts,
mixed  with  oil,  like  the  ordinary  mhihah,  '  waved,'  and
burnt.  The  accompanying  sacrifice  was  a  yearling
lamb  as  a  burnt  offering  (Lev.  23  12  f.  ).

The  two  leavened  loaves  of  new  wheat  flour  at
Pentecost  (§  14)  were  also  originally  a  local  offering  ;
in  later  times  they  were  presented  in  the  temple  for  the
whole  people.  The  preparation  of  the  fine  flour,  and
the  leavening  and  baking  of  the  loaves,  are  minutely
regulated.  Two  yearling  lambs  are  presented  with
the  loaves,  waved  before  Yahwe,  and  offered  as  peace
offerings  (§  40).  The  bread  does  not  come  upon  the
altar,  but  is  eaten  by  the  priests.  The  additional  burnt
offerings  on  this  day  have  been  enumerated  above

(§  33);

A  libation  of  wine  and  an  oblation  accompany  every
public  burnt  offering:  the  daily  holocaust  (  Nu.  28jf.

35.  Libations'  E*-294°^):  ^e  additional  burnt
offerings  on  sabbaths,  new  moons,
and  festivals  (Lev.  281837  Nu.  28914  29i8etc.  3339);
the  lamb  offered  with  the  first  sheaf  (Lev.  2813)  ;  and
the  bullock  of  burnt  offering  sacrificed  with  the  sin
offering  of  the  congregation  (Nu.  1624).  The  manner
of  offering  wine  is  referred  to  only  in  Nu.  287  :  'in  the
holy  place  (cnpa,  iv  r£  ayiif>)  offer  a  libation  of  strong
drink  (nae?,  criicfpa)  to  Yahwe.

1  Ant.  iii.  66,  10  7. See  esp.  M.  MenahOth  \iff.

2  M. Yoma 3n; M.  Shckallnt  5i;'/er.  S/trfallnt  tfd,
etc. On  the  special  art  of  baking  sacrificial  cakes  see  Athenjeus,
3  lisa.

3  See  also  Ep.  Arist.,  ed.  Thackeray,  532/T

*  Ex.  30  9  prohibits  a  libation  on  the  inner  altar.
8  See  above,  §§  14  and  313.


SACRIFICE

The  passage  is  difficult ;  sekar  is  not  elsewhere  prescribed  for
libations  ;  if  '  old  wine  '  (Tg.)  or  '  unmixed  wine  '  is  meant  it  is
hard  to  see  why  the  unusual  term  should  be  used  (cp  WINE)  ;
equally  strange  is  a  libation  in  the  temple  itself,  yet  the  words
admit  no  other  natural  explanation.

The  oblation,  of  which  the  libation  is  a  standing
accessory,  was  offered  on  the  great  altar,  and  there,
undoubtedly,  the  libation  accompanying  the  burnt  offer
ings  also  was  made.  Evidence  that  this  was  the  custom
is  given  by  Sirach  ( 50  15  [i6/.  ])  :  the  high  priest  '  stretched
forth  his  hand  to  the  chalice  and  made  a  libation  of  the
blood  of  the  grape  ;  he  poured  it  out  at  the  base  of  the
altar,  a  fragrance  well  pleasing  to  the  Most  High  the
universal  king"  ;  so  also  Jos.  Ant.  iii94.  In  the  same
way  the  rite  is  described  by  Maimonides. J  .17.  Mtnd-
holh  86  names  some  places  where  the  best  wine  for  the
temple  service  was  produced,  and  forbids  wine  grown
or  prepared  under  certain  conditions.  It  must  be  pure
natural  wine,  not  sweetened,  smoked,  or  boiled.

One  of  the  most  striking  ceremonies  of  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles  was  the  libation  of  water  which  was  made
every  morning  during  the  seven  days  of  the  feast  at  the
same  time  as  the  libation  of  wine  accompanying  the
morning  holocaust.2  The  water  was  carried  up  from
Siloam  through  the  water-gate,  and  poured  into  a  basin
on  the  top  of  the  altar  at  the  SW.  corner,  the  wine
being  poured  into  another.  The  bringing  of  the  water
into  the  precincts  was  accompanied  by  trumpet-blasts
and  loud  jubilation.3

The  oblation  in  the  sacra  publica  was  not  accom
panied,  as  was  that  of  individuals  (§  31  b],  by  a  portion
-fi  j  .of  frankincense  burned  on  the  great  altar.

,.  ''In  place  of  this,  a  costly  compound  in
cense  was  burned  on  the  small  altar  in
the  temple  at  the  morning  and  the  evening  sacrifice  (see
INCENSE,  §  6/.).  Urns  of  frankincense  stood  on  the
table  of  shewbread  ;  the  contents  were  removed  every
sabbath  and  burned  on  the  outer  altar  (above,  §  34  a).
Salt  was  required  with  all  public  as  well  as  all  private
offerings  ;  even  the  compound  incense  contained  salt.
Large  quantities  of  salt  were  consumed  in  the  temple  ;
Josephus  (Ant.  xii.  83)  records  that  Antiochus  the  Great
ordered  375  medimni  (annually)  to  be  delivered  to  the
Jews  for  the  maintenance  of  the  worship.4  Rock  salt
('  Sodom  salt  ')  is  specified  in  the  formula  for  the  com
pounding  of  incense,  and  was  doubtless  used  for  other
purposes  (see  SALT,  §  2).

(a)  Stated sin offerings at new  moons and feasts.
With  the  additional  burnt  offerings  (Xu.  28  /  ;  above,

„ .. §  33)  it  is  ordered  that  one  he  goat  (vyl")

ttiacula  s'la^  be  sacr'^ced  as  a  sm  offering  on
the  new  moon,  on  each  of  the  seven  days
of  Unleavened  Bread,  at  Pentecost,5  on  the  first  of  the
seventh  month,  on  the  tenth  of  the  same  month,  on  the
seven  days  of  Tabernacles,  and  on  the  closing  (eighth)
day  of  that  festival.  No  special  rules  for  these  sin
offerings  are  given  in  the  Pentateuch  ;  the  ritual  is
doubtless  the  same  as  that  described  in  Lev.  9 15,  cp
8-1 1  ;  that  is,  identical  with  that  of  the  private  sin
offering  (§  2811),  except  that  there  is  no  imposition  of
hands  (M.  Mlndhoth  9 7);  the  flesh  was  eaten  by  the
priests  under  the  same  restrictions  as  that  of  the  private
sin  offering.6

(b]  The  sin  offerings  of  the  Day  of  Atonement. Nu.

1  Ma'ase  hak-korbanoth,  2i.  R.  Abraham  b.  David,  on  the
contrary,  holds  that  the  wine — as  at  the  water  libation  at  Taber
nacles — was  poured  into  a  basin  on  the  top  of  the  altar,  whence
It  was  carried  off  by  a  drain.  This  difference  need  not  much
concern  us.

-  .!/.  Sukkiih  4 9,  5i;  Sukkdh  51  at,  cp  42^,  44^.  ^&ab;
J*r.  Sufckah  55^  ;  Ta'anith  3a  ;  Kos/i  ha-Shandh  i6a,  etc.

3  For  an  explanation  of  the  rite  see  NATURE  WORSHIP,  §  4.

4  Cp  Ezra  69  722,  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  2  3.

5  The  sin  offering  of  Lev.  23  19  is  thought  by  most  critics  to
bean  interpolation  from  Nu.  2827^;  the lews,  however,  de
cide  that  it  was  distinct  from  that. See  M.  Mcnahtth  4  2  :  Jos.
Ant.  iii.  106.

6  See  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  10s. This  is  the  rule  for  all  sin  offerings
whose  blood  is  not  brought  into  the  holy  place.

135  4213


SACRIFICE

29 ii  demands,  with  the  additional  burnt  offerings,  a  he
goat  as  a  sin  offering,  '  beside  the  goat  of  atonement ' —
that  is,  the  goat  chosen  by  lot  in  the  special  rites  of  the
day  as  a  hattdth  (Lev.  1659  15).  It  was  offered  after
the  peculiar  expiatory  ceremonies  of  the  day,  with  the
ordinary  ritual  ;  its  flesh  was  eaten.

The  propria  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  16) 1
begin  with  the  sacrifice  by  the  high  priest  of  a  bull  as  a
sin  offering  for  himself  and  the  priesthood  in  general ; 2
its  blood  was  carried  by  him  into  the  '  most  holy  place '
and  sprinkled  there  in  a  minutely  prescribed  manner.
The  sin  offering  of  the  congregation,  a  he  goat,  was
next  offered,  and  its  blood  in  like  manner  sprinkled  in
the  adytum.  The  blood  of  both  was  then  applied  to
the  horns  of  the  altar  and  sprinkled  with  the  finger
seven  times  upon  the  altar — that  is,  according  to  the
later  practice  if  not  to  the  original  intention  of  the
law,  the  altar  of  incense  (Ex.  30 10) ;  cp  Lev.  4?  18  ;  the
rest  of  the  blood  was  poured  out  at  the  base  of  the
great  altar.  The  usual  parts  of  both  victims  were
burned  on  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings  ;  the  rest  of  the
flesh  (cut  up  as  for  an  'oldh],  with  the  head,  legs,  in
wards,  and  hide,  were  carried  out  to  the  place  where
the  ashes  from  the  altar  were  emptied,  and  there  con
sumed  by  fire.  The  general  rule  is  that  the  flesh  of  sin
offerings  whose  blood  is  brought  into  the  temple  must
not  be  eaten  (Lev.  630  [23],  cp  4711,  etc.  1627).  The
attendant  who  thus  comes  in  contact  with  the  holy  flesh
is  unclean,  and  must  bathe  before  again  coining  into
the  city  (Lev.  1628,  cp  Nu.  19 5-10).

(c)  Occasional  sin  offerings. The  sin  offering  of  the
anointed  priest  (Lev.  43-12)  must  be  regarded  as  public,
because  the  premiss  is  that  his  inadvertent  transgression
has  brought  evil  consequences  upon  the  people  (42/~. ).
The  victim  is  a  bull  ; the  blood  is  taken  into  the  holy
place,  sprinkled  seven  times  before  the  veil,  and  applied
to the  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense  ; the  subsequent
procedure  is  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  the  high  priest's
bull  on  the  Day  of  Atonement. The  sin  offering  of  the
whole  congregation  (Lev.  413-21)  for  an  unknown  trans
gression, the  consequences  of which  they  surfer, is a
bull  ; the imposition of  hands is by  the  elders  ; the
minister  is  the  high  priest  ; the  ritual  is  the  same  as  in
his  own  sin  offering  above. An  older  parallel  to  Lev.
413-21 is  Nu.  1622-26. 3 The  sacrifices here  required
are  a  bull  as  a  burnt  offering,  with  the  regular  oblation
and  libation, and a  he  goat  as a  sin  offering. It is
assumed  that  the  ordinary  ritual  is  followed  ;  the  flesh
is  eaten  by  the  priests.

(d)  Sin  offerings  in  ceremonies  of  consecration.4 In
the  consecration  of  priests,  Ex.  29 *  ff.  (cp  Lev.  81^),  a
bull  is  offered  as  a  sin  offering,  with  the  usual  ritual ;
the  flesh,  hide,  and  offal  are  destroyed  by  fire. Similarly
in  the  inaugural  sacrifices  of  Aaron,  Lev.  9,  he  sacrifices
for  himself  a  bull-calf  as  a  sin  offering  with  the  same
rites. The  disposition  of  the  flesh  is  not  mentioned  ;
from  v.  15  it  may  be  inferred  that  it  was  burned  ;  but  a
late  passage  (10 16-20)  maintains  that  it  should  have  been
eaten,  since  it  did  not  fall  under  the  rule  of  6  30. At  the
dedication  of  the  Levites  (Nu.  88)  a  bull  is  sacrificed  as
a  sin  offering  without  specification  of  the  ritual.

In  addition  to  the  several  sin  offerings  of  the  Day  of
Atonement,  a  goat,  on  whose  head  the  sins  of  the  people

38.  Scape-goat;  had  been  solemnly  laid  by  the  high

,  ^  .-° '  priest,  was  sent  away  into  the  wilder-

ei  er. ness ,  to  ^zazel .  (see  ATONEMENT,

DAY  OF  ;  AZAZEL).  This  was  the  great  expiation  for
the  sins  of  the  year  (see  below,  §51).  Another

1  See  ATONEMENT,  DAY  OF.

2  Inasmuch  as  the  purification  of  the  priest  is  an  indispensable
preliminary  to  the  grand  fiac-ula  of  the  day,  this  sin  offering  is
here  classed  with  the  sacra  publica.

3  Rabbinical  exegesis  harmonised  them  by  interpreting  Nu.
15  22  of  the  sin  of  idolatry  as  the  violation  of  all  the  command
ments.  Siphre  loc.,  HSrayoth  8/'.

4  The  consecration  sin  offerings  are  not  without  significance
for  the  theory  of  such  piacula.

4214


SACRIFICE

peculiar  rite  which,  though  widely  differing  from
ordinary  sacrifice,  must  be  mentioned  here,  is  the
burning  of  the  red  heifer,  with  whose  ashes  is  prepared
a  holy  water  that  purges  the  uncleanness  arising  from
contact  with  a  dead  body  (Xu.  19).  The  rites,  as  de
scribed  in  the  Mishna  (Pdnlh),  are  plainly  assimilated
to  those  of  a  burnt  offering  (see  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,
§  17;  NUMBERS,  §  ao).  Another  noteworthy

piaculum  is  the  slaying  of  a  heifer  to  atone  for  a
murder  the  perpetrator  of  which  cannot  be  detected
(Dt.  21  1-9).

In  the  directions  for  the  consecration  of  Aaron  and  his
sons  (Ex.  29,  cp  Lev.  8),  after  the  sacrifice  of  a  bull  as  a
393  Instal-  sin  offeri"S  (above,  §  37)  and  a  rani  as
lation  of  a  ^urnt  on<ering.  another  ram,  called  the
priests  '  installation  ram  '  (C'N'TO  'TN,  v.  22)  is
offered.  Its  blood  is  rubbed  on  the  tip
of  the  candidate's  right  ear,  on  his  right  thumb,  and
his  right  great  toe  ;  1  the  blood  is  then  dashed  against
the  altar  as  in  other  sacrifices.  To  the  parts  usually
burned  upon  the  altar  in  the  sacrifice  of  a  sheep  as  a
peace  offering,  is  added  in  this  case  the  right  leg,  which
in  a  layman's  sacrifice  would  fall  to  the  priest.  From  a
basket  containing  loaves  of  bread,  cakes  made  with  oil,
and  wafers  smeared  with  oil  —  all  of  fine  flour  (cp  Lev.
7".^>  §30)  —  one  of  each  kind  is  taken  and  placed,
with  the  altar  portions  and  the  leg,  on  Aaron's  hands,
and  '  waved  '  by  Moses  before  Yahwe.  They  are  then
burned  upon  the  altar.  The  breast  of  the  ram,  which
Moses  waves  before  Yahwe,  is  his  portion  ;  the  rest  of
the  flesh  of  the  ram  is  boiled  in  a  holy  place  and,  with
the  remainder  of  the  contents  of  the  basket,  eaten  by
the  newly  consecrated  priests.  Any  that  is  left  till
morning  must  be  burned  ;  it  may  not  be  eaten  after
that  time.  It  is  implied  in  Ex.  29  29/1  (secondary)
that  the  same  ceremony  is  to  be  performed  whenever  a
high  priest  is  to  be  inducted  ;  cp  I>ev.  833^

In  Ex.2936/,  the  blood  of  the  bull  offered  as the
sin  offering  of  the  priests  also  purifies  the  altar  (  '  re-

89*.  Consecra-  'nves sn'' '  e*p for '  :  see


tion  of  altar.


.

below *  45^  ''  °P


Tmis


,
the  altar  becomes  '  very  holy  '  ;  what

soever  touches  it  is  thereby  made  sacred  (i.e.,  belongs
to  God).  In  a  still  later  supplement,  Ex.3026/:,  the
holy  anointing  oil  is  applied  to  the  tent  and  all  its
furniture,  as  well  as  to  the  priests.

Peace  offerings  were  ordinarily  private  sacrifices  ;  the

feast  of  the  worshippers  was  their  characteristic  feature.

40.  Peace II  is' ilulce<1' not  improbable  that at

Offerings  in the  high  festivals tne  kings  furnished

sacra  publica.  an)i.mafls  in  &??  n"mbers  <"f  their  free-
will  offerings)  for  the  assembled  people,

and  Ezekiel  plainly  contemplates  the  continuance  of  this
custom  (45  17);  but  in  P  there  is  no  recognition  of
offerings  of  this  kind.  In  the  completed  sacrificial
system  there  are,  however,  certain  public  or  quasi-
public  sacrifices  which  fall  under  this  head.  The  instal
lation  ram  of  the  priests  (Ex.  29)  is  plainly  a  peace
offering  with  certain  peculiar  rites.  The  inaugural
sacrifices  of  Aaron  in  Lev.  9  include  an  animal  from
the  herd  (sor)  and  a  ram  as  peace  offerings  for  the
people  ;  whether  the  author  means  it  to  be  understood
that  their  flesh  was  eaten  by  representatives  of  the
people  or  by  the  priests  is  not  clear.  The  annual
sacrifice  of  the  two  lambs  offered  with  the  two  loaves  of
new  wheat  bread  at  Pentecost  (Lev.  23  10)  are  public
peace  offerings  ;  2  the  flesh  fell  to  the  priests  and  was
very  holy.  With  this  exception  the  rule  holds  that  all
public  sacrifices  are  either  burnt  offerings  or  sin
offerings.

1  The  aspersion  of  blood  and  anointing  oil  on  the  vestments  of
the  priest  is  a  later  addition.

a  This  results  from  transferring  a  local  rite  in  which  the
lambs  were  real  selainim  to  the  central  sanctuary  ;  see  g§  14
and  34*.

4215


SACRIFICE

III. BELIEFS  AND  IDEAS

The  prevailing  conception  of  sacrifice  and  offering  in
the  OT  is  that  of  a  gift  or  present  to  God. The  two
41 Sacrifice  a  Seneric  terms  minhdh  and  korban  both
Rift  to  God cxPress this idea-1 Minhah applies
equally  to  Cain's  gift  of  the  fruits  of
the  earth  and  to  Abel's  of  animals  from  his  flock  (Gen.
43-5,  J). The  same  word  is  used  of  a  gift  to  a  fellow-
man as a token of friendship (Is.  39 1), an act of
homage (i S.  1027 i  K.  1025), tribute  to  a suzerain
(Judg.3isi7/ 28.826), to propitiate a powerful
person  who  has  been  wronged  or  offended  (Gen.  32 13  18
33  io/  ),  or  to  procure  favour  and  assistance  (Gen.  43  i\ff.
Hos.  106),  etc. In  the  later  technical  language  of  the
ritual  korban,  'present, 'is  the  comprehensive  name  for
sacrifice  and  offering  of  every  kind. The  general  rule
that  no  man should  come  into  the  presence  of  God
without  a  gift  holds  in  all  ages  ;  see  Ex.  23 15  34  20  Dt.
16i6,  Ecclus.  354  M.  Hugigdh\\. Gifts  to  God  were
made with the same variety of  motive  as to man.
Theophrastus names three  : homage, gratitude,  and
need  (7)  yap  5ia  TI/JLTJI>  ^  5ia  x^P1-"  %  Sib xPfio."  T&V
dyaeCiv,  ap. Porphyry,  De  abstin.lii,). Philo  distin
guishes sacrifices in which men pay to God the
honour  due  to  him  with  no  self-regarding  motive  from
those  brought  for  the  benefit  of  the  offerer,  either  that
he  may  obtain  good  things  or  be  delivered  from  evils.2
The  commonest  gift  to  God  is  something  to  eat  and
drink,  the  flesh  of  the  domestic  animals  used  for  food
by the Israelites, grain, fruit, oil and  wine.3 The
phrase 'food of  God' (cvrW  en1?), which occurs  re
peatedly  even  in  comparatively  late  contexts  (see  Lev.
2168  17  21  2225  [H], Ezek.  447  cp  16i9;  also  Lev.  3n
16  Xu.  28224), shows  to  what  end  such  offerings  were
made; cp Dt.  3238  : the  gods whom the Israelites
worshipped  '  eat  the  fat  of  their  sacrifices  and  drink  the
wine  of  their  libations  ' ;  see  also  the  protest  of  Ps.  f>0 13.
Doubtless those who first  used  the  phrase '  food of
God '  meant  it  quite  literally  (see  the  end  of  the  third
tablet  of  the Babylonian Cosmogonic Epic), though
observation  and  reflection  may  have  early  led  men  to
draw the distinction which modern peoples in low
planes  of  culture  often  make  between  the  visible  things
offered  and  their  subtle  essence  or '  soul ' which the
deity extracts for his enjoyment  —  a conception as
literal, though  not  so  crass,  as  the  other. The  mode
of  presentation  varies. The  shewbread  (originally  ac
companied,  doubtless,  by  wine  ;  see  above,  §  34^7)  was
kept  standing  continually  on  a  table  in the  house  of
Yahwe (i S.  21  6 Ex.  25  30 Lev.  24  5-9)  ; in animal
sacrifices  certain  parts — in  the  holocaust  all  the  flesh —
of  the  victim  were  consumed  by  fire  upon  the  altar,  as
were  also  sacrificial  cakes  of  various  kinds  and  unbaked
dough  ;  other  offerings,  as  the  firstfruits,  were  set  down
before  the  altar  with  a  dedicatory  formula  (Dt.  264-10),
or  'waved' ;  that  is,  with  one  of  those  fictions  so  common
in  ritual,  in  make-believe  thrown  upon  the  fire.

The  custom  of  burning  the  offerings  to  God  upon
a  sacrificial  fire  seems  to  have  been  adopted  by  the
Israelites  after  their  settlement  in  Canaan,  from  the  older
inhabitants  (see  above,  §  12),  probably  without  much
inquiry  or  reflection  about  the  significance  of  the  new
mode  or  the  reason  for  it.  The  verb  which  is  commonly
used,  however  (kitter,  see  above,  §  n),  implies  that  the
object  was  not  so  much  to  consume  by  fire  as  to  make  a
savoury  smoke  (see  INCENSE,  §  i  and  n.  i ).  In  this
fragrant  smoke,  as  it  arises,  the  finer  essence  of  the
gift,  etherealised,  is  conveyed  to  the  deity.4  This  is

1  See  above,  §§  n,  24. Cp  also  in  NT,  Mt.  523/  84  23i-/
(Sujpor).

2  De  I'ict.  offer. § 4,  2  240 Mangey. On the relation of
Philo's  analysis  to  Theophrastus,  see  Bernays,  %?f.  103  J?.

3  Dotations  and  votive  offerings  to  temples  which  do  not  fall
under  the  definition  of  sacrifice  are  not  considered  in  this  article.
See  VOTIVE  OFFERINGS.

4  Cp  //.  1317, etc. Porphyry explains  the  burning  as  an
aTraffavaTL^eiv  {De  abstin.  2  5).

4216


SACRIFICE

manifestly  an  advance  upon  the  setting  before  God  o
food  and  drink  just  as  the  worshippers  use  them.

The  offering  by  fire  (isseA,  TON) produces  a  '  soothing— that  is
an  agreeable  —  odour'  (rcf/i  nih5"/i,  nh%3  IT},  Gen.  821,  J
often  in  the  ritual  laws).  Yahwe  'smells'  this  odour,  and  is
appeased  or  gratified  by  it  (Gen.  821  18.2619);  when  he  is
an.^ry  he  will  not  enjoy  the  smell  of  it,  that  is,  he  rejects  the
sacrifice  (Lev.  2031  Am.  621).  The  burning  of  aromatic  gums
and  spices  is  a  later  refinement  (see  INCENSE,  §  3) ;  the  ideas
which  prompt  it  are  the  same.1

All  common  private  sacrifices  (zfbah,  Slldmim,  toddk],
whether  obligatory  or  voluntary,  were  accompanied  by

42.  Sacrificial  affs.t:  ?  w!?ich  the  offerer  participated
feasts  family,  neighbours,  and  guests.

Since  these  feasts  were  held  '  befor
Yahwe,'  at  the  holy  place,  after  God  had  received  his
portion,  it  is  a  natural  surmise  that  a  meal  in  which
God  and  men  join  is  an  essential  feature  of  ordinary
sacrifice,  and  that  the  hospitality  of  table  communion  is
a  pledge  and  bond  of  friendship  between  God  and  his
worshippers  as  it  is  among  men,  a  bond  closer  than
that  which  is  established  by  the  acceptance  of  a  gift.  It
must  be  admitted,  however,  that  this  conception  of  the
nature  and  efficacy  of  sacrifice  is  nowhere  distinctly
expressed  in  the  OT,  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  how
clearly  it  was  present  in  the  consciousness  of  Israelite
worshippers.3  Much  less  do  our  sources  throw  any
light  upon  the  origin  of  such  a  conception.  The
scholars  who  contend  that  the  sacrificial  meal  was
primitively  not  a  mere  hospitable  fellowship  but  sacra
mental  communion  in  the  divine  life  of  a  totem  animal,
do  not  maintain  that  the  Israelites  in  OT  times  regarded
their  sacrifices  in  any  such  way  ;  the  most  that  would
be  claimed  is  that  certain  survivals  in  the  cultus  and
superstitions  without  it  point  to  this  as  the  original
character  and  significance  of  the  sacrificial  feast.

It  is  clear,  however,  that  whether  the  feast  at  the
sanctuary  was  conceived  of  as  a  table-companionship  of
God  and  men  or  not,  it  must  actually  have  strengthened
the  bond  of  religion  by  the  sense  of  God's  presence  and
friendliness.

Our  investigation  in  the  first  part  of  this  article  of  the
history  of  Israelite  sacrifices  and  of  the  ritual  has  shown

43.  Blood that from  first to last the  utmost im-
of  victim P°rtance attaches to  the  disposition of

the  victim's  blood.  Indeed,  it  may  be
said  that  this  is  the  one  universal  and  indispensable
constituent  of  sacrifice.  When  Saul's  victorious  followers
rushed  upon  the  spoil  of  the  Philistines  and  began  to
slay  cattle  and  eat  them,  the  king  had  a  great  stone
rolled  up,  and  commanded  that  they  should  slaughter
there,  and  not  sin  against  Yahwe  by  eating  '  with  the
blood,'  that  is  the  flesh  of  animals  whose  blood  had  not
been  poured  out  at  a  sacriricial  stone  or  altar  (i  S.
l-t32-34);  cp  Lev.  \"n,ff.  (see  LEVITICUS,  §  15).  We
have  seen  that  in  Arab  sacrifice  also  the  pouring  of  the
blood  upon  the  sacred  stone  or  anointing  of  it  with
blood  was  the  essential  rite.  This  use  of  sacrificial
blood  is  older  than  the  offering  of  part  of  the  victim  by
fire,  and  is  the  necessary  antecedent  of  the  feast,  its
religious  consecration.  The  offering  or  application  of
the  blood  cannot  very  well  be  regarded  as  a  gift  to  God,
or  as  a  mere  incident  in  the  preparation  for  a  com
munion  meal.  It  is,  indeed,  plain  in  the  OT  itself  that
the  ideas  and  beliefs  that  are  connected  with  the  use  of
sacrificial  blood  belong  to  a  different  and  a  more  primi
tive  circle  of  ideas.

In  the  application  of  blood  to  the  doorposts  and
lintels  of  a  house  to  prevent  'the  DESTROYER'  (q.v.)
from  entering  to  slay  the  inmates  (see  above,  §  7)  we  have
an  instance  of  the  belief  that  the  blood  of  a  victim  serves
as  a  protection  against  disease  and  death  ;  that  is,  in

Cp  the  Babylonian  Flood  Tablet,  /.  1


pounded  by  Paul,  i  Cor.  10  18-21.
4217


SACRIFICE

primitive  apprehension,  against  the  spirits  which  cause
these  evils.  To  the  same  end  the  modern  Arab  rubs
the  blood  of  a  sacrifice  upon  his  tent-ropes,  or  smears
it  upon  his  camels  (Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1499).  It  is
said  that  in  an  outbreak  of  cholera  at  Hamath  in  1875
Christians  procured  blood  from  the  slaughter-house  and
made  with  it  a  cross  on  the  door  of  every  room  in  their
houses  (Curtiss,  Primitive  Semitic  Religion  To-day,
I97/,  cp  181,  i  So/).  With  the  same  motive  sacri
ficial  blood  is  applied  to  sick  persons  or  animals — the
same  power  which  averts  evil  can  expel  it.  The  use  of
blood  in  '  purifications  '  is  similar.  The  leper  whom
the  priest's  inspection  proves  to  be  free  from  the
disease  is  sprinkled  with  water  mingled  with  the  blood
of  a  bird,1  while  another  bird  after  being  dipped  in  the
bloody  water  is  allowed  to  fly  away.-  In  the  later  rite
blood  is  applied  to  the  man's  car,  hand,  and  foot.  It  is
not  improbable  that  in  other  purifications  the  blcod  was
primitively  applied  to  the  person  to  be  cleansed,  rather
than  to  the  altar  only,  as  in  the  actual  ritual  of  the
'  sin  offering. '  The  efficacy  of  blood  in  removing  un-
cleanness  is  exemplified  also  in  ceremonies  of  dedication
for  the  temple  or  altar,  and  for  their  periodical  purifica
tion  from  accidental  and  unknown  defilement,  as  well
as  in  the  consecration  of  priests  ; 3  the  removal  of
'  uncleanness '  and  the  establishment  or  restoration  of
'  holiness  '  are  effected  by  the  same  means.

Different  from  these  uses  of  blood  as  a  means  of
averting  or  removing  disease  and  defilement  is  the  dis
position  made  of  it  in  ordinary  sacrifice,  where  it  is
poured,  splashed,  or  smeared  upon  the  sacrificial  stone
(massfddh,  altar).4  The  significance  of  this  rite  seems
to  be  that  by  it  the  sacrifice  is  not  only  brought  im
mediately  to  the  attention  of  the  deity  to  whom  it  is
offered,  but — at  least  in  earlier  conception — physically
conveyed  to  him  ;  in  Arab  sacrifice  nothing  else  is
made  his.  Covenant  ceremonies  like  that  in  Ex.  244-8,
in  which  the  blood  is  applied  both  to  the  altar  and  to
the  people — that  is,  to  the  two  contracting  parties,  as
in  blood  covenants  between  men— are  also  to  be  noted.
The  profane  use  of  blood  is  stringently  prohibited  ;  to
taste  blood,  or  flesh  with  blood  in  it,  is  one  of  the  worst
and  most  dangerous  things  a  man  can  do.  Domestic
animals  were  in  old  times  slaughtered  at  the  sacrificial
Stone  and  the  blood  poured  out  there  ;  after  the
abolition  of  the  high  places  it  must  be  allowed  to  drain
into  the  ground,  as  that  of  beasts  killed  in  hunting  had
previously  been.  The  blood  of  some  species  of  sacrifice
made  taboo  everything  it  touched.

The  common  root  of  these  diverse  uses  and  restric
tions  is  the  almost  universal  belief  that  blood  is  a  fluid
in  which  inheres  mysterious  potency,  no  less  dangerous
when  misused  than  efficacious  when  properly  employed.
In  the  outpouring  of  the  blood  at  the  sacrificial  stone
we  may  perhaps  recognise  the  feeling  that  this  is  the
safest  disposition  of  it,  as  well  as  the  belief  of  a  some
what  more  developed  theology  that  it  belongs  to  the
deity  of  right.  What  makes  the  blood  so  powerful  for
good  or  ill  is  that  the  life  is  in  it  ;  the  theory  of  Lev.  17  n
is  based  on  a  fact  of  the  simplest  observation.

Many  of  the  practices  that  have  been  noted  above
manifestly  originated  in  an  animistic  nature  religion,  in
which  alone  they  have  meaning.  In  the  national
religion  of  Israel  they  become  part  of  the  worship  of
Yahwe  or  of  the  custom  of  the  people  under  his
sanction.  This  connection  logically  involves  a  change
of  apprehension  :  the  rites  are  not  efficacious  by  the
'nherent  potency  of  the  blood  or  the  virtue  of  the

1  Cp  the  '  water  of  uncleanness "  containing  the  ashes  of  the
red  heifer  in  purification  from  contact  with  death.

2  Cp  the Arab custom of release from widowhood, Taj,
.70  T.z_(f.  ;  Wellh.  Heid.V),  171  ;  WRS  Rel.  Seni.M,  422.

3  That  this  ceremony  was  felt  to  be  a  purification  is  shown  by
he  imitation  of  it  in  the  late  rite  for  the  cleansing  of  the  leper,

T,ev.  14  14^;

4  Curtiss,  of>.  cit.  ch.  15,  has  collected  many  modern  instances
n  which  the  blood  of  a  victim  is  smeared  on the  portal  of  a
hrine,  which  takes  the  place  of  the  old  sacred  stone.

4218


SACRIFICE

operation,  but  as  the  means  which  God  has  appointed.1
The  more  positive  the  conception  of  religion  becomes,
the  less  motive  there  is  to  seek  any  other  explanation
of  such  practices  than  that  God  has  commanded  them.
If,  finally,  the  irrationality  of  such  ceremonies  comes  to
be  felt,  and  their  incongruity  with  spiritual  religion,
allegory  and  symbolism  will  find  some  profound  signifi
cance  in  them.  Yet  the  ignorant  multitude  will  doubt
less  continue  to  have  faith  in  the  virtue  of  the  ceremony
itself,  and  to  understand  better  than  their  teachers  its
true  import,  because  the  old  animism  is  still  a  reality  to
them.

A  corresponding  change  is  wrought  in  the  conception
of  '  uncleanness. '  Whereas  originally  it  was  a  physical
thing  whose  evil  was  in  itself,  it  becomes  in  the  national
religion  a  pollution  offensive  to  Yahwe  ;  it  is  incom
patible  with  his  holiness  and  the  holiness  which  he
demands  of  all  that  approach  him  ;  its  consequences
are  not  only  natural  but  penal  ;  it  requires  to  be  not
merely  purged  but  expiated.  Uncleanness  is  in  this  light
a  moral  wrong,  and  involves  guilt.  On  the  other  hand,
a  not  inconsiderable  class  of  what  we  regard  as  moral
offences  were  included  in  the  category  of  taboos  requir
ing  purifications.  We  have  difficulty  in  realising  that
guilt  was  believed  to  have  the  same  physically  con
tagious  quality  as  uncleanness  —  one  man  who  had
touched  hfrem  (Din)  could  infect  and  bring  defeat  upon
a  whole  army  (josh.  7).  Almost  equally  strange  to  us
is  the  notion  that  guilt,  like  uncleanness,  can  be  con
tracted  without  knowledge  and  intention  ;  and  that  the
first  intimation  a  man  may  have  that  he  has  offended
God  is  that  he  suffers  the  consequences  (ii.fam),  with
its  converse,  that  misfortune  is  the  evidence  that
he  has  offended  without  knowing  how.  These  are
things,  however,  which  must  be  kept  in  mind  if  we
are  to  understand  the  piacular  aspects  of  Israelite
sacrifices.

A  man  who  has  offended  God  may  seek  to  propitiate

him  by  a  gift,  as  he  might  an  earthly  ruler  ;  so  David

.  . TJ  in the time of plague offers burnt

*.  Propitiation  offen .  threshing floor of

and  expiation. .  °, . ,.

Araunah  (2  8.2418-25).  More  fre
quently,  perhaps,  he  made  a  vow  that  if  God's  anger
under  which  he  was  suffering  were  withdrawn,  he  would
make  him  a  specified  sacrifice,  either  holocaust  or  peace
offering,-  or  both  together,  with  such  and  such  victims.
This  was  probably  in  all  periods  the  most  numerous
class  of  votive  offerings.  The  same  means  by  which
man  in  prosperity  sought  the  continuance  and  increase
of  God's  favour  were  employed  to  recover  it  when  in
any  way  it  had  been  lost.

The  special  piacula.  called  sin  offerings  have  a  very  limited
range  of  employment  (see  above,  §  2&tt).  They  are  prescribed
chiefly  for  unintentional  ceremonial  faults  or  as  purifications  ;
the  trespass  offering  is  even  more  narrowly  restricted  (above,
§  27).  The  great  expiation  for  the  whole  people,  in  later  times
at  least,  was  the  scape-goat  ;  not  any  form  of  .sacrifice.

Sacrifices  offered  to  propitiate  the  offended  deity
require  no  peculiar  rites  ;  the  outpouring  of  the  blood,
the  burning  of  the  fat  or  of  the  holocaust,  are  precisely
the  same  as  when  these  species  of  sacrifice  are  made,
say,  in  gratitude  for  the  signal  goodness  of  God.  The
blood  of  the  sin  offering  is  smeared  upon  the  horns  of
the  altar  instead  of  being  splashed  against  its  corners  ;  but
whatever  the  origin  of  this  difference  may  be,3  we  may,
in  view  of  the  whole  character  of  the  hathith,  confidently
affirm  that  it  is  not  a  purposed  heightening  of  the
application.

In the discussion of  Hebrew  ideas  concerning  the

1  The  constant  tendency  is  to  assimilate  ceremonies  of  pro
tection  or  purification  to  the  ritual  of  sacrifice  to  God.

2  Neither  sin  offering  nor  trespass  offering  could  he  vowed.

3  If  a  conjecture  may  be  allowed,  we  may  surmise  that  the
presence  of  the  polluted  man  requires  a  purification  of  the  altar  ;
or  that  the  blood  which  in  the  primitive  rite  was  applied  to  the
person  of  the  man  to  be  cleansed  has  in  the  cult  been  transferred
to  the  altar.

4219


SACRIFICE

effect  and  operation of  sacrifice the  meaning  of  the

45 Effect  of  vefk  k*PPer  w'tn  its  cognate  words  and

synonyms  has  filled  a  large  place  ; and,

,  ' by  a  fault  of method  which has  been

8' fruitful  of  error  in  the  study  of  the  OT,

the  investigation  has  frequently  set  out  from  etymological

assumptions  instead  of  from  the  plain  facts  of  usage.

Kaphcr,  a  word  of  jural  associations,  is  the  means — payment,
gift,  bribe — by  which  a  man  buys  himself  off  from  the  con-
secjuences  of  his  deed:  see  Ex.  2130  (  =  a  ransom  for  his  life),
Nu.  3531-33  Prov.  635188  Job3324  Am.  612  18.123  (bribe;
cp  Is.  47  ii);  Ex.  30  12  (head  money).  The  verb  kipper  (de
nominative  use  of  the  intensive  stem)  means  to  make  satisfaction
by  such  means;  see  especially  28.213  Gen.  32  20  [21].  Since
the  object  is  to  avert  the  consequences  of  misdoing,  the  verb
often  signifies  to  seek  or  procure  remission,  without  regard  to  a
material  satisfaction,  to  propitiate;  thus  Ex.  32  30  (Moses'  in
tercession  with  God  for  forgiveness  of  the  people's  sin),  cp  2  Ch.
30  18.  The  passives  regularly  mean  '  be  forgiven,'  e.g..  Is.  22  14
i  S.  3  14  Dt.  21  8  ;  and  conversely  the  active,  frequently,  '  for
give,'  e.g.,  Ezek.  1663  Jer.  1823.  With  these  senses  and  uses
in  common  life  and  religion  the  uses  .which  we  should  call
specifically  ritual  connect  themselves.  Offences  against  ( »<xl
are  not  confined  to  moral  wrong-doing  ;  the  infringement — even
unwitting — of  ceremonial  rules  or  of  the  many  laws  concern
ing  '  uncleanness  '  may  have  dire  consequences  unless  expiated.
The  defilement  may  be  contracted  by  thing1;  ?«  well  as  by  persons,
and  these  also  require  to  be  purged  in  a  similar  way ;  in  the
consecration  of  a  new  altar  it  is  necessary  to  ;  remove  its  sin,'  to
'expiate'  (kipper)  the  altar  (Kzek.  43  20  26)  ;!  the  semi-annual
purification  of  the  temple  is  a  removal  of  the  sin  of  the  sanctuary,
an  expiation  of  the  house  (Ezek.  45  20) ;  cp  Ex.  29  36^  Lev.  8  15
I'i  16  24.  The  sacrifices  or  rites,  of  whatever  nature,  by  which
tje  consequences  of  unwitting  or  inadvertent  invasion  of  the
sphere  of '  holiness 'are  nullified  are  expiatory,  and  the  verbXv//?/
is  the  technical  term  for  their  effect.  Other  verbs  are  frequently
joined  with  it,  especially  hitta,  NEH  (privative),  'remove  sin1
(of  things),  tihar,  "HE,  'make  pure  or  clean'  (of  things  and
persons),  kiddas,  CHp,  '  make  holy,'  which  is  the  positive  counter
part  of  the  preceding  terms.

The  word  kipper  is  not  so  common  in  old  tordih  as  might  be
expected.  It  occurs  with  especial  frequency  in  the  old  laws  for
the  trespass  offering  in  Lev.  5  and  the  supplements  to  them,  the
usual  formula,  standing  after  the  directions  for  the  sacrifice,
being,  '  and  the  priest  shall  make  propitiation  (122)  'n  h's  behalf
(Sy),  and  he  shall  be  forgiven  '  (see  Lev.  5  6  io/>  13  16  18  6  7  [5  26]
77  1922  Nu.  5s);  also  in  the  purification  of  the  leper  (Lev.  14
18-20,  cp  29  31  53),  the  Nazinte  defiled  by  death  (Nu.  6  n),
purification  after  childbirth,  gonorrhoea,  menorrhagia  (Lev.
12  if.  15  15  30)  ;  further,  in  the  sin  offering  of  the  congregation
or  an  individual  for  an  inadvertent  omission  (Nu.  107528,  cp
Lev.  4202631  35),  and  in  the  several  strata  of  the  ritual  of  the
Day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  16).  In  most  of  these  passages,  where
the  priest  is  subject,  kipper  (efiAacricoiu.ai),  '  make  propitiation,'
might  equally  well  be  translated,  'make  intercession,'  as  in  Vg.
(prare,  rogare,  deprecari,  etc.),  by  Saadia  (istag/ifara,  '  beseech
forgiveness '),  and  others.

The  propitiatory  or  expiatory  effect  of  sacrifice  is  not
restricted  to  any  particular  species  or  class,  though
specific  offences  have  prescribed  piacula,  not  only
trespass  offerings  and  sin  offerings,  but  also  the  private
burnt  offering  (Lev.  14),  and  even  peace  offerings  and
oblations  '  atone '  ;  the  whole  public  cultus  is  a  means
of  propitiating  God  and  obtaining  remission  for  sin  and
uncleanness  (Ezek.  45 15  17).  Nor  is  the  operation  of
propitiatory  sacrifice  centred  exclusively,  as  has  often
been  contended,  in  one  part  of  the  ritual,  the  shedding
and  application  of  the  victim's  blood  :  it  is  only  in
certain  peculiar  purifications  that  this  is  really  the  case  ;
elsewhere  the  very  formulation  of  the  laws  shows  that
the  whole  ceremony  has  atoning  value  (see,  e.g. ,  Lev.
426  31  35  5 10  13,  etc. ).  The  sin  offering  of  the  pauper,
which  is  only  a  little  meal,  is  as  effectual  as  the  bloody
sacrifices  of  his  more  prosperous  fellows.

The  term  kipper  is  used  in  relation  to  other  than
sacrificial  expiations  ;  thus  when  a  plague  broke  out,
Aaron  went  among  the  people  with  a  censer  of  burning
incense,  and  made  expiation  for  the  people  (  CJM  *?;•  is:"  >•
and  the  plague  was  stayed  (Nu.  1646  /  [17n/.])  ;  the
slaughter  of  a  guilty  man  by  Phinehas  made  expiation
for  the  Israelites  (Nu.  25 13)  ;  murder  profanes  the  land,
no  blood-wite  (kd'pher)  shall  be  taken  for  it,  '  the  blood
which  has  been  shed  shall  not  be  expiated  save  by  the
blood  of  him  that  shed  it '  (Nu.  3532/. )  ;  an  offering  of

1  Cp  expiandum  forum  Romannm,  Cic.  Phil.  i.  1230.
4220


f  bi  d

atonem°ent.


SACRIFICE

jewelry  from  the  spoils  of  war  serves  '  to  make  expiation
for  our  lives'  (Nu.  31  50)  ;  cp  also  Nu.  819  Lev.  IQibjf.
14  18  /.  16  10.

Whether  the  primary  meaning  of  the  root  -\si  in
Hebrew  was  'cover  up,'  as  in  Arabic,  or  'wipe,  wipe
off,'  as  in  Syriac,  we  need  not  here  inquire,  inasmuch
as  it  is  not  used  in  the  OT  in  a  physical  sense  at  all,  or
with  any  reminiscent  consciousness  of  such  a  sense.  It
is  of  more  moment  that  the  same  verb  is  used  in  Assyrian
of  ritual  purifications  or  expiations  for  persons  and
things,  performed  by  the  asipu-priest.1  Cp  RITUAL,
§8.

On  kapporeth,  see  MERCY  SEAT.

One  passage  only  seems  to  contain  a  more  explicit

theory  of  expiation  by  blood. Lev.  17  n  (Rp)  gives  as

TVi  a  mot've  f°r  tne  oft-repeated  prohibition

7  of  eatins  blood  :  For  the  life  of  the  body

is  in  the  blood>  anud  I,have  Sive?  h  to
you  to  use  upon  the  altar  to  make  ex

piation  for  yourselves  ;  for  the  blood  makes  expiation
by  virtue  of  the  life  [in  it]  ;  2  cp  v.  14.  That  the  life  or
soul  of  the  animal  is  in  the  blood,  or,  shortly  said,  the
blood  is  the  soul  (cp  Gen.  94  Dt.  1223  Lev.  17  14),  gives
it  the  mysterious  potency  which  is  the  ground  both  of
the  prohibition  and  of  the  piacular  efficacy  of  blood  (see
above,  §  43).  The  author  of  Lev.  17  n  merely  says
explicitly  what  is  implied  in  the  use  of  blood  in  rites
of  purification  and  expiation  ;  it  is  not  as  a  fluid  like
water  or  oil  or  wine  that  it  is  efficacious,  but  by  virtue
of  its  inherent  life.3  This  beginning  of  reflection  on
the  operation  of  sacrifice  is  interesting  because  it  is  re
flection  ;  it  also  truly  expresses  the  conception  which
underlies  the  rites.  We  should  err,  however,  if  we
sought  in  it  the  profounder  idea  of  the  substitution  of
the  victim's  life  for  the  sinner's  which  is  suggested  by
the  Greek  translation,  TO  yap  afyca  avrov  avrl  rijs  if/vxTJs
e^iXatrerat,  or  perhaps  even  that  the  offering  of  a  life  to
God  is  the  essential  thing  in  sacrifice.11

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Israelites  in  all  ages  firmly
believed  in  the  efficaciousness  of  sacrifice  to  preserve

_ __.  , and  restore  the  favour  of  Yahwe. In

47.  Efficacy  of  .  r

.,,  •  . times  of  prosperity  they  acknowledged

popular  belief.  his  g°odn<~ss  and  besought  its  con-
tinuance  by  sacrifice  ;  in  times  of
distress  they  multiplied  sacrifices  to  appease  him  and
make  him  again  propitious.  The  worship  of  God  by
sacrifice  and  offering  was,  indeed,  the  central  thing  in
their  religion,  we  might  almost  say  was  their  religion.
Its  rites,  as  they  had  been  received  from  their  fore
fathers,  they  believed  —  long  before  the  age  of  the  written
law  books  —  to  have  been  ordained  and  sanctioned  by
Yahwe  himself  ;  the  experience  of  generations  had
shown  that  he  honoured  the  faithful  observance  of
them  ;  how  should  they  not  have  confidence  in  them  ?
That  this  confidence  was  often  the  sincere  and  earnest
faith  of  godfearing  men  is  beyond  question  ;  but  bad
men  also  confided  in  sacrifice  as  an  effective  means  of
placating  God,  and  persuading  him  to  wink  at  their
unrighteous  deeds,  just  as  a  gift  might  serve  to  turn
aside  the  anger  of  a  king,  or  to  corrupt  a  judge.  This
confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  sacrifice  involved  an  im
moral  idea  of  God  and  of  religion  ;  it  was,  indeed,  the
very  stronghold  of  these  false  conceptions.  Against  it,
therefore,  the  prophets  direct  their  attack.

The  prophets  of  the  eighth  century  not  only  denounce

the  abuses  and  corruptions  of  the  worship  at  the  temples

48 Th and  n'§h  places  —  the  drunken  revelry,  the

crochet consecrated prostitution, the greed of  the

priests  and their  perversion  of  the  torah  ;

they  deny  the  efficacy  of  sacrifice  altogether. What

1  See  Zimmern,  Beitr.  2  292  ;  Haupt,  JBL,  19  61  80  (1900).

2  So £-233 is probably to  be taken,  not 'instead of (<&
Vg.  etc.).

*  See  above,  §  43.  It  may  be  recalled  that  in  the  temple  pains
were  taken,  by  stirring  it,  to  keep  the  blood  from  coagulating
before  it  v.-as  brought  to  the  altar.

4  No  such  theory  appears  in  later  Jewish  thought.

4221


SACRIFICE

God  requires  of  men  is  not  gifts  and  offerings  but  faith
fulness  and  obedience,  not  cult  but  conduct.  This
was  the  necessary  consequence  of  their  idea  of  God  and
of  religion.  Yahwe  is  a  righteous  God  ;  that  is  to  say,
his  character  is  perfectly  moral  ;  being  such,  by  his  very
nature  he  demands  righteousness  of  his  people,  and  can
accept  nothing  in  lieu  of  it.  The  sphere  of  righteous
ness  is  not  ritual  and  ceremonial  but  social  and  political  ;
it  means  truth,  integrity,  justice,  goodness  to  fellow-men,
in  all  the  relations  of  life.  The  demand  of  righteous
ness  is  not  something  aside  from  religion,  is  not  a  minor
part  of  religion  ;  it  is  its  fundamental  law,  its  sum  and
substance.  The  sacrifices  of  unrighteous  men  are  an
insult  to  God,  because  they  imply  that  he  is  like  them
selves.  They  deceive  themselves  fatally  when  they
think  that  they  can  buy  his  favour  or  his  forgiveness.
And  where  there  is  the  character  in  which  he  delights,
there  is  the  pure  religion  and  undefiled  which  has  no
need  of  sacrifice.  The  utterances  of  the  prophets  are
too  familiar  to  need  more  than  the  briefest  reference
here  ;  see  Am.  44  5 21  ff.  Hos.  48  13  56  9>i.i  /.  14s /.
Is.  In/.  22 12 f.  28 if.  Jer.  620721/1,  etc.

The  substance  of  the  prophetic  conception  of  religion  is
summed  up  for  all  time  in  Mic.  66-8  :  Wherewith  shall  I  approach
Yahwe  ;  bow  to  the  exalted  God  ?  Shall  I  approach  him  with
burnt  offerings  and  yearling  calves?  Will  Yahwe  accept
thousands  of  rams,  myriad  streams  of  oil?  Shall  I  give  my
firstborn  for  my  transgression,  the  child  of  my  body  for  my  own
sin?  He  has  told  thee,  Oman;  what  is  good,  and  what  doth
Yahwe  seek  of  thee,  save  to  practise  justice  and  to  love  charity
and  to  walk  in  humility  with  thy  God?

It  is  not  probable  that  the  prophets  distinctly  enter
tained  the  ideal  of  a  religion  without  a  cultus — a  purely
spiritual  worship  ;  sacrifice  may  well  have  seemed  to
them  the  natural  expression  of  homage  and  gratitude.
But  they  denied  with  all  possible  emphasis  that  it  had
any  value  to  God  or  any  efficacy  with  him  ;  he  had  not
appointed  it  ;  his  law  was  concerned  with  quite  different
things  (Jer.  722/1 ).

The  deuteronomic  reform  attempted  to  cut  off  the
abuses  of  the  worship  at  the  high  places  against  which
the  prophets  had  inveighed  by  suppressing  the  high
places  themselves  ;  and  made  by  consequence  consider
able  changes  in  the  old  customs,  the  most  serious  of
which  was  that  which  permitted  domestic  animals  to
be  slaughtered  for  food  without  any  sacrificial  rites  ;
but,  so  far  from  detracting  from  the  religious  im
portance  of  sacrifice,  Dt.  greatly  enhanced  it  by  incor
porating  its  ordinances  in  a  law  book  of  professedly
Mosaic  origin,  divine  sanction,  and  national  authority.
Ezekiel  lays  out  a  detailed  plan  for  the  sacrificial  cultus
of  the  restoration  ;  Haggai  and  Zechariah  zealously
urge  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  in  the  conviction  that
the  prosperity  of  the  community  depends  upon  it.  The
collections  of  torotk  made  or  edited  in  the  sixth  and
following  centuries  are  largely  occupied  with  ritual
prescriptions.

It  is  manifest  that  in  the  Persian  and  Greek  periods

sacrifice  held both in the actual  worship and  in the

p .  estimation  of  the  people  the  same  place

/ r-rSlav in  religion  that  it  had  had under  the

^erSds  kinSs  ;  see'  '*'  MaL17/-  83/  8  ff.
QS>  Joel  1  9  13  2 14  Dan.  8  ii /I,  cp  11  31
12n  Ecclus.  50n/l  i  Mace.  442/1,  etc.

In  the  Psalms  the  religious  spirit  of  sacrifice  finds
frequent  and  pious  expression  ;  e.g.,  266/1  276  6613-15
10722.  The  teaching  of  the  prophets  was,  however,
not  forgotten  :  God  has  no  delight  in  sacrifice  and
offering  ;  what  he  requires  is  to  do  his  will  with  delight
and  have  his  law  in  the  heart,  etc.  (Ps.  406/);  the
fault  God  finds  with  Israel  is  not  about  their  sacrifices
and  continual  burnt  offerings  ;  how  absurd  to  imagine
that  he  to  whom  belongs  the  world  and  all  that  is  therein
needs  their  beasts,  or  that  he  eats  the  flesh  of  bulls  and
drinks  the  blood  of  goats  !  (Ps.  507/)  ;  he  desires  not
sacrifice,  nor  is  he  pleased  with  burnt  offering  ;  the
sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit,  a  broken  and.

4222


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


contrite  heart  God  does  not  spurn — repentance,  not
expiation  ( Ps.  f>l  i6/. ,  cp  -jf. ).  The  Proverbs  teach  that
to  practise  uprightness  and  justice  is  preferred  by  God
to  sacrifice  (Prov.  21s;  cp  18.1622);  the  sacrifice  of
wicked  men  is  the  abomination  of  Yahwe,  but  the
prayer  of  the  upright  is  well-pleasing  to  him  (Prov.  158,
cp  2127  ;  see  also  166).

The  teachings  of  the  wise  concerning  sacrifice  in  the

second  century  B.C.  are  well  illustrated  by  Jesus  son  of

„. , Sirach. He  describes  with enthusiasm

Ph'l '  l'le  sP'enc'our  °f  the  temple  service  when

the high priest Simon offers sacrifice

(50iiJ^),  and  evidently  has  much  interest  in  priesthood

and  cultus  (cp  7  31  45  M/.  ). Hut  his  religious  estimate

of  sacrifice  is  thoroughly  ethical.

The  long  passage,  34  iS-35  [3121-32],  is  of  high  importance
throughout.  The  sacrifices  of  the  wicked  are  a  mockery  of
God;  he  will  not  accept  them,  nor  forgive  men's  sins  for  the
multitude  of  their  sacrifices  (34  19);  it  is  vain  to  try  to  brihe
God  by  offerings  (cp  Jubilees  5  16),  for  he  will  not  accept  them,
or  to  rely  on  an  unrighteous  sacrifice,  for  the  Lord  is  an
impartial  judge  (35  njf.);  offerings  made  of  goods  wrung  by
extortion  from  the  poor  are  like  murder  (3-420-22,  cp  18).  A
man  who  fasts  for  his  sins  and  then  repeats  them  is  as  one  who,
after  performing  his  ablution  to  cleanse  him  from  contact  with  a
dead  body,  goes  and  touches  it  again  ;  who  will  hear  his  prayer,
or  what  profit  is  there  in  his  humiliation  ?  (34  25^!).  Obedience
to  God  and  love  to  men  take  the  place  of  sacrifice ;  he  who
observes  the  law  makes  many  offerings  ;  he  who  gives  heed  to
the  commandments  sacrifices  a  peace  offering.  He  who  shows
kindness  offers  fine  flour  ;  and  he  that  practises  charity  sacrifices
a  thank-offering.  1  The  acceptance  of  God  is  secured  by  avoid
ing  wickedness,  and  forgiveness  by  abstaining  from  unrighteous
ness  (35  ijf.).  Literal  sacrifices  are  to  be  brought  when  men
visit  the  temple,  because  they  are  enjoined  by  the  command
ment  (v.  5),  not  because  they  have  a  moral  or  religious  value  in
themselves.  But  the  character  and  disposition  of  the  worshipper
is  still  the  essential  thing  (?'.  RJf.).  The  same  lessons  are
emphasised  elsewhere  in  the  book  ;  see,  e.g.,  1 &Jf.

For  a  representative  of  Hellenistic  Judaism  we  turn
to  Philo.  It  must  suffice  to  quote  a  single  passage.

There  are  those  who  think  that  slaughtering  bulls  is  religious
ness,  and  who  set  apart  for  sacrifice — inexpiable  sinners  that
they  are  ! — a  portion  of  what  they  have  got  by  theft  or  breach
of  trust  or  robbery,  in  order  to  escape  punishment  for  their
misdeeds.  To  such  I  would  say  :  The  tribunal  of  God  is  incor
ruptible  ;  those  who  have  a  guilty  conscience  he  turns  away
from,  even  if  they  offer  a  hundred  bulls  every  day;  but  the
blameless,  even  if  they  bring  no  sacrifice  at  all,  he  receives.
For  God  delights  in  tireless  altars  surrounded  by  the  chorus  of
virtues,  not  in  altars  blazing  with  a  great  fire  that  the  impious
sacrifices  of  unhallowed  men  (avifpiav  aOvroi  Ovtriai)  have  set
aflame,  which  do  but  remind  him  of  the  ignorance  and  deep
guilt  of  each  who  so  offers  (De  flantat.  J\\v,  ii.  §  25,  1345
Mangey).  See  also  I 'if.  Mos.  iii.  §  10,  2151;  and  on  the
character  of  the  worshipper,  especially  DC  I'ict.  §  5,  ^241  :  De
sacrificantibus,  §  \_ff~.  ;  DC  mere,  iiicrcti:  §  j,  •2264_/T,  Frag.
34,  etc.

The  superiority  of  uprightness  and  goodness  to  sacri
fice  is  not  infrequently  emphasised  by  Palestinian
ci  <sn\.  ~i  *  rabbis  ;  Hos.  66  ('  I  desire  mercy  and

51. ScllOOlS  01  -AT,  in t i  n

law  officacy  s;lcrifice, cp Mt.  9i3  127) 10i2

of  sacrifice M*-  6  8  Prov_  21 3  are  quoted  in  proof.

That God has regard, not to the

magnitude  and  costliness  of  the  offering  but  to  the  spirit

of  the  worshipper,  is  authoritatively  declared.

Without  dwelling  longer  on  this  aspect  of  their  teach
ing,  we  pass  directly  to  the  inquiry,  What  was  taught
in  Palestinian  schools  of  the  first  and  second  Christian
centuries,  or  defined  by  their  authority  concerning —
a,  the  efficacy  of  sacrifice  or  of  particular  sacrifices  ;  b,
the  religious  and  moral  conditions  of  their  efficacy  (§
52)  ;  and  c,  the  mode  of  their  operation  (§  53)  ?

(</)  The  effect  of  sacrifice  is  expressed,  as  in  the
Pentateuch,  by  the  verb  kipper  (see  above,  §  45),
'make  propitiation,  expiation'  ;  in  translating  passages
in  which  it  occurs  we  shall  render  as  consistently  as
possible  '  atone. '  The  general  principle  is  that  all
private  sacrifices  atone,  except  peace  offerings  (including
thank  offerings),  with  which  no  confession  of  sin  is
made.2  Sin  offerings  and  prescribed  trespass  offerings
atone  in  the  specific  cases  for  which  they  are  appointed

1  Cp  the  saying  of  Simon  the  Just,  Afoth,  1  2.

2  In  the  'world  to  come'  the  thank  offering  (tSiiah)  will  be
the  only  species  of  sacrifice  ; Tanchuma,  Emor,  14.

4223


in  the  law  ;  for  what  kinds  of  offence  the  burnt  offering
atones  (Lev.  14)  is  discussed  in  Tos.  Afind/io/h\Qi2.1
In  the  OT  all  sacra  publica  are  sometimes  regarded  as
atoning  (propitiatory)  ;  so  Ezek.  461517  (above,  §  45).
Piacular  value  attached,  however,  especially  to  the  sin
offerings — goats — at  the  new  moons  and  feasts,  and
on  the  Day  of  Atonement  (see  above,  §  37).  In  .I/.
Shfbuoth  lz-s  the  things  for  which  these  sacrifices
respectively  atoned  are  classified.  It  would  be  profitless
to  enumerate  them  here  ;  it  must  suffice  to  say  that  they
are  without  exception  cases  of  ignorant  or  unwitting
intrusion  of  the  '  unclean  '  into  the  sphere  of  '  holiness,'
as  when  a  man  ceremonially  unclean,  in  ignorance  of
the  fact,  enters  the  precincts  of  the  temple,  or  eats
'  holy '  food  without  knowing  that  he  was  unclean  or
that  the  food  was  holy,  and  the  like  C?y  Ts:1?  i'K3  I1?^
vcnpi  cnpo  nxcs,  .!/•  ShM.  1 4  end,  cp  Is  end).  Even
the  special  sin  offering  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  whose
blood  is  brought  into  the  adytum  of  the  temple,  atones
for  the  same  kind  of  offences,  but  for  such  as  were
committed  presumptuously;  cp  Lev.  16i6  with  v.  19.
'  For  the  rest  of  the  transgressions  defined  in  the  law,
venial  or  heinous,  presumptuous  or  inadvertent,  con
scious  or  unconscious,  of  omission  or  commission,
including  sins  the  penalty  of  which  is  excision  from  the
people  [by  God]  or  death  by  the  sentence  of  a  court,
the  scapegoat  atones'  (id.  16,  end).  This  is  the
authoritative  statement,  based  upon  Lev.  1621  f.
Another  authoritative  formulation  of  the  doctrine  of
sacrifice  is  found  in  M.  Yi>ma88f.:  Sin  offering  and
prescribed  trespass  offering  atone  ; 2  death  and  the  Dfl|9
of  Atonement  atone  if  accompanied  by  repentance ;
repentance  (by  itself)  atones  for  venial  sins  whether  of
omission  or  of  commission,  and  in  the  case  of  heinous
sins  it  suspends  the  punishment  till  the  Day  of  Atone
ment  comes  around  and  atones.  (9)  If  a  man  siys,
'  I  will  sin  and  repent  over  and  over  again,'  no  oppor
tunity  of  effectual  repentance  is  given  him  ;  if  he  says,
'  I  will  sin  and  the  Day  of  Atonement  will  atone,'  the
Day  of  Atonement  does  not  atone  for  him.  Trans
gressions  which  are  between  a  man  and  God,  the  Day  of
Atonement  atones  ;  transgressions  that  are  between  a
man  and  his  fellows,  the  Day  of  Atonement  does  not
atone  until  he  nas  propitiated  the  injured  party  (cp  Jer.
Yoma,  39  £,  ed.  Sitomir).

Somewhat  fuller,  and  fortified  by  biblical  proof  texts,  is  the
teaching  of  R.  Ishmael  concerning  four  kinds  of  sins  and  their
atonement,  which,  in  slightly  varying  forms,  is  repeated  in
many  places,  and  may  be  regarded  as  containing  the  generally
accepted  doctrine;  see  Tos.  Yfm  Kij>f>urimf>6  [4e] ;  YfmS
86a  ;  Jer.  J  oinii  45^ ;  Jer.  Shfbifdth  33^ ;  Jt'r.  Sanhtdr'tn
•2-jc;  Mekilta,  Yithro,  S  7(76*1,  \Veiss),  etc.  Ishmael  recojjniteil
the  chastisements  of  God  as  expiating  sin  in  whole  or  in  part;
see  below,  §  52.

(t>)  The  Mishna  and  R. Ishmael  include  repentance
among  the  things  which  obtain  the  remission  of  sins,
M 1 A  an(^  bring  us  naturally  to  the  question
. pra ana  wnetneri  jn  general,  repentance  is  re-
re  igious quisle  to  the  efficacy  of  piacular  sacri-
conditions  of  fices Qf  whether  they  expiate  sin  ,,

atonement.  of>erg  Operato>  without  regard  to  the
penitence  of  the  subject.

The  latter  theory  was  held  by  some  eminent  authorities,
among  them,  if  he  be  rightly  understood,  by  R.  Judah
the  patriarch,  who  maintained  that  the  great  expiation
of  the  Day  of  Atonement  (the  scapegoat)  atoned  for
the  sins  of  all  Israelites  who  had  not  deliberately  put
themselves  outside  its  effects  by  breaking  with  the
religion  of  their  people,3  independently  of  anything  in
the  conduct  or  disposition  of  man  himself,  a  view  \\  hich
might  find  support  in  a  literal  interpretation  of  Lev.
1622.  In  Jer.  Yoma  87,  where  this  utterance  of  Rabbi
is  recorded,  it  is  asked  with  surprise  whether  he  can
have  meant  that  repentance  is  not  essential,  and  it  is

1  See  also  Jer.  Targ.  on  Lev.  6  9.

2  They  expiate  certain  specified  offences.

3  By  atheism,  the  effacing  of  circumcision,  irreverent  liberties
in  the  interpretation  of  the  law.

4224


SACRIFICE

explained  that  he  held  that  in  this  respect  the  Day  of
Atonement  was  like  death,  of  which  also  he  taught —
contrary  to  the  general  opinion — that  it  expiates  sin
even  without  repentance.1  The  prevailing  view,  how
ever,  was  that  repentance  is  the  conditio  sine  qua  nan
of  expiation  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  as  is  laid  down
in  the  Mishna  quoted  above  (M.  Yomd  KB),  and  even
more  sweepingly  in  Tos,  Yarn  Kippurim  69  [4 9]  :  Sin
tii'tiTing  and  trespass  offering  and  death  and  the  Day  of
Atonement  none  of  them  atone  unless  accompanied  by
repentance  ;  for  it  is  said,  '  Only'  (-JN,  Lev.  2827)  ;  if  a
man  repent,  atonement  is  made  for  him  (l^TB3flD — i-e-<
he  is  forgiven),  but  if  not  no  atonement  is  made  for
him.  R.  Eleazar  quoted,  'And  clearing'  (npji,  Ex.
34?) ;  he  clears  those  who  repent,  but  not  those  who  do
not  repent.  R.  Judah  (ben  'Tlai)  taught  :  Death  and
the  Day  of  Atonement  atone,  with  repentance  ;  repent
ance  atones  with  death,  and  the  day  of  death  is  like
repentance  (another  reading  is,  '  by  means  of  repent
ance').  See  also  Yomd  85^,  and  esp.  86a.  In  accord
ance  with  this  doctrine  the  importance  of  repentance
and  its  effects  are  much  dwelt  upon  :  see  especially  Yomd
8611  />,  a  collection  of  eulogiums  on  repentance  from  the
lips  of  various  teachers.

A  fine  saying  may  be  quoted  from  Jer.  MakkSthlt  (also
Pfsikta,  Shubah,  158^)  :  Men  asked  philosophy  (ncrn),  What  is
the  consequence  of  sin?  It  answered:  Evil  pursueth  sinners
(Prov.  1821).  They  asked  prophecy.  It  answered:  The  soul
that  sinneth  it  shall  die  (Ezek.  184).  They  asked  the  law.  It
answered  :  Let  him  bring  a  trespass  offering  and  it  shall  be
forgiven  him  (i*»  Ijinjv'i).  They  asked  God,  and  he  answered  :
Let  him  repent  (rnicTI  nC'J?'),  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him.

The  nature  of  repentance  is  well  defined.  Who  is  a
truly  repentant  man?  it  is  asked.  One,  the  reply  is,
who,  having  sinned  and  repented,  does  not  yield  to  the
same  temptation  again  (  Yomd  86/>).  Genuine  repent
ance  is  a  resolute  turning  from  sin  ;  a  man  who
commits  a  sin,  and  confesses  it,  but  does  not  turn  from
it,  is  like  a  man  who  holds  some  crawling  vermin  (pi?)
in  his  hand  ;  though  he  were  to  bathe  in  all  the  waters
in  the  world  it  would  avail  him  nothing  ;  but  if  he
throw  it  away,  a  bath  of  forty  sgahs  suffices  to  make
him  clean,  for  it  is  said,  He  who  confesses  and  for
sakes  his  transgressions  shall  obtain  mercy  (Prov.  2813,
Taanith  i6a  ;  cp  Philo,  De  vict.  §  n,  2247  Mangey).
The  ethical  distinction  is  clearly  made  between  the
repentance  that  springs  from  love  to  God  and  the
counterfeit  of  it  which  is  only  the  expression  of  fear
inspired  by  chastisement  (  Yomd  86a  />}.

For  a  wrong  done  to  a  fellow -man,  we  have  seen
that  neither  repentance  nor  the  great  expiation  of  the  Day
of  Atonement  avail  to  obtain  of  God  remission,  until
the  offender  has  propitiated  the  injured  party  (M.  Yomd
89,  above).  This  propitiation  includes  the  reparation  of
the  material  injury,  the  confession  of  wrongdoing  and
sorrow,  and  the  obtaining  of  forgiveness  (cp  Mt.  523/1 ).
If  forgiveness  be  not  granted  at  the  first  seeking,  the
penitent  must  return  with  other  members  of  the  com
munity,  and  in  their  presence  confess  his  fault  and
beseech  pardon  (Jer.  YJmdSS).'2

An  expiatory  character  is  attributed  to  suffering,
regarded  as  the  chastisement  of  God  ;  whence  R.  'Aklba
taught  that  a  man  should  praise  God  not  merely  in
chastisement  but  for  it,  since  through  it  his  sins  are
atoned  for  (cp  i  Cor.  1132)  ;  and  R.  Eleazar  ben  Jacob
quoted  :  '  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  correcteth,  even
as  a  father  the  son  in  whom  he  delighteth '  (Prov.  812,
cp  Heb.  126).  Death  in  a  state  of  penitence  also
expiates  sin  (,l/.  YomdSS);  or,  in  the  more  detailed
exposition  of  R.  Ishmael,  death  finally  wipes  out  (pin)
the  remainder  of  guilt  which,  in  certain  great  sins,
neither  repentance  nor  the  piacida  of  the  Day  of  Atone
ment  nor  the  chastisements  of  this  life  suffice  wholly  to
atone  for.  Hence,  for  example,  a  criminal  sentenced  to

1  An  attempt  to  harmonise  the  opinion  of  Rabbi  with  the
Mishna  is  made  in  Yoind  851^.

2  Cp  a  corresponding  procedure,  Mt.  18  i$ff-

4225


SACRIFICE

death  was  exhorted  to  make  a  penitent's  confession  ;  only
then  will  his  death  be  an  expiation  for  all  his  crimes.

The  sufferings,  and  especially  the  death,  of  righteous
men  atone  for  the  sins  of  others.  Is.  53 12  is  interpreted
of  Moses,  who  '  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death  (Ex.
3232)  and  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors  (the
generation  that  died  in  the  wilderness)  and  bare  the  sin
of  many '  that  he  might  atone  for  the  sin  of  the  golden
calf  (Sot ah  14^).  Ezekiel  suffered  '  that  he  might
wipe  out  the  transgressions  of  Israel '  (Sankedrin  y)(i).
The  general  formulation  of  the  doctrine  is,  '  the  death
of  the  righteous  makes  atonement '  (Alo'ed  kdtdn  28a,
etc.) ;  cp  4  Mace.  627-29  1722.

(c)  The  only  explicit  answer  to  the  question  how
sacrifice  expiates  in  the  Jewish  authorities  of  our  period
is  that  of  Lev.  17 n  (see  above,  §  46)  ;  what  atones  in

„ „ ,  sacrifice  is  the  blood  (Siphrd  on  Lev.

63.  How  does ,  ,,-  •/<,!-?-

sacrifice l-c. ,  cp  Yomd  t>a,  ZMahim  6a). The

i  te^  question'  How  has  the  blood  this
efficacy  ?  is  not  raised  ;  and  the  specu
lations  to  which  Lev.  17  ii  seems  to  invite  by  its
association  of  the  blood  with  the  life,  and  in  which
Christian  theology  has  been  prolific,  appear  not  to
have  been  started.1  The  theory  that  the  victim's
life  is  put  in  place  of  the  owner's  is  nowhere  hinted
at,  perhaps  because  the  Jewish  doctors  understood
better  than  our  theologians  what  sin  offerings  and
trespass  offerings  were,  and  what  they  were  for.  Nor
is  there  any  discussion  of  the  mode  in  which  the  blood
of  sacrifice  operates  expiation.  The  verb  kipper  and  its
derivatives  are  used,  precisely  as  in  the  OT,  in  the
sense,  '  make  propitiation,  expiation,  procure  remission,'
without  recourse  to  etymology  and  imagined  '  primary
meanings. '  Hence  we  hear  nothing  about  the  '  cover
ing  '  of  the  sin  or  the  sinner,  or  the  'wiping  off' — or
'out' — of  guilt.'2  The  ancient  etymological  midrash
attaches  itself  not  to  the  verb  kipper  but  to  the  noun
'lamb.'  The  daily  morning  and  evening  holocaust
was  a  lamb  (kibes};  the  school  of  Shammai  said:  It
'  tramples  down  '  (kabaS)  the  sins  of  Israel  (cp  Mic.  69)  ;
the  school  of  Hillel  replied  :  What  is  trampled  down
comes  up  again  ;  sacrifice  '  washes'  (c23,  kibbes)  Israel
free  from  sin  (Pesiktd,  ed.  Buber,  6i/-).

Outside  the  ritual  sphere — in  the  ethical  sphere  of
religion,  that  is — it  is  repentance  that  atones  ;  it  is  the
condition  of  God's  forgiveness  ;  and  the  ultimate  ground
of  forgiveness  is  God's  love  ;  love  covereth  all  trans
gressions  (Prov.  10i2),  for  God  loves  Israel  (H'ay-
yikrd  R.  c.  7  begin. ).  As  a  motive,  the  merits  of  the
forefathers  are  often  referred  to.  See  also,  on  the
nature  of  repentance  and  its  relation  to  God's  forgive
ness,  the  fine  passage  in  Philo,  De  exsecrationibus,  §  8f,

It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  present  article
to  describe  or  discuss  later  theories  of  the  nature  and
effect  of  sacrifice,  such  as  the  poena  vicar ia,  or  the
sacramental  theory,  further  than  to  say,  as  the  result  of
the  whole  preceding  investigation,  that  they  are  not
derived  from  the  OT  but  imported  into  it.

IV. SACRIFICE  IN  NT

It  is  assumed  in  the  Gospels  that  Jesus  throughout

his  life  observed  in  the  matter  of  sacrifice,  as  in  other

_. - .  , respects, the Jewish law as it was

.- _ commonly  practised  in  his  time. Lk.

., „ .' relates  that  his  mother  offered  in  due
the  Gospels. .. .,

time  the  sacrifice  of  purification after

childbirth  prescribed  for  the  poor  (Lk.  'Iwff.,  cp  39,
Lev.  122468)  ;  at  the  age  of  twelve  he  first  went  with
his  parents  to  Jerusalem  to  the  Passover  (Lk.  241^).
He  kept  the  Passover  with  his  disciples  the  night  before

1  Philo,  indeed,  calls  the  blood  i^vxij?  (nrovSr/,  but  pursues  the
subject  no  farther.

2  These  senses — unknown  to  the  ancient  translators  or  inter
preters — were  discovered  in  the  Middle  Ages. If  either  etymo
logy  had  suggested  itself  to  the  Jewish  scholars  in  the  Talmudic
period  it  would  doubtless  have  been  the  latter  ('  wiping  off').

4226


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


his  death  (Mk.  14  12/1  and  ||s).  The  Fourth  Gospel
tells  of  several  other  visits  to  Jerusalem  at  the  annual
feasts  (lii/.  biff.  I*/.}.  Jesus  bids  the  leper  whom
he  has  healed  offer  the  sacrifices  appointed  in  the  law
for  his  purification  (Mk.  144  and  j]s,  Lev.  14).  The
injunction  to  effect  the  reconciliation  of  an  injured
fellow-  Israelite  lx.-fore  offering  sacrifice  (Mt.  §23/.),1
supposes  the  continuance  of  sacrifice  among  those
who  should  be  his  disciples;  cp  also  23  18  ff.  23.
There  is  in  the  Gospels  no  such  denunciation  of
the  sacrificial  worship  of  Jesus'  contemporaries  as  we
find  in  the  prophets  (see  above,  §  48)  ;  the  forms
of  Pharisaic  piety  which  Jesus  assails  are  of  a  different
kind  —  the  ostentatious  fasts,  almsgiving,  and  prayers.
He  quotes  Hos.  66,  '  I  desire  mercy  and  not  sacrifice'
(Mt.  §13  12?),  as  proof  that  goodness  to  our  fellow-
men  is  of  much  higher  value  in  the  sight  of  God
than  offerings  to  himself  ;  the  scribe  who  recognises
that  love  to  God  and  man  is  worth  more  than  all  burnt
offerings  and  sacrifices  is  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of
God  (Mk.  1232-34).  Such  utterances  are,  however,  not
infrequent  in  the  words  of  the  scribes  themselves.  It
cannot  be  said  that  the  teaching  of  Jesus  in  this  respect
differs  from  that  of  the  Jewish  masters  of  his  time,2
though  it  may  be  inferred  from  his  whole  attitude  that
he  set  far  less  value  on  observances  of  any  kind  than
they  did.  Mt.  ,  indeed,  represents  him  as  declaring
emphatically  that  not  the  minutest  particle  of  the  law
should  cease  to  be  observed  '  till  all  things  be  accom
plished  '  —  i.e.  ,  so  long  as  the  present  order  of  things
lasts  (5  17)  ;  and  as  bidding  his  disciples  do  and  observe
all  the  things  that  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  as  the
custodians  of  the  law  and  successors  of  the  legislator,
enjoined  (281-3);  but  this  is  rather  the  evangelist's
attitude  than  the  master's  ;  cp  Mk.  1  ^ff.  (  =Mt.  lf>i^).
In  the  accounts  of  the  last  supper  Jesus  calls  the  wine
'my  covenant  blood'  (rb  al/j,d  fnov  TTJS  SiaflijK^s),3  in
obvious  allusion  to  the  blood  by  which  the  covenant  at
Sinai  was  ratified  (Ex.  246-8).  The  various  additions,
'  \\hich  is  poured  out  in  behalf  of  many'  (Mk.  ),  'unto
remission  of  sins'  (Mt.  ),  bring  out  the  accessory  idea  of
atonement  through  his  blood;  cp  Mk.  1045  Mt.  2028
(see  below,  §  60).  Scholars  have  often  found  in  the
'  new  covenant'  an  implicit  abrogation  of  the  old,  with
all  its  institutions  ;  it  is  certain,  however,  that  the  early
Christians  in  Palestine  saw  nothing  of  the  kind  in  it  ;
they  continued  to  worship  in  the  temple  like  their
fellow-countrymen.  The  inference  is  first  explicitly
drawn  by  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
(chap.  10).

According  to  Acts  Paul  more  than  once  plans  a
journey  so  as  to  bring  him  to  Jerusalem  in  season  for  a
55  p  i  feast  (1821  20  16  ;  in  the  former  passage  the
'  words  are  lacking  in  NAB,  etc.  )  ;  he  declares
in  his  defence  before  Felix  that  he  came  thither  to
worship  (24  n),  to  bring  charitable  gifts  to  his  country
men  and  make  offerings  (wpoff  (papas,  24  17),  and  was
arrested  in  the  temple  in  the  midst  of  this  pious  occupa
tion  (7.-.  1  8).  To  give  the  lie  to  reports  that  he  per
suaded  Jews  in  the  provinces  to  abandon  the  observance
of  the  law,  he  consented  to  assume  the  cost  of  sacrifices
for  the  release  of  four  Jewish  Christians  from  the
Nazirite's  vow  (NTu.  613^:),  and,  after  the  usual  purifi
cations,  accompanied  them  into  the  temple  (21  20-26),
where  offering  was  made  for  each  of  them,  thus  proving
that  he  himself  lived  in  observance  of  the  law  (v.  24).
That  Paul  really  made  a  profession  so  contrary  to  his
own  precept  and  example  it  is  difficult  to  believe  (cp
Gal.  2  it  /.  ;  also  ACTS,  §7).

1  Without this the sacrifice  would  be of  no  avail,  as  the
Rabbis  taught. See  above,  §  52.

2  See  above,  S§  50  jff.,  and  Sttkkdft  49  £. To  infer  from  Mk.
12  28-34 that Jesus himself  probably offered no sacrifices is
unwarranted.

»  Mk.  1424  Mt.  2fi  28,  cp  Lk.  22  20  i  Cor.  11  25,  'the  new
covenant  in  my  blood  '  ;  cp  Jer.  31  31  Heb.  9  15^  etc.  On  the
original  form  of  the  saying,  see  EUCHARIST,  §§  if.

4227


56.  Hebrews.


We  have  already  referred  (above,  §  42)  to  the
important  passage,  r  Cor.  lOiS^ff,  in  which  Paul,  in
warning  his  readers  against  heathen  sacrificial  feasts,
argues,  as  from  something  that  would  be  understood
and  conceded  by  all,  that,  as  among  Jews  (cp  also
Heb.  13  10)  so  also  among  Gentiles,  those  who  eat  the
flesh  of  the  sacrifices,  sharing  it  with  the  altar,  become
commensals  of  the  God  whose  altar  it  is  —  the  sacrificial
meal  is  a  communion,  just  as  the  Christian  eucharist  is,
in  which  men  partake  of  the  table  of  the  Lord.

Figures  drawn  from  sacrifice  —  some  of  them  more
ingenious  than  natural  —  are  not  infrequent  in  the
Pauline  epistles.  In  Rom.  15i6  Paul  describes  himself
as  a  priest  (\eirovpy6s)  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gentiles  ;
the  ministry  of  the  Gospel  is  a  sacerdotal  function
(itpovpyovvTO.  rb  tvayyt\iov  TOV  0eoD),  which  he  performs
in  order  that  the  offering  (  irpofftpopa.  )  of  (consisting
of)  the  Gentiles,  may  be  made  acceptable  to  God,  being
consecrated  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  anticipation  of  his
approaching  death  he  speaks  of  his  blood  as  a  libation
poured  out  upon  the  sacrifice  and  priestly  ministry  of
his  converts  (Phil.  2i7,  cp  2  Tim.  46);  Christians  are
!  exhorted  to  furnish  their  bodies  as  a  sacrifice,  living,
i  holy,  well  -pleasing  to  God,  their  rational  worship
i  (Rom.  12  1,  cp  i  Pet.  2s);  the  contributions  of  the
Philippians  to  the  apostle  are  'a  gratifying  odour,'  an
!  acceptable  sacrifice,  well-pleasing  to  God  (Phil.  4i8).
The  references  to  the  death  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice  will
be  discussed  below  (§  57).  It  is  to  be  noted  here  only
that  Paul  does  not,  like  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to
the  Hebrews,  explicitly  declare  that  the  sacrifices  of  the
law  came  to  an  end  with  the  death  of  Christ.  To
draw  from  his  silence  the  inference  that  his  Jewish-
Christian  opponents  themselves  no  longer  regarded
sacrifice  as  binding  is  most  unsafe.

The  argument  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is
developed  in  a  running  comparison  between  the  sacri
fices  and  priestly  ministrations  of  the
old  covenant  and  the  work  of  Christ,
to  which  we  shall  return  in  a  later  paragraph  (see  §  58).
Here  we  shall  touch  only  upon  the  author's  view  of  the
intent  and  effect  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  law.  Sacrifices
and  offerings  are  made  for  sins  (5i,  cp  83  9g).

In  the  phrase  'gifts  and  sacrifices  '  (Swpd  re  /cal  OvtrCai)  the
words,  according  to  prevailing  OT  use,  correspond  to  Heb.
korhdn  and  minhah  respectively,  and,  thus  coupled,  the  Siapa.
are  by  pre-eminence  'sacrifices,'  the  Ovtriai,  'oblations,'  not  vice
versa,  as  NT  commentators  frequently  take  them  (cp  EV  'gifts
and  sacrifices  ').

They  do  not,  however,  really  take  away  sin  or  purge
the  conscience  of  the  sinner  ;  the  blood  of  bulls  and
goats  cannot  possibly  do  that  (104  n);  they  serve
rather,  in  their  stated  recurrence  —  the  author  is  thinking
of  the  solemn  piacula  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  —  to
bring  to  mind  the  sin  which  they  cannot  expiate  (10  3).
The  system,  indeed,  contemplates  only  what  we  should
call  ceremonial  faults.  The  sin  offering  of  the  Day  of
Atonement,  whose  blood  is  taken  by  the  high  priest
into  the  adytum  of  the  temple,  is  offered  for  the  un
witting  offences  of  the  people  (dyvorifj.ara,  97  ;  cp
IGNORANCE).  Sacrifices  and  offerings  cannot  restore
the  worshipper  to  his  integrity  in  the  forum  of  con
science  ;  they  have  to  do  only  with  such  matters  as
foods  and  drinks  and  diverse  ablutions1  —  prescriptions
of  bodily  purity  imposed  till  the  time  comes  for  making
things  right  (9g/  ).  The  blood  of  goats  and  bulls,  and
the  ashes  of  a  heifer  sprinkling  those  that  have  con
tracted  defilement,  make  them  (ceremonially)  'holy,'  so
that  their  body  is  clean  ;  in  contrast  to  the  purging  of
conscience  (9  13).  The  application  of  blood  is  a  rite  of
lustration  or  purification  ;  at  the  ratification  of  the
covenant  Moses  sprinkled  the  law  book  and  the  people
with  the  blood  of  young  bulls  and  goats,  '  with  water

1  That  is,  inadvertent  transgression  of  the  rules  of  clean  and
unclean.  This  is,  at  least,  the  more  probable  interpretation  of
the  obscure  connection.

4228


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


and  scarlet  wool  and  hyssop*  (Qig);1  in  like  manner  he
sprinked  with  blood  the  tent  and  all  the  utensils  of
worship  (cp  v.  23)  ;  according  to  the  law  nearly  every
thing  is  purified  with  blood,  and  without  outpouring  of
blood  no  remission  (a^>e<rcs)  is  effected  (92i_/".  ).a

The  writer's  conception  of  the  expiatory  rites  of  the
law  thus  agrees  entirely  with  the  teaching  of  the  Jewish
authorities  (see  above,  §  51).  For  him,  however,  the
system  was  typical  and  prophetic  of  the  one  real  and
all-sufficient  sacrifice  of  Christ.  When  this  had  been
made  there  was  no  longer  reason  or  room  for  the
sacrifices  of  the  law  (10  18).  Henceforth  the  only
sacrifices  are  praise  to  God  and  goodness  to  men
(13i5/,  alluding  to  Ps.  10722  116i7  Hos.  142  etc.).3

That  '  Christ  died  for  (inrtp)  our  sins  according  to
the  scriptures  '  is  an  article  of  the  common  tradition  of

- the  Christian  faith  which  Paul  delivered
57.  Deatli  01  , •

riv. •  * t> v to ms  converts  as  ne  nad  received it
it:  gamine  from those who were before him

les'  (  i  Cor.  15  3).  By  his  death  men  are
redeemed,  justified,  forgiven,  reconciled  to  God  ;  see
Rom.  ^25  5Bf.  832  2  Cor.  5  15  Gal.  14  i  Thess.  5  10  Col.
l2i/.  Eph.  ly  Tit.  "2  14  etc.  The  death  of  Christ,  that
is,  was  expiatory  ;  he  suffered  on  the  cross,  not  for  his
own  sins  but  for  those  of  others,  and  by  the  expiation
which  he  thus  made  they  were  delivered  from  the  conse
quences  of  their  transgressions  (see  further,  below,  §  60).
The  idea  of  expiation  is,  however,  as  we  have  seen,
closely  associated  with  sacrifice  ;  one  great  class  of
sacrifices,  among  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  was  piacular
in  motive  and  intention  ;  and  in  a  looser  sense  the  whole
sacrificial  worship  was  often  thought  of  as  atoning  (see
above,  §  45).  It  was  natural,  therefore,  that  the  death
of  Christ  should  be  conceived  as  a  sacrifice,  or  spoken
of  in  sacrificial  figures.  In  Paul,  however,  this  con
ception  is  not  developed  as  it  is  in  some  of  the  other
NT  writings.

In  the  much-vexed  passage,  Rom.  3  25,  '  whom  God  set  forth  as
a  hilasterion  through  faith  in  his  blood  '  (ov  irpoedero  6  flebs
iAao'Tijpioi'  Sid  Trun-ews  ev  Tta  avrou  ai/xart),  the  interpretation
'atoning  sacrifice'  (after  the  analogy  of  criarrjpi.ov,  xapio-rrjpioi',
TeAeorrjpioi',  etc.)  is  not  entirely  certain,  though  highly  prob
able  ;  the  more  general  '  means  of  expiation  '  satisfies  the  con
text,  and  the  addition  of  the  words  'in  his  blood"  does  not
necessarily  imply  that  this  means  is  thought  of  as  sacrificial.
Cp  MERCY  SEAT,  §  8.

Even  if  we  translate  Rom.  825  outright  '  an  expiatory
sacrifice  '  the  expression  would  still  be  only  a  passing
metaphor  in  a  context  of  a  different  tenor  —  Christ's
death  the  demonstration  of  the  righteousness  of  God.
Christian  theologians,  indeed,  have  been  so  long
accustomed  to  regard  the  OT  sacrifices  from  the  jural
and  governmental  point  of  view  —  that  is,  in  the  light  of
their  construction  of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ  4  —  that
they  hardly  feel  the  reference  to  an  expiatory  sacrifice
here  as  even  a  change  of  figure  ;  but  Paul  was  not  a
modern  theologian.

Xo  greater  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  idea  of  sacrifice  in
i  Cor.  57/i,  where,  in  an  exhortation  to  put  away  evil,
its  leaven-like  working  suggests  the  scrupulous  care  with
which  a  Jewish  house  was  purged  of  leaven  on  the  eve
of  the  Passover,  and  that,  again,  leads  to  the  thought
'  for  indeed  our  Passover  is  sacrificed,  Christ  ;  so  let  us
keep  the  feast  not  with  the  old  leaven  of  malice  and
wickedness,  but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity
and  truth.'

Evidence  of  a  more  pervasive  association  of  Christ's

*  The  heightening  of  the  rite  described  in  Ex.  24s  by  traits
borrowed  from  Lev.  14  5^  (the  leper)  shows  that  the  author
conceives  it  as  a  lustration.

2  Cp  the  use  of  the  verb  in  the  dsam  laws  (see  Lev.  5  10  16  18,
also  42631  34  etc.)  :  <cai  «fiAacreT<u  Trepi  ati-roC  6  tepeus  • . . *ai
ai^eflrjo-fTai  avriZ  (17  nSojl)- The  remission  is  the  consequence
of  the  propitiation  made  by  the  priest  with  the  sacrifice.

3  The  Rabbis  also  taught  that  the  'praise  offering'  (todali)
was  the  only  sacrifice  that  would  remain  in  the  '  world  to  come  '
(cp  above,  col.  4223  n.  2).

4  The  assertion  sometimes  made  that  the  Jewish  conception
of  sacrifice  was  similarly  influenced  by  the  idea  of  divine  justice
is  unsupported.

4229


death  with  sacrifice  has  been  sought  in  the  references  to
his  blood  as  the  ground  of  the  benefits  conferred  by  his
death  (Rom.  825  5  9)  ;  the  thought  of  sacrifice  is  so
constantly  associated  with  his  death,  it  is  said,  that  the
one  word  suffices  to  suggest  it.  But  in  view  of  the
infrequency,  to  say  the  least,  of  sacrificial  metaphors  in
the  greater  epistles,  it  is  doubtful  whether  ctT/m  is  not
used  merely  in  allusion  to  Jesus'  violent  death.  Nor
is  the  case  clearer  in  Col.  1  20  Eph.  17213;  the  really
noteworthy  thing  is  that  the  context  contains  no  sug
gestion  of  sacrifice  either  in  thought  or  phrase.  The
words  'for  sin'  (Trepi  d/xaprtas)  in  Rom.  83,  are  often
mechanically  translated  '  sin  offering,'  because  in
Leviticus  this  phrase  is  the  common  rendering  of
hattdth  ;  even  a/j.apTiav,  2  Cor.  5  21,  has  been  understood
in  the  same  way  —  the  death  of  Christ  specifically  a  sin
offering.  The  misconception  of  the  nature  of  the  sin
offering  which  underlies  this  strained  interpretation  has
been  commented  on  above  (§  28  a).1

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  noted  as  an  indication  that
the  idea  of  expiatory  sacrifice  was  not  prominent  in
Paul's  thought  of  Christ's  death,  that  he  nowhere  uses
the  characteristic  terms  inseparably  associated  in  the
OT  with  these  sacrifices,  i\dcr/co,u.cu,  e£i\d(rKo/u.a.i,  and
their  derivatives;  i\affrr;piov,  Rom.  825,  is  the  only
word  of  the  family  in  all  the  Pauline  literature.  This
group  of  words  is,  however,  rare  in  all  the  NT  ;  even
in  Hebrews  i\d<TKfffdai  occurs  but  once  ;  iXaoyxos  but
twice  in  the  NT  (i  Jn.  22  4  10).

For  the  author  of  Hebrews  the  priesthood  and
sacrificial  institutions  of  the  old  dispensation  are  but
KO  T  TT  v.  types  and  shadows  of  the  heavenly

Bl  reality  that  was  to  come  (85  10  1,  cp
99).  The  main  thesis  of  the  book  is  that  the  Son,  the
mediator  of  the  new  and  better  covenant  (86-13  9  15
etc.  ),  is  the  true  high  priest.  Now  every  high  priest
must  have  something  to  offer  ;  this  is  his  constitutive
function  (83)  ;  Christ,  therefore,  brings  his  sacrifice.
The  nature  and  effect  of  this  sacrifice  is  developed  in
chaps.  8-10  18,  in  contrast  to  the  sacrifices  of  the  law,2
particularly  to  the  sacrifice  (Ex.  244-8)  by  which  the  old
covenant  was  ratified  (9  15^  1029,  cp  1224  13  20),"  and
to  the  specific  piacula  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  in
which  the  Jewish  system  culminated.

The  Jewish  high  priest,  having  human  weaknesses
(728),  had  first  of  all  to  offer  a  sacrifice  for  his  own  sins
(727  9?)  ;  Christ,  the  perfect  priest,  had  no  such  need
(72628).  In  the  Mosaic  sacrifices  was  offered  the  blood
of  bulls  and  goats,  which  could  not  possibly  take  away
sin  (10411),  but  effected  only  a  purification  of  the
body  Cdgf.  i2/".  )  ',  Christ  entered  the  holy  place  of  the
greater  and  more  perfect  sanctuary,  that  is,  heaven  itself
(924),  through  his  own  blood,  having  found  an  eternal
redemption  (7  27  9  12  15  10  10).  Sacrifices  could  not  relieve
men's  conscience,  but  served  rather  to  call  sin  to  mind
(9  9  10  1-3)  ;  the  blood  of  Christ  purges  the  conscience
from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  (9  14,  cp  1022).
They  had,  therefore,  to  be  perpetually  repeated,  just
because  they  had  no  real  efficacy  either  objective  or  sub
jective  (96  \Qj,f.  }  ;  his  sacrifice  is  made  once  for  all,  for
ever  perfecting  them  that  are  sanctified  (727  9  12  25/1  28
10  12  14).  The  sacrifices  of  the  law,  finally,  did  not  open
to  men  a  way  of  access  to  the  holy  presence  of  God
(98);  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  a  new  way  is  made  by
which  they  may  confidently  approach  him  (10  19^.).

The  sacrifice  of  Christ  thus  not  only  expiates  the  sins
of  the  people  (i\dffKe(T0ai,  2  17),  but  also  establishes  the
new  covenant  foretold  by  Jeremiah  (31  ^\ff.  ),  under  which
God  lays  his  laws  upon  men's  hearts  and  inscribes  them

1  There  are  less  excusable  »rrors  in  the  books.  In  Sanday-
Headlatn,  Rowans,  193,  we  are  told  that  'the  ritual  of_the
sin-offering  is  fully  set  forth  in  Lev.  iv.  The  most  characteristic
feature  in  it  is  the  sprinkling  with  blood  of  the  horns  of  the  altar
of  incense.  '

-  On  the  author's  view  of  the  1'itter,  see  abote,  §  56.

3  This  parallel  is  suggested  in  the  Gospel  accounts  of  the
institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper.

4230


SACRIFICE


SACRIFICE


on  their  minds,  and  no  longer  remembers  their  sins  and
iniquities  (10i6  ff.,  cp  88_^)— a  real  remission  which
makes  all  other  sacrifice  useless.  Two  things  are
especially  noteworthy  in  the  author's  treatment  of  the
subject ;  first,  the  importance  attached  to  the  subjective
effect  of  Christ's  blood  in  purging  the  conscience  of  man  ;
and,  second,  the  ultimate  end,  the  creation  of  a  new
way  of  access  to  God  by  which  men  may  confidently
draw  near  to  him.  In  these  conceptions  we  see  a
positive  ethical  and  religious  interpretation  and  valuation
of  the  death  of  Christ  going  far  beyond  the  mere  sacri
ficial  expiation  of  sins  or  forensic  justification  of  the
sinner.  How  the  blood  of  Christ  has  these  effects  the
writer  does  not  rellect,  any  more  than  he  or  his  con
temporaries  reflected  on  the  mode  of  operation  of  the
blood  of  the  OT  sacrifices.

By  the  side  of  sacrificial  ideas  and  terms,  such  as  pavriffiy
9  13  1921  1*)  22,  KiDapiftiv  1  3  0  14  22,  ayid^eiv  10  10  14  29,  words
of  different  association  sometimes  occur:  Avrpwcrtf  9 17,  an-oAv-
Tpiocris  '.'15,  an-aAAacrtreti'  '2  15  ;  but  the  characteristic  Pauline
'justify  '  (St.ica.iovv)  and  cognate  words  and  phrases  are  absent.

The  references  to  the  death  of  Christ  in  i  Pet.  are
in  the  nature  of  allusions  rather  than  of  doctrinal  state-
_  ,  ment  or  argument  ;  their  phraseology
'  often  suggests  reminiscences  of  earlier
XT  writings.  Christ  died  once  for  sins,  a  righteous
man  for  unrighteous  men,  that  he  might  bring  us  to
God  (3x8)  ;  he  suffered  for  his  followers,  leaving  them
an  example  (22i,  cp  4i);  persecuted  Christians  are
partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings  (4 13,  cp  4i,  etc.);  he
carried  their  sins  in  his  body  on  to  the  cross  ("2241 — the
whole  passage,  vi>.  21-25,  is  an  application  of  Is.  53  to
Christ  ;  they  are  redeemed  (eXurpudriTf)  from  the  foolish
way  of  life  they  learned  from  their  fathers  by  costly
blood  as  of  an  unblemished  unspotted  lamb,  Christ
(li&f.);  one  of  the  ends  of  Christians'  election  is
sprinkling  with  the  blood  of  Christ  (12).  The  latter
phrase  suggests  a  passage  in  Heb.  (1224,  cp  1022
9131921),  in  which  epistle  alone  the  expression  occurs.
In  Ii8/!  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  blameless  lamb
of  Is.  687  (cp  9)  is  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  who
makes  such  large  use  of  that  chapter  in  2  21^  ;  for
the  rest  cp  Eph.  lj  ('redemption  [diroXirrpowij]  through
his  blood,  the  remission  of  our  trespasses')  Rom.  824/1
Heb.  9 12.  A  direct  allusion  to  the  paschal  lamb  (Ex.
12s)  would  probably  have  been  more  distinct.

The  references  to  the  sacrificial  aspect  of  the  death  of
Christ  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  are  few  and  of  the  slightest

_  T  ,  .  kind.  The  Baptist  hails  Jesus  as  the
60.  Johannme  Lamb  of  God  which  ^  away  the

.ings.  sin  oj.  the  WQrjcj  (i2g)i  with  evident
allusion  to  Is.  53;,  cp  4  f.  n  ;  in  17  19  'in  their  behalf
I  hallow  myself,'  ayidfa  is  a  word  of  sacrificial  associa
tions,  whether  we  refer  it  to  the  consecration  of  the
victim  or  (with  greater  probability)  to  the  preparation
of  the  priest  for  his  functions.  In  i  fn.  the  allusions
are  more  frequent  ;  we  read  not  only  that  Christ
laid  down  his  life  for  us — wherefore  we  ought  to  lay
down  our  life  for  the  brethren  (3i6) — and  that  our  sins
are  remitted  for  his  name's  sake  (2 12),  but  also  that  he
was  manifested  that  he  might  take  away  sin  (85),  that
he  is  a  propitiation  (iXacr/uosI  for  our  sins  and  for  those
of  the  whole  world  (22  4io),  and  that  the  blood  of  Jesus
cleanses  us  from  every  sin  (179).  But  everywhere  such
expressions  appear  as  familiar  Christian  phrases,  rather
than  as  part  of  the  distinctive  Johannine  conception  of
the  salvation  in  Christ.

The  lamb  in  the  Apocalypse  is  probably,  as  in  Jn.
1  29,  derived  from  Is.  53  ;  as  in  i  Pet.,  the  idea  of  purchase
(dyopd^eiv,  i  Cor.  620  723)  by  the  blood  of  Christ  has
been  combined  with  the  older  conception  of  the  expiatory
suffering  of  the  Servant  of  Yahwe  ;  see  56jf  138  14  3/.
The  other  representation  of  purification  by  his  blood
appears  in  7  14  ;  cp  22 14,  and  note  the  variant  in  1  5  :
\vffavTi  .  .  .  €K,  Xcvaavri  .  .  .  airt)  (TWV  a^apTiuv).

It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  present  article

4231


to  discuss  the  various  theories  which  theologians  have
-  „  .  from  time  to  time  set  up  concerning  the
'  .  ,  '  sacrificial  death  of  Christ,  nor  even  the
constructions  of  biblical  theology.  Many
of  these,  even  among  the  most  recent,  rest  upon  pro
found  misunderstandings  of  the  nature  of  the  OT  sacri
fices,  and  entirely  ignore  Jewish  conceptions  of  the  effect
and  operation  of  sacrifice.  The  task  which  remains  to
us  is  only  to  explain  briefly  the  facts  that  have  been  set
in  array  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs.

To  begin  with,  it  is  necessary  to  say  that  in  describing
the  death  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice  the  NT  writers  are
using  figurative  language.  Some  modern  theologians,
indeed,  still  affirm  that  '  the  apostles  held  it  to  be  a
sacrifice  in  the  most  literal  sense  of  the  word  '  (Paterson,
in  Hastings,  DB  4 343  /.);  but  such  writers  do  not
expect  us  to  take  their  '  literal '  literally.  The  author
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  for  example,  regarded
the  death  of  Christ  as  the  true  sacrifice,  because  by  it
was  really  effected  what  the  OT  sacrifices  only  pre
figured  ;  but  he  was  too  good  an  Alexandrian  to  identify
'  true  '  with  '  literal. '

In  the  second  place,  it  is  essential  to  note  what  the
problem  was  which  confronted  these  early  Christian
thinkers,  in  the  effort  to  solve  which  they  came  to  con
ceive  of  the  death  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice.  They  did
not  set  out,  as  has  frequently  been  supposed,  to  answer
the  question  how  God  without  detriment  to  his  justice
or  to  his  moral  government,  could  remit  sin,  and  find
the  solution  in  the  sin  offerings  of  the  law,  by  whose
blood  the  sinner  was  '  covered'  (so  the  common  etymo
logical  metaphor)  and  protected  from  the  righteous
wrath  of  God  ;  they  had  a  far  more  urgent  task,  namely,
to  account  for  the  death  of  Jesus.

The  death  of  Jesus  was  a  severe  shock  to  the  faith  of
his  disciples  ;  and  though  the  resurrection  speedily  re
established  this  faith,  they  had  need  both  for  its  con
firmation  and  for  its  defence  before  their  unbelieving
countrymen,  to  whom  a  crucified  Messiah  was  an  in
superable  stumbling  block,  of  proof  from  the  scriptures
that  his  sufferings  were  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.
That  there  were  predictions  they  could  not  doubt  ;  and
as  now  with  a  new  insight  they  searched  the  scriptures,
it  was  as  if  the  Master  himself  opened  their  mind  to
understand  them  (Lk.  2445 _^),  and  interpreted  to  them
the  prophecies  concerning  himself  (IT.  25-27). :

Thus  the  cross,  instead  of  being  the  refutation  of  his
claims,  became  their  most  conclusive  demonstration.
Among  the  scriptures  which  they  thus  for  the  first  time
understood,  Is.  53  was,  with  good  reason,  the  most
important.  Not  only  did  the  picture  of  the  suffering
Servant  of  Yahwe  seem  to  foreshadow  even  in  minute
details  the  experience  of  Jesus,  but  in  fact  the  author  of
the  chapter  had  undertaken  to  solve  the  same  problem,
viz.,  Why  did  the  Servant  (Israel),  for  no  fault  of  his
own,  suffer  what  seemed  the  extremities  of  God's  dis
pleasure  ?  His  answer  was,  The  sufferings  of  the  Servant
of  Yahwe  are  an  expiation  for  others'  sins,  '  the  Lord
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all  and  by  his  stripes  we
are  healed. '  2

The  idea  that  sins  could  thus  be  expiated  by  the
suffering  of  one  who  had  not  deserved  it  was  not  re
pugnant  to  ancient  minds,  in  which  the  sense  of  social
solidarity  was  stronger  than  that  of  individual  rights  ;
it  seemed,  in  fact,  most  natural.  The  sufferings  of  the
righteous  were  frequently  represented  as  an  atonement
for  their  people.  Thus,  of  the  Maccabasan  martyrs  it
is  said  :  '  Having  become  as  it  were  a  vicarious  ex
piation  (dvTL^/i>xov)  for  the  sins  of  the  nation,  and
through  the  blood  of  those  godly  men  and  their  atoning
death  (l\a<miplov  Bavdrov),  divine  providence  saved
Israel  which  had  before  been  evil  entreated'  (4  Mace.
1722,  cp  627-29) ;  cp  also  Rom.  5?  Col.  124.3

1  See  Holtzmann,  NT  Theol.  \  367 _ff.

2  Lipsiu.sinSchenkel,^?Z,2493;  Holtzmann,  tfTTkeo!.\jfigf.

3  See  above,  §  52,  end.

4232


SACRIFICE

The  great  influence  of  Is.  53  upon  the  early  conception  of  the
death  of  Christ  is  manifest  not  only  in  Acts  8  32-35^  Philip  and
the  Ethiopian  eunuch  ;  cp  also  3  13  26  4  27 ./C  30— JTCUS,  'servant,'
Is.  :V_:  13,  a  standing  title  of  Jesus),  and  the  epistles  (Heb.  928
i  Pet.  -221-25  ijn.  85,  etc.),  but  also  in  the  fact  that  it  has
worked  back  into  the  gospel  tradition  (Lk.  22  37  Jn.  1  29  36).

The  first  point  established  was,  therefore,  that  the
death  of  Christ  was  not  for  his  own  sins,  it  was  not  a
triumph  of  the  wicked  over  the  good,  an  inexplicable
tragedy  ;  it  was  an  expiation  for  the  sins  of  others.
This  is  the  tradition  which  Paul  had  received  (above,
§  t;7).  This  expiation  was  originally  thought  of  in
relation  to  the  punishment  of  sin  ;  by  virtue  of  it  the
sins  whose  penalty  would  otherwise  have  been  visited
upon  the  offender  are  remitted  and  he  is  cleared.  From
this  side  Paul  works  out  his  theory  of  atonement.  The
association  of  expiation  with  sacrifice  in  the  law  and  in
the  common  ideas  of  the  time  leads  to  the  employment
of  sacrificial  figures  and  terms  in  speaking  of  the  work
of  Christ  ; l  but  even  in  Hebrews,  where  the  idea  of  the
death  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice  is  most  elaborately  de
veloped,  it  is  plain  that  the  premise  of  the  whole  is  that
Christ  by  his  death  made  a  real  expiation  for  the  sins
of  men,  by  which  they  are  redeemed.  It  was  not,  there
fore,  the  conception  of  the  death  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice
which  brought  in  the  idea  of  expiation  and  propitiation,
but  the  opposite.  Hence  the  freedom  and  variety  in
comparing  his  death  to  the  different  species  of  OT
sacrifices,  as  they  suggest  different  aspects  of  his  work —
the  covenant  sacrifice,  the  Passover,  the  expiations  of  the
Day  of  Atonement.  Hence  also  the  fact  that  there  is  no
doctrine  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  in  the  NT  as  there  may
be  said  to  be  doctrines  of  redemption  or  of  justification.
On  the  OT  sacrifices  see  the  commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch
(see  EXODUS,  §  7,  LEVITICUS,  §  33,  NUMBERS,  §  23,  DEUTERO
NOMY,  §  33),  among  which  those  of

62.  Bibliography.2  Knobel-DUlmannmaybe  specially  men
tioned  ;  also, for  their  Jewish  learning,

Kalisch  on  Exodus  and  Leviticus.  Spencer,  De  legibits
ritualibus,  1675  (bk.  3);  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Mosaisches  Recht,1?)
1775;  Saalschiitz,  Mosaisches  Recht,  1846,  Arch.  d.  Hcb.,  1855  ;
Waehner,  Ant.  Ebra-orum,  etc.,  1743;  Ew.  Alt.  Isr.,<fr  1866,
ET  1876  ;  Nowack,  HA,  1894;  Benz.  HA,  1894.  On  sacrifices
in  particular:  Outram,  De  sacrilciis,  1677;  Kurtz,  Der  A  Ittes-
tamentlicke  Opferkultus,  1862,  ET  1865  ;  Biihr,  Symbolik  des^
mosaiscken  Culttis,  1837;  also  articles  'Opfer,'  'Sacrifice,'
etc.,  in  the  Bible  dictionaries  of  Schenkel,  Riehm,  Smith,
Hastings,  and  in  PRE.  On  particular  species  of  sacrifice  :  Thal-
hofer,  Die,  unblutigen  Opfer  des  mosaischcn  Kultus,  1848 ;
Riehm,  '  fjber  das  Schuldopfer,'  Siiidien  unit  Kritiken,  1854,
p.  93  Jf. ;  Rinck,  '  Das  Schuldopfer,'  ib.  1855,  P-  399  ff-  >
Schmoller,  '  Wesen  der  Siihne  in  der  a.-test.  Opferthora,"  St.  Kr.
1891,  205  jf.\  Vatke,  Religion  des  Alien  Testaments,  1835;
\\\:llhausen,  Prole?.  (iSjS),(^  1899,  ET  l885  '<  H-  Schultz,
Alttestamentliche  Theologie,$)  1896  ;  Smend,.-J//.  Rel.-gesch.,\^
1899;  Dillmann,  Alt.  Theol.  1895;  Marti,  Gesck.  der  Israclit-
isclien  Religion,*?)  1897.  Signification  of  sacrifice  :  Riehm,
Bezriff  der  Siine  im  Alien  Testament,  1877  ;  H.  Schultz,
'Significance  of  Sacrifice  in  the  OT,'  Amcr.  Journ.  of  Theol.
4-57_^  (1900).  Systematic  works:  Ritschl,  Rcchtfertigimg
•und  l'ersohnuKg,(3)  1889  ;  Cave,  Scriptural  Doctrine  tif  Sacri
fice,^  1890.  See  also  Hubert  and  Mauss,  '  Nature  et  fonction
du  sacrifice,'  L'annee  Sociologiqite,  1897-1898,  29-138  (based
on  comparative  study  of  Jewish  and  Hindu  sacrifice).

On  the  Jewish  sacrificial  system  :  Maimonides,  Yad '  hiizakah,
in  which  the  material  from  the  Mishna  and  similar  sources  is
collected  and  methodically  arranged,  is  indispensable,  not  only
as  an  exposition  of  the  system  but  also  as  a  key  to  the  scattered
sources.  Modern  works  are:  Duschak,  Gesch.  it.  Darstellung
desjiidischen  Cultus  ;  Edersheim,  The  Temple  and  its  Ministry,
1874.  For  Jewish  ideas  concerning  sacrifice  Christian  scholars
generally  turn  to  Weber's  Lehren  des  Talmuds,  a  work  not  only
uncritical  but  dominated  by  a  false  theory  ;  Bacher,  Die  Agada
der  Tannaiten,  3  vols.  (critical  sifting  of  the  material)  ;  see  also
Kohler,  '  Atonement,'  Jewish  Encyclopedia,  2  zf^ff.

Sacrifice  in  the  NT:  in  addition  to  the  commentaries  on  the
NT  and  the  comprehensive  works  named  above  ;  Pfleiderer,
Urchristenthum,  1887,  (2)  1902;  Der  Paulinisnnis,^)  1890;
Weizsacker,  Das  apostolische  Zeitalter, (-)  1892  ;  H.  Holtzmann,
NT  Theol.  1897;  Sanday,  Priesthood  and  Sacrifice,  1900;
W.  H.  Ward,  'The  NT  doctrine  of  the  relation  of  Christ's
death  to  the  OT  sacrificial  system,'  Bibl.  Sac.  51  246  Jf.  (1894).

G.  F.  M.

1  In  Is.  53  10  (asani)  the  connection  seems  to  be  preformed  ;
but  (B  translates  otherwise.

2  Of  the immense  literature  on  the  various  aspects  of  the
subject  only  a  selection  can  be  given  here. The  list  is  intended
to  include  works  which  either  are  of  value  to  the  modern  student
or  hold  an  important  place  in  the  history  of  discussion.

4233


SADDUCEES

SACRILEGE.  In  Rom.  222  the  question:  'Thou
that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou  rob  temples'  (AV  'commit
sacrilege'  ;  6  /35eXucrcr6/ixei'os  TO.  dowXa  iepoffv\cis)  is  to
be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  Dt.  7  25  where  not  only  is
it  commanded  to  burn  the  graven  images  of  the  gods  of
the  nations  with  fire,  but  it  is  also  forbidden  to  covet
the  silver  or  gold  that  is  on  them  or  to  '  take  it  unto
thee  ;  for  it  is  an  abomination  (mi;w)  to  Yahwe  thy  God,
and  thou  shall  not  bring  an  abomination  into  thy  house
so  as  to  become  an  anathema  like  it  ;  thou  shall  utterly
detesl  and  abominale  it,  for  it  is  anathema  '  (see  AHOMI-
NATION,  4  ;  IDOL,  §  zd}.  In  Jos.  Ant.  iv.  810,  §  207,
this  law  is  rendered  '  Let  no  one  blaspheme  those  gods
which  other  cities  esteem  such  ;  nor  may  any  one  steal
the  sacred  things  of  strange  temples  (/J.rjd(  cri'\dv  iepa
^epi/cd)  nor  take  any  treasure  that  may  be  dedicated  to
any  god.'  In  accordance  with  this,  in  Acts  1937  we  find
the  town  clerk  of  Ephesus  urging  in  the  case  of  Paul
and  his  Jewish  companions  that  their  offence  has  at
least  not  been  of  the  most  aggravated  kind,  they  being
'  neither  robbers  of  temples  (iepoavXovs)  nor  blasphemers
of  our  goddess.  '

As  regards  sacrilege  against  the  temple  in  Jerusalem,  2  Mace.
4  39-42  records  the  sacrileges  (iepocrvA»j(naTa)  committed  in  the
city  by  Lysimachus  with  the  consent  of  Menelaus,  the  riot  it  led
to,  and  the  death  of  the  sacrilegious  person  (iepoo-vAos)  beside
the  sanctuary.  The  alleged  attempt  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  to
rob  a  temple  (iepoo-vAeii')  in  Persepolis  is  alluded  to  in  2  Mace.
9  2,  and  in  2  Mace.  13  3-8  the  death  of  Menelaus  by  precipitation
from  the  tower  for  the  punishment  of  '  him  that  is  guilty  of
sacrilege  (iepo<ruAt'<x)  or  has  attained  any  pre-eminence  in  any
other  evil  deeds  '  is  related.  In  Ant.  xvi.  6  2  Josephus  records  a
decree  of  Augustus  in  the  course  of  which  it  is  enacted  that  the
sacred  things  [of  the  Jews]  are  not  to  be  touched  (TO.  re  iepa  eifat
iv  atrvAi'a),  and  that  '  if  any  one  be  caught  stealing  their  holy
books  or  their  sacred  money,  whether  from  the  synagogue  (<raj3-
/Sart-i'ov)  or  from  the  public  school  (avSplavot),  he  shall  be  deemed
a  sacrilegious  person  (iepocrvAov),  and  his  goods  shall  be  brought
into  the  public  treasury-  of  the  Romans.'  In  xviii.  3  $f.  the  ex
pulsion  of  the  Jews  from  Rome  in  Tiberius  's  time  is  said  to  have
been  due  to  the  wickedness  of  four  Jews  who  embezzled  Fulvia's
gift  of  purple  and  gold  for  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.

SADAMIAS  (SALA.VE),  4  Esd.  1  1  AV  =  SHALLUM,  6.

SADAS  (ACTAA  [A]),  i  Esd.  5  13  AV,  RV  ASTAD  ;
see  AZGAD.  The  AV  is  derived  from  the  Geneva
version.

SADDEUS,  RV  LODDEUS  (AAAAAIOC  [B]),  i  Esd.
845.  See  IDDO  (i.  ).

SADDLE.  The  word  231O,  merkdb,  is  in  Lev.  log
rendered  '  saddle  '  in  EV,  but  AV"'*>r-  has  '  carriage  '  (cp
iK.426[56]).  The  word  literally  mean:;  'place  of
riding'  —  i.e.,  riding  seat  (cp  CHAKIOT,  §  i,  begin.),
and  in  Cant.  3io  it  clearly  means  the  seat  of  Solomon's
palanquin  (see  RV  and  LITTKK).  Not  less  evidently
this  sense  will  not  suit  in  Lev.  (I.e.).  A  suggested
emendation  is  inns,  'rug'  (see  TAPESTRY).

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  though  riding  was  the  most  common
mode  of  travelling  in  Bible  days,  saddles  in  the  modern  sense  of
the  word  were  not  used  but  only  '  horse-cloths,'  or,  failing  that,
a  garment  (Mt.  '21  7).  Furrer  (BL  5  191)  compares  Ezek.  '27  20
as  showing  that  costly  horse-cloths  were  brought  to  market  at
Tyre  by  the  Dedanites.  But  the  text  is  corrupt  (cp  AV  and

V). For  th


RV). For  the  most  probable  reading  .see  CLOTH,  n.  i  ;  young
steeds,  not  cloths,  are  referred  to. On  the  camels'  '  furniture,'


Nu.  2221  etc.,  literally  means  'to  bind.'


SADDUC,  RV  Sadduk  (cAAAoyKoy  [A],  c&AAoy-
AOYKOY  [«].  ceAAoyK  [L]),  i  Esd.  82.  See  ZADOK.

SADDUCEES.  The  origin  of  the  name  Saddukim
(D^p-ny,  so  probably,  rather  than  D^pHV)  has  keen
explained  in  two  ways  :

i. As  if  from  saddik  (pnx),  the  specially  righteous  —

a  most  unsatisfactory  derivation,  although  favoured  by

-_  Jerome  and  other  of  the  Fathers. The

1.  Name: chanRe  from  sa^^  /,,-,-)  to  sadduk

fMTTTPTlT

, ,.  (am)  is  warranted  bv  no  analogy,  nor

explanations. ^  {he  name  as  explained  at  all  appro

priate. There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Sadducees  ever

made  any  special  claim  to  'righteousness,'  as  under-

4234


SADDQCEES

stood  by  the  Jews,  and  certainly  they  were  not  credited
with  it  by  their  opponents.  Such  a  claim  was  far  more
likely  to  be  made  by  the  Pharisees.

2.  From  the  personal  name  Zadok  (pins).  This  is
not  much  more  satisfactory  than  the  other,  for  it  does
not  account  for  the  well-attested  double  d  in  saddukim
(D'pnx),  and  besides  there  is  no  direct  proof  of  a  con
nection  with  Zadok.  Three  persons  of  that  name  have
been  suggested  :  (a)  a  certain  Zadok,  otherwise  un
known,  who  is  said  to  have  been  with  a  certain
Boethos,  a  disciple  of  Antigonus  of  Socho  ;  (6)  an
unknown  founder  of  the  aristocratic  party  ;  (c )  Zadok
the  priest  in  the  time  of  David  and  Solomon.

a.  For  the  first  (disciple  of  Antigonus)  we  have  only
the  authority  of  the  Aboth  di  R.  Nathan,  a  late  com
pilation, probably  of  the  ninth  century, which  carries
no  weight  with  regard  to  historical  events  earlier  by  1000
years. It is likely  that this represents  a  Talmudic
tradition,  since  the  Boethusians  are  sometimes  confused
with,  and  (even  in  the  Toseftd)  put  for  the  Sadducees.
The  story  is, in  the  common Rabbinic manner,  due
solely  to  a  desire  to  account  for  the  supposed  origin  of
Sadduceism  from  the  well-known  dictum  of  Antigonus
(Pirke  Aboth,  13)  that  we  should serve God  without
expectation  of  reward,  which  is  then  said  to  have  been
perverted  by  his  disciples  to  mean  that  there  will  be  no
retribution after  death. Apart from the  unhistorical
nature  of  the  story,  however,  the  saying  refers  quite  as
much  to  rewards  in  this  life  as  to  the  future,  and,  in
any  case,  accounts  only  for  one  side  of  Sadduceism.

b.  The  second  Zadok  (a  person  assumed  to  account
for  the  name),  although  supported  by  Kuenen,  may  be
dismissed  as  purely  hypothetical.

c.  The  least  unlikely  is  the  third  (Zadok  the  priest,
temp. David  and Solomon). Ezekiel  certainly  insists
strongly  on  the  'sons  of  Zadok'  (pm  '33)  as  the  only
legitimate  holders  of  the  priestly  office  ; but  his  pro
phecies  were  uttered  in  circumstances  wholly  different
from those in which the Sadducean and Pharisaic
parties  became  distinguished. In  Kzekiel's  time  Israel
appears  to  have  been  sunk  in  idolatry,  and  he  depicts
an  ideal  state  of  things  which  for the  most part  was
never realised. A great gulf is fixed between his
time and that of  Ezra. Modern Judaism, a  system
quite distinct from  anything pre- exilic, may be said
to  have  begun  with  Ezra,  and  the  people  never  again
fell into idolatry. The breach of continuity is so
definite  that  what  might  be  true  or  desirable  in  the  sixth
century  B.C.  forms  no  argument  for  what  was  the  fact
in  the  third  century. It  must  be  remembered  too  that
Ezekiel  was  himself  a  priest. A  much  stronger  argu
ment  might  be  derived  from  the  Hebrew  text  of  Ecclus.
51i2[q] (ed. Schechter), 'Give thanks to him who
chose  the  sons  of  Zadok for  priest,'  if  the  passage  is
genuine,  as  it  probably  is. However,  there  is  evidence
that  this  view  did  not  prevail  exclusively,  for  in  i  Ch.  24
the sons of  Ithamar  share  in  the  priesthood, and  in
later  times  the  priests  are  designated  by  the  wider  term,

'  sons  of  Aaron. '  The  form  of  the  name  is  not  the
only  difficulty  ;  it  does  not  appear  that  the  Sadducees
ever  claimed  to  be,  or  were  regarded  as,  sons  of  Zadok.
Whilst  they  chiefly  belonged  to  the  priestly  or  aristocratic
caste,  that  party  was  in  its  essence  political,  and  the
name,  which  denotes  a  certain  set  of  doctrines,  or  rather
the  negation  of  them,  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  them
as  a  term  of  reproach  by  their  opponents.  That  is  to
say,  it  was  used  as  a  theological,  not  a  political  term,
referring  not  to  the  origin  of  a  particular  family,  party,
or  caste,  but  to  the  special  form  of  supposed  heterodoxy
which  happened  to  be  characteristic  of  that  party,  so
that  a  man  might  have  been  described  as  a  Sadducee
on  account  of  his  views,  although  not  necessarily  being
a  member  of  the  party — a  case  which,  however,  was
unlikely  to  occur.

3. A  third  explanation  of  the  name  may  perhaps  be

4235


SADDUCEES

hazarded, though with great diffidence. In modern


2.  Another


Persian  the  word  zindik  is  used  in  the


explanation. sense  of  Manich*an,  or,  in  a  gener
sense, for  infidel, one who does n


eral
ot

believe  in  the  resurrection  or  in  the  omnipotence  of  God.
It  has  been  adopted  in  Arabic  (zindik"",  plur.  sanadik"
and  sanddika'"")  with  the  meaning  of  infidel,  and  also
in  Armenian  (cp  Eznik  [5th  cent.]  against  heresies,
chap.  2  on  the  errors  of  Zoroastrianism).  Mas'udi  ( loth
cent. )  says  that  the  name  arose  in  the  time  of  Manes  to
denote  his  teaching,  and  explains  that  it  is  derived  from
the  Zend,  or  explanation,  of  the  Avesta.  The  original
A  vesta  was  the  truly  sacred  book,  and  a  person  who
followed  only  the  commentary  was  called  a  Zindik,  as
one  who  rejected  the  word  of  God  to  follow  worldly
tradition,  irreligious.  But  the  term  cannot  have
originated  in  the  time  of  Manes  (3rd  cent.  A.D.  ),  for
the  Zend  '  commentary,'  whatever  view  be  taken  of  its
date,  was  by  then  already  becoming  unintelligible.  It
must  be  much  earlier  and  have  acquired  the  general
sense  of  infidel  very  soon.  Mas'udi,  indeed,  himself
implies  that  ^Jj  j  was  used  long  before  in  this  sense,
and  makes  Zoroaster  the  author  not  only  of  the  Avesta,
but  of  the  Zend  and  Pazend  (super-commentary),  parts
of  which  he  says  were  destroyed  by  Alexander  the
Great.1  Makriz!  (i5th  cent. ),  who  borrows  largely  from
Mas'udi,  confuses  the  Zanadikah  with  the  Samaritans
and  Sadducees,  and  says  that  they  deny  the  existence
of  angels,  the  resurrection,  and  the  prophets  after
Moses,  whence  it  has  been  suggested  that  Zanadikah
is  a  corruption  of  Zaddukim.  The  reverse  may,  how
ever,  be  the  case.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  Persian
word  was  used  about  200  B.C.  in  the  sense  of  '  Zoroas-
trian,' '-  and  if  so,  it  might  well  be  applied  by  opponents
to  a  party  in  Judaea  who  sympathised  with  foreign
ideas,  and  rejected  beliefs  which  were  beginning  to  be
regarded  as  distinctively  Jewish.  It  would  thus  have
been  used  at  first  in  a  contemptuous  sense,  and  later,
when  the  original  meaning  was  forgotten,  was,  in  the
well-known  Jewish  manner,  transformed  in  such  a  way
as  to  bear  the  interpretation  of  '  sons  of  Zadok  '  (pns'ja)
with  a  suggestion  of  'righteous'  (o'pns).  This  would
explain  the  daghesh  (for  suppressed  :)  with  pathah,  and
the  i  for  \  It  may  be  mentioned,  though  perhaps  as  a
mere  coincidence,  that  zanddika  is  used  for  Sadducees
in  Arabic  translations  of  the  NT.  That  they  did  not
hold  Zoroastrian  views  is  no  objection  to  this  explana
tion.  In  later  Jewish  literature  Epikurus  (omp'Sx)  is
used  for  a  freethinker,  without  any  idea  of  his  holding
the  views  of  Epicurus  (see  EPICUREANS),  and  is  con
nected,  by  a  popular  etymology,  with  the  root  ips.  In
fact,  after  the  real  meaning  of  the  name  has  been  for
gotten,  Epikurus  becomes  in  the  Talmud  doctrinally
almost  the  exact  representative  of  the  earlier  term
Sadducee,  the  errors  chiefly  condemned  in  the  '  sect '
being  their  denial  of  the  resurrection  and  the  rejection
of  the  oral  law.  It  is  very  probable  that  Sadducee
never  had  any  more  definite  sense  than  this.

The  beginning  of the party naturally  can not  be

traced. In its political aspect it must have  existed

3 Historv  of  actua"y  or  potentially  ever  since  there

Sadducees. ™  a  .Jewish  state'  *  the  ™w  takenf
below is  correct. Doctrinally too, if

it  is  in  essence  the  opposite  of  the  Pharisaic  develop
ment,  its  origin  goes  back  to  the  first  beginnings  of  a
law  which  had  to  be  interpreted.  The  uncertainty  of
the  evidence  and  its  paucity  prevent  our  assigning  any
definite  date  for  the  first  (Pharisaic)  amplification  of  the
Torah.  We  may,  however,  feel  sure  that  the  Law-book
of  Ezra  enlarged  the  existing  documents  sufficiently  to
meet  all  the  requirements  of  the  time.  It  must  have

1  The  question  of  the  origin  of  the  Zoroastrian  writings  is
extremely  difficult,  and  very  little  is  certain  except  that  the
Gathas  are  the  earliest  stratum. See  ZOROASTRIANISM.

2  The  meaning  of  '  infidel '  would  then  be  due  to  the  later
influence  of  Christianity  and  Islam.

4236


SADDUCEES


SADDUCEES


been  later  that  the  progressive  school  began  to  develop
tradition.  In  the  Mishna  tractate  Aboth,  after  the
canonical  authorities,  the  first  link  in  the  chain  of
tradition  (nSapn  n^s/re1)  is  the  '  Great  Synagogue,'  1  and
the  first  personal  name  is  that  of  Simon  the  Just  (prob
ably  early  in  the  3rd  cent.  H.c.  ).  No  doubt  the  first
steps  had  been  taken  before  his  time  ;  but  it  seems  that
historical  record  did  not  go  farther  back.  We  shall
perhaps  not  be  far  wrong  in  placing  the  actual  be
ginnings  of  the  new  teaching  about  300  B.C.,  and  this
agrees  very  well  with  the  conclusion  which  has  been
drawn  from  other  evidence,  that  after  the  time  of  Alex
ander  the  Great  Judaism  became  powerfully  affected  by
that  Persian  influence  to  which  may  be  traced  the
increasing  popularity  of  the  doctrine  of  a  future  life  with
rewards  and  punishments.  The  rise  of  the  liberal
party,  or  school  of  theological  development,  implies  the
formation  of  a  conservative  opposition.  It  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  the  two  parties  were  from  the  first  sharply
divided,  still  less  that  they  acquired  distinctive  names.
It  is  historically  more  probable  that  the  divergence
increased  gradually,  and  was  intensified,  and  at  last
definitely  realised  in  the  religious  revival  of  Maccabean
times.  As  to  the  first  use  of  the  name  to  indicate
differences  consciously  felt,  it  does  not  occur  in  the  OT
or  in  Ecclus.  ,  and,  in  fact,  the  earliest  documents  which
mention  Sadducees  are  the  Gospels  (but  not  Jn.  ).  There
is,  however,  no  reason  to  reject  the  testimony  of
Josephus  that  the  name  was  used  in  the  Maccabasan
period,  and  if  it  was  then  well-established,  we  may
assume  that  it  was  used,  if  not  generally,  at  least
sporadically,  at  an  earlier  time  to  denote  opposition  to
doctrines  which  are  afterwards  known  as  Pharisaic.  In
Josephus  they  always  appear  as  a  definite  political  party,
an  inexact,  though  convenient,  view  which  is  due  to  the
colouring  of  the  historian.  Under  the  earlier  Macca-
bseans,  as  would  be  expected,  they  are  not  much  in
evidence  ;  but  with  the  Hasmonseans  they  again  come
into  prominence.  John  Hyrcanus  definitely  allied  him
self  with  them.  Alexander  Jannaeus,  as  being  himself
high  priest,  was  supported  by  them  (cp  Sukkah,  48^),
and  his  war  may  be  regarded  as  a  contest  between  the
Pharisaic  and  the  Sadducean  parties.  In  their  political
relations  they  show  a  sympathy  with  foreign  influences
which  was  strongly  reprobated  by  the  nationalistic
Pharisees.  Thus  we  find  them  accused,  perhaps  justly,
of  tolerating  Greek  religious  practices,  and  even  of
adopting  them.  This  is  the  less  surprising  if  it  be  con
sidered  that  the  Judaism  which  they  professed  can  have
had  (to  use  a  modern  phrase)  no  religious  hold  on  them.
It  was  rather  the  machinery  by  which  a  certain  political
system  was  worked,  and  when  circumstances  changed,
it  could  be  adapted  to  the  new  conditions.  In  the
Roman  period  their  influence  diminished  again.  The
party,  always  in  a  minority,  was  not  likely  to  be  largely
recruited.  They  apparently  had  no  existence  outside
Jerusalem  with  the  temple  and  its  ritual,  the  centre  of
religious  and  political  life.  With  the  fall  of  Jerusalem
they  disappear  from  history,  and  a  century  later  the
Mishna  knows  of  them  only  by  tradition.  (See,  further,
PHARISEES,  §§  17-20).

It  would  seem  that  Sadduceeism  is  to  be  rightly
regarded  as  negative.  Wherever  reference  is  made  to

.  _.  .  .  it,  the  suggestion  is  that  certain  views  are
4.  Doctrine  :  .  .  'T^  •  n  r  n

,.  rejected. This naturally follows from

°  ' what  has  been  said  above. Phariseeism

represents  the  tendency  which  ultimately  resulted  in
modern  Judaism.  It  was  at  once  exclusive  in  that  it
strenuously  opposed  all  dealings  with  the  foreigner,  and
popular  in  that  it  provided  for  the  spiritual  needs  of  the
people.  The  doctrines  which  we  find  the  Sadducees
rejecting  are  precisely  those  which  had  been  deduced

1  The  rabbinical  accounts  of  the  great  synagogue  are  irrecon
cilable  with  the  received  chronology.  If  Ezra's  date  could  be
put  a  century  later,  as  has  been  suggested,  many  difficulties
would  be  removed.

4237


from  the  law  and  the  prophets  to  suit  the  requirements
of  the  time.  If  Judaism  was  to  continue  as  a  living
system,  it  became  necessary  to  adapt  it  to  altered  con
ditions  not  contemplated  by  the  law  of  Moses,  and
hence  arose  the  whole  body  of  oral  tradition  ("jpat?  mm
ns).  At  a  time,  too,  when  theological  speculation  was
widely  cultivated,  it  was  equally  natural  that  Judaism
should  be  affected  by  the  striving  after  those  spiritual
hopes  which  at  all  times  have  been,  rightly  or  wrongly,
the  most  cherished  source  of  comfort  in  human  suffer
ing.  Hence  arose  the  doctrines  of  a  future  life  with
rewards  and  punishments  compensating  for  the  apparent
incompatibility  between  virtue  and  happiness  in  this
life.  How  keenly  this  problem  appealed  to  the  Jewish
mind  is  evident  from  the  Psalms  (e.g.,  Ps.  73).  Per
haps  to  no  people  has  it  appealed,  for  various  reasons,
more  poignantly.  Naturally,  however,  it  was  to  the
poor,  the  weak,  and  their  sympathisers,  that  the  need
for  a  future  rectification  in  the  cause  of  justice  was  most
apparent.  It  is,  therefore,  only  what  would  be  expected
when  we  find  that  those  who  reject  such  comfortable
words  are  a  relatively  small  party  of  the  well-to-do  (TOI)S
evirbpovs  fj-ovov  ^XOVTWV).  Whilst,  however,  it  appears
to  have  been  generally  the  case  that  Sadducean  views
were  held  by  the  aristocratic  (i.e.,  primarily,  the  priestly)
party,  we  must  beware,  as  suggested  above,  of  regarding
aristocrat,  priest,  and  Sadducee  as  convertible  terms.
Many  of  the  priests  were  Pharisees,  as  we  see,  e.g.  ,  from
the  names  of  doctors  quoted  in  the  Mishna  with  the
title  '  priest'  (jro),  etc.,  and,  moreover,  the  separation
between  the  higher  and  the  lower  classes  of  priests  was
as  great  as  between  the  aristocratic  party  and  the  common
people.  Nor  again  was  the  difference  between  Pharisees
and  Sadducees  politically  insuperable.  They  could  sit
together  on  the  Sanhecliin  (Acts  236),  and  priests  and
Pharisees  could  combine  in  a  common  cause  (Jn.  7  32
45).  That  the  Sadducees  were,  however,  in  an  oligar
chical  minority  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  they  seem
to  have  found  it  advisable  to  conform  at  times  to  the
more  popular  Pharisaic  practice  —  e.g.,  Yomd  ig&,
'  although  we  are  Sadducees  we  are  afraid  of  the
Pharisees'  (c'E'nsn  jo  j'KTnD  UN  ppmc1  fi  y  «),  where
the  whole  passage  shows  a  strong  anti-Sadducean  feel
ing.  1  Cp  also  Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  1  4.

Taking  then  the  view  that  Sadducean  opinions  were

held  mainly  by  members  of  the  dominant  aristocratic

_ , class,  we  have  now  to  consider  those  opinions

5.  .uata. in  detaiL The  data  furnished  by  the  NT(

though  clear,  are  meagre.  The  account  in  Josephus  is
fuller  (see  especially  Ant.  xviii.  1  2-4,  Z?/ii.  814).  His
statements  are,  however,  coloured  partly  by  his  own
strong  Pharisaic  prejudice,  and  still  more  by  a  desire  to
express  himself  in  terms  of  Greek  philosophy.  It  must
be  remembered  that  philosophical  notions  which  appealed
to  the  Greek  mind  were  entirely  foreign  to  the  methods
of  thought  underlying  Sadducean  belief  or  disbelief.
In  this  respect  Jew  and  Greek  start  from  different
premises,  representing  a  racial  distinction.  Roughly
speaking,  the  one  founds  his  faith  on  the  will  of  God
and  the  revelation  bound  up  with  it,  the  other  deduces
his  scheme  of  the  universe  from  a  metaphysical  con
ception  of  the  necessary  conditions  of  being.

The  distinctive  Sadducean  views  may  be  classed  (as
by  Schtirer)  under  three  heads  :  (  i  )  they  denied  the
resurrection,  personal  immortality,  and  retribution  in  a
future  life  ;  (2)  they  denied  angels,  spirits,  and  demons  ;
(3)  they  denied  fate  (ei/j.ap/J.{vri),  and  postulated  freedom
of  action  for  every  man  to  choose  good  or  evil,  and
work  out  his  own  happiness  or  the  reverse.

i.  With  regard  to  the  first  point,  Sadduceeism  un
doubtedly  represents  the  old  Jewish  standpoint.  What
ever  doctrines  may  be  inferred  from  the  Torah,  it  is

1  This  seems  possibly  true  to  the  circumstances,  though
Talmudic  references  are  not  to  be  implicitly  accepted.  The
Gemara  is  not  to  be  trusted  for  distant  historical  /acts,  but  may
represent  a  true  traditional  attitude.

4238


SADDUCEES


SAFFRON


evident that the theory  of a future life and future

. _,  ,. retribution is not inculcated in it.

6.  Resurrection.  The  objecl  of_  at  any  rate  the  earher

parts  of  the  Torah  was  not  spiritual  teaching,  apart
from  the  edification  to  be  derived  from  the  historical
narrative,  but  to  set  forth  the  practical  details  of  the
ritual  of  Yahweism.  Such  words  as  '  holiness '  and
'  purity  '  had  a  technical  religious  meaning  quite  distinct
from  the  moral  content  which  has  been  put  into  them
by  later  theology.  From  a  law-book  the  poetical,  the
spiritual,  the  emotional  were  fittingly  excluded.  Into
the  causes  of  the  development  which  we  find  in  the
other  canonical  books,  in  Phariseeism,  and  in  later  Jewish
thought,  we  need  not  enter  here  (see  PHARISKES).
That  development  was  necessary.  Sadduceeism  only
emphasised  the  earlier  point  of  view  by  rejecting  the
new  doctrines  with  unvarying  conservatism.  When  we
consider  that  the  Sadducees  had  a  certain  sympathy  with
Greek  and  foreign  influences  generally,  this  attitude
may  be  thought  remarkable.  It  is  not  so  if  we  rightly
understand  the  nature  of  the  original  Torah  and  the
Semitic  mind  which  is  deeply  interested  in  the  problems
of  the  present,  but  shows  only  a  slight  capacity  or
inclination  for  dealing  with  the  questions  of  modern
theology.  The  Jewish  mind  can  indeed  insist  on  the
oneness  of  God  ;  but  how  misplaced  in  a  Midrash,  nay,
how  impossible,  would  be  for  instance  a  discussion  of
the  doctrine  of  homoousia,  even  if  it  could  arise.  Such
questions  have,  or  had,  an  attraction  for  the  western
mind.  They  have  none  for  the  Jew.  Moreover,  we
may  well  suppose  that  in  the  aristocratic  party  a  certain
materialistic  tendency  would  show  itself,  that  practical
politics  would  absorb  attention  to  the  exclusion  of  more
contemplative  pursuits.  Whilst  thus  holding  to  primi
tive,  formal  Judaism,  the  Saclducees  would,  so  far  as
they  were  disposed  to  be  controversial,  look  with  sus
picion  on  Pharisaic  developments,  as  tending,  by  a  sort
of  self-contradiction,  to  vitiate  the  observance  of  the
Law.  The  Pharisee  was,  indeed,  exact  in  paying  tithes
of  the  mint  and  the  cummin  ;  but  a  later  teacher  could
say,  '  Whoever  gives  a  poor  man  a  coin  attains  six
blessings  ;  but  he  who  addresses  to  him  soothing  words
attains  eleven  blessings'  ( n&c'i  Tnno  'jj*"?  rmne  jnun  hi
mD-a  sr:i  -pans  C-ITU  iD"2cm  nn-n).  Besides  the  danger
of  such  teaching  in  undermining  the  foundations  on
which  the  Sadducean  position  rested,  there  may  also
have  been  a  conscientious  desire  to  arrest  the  breaking
up  of  that  system  by  which  alone  the  nation  could
rightly  serve  God.  They  accordingly  rejected  entirely
the  oral  tradition  (ns  Si'Ds?  min)  by  which  the  Pharisees
supplemented  the  written  Law.  According  to  Phari
saic  doctrine  this  was  of  equal  authority  with  the
written  Law,  and  in  a  sense  even  more  binding,  since
it  provided  for  what  was  not  to  be  found  in  the  Law.
Later  teachers  claimed  that  the  whole  of  tradition  was
revealed  to  Moses,  who  transmitted  it  orally  to  Joshua
and  the  seventy  elders.  The  difficulty  of  preserving  it
intact  through  so  many  centuries  was  evaded  by  the
theory  of  a  sort  of  apostolic  succession  (n^apn  rbxhw),  a
series  of  authoritative  teachers.  The  whole  of  this
superstructure,  and  therewith  the  doctrines  deduced  by
it,  chief  among  which  was  that  of  the  future  life,  were
ignored  by  the  Sadducees.

2..  With  regard  to  the  second  specific  point — the  dis
belief  in  angels,  spirits,  and  demons  —  the  Sadducean
.  .  position  was  probably  in  advance  of  the
°  Torah,  where  we  still  find  traces  of  the  belief,
common  to  all  primitive  peoples,  in  the  existence  and
power  of  demons.  How  they  could  abandon  this,  still
more  how  tney  could  explain  it  (e.g. ,  the  rite  connected
with  Azazel)  we  do  not  know.  It  is,  however,  a  natural
consequence  of  the  materialistic  tendency  and  of  the
attitude  described  above.  No  doubt  it  was  also
emphasised  by  opposition  to  the  Pharisaic  development
of  angelology  and  demonology.  Already  in  the  Book
of  Daniel  angels  have  names  ;  in  the  Midrashim  and

4239


the  Talmud  the  system  is  further  extended,  and  later,  in
the  '  practical  Kabbalah,'  it  passes  all  bounds.

3. For  the  third  point — the  freedom  of  will  and  the
denial  of  fate — we  have  only  the  authority  of  Josephus.
_  ... Schiirer  points  out  that  this  way  of  stating

ie-wi  1.  tjie  case  js  entirejy  un.jewish,  although
the  question  of  God's  providence  was  undoubtedly  dis
cussed.  In  spite  of  its  not  being  confirmed  by  other
evidence,  it  is  very  probable  that  Josephus'  account  is
substantially  correct.  The  doctrine  is  in  agreement
with  the  worldly,  materialistic  character  of  Sadduceeism,
noted  above,  and  with  their  tendency  to  keep  to  the
simplest  elements  of  faith,  rejecting  all  admixture  of  the
supernatural.  It  also  probably  represents  the  point  of
view  of  the  Pentateuch  (e.g.,  Dt.  4  and  6).  The  Sad
ducees  would  not  have  denied  that  good  and  bad  actions
brought  their  respective  consequences  in  this  world,  for
a  moral  sanction  is  necessary  ;  but  they  would  reject
any  theory  of  predestination  as  well  as  that  of  future
retribution.  Possibly  Persian  influence  may  be  traceable
here.

There  remains  yet  a  fourth  point  to  be  considered.
According  to  the  church  fathers  (Origen,  Jerome)  the
_  ,  Sadducees  accepted  only  the  Torah,  reject-
ing  all  the  other  canonical  books.  This
seems  to  be  a  misconception  based  on  Mt.  2'2-^if.
Why  should  Jesus  have  chosen  an  argument  from  the
Pentateuch,  when  others  more  obvious  were  to  be  found
in  the  other  books,  unless  the  Sadducees  acknowledged
only  the  authority  of  the  Pentateuch  in  such  matters  ?
We  have,  however,  no  evidence  for  such  a  view,  which
could  hardly  fail  to  be  laid  to  their  charge  if  there  were
the  least  ground  for  it.  The  argument  from  silence  is
not  conclusive  ;  but  it  is  very  strong  here,  for  nothing
could  have  been  better  calculated  to  damage  an  opponent
than  to  show  that  he  rejected  any  of  the  canonical
books.  The  truth  is,  however,  that  the  Jews  have
always  regarded  the  Torah  as  on  a  wholly  different
level  of  holiness  and  authority  from  the  other  books.
In  the  time  of  Ezra,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the
starting-point  of  Judaism,  as  we  understand  it,  the
Torah  must  have  been  the  only  sacred  writing.  Other
documents  won  their  way  only  gradually  to  a  canonical
position.  The  conservative  Sadducees  would,  no  doubt,
hold  more  rigidly  than  others  to  the  supreme  position  of
the  Torah,  and  would  view  with  a  certain  suspicion  any
enlargement  of  the  canon  as  showing  a  Pharisaic
tendency.  (Cp  the  attitude  of  the  Protestant  churches
towards  the  Apocrypha. )  It  must  be  admitted  too  that
the  prophets  and  hagiographa  generally  lend  more
countenance  to  Pharisaic  views  than  the  Torah,  and
were,  in  fact,  a  result  of  the  same  development.  Though
we  need  not  suppose,  therefore,  that  they  rejected  them,
the  Sadducees  may  well  have  used  them  only  '  for
example  of  life  and  instruction  of  manners '  ;  and  the

|  argument  in  Mt.  22  32  is  probably  chosen  from  the  Torah
in  order  to  be  above  criticism.  The  statement  of  the
fathers  is  no  doubt  partly  due  to  a  very  common  con
fusion  with  the  SAMARITANS  (q.v. ),  who  did  accept  only
the  Torah  (for  the  same  reasons  which  caused  the

|  Sadducees  to  regard  it  with  special  veneration),  and,
curiously  enough,  use  the  very  passage  quoted  in  Mt.
as  an  argument  for  the  future  life.  A.  F..  c.

For  the  literature  see  SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES,  §  21.

SADOC. i. (SADOCH]  4  Esd.  1 1. See  ZADOK.
•2.  (<raS<aic  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.  1 14. See  GENEALOGIES  ii.

SAFFRON  (Din?,  karkom  ;  KROKOC,  Cant.4i4t).
The  Hebrewword  is  probably  identical  with  Syr.  kurkcma,
Ar.  kurkum,  both  of  which  denote  the  crocus  or  saffron.
The  same  word  is  found  in  Persian  and  Armenian  (in
the  latter  probably  borrowed  from  Heb.  ;  Lag.  GA  58,
Arm.  St.  161),  and  the  common  origin  seems  to  be
Sans,  kunkuma.  The  source  of  saffron  is  Crocus  salivas,
L. ,  a  plant  of  doubtful  origin,1  which,  though  found  in

1  See  the  discussion  in  Fli'ick.  and  Hanb.12'
4240


SAIL


SAINT


Palestine  (FFP  422),  is  not  apparently  indigenous  there.
D.  H.  Mtiller,  on  the  other  hand,  separating  karkom
from  the  other  words  mentioned  above,  connects  it  with
Ar.  kamkam  (Sab.  C3D3)  and  Gk.  KdyKa/j-ov,1  and  so
takes  it  to  be  the  resin  of  the  dirw  or  mastic  tree  —  i.e.  ,
s<)>-/,  'is  (Sa6.  Denkm.  82).  But  Muller's  identification
of  Ka.yKa.iJ.ov  with  the  resin  of  the  mastic  tree  is  a
mistake  :  KdyKo.fi.ov  is,  according  to  Fraas  (Syn.  PI.  Fl.
class.  87),  derived  from  Amyris  [.—  Balsamodendroti\
Kataf,^  and  is  in  all  probability  therefore  the  fragrant
gum  much  esteemed  in  the  east  as  '  Bissa  bol  '  —  in  fact,
an  inferior  kind  of  myrrh.  Mordtmann  does  not
believe  in  the  connection  of  cins  with  kamkam  and
K  ay  K  a  [MOV  :  and  it  seems  best  to  follow  ancient  tradition
in  identifying  the  Heb.  word  with  saffron.

N.  M.  —  w.  T.  T.  -D.

SAIL.  i.  tnSD,  miphras;  crpooMNH,  Ezek.  27y,
'  Thy  sail  to  serve  as  ensign  '  (D3  ;  6d£a).

2.  DJ,  nes  ;  OTj/neiov  or  TO.  i<7Ti'a  ('?),  Is.  33  23,  'The  many-
coloured  sails  served  in  ancient  times  as  distinguishing  marks.'
See  SHIT.

SAINT.  'We  have  to  deal,  in  this  article,  not  with
the  subject  of  Christian,  or  rather  biblical,  '  perfection,'

1 U  e  of  kut  w'tl1  tlle  use  °f  '  saint  '  and  '  noly  '  in

'  the  EV. The  former  word,  as  a  rendering,

either  of  kadtf  or of  hdsld,  has  had the

unfortunate effect of obscuring characteristic biblical

ideas. Readers  of  the  EV  must  therefore  supply  for

themselves  the  necessary  mental  correction  or  interpre

tation. AV  applies  the  term  in  OT  :

1.  To  the  angels  (kfdosim,  G'uhp),  Job5i 15  15  Ps.
89  5  7  [6  8] Zech.  14s. RV, however,  calls  the  angels
'  holy ones.  ' Whether even  this phrase  conveys  the
right  idea  to  a  modern reader may  be  doubted  (see
c),  and  we  may  well  be  grateful  to  Budde  (note  on  Job
5i)  for  his  suggestion  '  heavenly  ones.'

2.  To persons who are 'holy'  —  i.e., consecrated
(kaJos,  c;np,  kaddls,  o^g)  —  e.g.  ,  Ps.  106  16  (Aaron),  34  9
fio]  Dan.  7  18  21  /.  25  27  (faithful  worshippers  of  Yahwe).
So,  too,  RV.

3.  To  Israelites  who  fulfil  the  duties  of  piety  (hdsid,
Ton  ;  ocrios,  sanctus,  see  LOVINGKINDNESS),  i  S.  2g  (©
Shaw  or  om.  )  Ps.  16  10  304  [5]  50s  52g  [n]  792  Prov.
28  ((5,  (vXafiov/iifvuv),  etc.  ; so  RV,  except  in  i  S.  2g,
where  it  gives (not  happily)  'holy  ones,'  and  in  mg.
'  godly  ones.  ' '  Loyal  ones  '  would  give  one  side  of
the  meaning  (cp  Ps.  50s?). In  NT  (see  above)  the  EV
uses '  saints  '  often  of  Christians. It may  be  a  con
venient  term  ; but  if  ideas  are  to  be  translated,  '  God's
people  ' would perhaps  be  a  better  rendering, with  a
marg.  'holy  ones  —  i.e.  ,  consecrated  ones.'

Two  passages  in  Rev.  deserve  attention.  In  163,  AVs  '  thou
king  of  saints  '(6  /SacrtAeus  -riav  ayiuiv,  TR,  Ti.WHnig.  o  /3.  T.
Uyiov)  has  become  in  RV  '  thou  king  of  the  ages  '  (6  /Sa<r.  TMV
aituviav,  RV,  WH)  ;  and  in  1820  AV's  'ye  holy  apostles  and
prophets  '  has  become  '  ve  saints,  and  ye  apostles,  and  ye
prophets.'  Textual  criticism  certainly  has  had  its  rights;  but
the  rendering  '  saints  '  seems  an  unnecessary  coneession  to  a
usage  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance.
'  Ye  holy  ones  '  would  surely  have  been  adequate.

There  are  also  great  difficulties  connected  with  EV's
use  of  the  rendering  'holy,'  especially  when  it  is  used
for^"^(°nwhichcpDr.  Par.  Ps.  443/  ;

K[^rl£  P*?L™>  S44/  :  BDB,  ,

i.  Ps.  862,  'Preserve  thou  my  soul,
for  I  am  holy  '  (hdsid}  ;  so  AV,  cp  Vg.  and  Jer.  ;  but
RV  '  godly.'  AV  is  here  even  more  misleading  than  in
60s  ('gather  my  saints  [hasfday]  together  unto  me').
1  Who  can  be  the  speaker  of  these  words  but  the  Sinless
One?'  asks  Augustine.  This  of  course  is  theology,  not
exegesis  (cp  OPs.  260),  and  even  if  we  take  Ps.  86  to  be
a  psalm  of  the  pious  community  (Smend,  Ba.  ,  etc.  ),  yet,
like  Job,  the  community,  while  maintaining  its  conscious
ness  of  righteousness,  would  abstain  from  calling  itself

1  On  this  see  Diosc.  1  23.  Plin.  HNI2  44.

2  Sprengel  (Hist.  rei  Hcrb.\\Tz)  calls  this  Amyris  Kafal,
which  is  possibly  the  same  thing.

4241


2


subjectively  '  holy  '  or  '  sinless.'  '  It  is  not  to  the  state  of
holiness  that  the  Psalmist  lays  claim,  but  to  the  over
mastering  affection  of  moral  love,  the  same  in  kind  as
that  of  which  he  is  conscious  towards  his  brother  Israel
ites,  and  in  some  degree  towards  his  brother  men.  To
a  good  Israelite  there  is  no  boastfulness  implied  in  such
a  claim  as  the  Psalmist's.  Whom  should  he  love  but
Yahwe,  who  has  granted  Israel  a  "covenant  ordered
in  all  things  and  sure,"  a  covenant  based  on  the  pre
supposition  that  those  who  desire  its  benefits  are  bound
by  practical  love  to  each  other,  and,  both  as  individuals
and  as  a  community,  by  worshipping  and  obedient  love
to  Jehovah '  (Aids,  345 /. )  ?  Kirkpatrick  (op.  cit. ),  how
ever,  following  Hupfeld,  thinks  the  passive  sense,  '  be
loved  ' — i.e. ,  the  object  of  thy  lovingkindness,  '  far  more
suitable.'  See  LOVINGKINDNESS.

2.  Ps.  16 10,  '  Neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One1
(hdsiil), etc. RV  removes  the  capital  letters; RV'K

1  Or  godly  ;  or  beloved. '  Any  rendering  would  be  better
than  'holy  one'  or  'Holy  One.'  Perhaps  'thy  loyal
one '  gives  the  most  important  part  of  the  sense  best.
The  phrase  implies  an  argument  ;  '  thou  wilt  preserve
me  because  of  the  covenant-bond  of  lovingkindness.'

In  Ps.  25  16,  too,  the  same  idea  underlies  the  text,  if  Gratz  is
right  in  emending  the  very  doubtful  yalud  (Trr)  >n'°  hasld
(l'2n),  'have  mercy  upon  me,  for  I  am  loyal  (to  the  covenant).'
In  all  such  passages  pious  Israel  is  the  speaker,  not  an  individual
(though  a  Christian  application  can  be  reasonably  defended).
In  Ps.  16  the  reading  of  the  text  (Kt.)  is  '  thy  holy  ones.'  EV,
however,  in  following  the  Hebrew  margin  (Kr.)  has  the  authority
of  the  versions,  and  the  best  MSS  and  editions.  The  case  with
Ps.  89  19  [20]  is  somewhat  similar.

3.  Ps.  89 19  [20],  ©  wots,  AV  '  Thou  spakest  in  vision
to  thy  Holy  One'  (hdsld}  ; RV  '  to  thy  saints,'  because
'  Holy  One ' (kados]  precedes  in  v.  18,  and  because  the
text  (Kt. ) and the versions  have  the plural, though
the  singular  is  supported  by  the  Heb.  marg.  (Kr. )  and
by  some  MSS  and  early  editions. Certainly  the  '  vision  '
of  2  S.  7  was  to  an  individual  (Nathan)  ;  though  ulti
mately  it  belonged  to  all  the  Msidim. '  Godly  ones  (or
one),'  as  Driver,  or  '  to  thy  loyal  ones  (one),1  would  be
an  improvement  on  AV's  rendering.

4.  i  S.  2g, '  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  holy  ones,'
RVm£-  '  of  his  godly  ones  '  (hasiddw,  Kt.  ; but  /iiisido,
Kr. ). EV  is  unfortunate.

5.  and  6. iTim.28,  EV 'holy  hands' ;  Tit.  18,  'just,
holy,  temperate. ' 6'crtos  is  never  =  ayios  ; it  comes  nearer
to  dlKaios,  and  denotes  the  righteousness  of  him  who
regards  not  chiefly  the  law,  but  the  lawgiver  ;  in  short,
piety. So  Philo,  offiorris  /j.tv  wpbs  Qebv,  5iKaio(nJvT)  5£
irpbs  dvdpunrovs  deupelrcu  (Op.  Mnngey,  230).

But  there  are  difficulties  of  another  order — difficulties

inherent  in  the prevalent system of  translation. Are

. , .  only  words  to  be  translated,  or  ideas

6.  A  aesigna-  also? Must  notj  jn  certajn  cases,  a

concession  be  made  to  a  wider  theory
of  translation  than  that  which  is  possible  in  a  mere  re
vision  of  an  old  version?  The  names  of  God,  at  any
rate,  it  would  seem,  need  to  be  retranslated,  at  least  in
the  margin.  '  The  Holy  One  of  Israel '  is  a  phrase
which,  taken  simply  as  it  stands,  scarcely  conveys  any
idea.  Kfdosim  and  Elohlm  being  so  nearly  synonymous
terms,  we  might  give  as  an  alternative  rendering  '  the
Majestic  One  whom  Israel  worships.'  'The  Devoted
One  of  Israel' — i.e. ,  'He  who  is  devoted  to  Israel'
(Duff,  OT  Theology,  1 190) — can  scarcely  be  the  meaning  ;
Kddos  implies  one  who  dwells  in  unapproachable  light,
and  has  no  contact,  save  by  acts  of  judgment  or  by
covenant  favour,  with  earthly  things  ;  Ezekiel  once  has
the  phrase  'the  Holy  One  in  Israel'  (Ezek.  397;  see
Davidson,  ad  loc.}.  Israel  is  'holy  (i.e. ,  devoted,  dedi
cated)  to  Yahwe,'  no  doubt  ;  but  this  phrase  implies  a
secondary  sense  of  the  word  '  holy. '  The  rendering
'Majestic  One'  (majesty  and  dazzling  purity  are  con
nected  ideas)  will  suit  also  in  Hos.  11 9  (of  which  Duff
also  gives  an  unusual  exposition,  OT  Theology,  1 108),
which  contains  the  words,  '  I  am  God,  and  not  man,

4242


SALA

the  Majestic  One  in  the  midst  of  thee. '  Hosea  announces
the  destruction  of  Ephraim  or  Israel  (see  Nowack),
because  God  is  not,  like  an  impressionable  human
being,  to  be  cajoled  into  forgiveness  ;  he  is  in  the  midst
of  Israel  in  all  his  awful  majesty,  and  must  sweep  out
of  existence  those  who  persistently  reject  his  gracious
condescension.  '  Holiness,'  as  early  as  the  age  of  Hosea,
tends  to  become  ethical.  On  the  holiness  of  Israel  and
of  Israelites,  cp  Weber,  Jud.  Theol.  52  ff.\  Lazarus,
Die  Ethik  des  Judenthums,  311  ft  (1898).  T.  K.  C.

SALA  (CAA&  [Ti.  WHj),  Lk.  835;  and  SALAH
(r6l';,  Gen.  1024);  RV  SHKLAH.

SALAMIEL  (C&AAMIHA  [BA]),  Judith  8 1  RV.  See
SHKLUMIKL.

SALAMIS  (c&A&MlC.  Acts  13s).  Salamis  (repre
sented  by  the  modern  town  of  Famagusta]  was  situated
on  the  eastern  side  of  Cyprus,  near  the  river  Pediasus
which  traverses  the  fertile  plain  which  runs  inland  to
Nicosia,  the  present  capital  of  the  island.  It  had  the
advantage  of  a  good  harbour,  which  in  history  is  famous
for  the  double  victory  of  the  Athenians  over  the
Phoenicians  in  449  B.C.,  and  the  great  sea-fight  in
which  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  defeated  Ptolemy  I.  in
306  B.C.  From  prehistoric  times  Cyprus  was  famous
for  its  copper  mines  (copper  in  fact  deriving  its  name
from  that  of  the  island  ;  see  CYPRUS),  and  its  valuable
timber  supplies.  From  the  ninth  century  B.  c.  iron  also
was  worked  (cp  Plin.  HN  342).  The  forests,  though
much  reduced  by  the  continual  export  of  timber,  had
not  wholly  disappeared  even  in  imperial  times  (Strabo,
684).  Corn,  wine,  and  oil  were  also  exported,  and
salt  was  prepared  at  Salamis  and  at  Kition  (Plin.
//TV  31 84).  In  all  these  natural  advantages  Salamis
largely  shared,  and  in  fact  became  by  far  the
largest  and  most  prosperous  town  in  the  island,  to  a
great  extent  owing  to  its  favourable  situation  with
respect  to  the  Syrian  coast  and  also  to  that  of  Cilicia.
Even  distant  Lebanon  is  visible  from  the  mountain
Stavroviini  (2260  ft.  high)  above Larnaka  (anc.  Kition)
on  the  SE.  coast  (cp  Is.  23 1,  '  from  the  land  of  Chittim
it  is  revealed  to  them' — i.  e. ,  the  smoke  of  burning  Tyre). l
Much  more  readily  then  is  the  opposite  coast  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Seleucia  and  Antioch  visible  from
Salamis.

The  natural  result  was  that  Cyprus  displayed  a  long-
continued  struggle  between  Phoenician  and  Hellenic
civilisations.  Greek  tradition,  however,  consistently
claims  Salamis  as  a  very  early  Hellenic  colony,  along
with  Curium  ;  and  we  now  know  that  both  were
centres  of  the  civilisation  called  '  Mycenaean,'  which  is
certainly  not  Semitic.  Nevertheless,  in  Salamis  as  else
where,  Phoenicians  and  Greeks  were  settled  side  by  side,
and  although  Hellenic  influences  had  a  firm  hold  upon
the  town,  this  affected  little  the  general  condition  of  the
island,  where  upon  the  whole  the  original  basic  popula
tion  was  in  affinity  with  the  Phoenician  element.  After
the  withdrawal  of  the  Greeks  from  interference  in
Cyprus  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  Peace  of  Cimon,
there  took  place  a  reaction  against  Hellenism,  until
about  410  B.C.,  when  Evagoras  won  back  his  ancestral
throne  of  Salamis.  Salamis  was  thus  once  more  open
to  Hellenic  influences  and  was  connected  by  close  bonds
with  Athens  (Isocr.  Evag.  47  f.,  CIA  2397).  Subse
quently  it  was  to  Egypt  that  Cyprus  succumbed  ;  for  in
295  B.C.  Ptolemy  reconquered  the  island,  and  under  the
Ptolemaic  regime  large  numbers  of  Jews  settled  in  it
(cp  i  Mace.  1523).  Their  numbers  would  be  increased
under  the  early  Empire  owing  to  the  fact  that  Herod

1  [One  form  of  the  ordinary  view  is  thus  expressed  by  Delitzsch
(Isaiah,  ET,  1 405),  '  Cyprus,  the  principal  Phoenician  emporium,
is  the  last  place  of  call.  As  soon  as  they  put  in  here,  what  they
had  heard  as  a  rumour  on  the  high  sea  is  disclosed  to  these
crews  (,i^jj) — i.e.,  it  becomes  clear,  undoubted  certainty.'  But
this  does  not  exhaust  the  possibilities  of  meaning.  See,  further,
Crit.  Bit.}

4243


SALEM,  THE  VALLEY  OF

the  Great  farmed  the  Cyprian  copper  mines  (Jos.  Ant.
xvi.  4s).  Hence  we  find  apparently  more  than  one
synagogue  at  Salamis,  whither  of  course  the  majority  of
the  Jews  would  congregate  (Acts  13s).

Various  reasons  account  for  the  fact  that  Salamis  was
the  starting-point  of  the  missionary  work  of  Paul  and
Barnabas.  Not  only  was  Barnabas  himself  a  Cypriote
(Acts  4  361  Ki'Trpioj  r(f  yevei),  possibly,  for  aught  we  know
to  the  contrary,  a  native  of  Salamis  ;  but  many  natives
of  the  island  were  Christians  and  had  set  the  example
of  missionary  enterprise  (Acts  11  19  f.);  and  lastly,  the
number  of  the  Jews  established  there  and  in  other  parts
of  the  island  was  a  guarantee  of  the  existence  of  a  pro
portionate  number  of  proselytes.  If  Cyprus  was  to  be
visited  at  all,  entry  would  be  most  naturally  made  from
Syria  at  Salamis,  wh^ch  besides  was  connected  with
Paphos  by  two  good  roads  —  one  by  way  of  Soli,  the
other  along  the  S:  coast  by  way  of  Curium  and  Citium
(vid.  Tab.  Pent.}.

As  regards  the  later  history  of  Salamis,  mention  should  be
made  of  the  great  insurrection  of  the  Jews  in  the  time  of
Trajan  (117  A.n.),  in  which  a  large  part  of  the  city  was  de
stroyed.  Hadrian  in  consequence  expelled  all  Jews  from  the
island  and  closed  it  to  them  under  penalty  of  death  (Milman,
Hist,  of  the  Jews,  3  myC).  In  Constantine's  time,  having  been
ruined  by  earthquakes,  Salamis  was  rebuilt,  and  renamed  Con-
stantia  (cp  Jer.  Pkilem.).  In  the  fourth  century  A.D.,  conse
quent  upon  the  discovery  of  the  relics  of  Barnabas,  with  a  copy
of  the  First  Gospel,  at  Salamis,  Cyprus  was  made  autonomous
and  the  patriarch  has  ever  since  enjoyed  the  right  of  signing  his
name  in  red  ink.  w.  J.  W.

SALASADAI  (c&A&c&A&l  [A]),  Judith  8  1.  See
ZURISHADDAI.


SALATHIEL  ?Wf$,  iCh.  3i7;  C&A&6IHA
[Ti.WH],  Lk.  827),  RV'SHEALTIEL.

SALCAH,  RV  Salecah  (H^D  ;  [c]eAx&  [BAFL]),»
an  ancient  city  on  the  E.  border  of  Bashan  (Josh.  13  n,
&X&  [^])p  P°ss'bly  also  the  name  of  a  district  (cp  125,
C6KXA.I  [B],  <NCeA\A  [A]),  which  belonged  to  the  b'ne
Manasseh  (Dt.  3io,  AV  Salchah)  and  later  to  Gad
(i  Ch.  5n).  Salcah,  the  mod.  Salhat  or  Sarhad,  is
situated  four  or  five  hours  E.  of  Bosra,  on  an  eminence
(probably  once  a  crater)  in  a  very  strong  position  on  the
S.  extremity  of  the  Jebel  Hauran.  It  seems  to  have
been  hotly  contended  for  by  the  Aram^ans  and  the
Israelites  respectively,  and  may  have  played  a  prominent
part  in  the  legends,  legendary  genealogies,  and  history
of  the  Israelites,  though  Cheyne  thinks  a  geographical
confusion  may  well  be  suspected,  see  GILEAD,  RAMOTH-
GILEAD,  cp  also  ZELOPHEHAD.  It  was  well  known  to
early  Arabian  geographers.  The  Nabatasans  called  it
in^Si  and  an  inscription  found  there  (of  66  A.D.  )  refers
to  the  fact  that  the  goddess  al-Lat  (nSn)  was  especially
honoured  by  its  inhabitants  (CIS  2182).  For  descrip
tions  of  the  modern  place  see  Burckhardt,  Reisen,  180;
de  Vogue1,  Syr.  Centr.  107-9  !  CP  also  Buhl,  Pal.  252.


SALEM,  or  rather  SHALEM  (D1?,  Gen.  14i8
[ADL];  C^AHM,  Ps.  76a[3],  £N  GIRHNH  [BNRT]).
See  JERUSALEM,  SHILOH,  MELCHIZEUEK,  SODOM.


SALEM,  THE  VALLEY  OF  (TON  AyAcoNA  c<\AHM

[BNA],  Syr.D^jn  K3lVlK),  one  of  the  localities  where
the  Jewish  inhabitants  took  defensive  measures  against
Holofernes  (Judith  4  4).  Some  well-known  place  must
be  meant  —  not,  therefore,  the  Salumias  of  O5149i8,
8  R.  m.  from  Scythopolis  (Reland),  or  the  Salim  near
Nablus  (Wolff).  Probably  the  whole  verse  should  run
thus,  '.  .  .  Samaria,  and  CYAMON  \.q.v.~\,  and  IBI.KAM
(see  BELMEN),  and  Jericho,  and  the  circle  of  Jordan
(Syr.  ;  see  CHOBA),  and  to  Esdraelon.'  The  words  KCL!
aifftapa  Kai  TOV  av\u>va  ffaXrjfj.  seem  to  be  made  up  of
three  fragments  of  ecr8pri\<i>v  fffSpi)\wfJi.  (Cp  oi'Xwi'OJ
for  -riSx  in  Dt.  11  30,  oi  XOITTOC  in  Hex.)  T.  K.  C.

1  Owing  to  the  fact  that  in  nearly  every  case  the  Gk.  name
follows  «o«,  the  initial  of  the  name  has  been  often  dropped,
and  it  appears  under  the  form  f\\a.

4244


SALEMAS
SALEMAS  (s.4L.4M£), 4  Esd.  li  RV. See  SHAL-

LUM,  6.

SALIM  (cAAeiM  [Ti.WH],  ».-/.  c<\AAeiM  [A],
C&AHM  [V,  Bus.  Cyr.  Theophylact)],  a  place,  on  tlie
W.  of  the  Jordan,  near  which  was  yEnon,  where  John
baptized,  Jn.  8237.  The  reason  given  for  the  choice
of  yEnon  (=a  place  of  fountains)  is,  'because  there
were  many  springs  (vdara)  there,'  so  that  a  multitude
could  spread  themselves  out,  and  John  could  pass
from  one  spring  to  another  baptizing  them.  Eus.
and  Jer.  (C»52459i  134  25)  place  yEnon  8  R.  in.
S.  of  Scythopolis,  'juxta  Salim  et  Jordanem,'  and  it
is  true  that  about  seven  miles  from  Beisan  there  is
a  large  Christian  ruin  called  Umn*  el-'Amdan,  near
which  are  several  springs.  But  no  name  like  Salem
or  yEnon  has  been  found  there.  Conder  himself,
who  points  this  out,  identifies  yEnon  with  the  springs
between  the  well-known  Salim  (near  Nablus)  and
a  place  called  'AinCin,  in  the  Wady  Fari'a.  The
place  is  accessible  from  all  quarters,  especially  from
Jerusalem  and  Galilee  (see  the  attractive  description  in
Tent  Work,  2s7/. ).  But  the  distance  of  the  springs
from  Salim  (about  seven  miles)  is  rather  against  this
identification.  It  should  be  noticed,  too  (i)  that  Jesus,
as  we  are  told,  was  at  this  time  baptizing  in  the
country  districts  of  Judsea  (v.  22),  and  was  apparently
not  very  far  from  John,  and  (2)  that  'near  Salem'  is
really  mentioned  to  explain  the  ready  access  of  the
Jews  to  John  (#ri  i)dara  TroAXa  fy  tnei  has  the  appear
ance  of  being  a  gloss).  Considering  the  frequent
errors  of  the  text  connected  with  'Salem,'  it  is  very
plausible  to  correct  rov  ffa\rj/a  (see  above)  into  tepov-
iraXrifj.,1  in  which  case  it  becomes  natural  to  identify
yEnon  with  'Ain  Karim,  which  boasts  of  its  beautiful
St.  Mary's  Well,  and  to  the  W.  of  which  is  the  'Ain
el-Habs  (the  Hermit's  Fountain),  connected  by  a  very
late  Christian  tradition  with  John  the  Baptist.  The
legendary  connection  should  not  prejudice  us  against
the  view  here  proposed,  which  rests  solely  on  exegetical
and  geographical  considerations.  Cp  BETH-HACCEREM,
and,  for  an  analogous  emendation,  NAIN.

On  the  tradition  connecting  'Ain  Kfirim  with  John  the
Baptist,  see  Schick,  ZDPV  '21  ['99]  81  ff.  T.  K.  C.

SALIMOTH  (c^AeiMooe  [B]),  i  Esd.  836  RV  =
Ezra  8 10,  SHELOMITH,  4.

SALLAI  (^D), i.  Neh.  12ao; in  127  SALLU  (q.v.

11).
2.  See  GABBAI  SALLAI.

SALLAMUS  (cAAAoyMOC  [B*A]),  i  Esd.  9 25  =  Ezra
1024,  SHALLUM,  n.

SALLU  (N;>D  [Neh.],  N-1;>p  [Ch.]),  a  Judoean
Benjamite( BENJAMIN,  §9,  iii. ),  temp.  Nehemiah  (Neh.
11 7;  CHAoo  [BN*A],  cnAooM  [Sc-a],  C&MAA  [L] ;
i  Ch.  97  ;  C^ACOM  [BL],  c*Aco  [A]).  Cp  SALU.

SALLU  (•t'pD),  a  priest  enumerated  in  one  of  the
post-exilic  lists  (Neh.  12 7  CAAoy&l  [Nc-a '"£•  SUP-],
C&AOYIA  [L],  om.  BX*A).  In  Neh.  1220  the  name  is
SALLAI  (-*a;  craXXcu  [Xc-arae- inf],  (rctXowu  [L],  om.
BS*A) ;  and  the  head  of  Sallai's  '  father's  house'  in  the
time  of  Joiakim,  Joshua's  successor,  is  said  to  have
been  K.ALLAI  (^p_).

SALMA  (HD/SP),  the  name  of  the  clan  which  was
reckoned  as  the  'father'  of  Bethlehem,  iCh.  25154,
and  introduced  into  the  genealogy  of  Jesse,  v.  n.  Ac
cording  to  Wellhausen  ((T//358,  cp  De  gent.  29),
'  Salma  is  the  father  of  Bethlehem  after  the  exile. '  But
to  the  present  writer  there  is  good  reason  to  suppose
that  the  Bethlehem  intended  is  not  the  Bethlehem  in
Judah,  but  another  Bethlehem — i.e. ,  Beth-jerahmeel,  in
the  Negeb  (RuTH,  §  4).  It  will  be  noticed  that  the

1  It  is  true  that  the  Fourth  Evangelist,  according  to  the
MSS,  invariably  uses  iepo<7oAvfia.  Hut  he  may  now  and  then
have  used  tepovcraArjm  like  other  evangelists.

136  4245


SALMONB

'  sons  '  of  Salma  include  Netophah  and  Atroth-beth-
Joab.  Now  Netophah  is  most  probably  a  modification
of  Nephtoah  or  Naphtoah  (cp  NAPHTUHIM,  SALMAH,
2),  and  Atroth  of  Ephrath.  See  JABEZ,  SHOBAL,  and,
on  the  Arabian  affinities  of  this  clan,  SALMAH  (vv.  51  54l
craXwjU.wj'  [BA],  (ra/u.a,  -aa  [L];  v.  n,  ffa\/j.uv  [BL],  -av

[A]).  T.  K.  C.

SALMAH  (n»?fe>  ;  C&AMCON  [AL],  -AN  [B]).

1.  Ruth  420 RVms-, according to MT's reading.
See  SALMA,  SALMON.

2.  The  name  of  an  Arabian people  mentioned in
several  OT  passages  —  Cant.  Is  i  K.  4n  Nu.  2423  Ezra
25558  (and  ||  passages),  Neh.  113. (i)  In  Cant.  1  5  the
poet couples the '  tent-curtains of Salmah  ' (read
na^sy, not nbV^) with the 'tents of Kedar' (see

T  : -  | '

CANTICLES,  §  6,  col.  687).  Now  the  tribes  of  KEDAR
[q.v.]  tenanted  the  region  afterwards  appropriated  by
the  Salmceans  (laSr),  and  the  Salmasans  were  followed
by  the  Nabatseans.  The  two  latter  peoples  are  men
tioned  together  in  a  Nabatasan  inscription  (CJS  ii.  1979).
Pliny  mentions  the  '  Salmani  et  Masei  Arabes  '  (NH
630),  and  Steph.  Byz.  ,  quoted  by  Euting,  refers  to  the
ZaXd/uot  as  an  Arab  population  in  alliance  with  the
Nabataeans.  The  emendation  in  Cant.  I.e.  is  due  to
Wellh.  (Prol.(^  218,  n.  i);  cp  Wi.  AOFl  196292.  (2)
Most  probably  in  i  K.  4n  nO^Brna  should  be  pointed
nc'x'TQ-  This  suggestion  assumes  that  two  of  Solomon's
prefects,  supposed  to  have  had  daughters  of  Solomon
as  wives,  really  married  Salamian  or  Salmaean  women.
One  of  these  is  called  Basemath  (nctso),  a  corruption  of
'  Ishma'elith'  ;l  the  pther  TAPHATH,  perhaps  a  corrup
tion  of  Naphtuhith  (cp  i  Ch.  2  54,  reading  Naphtuhi).
(3)  The  impossible  words  *?N  icc-p  in  Nu.  I.e.  should  be
emended  into  no^B-D  or  c'NcStra.  The  context  relates
to  the  Kenites.  Observe  that  in  the  Targums  »KoW  's
the  equivalent  of  the  Heb.  'yp.  See,  however,  BALAAM,
§  6  ;  Wi.  AOF  '2423.  (4)  On  the  passages  relating  to
the  naStf  '13J?  in  Ezra-Neh.  ,  see  SOLOMON'S  SERVANTS,
SONS  OF.

Winckler(^Ojs"  2  545^)  proposes  to  substitute  the  '  Salamians  '
for  '  Shalman'  in  Hos.  10  14,  as  the  barbarous  captors  of  lieth-
arbel.  In  this  he  shows  much  acumen  ;  but  it  is  more  probable
that  '  Shalman  '  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  N.  Arabian  kings  who
invaded  the  Negeb.  He  was  apparently  a  king  of  the  N.
Arabian  Cusham  or  Cush  (see  Crit.  Bil>.  on  Hos.  10  14  Am.  1  3).

This  article  illustrates  the  names  SALMA,  SAMLAH,  SALMON,
SAMLAI,  SHELUMIEL.  T.  K.  C.


SALMAI  PP  [ord.  text]),  Neh.  7  48  RV,  AV
SHALMAI.

SALMANASAR  (Salmanassar],  4  Esd.  1840  ;  in
Kings,  SHALMANEZER.

SALMON  (JID^V).  Ps-  68i4[iS]t  RV,  AVZALMON,  2.


SALMON  (pob';  C^AMAN  [B]  :  -MCON  [AL]),
father  of  Boaz,  Ruth  4  20  /.  (a  variant  to  MT's  SALMAH
in  v.  20.  cp  ©  Vg.),  Mt.l4  Lk.332  (EV  CAAM60N
[«CAD];  but  c^AA  [K*B]).  See  RUTH,  §  4.  Mt.  (14)
makes  him  the  husband  of  RAHAB,  whom,  however,
Talmudic  tradition  makes,  as  a  proselyte,  the  wife  of
Joshua.  Cp  Nestle,  Exp.  T  IQgi,  and  see  GENE
ALOGIES  ii.  ,  §  2.

SALMONE  (C^AMOONH  Ti.WH),  a  cape  at  the
eastern  extremity  of  Crete,  as  appears  from  the  passage
in  Acts  27  7,  where  it  is  spoken  of  as  the  first  land  sighted
after  leaving  Cnidus.

The  ship  on  which  Paul  sailed  beat  up  with  difficulty  (noAt?,
7'.  7)  to  the  latitude  of  Cnidus  from  Myra.  A  true  course  W.  by
S.  from  Cnidus  would  have  taken  her  by  the  N.  side  of  Crete.
As  she  was  unable  to  hold  that  course,  but  was  _  yet  able  to
fetch  the  eastern  cape  of  the  island,  which  bears  SW.  by  S.  from
Cnidus,  we  may  infer  that  the  wind  blew  from  between  NNW.
and  WNW.  (assuming  that  the  ship  could  make  good  a  course
about  seven  points  from  the  wind).  The  wind,  therefore,  in
common  language  would  have  been  termed  NW.  (see  Smith,

1  This  explanation  of  Basemath  accounts  for  the  double  name
of  Esau's  wife—  Basemath  and  Mahalath—  i.e.,  '  Ishmaelite  '  and
'  Jerahmeelite.'  The  initial  B  (or  M  ?  see  ©)  is  secondary.

4246


SALOAS

Voyage  a*d  Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul,  T4/.\  Such  winds  prevail
in  the  eastern  Mediterranean  in  the  summer,  and  are  the  Etesian
winds  of  the  ancients  (Aristotle,  L>t  Mumio,  4  15;  Pliny,  HN
247).

As  regards  the  identification  of  Salmone  some  doubt
is  possible.  The  name  appears  in  various  forms.

lloA/iuii'T),  Acts -7  7;  iaA/j.ioris  dxpa,  Apoll.  Rhod.  Argon.
41693;!  SaAfiwi'iOP,  Str.  io6;2  the  most  frequently  recurring
form  is  ^a/buociop  (Str.  472,  etc.,  Statiiasin.  in.ni.,  §§  318  ana
355,  Ptol.  3  17,  Plin.  UN  4  20  [Sammonium]).

The  extreme  NE.  cape,  now  called  Cape  Si  <t hero
(the  '  Iron  Cape')  or  C.  Salomon,  is  generally  supposed
to  be  the  ancient  Cape  Salmone  ;  but  it  is  perhaps  more
probable  that  Cape  Salmone  should  be  identified  with
the  promontory  called  Plaka,  some  7  m.  to  the  south
ward  (so  it  is  in  the  map  in  vol.  i.  of  Spratt's  Travels
and  Researches  in  Crete ;  see  discussion  of  the  point,
ibid,  i89/. )  It  is  very  possible  also  that  the  usage  of
the  name  may  have  varied  in  ancient  times  in  the  case
of  two  conspicuous  promontories  lying  so  close  together.

\v.  j.  \v.

SALOAS  (CAA9AC  [B]),  i  Esd.  922  RV=Ezral022,
ELASAH,  i.

SALOM  (cAAuiM  [ANY]),  i  Mace.  226  AV,  RV
SALU.

SALOME  (CA.\COMH,  see  NAMES,  §  50,  cp  •  She-
lomi,'  '  Shelumiel '  ;  or,  perhaps,  'Salma,1  see  ISRAEL,
§  79,  ad  fin.  and  cp  SOLOMON,  §  i),  one  of  the  women
who  witnessed  the  crucifixion  and  afterwards  visited  the
sepulchre  of  Jesus,  Mk.  1640  16 if-  She  is  almost
certainly  to  be  identified  with  the  wife  of  Zebedee,  the
mother  of  James  and  John;  see  Mt.  27  56,  and  cp
CLOPAS,  §  2.

The  name  Salome  was  borne  also  (i)  by  the  daughter  of
Herodias;  see  HEKOU,  §  10 ;  (2)  by  the  wife  of  Alexander
Jann;Eus  ;  see  ISRAEL,  §  80.

SALT  (n?E>  ;  ©  &Ac-  also  A.AA.C.  &A<\)-3  Indis
pensable  as  the  use  of  salt  appears  to  us,  it  must  have

n  been quite unattainable to primitive

1.  Domestic  „<• .!,„ — ij


uses  of  salt.


man in many parts of the world.


Indeed  where  men  live  mainly  on
milk  and  flesh,  consuming  the  latter  raw  or  roasted,
so  that  its  salts  are  not  lost,  it  is  not  necessary  to  add
sodium  chloride,  and  thus  we  understand  how  the
Numidian  nomads  in  the  time  of  Sallust  and  the
Bedouins  of  Hadramaut  at  the  present  day  never  eat
salt  with  their  food.  On  the  other  hand,  cereal  or
vegetable  diet  calls  for  a  supplement  of  salt,  and  so
does  boiled  meat.  The  important  part  played  by  the
mineral  in  the  history  of  commerce  and  religion  depends
on  this  fact.  At  a  very  early  stage  of  progress  salt
became  a  necessary  of  life  to  most  nations,  and  in  many
cases  they  could  procure  it  only  from  abroad,  from  the
sea-coast,  or  from  districts  like  that  of  Palmyra,  where
salty  incrustations  are  found  on  the  surface  of  the  soil.
The  Hebrews  had  ready  access  to  an  unlimited  supply
of  this  necessity  of  life  in  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea,
and  in  the  range  of  rock-salt  at  its  south-western  ex
tremity.

When  the  waters  of  the  'Salt  Sea'  (see  DEAD  SEA)  subside
after  the  spring  floods  have  caused  them  to  rise  several  feet
beyond  their  normal  level,  the  heavily  impregnated  water,  left
in  the  marshes  on  its  borders,  rapidly  evaporates,  leaving  a
deposit  of  salt.  The  Dead  Sea  is  said  to  yield  by  evaporation
24.57  Ibs.  of  salt  in  100  Ibs.  of  water,  as  compared  with  6  Ibs.
from  the  same  quantity  of  water  taken  from  the  Atlantic  Ocean
(Hull).

It  has  been  adduced  as  evidence  of  the  '  practical  turn
of  the  prophet's  mind'  (Dr.  fntr.W  294)  that  the
marshes  found  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Dead
Sea  in  Ezekiel's  day  are  expressly  exempted  from  the
sweetening  and  reviving  influence  of  the  river  of  the
prophetic  vision  (Ezek.  47").  The  second  source  of
supply,  above  referred  to,  was  the  famous  ridge  of  Jebel

1  SoAjitoi'i?  icou  SoAjucoytov,  aKpioTT/jpiov  Kpijrjjs,  Schol.  in  loc.
Cp  Pionys,  Perieg.  \\of.

2  Cp  'AOapaia  SaA/nwria  in  CIG  2555,  /.  13.

3  Certain  parts  of  this  article  which  it  has  not  been  deemed
necessary  to  indicate  specially  are  taken  from  Professor  Robertson
Smith's  contribution  to  the  article  '  Salt'  in  Ency.  Brit.$).

4247


SALT

Usdum,  whence  probably  came  the  mclah  sidomith
(rrpiip  nSc)  or  'sa.lt  of  Sodom'  of  the  Talmud.  This
ridge,  which  geologists  tell  us  must  once  have  formed
the  bottom  of  a  larger  lake,  consists  mainly  of  rock-salt,
the  friable  nature  of  which,  under  climatic  influences,
causes  portions  of  the  range  to  assume  fantastic  shapes.
One  of  these,  a  pillar  resembling  in  outline  a  gigantic
female  form,  gave  rise  in  the  prehistoric  period  to  the
familiar  legend  of  Gen.  1926  (cp  \Yisd.  10; — where  the
pillar  of  salt  is  characterised  as  'a  monument  of  an  un
believing  soul1 — Jos.  Ant.  i.  114  [§  203],  and  the  illus
tration  in  Stade,  GV'l\\\<)).  To  one  or  other  of  these
sources  of  supply  reference  is  made  in  the  obscure
mikreh  melah  (n^D  rnao)  of  Zeph.  2  9  (EV  'saltpits';  <5
Ot^uvia.  &\(i}vos),  it  being  uncertain  whether  the  expres
sion  signifies  salt-pans  for  evaporation  (ras  rou  d\6s
\lfjLvas  of  i  Mace.  11 35),  or  salt-pits  for  the  excavation
of  salt.

As  among  ourselves,  salt  entered  in  countless  ways
into  the  domestic  and  social  economy  of  the  Hebrews.
A  morsel  of  bread  and  salt  and  '  water  by  measure '  ( Ezek.
4  n)  are  given  by  a  late  Jewish  thinker  as  the  irreducible
minimum  of  human  sustenance  (Pirke  AbotfiQ^}.

Similarly,  among  the  principal  things  for  the  whole
use  of  man's  life,  the  son  of  Sirach  assigns  a  prominent
place  to  salt  (Ecclus.  39  26,  cp  Job  6  6).

P.read  (n|?23  np,  Aboth  I.e.)  and  olives  (.^fa'asfr.  43)  dipped
in  salt  were  the  poor  man's  fare  ;  or  the  salt  might  be  dissolved
in  water  for  this  purpose  (SAaA6.Ha',  cp  A'rui.Si).  In  a
stronger  form  as  brine  ('D'^ — i.e.,  OA^TI),  salt  water  (HpSDH  'D)
was  used  for  pickling  vegetables  and  meat  (I'aruch,  C  [Ep.  of
Jeremy)  28)  and  in  the  preparations  of  olives  for  the  table

(FKU1T,  §  9).

The  practice  of  rubbing  the  flesh  of  newly  killed
animals  with  salt  for  the  purpose  of  depleting  it  of  every
particle  of  blood  required  a  large  supplv  of  salt.  So,
too,  the  process  of  pickling  (roptxetfw)  and  preserving
fish,  which  formed  so  important  an  article  of  commerce
(for  methods  adopted  see  FISH,  §  7).  Salt  was  also
employed  for  preserving  hides  (Middoth,  63).  In  the
Messianic  age,  even  the  domestic  animals  are  to  share
in  the  material  joys  of  the  period  by  having  their  pro
vender  seasoned  by  the  addition  of  saline  herbs  ( Is.  8624
j"pn,  RVm*>'-  'salted').  Besides  the  natural  sea-  and
rock-salt,  the  Jews  of  later  times  were  familiar  with  the
sal conditum  or  spiced  salt  of  the  Romans  (n^jsho'A6.
Z,ir.  26 — for  other  readings  and  explanations  see
Jastrow,  Diet,  of  Targ.  etc.,  s. v. ).  Salt  was  also  used
medicinally.  A  grain  of  salt  in  a  decayed  tooth  was
reckoned  a  cure  for  toothache  (Shabd.  65).  Here,  too,
may  perhaps  be  classed  the  rubbing  of  new-born  babes
with  salt,  attested  by  Ezekiel  (164,  see  FAMILY,  §9),
varied  by  washing  in  salted  water  (Yan  Lennep,  Bible
Land's,  569),  although  it  probably  had  its  origin  in  a
quite  different  circle  of  ideas  as  a  safeguard  against
demonic  influence  (cp  Bfkhoroth  4012,  where  salt  at  meals
is  alleged  to  have  this  effect).  For  the  medicinal
properties  of  the  water  of  the  '  Salt  Sea  '  see  DEAD
SEA  (col.  1045).  Many  other  illustrations  of  the  cura
tive  properties  of  salt  itself,  as  employed  among  semi-
civilised  races,  are  given  by  Trumbull  in  his  exhaustive
treatise  The  Covenant  of  Salt,  1899.  The  economic
importance  of  salt  is  further  indicated  by  the  almost
universal  prevalence  in  ancient  and  mediaeval  times,  and
indeed  in  most  countries  down  to  the  present  day,  of  salt
taxes,  or  of  Government  monopolies.

An  interesting  and  exhaustive  study  of  the  working  of  the  salt
monopoly  in  Egypt  under  the  Ptolemies  is  given  by  U.  Wilcken
in  his  recent  work  Griechische  Ostraka  atts  sEgyften,  etc.
(\i4iff.,  r/  aAucrj,  salt-tax).  In  Palestine  under  the  Seleucids,
the  salt-pans  on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  were  also  a  govern
ment  property,  as  we  learn  from  the  remission  of  the  royalty
upon  salt  (rj  Ti(xi)  TOV  dAos)1  decreed  by  Demetrius  in  the  hope
of  gaining  the  support  of  the  Jews  (i  Mace.  1029  1135).  We

1  The  identical  expression  dirb  TI/^TJS  dAov  is  found  upon  an
Egyptian  ostracon  (Wilcken,  op.  fit.  1  144).

4348


SALT

have  no  further  information,  unfortunately,  as  to  the  details  of
the  operation  of  this  tax.

That a religious significance was attached to a

substance  so  highly  prized, which  was  often  obtained

. ,. with  difficulty,  is  no  more  than  natural.

2.  Salt  in  tne  Hut  u  must  a]so  be  remembered  that  tne

mcia  iiakitual  use  of  salt  is  intimately  connected
ritual.  wjth  the  advance  from  nomadic  to  agri
cultural  life,  i.e. — with  precisely  that  step  in  civilisation
which  had  most  influence  on  the  cults  of  almost  all
ancient  nations.  The  gods  were  worshipped  as  the
givers  of  the  kindly  fruits  of  the  earth,  and,  as  all  over
the  world  '  bread  and  salt '  go  together  in  common  use
and  common  phrase,  salt  was  habitually  connected  with
offerings,  at  least  with  all  offerings  which  consisted,  in
whole  or  in  part,  of  cereal  elements.  This  practice  is
found  alike  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  among
the  Semitic  peoples  (Lev.  2 13) ;  Homer  calls  salt '  divine,'
and  Plato  names  it  '  a  substance  dear  to  the  gods '
(Timcsus,  60  ;  cp  Plutarch,  Sympos.  5io).

Bread  and  salt  were  the  chief  and  inseparable  con
stituents  of  the  Hebrews'  daily  food.  It  was,  there
fore,  to  be  expected  that  every  offering — was  it  not
the  '  bread  of  God  '  (oTiVx  cnh  Lev.  21 22)  ? — laid  upon
the  altar  should  also  have  the  accompaniment  of  salt.
It  is  immaterial  whether  we  regard  the  actual  provision
of  Lev.  2 13  c  :  '  With  all  thine  oblations  thou  shall  offer
salt '  as  younger  than  the  more  special  provision  of  i%a
'  every  oblation  of  thy  meal  offering  (minhdh)  shall  thou
season  with  salt  (RV),'  as  Dillmann  and  some  olhers
are  inclined  lo  do  (bul  see  Ezek.  4824),  since  both  Ihe
fundamenlal  conception  of  primitive  sacrifice  and  the
extanl  leslimony  lo  Ihe  actual  practice  in  historical
times  poinl  lo  the  constanl  praclice  of  adding  sail  lo
every  species  of  offering,  animal  and  vegelable  alike.

Hence  the  statement  of  Mk.  9  49^,  '  every  sacrifice  shall  be
salted  with  salt,'  though  absent  from  the  oldest  authorities,  is  a
statement  of  fact  (cp  for  the  NT  times  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  9  i,  Mishna,
Zebdh.  Q  sf.).  Even  incense  was  not  excepted  (see  INCENSE,  §  6),
and  the  Greek  text  of  Lev.  24  7  is  doubtless  right  in  adding  salt  to
the  SHEWBREAD  (which  see,  and  cp  Philo,  Vit.  Mas.  3  10  [ed.
Mangey,  2  151]  '  loaves  andsalt ').  Grants  of  salt  for  the  services
of  the  restored  worship  of  the  returning  exiles  were  thus  entirely
in  place  (Ezra  69722;  cp  for  a  later  period  the  decree  of
Antiochus  '  345  medimni  of  salt,'  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  3  3  [§  140]).

Whilst,  however,  the  origin  of  the  presence  of  salt  in
the  cultus  is  to  be  traced  to  a  primitive  conceplion  of
sacrifice,  il  musl  be  borne  in  mind  lhal  al  Ihe  stage  of
religious  thoughl  reflecled  in  the  prieslly  legislation,  the
use  of  salt  has  already  become  symbolical  (see  §  3).

In  the  cults  of  Greece  and  Rome  we  find  the  same  appreciation
of  salt,  as  is  shown  by  the  frequent  references  in  classical  writers
(see  Di.-Ryssel,  Kurzgef.  exeget.  Handb.,  on  Lev.  213;  also
Hehn,  Das  Salz,  (iff.,  Schleiden,  Das  Salz,  T$ff.  [1875]).  It
also  appears  in  the  lists  of  offerings  in  the  older  cultus  system  of
Babylonia  (Zim.  Beitrage  sur  Kcnntnis  der  Babyl.  Religion
1901,  95).  Cp  RITUAL,  §  10,  col.  4123.

The  absolute  barrenness  of  the  region  bordering  on

the Dead  Sea, owing  to  the  saline  incrustations  with

„ .,  . which Ihe  ground is  covered, naturally

e>alt  in SUggested the employment, by various

bol: ana  Hebrew writers,  of  salt as a  figure for

metaphor.  barrenness  and  desolation  (Dt.  2923  [22]  ;
cp  Job  396  Jer.  176).  Such  a  barren  waste,  innocent  of
every  form  of  vegelalion,  formed  a  fitting  contrast  to
'Ihe  fruitful  land'  (Ps.  107 34  render  with  RV  'a  salt
desert  [nnSp] '  for  '  barrenness  '  of  AV).  This  figurative
use  of  '  sail '  and  '  sallness '  is  not  confined  to  Hebrew,
being  found  in  several  of  the  other  Semilic  dialects  (Toy,
'  Ezekiel,'  SBOT,  74  ET).  The  same  idea  has  usually
been  regarded  as  underlying  the  expressive  symbolical
act,  once  referred  to  in  the  OT,  of  sowing  a  city  that
had  been  put  under  the  ban  (herem,  see  BAN)  with  salt
(Judg.  945).  It  is  more  probable,  however,  thai  Ihis
practice  is  to  be  brought  into  connection  with  the  use  of
salt  in  sacrifice  (Rel.  Sem.W  454  n. ),  the  idea  of  the
complete  dedication  of  Ihe  cily  lo  Yahwe,  as  symbolised
by  Ihe  slrewing  of  it  with  salt,  being  more  in  harmony

4249


SALT

with  the  fundamental  conception  of  Ihe  '  ban.'1  This
praclice  is  also  allesled  for  Cyprus  (Rel.  Sem.W  I.e.,
Schleiden,  Das  Sals,  95,  who  adduces  as  hislorical
parallels  Ihe  Iradilion  lhal  Attila  so  Irealed  Padua,  and
Friedrich  Barbarossa,  Milan).  [Cp  also  Zimrnern's
correclion  (in  Gunkel,  'Gen.'  in  HK,  193)  of  the
Iranslalions  of  Assyrian  inscriplions  (Tiglalh-pileser  and
Asur-bani-pal)  in  KB\^  2207,  where  'sail'  should  be
read  for  '  slones  '  and  '  dry  sand. ']

As  covenanls  were  ordinarily  made  over  a  sacrificial
meal,  in  which  salt  was  a  necessary  element,  the  ex
pression  '  a  covenant  of  salt '  (Nu.  1819)  is  easily  under
stood  ;  it  is  probable,  however,  lhat  the  preservative
qualities  of  salt  were  held  to  make  it  a  peculiarly  fitting
symbol  of  an  enduring  compact,  and  influenced  the
choice  of  Ihis  particular  element  of  the  covenant  meal  as
thai  which  was  regarded  as  sealing  an  obligation  lo
fidelity.  Among  the  ancients,  as  among  orientals  down
to  the  present  day,  every  meal  that  included  salt  had  a
cerlain  sacred  character,  and  created  a  bond  of  piety  and
guest-friendship  belween  Ihe  participants.  Hence  the
Greek  phrase  aXas  (cat  rpdire^av  Trapafiaiveiv,  the  Arab
phrase  '  there  is  sail  between  us,'  the  expression  '  to  eat
Ihe  sail  of  the  palace'  (Ezra4i4  RV  ;  not  in  <SBA),  the
modern  Persian  phrase  namak  haram,  '  untrue  to  sail '
— i.e.,  disloyal  or  ungrateful — and  many  others.  The
OT  expression  '  covenanl  of  salt'  (Lev.  213  Nu.  18 19)  is
Iherefore  a  significant  figure  of  speech,  denoting  Ihe
perpelual  obligation  under  which  the  participants  in  Ihe
covenanl  of  God  with  Israel  (having  in  the  sacrifice  and
sacrificial  meal  partaken  of  salt  together)  lay  to  observe
its  conditions.'2  So  also  in  2  Ch.  13s  the  expression
may  legilimalely  be  rendered  without  a  figure  by  '  a
perpetual  irrevocable  covenant.'

Although  salt,  from  one  aspect  of  ils  effects  in  nature,
might  be  used,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Hebrew  writers
as  a  figure  of  desolation  and  death,  on  the  other
hand,  in  virtue  of  its  giving  piquancy  and,  so  to  say,
life  lo  otherwise  insipid  articles  of  diet  (cp  Plutarch,
Sympos.,  cited  by  Trumbull,  Covenant  of  Salt,  53),  or  it
may  be,  as  Trumbull  suggests  (I.e. ),  from  its  being
associated  with  blood  in  Ihe  primitive  mind,  '  salt  seems
to  stand  for  life  in  many  a  form  of  primitive  speech  and
in  the  world's  symbolism. '  It  is  as  a  symbol  of  life  lhal
salt  is  employed  by  Elisha  in  healing  the  dealh-dealing
spring  al  Jericho  (2  K.  2 19^  ).

Here,  too,  may  be  classed  the  familiar  description  of  the  true
followers  of  Jesus  as  '  the  salt  of  the  earth  '  (Mt.  5  13),  the  living
embodiment  of  the  highest  ideals  of  life,  a  permanent  and  per
vasive  influence  in  the  world  making  for  righteousness.  Paul's
exhortation  to  the  Colossians  (46)  to  have  their  '  speech  seasoned
with  salt '  is  not  to  be  understood  of  '  wit,'  the  '  Attic  salt '  of  the
ancients,  but  rather  of  sober,  good  sense,  as  contrasted  with
'  profane  and  vain  babblings '  (i  Tim.  6  20  2  Tim.  '2  ID).

For  Ihe  many  inlerpretations  of  the  mix  inter
pret  urn,  Mk.  9  49  a  ( '  sailed  with  fire'),  reference  musl
be  made  to  the  commentaries  (cp  also  Trumbull,  op.  cit.
65/)  Finally  the  much  discussed  reference  to  the  im
possibility  of  restoring  lo  salt  its  lost  savour  (Mt.  5  13  and
parallels)  is  ingeniously  connected  by  Robertson  Smith
with  Ihe  oppressive  laxation  of  salt,  referred  to  above,
one  result  of  this  being  that  the  article  is  apt  to  reach
the  consumer  in  a  very  impure  state  largely  mixed  with
earth.  '  The  salt  which  has  lost  its  savour '  is  '  simply
the  earthly  residuum  of  such  an  impure  salt  after  the
sodium  chloride  has  been  washed  out. '

The  use  of  salt  in  various  rites  of  the  Christian  church,  as  in
the  baptism  of  catechumens,  in  holy  water,  etc.,  falls  with
out  the  scope  of  this  article  (see  Smith's  Diet,  of  Christ.  Antiq.,
s.v.,  Trumbull,  op.  cit.).  W.  R.  S. — A.  R.  S.  K.

1  This  view  is  also  preferable  to  that  suggested  recently  by
Schwally, Scmitischc KriegsalteHiimer (1901) 32, that the
'  strewing  with  salt  denotes  dedication  to  the  demons  of  solitary
and  barren  places.'

2  Fora  slightly  different  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  expres
sion  see  Kraetzschmar,  Die  Bundesvors tellitng  ivi  A  7M6  n.  207.
Cp  Rel.  Seni.V)  479  (the  Arab  oath  taken  over  salt  strewn  upon
a  fire). For  other  examples  of  salt  in  covenants  and  oaths  see
Wellh.  Heid.V\  124,  189,  Landberg,  Arabica,  5  134  i57(Leyden
1898).

4250


SALT, THE  CITY  OF

SALT,  THE  CITY  OF  (P6sn  Ttf  ;  AI  noAeic
CAAcoM  [B],  AI  rroAic  AAu>N  [A],  AI  noAeic  TOON
AAtoiM  [L]),  one  of  the  six  cities  'in  the  wilderness,'
grouped  with  XIBSHAN  and  EN-GEUI  [y.f.]  in  Josh.
156z.  If  the  VALLEY  OK  SALT[?.z'.]or  rather  'Valleyof
ham-melah,'  is  the  \Vady  el-Milh,  the  'Ir  ham-melah
may  be  placed  on  the  site  now  known  as  el-Milh,  a
little  to  the  SE  of  Kh.  Sa'we  (the  ancient  SHEMA  or
JESHUA?)  on  the  great  route  from  Hebron  to  the  Red
Sea  through  the  'Arabah  (cp  MOLADAH).

In  this  case,  it  is  plain  that,  as,  e.g.,  in  i  S.  23  29  24  i,  En-
gedi  must  have  come  from  En-gaols',  En-kadesh  (Kadesh-
'barnea'),  and  the  wilderness  be  that  of  Arad  (Judg.  1  16,  if
we  may  read  -\-\y  1313;  see  KENITES),  the  term  'if  ham-inelah
is  a  corruption  of  'irjera/imeel,  'city  of  Jerahmeel.'  A  'city
of  Jerahmeel'  is  referred  to  in  18.165;  also  probably  in
Judg.  1  16  (crit.  emend.,  see  K.ENITES).  See  JEKAHMKEL,  §  4.

T.  K.  C.


SALT,  THE  VALLEY  OF  irDlfn  '3,  in  Chronicles
and  Psalms  [H]KOIAAC  [or  4>ARAr5]  TOON  AAooN  ;  in
Samuel  and  Kings  peBeAe/VA.  pCMeAe  [B],  fHMAAA,
fAIVkeAA  [A],  f'M'weAAX,  ~ex  [Ll>'  the  scene  of  en
counters  between  the  Israelites  and  the  Kdomites  (or
rather,  perhaps,  Aramites  —  i.e.  ,  Jerahmeelites),  first
under  David  (28.813  [DIN],  i  Ch.  18  12  [onx],  Ps.  60
heading  [both  DIN  and  onx]),1  and  then  under  Amaziah
(2  K.  14y  [ovm],  2  Ch.  25n  [see  closing  sentence]).
The  '  Valley  of  ham-melah  '  has  been  identified  with  the
great  marshy  plain  (es-Sebkhah)  at  the  S.  end  of  the
Dead  Sea  (see  DEAD  SEA,  §  3),  which  is  strongly
impregnated  with  salt.  It  is  true,  it  is  described  as  at
the  present  day  '  too  spongy  to  walk  upon,'  nor  can  we
easily  understand  how  it  can  ever  in  the  historical  period
have  been  otherwise  than  marshy.  An  examination  of
the  text  of  the  passages  referred  to,  however,  makes
it  seem  in  the  highest  degree  superfluous  to  choose
this  site  for  the  famous  battlefield.  It  is  plausible
(Buhl,  Pal.  88)2to  identify  the  '  valley  of  ham-melah  '
with  the  Wady  el-Milh,  one  of  the  two  wadys  into
which  the  IV.  es-Seba'  parts  at  Beersheba.  This  wady
and  the  \V.  es-Seba  may  be  regarded  as  forming  a
first  frontier  between  Canaan  and  the  steppe-country.

It  is  important  to  notice  that  hain-ntelah  (in  the  Hebrew
name)  is  an  easy  corruption  of  JERAHMEEL  (<f.~'.,  §  4),  and  that
the  l^iiify  el-Milh  would  naturally  enter  into  the  Negeb  of  the
Jerahmeelites.  Most  probably  we  should  read  C^N  ('Aram,  'a
popular  corruption  of  Jerahmeel)  instead  of  C1K  in  all  the
passages  quoted  above,  except  the  last  (2  Ch.  25  n),  where
T>B'"J3  should  be  emended  into  •flXD~';i2  —  i.e.,  the  Misrites.
CpJoKTHEEL;  SALT,  CITY  OF  ;  SALT  SEA.  T.  K.  C.

SALT  SEA  (r6sn  DJ;  see  DEAD  SEA,  §  i),  a
name  of  the  Dead  Sea,  Gen.  14s  NTu.  34s  12  Dt.  817
Josh.  3i6  12s  1625  ISigt.  It  is  an  expressive  name,
no  doubt  (cp  Hull,  Mount  Seir,  108),  but  need  not  on
that  account  be  original.  If  the  ge-hammtlah  (see
SALT,  VALLEY  OF)  has  arisen,  by  a  popular  corruption
from  ge-ygrahme'  el  (valley  of  Jerahmeel),  the  presump
tion  surely  is  that/ifvz  ham-m^lati  (EV  'salt  sea')  has
arisen  in  the  same  way  out  of  yam  yf  rah  me  el  (  '  sea  of
Jerahmeel'),  which  is  most  naturally  viewed  as  the
original  Hebrew  name  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Winckler,  how
ever  ((7/236),  thinks  that  the  identification  of  the  '  Salt
Sea  '  with  the  '  vale  of  SIDDIM  '  [<j.v.  ]  is  due  to  a  mistake
on  the  part  of  the  second  editor  or  reviser  of  the  original
narrative.  His  theory  is  that  the  first  editor  or  reviser
meant  Lake  Huleh  (cp  MEROM),  called  by  William  of
Tyre  Melcha,  on  the  NW.  side  of  which  is  a  fountain
still  called  'Ain  el-Mellaha.  The  water  of  Lake  Huleh,
however,  is  not  salt.  The  same  editor,  it  is  added,
interpreted  the  phrase  'the  vale  of  Siddim(?)'  as

1  The  latter  part  of  the  heading  is  evidently  a  later  addition,
which  was  made  after  the  probable  original  text  of  the  heading
had assumed its present form. That text may have been
-MO  CINI  ^Kany  onx  j-nVa  (PSALMS,  BOOK  OF,  §  45  ;  cp  §  28,

iv.)i

2  In  Gesch.  tier  Edomittr,  20(1893),  Buhl  had  accepted  the
ordinary  identification  (es-Sebkhah). Cp  also  EDOM,  §  6.

4251


SALUTATIONS

referring  to  a  wady  running  towards  Lake  Huleh,  the
same  in  which  the  'Ain  el-Mellahah  is  situated.
Winckler  (li/'Zgif.  108)  also  offers  a  new  explanation
of  ' sail  sea.'  He  connects  the  phrase  with  the  wide
spread  Oriental  myth  of  sweet  and  bitter  waters  (cp
MAKAH).  It  may  be  remarked,  however,  that  place-
names  compounded  with  malih,  malik,  and  the  like,
are  at  the  present  day  of  not  infrequent  occurrence  in
Palestine.  See  SOUOM  AND  GOMORRAH.  T.  K.  c.


1.  Prostration.


Job304  RV,  AV  MALLOWS.

SALU  (N-17D,  cp  SALLU),  a  family  of  SIMEON  (q.v.),
Nu.  25 14  (CAAMCGN  [B],  cAAco  [A],  -M  [FL]),  i  Mace.
2  26  (cAAcoM  [ANV],  AV  SALOM).  Jer.  Targ.  identifies
the  name  with  Shaul  of  Gen.  46 10.

SALUM.  i.  (cAAoy/v\  [A]),  i  Esd.  528  =  Ezra242
Neh.  7  45,  SHALLUM,  8.

2.  R V  SALEM,  o-oA^ou  [HA],  i  Esd.  8  i  =  i  Ch.  0  i2/  [5  38  /],
Ezra"  2,  SHALLUM,  6.

SALUTATIONS.  To  '  salute '  is  EV's  equivalent
for  Heb.  'B  Dvtv  /Nt',  lit.  '  to  ask  after  the  welfare
of  some  one'  (2S.  11?  and  elsewhere),  and  DP  SWJ

Di/t?V,  ' to  as^  some  one  as  to  welfare'  (iS.  104
and  elsewhere),  and  for  Gk.  d<rird^o/j.ai  (Mt.  047  Rom.
163^  and  often)  whence  dirTracr/Aos,  'salutation'  (Mt.
287  and  elsewhere).

The  Hebrew  phrase,  however  (cp  Lat.  salutatio,  '  wishing
health')  means  to  greet,'  whereas  the  Greek  includes  both
greetings  and  embraces.  In  Rom.  10  16  i  Cor.  16  20  2  Cor.  13  12
i  Thess.  5  26  i  Pet.  5  14  we  h  i\'e  the  phrase  a.cmdcraa'Of  er  <f>t\ri-
fiaTi  (ayiia  or  [i  Pet.]  <rydjn)«  ;  see  §  3).

We  take  salutation  here  in  the  widest  sense,  and
begin,  not  with  formulas  of  greeting,  but  with  those
conventional  gestures  which  are  even  more  significant.

Of  prostration  as  a  sign  of  deep  humility  and  respect,
not  much  need  be  said.1  David  bowed  himself  three
times  before  his  friend  Jonathan
(i  S.  2041)  ;  Jacob,  seven  times  before
his  offended  brother  Esau  (Gen.  883).  The  lowly
prostrations  exacted  by  sovereigns  are  too  familiar
to  require  examples  from  the  OT  or  illustrations  from
other  nations.  The  prostrations  of  women  before  men
(or,  at  least,  men  of  rank)  are  more  startling  (Gen.  2464
i  S.  2023);  K.  Niebuhr  found  the  same  custom  in
Arabia.  Kneeling  will  be  referred  to  later  (see  §  5).

The  custom  of  embracing  and  kissing  calls  for  fuller

treatment. When Esau ran to meet Jacob, he

_.  '  embraced  him,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and

2. Kissing. kissed him. (Gen.334). and Joseph's

recognition  of  his  brethren,  and  especially  of  Benjamin
(Gen.  45 14  /! ),  and  the  meeting  between  'the  prodigal
son'  and  his  father  ( Lk.  15 20),  are  described  in  exactly
similar  terms.2  In  the  last  two  biblical  passages
AraTa^iX^w  is  the  word  used  in  the  Greek  ;  but  in  Gen.
884  <t>i\(u.  There  is  no  strongly  marked  distinction
between  them,  nor  is  there  more  than  a  theoretical
difference  between  Heb.  nasaband  nissek  (Piel  indicating
a  formal  kiss).

Parting  friends  quite  as  naturally  used  these  con
ventional  acts.  Thus,  after  his  father's  death,  Joseph
'  fell  on  Jacob's  face,  wept  upon  him,  and  kissed  him  '
(e(f)i\Tf)<T(v  Gen.  50 1),  and  the  disciples  from  Ephesus
1  wept  sore,  and  fell  on  Paul's  neck  and  kissed  him  '
(Karf(f>i\ow,  Acts  20 37),  when  he  continued  his  journey
to  Jerusalem.

Such  is  still  the  mode  of  exchanging  salutations
between  relatives  and  intimate  friends  practised  in
Palestine.  '  Each  in  turn  places  his  head,  face  down
wards,  upon  the  other's  left  shoulder  and  afterwards
kisses  him  upon  the  right  cheek,  and  then  reverses  the
action,  by  placing  his  head  similarly  upon  the  other's

1  On  Mordecai's  refusal  to  prostrate  himself  before  Haman,
see  ESTHER,  §  4.

-  Compare  the  recognition  scene  in  Horn.  Od.  21  223.

4252


SALUTATIONS

right  shoulder,  and  kissing  him  upon  the  left  cheek '  ; a
'or,  again,  a  man  will  place  his  right  hand  on  his
friend's  left  shoulder,  and  kiss  his  right  cheek,  and  then
lay  his  left  hand  on  his  right  shoulder,  and  kiss  his  left
cheek. '  A  third  mode  of  salutation  may  be  mentioned.
The  person  who  gives  the  kiss  lays  the  right  hand  under
the  head  of  his  friend  and  supports  it  while  it  receives
the  kiss.  This  custom  is  referred  to  in  the  account  of
Joab's  assassination  of  Amasa  (28.209).  One  or  the
other  of  the  two  former  customs  may  explain  the  account
of  the  entertainment  of  Jesus  by  Simon  the  Pharisee,  in
which  none  of  the  usual  courtesies  were  granted  to  the
wandering  teacher — '  thou  gavest  me  no  kiss  '  (Lk.  7  45).
Absalom's  self-seeking  geniality  to  the  common  people
(28.  15s)  may  best  be  brought  into  connection  with  the
second  form  (the  hand  on  the  shoulder).

The  cheek,  the  forehead,  the  beard,  the  hands,  the
feet  may  be  kissed,  but  not  (in  Palestine)  the  lips.

Two  passages  of  AV  seem  to  contradict  this.  In  the  MT  of
Gen.  41  40  (literally  rendered)  the  Pharaoh  is  made  to  say  to  his
Hebrew  vizier,  'Upon  thy  mouth  shall  all  my  people  kiss.'
Dillmann  and  Delitzsch  render  '  According  to  thy  mouth  (  =  com
mand)  shall  all  my  people  order  themselves '  (so  too  RVmg.).  This
is,  at  any  rate,  not  against  the  social  customs  of  the  East ;  but
no  Hebrew  writer  would  have  expressed  his  meaning  thus.
It  is  better  to  read  'shall  obey  thee '  (3't^V  T^V}  ;  see  Crit.
Bib.).  The  other  passage  is  Prov.  24  26  '  (Every  man)  shall  kiss
(his)  lips  that  giveth  a  right  answer.'  EVnig.  gives  a  less
objectionable  rendering,  '  He  kisseth  with  the  lips  that  giveth  a
right  answer.'  But  yissak  should  be  yaksibfi,  and  the  passage
(see  Crit.  Bib.)  should  be 'rendered—

26  Even  the  simple  will  listen

To  him  who  gives  a  right  sentence,
25  And  those  that  rebuke  will  they  trust,

And  upon  such  a  blessing  will  come.

Kissing  the  hands  or  even  the  feet,  or  the  hem  of  the
garment,  is  at  present  the  respectful  salutation  given  to
a  superior.  Kissing  the  feet  of  Jesus  was  the  grateful
tribute  of  the  sinful  but  reclaimed  woman  at  Simon's
feast  (Lk.  745,  /cara^iAoDcra).  A  kiss  on  the  hand  is
nowhere  expressly  mentioned  in  OT  or  NT.  Still,  such
a  kiss  may  be  meant  in  the  narrative  of  the  betrayal  of
Jesus  (Mt.  2649  Mk.  144S).  If  Delitzsch  is  right  in  sup
posing  the  kiss  of  i  S.  10 1  to  be  the  kiss  of  homage,  we
may  further  conjecture  that  Samuel  raised  the  hand
of  Saul  respectfully  to  his  lips.  More  probably,  the
narrator  means  that  Samuel  greeted  the  new  king  as  a
friend,  on  the  cheek.  In  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  the
vassals  of  the  great  king  are  said  to  signify  their  sub
mission  by  kissing  his  feet  (see  BABYLONIA,  §  69).  No
Hebrew  phrase  of  this  sort  occurs,  though  the  phrase
'  to  lick  the  dust '  in  Is.  49  23  Ps.  72 9  may  be  suggested
by  the  custom  of  kissing  the  ground  on  which  a  superior
has  trodden  ( '  to  smell  the  dust '  is  a  parallel  Egyptian
phrase).  The  Assyrian  kiss  of  vassalage  may  also
perhaps  have  been  less  humiliating  than  it  seems  ;
primitive  usages  early  began  to  lose  their  original  crude-
ness.  In  modern  Syria,  when  a  man  seeks  to  propitiate
one  placed  over  him,  he  will  just  touch  the  feet  of  his
superior  with  his  right  hand,  and  then  kiss  the  hand  and
place  it  on  his  forehead.2  This,  or  some  other  modifi
cation  of  the  complete  ceremony,  may  be  meant  by
Ziba's  '  I  do  obeisance'  in  28.  164  (see  OBEISANCE).

There  is  only  one  OT  passage  in  which,  if  the  text  is
correct,  the  kiss  of  homage  (whether  given  to  hands  or
feet)  must  be  referred  to, — viz.,  '  kiss  the  Son'  (-Qiptn)
in  Ps.  2 12.  Acting  on  the  principle  that  a  text
which  contradicts  the  social  usages  of  Palestine  cannot
be  correct,  we  are  bound  to  try  all  available  means  of
emending  the  text.3  Such  a  cautious  critic  as  Baethgen
admits  '  kiss  the  Son '  into  his  version  only  with  a
parenthetic  note  of  interrogation.

1  Neil,  A'issrnj;  :  its  curious  Bible  mentions,  37  (1885).

2  Neil,  op.  cit.,  p.  7.

3  <B renders ip<ifa<r0e jraiSei'a? ; Tg. NJB'JIN  l|?'3pi  perhaps
reading  10133. See  Lag.  and  Baethgen,  ad  loc.,  and,  for  a  new
solution  [since proposed independently by  Marti and  J. D.
Prince],  Che./^w.  Rel.  Life,  112. Hupfeld's  suggestion  13  1pK:J,
though  often  referred  to,  is  inadmissible,  because  unidiomatic.

4253


SALUTATIONS

It  hardly  needs  to  be  remarked  that  freedom  of  inter
course  between  the  sexes  was  unknown  to  the  Jews  in
3  The  the  Period  of  the  rise  of  Christianity.
'  Holy  Kiss  '  Ecclus-  42 12  (CP  Jn.  4  27)  is  proof  enough
that  the  exchange  of  a  kiss  between  men
and  women,  as  a  sign  of  their  common  membership  in
a  religious  society,  must  have  shocked  Jewish  sentiment.
It  appears  to  be  the  received  view  that  such  a  shock  to
Jewish  sentiment  was  really  given  in  early  Christian
worship,  and  whenever  recognition  of  a  common
Christian  standing  was  called  for.  In  the  article  '  Kiss  '
in  Wace  and  Cheetham's  Diet,  of  Christian  Antiquities,
it  is  stated  that  '  the  primitive  usage  was  for  the  ' '  holy
kiss  "  to  be  given  promiscuously,  without  any  restriction
as  to  sexes  or  ranks,  among  those  who  were  ' '  all  one  in
Christ  Jesus,"  '  and  that  only  when  this  indiscriminate
use  had  given  rise  to  scandals  was  it  restricted  by  the
church  authorities.  The  evidence,  however,  is  not  so
distinct  and  certain  as  to  justify  so  positive  a  statement.1
Paul  (reff.  above)  does  not  expressly  direct  this  startling
mode  of  applying  the  truth  that  '  ye  all  are  one  man  in
Christ  Jesus.'  We  know,  however,  that  he  does  enjoin
that  women  should  have  their  heads  veiled  in  the  Christian
assemblies  (i  Cor.  116),  which  implies  that  he  was  on  his
guard  against  the  occurrence  of  scandals.  We  also  know
that  the  Apostolical  Constitutions  (2  57  8  n)  direct  that  the
men  of  the  laity  should  salute  the  men,  and  the  women
the  women  separately,  and  that  the  Didascalia  (early
in  3rd  cent.),  on  which  Book  II.  of  the  Constitutions  is
based,  distinctly  refers  to  the  separate  places  of  men  and
women,  though  the  'kiss  of  peace'  is  not  referred  to
at  all.

It  seems  very  possible  that  the  Constitutions  do,  in  fact,
represent  the  mind  of  the  original  founders  of  the  churches  on
this  subject,  and  that  we  are  not  compelled  by  a  somewhat
obscure  passage  in  Tertullian(/Jd'  Uxorent,  ii.  4),  who  can  only
speak  for  Africa,  to  suppose  a  violation  of  Jewish  sentiment
in  any  of  the  earliest  Christian  assemblies.  There  may,  how
ever,  of  course,  have  been  a  deviation  in  some  places  from  the
earliest  church  practice.

We  have  still  to  refer  briefly  to  the  kiss  of  adoration.

'  It  was  dim  night,'  writes  Doughty,  '  and  the  drooping

„. - clouds  broke  over  us  with  lightning  and

A^nlf rain- I  said  to  Thaifullah,  "  God  sends
Adoration. ,  . ,  ,  , ,, , ,

his  blessing  again  upon  the  earth. ' '  Ay,

verily,"  he  answered  devoutly,  and  kissed  his  pious  hand
toward  the  flashing  tempest'  (Ar.  DCS.  267).  But  there
was  a  time  when  this  religious  hand-kiss  was  a  sign  of
idolatry.  Job  denies  having  practised  it,  for  it  would
have  proved  him  a  worshipper  of  sun  and  moon,  and
not  of  him  who  created  both  (Job  31  26-28).  In  Farther
Asia  as  well  as  in  Greece  the  rising  sun  was  greeted  by
his  worshippers  with  a  hand-kiss  (Lucian,  De  Saltat.
17).  This  was,  in  fact,  a  substitute  for  the  kiss
which  would  be  offered  to  an  idol — such  a  kiss  as  is
referred  to  in  Hos.  182,  'The  men  that  sacrifice  kiss
calves'2  (see  CALVES,  GOLDEN),  and  in  i  K.  19 18,
'  Every  mouth  which  has  not  kissed  (Baal).'

The  ordinary  salutations  of  worship  were  two —
prostration,  and  spreading  forth  the  hands  (see  the  Pss.


5.  Kneeling.


passim,  Ex.  20s  2  K.  5i8  for  the  former,


and  i  K.  8  22  38  Is.  lis  for  the  latter).
A  substitute  for  prostration  was  kneeling,  which  Hebrew
custom  set  apart  as  an  act  of  homage  to  the  Deity
( i  K.  8  54  2  Ch.  6 13  Is.  45  23  Dan.  6 10  Lk.  22  41  Acts  7  60
and  elsewhere),  though  from  Mk.  1 40  10 17  15  19  Mt.  1 7  14
2729  we  may  infer  that,  when  haste  was  required,
kneeling  might  take  the  place  of  prostration  as  a  sign
of  respect  to  a  man  of  rank.

Formulae  of  greeting  are  either  inquiries  as  to the

1  Cp Neil, op. cit., iTff. ^ff. On the 'holy kiss,'  etc.
Conybeare  (Expos. 1894  a,  461) points out two passages in
Philo's  Quiestiones  in  Ex.,  preserved  in  Armenian,  which  seem
to  imply  that  the  '  kiss  of  peace  '  or  '  of  concord  '  was  a  formal
institution  of  the  synagogue.

2  There  is  some  difficulty  in  this  passage. But  at  any  rate  the
phrase  '  kiss  calves'  is  possible. Cp  Crit.  Bib.

4254


SAMAEL


SAMARITANS


welfare  of  the  friend,  or  prayers  for  his  continued  pros-


6.  Greetings.


perity. The  treacherous  Joab  addresses


Amasa,  '  Art  thou  in  peace,  my  brother  '
((S  ei  i>yiaivtis  [crii]  adt\(}>{  ;  2  S.  2Qg).  Jesus  bids  his
disciples  say,  on  entering  a  house,  '  Peace  be  to  this
house'  (Lk.  10s).  Boaz,  when  he  meets  his  reapers,
says,  '  Yahwe  be  with  you,'  and  the  friendly  answer  is,
'Yahwe  bless  thee'  (Ruth  2  4;  cp  Ps.  1298).  Saul
piously  addresses  Samuel  with  the  words,  '  Blessed  be
thou  of  Yahwe  '  (  i  S.  15  13).  To  a  king  the  loyal  saluta
tion  was,  '  Let  the  king  live'  (i  S.  1024  2  S.  16  16  i  K.
1  39  2  K.  11  12),  or  '  Let  the  king  live  for  ever  '  (i  K.  1  31  ;
cp  Dan.  24  89  5  10  6621  Neh.  23),  possibly  with  an
allusion  to  legendary  tales  of  highly  favoured  mortals
who  had  escaped  Sheol.  In  the  NT  we  find  the  Greek
expression  xa^P€-  as  a  substitute  for  '  Peace  be  to  thee  '
(Mt.  2649  Mk.  15  18  Lk.  128,  and  elsewhere).  For  epis
tolary  greetings,  see  Ezra  4  17  7  12  Acts  23  26  30,  and  the
close  of  Pauline  Epistles.

'  Peace  be  on  you  '  is  still  the  commonest  form  of
salutation  among  Moslems.  The  conventional  reply  is,
'  And  on  you  be  the  peace  (of  God),'  to  which  it  is  usual
to  add,  'and  the  mercy  of  God,  and  his  blessings.'
This  salutation  may  not  be  used  by  or  to  an  'infidel';
a  Moslem  who  finds  that  he  has  addressed  it  by  mistake
to  a  wrong  person  generally  revokes  his  salutation.  He
may  also  do  so  if  a  Moslem  refuses  to  return  his  greet
ing,  saying,  '  Peace  be  on  us  and  on  (all)  the  right
worshippers  of  God  !  '  This  seems  to  Kitto  (Bid.
Cyclop.,  s.v.  'Salutation')  a  striking  illustration  of
Lk.  lOs/I  2  Jn.  ii.  The  salam,  however,  is  only  the
beginning  of  a  string  of  conventional  formula;  which
take  up  much  time,  and  are  evaded  by  persons  in  haste.
Specimens  of  these  are  given  by  Lane  (Mod.  Egyptians,
1  253).  No  doubt  Jewish  politeness  had  also  its  optional
formulre,  which  would  be  evaded  in  circumstances  such
as  are  described  in  2  K.  429  Lk.  104.  T.  K.  c.


SAMAEL /c&AAMiHA [BA]), Judith  8  1 AV, RV
SAL.AMIEI,  ;  the  same  as  SHELUMIKL.

SAMAIAS (cAM<MAC>- i. i  Esd.  1  9  =  2  Ch.  35g
SHE.MAIAH,  15.

2.  i  Esd.  8  39  =  Ezra  8  13,  SHEMAIAH,  16.

3.  i  Esd.  844  —  Ezra  8  i6,  SHEMAIAH,  17.

4.  Tobito  13,  see  SHEMAIAH,  23.

SAMANASSAR (c&N&MACC&pco  [B], i  Esd.  2i2
RVm£-),  see  SHESHBAXZAR.

SAMARIA  (|'n)?b;  ;  the  Aram.  pEC*,  whence  the
Gk.  CAMA.p[e]l&.  has  become  assimilated  to  names  like
1  Name  ^Ianana'm'  Ramathaim  [cp  N  AMES,  §  107];
Ass.  Samerina).1  The  city  so  called  is
said  in  i  K.  1624  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  12s)  to  derive  its
name  from  -\QS?  (SHEMKR),  the  owner  of  the  hill  on
\fhich  it  was  built.2  Shemer  may  in  fact  quite  well  be  an
ancient  clan-name,  though  it  is  plausible  enough  to
derive  the  name  of  such  a  loftily-placed  city  from  TDB>
in  the  sense  of  'outlook'  (so  GASm.,  HG,  346).
Shomeron  may  denote  (i)  the  hill,  (2)  the  city  built  on
it,  (3)  the  whole  district  of  which  the  city  came  to  be  the
capital.  In  the  last  sense  Shomc'r6n,  EV  '  Samaria,'  is
equivalent  to  the  Northern  or  Israelitish  kingdom
(Hos.  7  i  86,  etc.  [Wellh.]),  and  hence  p-icE*  ny  means
Israelitish  cities  (2  K.  172426  23i9).3

The  city  is  situated  close  to  the  borders  of  Ephraim

1  On  the  question  whether  Samerina  always  means  Samaria,
see  MENAHEM.

2  According  to  Stade  (ZATIV,  6171),  the  punctuation  with
Holem  implies  an  erroneous  explanation  of  the  Aramaic  forms
with  a. The  lateness  of  this  pronunciation  may  be  inferred
from (S's representation of  rrKV 'n '  K.  1624,  which is  (i)
<rtfj.epiai>  [B],  ffitpiav  [Al,  <rofj.optav  [L],  (2)  a-a.tpr)ptav  [B],  tro^ptav
[A], <ro/Liopuii/  [L]. Cp,  however,  Kittel's note in  SBOT  on
a  Ch.  134,  and  note  in  HK  on  i  K.  1624.

3  [On  the  possibility of  frequent  confusion  between
Samaria,  and  piaip,  Shimron  in  the  Negeb,  see  PROPHET,
8,  35,  SHIMRON.]

4255


and  Manasseh,  in  Mt. Ephraim,  about  6  m. N\V.  of
,, IT-  i.  the earlier capital Shechem. Of its

^'  foundation  we  have  a  definite  account  in
i  K.  1624,  where  it  is  stated  that  Omri  purchased  the
hill  from  Shemer  for  two  talents,  and  built  on  it  the
city  which  he  called  after  the  name  of  the  former  owner.
Kittel  confirms  the  accuracy  of  this  notice  by  a  reference
to  the  case  of  David  in  2  S.  'lliiff.  From  Omri's  time
(about  925  B.C.)  it  became  the  capital  of  the  northern
kingdom,  although  it  never  attained  to  the  religious
prestige  of  the  older  Shechem.  Ahab  adorned  it  with
a  temple  of  Baal,  and  Baal-worship  soon  became
recognised  there  as  on  a  level  with  the  original  Israelitish
calf- worship.  The  city  was  in  a  naturally  strong
position  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  102),  standing  on  an  oblong
isolated  hill  which  is  precipitous  on  the  one  side,  and
easily  fortified  on  the  other.  In  the  reign  of  Ahab  it
was  besieged  (901  B.C.)  unsuccessfully  by  the  Aramaeans
under  Ben-hadad  (i  K.  20),  and  again  in  the  .'eign  of
Joram  (892  B.C. ),  when  it  was  relieved  by  a  panic  among
the  Aramasans  (2  K.624).  It  was  captured  by  the  Assyrian
army  in  721  after  a  siege  of  three  years,  many  of  the
inhabitants  were  deported  and  the  kingdom  of  Israel
was  finally  brought  to  an  end.  For  its  colonisation
and  the  little  that  can  be  gathered  as  to  the  history  of  the
district  down  to  the  time  of  Nehemiah,  see  SAMARITANS.
It  was  again  taken  by  Alexander  the  Great  who  de
ported  many  of  its  inhabitants  to  Shechem,  and
substituted  Syro- Macedonian  settlers.  The  district,
— a/j.apfiTL'5  "x_(i3pa.,  was  then  given  over  to  the  Jews.
The  city  seems  to  have  remained  in  the  occupation  of
Alexander's  settlers  until  the  time  of  John  Hyrcanus,
who  completely  destroyed  11(109  B.C.)  and  seized  the
whole  district  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  10s).  It  was  partially
restored  under  Gabinius  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  63),  and  shortly
afterwards  (in  25  B.C.)  entirely  rebuilt  on  a  large  scale
by  Herod  the  Great  (ib.  xv.  8  5),  who  named  it  Sebaste[ia]
( Ze/Jaorij  or  — e/3daT«a  ;  Rabb.  'BD^D  or  >BDI;D)  in  honour
of  the  Emperor.  After  Herod's  death  in  B.C.  4  the  king
dom  of  Samaria  together  with  that  of  Judaea  went  to  his
son  Archelaus.  In  the  NT  the  city  is  not  mentioned  ;
the  name  Samaria  denotes  the  district.  As  Samaria  lay
between  Galilee  and  Judoea,  Jesus  passed  through  it
on  his  way  S.  to  Jerusalem  (Lk.  17  n  Jn.  4)  although
the  Jews  ordinarily  avoided  doing  so.  Later,  Christianity
was  preached  there  (ets  rr\v  iro\tv  rijs  ^djuapeias)
by  Philip  the  evangelist  (ActsSs^i).  The  subsequent
history  of  the  city  is  obscure,  and  there  is  no  record  of
its  final  destruction.  According  to  Jerome  Sebaste  was
believed  in  his  time  to  be  the  burial-place  of  John  the
Baptist,  as  well  as  of  the  prophets  Elisha  and  Obadiah.
It  apparently  was  a  place  of  some  importance  in  the
early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  since  we  find  a
Bishop  of  Sebaste  at  the  Council  of  Nicosa  (325)  and
again  at  that  of  Jerusalem  (536).  It  was  occupied  by
the  Crusaders,  and  a  bishopric  re-established  there  in
1155.  The  site  is  now  represented  by  a  village  named
Sebustiyeh,  where  is  the  interesting  half-ruined  church
of  John  the  Baptist,  with  other  Christian  remains.
Not  far  off,  at  about  the  same  level,  run  the  streets  of
columns  with  which  Herod  adorned  the  city.

A.  E.  C.

SAMARITANS

Origin  (§§  i-3a).  Beliefs  (§§  v*-c).

History  (§  3$).  Institutions  (g  4^).

Literature  (§§  $a  sa-c).  Language  (§  $t£).

Bibliography  (§  6).

The  ^Samaritans are  called  once  in the  OT (2  K.
1729)  Someronlm (D^ICty), a  name  which becomes
„  common  later. It  is  a  gentilic  form  from

me>  -|JOf.  In  Rabbinical  literature  they  are
called  kuthim  (o'nis),  a  term  intended  to  be  con
temptuous,  referring  to  the  colonists  from  Cuthah.
The  Greek  Za/uaperrcu  properly  means  inhabitants  of
the  district  of  Za/udpeta.  They  call  themselves  ^vrte*  '33,

4256


SAMARITANS

or  specifically  o"icfe>  from  nor, properly  keepers, sc.  of
the  Law. On  the  name  of  the  place,  see  SAMARIA.

The  history  of  the  Samaritans,  as  such,  begins  where
that of  the northern kingdom ceases. We read  in

2.  Colonisation.  *  K'  173^  that  Shalmaneser  went  up
to  Samaria,  and  that  in  the  ninth  year
of  Hoshea,  the  king  of  Assyria  took  Samaria,  and  carried
Israel  away  into  Assyria  and  brought  men  from  Babylon,
and  from  Cuthah,  and  from  Avva,  and  from Hamath
and Sepharvaim and placed them in the cities of
Samaria. In Ezra 4  2 it is '  Esar-haddon, king of
Assyria, who brought  us  up  hither.' Lastly  in  Ezra
4 10 they  are  'the  nations  whom  the  great  and  noble
Osnappar  brought  over.'1 The  importation  of  foreign
colonists  is  thus  attributed  apparently  to  three  several
kings, the  last of  whom  bears  a  name  not  otherwise
known. To  these  names  yet  a  fourth  must  be  added.
It is noticeable that in 2  K.lSg/. it is stated that
Shalmaneser besieged Samaria, '  and at the  end of
three  years  they  (not  he)  took  it.' It  is  now  known  that
SHALMANESER [q.v.~\, who  began the  siege, died  in
723  B.C.,  and  that  it  was  his  successor,  Sargon  II.,  who
actually  took the city  in  721. Perhaps  the  death  of
Shalmaneser  may  account  for  the  length  of  the  siege.
It  is  natural  therefore  to  infer  from  the  accounts  in  2  K.
that  Sargon  introduced  the  (first)  settlement  of  colonists,
and  this  is  definitely  stated  to  be  the  case  in  the  annals
of Sargon.2 With regard  to the other names, most
recent  critics  rightly  identify  Osnappar  with  Asur-bani-
pal. The  accounts  are  further  simplified  if  Esar-haddon
be  taken  as  a  corruption  of  the  same  name,  due  to  the
similarity  of  the  first  element  in  each  (see  ASNAPPER).
We shall thus have two colonisations, the first by
Sargon,  the  second  by  Asur-bani-pal. As  to  the  list  of
cities  from  which  the  colonists  were  drawn,  Sepharvaim
should no doubt be the Babylonian Sippar. The
cuneiform  account  expressly  states  that  Babylon,  Cuthah,
and Sippar opposed  Asur-bani-pal, and it would  be
consistent  with  Assyrian  policy  to  deport  the  inhabitants
of  those  cities  to  the  distant  province  of  Samaria. On
the  other  hand,  it  would  be  altogether  an  unusual  step
to  transfer  the  inhabitants  of  Hamath  or  of  Avva  (in
Syria  ;  but  cp  AVVAH)  to  a  neighbouring  district. See
HAMATH. Sargon  may  indeed  have  brought  colonists
from Hamath, which he reduced in 720, and the
combination  of  the  two  sets  of  malcontents  may  have
led to the  necessity  of  his  reducing  Samaria  for the
second  time  in  720  ;  but  there  are  no  grounds  for  such  a
conjecture. It  is  far  more  consistent  with  the  facts  to
suppose  (with  Winckler)  that  just  as  the  Deuteronomic
redactor has combined into one the two Assyrian
kings,  and  inserted  a  long  passage  to  point  the  moral
of  the  story,  and  imparted  to  the  whole  a  tone  hostile  to
the  Samaritans,  so  he  has  combined  the  two  colonisa
tions into one, and amplified his  account  from 2  K.
1834  which  he  took  to  refer  to  the  same  events. But
this  last  passage  has  not  necessarily  anything  to  do  with
the  colonisation  of  Samaria. The  Rabshakeh  is  there
citing instances of towns which have fallen before
Assyria,  so  that  Hamath,  Sepharvaim,  and Ivvah  (see
AVVAH)  are  quite  in  place  as  being  comparatively  close
at  hand  and  therefore  the  more  likely  to  appeal  to  the
inhabitants of  Jerusalem. The redactor's view was
doubtless  based  on  a  confusion  of  Sippar  (in  Babylonia)
with  Sepharvaim  (in  Syria) ;  see  SEPHARVAIM. From
the  biblical  and  the  Assyrian  accounts  together  we  thus
restore  the  history  as  follows  : Shalmaneser besieged
Samaria  but  died during  the  siege  : Sargon  took  the
city  in  721, deported 27,290  of  its  inhabitants, and
introduced  in  their  place  (?  in  715)  colonists  from  other
conquered  cities  :  in  720  the  country  had  to  be  subdued
again  :  later  Asur-bani-pal  further  colonised  the  country.

1  Cp  Winckler,  AUtest.  Unt.  97  ff.  ;  also  EZRA-NEHEMIAH,
§9-

2  Winckler,  Keilinschrift-tcxte  Sargons,  1  5  7  21.

4257


SAMARITANS

The  resulting  population  was  called  by  the  general
name Samaritan. How far must it be considered

3a.  Population.  ,foreign  (**x°7«"fr.  Lk.17.8)?  The
later  Samaritans  have  always  claimed
very  strongly  to  be  "?>ne"  >:3,  regarding  Joseph  especi
ally  as  their  ancestor  (cp  Bireshith  Kabba,  §  94,  on
Gen.  4613).  On  the  other  hand,  the  Jews  deny
them  any  right  to  the  name  of  Israel,  representing
them  as  merely  descendants  of  the  Assyrian  (Cutha>an)
colonists.  The  truth  lies  midway.  It  is  now  gen
erally  admitted  that  the  deportation  under  Sargon
was  not  complete.  A  district  so  important  as
Samaria  would  not  have  been  entirely  depopulated  by
losing  27,290  of  its  inhabitants.  (When  a  similar  fate
bt-fel  Judah,  upwards  of  200,000  went  into  captivity.)
The  number  undoubtedly  represents  the  persons  of
importance  (including  the  priests),  who  alone  were
likely  to  be  dangerous,  whilst  the  poorer  class  were  left
as  before  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  outlying  towns  and
villages  were  probably  hardly  affected.  This  seems
indeed  to  be  definitely  stated  by  Sargon,  though  the
passage  is  not  very  clear.  The  account  in  2  K.  17  is
written  from  the  Jewish  point  of  view  ;  but  the  real  state
of  the  case  comes  out  in  the  later  history — e.g. ,  when
Josiah,  a  century  afterwards,  put  down  idolatry  '  in  the
cities  of  Samaria'  (2  K.  23isi9/)  obviously  among
Israelites  (cp  2  Ch.  34 6/.),  and  collected  money  for  the
repair  of  the  temple  from  'Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  and
of  all  the  remnant  of  Israel'  (il>.  v.  9).  There  can
hardly  be  a  doubt  that  in  Nehemiah's  time,  for  example,
the  population  of  the  district  of  Samaria  consisted  of
the  '  remnant  of  Israel '  with  an  admixture  of  foreigners.
What  was  the  proportion  of  the  two  elements  to  one
another  cannot  now  be  determined.  Nor  have  we  any
means  of  knowing  how  far  they  were  intermixed,  and
how  far  the  colonists  really  adopted  the  religion  of  the
'  God  of  the  Land.'  So  long  as  the  name  '  Samaritan  '
meant  only  the  inhabitant  of  Samaria  and  the  surround
ing  country,  it  no  doubt  included  all  the  mixed  popula
tion  ;  but  when  the  name  of  the  city  was  changed  the
term  acquired  a  purely  religious  significance,  and  then
probably  denoted  the  descendants  of  the  '  remnant  '
together  with  such  of  the  colonists  as  had  become
proselytes  and  intermarried  with  Israel.  But  it  was
just  this  (perhaps  slight)  admixture  which  gave  colour
to  the  Jewish  taunt  implied  by  the  term  Cuthasan.

As  to  the  early  history  of  the  Samaritan  people,  we
have  little  information.  We  are  indeed  told  in  2  K.
Sb  H'  t  1?25  that  the  country  was  infested  by  lions

*"  (Jos.  Ant.  ix.  14s,  §  289,  says  a  pestilence)
and  that  the  inhabitants  in  consequence  made  request
to  '  the  king  of  Assyria  '  for  a  priest  who  was  accordingly
sent  to  '  teach  them  the  manner  of  the  god  of  the  land. '
Josephus  says,  'some  of  the  priests,'  and  it  is  probable
that  this  was  the  original  reading  of  2  K.  17  27,  since
the  text  still  preserves  the  strange  plurals  '  let  them  go
and  dwell'  (latri  ID^'I)-  The  idea  is  quite  in  keeping
with  the  common  view  of  a  tutelary  deity  whose
protection  was  necessary  in  his  own  land  and  whose
power  was  connected  with  and  restricted  to  it.  Cp  a
similar  incident  in  the  story  of  Naaman,  2  K.  517.  It
is  generally  thought  that  this  request  could  only
have  been  made  by  the  foreign  colonists  ;  but  since
the  'remnant'  consisted  of  'the  poorer  sort,'  the
people  of  the  land  (pun  cy)  who  in  Rabbinical  litera
ture  are  proverbially  ignorant  of  the  law,  it  is  only
natural  that  all  alike  should  require  a  teacher  who
understood  the  technicalities  of  Yahwe-worship.  So
'  they  feared  Yahwe,  and  served  their  own  gods
(2  K.  1733).  However,  the  high-places  which  Josiah
suppressed  need  not  have  been  idolatrous  :  they  may
have  been  merely  unauthorised  Yahwe-shrines.  That
'  the  remnant '  joined  with  Judah  in  the  use  of  the
temple  at  Jerusalem  at  this  period,  may  be  inferred  from
2  Ch.  34g  and  also  from  Jer.  41s  where  it  is  mentioned

4258


SAMARITANS

that  eighty  men  came  '  from  Shechem,  from  Shiloh,  and
from  Samaria'  to  make  theirofferings  there(cp  SHECHEM,
§  2,  SHILOH,  §  2).  It  is  unlikely  that  these  were  apostate
Jews  :  they  can  only  have  been  Samaritans.

After  another  period  of  nearly  a  century,  during
which  we  have  no  information  about  the  Samaritans,
they  are  mentioned  in  the  account  of  a  return  of  Jews
from  Babylonia  under  Cyrus,  when  they  ask  to  be
allowed  a  share  in  the  building  of  the  new  temple — •
a  request  which  was  refused  (Ezra 4 5).  It  is  usually
considered  that  this  refusal  was  the  cause  of  a  mutual
estrangement  and  an  implacable  hatred  between  the  two
peoples.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that  the
real  cause  was  something  deeper  and  went  back  farther
than  this  mere  incident.  If  we  admit  the  presence  of  a
strong  Israelitish  element  in  the  Samaritan  people,  we
shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  seeing  here  the  old  spirit  of
opposition  between  Israel  and  Judah,  always  ready  to
break  out,  which  definitely  asserted  itself  under  Jero
boam, — the  refusal  to  recognise  Judah's  claim  to  a
hegemony,  the  revolt  against  centralisation.  It  was
based  on  a  difference  of  race,  an  incompatibility  between
N.  and  S. ,  and  was  more  political  than  religious.  No
reason  is  assigned  for  the  refusal :  the  Jews  do  not  charge
their  '  adversaries  '  with  idolatry,  nor  even  with  heresy.1
Indeed  it  would  seem  that  Israel  continued  to  be  willing,
and  were  allowed,  even  after  this,  to  join  in  Jewish
worship  in  Jerusalem,  if  Ezra62i  is  to  be  so  understood.

On  the  other  hand  the  Jewish  policy,  while  purely
patriotic,  was  rigidly  exclusive.  It  aimed  at  fixing  the
worship  of  Yahw6  as  the  religion  of  Judah,  purifying
it  from  all  foreign  elements,  and  making  Jerusalem  its
headquarters.  Hence  it  was  out  of  the  question  that
they  should  allow  the  participation  of  a  race  whose
devotion  to  Jewish  ideals  was  open  to  suspicion  and
whose  origin  was  perhaps  mixed.  The  Jew  could  not
risk  contamination  by  having  any  dealings  with  the
Samaritan  ;  but,  as  we  see  from  Ezra62i  and  Jer.  41  4,
there  was  no  barrier  of  the  kind  on  the  Samaritan  side.
Only  when  Judah,  by  refusing  their  help,  proclaimed  an
exclusive  policy,  did  a  political  separation  become
inevitable,  and  it  then  became  necessary  for  the
Samaritans  to  pursue  something  of  the  same  policy.
No  doubt,  in  their  condition  of  social  and  religious
disorganisation,  the  restoration  of  a  Jewish  state  at
Jerusalem  appearedan  imminent  danger,  and  accordingly
we  find  them  endeavouring  by  truly  Oriental  intrigues
to  prevent  first  the  building  of  the  temple  and  afterwards
the  erection  of  the  walls  (Ezra44^  Neh.  ^iff.}\  cp
E/.RA-NEHEMIAH,  §  io.  In  this  they  were  unsuccessful,
and  matters  must  have  continued  in  much  the  same
state  of  political  separation,  with  a  good  deal  of
individual  intercourse,  until  the  building  of  the  temple
on  Mt.  Gerizim,  which  made  Shechem  the  religious  centre
of  Samaria  and  finally  rendered  re-union  impossible.2
A  sanctuary  once  established  on  their  own  sacred
mountain,  it  became  a  point  of  honour  to  refuse  to
recognise  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  Of  the  Samaritan
temple  we  have  no  mention  in  the  OT,  and  the  occasion
and  date  of  its  erection  are  alike  difficult  to  ascertain.
According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  xi.  7  2,  xi.  82)  the  satrap
of  Samaria  under  Darius  Codomannus  (336-330)  was
Sanballat,  who  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to
Manasseh,  the  brother  of  Jaddus  the  Jewish  high
priest.  Manasseh  was  ordered  by  the  elders  and
Jaddus  either  to  give  up  his  foreign  wife  or  to  renounce
the  priesthood,  and  thereby  the  possible  succession  to
the  office  of  high  priest.  He  thereupon  complained  to
Sanballat,  who  urged  him  to  migrate  to  Samaria,
promising  to  get  him  established  there  as  high  priest
under  state  protection,  and  to  build  a  temple.  He

1  In  Ezra 4 12  'to  us"  suggests  that  Samaritans  had  been
accustomed  to  use  Jerusalem  as  a  sacred  place  before  the  return.

-  [On  the  constitution  of  the  Samaritan  community  see  further
Duhm's  commentary  on  Isaiah  (chaps.  515-60);  Che.  Introd.
Is.  3i6/,  322,  364-374  385 ;  Jew.  Ret.  Life,  25-68.]

4259


SAMARITANS

was  joined  by  other  Jews  who  had  foreign  wives  or  were
discontented  with  the  reforms  at  Jerusalem,  and  the
rival  temple  was  ultimately  built  in  332  under  the
sanction  of  Alexander  the  Great.  This  account  njust
however  be  received  with  caution.

Where  Josephus  differs  from  Isehemiah  we  so  often  find  him
to  be  in  the  wrong  that  his  narrative  is  open  to  suspicion  where
we  have  no  such  check.  In  this  instance,  from  whatever  cause,
he  seems  to  be  confused,  and  to  place  his  account  (which  may
very  likely  represent  the  facts)  a  century  too  late.  After  the
enactments  mentioned  in  Ezra910s  Neh.  1031  182328,  it  is
improbable  that  foreign  marriages  would  still  be  occurring  in
Jerusalem  in  333.

On  the  other  hand  the  story  fits  on  very  well  to  the
events  mentioned  in  Neh.  1828,  so  that  it  would  seem
that  Josephusconfounds  Darius  Nothus  with  Codomannus
and  fills  out  his  story  accordingly.  It  is  possible  that
he  is  following  a  trustworthy  tradition  in  ascribing  the
foundation  of  the  temple  to  the  time  of  Alexander,  and
that  he  intentionally  connects  with  it  the  story  of
Manasseh  in  order  to  cast  discredit  on  the  Samaritan
religion  as  being  founded  by  a  renegade  priest.  Cp
SANBALLAT.  We  may  therefore  put  the  secession
of  Manasseh  soon  after  432,  and  perhaps  accept
Josephus'  account  that  the  temple  was  built  about  332.

The  Temple  continued  to  exist  till  128  B.C.  when  it
was  destroyed  by  John  Hyrcanus,  in  pursuance  of  the
same  exclusive  policy  noticed  above.  From  the  time  of
Alexander,  Samaria  shared  the  varying  fortunes  of  its
neighbours,  gradually  losing  any  political  importance
it  ever  possessed.  A  few  events  only  need  be  mentioned.
The  city  of  Samaria  was  embellished  by  Herod  the
Great  and  renamed  Sebaste  in  honour  of  Augustus.
The  temple  on  Mt.  Gerizim  was  rebuilt  by  the  Romans
.is  a  reward  for  Samaritan  help  in  the  suppression  of
Bar  Kokhba's  revolt.  But  such  favourable  treatment
was  not  often  received  or  deserved  by  them.  After
the  national  existence  of  Judah  had  been  destroyed
under  Titus  and  Hadrian  the  animosity  of  the  Samaritans
turned  towards  the  growing  power  and  claims  of  the
Christians.  Their  excesses  were  repressed  by  Justinian
with  a  severity  from  which  they  never  recovered.

During  the  middle  ages  only  scattered  notices  of  the  Samaritans
occur,  and  the  native  records  are  little  more  than  lists  of  names.
Colonies  are  mentioned  by  Benjamin  of  Tudela  (died  1173)35
living  in  several  cities  besides  Nablus  (Shechem),  and  Obadiah
of  Bartinoro  (circa  1487)  speaks  of  them  in  Cairo.  There
certainly  was  a  community  in  Damascus,  and  probably  also  in
Cairo,  as  late  as  the  seventeenth  century.  In  more  modern
times  communications  were  opened  with  them  by  Scaliger  and
continued  by  Huntington,  Ludolf  and  others.  At  the  present
day  the  only  remnant  of  them  is  at  Nablus  (Shechem).  They
number  about  120  persons,  and  'the  forty"  (families)  have
become  locally  proverbial.  According  to  a  recent  traveller
attempts  are  being  now  made  to  save  the  tribe  from  extinction
by  encouraging  intermarriages  with  the  neighbouring  Jewish
families,  but  hitherto  with  little  success,  although  no  difficulty
seems  to  be  felt  on  religious  grounds.

i.  Sacred  books. — The  Samaritans  are  by  no  means  a
Jewish  sect.  Though  they  started  from  the  same  point

„ T» i  • the development of their respective
4a.  Doctrine  :  , ,

book  systems  has  proceeded  on  independent,

though  naturally  parallel,  lines.  Their
only  sacred  book  is  the  Pentateuch,  of  which  they
possess  a  recension  agreeing  essentially  with  the  Jewish
(Massoretic)  text.  (See  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS,  §  45.)

At  what  time  they  first  received  the  Pentateuch  cannot  now
be  determined  ;  but  it  is  most  natural  to  suppose  that  a  copy
(or  copies)  of  the  law  would  be  carried  by  Manasseh  to  Samaria
at  the  time  of  his  migration  thither.  It  is  not  probable  that
any  but  the  priestly  caste  would  possess,  or  would  be  allowed
to  possess,  a  copy  of  it  at  that  time.  If  then  Manasseh  took
with  him  a  book  of  the  law  as  part  of  his  priestly  equipment
about  430,  this  would  explain  the  fact  that  the  Samaritans
accepted  it  in  its  final  form,  which,  according  to  modern  criti
cism,  had  probably  been  attained  about  that  date.

The  reason  why  the  Pentateuch  alone  of  Jewish  books
was  taken  over  is  obvious.  The  Torah  is  of  the  highest
importance,  not  for  its  historical  contents,  but  as  con
taining  practical  rules  for  the  ritual  '  of  the  God  of  the
land,'  and  the  haUikhdh  or  regulations  by  which  the
daily  '  walk '  of  Jew  and  Samaritan  alike  must  be

4260


SAMARITANS

governed.  These  things  alone  are  of  vital  importance  ;
matters  of  faith  and  theoretical  doctrine  are  secondary.
Moreover,  even  among  the  Jews,  the  other  books  had
not  yet  acquired  the  authority  which  they  possessed  at
a  later  time.  Having  once  accepted  the  Torah,  the
Samaritans  followed  its  injunctions  with  a  rigidity  recog
nised  even  by  the  Jews.  For  example,  in  Jn.  48  the
disciples  went  into  a  Samaritan  city  to  buy  food,
apparently  as  a  matter  of  course,  whilst  the  question
in  v.  9  probably  refers  to  the  asking  of  a  favour,  and
the  following  comment  is  a  later  gloss.  At  a  later  time
Jewish  opinion  became  more  hostile,  and  various
charges  were  laid  against  them,  mostly,  it  would  seem,
without  foundation.  '  He  that  eateth  bread  of  a
Cuthtean  is  as  one  that  eateth  swine's  flesh.'  They
were  accused  of  worshipping  a  dove  and  a  god  Ashlma.
For  the  former  there  is  no  evidence,  nor  is  it  even
probable  from  what  we  know  of  them  otherwise  ;  the
latter  is  due  to  a  malicious  misunderstanding  of  the
Samaritan  pronunciation  of  not/'  (eshma,  'the  name')
which  they  everywhere  substitute  for  mrr,  just  as  the
Jews  read  <:-IN  (and  earlier  cs?n),  from  motives  of  rever
ence.  But  while  holding  closely  to  the  Levitical  law  as
the  one  thing  needful,  the  Samaritans  did  develop
theoretical  doctrine,  based  upon  the  Torah,  if  not
derived  from  it.  The  earliest  evidence  for  anything  of
the  kind  is  contained  in  Jn.  4.

ii. Eschatology.- — The  belief  in  a  Messiah  is  already
46.  Eschatology.  established,  in  Jn.  4,  and  from  later
°J Samaritan sources we now know
its  character.

The  Messiah  is  called  rcnOi  the  Taheb,  a  term  variously  ex
plained  to  mean  '  he  who  returns '  or  (more  probably)  '  he  who
restores,'  and  the  belief  is  founded  on  Dt.  IS  15.  He  will  bring
to  an  end  the  period  of  Fanuta  (nrtUB),  which  has  lasted  since
the  schism  of  Eli  who  removed  the  tabernacle  to  Shiloh,  and,
as  the  name  probably  implies,  he  will  restore  the  period  of
grace  (ridzvan,  nrtlrn)  with  the  tabernacle  and  the  worship  of
the  Lord  on  Mt.  Gerizim,  as  well  as  the  temporal  prosperity  of
the  nation,  after  which  he  will  die.

The  chief  external  information  on  such  points  is  in
the  writings  of  the  Christian  fathers,  who  assert  that  the
Samaritans  did  not  believe  in  angels,  the  resurrection,
or  a  future  life.  These  statements  are  due  partly  to  a
confusion,  and  partly  to  a  disregard  of  the  development
cf  theological  speculation,  since  we  know  from  native
sources  that  all  these  doctrines  were  held  at  least
from  the  fourth  century  onward.  Nevertheless  the
patristic  account  very  probably  rests  on  a  basis  of
genuine  tradition.

If  the  Samaritans  acquired  their  law  and  their  priestly  system
about  430  B.C.,  they  no  doubt  took  over  with  them  the  set  of
beliefs  current  at  the  time  in  Jerusalem.  But  in  the  fifth  century
B.C.  Jewish  theology  was  not  concerned  with  eschatological
doctrines,  or  at  any  rate  had  never  formulated  them,  and  the
Samaritans,  being  essentially  conservative,  probably  developed
doctrine  more  slowly  than  the  progressive  Pharisaic  party  in
Judaea.  (Cp  ESCHATOLOGY,  §  45.)

The  native  literature,  from  which  alone  we  can  safely
judge  of  the  beliefs  of  the  Samaritans,  begins  only  in
the  fourth  century  A.D.  ,  and  we  then  find  them  in  full
possession  of  those  doctrines  which  the  Christian  fathers
denied  to  them.  It  would  therefore  seem  that  the
patristic  account  perpetuates  a  tradition  which  had  once
been  correct  but  had  ceased  to  be  so.  In  the  liturgies
frequent  references  are  made  to  the  Taheb.  Closely
connected  with  that  belief  is  the  doctrine  of  the  final
judgment,  which  shall  be  after  the  death  of  the  Taheb,
when  the  righteous  shall  go  into  the  garden  of  Eden,
and  the  wicked  be  burned  with  fire.

The  full  expression  is  BTBfl  Cp3  DV  (sometimes  r<2~\  fin  DV)
derived  from  Dt.  32  35,  where  the  Samaritan  text  reads  crS  f°r
the  Massoretic  ik  The  character  of  the  future  life  to  be  enjoyed
by  the  righteous  is  not  further  described.  It  would  seem  that
the  condition  of  the  dead  in  the  interval  between  the  present
time  and  the  final  judgment  is  capable  of  alteration,  since  prayers
are  offered  on  their  behalf.

With  regard  to  the  belief  in  angels  the  case  is  quite
4261


SAMARITANS

as  clear. It  has  often  been  said  that  angels  were  con-


4c.  Angels.


sidered merely  as aspects  of  the  divine


energy,  virtutes  del,  and  this  view  was
supported  with  much  ingenuity  by  Reland.  It  is  indeed
true  that  such  apparent  abstractions  as  ,11133  and  nam
are  often  mentioned  ;  but  there  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt  that  these  were  considered  as  the  names  of  real
persons,  nor  have  we  any  ground  for  supposing  the
Samaritan  mind  capable  of  any  more  abstract  concep
tion.  In  their  Targum  an  angel  is  regularly  introduced
instead  of  the  name  of  God  wherever  it  is  possible  so
to  avoid  anthropomorphism.  Man  is  formed  in  the
image  of  the  angels,  and  it  is  an  angel  who  spoke  with
Moses  from  the  bush.  This  is  only  one  instance,  out
of  many,  of  their  spiritual  conception  of  God.  He  is
eternal,  without  beginning,  without  a  companion.  He
uttered  a  word  without  a  mouth  and  the  world  was
created  from  nothing.  He  rested  on  the  seventh  day,
but  not  from  weariness.  Possibly  owing  to  the  un
approachable  attributes  of  God  we  find  prayers  offered
through  the  mediation  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,
of  Joseph,  the  seventy  elders,  the  holy  angels,  and  more
especially  of  Moses.  Thus  the  development  of  Samaritan
theology  corresponds  in  the  main  with  the  development
of  Jewish  belief,  by  which,  no  doubt,  it  was  in  some
respects  influenced.

iii.  Alt,  Gerizim.- — The  essential  points  of  difference
were  with  regard  to  Moses  and  Mt.  Gerizim.  Moses  is

4rf  Gerizim  the  only  Pr°Phet  and  aPostle  of  God-
"  of  miraculous  birth,  destined  from  the
creation  to  reveal  the  law  to  Israel.  In  Dt.  34 10  the
Samaritans  read  cip'  N1?  for  cp  N1?,  and  on  this  ground
admit  no  later  prophets.  From  the  Jewish  point  of
view  the  most  insurmountable  difference  was  the
Samaritan  reverence  for  Mt.  Gerizim.  It  is  called  the
'blessed  mountain,'  'the  house  of  God,'  and  is  re
garded  as  the  place  which  Yahwe  chose  to  place  his
name  there.

On  Gerizim  are  still  shown  the  sites  of  the  altars  built  by
Adam  and  Seth,  the  altar  built  by  Noah  after  the  flood,  and  the
altar  on  which  Abraham  was  about  to  sacrifice  Isaac.  A  few
yards  off  was  the  thicket  in  which  the  ram  was  caught,  and  on
this  spot  afterwards  stood  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  the  Samaritan
temple.  On  Gerizim,  too,  are  the  stones  brought  up  from  the
Jordan  whereon  Joshua  wrote  the  words  of  the  law  (Dt.  27  4,
Gerizim  being  read  for  P^bal),  and  there  are  still  celebrated  the
most  sacred  rites  of  the  community.

iv.  Priesthood  and  festivals. — The  priestly  family  of
the  house  of  Aaron  died  out  in  1624  A.  u. ,  and  the  office

is  now  held  by  Levites  of  a  younger
4e.  Institutions.  bi.anch>  who  *Q  not  bear  th/title*of

'high  priest'  (,131  funs)-  The  festivals  observed  are
the  same  as  those  of  the  Jews  in  so  far  as  they  are
authorised  by  the  Pentateuch.  They  do  not  therefore
keep  Purim,  nor  any  of  the  later  and  more  specially
Jewish  ceremonies,  such  as  Hanukkah  or  the  gth  of
Ab.  Half-yearly,  sixty  days  before  Passover  and
Tabernacles  respectively,  they  keep  the  assembly  (mcs,
also  an  astronomical  term,  '  conjunction  ')  of  those  feasts,
when  every  man  pays  to  the  priest  a  half  shekel,  and  a
calendar  for  the  ensuing  six  months  is  fixed.  The  Pass
over  is  still  celebrated  by  the  offering  of  sacrifice  on  Mt.
Gerizim.  The  whole  congregation  assembles  before
dawn  at  the  door  of  the  synagogue,  and  then  proceeds
in  pilgrimage  (the  meaning  they  attach  to  the  term  jn,
hajj)  up  the  mountain,  where  specially  selected  lambs
are  sacrificed,  baked  entire  for  some  hours  in  a  hole
in  the  ground,  and  then,  at  sunset  (c'3iJM  }'3),  eaten
in  haste.  Then  follow  the  seven  days  of  unleavened
bread,  on  the  last  of  which  they  again  make  the
pilgrimage.  The  day  of  Pentecost  is  kept  as  the  anni
versary  of  the  giving  of  the  law.  For  these,  as  well  as
for  New  Year,  the  day  of  Atonement,  the  feast  of
Tabernacles,  and  many  minor  occasions,  there  arc
special  services,  besides  the  ordinary  prayers  for  Sabbath.
There  are  also  services  for  circumcision  (which  must  be
performed  on  the  eighth  day,  even  though  it  be  a
Sabbath),  for  marriage,  and  for  burial.
4262


SAMARITANS

With  regard  to  the  sects  alleged  to  have  existed  among
the  Samaritans,  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  certain
facts.  The  accounts  are  confused,  and  there  seems  to
be  no  mention  of  them  in  the  native  literature.

The  native  literature naturally  centres in the one

sacred  book,  the  Pentateuch,  which  has  been  preserved,

_  . .  as mentioned above, in a recension

TV r61  agreeing in all essentials with the
loranana MT Jt first became known in

largum.  Europe  from  a  copy  brought,  to
gether  with  the  Targum,  from  Damascus  by  the  great
traveller  Pietro  della  Valle  in  1616,  and  now  preserved
in  the  Vatican  library.  The  text  was  published  in  the
Paris  Polyglott  from  which  it  was  afterwards  copied
by  Walton,  and  its  variations  from  the  MT  gave  rise
to  the  keenest  controversy.  The  question  is  by  no
means  settled  yet,  nor  can  it  be  so  until  we  have  a
thoroughly  critical  edition  of  the  text.  The  many
passages  in  which  the  Samaritan  agrees  with  the  Septua-
gint  against  the  Massoretic,  show  that  a  study  of  it  is
important.  The  MSS  are  many,  mostly  dated,  but  not
of  great  age.

The  copy  in  the  synagogue  at  Nablus  is  regarded  with  great
veneration  as  having  been  written  by  Abisha  the  great-grandson
of  Aaron,  thirteen  years  after  the  entry  into  Canaan.  No  scholar
has  ever  had  the  opportunity  of  examining  it  with  a  view  to
determining  its  date  ;  but  there  are  no  reasons  for  supposing  that
it  is  much  older  than  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century,  about
which  time  its  '  invention  '  is  chronicled  by  Abulfath.

Several  translations  of  the  Pentateuch  were  made.

1.  Perhaps  it  was  translated  into  Greek. TO  2a/za-
pfiriKov  is quoted by  the  early  fathers  ;  but  we  have
no  certain  information  about  it, and  cannot  even  say
whether  it  was  a  distinct  version  or  whether  the  citations
of  it  are  only  a  loose  way  of  citing  the  Sam. -Hebrew
text.

2.  It was translated into Samaritan proper, or
Aramaic. The  most  noticeable  feature  of  this  Targum
is  its  frequently  close  resemblance  to  Onkelos. Until
this fact has been thoroughly investigated the most
reasonable  explanation of  it seems to be that both
Targums go back to an oral tradition current in
Palestine  at  the  time  when  Aramaic  was  the  common
language  of  the  people,  and  that  they  were  subsequently
reduced  to  writing  independently,  and  with  local  varia
tions,  in  Samaria  (probably  in  the  4th  cent.  A.  D. )  and  in
Babylon. It was brought to Europe, as mentioned
above,  in  1616,  and  first  printed  in  the  Paris  Polyglott.
MSS  of  it  are  very  scarce,  since  the  language  died  out
before  the  eleventh  century,  and  copies  were  no  longer
multiplied.

For  the  same  reason  the  text  has  suffered  much  corruption  and
is  by  no  means  yet  definitely  settled  even  in  the  best  edition.
In  character  the  Aramaic  translation  is  very  literal ;  it  very
carefully  avoids  anthropomorphisms.  It  seems  to  be  by  several
hands,  and  to  have  received  interpolations  at  a  later  period.
These  and  the  corruptions  of  copyists  are,  according  to  the  latest
researches,  responsible  for  most  of  the  enigmatical  words
formerly  supposed  to  be  specially  Samaritan.

3.  The origin of the translation into Arabic is
obscure. It  was  perhaps  made  by  Abulhasan  of  Tyre
in  the  eleventh  century,  and  revised  early  in  the  thir
teenth  century  by  Abu Said. There are  many  good
MSS  of  it. The  translator  apparently  made  use  of  the
Jewish  Arabic  version  by  Saadiah  Gaon.

The  Chronicles  which  have  come  down  to  us  are  :
(i)  A  Book  of  Joshua,  in  Arabic,  giving  the  history  of


5b.  Chronicles.


Israel  {i.e. ,  the  Samaritans)  from the


time  of  Joshua  to  the  fourth  century
A.n.  It  is  a  compilation,  dating  perhaps  from  the  thir
teenth  century.  As  history  its  value  is  very  small,  since
it  consists  mostly  of  fabulous  stories  of  the  deeds  of
Joshua,  whilst  its  later  chronology  is  of  the  wildest.
(2)  El-Tolideh.  in  Samaritan-Hebrew  with  an  Arabic
translation.  It  contains  the  history  (or  rather  annals)
from  Adam  to  the  present  time.  The  original  part
of  it  is  ascribed  to  Eleazar  b.  Amram  in  the  middle
of  the  twelfth  century,  and  it  has  been  carried  on  by
various  writers  from  time  to  time.  The  history,  if  used

4263


5c.  Liturgies,
etc.


SAMARITANS

with  caution,  is  generally  trustworthy,  especially  for  the
period  just  preceding  the  date  of  each  several  author.
(3)  The  chronicle  of  Abulfath  written,  in  Arabic,  in  1355
A.  D. ,  is  a  compilation  from  earlier  works.  By  a  com
parison  of  these  two  (El-tolideh  and  Abulfath)  it  is
possible  to  arrive  at  a  tolerably  trustworthy  account  of
the  Samaritan  families  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Of  com
mentaries  and  theological  works  there  is  a  considerable
number  in  MS  ;  but  very  little  has  been  published.

One  of  the  most  interesting  is  a  fragment  on  Genesis  by  an
unknown  author,  in  Arabic,  remarkable  as  quoting  from  many
books  of  the  OT  and  from  the  Mishna.  A  commentary  by
Markah  on  the  Pentateuch  survives  in  a  late  but  apparently
unique  MS  in  Berlin,  and  is  linguistically  important  as  being
composed  in  the  Samaritan  dialect  of  which  there  are  few
specimens  outside  the  Targum.  Others  are,  a  book  of  legends
of  Moses  in  Arabic,  and  a  commentary  by  Ibrahim  'of  the  sons
of  Jacob,'  from  which  extracts  have  been  given  by  Geiger.

The  liturgies  form  a  very  large  and  important  branch
of  the  literature.  The  earliest  pieces  which  can  be
dated  with  any  certainty,  are  those
of  Markah  and  Amram,  composed  in
Aramaic  in  the  fourth  century  A.n.  at
the  instance  of  Baba  Rabba,  a  sheikh  of  some  eminence
in  his  time,  who,  according  to  El-Tolideh,  restored  the
services  of  the  synagogue.  These  are  called  par  ex
cellence  the  Defter  or  '  book. '  The  later  portions  are  in
Samaritan-Hebrew  mostly  of  the  fourteenth  and  subse
quent  centuries  down  to  the  present  time.  MSS  of  the
later  liturgies  are  very  numerous.

Finally,  there  are  several  letters  in  existence,  written

by Samaritans to scholars in Europe. The first of

! these,  in  1589,  was  an  answer  to  one  from  Jos.  Scaliger;

others  were  addressed  to  Huntington,  Ludolf,  De  Sacy,

Kautzsch  (in  1884),  and  recently  to  the  present  writer.

The  Samaritan  language  proper  is  a  dialect  of  Western
Aramaic  as  commonly  spoken  in  Palestine,  and  is  found

,  ..  in  the  Targum  and  in  the  earlier

.  .Language.  ^turgjes  jt  may  best  be  compared
with  the  Aramaic  of  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  and  with
Palestinian  Syriac.  The  '  Cuthcean '  words  formerly
supposed  to  be  found  in  it,  have  been  shown  by  Kohn
to  be  mostly  corruptions  of  good  Aramaic  forms.
The  native  dialect  probably  began  to  be  supplemented
by  Arabic  soon  after  the  Mohammedan  conquest  of
Syria,  and  was  no  longer  commonly  understood  in
the  tenth  century,  although  used  for  ritual  purposes.
From  that  time  onward  Arabic  has  been  the  language
used  both  in  ordinary  life  and  for  literary  purposes.
The  later  liturgies,  however  (and  the  letters),  are  written
in  a  corrupt  Hebrew.

In  the  following  bibliography  early  works  which  have  been

superseded,  and  most  articles  in  periodicals  have  been  excluded.

i.  Pentateuch. — In  the  Paris  Polyglott, 1645,

6.  BibllO-  and  the  Loniion  Polyglott,  1657  ;  Rlayney,  Penta-

KTJlphy. teucltus  Sam. 1790  (in square character) ; Ges.
De  Petit.  Sam.  origine,  1815;  Barges,  Notice  sur
deux  fragments  .  .  .,  1865;  Kohn,  De  Pent.  Sam.,  1865.

ii.  Targum.— Besides  the  Polyglotts,  Brill,  Das  Sam.  Tar-
gutn,  1874,  etc.  (a  reprint  of  the  Polyglott  text,  in  square  char
acter) ;  Petermann  -  Vollers,  Pentateuchus  Sam.,  1872,  etc.
(Targilm  text  with  apparatus  criticus) ;  Nutt,  Fragments  of  a
Sam.  Targum,  1874(366  also  appendix  to  Brill  op.  tit.)  ;  Winer,
De  versionis  Sam.  indole,  1817  ;  Kahle,  Textkritische  .  .  .
Bemerkungen,  1898  ;  Kohn,  Samaritanische  Studicn,  1868,  and
'Zur  Sprache  .  .  .  d.  Sam.,'  pt.  ii.  (in  Abh.  f.  d.  Kunde  d.
Morgcnlandes,  64),  1876.

iii.  Arabic  Version. — Hvviid,  Specimen  ined.  vers.  Arab.-
Sam.,  1780;  Kue.  Specimen  .  .  .  exhibens  Librum  Geneseos  .  .  .
1851  (Gen.-Lev.);  Bloch,  Die  Sam. -atal>.  Pent.- Utters.  Dt.
i-xi,  1001.

iv.  Commentaries. — Neubauer  in  Jour.  As.,  1873;  Drabkin,
Fragm.  Comm.  .  .  .  Sam.-Arab.,  1875;  Kohn,  Zur  Sprache
.  .  .,  pt.  i.,  v.  sup.  (part  of  Marqah's  Commentary  on  the  Penta
teuch):  ¥,an<*\\,  DesSamaritanersMarqah  .  .  '.  Abhandlung,
1888  (part  of  the  same);  Munk,  Des  Sam.  Marqah  Ei~ah-
lung  .  .  .,  1890  (part  of  the  same)  ;  Heidenheim,  Der  Comm.
Marqah's  .  .  .,  1896  (bks.  i.,  ii.,  iv.  of  the  same;  to  be  used
with  caution);  Emmerich,  Das  Sicgeslied,  pt.  i.,  1897  (part  of
the  same)  ;  Hildesheimer,  Des  Sam.  iMarqali  Buch  d.  ll'under,
1898  (with  corrections  of  Heidenheim).

v.  Theological.— Ges.  De  Sam.  theologia,  1822;  Kirchheim,
Introd.  in  lib.  Talm.  de  Sam.,  1851  (in  Hebrew);  Leitner,  Die
Sam.  Legenden  Jtfosis.  trans,  in  Heidenheim's  Vierteljahrs-
schri/t,  4  184  Jf.  \  Taghcht,  Die  Kuthaer  als  Rcobachter  des

4264


SAMATUS

Gesetzes,  1888;  Wreschner,  Sam.  Traditionen,  1888;  Cohn,
Die  Zaraath-Gesetze,  1899;  Morgenstern,  Die  i'erleumdungen
.  .  .  d.  Judengegen  d.  Sa»i.  (Berlin,  n.d.).

vi.  Liturgical. — Ges.  Cannina  Sain.  {Anecdota  Orientalia,
fasc.  i.),  1824,  re-edited  by  Kirchheim,  op.  cit. ;  Heidenheim's
I  'ierteljahrsschrift,  passim,  and  Die  Sam.  Liturgie,  1885,  etc.
(in  both  the  text  is  often  faulty ;  cp  the  criticisms  of  Geiger  in
ZD.MG  lli-22)  ;  Rappoport,  La.  Liturgie  Sam.,  1900.

vii.  Historical  and  General. — Juynboll,  Commentarii  in
hist,  gentis  Sam.,  1846,  and  Chronicon  Sam.  .  .  .  lib.  Josuce,
1848;  Petermann,  Reisen,  1860;  Vilmar,  Abulfathi  Annales
Sam.,  1865.  Payne  Smith,  'The  Sam.  Chron.  of  Abu'l  Fatah'
(with  trans.)  in  Heidenheim's  /  'ierteljahrsschrift,  '1  304^  and
432  ff-  (incomplete).  Neub.  '  Chronique  Sam.'  in  Journal
Asiatiqtie,  1869.  The  letters  in  Notices  et  Extraits,  vol.  xii.,
1831  (collected  by  De  Sacy).  Hamaker,  '  Aanmerkingen  over  de
Sam.  en  hunne  briefwisseling '  (e.xtr.  from  A  rcliicf  voor  Kerk.
Gesc hiedenis,  5).  Kautzsch,  '  Ein  Brief  des  Hohenpriesters  .  .  .
Ja'kub '  (in  ZDPl'  S).  Almkvist,  '  Ein  sam.  Brief  an  Konig
Oscar  '  (Skrifter  utgifna  of  A".  Humanistiska  I'etenskapssam-
fiindet  i  Upsala,  5  2).  Knobel,  ZurGeschichte  d.  Sam.  (extract,
1847);  Barges,  Les  Sam.  de  Naplouse,  1855;  Mills,  Three
Months'  Residence  at  Nablus,  1864 ;  Appel,  Qua-stiones  de
rebus  sam.,  1874;  Nutt,  A  Sketch  of  Sam.  History,  1874  (an
excellent  general  account).  Freudenthal,  Hellenistische  Studien,
i.,  ii.,  1875  ;  Brill,  Zur  Geschichte  it.  Literatur  d.  Sam.,  1876  ;
Spiro,  '  Etude  sur  le  peuple  Sam.'  (from  the  Revue  Chretienne.
n.d.).

viii.  Linguistic:  Castellus,  Lexicon  Heptaglotton,  1669;
Uhlemann,  Institutiones  ling.  Sam.  1837  ;  Nicholls,  A
Grammar  of  the  Sam.  language,  n.d.  [1858].  Ndldeke,  Ueber
einige  Sam.-arab.  Schriften  (in  GGN  nos.  17  and  20),  1862  ;
Petermann,  '  Versuch  einer  hebr.  Formenlehre,'  i86S  (Abhand-
litngen  f.  d.  Kunde  d.  Rlorgenlandes,  5  i),  and  Hrevis  ling.
Sam.  Gramm.  (Porta  Lingg.  Or.  3),  1873  (containing  a  biblio
graphy  of  earlier  works) ;  Kohn,  Sam.  Studien,  1868,  and  Zur
Sprache,  etc.,  see  above.

ix.  Catalogues  of  Manuscripts^ :  for  the  Bodleian  Library  see
in  the  Oriental  Catalogue  of  Uri,  with  the  corrections  in  pt.  ii.
by  Nicoll  and  Pusey,  and  in  Neubauer's  Catalogue  of  the
Hebrew  MSS,  1886.  For  the  British  Museum,  G.  Margoliouth's
Descriptive  List  of  the  Hebrew  and  Sam.  A[SS,  1893  (the  full
catalogue  is  in  progress).  For  Paris  [Zotenberg's]  Catalogue
des  MSS  Heb.  et  Sam.  [Paris,  1860].  For  St.  Petersburg,
Harkavy's  Opisanie  samarityanskikh  rukopisei,  1875  (vol.  ii.
pt.  i.  of  the  Catalog  d.  hebr.  u.  sa»i.  Handscliriften,  dealing
with  the  Pentateuch  MSS,  text  and  targum.  In  Russian).

A.  E.  C.

SAMATUS  (cAMATOc[BA])  i  Esd.  934  =  Ezra  1042
SHALLUM,  12.

SAMEIUS,  RV  Sameus  (CAMAIOC  [A])  i  Esd.  92i
=  Kzra  102i  SHEMAIAH,  18.

SAMELLIUS  (cAMeAAioc  [B])  i  Esd.  2i6  RV  =
Ezra  48  SHI.MSHAI.

SAMGAR-NEBO ('nr"l5OD  with Bit., Gins., not

•inr'D  ;  cAMArwe  [BNJ,  -r^e  [A],  -A  [Q].  -p  [Qmff-]),

apparently  a  Babylonian  name  (Jer.  39s).  According
to  Schrader  the  words  are  Hebraised  from  sumgir-nabii,
'  be  gracious,  Xebo'  (KAT^,  416);  but  Giesebrecht  con
jectures  a  corruption  of  aa  -\c,  sar-mag,  equivalent  to
iC  31,  rab-mag,  which  implies  virtual  dittography.  (5
connects  vafiovwiih  the  following  name  (see  SARSECHIM).

The  truth,  however,  probably  is,  that  the  editor  had  a  corrupt
text  before  him,  and  tried  in  vain  to  make  Babylonian  names
out  of  the  false  readings.  123  might  come  from  3~U,  NODAB
(y •"'•)',  i:DD  from  csmfol-  SARSECHIM  (ff.T.)  was  therefore
written  twice  over,  and  once  it  has  taken  the  place  of  ib  (before
3nj).  Read  therefore  '  and  the  prince  of  Nodab '  (one  of  the
Terahmeelite  princes  in  the  army  of  king  Nebuchadrezzar,  at
least,  if  some  other  name — not  Babylonian— does  not  underlie
'Nebuchadrezzar').  See  NERGAL-SHAKEZEK.  T.  K.  C.

SAMI,  RV  Sabi  (cABei  [A],  om.  B)  i  Esd.  528  =
Ezra  242  SHOBAI.

SAMIS  (coMeeic  [BA])  i  Esd.  934=  Ezra  1038,
SHIMEI,  16.

SAMLAH  (rhl?y,  in  Gen.  CAAAMA  [A],  CAM*AA
[•£>].  A^AMA,  CAA/V\A[E]),  CAMAA  [L] ;  in  Ch.  CAMAA
[A;  B  in  i'.  51],  (:ABAA  [L])  ;  the  fifth  Edomite  king,
Gen.  8636  f.  i  Ch.  147/.  See  MASREKAH.  The  evi
dence  offered  by  Prof.  Sayce  (Hibb.  Leer.  54,  n. )  for
a  connection  between  Samlah  and  Sernele  is  unsound
(cp  Tiele,  Th.  T,  1890,  p.  96).  Beyond  reasonable
doubt  we  should  read  Salmah  (see  SALMAH,  and
SOLOMON,  §  i).  Was  this  king  of  the  Salmcean  race?

T.  K.  c.

4265


SAMOS

SAMMUS  (CAMMOYC  [A]  -oy  [BJ)  i  Esd.  943  =
Neh.  84,  SHEMA.

SAMOS  (CAMOC.  i  Mace.  1523  Acts  20is).  The
third  in  size  of  the  four  large  islands  (Lesbos,  Chios,

1 Geojn-aphv  Samos' and Cos) which lie  off the

and  history  western  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  all  appear-
y'  ing  in  the  narrative  of  Paul's  journeys.
;  Samos  lies  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay  of  Ephesus,  into
which  the  Cayster  flows,  and  so  midway  lx;t\veen
Ephesus  and  Miletus  by  the  sea  route.  It  gained  its
name  from  the  line  of  '  lofty  broken  summits '  (so
described  by  Tozer,  Islands  of  the  /Kgean,  1577.)
running  from  E.  to  W.  through  the  island  ;  for  the
name  Samos  means  '  height '  (Str.  346,  crd/xoi;s  e'tfdAow
TO,  V\l/r).  Cp  id.  457,  and  see  SAMOTHRACE).  The
highest  point,  Mt.  Kerki  (anc.  Kerketeus)  is  4725  ft.
high,  a  conspicuous  feature  from  all  the  surrounding
islands.  Between  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  island
(Cape  Colonna,  anc.  Poseidium)  and  the  long  well-
wooded  ridge  of  Mycale  on  the  mainland  (Herod.
1 148)  there  is  a  narrow  '  marine  pass  '  about  one  mile
in  width  ;  this  strait  was  the  scene  of  the  Greek  victory
over  the  Persian  fleet  and  army  in  479  B.C.  (Herod.
9ioo/).

The  Samians  at  an  early  period  were  distinguished
for  their  maritime  enterprise  (cp  Paus.  vi.  2g)  ;  it  was  a
Samian  who  first  ventured  through  the  pillars  of
Herakles  into  the  western  ocean  (Herod.  4 152  ;  cp  Thuc.
113;  Plin.  HA '7 57).  Samian  power  and  splendour
reached  their  highest  pitch  under  the  so-called  tyrant
Polycrates  (c.  533-522  B.C.)  who  made  the  island  for  a
short  time  the  mistress  of  the  eastern  /Egean.  At  this
period  Samos  had  extensive  commercial  relations  with
Egypt  (Herod.  2178).  She  produced  oil  in  abundance ;
but  her  wine  was  not  of  the  best  quality  (Str.  637).
Her  trade  was  largely  in  pottery  (cp  Plin.  //A7 3546,
Samia  in  esculentis  laudantvr).1  Many  Jews  resided  in
the  island  (i  Mace.  1623)  ;  and  they,  and  the  Samians
generally,  enjoyed  the  liberality  of  Herod  the  Great,  \\ho
with  Agrippa  was  in  the  island  in  14  A.D.  (Jos.  Ant.
xvi.  22  ;  BJ  i.  21  ii,  TOS  eis  AVKIOVS  i)  2a/uioi>s  dupeds).
In  Paul's  time  Samos  was  a  libera  civitas  (Plin.  HN
037;  Dio  Cass.  549)  in  the  Province  of  Asia  by  the
favour  of  Augustus  ;  Vespasian  deprived  it  of  this  privi
lege  (Suet.  Vesp.  8).

The  island  and  its  chief  town  bore  the  same  name.

The  town  (now  Tigani)  lay  on  the  SE.  shore,  whereas

.-_ the  modern  capital, Vathy,  is  on  the  N.  of

.'  the  island. The  question of  the  meaning

"  of  the  word  in  the  account  of  Paul's  voyage
is  difficult  (cp  the  case  of  Chios,  Acts  20 15).  In  neither
case  apparently  did  the  ship  stopatthe  town  or  its  harbour
itself,  nor  did  Paul  land.  '  The  ship  evidently  stopped
every  evening.  The  reason  lies  in  the  wind,  which  in  the
yEgean  during  the  summer  generally  blows  from  the  N.,
beginning  at  a  very  early  hour  in  the  morning  ;  in  the
late  afternoon  it  dies  away  ;  at  sunset  there  is  a  dead
calm,  and  thereafter  a  gentle  S.  wind  arises  and  blows
during  the  night'  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the  Traveller,
293).  It  stopped  at  a  point  opposite  Chios  (KarTjvrri-
ffa.fj.ev  &VTIKPVS  Xiov,  'came  .  .  .  over  against,'  EV),
i.e.,  probably  in  the  strait  between  Chios  the  capital  of
the  island,  and  Cape  Argennum  on  the  opposite  main
land.  Next  morning  they  struck  across  to  Samos
making  a  course  either  E.  of  S. ,  to  the  western  extremity
of  that  island,  by  the  Great  Boghas  (so  Ramsay.  I.e.),
or  more  easterly  across  the  Caystrian  Bay  to  the  eastern
extremity  of  the  island,  so  as  to  pass  through  the  Little
ttoghaz  or  strait  of  Mycale.  In  either  case,  the  failure
of  the  breeze  from  the  X.  found  them  at  Trogyllium
(the  reference  to  which  should  undoubtedly  be  retained
from  DHLP  :  see  TROGYLLIUM),  and  there  is  no  need
to  understand  Samos  to  be  the  town,  and  not  rather  the
island  merely  ;  for  the  Greek  word  translated  '  arrived

1  Cp  Vulg.  in  Is.  459,  testa  de  Samiis  terrse.
4266


SAMOTHRACE

at '  (n-ape/JctXo/xei',  so  AV  ;  '  touched  at,'  RV)  does  not
necessarily  imply  stoppage  or  landing  at  the  harbour  of
Samos.  Probably  it  was  this  erroneous  idea  that  was
largely  responsible  for  the  omission  of  the  reference  to
Trogyllium  ;  for  the  distance  between  the  town  of  Samos
and  the  anchorage  of  Trogyllium  (5  m. ,  according  to
Strabo  636)  is  too  small  to  make  a  distinct  stage  of  the
voyage.  It  ought,  however,  to  be  noticed  that  fj.eivai>Tfs
need  not  be  restricted  to  spending  the  night  at  anchor,
but  might  indicate  a  short  stop  occurring  during  the
final  run  between  Samos  and  Miletus  ;  but  the  order  of
the  words  seems  to  be  opposed  to  that  interpretation.

w.  J.  w.

SAMOTHRACE  RV,  AV  Samothracia  (CAMO-
0RAKH.  ActslGn).  The  two  conspicuous  features  of
the  Thracian  sea  are  Mt.  Athos  and  the  island  of
Samothrace.  The  island  is  described  as  a  '  huge
boulder  planted  in  the  sea,'  towering  above  Irnbros
and  conspicuous  from  the  Thracian  and  the  Asiatic
shore.

Homer,  who  calls  the  island  the  '  Thracian  Samos,'  describes  the
seat  of  Poseidon  on  its  topmost  peak  overlooking  'all  Ida,  with  the
city  of  Priam  and  the  ships  of  the  Achaeans '  (//.  13  12,  vif/ov  en'
dicpOT-anjs  K0pv(j>r)s  Sajiov  uAT)e'<r<7T)f  ©pjjiici'ijs  K.T.A.  cp  Verg.
^•Kn.  7  208,  ihreiciantqut  Sa»iu»i,  qiue  mine  Samothracia.
fcrtur;  Strabo,  331,  frg.  50,  e/caAfiro  £e  TJ  SajuoSpaKrj  2oiju.o?  rrpiv).*

So  excellent  a  sailing-mark,  placed  also  at  a  convenient
distance  in  the  passage  from  the  Asiatic  to  the  Thracian
and  Macedonian  shores  was  certain  to  arrest  attention.
The  ship  in  which  Paul  sailed  from  Troas  (Acts  16 n)
'ran  before  the  wind'  (fvdv5po^ffa.iJ.ev,  'came  with
[RV  'made']  a  straight  course')  to  the  island,  passing
probably  to  the  E.  of  Imbros,  in  order  to  avoid  the
Mythonaes  reef  which  lies  off  the  coast  of  Lemnos.
Although  the  island  possesses  several  good  anchorages,
it  has  no  good  harbour  (re I  importuosissima  omnium,
is  its  description  by  Plin.  HN  4  23).  The  safest
landing-place  is  near  the  promontory  Acroteri  at  the
western  end  of  the  island,  and  there  was  probably  the
ancient  anchorage  Demetrion,  in  which  Paul's  vessel
may  have  spent  the  night  at  anchor.  The  old  capital
(now  Paleeopoli]  is  on  the  northern  side.  The  voyage
to  Macedonia  thus  occupied  two  days  (v.  n),  whereas
the  reverse  journey  on  a  subsequent  occasion  took  five
days  (Acts 20 6).

In  history  Samothrace  is  chiefly  famous  as  the  main
seat  of  the  worship  of  the  Cabiri  and  the  religious
mysteries  connected  therewith.  The  Cabiri  were
known  to  the  Greeks  as  '  the  Great  Gods,'  and  were
probably  pre- Hellenic  and  in  the  main  of  Semitic
origin.  Their  worship  was  of  great  celebrity  and  lasted
to  a  very  late  time.  Both  Philip  of  Macedon  and
his  wife  Olympias  were  initiated  into  the  Cabiri  mysteries
(Plut.  Alex.  2).  After  Delos,  Samothrace  numbered
more  votaries  than  any  other  spot  in  the  /Egean  (see
Herod.  2 51  ;  Aristoph.  Pax,  277  ;  Tac.  Ann.  254).
The  cult  was  in  full  vigour  in  Paul's  time.  It  was
owing  to  its  celebrity  that  Samothrace,  which  belonged  to
the  Thracian  kingdom,  became  a  free  state  when  Thrace
was  reduced  to  a  province  in  46  A. D.  by  Claudius  (cp
Tac.  Hist.  In).

Literature. — Conze,  Hauser,  and  Niemann,  Archfiologische
U  ntersuchungen  auf  Sainotkrake  (Vienna,  1875  Jf.)  ;  Conze,
Rfise  auf  lien  Inseln  des  Thrakischcn  Mecrcs  (1860).  Popular
account  in  Tozer,  Islands  of  the  sEgean,  3ioyC  w.  J.  \v.

SAMPSAMES  (cAMyAKH  [A],  CAMVAMH  [SV],
lampsaco  [whence  EVnle-  LAMPSACUS],  samsamie  [Vg. ])
a  locality  mentioned  first  in  a  list  of  peoples  and  coun
tries  in  i  Mace.  1523.  According  to  Grimm,  identical
with  Samsun,  which  is  described  by  Abulfeda  as  lying
on  the  Black  Sea  between  Trebizond  and  Sinope.

1  Samos  =  height :  cp  Strabo,  346,  <ra/aovs  tKaXovc  TO.  v</oj.  The
word  is  of  Semitic  origin.  The  Samothracian  coins  are  all
subsequent  to  the  time  of  Alexander.  On  an  imperial  coin  of
Hadiian  occurs  the  remarkable  inscription  Sa^uW  cv  fr>pa«T).
On  some  the  fore-part  of  a  ram,  or  a  ram's  head,  occurs,  a
symbol  of  the  cult  of  lower-world  divinities  of  a  pre-Hellenic
type.  See  Head,  Hist.  Nutntn.  226.

4267


SAMSON

But  some  better  known  people  or  place  is  surely  meant.
The  reading  crafj.\^aKrj  (cp  Vet.  Lat. )  is  almost  certainly
an  intentional  corruption  arising  from  the  difficulty
felt  in  identifying  Sampsame  (so,  rather  than  Samp-
sames).

SAMSON  (PB>PB>,  SimSon.  i.e.,  'solar';  the  MT
pronunciation  is  not  so  old  as  that  of  ©,  CA/v\yu)N
1  Story  of  tHALl;  cP&amti"u  [Hilprecht]).  The
Samson  Sreat  enemy  of  the  Philistines  is  reckoned
as  one  of  the  judges  of  Israel  in  two
editorial  notes  which  belong  to  the  chronological  scheme
of  the  book  of  Judges  (1620  [see  Budde's  note],  1631);
but  this  view  is  not  that  of  the  story  of  Samson  itself.
The  story  of  Samson  is  a  self-contained  narrative  by  a
single  hand  (Judg.  182-1631(7  ;  see,  however,  §  3)  and
represents  Samson  not  as  a  judge  but  as  a  popular  hero
of  vast  strength  and  sarcastic  humour,  who  has  indeed
been  consecrated  from  his  birth  as  the  deliverer  of
Israel,  and  is  not  unaware  of  his  vocation,  but  still
is  inspired  by  no  serious  religious  or  patriotic  purpose,
and  becomes  the  enemy  of  the  Philistines  only  from
personal  motives  of  revenge,  the  one  passion  which  is
stronger  in  him  than  the  love  of  women.  In  his  life,
and  still  more  in  his  death,  he  inflicts  great  injury  on
the  oppressors  of  Israel  ;  but  he  is  never  the  head  of  a
national  uprising  against  them,  nor  do  the  Israelites
receive  any  real  deliverance  at  his  hands.  The  story  of
his  exploits  is  plainly  taken  from  the  mouths  of  the
people,  and  one  is  tempted  to  conjecture  that  originally
his  Nazirite  vow  was  conceived  simply  as  a  vow  of
revenge,  which  is  the  meaning  it  would  have  in  an  Arab
story.  Our  narrator,  however,  conceives  Samson's  life
as  a  sort  of  prelude  to  the  work  of  Saul  (13s),  and  brings
out  its  religious  and  national  significance  in  this  respect
in  the  opening  scene  (chap.  13),  which  is  closely  parallel
to  the  story  of  Gideon,  and  in  the  tragic  close  (chap.  16) ;
whilst  yet  the  character  of  Samson,  who  generally  is  quite
forgetful  of  his  mission,  remains  much  as  it  had  been
shaped  in  rude  popular  tale  in  a  circle  which,  like
Samson  himself,  was  but  dimly  conscious  of  the  national
and  religious  vocation  of  Israel.

Though  the  name  means  '  solar,' '  neither  name  nor
story  lends  any  solid  support  to  Steinthal's  idea  that
the  hero  is  nothing  but  a  solar  rnyth  (cp  Wellh.  CH
229/.  [and  GASm.  HG  222  f.  ;  Wellhausen,  whilst  he
rejects  Steinthal's  myth  theory,  also  denies  Samson's
historical  character]).  He  is  a  member  of  an  un
doubtedly  historical  family  of  those  Danites  who  had
their  standing  camp  near  ZORAH,  not  far  from  the
Philistine  border,  before  they  moved  north  and  seized
Laish  (cp  1825  with  188  ii/  ).  The  family  of  MANOAH
(q.v. )  had  a  hereditary  sepulchre  at  Zorah,  where  Samson
was  said  to  lie  (1631),  and  their  name  continued  to  be
associated  with  Zorah  even  after  the  exile,  when  it
appears  that  the  MANAHETHITES  of  Zorah  were  reckoned
as  Calebites.  The  name  had  remained  though  the
race  changed  (i  Ch.  252  54).  The  narrative  of  Samson's
marriage  and  riddle  is  of  peculiar  interest  as  a  record  of
manners  ;  specially  noteworthy  is  the  custom  of  the  wife
remaining  with  her  parents  after  marriage  (cp  Gen.  224).
See  KINSHIP,  §  8,  and  DAN,  §  3.

After  all  has  been  said,  the  probability  of  mythic
elements  remains.  When  we  consider  the  great  sus-


2.  Mythic


ceptibility  of  the  Jews  in  later  times  for  a


,  . folklore containing features of mythic

origin,  it  is  intrinsically  probable  that  the
beliefs  of  the  early  Israelites  were  also  affected  by
mythology.  That  this  is  so  in  the  case  of  the  Samson-
story  seems  likely,  if  the  present  text  is  on  the  whole
correct  (cp  §  4).  If  the  hero's  name  was  really
Samson,  and  if  in  the  neighbourhood  commonly  con-

*  It  is  worth  noting  that  Samson's  tribe  or  clan  bears  a  name
(Dan,  i.e..  judge)  which  belongs  specially  to  the  Assyrian  sun-
god,  and  that  there  is  Egyptian  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a
place  called  Samsan  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  southern  Dan.
See  BETH-SHEMESH,  i.

4268


21


SAMSON

nected  with  Samson  there  was  really  a  Canaanitish
sanctuary  called  Beth-shemesh  (but  known  perhaps,  as
Budde  conjectures,  in  earlier  times  as  Bit-Ninib  ;  see
HEKES,  MOUNT),  we  may  venture  to  infer  the  existence
of  a  primitive  solar  myth.  In  short,  we  may  in  this
case  surmise  that  there  may  have  been  a  solar  hero
analogous  to  Gilgames,1  who  bore  the  name  or  title
Samsan,  which  ultimately  attached  itself  to  some  real
or  imagined  champion  of  the  Danites,  or  even  of  the
people  of  Israel  against  Philistine  oppression.  Some
of  the  exploits  of  the  legendary  Samson  may  also  have
affinities  with  nature  myths  ;  but  nature  myths  had
become  no  more  than  '  fairy  tales '  by  the  time  they
supplied  details  to  the  plastic  imagination  of  the  people.

See  Steinthal's  essay  on  Samson  (1862),  translated  in  Gold-
ziher's  Hebrew  Mythology  (by  R.  Martineau),  392-446,  also
Goldziher's  remarks,  pp.  21  f.,  Stucken,  Astralmythen,  14-6

2-75  (1898), and  references  in Moore's  commentary, and  cp

Judde,  Das  Kuch  der  Richter,  109,  Van  Doorninck,  Th.  T,
1894,  pp.  14-32,  1896,  pp.  162-167.  For  mythic  elements,  see
also  HEKES  [MOUNT],  JAWBONE,  CUTTINGS  OF  THE  FLESH
(§  3),  HAIK  (§  2),  and  cp  BEE,  Fox,  EN-HAKKORE,  LEHI,
SHAKUHEN.

Robertson  Smith's  view  that  the  Samson-story  forms

a  single  narrative  would  perhaps  have  been  modified  by

... . him,  had  he  been  able  to  take  his  part

3.  A  national m  current  Debates. It  is  very  possible
ciiciinvuon  ?  ,  /.  ...

that  the  narrative  is  of  composite  origin,

and  that  in  one  of  its  forms  it  represented  the  hero  as  a
national  champion.  It  is  true,  Moore  (Judges,  313)
contrasts  the  '  solitary  hero '  Samson  who  '  in  his  own
quarrel,  single-handed,  makes  havoc  among  the  Philis
tines  '  with  Ehud,  Deborah  and  Barak,  Gideon,  and
Jephthah,  '  who,  at  the  head  of  their  tribesmen,  "  turned
to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens,"  and  delivered  their
countrymen.'  But  according  to  Budde  (Richter,  92
[1897]),  each  of  the  two  great  sources  or  strata  of  early
tradition  had  a  national  champion  :  the  S.  Israel itish
source  (J)  Samson  the  Danite  ;  the  N.  Israelitish  source
(E)  Samuel  the  Ephraimite.  Samuel  in  J  (i  S.  9/. )  is
only  Yahwe's  messenger  to  Saul ;  in  the  war  of  libera
tion  he  plays  no  part.  In  a  similar  case  (Judg.  4  ;
Jabin  and  Sisera)  the  redactor  effected  a  fusion  of
kindred  narratives  ;  in  the  case  of  the  two  Samson
stories  he  preserved  the  individuality  of  each.  Budde
also  thinks  that  there  were  two  forms  of  the  Yahwistic
story  of  Samson  (Jx  and  J.,)  which  a  redactor  harmonised.
See  further,  JUDGES  [BOOK],  and  Van  Doorninck,  I.e.  ;
also  SHAMMAH,  SHAMGAR  (the  legends  of  Samson
present  points  of  contact  with  the  legends  of  these
heroes).

Whilst granting that  the  Samson-legends  as  we  now  have

them  seem  to  present  '  motives '  derived  from  a  solar  myth,  the

present writer  cannot any  longer  admit that

4.  New there  were  such  mythic  elements  in  the  original

hypothesis, legend  of  the  Danite  deliverer.

i.  That  the  scene  of  the  legends  has  been
shifted,  and  that  as  a  consequence  the  name  of  the  hero  has
undergone  modification,  seems  for  several  reasons  highly
probable.  A  close  examination  of  the  text  may  convince
us  that  this  has  occurred  in  other  stories  in  the  Book  of
Judges;  indeed  warning  is  already  given  in  Judg.  83,  if  the
nations  by  which  Israel  was  to  be  'proved'  are  catalogued,
according  to  a  very  probable  restoration  of  the  text,  as  '  the  five
princes  (read  '3p)  of  the  Zarephathites,  and  all  the  Keniz-
zites,  and  the  Misrites,  and  the  Horites  that  dwell  in  the
mountains  of  Jerahmeel  unto  the  entrance  of  Maacath.'  The
first  heroic  impulses,  we  are  told  in  1825,  came  to  Samson  'in
Mahaneh-dan,  between  Zorah  and  Eshtaol.'  But  the  original
text  may  have  said,  'between  Missur  and  Eshtaol,'  while  for
MAHANEH-DAN  (q.v.),  we  should  read  'Manahath-dan';  see
i  Ch.  2  52-54,  where  the  Chronicler,  like  modern  critics,  is
puzzled  at  the  combination  of  Manahath-dan  both  with  Zorah
and  Eshtaol  and  (see  Judg.  18nyC)  with  Kirjath-jearim  ;  the
present  writer  believes  that  Kirjath-jearim  is  simply  a  corruption
of  Kirjath-jerahmeel,  and  that  all  the  places  referred  to  lay  near
together  in  the  Negeb.  According  to  his  theory  the  Negeb
was  always  a  'bone  of  contention'  between  the  Zarephathites
(Philistines)  or  Jerahmeelites  (Arammites  or  Amorites)  and  the
Israelites.  The  Israelite  champion  known  to  us  as  Samson  was
known  to  the  earliest  narrator  only  as  a  Cushamite.  There  was
in  fact  another  place  in  the  Negeb  of  even  more  importance

1  See  CAINITES,  and  cp  Jastrow,  RBA,  471.
4269


SAMUEL

than  either  Missur  or  Eshtaol— viz.,  Cusham.  Often  its  irue
name  is  (through  a  faulty  geographical  theory)  disguised  as
SHECHBM  (q.i>.,  2);  but  sometimes  (e.g.,  i  8.69^)  as  '  Beth-
shemesh  '  (from  Beth-cusham  1).  A  similar  corruption  or  dis
tortion  has  occurred  in  the  personal  name  Shimshai,  which
comes  from  '  Cusham.'  See,  further,  SHIMSHAI.

2.  To  the  question,  Did  the  early  legend  of  the  Cushamite
deliverer  present  mythic  motives?  we  reply  in  the  negative  for
two  reasons,  (a)  The  mythic  '  motives  '  discovered  by  Winckler
in  the  legends  of  the  other  judges  rest,  according  to  our  theory,
upon  a  precarious  textual  basis;  and  (t>),  not  only  the  name
Samson  but  also  the  story  of  the  foxes,  and  that  of  the  jawbone,
explained  by  Steinthal  and  Stucken  as  mythological,  are,  we
suspect,  really  based  on  corruptions  of  the  text  of  the  written
story  which  lay  before  the  narrator.2  See  Crit.  Bib.

\V.  K.  S. (§  I); T.  K.  C. (§§2-4).

SAMUEL  pX-lCp',  §§  21,  39,  CA.MOYHA
[BNAQRTL]).  I.  A  prophet,  or  rather  seer,  who

1  Na  e  atta'ne<^  distinction  in  the  period  of  Israel's
transition  to  regal  government.  Narratives
respecting  Samuel  are  contained  in  i  S.I  1-1613
19 18-24  25 1.  He  is  also  mentioned  in  Jer.  15 1  (not  <5A)
Ps.  996  iCh.  10i3  (<5  not  MT)  628  [13]  33  [18]  922  113
2628  2929  2Ch.  35  18.

On  the  etymology,  see  SAUL,  §  i ;  SHEMUEL  ;  SHEM  (NAMES
WITH).  The  two  etymologies  'asked  of  God'  (i  S.  1  20)  and
'  lent  to  God  '  (v.  28)  come  from  the  narrators  and  have  only  the
value  of  popular  etymologies.  This  is  too  clear  for  any  trained
biblical  scholar  to  deny  (see  Dr.  TBS  I3./C).

i  S.I  i-16  13 has  the  appearance  of  forming  a  con
nected  account  of  Samuel. A  closer  examination,  how-
Old r ever'  shows  that  this  section  contains  very

,',.,.  inconsistent  elements. The  narratives  have

traditions.  ,

been  put  together  from  different  sources,

two  of  which  (the  parallel  reports  fused  together  in  i  S.
4ii$-7i)  make  no  mention  of  Samuel,  and  they  have  re
ceived  their  present  form  by  a  complicated  process  of
redaction.  The  inconsistencies  which  they  present  are
to  be  explained  by  the  transformation  which  the  tradi
tional  picture  of  Samuel  experienced  in  connection  with
the  development  of  religious  ideas  in  Israel  and  in  the
Jewish  community.  This  transformation  is  no  isolated
phenomenon.  In  many  another  people  a  variation  in
the  national  and  religious  ideals  has  produced  a  cor
responding  change  in  the  picture  of  the  old  national
heroes.  Since  life  means  continual  change,  the  great
men  of  a  people  can  live  on  only  through  a  constant
modification  of  the  forms  which  they  wear  in  memory.

The  oldest  notices  of  Samuel  occur  in  the  section  i  S.
9  10i-i6  13  i  7<7  16-18  23  14  1-46  (see  SAMUEL  [ BOOKS],
§  3).  Samuel  is  there  represented  as  a  seer  (nxi),  who
at  the  same  time  officiates  as  a  priest  on  the  bamdh
('high  place')  of  a  small  country-town  in  the  'land  of
Zuph'  (9s) — i.e.,  the  district  inhabited  by  the  clan  so
called.  [Cp  PROPHET,  §  5.]

The  name  of  the  town  is  not  given,  from  which  Budde  (ZA  TW
8  225)  infers  that  it  was  certainly  not  Ramah,  which  is  the  name
given  in  the  later  narratives.  But  what  can  have  induced  later
writers  to  place  Samuel's  dwelling  in  Ramah,  unless  this  were
the  view  of  the  older  tradition  ?  For  we  find  other  places  (Gilgal,
Mizpah,  Bethel)  mentioned  as  the  scenes  of  his  official  activity.

At  any  rate  Samuel  is  a  much  respected  seer,  whose
predictions  are  thoroughly  trustworthy  ;  but  his  reputa
tion  is  only  local,  for  Saul,  who  dwells  at  Gibeali  in
Benjamin,  is  unacquainted  with  him,  and  has  his
attention  called  to  him  for  the  first  time  by  his  servant.
The  story  of  the  meeting  of  Samuel  and  Saul  is  well
known.  Saul  was  in  quest  of  the  lost  she-asses  of  his
father,  and  his  servant  wished  him  to  fee  the  man  of
God  to  tell  them  where  to  go.  Samuel  on  his  side  was
already  expecting  the  visitor.  He  knew  by  revelation  that
the  destined  ruler  of  Israel  would  be  sent  to  him,  and  after
announcing  to  Saul  his  high  destiny,  he  specified  three

1  Cp  Shaalabbim  or  SHAALBIM  (near  'Zorah')  from  Beth-
Ishmaelim.

2  Injudg.l54  C'SjW  rhVOrtfhti  IS^l  should  be  D^NJ-'CC"  TJ'l ;
the  continuation  is given  in  v.  8a,  which  should  run  crtlN  "VI
tSnOnT  S?1D]  '.  'Cush' and 'Jerahmeel' are  glosses. On  '  Lehi,'

Ramath-lehi,'  and  'En-hakkore'  in  w.  9  19,  see  LEHI.
Similar  corruptions  abound  ;  see,  e.g.,  SODOM,  §  6,  n.  (correction
of  Gen.  14  14).

4270


SAMUEL


SAMUEL


striking  experiences  which  he  would  have  as  he  returned
home.  These  were  to  be  the  sign  of  the  truth  of  the
announcement.  Not  long  after,  the  first  exploit  of  Saul
marked  him  out  to  the  people  as  their  king(i  S.  11).
The  narrative  contains  two  mentions  of  Samuel ;  but  the
words  '  and  after  Samuel '  in  v.  ^  and  the  whole  of  vv.
12-14  are  later  insertions.  Saul  and  the  people  are  the
two  parties  in  the  great  ceremony  whereby  Saul  is  made
king  '  before  Yahwe  '  at  Gilgal.

The later strata in the Book  of  Samuel  are  dis
tinguished from this old tradition by the increased
_ . importance  which  they  attribute  to  Samuel.
. ' ,., . They  represent  him,  not  as  a  seer  of  merely
ra  i  ions.  jocaj  reputat;on \)Ul  as  an  authority  for  the

whole  of  Israel ;  and,  so  far  as  they  have  not  a  deutero-
nomic  colouring,  they  regard  him  as  a  prophet  (NOJ)-
We  turn  first  to  the  two  narratives  in  (a)  i  S.  1 1-28
2n-26  81-20  (transpose  r.  20  and  v.  21  ;  see  (5),  and  (b)
chap.  15.  The  former  describes  the  youth  of  Samuel,
bringing  him  into  connection  with  the  old  sanctuary  at
Shiloh.  He  was  the  s«n  of  the  Kphraimite  (or,  more
precisely,  the  Zuphite)1  Elkanah  and  of  his  favourite
wife  Hannah,  who  had  long  been  childless,  and  had
vowed  to  give  the  son  who  might  be  born  to  her  to
Yahwe  (i  S.  In).2  He  grew  up  at  Shiloh,  where  he
acted  as  Eli's  minister,  and  became  the  true  heir  of
Eli's  spirit,  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phinehas,
being  worldly  and  degenerate.  While  still  young  he
learned  by  revelation  the  impending  fall  of  the  house  of
Eli,  and  afterwards  he  became  known  as  a  prophet
whose  words  came  true,  '  from  Dan  even  to  Beersheba. '

The  narratives  in  (6)  regard  Samuel  as  a  prophet
whose  home  was  in  Ramah.  The  command  to  ex
terminate  the  Amalekites  was  transmitted  by  him  to
Saul,  who  obeyed,  but,  in  violation  of  the  ban  (htrem  ;
see  BAN),  spared  the  Amalekite  king  (see  AGAG)  and
the  best  of  the  animals  taken.  A  revelation  then  came
to  Samuel  to  the  effect  that  Yahwe  repented  that  he
had  made  Saul  king.  The  prophet  announced  this  to
the  disobedient  king  at  the  Judaean  Carmel,  and  then
hewed  Agag  in  pieces  before  Yahwe's  altar  (i  S.  15).
The  chapter  presupposes  the  tradition  in  i  S.  9  10i-i6,
since  Samuel  expressly  refers  (v.  i  ;  cp  v.  17)  to  his
having  anointed  Saul.  The  author  must  have  lived  in
the  time  of  the  first  literary  prophets,  or  at  any  rate
have  shared  their  circle  of  ideas.  Samuel  confronts
Saul  very  much  as  Isaiah  confronts  Ahaz  (Is.  7),  and  the
saying  in  i  S.  1522  f.  is  entirely  in  the  prophetic
manner.3  Much  as  we  sympathise  with  this  fine  utter
ance,  the  following  verses  place  Samuel  in  an  extremely
unpleasing  light  from  our  modern  point  of  view.  Vatke
does  not  mince  matters  when  he  says  (Die  Religion  des
AT,  1835,  p.  300),  'Samuel  appears  here  as  a  stern
and  obstinate  zealot '  ;  but  his  words  are  true.  The
passage  in  question  is  largely  responsible  for  unfavour
able  judgments  on  Samuel's  character.

The  deuteronomistic  narratives  (i  8.72-822  10 17  27
12 1-25)  show  a  further  tendency  to  glorify  Samuel.
A  T»*  XT  This  hero  of  tradition  now  becomes

reS>  the  last  of  the  Judges  of  all  Israel  in
succession  to  Eli.  Like  Eli,  he  is  also  a  priest  of
Yahwe,  and  it  is  he  who  brings  the  Israelites  back  to
the  worship  of  Israel's  God.  It  is  Samuel  too  who
delivers  Israel  from  the  yoke  of  the  Philistines,  gaining
a  brilliant  victor}'  as  the  reward  of  a  national  repentance
and  reformation4  (see  EBEN-EZER,  BETH-CAR).  In  his

1  i  S.  1  i  should  run  thus,  '  There  was  a  certain  man  of
Ramathaim,  a  Zuphite  of  the  hill-country  of  Ephraim.'  See
Dr.  (TBS  if.),  We.,  Klo.,  Ki.,  Bu.  [hut  cp  RAMATHAIM-
ZOPHIM,  ZUPH].  On  the  genealogy,  cp  EI.KANAH,  JEROHAM.

a  That  is,  Samuel  was  to  be  a  priest  (not  a  Nazirite).

3  [Cp Che., '  A Study of  I  S.  15  22  23,' Biblical World,
April  1894,  pp.  281-290.]

4  [Kittel  is  of  opinion  (/fist.  2  108)  that,  though  1  S.  7  in  its
present  form  is  'decidedly  unhistorical,'  there  is  an  element  of
early  tradition  in  it  (similarly  Budde). He  therefore  accepts  the
assembly  at  Mizpah  under  the  presidency  of  Samuel  issuing  in  a
religious reform as historical. To  Stade  such a  distinction

4271


old  age  he  appoints  his  sons  to  be  judges.  Their  gross
misconduct  is  given  as  the  reason  why  the  chief  men  of
Israel  desire  a  king.  It  is,  however,  a  foolish  and
wicked  desire,  and  in  obedience  to  a  divine  command
Samuel  warns  the  Israelites  of  the  hardships  to  which
the  subjects  of  a  king  are  liable.  Their  request,  never
theless,  is  granted.  At  Mizpah  a  religious  assembly  of  the
people  is  held.  The  sacred  lot  falls  upon  Saul,  who
receives  the  admiring  homage  of  the  people.  Before
transferring  the  reins  of  power  to  Saul's  hands,  how
ever,  Samuel  makes  a  solemn  '  apologia '  to  the  people,
coupling  this  with  a  farewell  charge.  How  the  writer
of  chap.  12  harmonised  his  representations  with  7 15,
indeed  whether  he  himself  noticed  the  inconsistency
(Josephus,  Ant.  vi.  13s,  certainly  did  not)  we  have  not
the  means  of  judging.

Subsequently  to  the  time  when  the  historical  books
underwent  the  deuteronomistic  redaction,  three  narra
tives  arose  as  the  result  of  reflection


5.  Post-Deut.
embellishments.


on  the  traditional  narrative. Their


late  origin  is  shown  both  by  the
nature  of  the  contents  and  by  their  very  loose  connection
with  the  surrounding  narratives,  (a)  One  is  the  story
of  the  early  anointing  of  David  by  Samuel  in  accordance
with  a  divine  command  (i  S.  161-13),  which  is  incon
sistent  with  the  traditional  account  in  2  S.  24.  To
remove  this  contradiction,  or  at  any  rate  to  justify  the
statement  in  2  S.  24,  the  Chronicler  assumes  that  the
anointing  at  Hebron  was  in  obedience  to  the  word  of
Yahwe  by  Samuel  ( i  Ch.  11 3).  (l>)  Another  is  the  account
of  the  very  early  rejection  of  Saul  (  r  S.  13  7^- 15*7),  inserted
in  the  account  of  Saul's  war  against  the  Philistines.
This  passage  is  merely  an  anticipation  of  chap.  15.
(c)  A  third  is  an  anecdote  in  which  Samuel  appears,
like  an  Elijah  or  an  Elisha,  as  the  head  of  the  prophetic
community  in  Ramah,  with  which  David  seeks  refuge
(i  S.  19 18-24).  See  DAVID,  §  i  (end).

In  one  of  those  passages  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  which  betray
the  hand  of  an  editor  (Jer.  1 5 1  ;  not  &  A)  1  we  find  Samuel  placed
beside  Moses  as  an  intercessor  for  his  people  and  a  hero  of  prayer.
The  same  view  of  him,  which  is  clearly  due  to  exegetical  study
of  the  Book  of  Samuel  (see,  e.g. ,  i  S.7g  86  12  is),  is  given  in  Ps.
996  (post-exilic).  The  Chronicler  even  makes  Samuel  a  member
of  the  tribe  of  Lev!  because,  according  to  the  Book  of  Samuel,
he  offers  sacrifices;  in  i  Ch.  622-28  [7-13]  and  33-38  [18-23]  he
gives  us  two  genealogies  which  trace  Samuel's  descent  hack  to
Kohath.2  Some  very  singular  statements  respecting  Samuel
'  the  seer  '  will  be  found  in  i  Ch.  9  22  26  28.

To  assign  an  equal  weight  to  all  these  documents  is
of  course  impossible.  The  oldest  are  the  most  trust-

_  .  worthy,  and  wherever  the  later  notices

&  P-  are  inconsistent  with  the  earlier  and
can  be  understood  by  that  inevitable  modification  of
traditional  pictures  of  which  we  have  spoken,  they  must
be  rejected.  This  at  once  compels  us  to  set  aside  those
narratives  which  represent  Samuel  as  a  leading  prophet
for  all  Israel,  or  as  a  zealous  advocate  of  the  exclusive
worship  of  Yahwe,  or  as  a  judge  and  a  deliverer  of
Israel  from  the  Philistine  yoke.  They  contradict  the
surest  facts  of  the  beginning  of  the  regal  period.  Take
the  deuteronomistic  narratives.3  The  transformation  of
facts  is  here  radical.  The  presuppositions  are  those
of  an  age  which  had  no  kings,  and  regarded  kingship  as
opposed  to  the  will  of  God,  and  as  the  means  by  which
Israel  was  turned  away  from  its  true  mission.  Its  own
ideals  were  once,  it  believed,  those  of  Israel  ;  but  by
desiring  a  king  Israel  fell  to  the  low  level  of  the  other
peoples.  To  this  we  may  add  that  if  these  narra
tives  were  based  on  an  old  tradition,  the  rise  of  another
tradition  which  made  Samuel  a  seer  of  merely  local
celebrity  would  be  inconceivable,  whereas,  granted  the

appears  unsafe.  See  his  GF/l2o6,  and  cp  his  review  of
Budde's  disposition  of  the  text  of  Samuel  in  S£O  T,  Theol.  LZ,
1890.  col.  9.]

1  See  Stade,  Gl  1  647  end  of  note.

2  See  the  proof  in  Bertheau,  CkronikW,  fsoff.

'  [On  the  suggestive  but  unhistorical  idyll  of  Samuel's  youth
in  i  S.  1-3  see  We.  Prol.  ET  270,  and  cp  his  C/fl3)  238  n.]

4272


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

priority  of  the  simpler  story,  the  growth  of  the  deuterono-
mistic  account  is  perfectly  natural.

Really  trustworthy  material  for  a  picture  of  Samuel
we  must  seek  first  of  all  in  chaps.  9  10 1-16.  The  tragedy
in  the  fate  both  of  peoples  and  of  individuals  springs
from  uncomprehended  circumstances  and  neglected
opportunities.  The  greatness  of  leading  personalities
consists  in  this — that  they  comprehend  the  national
aspirations  and  turn  to  account  favouring  circumstances.
Only  thus  can  impending  ruin  be  averted  and  the
road  to  progress  and  prosperity  be  opened.  Others
besides  Samuel  may  have  conceived  the  idea  that  the
deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  Philistines  was  possible
only  for  a  king  ;  but  it  is  his  inalienable  merit  to  have
found  in  Saul  the  man  who  appeared  equal  to  the  task,
and  to  have  awakened  in  him  the  consciousness  of  his
divine  mission.  The  people  itself,  too,  comprehended
the  situation,  and  gave  this  a  legal  expression  by  a
solemn  choice  of  Saul  at  Gilgal  (i  S.  11 15).

This  view  of  the  historical  significance  of  Samuel  is  in
perfect  harmony  with  the  statement  that  his  course  of
action  was  determined  by  Yahwe,  who  pointed  out  to
him  Saul  as  the  future  king  of  Israel.  Ideas  which
burst  upon  a  man  suddenly  and  seem  to  have  no  links
with  his  other  thoughts  belong  to  modern  as  well  as
ancient  experience  ;  to  the  ancients  it  was  natural  to
regard  them  as  given  by  inspiration.  When  Saul's
imposing  form  came  before  the  seer,  revealing  doubtless
already  something  of  that  impetuous  energy  which
marked  Saul  as  king,  the  idea  may  have  flashed  through
his  mind  that  here  was  Israel's  king.  There  is  no
reason  to  doubt  that  Samuel  became  accidentally  ac
quainted  with  Saul,  and  then  anointed  him  king  over
Israel  (cp  SAUL,  §  i).

On  the  other  hand  it  is  not  so  certain  whether  the  account  of
the  details  of  the  first  meeting  of  Samuel  and  Saul  in  chap.  9
10  1-16  is  based  on  an  exact  knowledge  of  facts.  They  spoke
together  without  witnesses,  and  upon  Saul's  accession  his  grown
up  son  Jonathan  was  already  his  best  support.  It  is  therefore
very  improbable  that  at  this  important  moment  he  was  but  like
a  superior  servant  who  could  be  sent  out  to  seek  for  runaway
asses,  and  that  such  a  person  should  find,  not  indeed  the  asses,
but  a  kingdom.  Surely  this  representation  is  but  part  of  the
literary  vehicle  of  the  tradition.

Besides  the  kernel  of  chap.  9  10i-i6  we  may  regard
as  historical  the  central  facts  of  chap.  15 1-23  32-35  [see
SAUL,  §  3].  The  expedition  against  Amalek  would  of
course  not  be  undertaken  without  an  oracle,  and  Saul's
earlier  relations  to  Samuel  make  it  intelligible  that  the
oracle  would  come  from  that  seer.  The  violation  of  the
ban  corresponds  to  the  egoistic  character  of  the  Israelites
of  that  time,  and  the  slaying  of  Agag  before  the  altar
is  consistent  with  their  religious  usages.  Nor  need  we
doubt  that  Samuel  himself  hewed  Agag  in  pieces.
Probably  enough,  too,  difficulties  may  have  arisen
between  Samuel  and  Saul  in  consequence  of  the  viola
tion  of  the  ban  [cp  SAUL,  §  3].  The  influences  of  the
later  period  when  the  narrative  was  written  will  be  con
fined  to  the  description  of  the  attitude  of  Saul  on  his
meeting  Samuel,  to  the  statement  that  Samuel  on  this
occasion  made  known  to  Saul  his  rejection  by  Yahwe,
and  to  the  fine  prophetic  saying  ascribed  to  Samuel.

According  to  i  S.  283,  Samuel  died  and  was  buried  at  Ramah,
to  which  25  i  adds  that  his  grave  was  in  his  own  house,  which
corresponds  to  the  early  custom  (cp  i  K.  2  3^).  This  of  itself
shows  that  the  late  tradition  which  placed  his  dwelling-place
and  sepulchre  at  Neby  SamwTl  is  wrong.  See  MIZPAH.
Nothing  is  said  of  Samuel's  age  at  the  time  of  his  death.  The
number  20  in  i  S.  7  2  is  obtained  by  artificial  means.  This  is
also  true  of  the  statements  in  Josephus  (Ant.  vi.  13$  14 9)  and  in
the  Midrash.  They  depend  on  exegetical  inferences  which,
from  the  nature  of  the  sources,  are  destitute  of  any  sure
foundation.  B.  S.

SAMUEL  (BOOKS)


Name  (§  i).
Literary  history  (§  2).
Samuel,  Saul :  i  S.  1-15  (§  3).
David  :  i  S.  16-2  S.  8  (§  4).


Later  additions  (§  5).
2  S.  9-i  K.  2  (§  6).
Summary  (§  7).
Literature  (§  8).


That  the  two  books  of  Samuel,  like  the  two  books  of
4273


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

Kings,  originally  formed  one  book,  is  explained  else-
1  Name  where  (CANON-  §  I0)-  The  idea  of  dividing
the  respective  books  of  Samuel  and  Kings
comes  from  (5,1  where,  however,  the  divided  books  are
recombined  as  the  four  Books  of  Kingdoms  (fli/3\oi.
fiaffiXetwv).  It  is  true  that  the  greater  part  of  the  Book
of  Samuel  refers  to  the  regal  period,  and  that  the
gap  between  2  S.  24  and  i  K.  1  is  less  prominent  in
the  <5L  arrangement  (cp  KINGS,  §  i).  But  the  older
Palestinian  -Hebrew  arrangement  has  the  advantage
of  reflecting  the  fact  that  Samuel  and  Kings  arose
by  editorial  redaction  out  of  two  different  older
works,  the  limits  of  which  were  only  effaced  when  two
chapters  which  originally  belonged  to  Samuel  were
attached  to  the  Book  of  Kings  (i  K.  I/.).  The  Book
of  Samuel  derives  its  name  from  the  fact  that  it  opens
with  the  story  of  Samuel's  birth  (cp  the  names  Genesis,
Exodus,  etc.  ,  which  correspond  to  the  Jewish  custom  of
naming  books  with  reference  to  their  commencement).
In  reality  it  describes  the  origin  of  the  Israelitish
kingdom,  and  the  fortunes  of  Saul,  Ishbaal,  and  David.

A  book,  in  the  modern  sense,  Samuel  can  no  more  be

said  to  be  than  any  other  of  the  historical  writings  of

-  .,  the  OT. It  is  a  compilation  from  older

'.  .  ,  ^  works  which  has  passed  through  repeated
•*"  redactions,  and  the  final  redaction  of  all
can  have  occurred  only  after  the  close  of  the  Penta
teuch,  in  connection  with  the  formation  of  the  prophetic
canon.  Like  the  Torah,  however,  and  like  the  other
books  of  the  'former  prophets,'  the  Books  of  Samuel
attained  in  essentials  their  present  form  as  a  result  of
the  great  '  Deuteronomistic  '  literary  movement  (see
HISTORICAL  LITKRATURK,  §  7).  In  the  book  which
immediately  precedes  Samuel  this  movement  has  left  only
too  many  traces  of  its  influence.  In  Samuel,  however,
we  are  happily  in  a  position  to  indicate  a  series  of  vivid
and  ancient  narratives  which  is  only  at  certain  points
interrupted  by  later  insertions  and  additions.  We  must
infer  from  this  that  the  deuteronomistic  editor  or  editors
found  this  connection  already  in  existence  ;  in  other
words,  the  basis  of  our  Samuel  was  formed  by  a  pre-
deuteronomic  redaction  of  older  works.

The  insertions  and  additions,  however,  are  to  a  great  extent
derived  neither  from  the  deuteronomistic  nor  from  the  final
redaction.  Not  only  do  some  relate  to  the  time  between  both
redactions,  but  in  certain  cases  it  seems  possible  that  they  may
have  been  brought  into  their  present  connection  before  the
deuteronomistic  redaction  occurred.  The  history,  therefore,  of
the  origin  of  the  Books  of  Samuel,  in  spite  of  the  great  pre
dominance  of  the  ancient  sources,  is  very  complicated.  It  is,
however,  only  what  might  have  been  expected,  when  we
consider  the  manner  in  which  the  OT  writings  have  come  down
to  us  ;  the  processes  of  copying  and  of  exegetical  study  were,  in
the  case  of  Samuel,  combined  with  redactional  alteration  of
various  kinds,  and,  more  particularly,  with  additions  of  new
materials  and  insertion  of  explanatory  matter.

The  Books  of  Samuel  fall  into  three  main  divisions.
(i)  The  history  of  Samuel  and  of  Saul  down  to  the
rejection  of  the  latter,  i  S.  1-15  (§  3);  (2)  the  history
of  David  during  the  reigns  of  Saul  and  Ishbaal,  and  his
own  reign  at  Hebron,  i  S.  16-2  S.  8  (§  4/);  (3)  the
history  of  David  at  Jerusalem,  2  S.  9-24  (§  6).

Part  I.  has  for  its  nucleus  two  sections  :  (a)  i  S.  4i-
7  1,  a  fragment  —  the  original  beginning  and  end  are  no\v
wanting  —  recounting  the  subjugation  of
Israel  by  the  Philistines  and  the  captivity
of  the  ark  of  Yahwfc;  (6)  i  S.  9i-107
109-i6  Ili-iii4/  132-7*  i7/.  23  14  1-46,
which  describes  the  anointing  of  Saul  by  Samuel,  Saul's
victory  over  Ammon,  his  election  as  king,  and  his  first
encounters  with  the  Philistines.

The  first-mentioned  section  (a)  —  a  torso  (for  it  intro
duces  the  reader  abruptly  into  the  midst  of  the  Philistine
wars,  and  does  not  complete  the  account  of  the  fortunes
of  the  sanctuary  at  Shiloh  and  of  the  ark)  —  gives
the  necessary  premises  for  the  section  which  follows,

1  There  is  a  trace  of  i,  2  S.  and  i,  2  K.  having  been  each  one
book  in  ©B  where  the  first  words  of  2  S.  and  2  K.  are  also  made
the  last  words  of  i  S.  and  i  K.

4=74


j
Q


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

according  to  which  the  kingship  is  Yahwe's  way  of  inter
posing  to  save  Israel  from  the  Philistines.  The  two
sections,  however,  are  from  different  pens.  The  former
is  made  up  of  two  parallel  accounts,  one  Yahwistic,  the
other  Elobistic.1  But,  first  of  all,  to  satisfy  the  reader's
curiosity  respecting  the  central  figure  of  chap.  9/. ,  a
description  of  Samuel's  childhood  has  been  inserted
(li-28  2  11-26  81-21),  which  bears  throughout  the  stamp
of  a  later  age  than  the  two  parallel  narratives,  but  may  |
quite  well  be  pre-exilic.  The  substance  of  the  narrative  j
thus  produced  has  undergone  much  drastic  revision  at
the  hands  of  the  deuteronomist.

A  specimen  of  this  is  met  with  in  i  S.  827-36 — where  an  un
named  man  of  God  foretells  the  doom  of  Eh  and  his  house  and
his  supersession  by  a  '  faithful  priest' — i.e.,  collectively,  Zadok !
and  his  house  (cp  i  K.  '2  26 f.,  see  ZADOK). According  to  Kuenen, '
Yahwe's  revelation  to  Samuel  in  the  night  (i  S.  3  11-14)  was  a'so
worked  over  by  D  ;  hut  it  sufficiently  meets  the  case  if  we  regard \

3  12  as  a  redactional  back-reference  to  227^ On  the  notice  of j

4  18^,  added  by  the  last  deuteronomistic  redactor,  see  below,  §  7.

The  second  narrative  (b]  has  been  much  more  pro
foundly  modified  by  inserted  deuteronomistic  passages
(i  S.  72-822  1017-27  121-25).  In  fact,  the  account  of
the  rise  of  the  monarchy  contained  in  these  sections
directly  contradicts  the  original  story  at  every  point.
Samuel  is  Israel's  last  judge.  Under  his  leadership
repentant  and  converted  Israel  throws  off  the  Philistine
yoke  (7),  and  in  order  to  be  like  other  nations  requests
Samuel  to  give  it  a  king.  This  Samuel  does  at  the
command  of  God  (8).  At  Mizpah  the  sacred  lot  falls
on  Saul  (10 17^).  Samuel  then  reproaches  the  people
with  ingratitude  towards  Yah  we  (12).  The  links  which
connect  this  narrative  with  the  older  account  are  1025-27

11  I2/.

Critics  are  not  agreed  as  to  whether  we  have  before  us  here  a
narrative  written  with  full  knowledge  of  the  older  account  in  9
10  1-16  11,  bikt  with  the  deliberate  intention  of  altering  its  scope
(We.,  Kue.) — in  which  case  the  links  just  mentioned  may  be
derived  from  the  writer  himself — or  whether  we  have  an  in
dependent  source  which  has  been  brought  into  connection  with
the  older  narrative  by  means  of  these  same  links,  which  on  this
hypothesis  must  be  attributed  to  the  hand  of  a  redactor  (Co.,
Bii.).  The  first  of  these  assumptions  is  in  harmony  with  the
known  habits  of  deuteronomistic  writers,  and  not  less  so  is  the
wording  of  820  12  12,  which  plainly  suggests  that  we  have
before  us  a  deuteronomistic  narrative,  dependent  on  the  older
account.  Cornill  and  Budde  fail  to  perceive  the  character  and
age  of  these  deuteronomistic  pieces,  holding  them  to  be  pre-
deuteronomic  and  assigning  them  to  an  Elohistic  source.

The  old  version  of  the  story  of  Saul  has,  however,
undergone  other  expansions.  The  oldest  of  these  (it
is  perhaps  pre-exilic)  occurs  in  161-2332-35  (Saul's  war
against  the  Amalekites  and  his  rejection  by  Samuel).
Verses  24-31,  which  describe  Saul's  self-abasement  before
Samuel,  are  a  later  embellishment  to  this  narrative.  To
another  late  writer,  however,  it  seemed  that  Saul's  re
jection  did  not  occur  early  enough,  and  he  has  therefore
in  i  S.  138-is  carried  back  this  occurrence,  which  is
most  awkwardly  accounted  for,  to  the  beginning  of
Saul's  reign,  preparing  the  way  for  it  by  means  of  108.
These  additions  are  later  than  the  deuteronomistic
portions,  for  they  regard  Samuel  as  an  authority
superior  to  Saul.  A  later  interpolation  also  is  1819-21,
with  its  incredible  statement  that  the  smith's  craft  was
suppressed  by  the  Philistine  overlords  throughout  the
land  of  Israel.  The  Song  of  Hannah  ( i  S.  2  i-io)  was
interpolated  at  a  still  later  period,2  and  probably  owed
ts  introduction  here  to  a  mistaken  interpretation  of  the
figure  (v.  5)  of  the  barren  woman.  It  is  a  post-exilic
psalm,  which  gives  expression  to  the  belief  of  the  Jewish
Church  in  the  compensating  Messianic  judgment  of
Yahwe.

In  Part  II. (i  S.  16i-2  S.  818)  the  pre-exilic  sources

1  CpSt.  Gl'lV  1  202/;  Mez,  Die  Bibel des  Jos.,  62  ff.  (1895).

2  [So  Cheyne,  OPs.  57,  who  points  out  that  the  fortunes  of
Sarah  and  Hannah  were  regarded  as  types  of  those  of  Israel.
Budde, however, finds in 2i-io  the thanksgiving -song  of  a
victorious  king, which  must therefore  be pre-exilic  (Ri.  Sa.
I97)-]

4275


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

are  present  in  almost  a  larger  proportion.  The  passage
-.  ..  contained  in  i  S.  1614-23  is  old.  Saul
S  1  fi  S  S  's  se'ze<^  with  melancholy ;  David  is
''  '  brought  to  the  court  to  cheer  him  with
his  harp.  The  narrative  is  brought  by  14  52  into  con
nection  with  that  of  Saul's  election  and  his  struggles  with
the  Philistines.  The  continuation  of  i  S.  1623  is  to  be
sought,  not  in  17 * /.  (WRS  OTJC  433)— for  what  is
there  related  is  irreconcilable  with  16 18  —  but  in
186-8a  (Saul's  jealousy  of  David's  growing  popularity).
Between  these  two  sections  is  interpolated  a  narrative,
compounded  from  two  independent  but  both  much  later
sources,  describing  David's  victory  over  Goliath  and  his
friendship  with  Jonathan  (17i-18s).  Chaps.  17-18
rank  among  the  most  interesting  of  all  the  sections
in  the  Book  of  Samuel,  for  here  we  have  alongside  of
MT  a  shorter  text  in  <5"  where  17  12-31  41  50  (in  v.  51,
'  and  he  drew  it  out  of  its  sheath  ')  55-185  Zb-n  126  17-19
are  wanting — a  statement  that  is  unaffected  by  the
presence  of  1 8  9  in  B.  The  critics  are  not  at  one  on  the
question  whether  it  is  the  original  that  has  come  down
to  us  in  the  Greek  recension,  or  whether  we  have  to
do  with  an  abridgment  made  in  harmonistic  interests.1
The  main  argument  that  makes  for  the  abridgment  view
is  that  20  8  seems  to  take  account  of  the  bond  of  brother
hood  between  David  and  Jonathan  spoken  of  in  IS 3
(Kuenen).  But  this,  doubtless,  was  one  of  the  constant
themes  of  the  older  history,  and  we  can  all  the  more
readily  imagine  208  to  have  referred  to  some  passage
which  has  not  come  down  to  us,  inasmuch  as  between
1623  and  186  it  is  probable  that  a  piece  of  ancient
narrative  has  dropped  out.  But,  further,  the  question
as  to  the  character  of  the  text  of  @  does  not  quite
dispose  of  the  question  as  to  its  composition,  inasmuch
as  abridgment  with  a  view  to  obviating  contradictions
is  an  operation  that  might  very  well  have  been  per
formed  precisely  upon  the  later  portions  in  chap.  17/.

The  view  trtot  the  shorter  recension  (<SB),  17  i-ii  32-4042-49  51
(in  part)  52-54,  constitutes  a  narrative,  complete  in  itself,  which
has  been  broken  up  in  MT  by  fragments  of  a  parallel  account
(vv.  12-31  41  ~pf.  [in  part]  55-58),  is  supported  by  the  fact  that
v.  54  marks  the  conclusion  of  a  narrative,  and  that  v.  32  admits
of  being  joined  on  to  v.  n,  whilst  v.  12  is  plainly  the  beginning
of  a  new  story.  The  same  phenomena  show  that  in'.  55-58  also,
and  18  1-5,  which  form  the  immediate  continuation  of  the  frag
mentary  narrative,  proceed  from  another  source  than  the  main
narrative.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  close
of  the  fragmentary  narrative  was  perhaps  originally  182,  and
ZT.  3-5  an  addition  ;  for  v.  2  separates  v.  i  from  v.  3.*

The  connecting  link  by  which  the  two  parallel  narra
tives  are  held  together  is  constituted  by  17 14^-16.  Of
the  two  accounts,  the  main  narrative  relates  the  events
in  the  form  of  a  history  of  the  kingdom,  whilst  the
fragmentary  narrative  has  the  character  of  a  biography.
If  we  assume  that  v.  36  has  not  been  worked  over,  and
that  v.  47  is  a  later  addition,  both  narratives  can  only  be
exilic,  at  the  earliest  (cp  GOLIATH).

The  continuation  of  18  Sa  is  found  in  vv.  12-16.
David  is  removed  from  the  court  with  honour.  His
own  popularity,  and,  with  it,  Saul's  fear,  go  on  in
creasing.  The  story  of  Saul  and  his  javelin  in  v.  8^-n,
viewed  by  itself,  can  very  well  have  come  from  an  old
source  ;  but  it  is  here  out  of  place.

Verses  17-19  are  likewise  foreign  to  the  ancient  source,  as  is
shown  by  what  comes  after  :  Saul  promises  his  daughter  Merab
to  David,  but  does  not  keep  his  word.  This  story  has  grown
out  of  the  fragmentary  narrative  of  MT  contained  in  17  12-31
41  5°  55.^-.  >f  indeed  it  does  not  actually  form  part  of  it.  It  can
very  well  have  come  in  after  18  2.

Chap.  18 16  has  its  continuation  in  1820-30.  Michal
falls  in  love  with  David,  who  marries  her  in  spite  of
Saul's  malignant  plot  against  him.  (Verse  21^  is
wanting  in  ©"  and  is  a  later  addition).  We  again  come
upon  old  material  in  chap.  20 — one  of  the  accounts  of
the  outbreak  of  enmity  between  Saul  and  David.

1  On  the  one  side  (expansion)  are  Co.,  St.,  WRS  ; on  the
other  (abridgment)  We.,  Kue.,  Bu.,  and  others  (for  references
see GOLIATH). We. formerly  held  an opposite  view  (TBS
io4/).

2  For  the  proof  see  WRS  OTJCV),  433.

4276


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

Jonathan  helps  David  in  ascertaining  what  Saul's  true
disposition  towards  him  is  ;  w.  4-17  and  40-42  are
disturbing  insertions  of  a  later  hand.  As  it  now  stands,
this  account  is  without  its  natural  premises  ;  if  it  comes
from  the  same  source  as  161423  186-80  12-1620-30,
something  has  dropped  out  from  between  them.  The
continuation  is  given  in  i  S.  21 1-7  (David's  flight  to
Nob),  221-46-23  (David's  sojourn  in  Adullam,  and
Saul's  vengeance  on  the  priests  of  Nob),  23 1-14  (David
takes  refuge  in  Keilah,  but  in  fear  of  Saul  quits  it  for
the  wilderness);  25  (David's  life  in  the  wilderness,  and
the  Nabal-episode),  27 1-12 l  (David  takes  refuge  with
Achish  and  receives  Ziklag),  28  if.  29  i-n  (David  takes
the  field  with  the  Philistines  against  Saul,  but  is  mis
trusted  and  sent  back),  30 1-31  (David  finds  Ziklag
plundered  and  burnt  by  the  Amalekites,  but  pursues
them  and  recovers  the  spoil),  31 1-13  (Saul  and  his  sons
fall  in  battle).

In  2  S.  the  same  source  is  continued:  28.21-32
(David  is  made  king  of  Judah  at  Hebron,  Ishbaal  king
of  Israel  at  Mahanaim  ;  there  is  war  between  them),
3 1  6^-39  (Abner's  betrayal  of  Ishbaal;  Joab's  vendetta
on  Abner),  4x205-12  (Ishbaal' s  assassination — where
vv.  sf.,  on  the  one  hand,  and  v.  7  on  the  other,  show
that  the  section  contains  remnants  of  a  second  parallel
account  of  this  occurrence),  51-317-25  (David  becomes
king  over  all  Israel  and  is  victorious  over  the  Philistines),
8  (David's  wars  against  external  enemies  ;  his  officers).
Chap.  8,  however,  in  its  present  form  has  been  much
revised  and  corrected  throughout  (see  DAVID),  which
opens  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  what  comes  after  is
derived  from  another  source.  If  we  have  already
found,  in  chap.  4,  traces  of  an  ancient  parallel  narrative,
we  are  able  to  point  out  other  elements  also  which
interrupt  the  thread  of  the  narrative.  2  S.  1 1^-4  n/i ,
is  old  ;  an  Israelite  warrior  escaped  from  the  battle
brings  David  the  news  of  Saul's  death.  That  the
source  here  is  not  the  same  as  before  is  shown  by  the
joining  in  v.  ia,  and  by  a  comparison  of  v.  4  with
i  S.  31  2.  Verses  5-10  13-16,  according  to  which  the
messenger  is  a  chance  Amalekite  who  happened  to  be
on  the  battlefield,  are  a  later  interpolation,  of  the
nature  of  Midrash,  based  upon  2  S.  4io  not  rightly
understood.  2  S.  5  6-12  is  also  old,  but  from  another
source  than  the  adjacent  portion.  David  conquers
Jebus  and  enters  into  relations  with  Hiram  of  Tyre  ;
and  in  chap.  6  David  brings  the  ark  to  Jerusalem.
Both  these  passages  perhaps  come  from  the  same
source  as  that  which  we  afterwards  come  upon  again
in  chap.  9.

Part  II.  has  undergone  excessive  expansions.  Prob
ably  we  ought  to  assign  to  a  later  date  (i)  both  the
_  ,  parallel  accounts  of  David's  adventure

5.  Latei in  the  wilderness  of  ziph.  (a)  x  s  23 19-

'ns>  24  23  [22],  (3)  chap.  26.  The  Ziphites
betray  David  to  Saul.  He  escapes  Saul's  pursuit,
however,  and  spares  him  when  chance  has  brought
him  into  his  power.  Both  passages  are  brought
into  connection  with  one  another  and  with  the
subsequent  interpolation,  2815-18,  describing  a  visit  of
Jonathan  to  David,  by  means  of  23  igb.  The  expres
sions  '  in  the  strongholds '  and  '  in  the  wilderness  of
Ziph  '  bring  them  into  relation  with  the  older  section.
(2)  284-25  (Saul's  visit  to  the  witch  of  Endor).

i  S.  17  and  the  later  portions  of  chap.  18  have  already  been
considered.  19 1-16,  one  of  the  variants  on  the  outbreak  of
enmity  between  Saul  and  David,  takes  account  of  these
(see  v.  5).  Jonathan,  we  hear,  attempts  the  part  of  mediator,
but  in  vain.  Then  a  victory  of  David's  brings  Saul's  hatred  to
a  crisis  ;  he  throws  his  javelin  at  his  rival,  who  with  Michal's
help  succeeds  in  making  his  escape.  Co.  and  Bu.  mark  v.  if.
as  a  later  addition,  but  with  doubtful  justification  ;  for  this
would  involve  the  deletion  of  the  whole  of  v,  7,  which,  however,
is  necessary  for  the  connection.

The  following  are  the  sections  in  this  part  which  are

1  i  S.  278-12  was  rejected  by  St.  GVI(l)  252  (after  Wellh.,  in
Bleek,  /JY«/.(*)  •2?.o  =  CH  253)  as  a  later  addition.  But  in
GescA.fi)  Stade  withdrew  this  view.  Cp  Bu.  Ri.  Sa.  232.


137


4277


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

of  later  origin  :  (i)  161-13  (Samuel,  after  the  rejection
of  Saul,  anoints  the  youthful  David  at  Bethlehem  as
king).  This  was  written  specially  for  the  place  where  it
now  occurs,  for  it  stands  in  immediate  connection  with
chap.  15  (cp  v.  if. ),  aims  at  correcting  the  narrative  of
i  S.  1614-23,  and  in  v.  12  takes  account  of  1742.  It  is
probable  that  the  parenthesis  in  v.  19  ( '  which  is  with
the  sheep')  comes  from  the  same  hand.  (2)  1918-24
( David  flees  from  the  presence  of  Saul  to  the  school  of
the  prophets  at  Ramah).  This  is  a  probably  post-
exilic  development,  in  the  nature  of  Midrash,  from  the
proverbial  saying  '  Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ? '

(3)  Apart  from the passage, already  referred to, in

1  S.  2815-28,  the  old  theme  of  the  friendship  of  David
and  Jonathan  occurs  in  another  variant  in  i  S.  2640-42.

(4)  21 11-16  [10-15]  (David  flees  from  Nob  to  Achish  of
Gath,  and,  to  save  his  life,  feigns  madness). Kuenen
conjectures  this  to  have  been  intended  to  take  the  place
of  i  S.  27,  where  David's  real  relations  to  Achish  are
set  forth. (5) Particulars  about David's  family  : (a)

2  S.  82-5  (his  children  born  in  Hebron) ;  (6)  2  S.  5 13-16
(the  wives  he  married  in  Jerusalem  and  the  children  born
to  him  there). Late  interpolations  in  any  case  are  also
the  following  poems :  ( i )  David's  lament  (28.!  17-27)  over
Saul  and  Jonathan,  the  genuineness  of  which  is  doubtful.
It  has  come  into  its  present  position  from  the  '  Book  of
Jashar' (see JASHER, BOOK OF, §  2). (2) David's
lament  over  Abner  (2  S.  3  33  f. ) ',  34^  in  particular,  which
is  rendered  superfluous  by  v.  yb,  betrays  the  interpola
tion  (cp  DAVID,  §  13,  col.  1035).

2  S.  7  is  also  an  instance  of  deuteronomistic  ex
pansion  in  Pt.  II.

David  desires  to  build  a  house  for  Yahwe,  and  is  encouraged
in  his  purpose  by  Nathan.  Afterwards  Nathan  is  commanded
by  Yahwe  to  prohibit  David  from  doing  so.  David  is  not  to
build  a  house  for  Yahwe,  but  Yahwe  for  David — the  stability  of
his  dynasty  being  meant.  Verse  13,  which  conflicts  with  v.  16
and  destroys  this  point  (Wellh.)  by  making  the  prophecy  of
Nathan  refer  to  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple,  is  a  gloss.

Chap.  7  is  certainly  a  later  addition,  for  it  connects
the  accounts  of  David's  building  of  a  house  (28.  5  nf. )
and  of  the  removal  of  the  ark  to  the  city  of  David
(2  S.  61^),  and  is  occasioned  by  these.  It  is  rightly
held  by  Wellhausen  and  Kuenen  to  be  deuteronomistic  ;
cp  the  reference  to  the  appointment  of  judges  and  the
dark  days  of  the  period  of  the  judges,  also  w.  i  and  n
with  Dt.  12  9  i  K.  54[x8]  8  56.

It  is  impossible,  however,  to  agree  with  Wellhausen  in  holding
the  passage  to  have  been  written  while  the  kingdom  of  j  udah  still
subsisted,  perhaps  under  Josiah,  or  with  Kuenen  in  holding  it  to
be  manifestly  pre-exilic.  The  promise  of  the  perpetual  kingship
of  the  house  of  David  had  also,  as  Ps.  80  shows,  a  meaning  for
the  Messianic  faith  of  the  post-exilic  period,  and  v.  10  betrays
acquaintance  with  the  exile.

It  is  no  longer  possible  to  determine  how  this
deuteronomistic  interpolation  is  related  in  point  of  age
to  the  latest  interpolations  previously  referred  to,  or  how
many  of  these  are  of  later  date.  So  far  as  the  poetical
pieces  and  the  Midrash  narratives  are  concerned,  it  may
be  assumed  with  some  degree  of  confidence  that  they
did  not  find  their  way  into  the  book  until  after  the
deuteronomistic  interpolation  had  occurred.

It  is  in  Pt.  III.  that  the  greatest  amount  of  old
material  has  been  preserved,  and  here  also,  accordingly,
the  impression  of  literary  unity  is
greatest.  The  narrative  in  9-20  is
continuous,  exhibits  the  same  peculiar
ities  of  style  throughout,  and  must  therefore  be  attri
buted  to  one  and  the  same  writer  ;  it  is  but  rarely  that
the  original  thread  is  interrupted  by  glosses  and  expan
sions.  It  describes  Meribaal's  succession  to  the  heritage
of  Saul  (9),  David's  Ammonite  wars  and  his  sin  with
Bathsheba  (10-12),  the  story  of  Amnon  and  Tr.mar
(13),  Absalom's  revenge  and  banishment,  and  the
revolts  of  Absalom  and  Sheba  (14-20).  To  it  also
belongs  i  K.  I/ ,  containing  Adonijah's  proclamation
as  king,  the  death  of  David  and  Adonijah's  downfall.
The  narrator,  one  of  the  best  in  the  OT,  apparently
wishes  to  show  how  it  was  precisely  that  Solomon  should
4278


6.  David  :  2  S.
9-1  K.  2.


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

have  come  to  be  David's  successor.  He  dwells  by
preference  on  the  more  intimate  affairs  of  the  court,  and
depicts  the  different  characters  with  admirable  skill.
Later  insertions,  however,  are  not  altogether  wanting.
Among  these  are  certainly  the  notes  upon  the  dress  of
kings'  daughters  (13i8«)  and  upon  Absalom's  beauty
(1425/. ),  and  the  reference  to  the  Levites  in  15z4.
This  reference,  which  is  post-exilic,  needs  no  explana
tion  ;  the  other  two  notes  owe  their  origin  to  the
antiquarian  interests  of  some  reader,  and  are,  at  the
earliest,  exilic;  cp  14 26  ('the  [Babylonian]  king's
weight').  The  account  of  David's  war  against  Hadar-
ezer  (Hadadezer)  in  lOis-iprt  is  also  liable  to  suspicion
(see  DAVID,  §  8[£]) ;  and  Schwally  ('/.A  T\VV1\^/.}
even  regards  the  whole  of  12i-is<2,  including  the  parable
of  Nathan,  as  an  addition  (see  JKDIDIAH,  NATHAN).
Whether  we  accept  the  latter  view  or  not,  it  is  beyond
doubt  that  12/^8,  the  first  clause  of  v.  9,  and  w.  10-12
were  inserted  at  a  later  date.  This  is  especially  clear
in  the  case  of  vv.  10-12,  for  these  verses  disagree  with
the  tenor  of  the  denunciation  by  which  they  are
followed,  and  are  a  I'aticiniutn  ex  eventu.

This  section  also,  as  is  shown  by  i  K.  If.,  has
undergone  deuteronomistic  revision.  In  28.14-20,
indeed,  it  is  impossible  to  establish  traces  of  such
redaction  ;  but  the  gradual  amplification  of  the  old
sources  can  here  be  demonstrated  with  exceptional
clearness.  The  connection  between  2  S.  20  and  i  K.  1
is,  in  the  first  instance,  broken  by  the  interpolation  of
those  old  sections,  28.  21 1-14  (the  vengeance  of  the
Gibeonites  on  the  house  of  Saul)  and  2  S.  24  (the
numbering  of  the  people,  the  pestilence,  the  establish
ment  of  the  sanctuary  on  Oman's  threshing  floor).
Both  are  from  the  same  pen  and  may  have  been  intro
duced  here  even  by  a  pre-deuteronomic  editor.  The
connection  thus  constituted  (28.  9-20  21 1-14  24  i  K.
I/.)  is  again  broken  up  by  the  introduction  of  the
anecdotes  of  the  encounters  of  David  and  his  worthies
with  the  Philistines  (28.2115-22),  and  the  list  of  these
worthies  (288-39).  These  portions  were  probably  first
introduced  into  the  book  after  it  had  been  deutero-
nomisticall}7  edited.  It  is  also  advisable  to  assume
this  for  22  1-51  (a  psalm  expressive  of  the  Messianic
faith  of  the  post-exilic  community,  here  introduced  as  a
song  of  David's),  and  for  23  1-7  (David's  last  words,
which  were  not  introduced  here  till  after  the  narrative
had  been  expanded  by  the  addition  of  21  15-22  23  8-39,
and,  in  point  of  fact,  themselves  interrupt  this  addition).

Thus  four  strata  are  observable  in  the  narrative  of
Samuel  as  it  now  stands.  At  the  foundation  lies  a

„ .. . series  of  pre-exilic narratives relating
I. rOSSUlo  01 . .,  ,  ., ,. .._


analysis.


to  the  origin  of  the  kingship,  and  its


earlier  history.  It  is  possible  that  in
its  oldest  form  this  series  may  have  contained  pieces
which  disappeared  in  later  revisions.  In  particular
there  is  some  reason  to  conjecture  that  after  i  S.  7 1
there  at  one  time  stood  an  account  of  the  downfall  of
the  sanctuary  at  Shiloh.  We  have  no  means  of  deter
mining  the  date  at  which  the  narratives  embodied  in  the
succeeding  record  became  incorporated  with  the  pre-
exilic  part  of  the  book.  Equally  in  the  dark  are  we  as
to  whether  the  process  of  redaction  involved  in  this  led
to  excisions  of  old  material.  This  was  certainly  the
case  when  the  deuteronomistic  revision  was  made  ;
cp  what  has  been  said  above  on  i  S.  4i-7i.  By  means
of  this  last  revision  Samuel  was  brought  into  line  with
the  series  of  historical  books  which,  in  continuation  of
the  Pentateuch,  describe  the  history  of  Israel  from  the
conquest  of  Canaan  onwards.  It  is  probable  that  more
than  one  hand  had  a  share  in  this  deuteronomistic
redaction.  The  deuteronomistic  portions  are  partly
edifying  amplifications  (18.227-36  2S. 7),  partly  con
texts  and  substituted  passages  intended  to  correct  the
course  of  the  history  (i  S.  7  8  \§\T /.  12).  At  the  same
time  the  narrative  was  conformed  to  the  chronological
system  of  the  deuteronomistic  recension  of  the  Book  of

4279


SAMUEL  (BOOKS)

Judges.  The  traces  of  this  process  are  to  be  found  in
I  8.  4 18£  27?  28.  2ioa/.  5tf. ,  and  its  connection  with
the  work  of  the  deuteronomist  appears  in  i  8.  7  2.  If
©I1A  (cp  65L)  has  preserved  the  more  original  form  of  the
narrative  in  omitting  i  S.  13i,  this  kind  of  work  must
have  continued  much  later.  Regarding  the  additions
made  to  the  text  in  the  further  course  of  its  transmis
sion,  we  cannot  always  be  sure  whether  they  were
inserted  directly  by  some  redactor  or  made  their  way  in
from  the  margin.  Some  of  these  have  been  already
indicated.  To  the  same  class  belong  18.617183  99
24 13  [14]  30s9<J  28.830  42^3  11 2m  and  perhaps  other
passages.

It  has  been  already  remarked  that  the  exact  date  of
these  additions  often  eludes  us.  At  the  same  time  there
is  good  ground  for  the  belief  that  the  poems  (i  S.  2i-io
28.117-27  833/1  22  281-7)  and  those  additions  which
have  the  characteristics  of  Midrash  were  the  latest
passages  to  be  inserted.  Since  28.  21 18-22  is  repeated
in  i  Ch.  20  iff.  and  2  S.  238-39,  and  24  in  i  Ch.  \\ioff.
21,  the  Chronicler  (about  300  B.C.)  must  have  used  our
book  in  a  form  agreeing  in  all  important  points  with
the  recension  that  has  reached  us  in  the  Hebrew  te<t
(see  CHRONICLES).  From  the  fact  that  Chronicles  does
not  contain  the  psalm  or  the  last  words  of  David  (2  S.
2223  1-7)  Budde  concludes  that  these  were  not  inserted
into  Samuel  till  after  the  Chronicler's  time.  That  is  no
doubt  possible  ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  proved  by  such  an
argumentum  e  silentio.  We  cannot  argue  from  the
presence  of  the  psalm  in  I  Ch.  168^  that  the  Chronicler
would  not  have  passed  over  a  Davidic  psalm  found  in
his  old  source,  for  iCh.  1(58^  is  a  later  interpolation
into  the  Book  of  Chronicles.  That  the  Chronicler  was
acquainted  with  the  present  division  into  Samuel  and
Kings  may  be  conjectured.  Still,  the  fact  that  many
passages  occur  with  a  better  text  in  Chronicles  shows
that  the  text  of  Samuel  was  not  yet  in  the  Chronicler's
time  quite  identical  with  ours.1  That  the  text  found
now  in  all  Hebrew  MSS  has  not  arisen  without  con
siderable  distortion  of  the  manuscript  tradition  appears
on  comparing  it  with  the  text  of  ©  ;  and  in  many  cases
it  is  only  when  this  is  done  that  the  Hebrew  text  Incomes
intelligible.  This  undesigned  distortion  of  the  text  is
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  Books  of  Samuel  were
never  used  in  the  regular  service  of  the  synagogue.

Thenius,  Die  Backer  Sam.  erkUrtV},  1864,  <»)  by  Lr.hr,
1898  ;  Klostermann,  Die  Biicher  Sam.  u.  Kan.,  1887  ;  Well-

hausen,  TBS,  1871;  Driver,  TBS,  1890;
8.  Literature.  Budde,  Heb.  Text,  crit.  ed.  with  notes,

SBOT,  1894;  Ewald,  G>7(3)2576  ff.  (1865);
(3)322^  (1866);  Koh.  Lehrb.  dcr  Inhl.  Gesch.  AT  ii.1  122  ff.
(1884);  Kittel  in  Kau.  US,  Bciltigcn,  %ff.  ;  H.  P.  Smith,  Sam.
(1899);  Budde,  A"//C(i9°2);  Nowack, //A'(i9o2).2  On  analysis
of  text,  also  Wellhausen  in  Bleek.W  206^  (1878),  and  CH,
1899,  235^;  Stade,  (7/"/(2>l  197^,  review  of  Budde's  critical
edition  in  TSL,  1895  ;  Cornill,  '  Ein  elohistischer  Bericht  iib.  d.
Kntstehung  des  Israelit.  Konigthums'  in  ZKH-',  i885,pp.  \\'2jf.,
continued  in  Kdnigsberger  Studien,  \  (1888)  25^:,  ZATW
10  96  ff.,  EM.  (1892)  io=,ff.\  Budde,  Ri.  Sa.  167^  (1890);
Kittel,  review  of  Budde  in  Th.  Stud.  u.  Krit.,  1892,  pp.  44^  ;
Hist.  222  f. ;  Driver,  ftttrod.Pl ;  Kautzsch,  Outline  nf  the  Hist.
of  the  Lit.  of  the  OT  (1898);  S.  A.  Cook  in  AJSL,  1900,  pp.
145-177.  For  the  text  see  Klost.  and  Bu.  (above);  Noldeke,


1  That  it  was  worked  at  even  after  his  time  is  shown  by  28.
10  D, where  the  Chronicler  did not read  P'N  f)St  after  nr>'?

as  the  MTof  28.  does.

2  [H.  P.  Smith  divides  most  of  the  contents  of  Samuel  between
two  main  sources,  each  of  which  gives  an  account  of  Saul  and
David,  one  of  them  including  28.  0-20  (the  court history  of
David,  relating  the  story  of  Uriah,  Bathsheba,  Amnon,  Tamar,
and  Absalom). There  are  also  two  accounts  of  the  denunciation
of  Eli  ;  the  appointment  and  rejection  of  Saul  ;  the  coming  of
David  to  Saul's  court,  the  negotiations  for  his  marriage,  his
flight,  his  generosity  to  Saul,  his  flight  to  Achish,  and  the  death
of  Saul. This  constant  duplication  of  incidents is the  chief
ground  for  holding  the  existence  of  the  second  source,  which  is
less  primitive  than  the  other,  and  presents  '  indications  of  a  com
paratively late date—perhaps  in  or  after  the  exile.' But  it
should  be  noticed  that,  according  to  H.  P. Smith,  these  two
sources  are  themselves  of  composite  origin. The  date  suggested
for  the  second  main  source  involves  the  transference  of  much
material  usually  regarded  as  pre-deuteronomic  to  the  period  of
the  deuteronomistic  writers.]

4280


SANAAS

Z\VT  (1873),  H7./  ;  A.  Mez,  Die  Bib.  <icsjos.,  1895  ;  Meritan,
La  version  grecque  des  li-vrcs  de  Sam. ,  precedee  dune  introd.
sur  la  critique  textuelle  (1898,  not  important);  N.  Peters,
Beitr.  zur  Text-  u.  Literaturkritik  so-wie  zur  Erkliirung  tier
BB.  Samuel  (1899).  B.  S.

SANAAS  (CANAAC  [A]),  iKsd.  023  RV=Ezra235,
SENAAH.

SANABASSAR  (cANABACC&pco  [Aa]),  lEsd.  2i2,
SANABASSAHUS,  ib.  61820  (CANAB&CCAROC  [A  ;  and  B

in  r.  20]). See  SHESHBAZZAR.

SANASIB  (cAN&Beic  [B],  <\N&ceiB  [A]),  a  priestly
name,  lEsd.  624,  wanting  in  ||  Ezra  2  36  Neh.  739.
Possibly  a  corrupt  repetition  of  Senaah  in  the  preceding
verse.

SANBALLAT (D^apD  —  i.e., San«bhallat  =  Sin-

uballit[anni],  'Sin  [the  moon-god]  caused  [me]  to  live  '  ;

1 Earlier cp Xab<Hu]ballitanni  ; c&NAB&AAAT

theories  tBNA]-  <*N*B.  [twice  B,  once  N],  CAA<\B.
[once  N],  c&NA.B&A(Vr  [L,  twice  N]),  one
of  the  chief  opponents  of  Nehemiah  (Neh.  2io  Gif.).
He  is  called  a  '  Horonite '  (Neh.Uio) — i.e.,  according
to  most  scholars,  a  native  of  Beth-horon  or  Horon  (see
BETH-HORON,  §  4,  and  cp  ISRAEL,  §  55)  ;  Winckler
(AOFIzv&jf.}  pleads  very  earnestly  for  the  view  that
Sanballat  was  a  Moabite  of  Horonaim.  This  view,  how
ever,  is  out  of  the  question  if  Guthe  has  rightly  emended
the  text  of  Neh.  42  (834),  '  And  he  said  in  the  presence
of  his  brethren  (  =fellow  Samaritans),  "  Is  this  (njn)  the
might  of  Samaria  that  these  Jews  are  building  their
city?"  '  (following  <SI!NA,  cp  <SL).  It  is  also  generally
held  that  Sanballat's  daughter  would  not  have  been
taken  to  wife  by  a  grandson  of  the  Jewish  high  priest
(Neh.  1828),  if  he  had  not  been,  at  any  rate,  of  a  N.
Israelitish  stock.  Josephus,  certainly,  calls  him  a
Cuthrean  (cp  2  K.  1724),  and  states  that  he  was  sent  by
the  last  Darius  as  governor  to  Samaria,  and  that  he
married  his  daughter  Nicaso  to  Manasseh,  brother  of
Jaddua  the  high  priest  (Ant.  xi.  72).

If  the  geography  of  MT  is  correct  these  arguments  are  very
strong.  If,  however,  as  can  be  made  probable  with  regard  to
many  other  narratives,  the  received  text  has
2.  New  theory,  been  produced  by  editorial  manipulation,
and  if  the  opponents  of  the  Jews  come  from
the  N.  Arabian  region  where  (on  the  present  writer's  theory)  the
Jews  had  languished  in  captivity,  the  question  of  Sanballat's
ethnic  connection  (and,  indeed,  that  of  his  name  as  well)  passes
into  a  new  phase.  «j-irj  will  then  naturally  be  read  Harani,  '  the
Haranite  '  (there  being,  according  to  the  theory  in  question,  a
southern  as  well  as  a  northern  Haran).  Certainly  the  passage
quoted  above  in  Guthe's  text  may  be  more  plausibly  read  thus,
'  And  he  said  before  the  Jerahmeelites  in  Shimron,  What  do  the
Jews?'  1  Now,  too,  there  is  considerable  reason  for  questioning
the  name  '  Sanballat. '  Very  possibly  it  is  the  coinage  of  the
redactor  ;  the  original  name  may  have  been  Nebaiothi  (man  of
NEBAIOTH).  Corresponding  emendations  of  the  names  of  San
ballat's  companions  must  also  be  made.  For  '  Sanballat  the
Horonite,  Tobiah  the  Ammonite,  Geshem  (or  Gashmu)  the
Arabian,'  we  should  possibly  read,  'The  Nebaiothite,  the
Haranite,  the  Tubalite,  the  Jerahmeelite,  the  Cushamite,  the
Arabian.'  The  true  opponents  of  the  Jews  were  not  merely
individuals  but  masses  of  men  representing  the  X.  Arabian
borderland — i.e.,  the  story  of  Nehemiah  has  very  possibly  been
rewritten  on  the  basis  of  a  very  imperfect  text.  Josephus's
phrase,  '  a  Cuthaan  as  to  race  '  (Ant.  xi.  7  2)  is  not  so  far  wrong
as  it_may  seem,  for  '  Cuth  '  in  2  K.  17  30  is  doubtless  an  editorial
manipulation  of  '  Cush '  (i.e.,  the  N.  Arabian  Cush).  See
TOHIAH,  and  cp  SHESHBAZZAK.

On  the  chronological  questions  involved  in  the  earlier
theories,  see  CANON,  §  25  ;  ISRAEL,  §  65,  and  SAMARI
TANS.  T.  K.  c.

SANCTIFICATION  (AHACMOC). See  SAINT.

SANCTUARY.  See,  generally,  TEMPLE.  The
words  are  : —

i.  ^'^p,  kedes,  usually  rendered  '  holy  place' ;  used  (a)  of  the
tabernacle  or  temple  generally ;  (V)  of  the  '  holy  place '  in  the
technical  sense;  (c)  of  the  'holy  of  holies'  (Lev.  102  f.  etc.).
©  has  TO  aycov  (cp  Heb.  9  25  13  n,  TO.  ayia).


1  V'ni  VnX  and  D'Scxn  must  come  from  Q'^MDrrV  (Jerah-
meelites).  niDty  is  the  Shimron  mentioned  in  Amos  (see  PRO
PHET,  §  8).

4281


SAPHIR

2.  BnpC, mikdas, often; in Am.  7  13, AV 'chapel'; see
BETHEL,  S  3,  with  n.  2.

3.  ayi'aoyia,  i  Mace.  1  37  845  etc.—  i.e.,  the  veto?  or  i/aot.

4.  i/ews,  2  Mace.  62  9  16  10  3  5  1823  14  33,  AV  'temple'  RV
sanctuary'  throughout.

5  and  6.  i-adj  in  Mt.  23  35  27s,  and  otxos  in  Lk.  11  51,  where
AV  has  temple,'  but  RV  'sanctuary.'  The  Holy,  and  the
Holy  of  Holies  are  meant,  the  '  house  of  God  '  (Mt.  12  4).  '  How
vividly  does  it  set  forth  the  despair  and  defiance  of  Judas
that  he  presses  even  into  the  vaos  itself  (Trench,  NT
Synonyms,  14)  !  But,  as  I?.  Weiss  points  out,  the  form  of  the
narrative  is  suggested  by  Zech.  11  13,  '  in  the  house  of  Yahwe.'

SANDALS, i. 7W,  naal. Cant.  7  1  [4 RV,  and

2. o-ai'SaAta,  Mk.  69  Acts  12  8. See  SHOES.

SANDAL  WOOD  (D'SB^N),  iK.  10n  RVur.,  EV
ALMUG.

SAND  FLY  (D'33),  Ex.  816  RV'"e-,  EV  LICE.
SAND-LIZARD  (Lev.  11  3o  RV). See  LIZARD,  5.

SANHEDRIN  (jnf  HJO).  See  GOVERNMENT,  §  31,
and  SYNEDRIUM.


SANSANNAH  (nsp^p;  ceGeNNAK  [B],  CAN
CAN  N<\  [A],  ceeNN&K  [L]),  a  remote  city  of  Judah
(Josh.  ISsif).  corresponding  to  HAZAR-SUSAH  in  Josh.
19s.  The  name  seems  to  mean  '  palm  -branch  ';  but
there  are  parallels  enough  for  the  view  that  it  is  really  a
corruption  of  nce'St'  =  ctf'13  (Cusham),  cp  Hazar-susah  =
Hazar-cusham,  another  name  of  the  same  place,  and
see  MARCABOTH.  T.  K.  c.

SAPH  (?|p),  2  S.  21  18  ;  in  i  Ch.  204  SII-PAI.

SAPHAT  (C&G>AT  [A]).  i.  i  Esd.  59  =  Ezra24,
SHEPHATIAH,  7.

2.  i  Esd.  5  34  RV,  AV  SABAT,  i.

SAPHATIAS (co4>OT!OY [Bl)> i  Esd.  8  34  =  Ezra

88,  SHEPHATIAH,  7.

SAPHETH  (c<\<t>Yei  [A]),  iEsd.533  AV  =  Ezra257,
SHEPHATIAH  [g.v.  ,  8].

SAPHIR,  or,  rather,  as  RV,  SHAPHIR  (RV  TD'J',
'glittering,  beautiful';  x&Acoc  [BAQ]),  a  place  men
tioned  in  Micah's  elegy  on  towns  of  Judah  (Mic.  In).
Generally  identified  with  Shamir  or  Shaphir  in  the
mountains  of  Judah  (Josh.  1548).  See  SHAMIR.

Eusebius,  however,  places  aa(peip  between  Eleuthero-
polis  and  Ascalon  (OS  29837  151  27)  ;  he  says  that  it  is  in
the  mountain  district,  but  this  is  because  he  supposes  it  to
be  the  ffatfieip  (cp  ©AL)  of  Josh.  1648,  which  is  reckoned
among  the  cities  of  the  mountains.  The  cratpeip  of
Eusebius  may  possibly  be  one  of  the  three  villages
called  Sawafir  in  the  Philistine  plain,  SE.  of  Ashdod.
But  it  is  not  likely  (Gath  being  —  see  Crit.  Bib.  —  very
probably  a  misreading  in  Mic.  1  10)  that  Micah  troubled
himself  about  Philistine  cities.  There  were  doubtless
several  places  called  Shaphir  ;  es-Safinyeh,  near  Bet
Dejan  (BETH-DAGON),  may  be  one  of  them.  The  latter
place  is  too  far  from  Mareshah  to  be  meant  ;  but  there  is
one  spot  which  has  a  good  claim  to  be  called  Shaphir,
'  the  glittering,'  and  may  be  the  place  meant  by  Micah,
even  if  it  be  also  the  Mizpeh  (nssan)  of  Josh.  1038,  and
that  is  that  tall  white  cliff  which  commands  the  entrance
to  the  Wady  es-Sant  from  the  Philistine  plain,  known
to  the  Crusaders  as  Blanche  Garde,  and  to  Arabic
speakers  of  to-day  as  Tell  es-Safiyeh,  '  the  shining  hill.'
See  MIZPEH,  i.  The  prophet  perhaps  foresees  that  the
'brilliance'  (vnBi?)  of  the  far-shining  fortress  will  '  pass
into  captivity'  ("3B:3  izy).  At  the  same  time,  another
view  (see  below)  is  more  probable,  if  the  criticism
summed  up  in  MICAH  (BOOK),  §§  s/,  PROPHET,  §38,
be  in  the  main  correct.

On  the  text  see  Che.  JQR,  July  1898,  and  Crit.  Bib.  Nowack
admits  that  what  MT  gives  must  be  incorrect.  On  the  root
nsr,  'to  glitter'  see  G.  Hoffm.  ZA  TIV  268  (1882).

It  will  be  noticed  that  both  Mizpeh  in  Joshua  and  Shaphir  in
Micah  stand  near  Zenan  or  Zaanan  and  Lachish.  It  is  not  in).
probable,  however,  that  the  lists  in  Josh.  1633^".  (in  part?)  and
also  the  elegy  Mic.  1  10  Jf.  referred  originally  to  the  Negeb.
This  affects  the  situation  of  Shaphir.  See  ZAANAN.

T.  K.  C.


SAPHUTHI

SAPHUTHI  (cAdjyei  [A]),  i  Esd.  533  RY=Ezra
2  57,  SHEPHATIAH,  8.

SAPPHIRA  (c&TTd>eipH=Syr.  Sappira,  'beautiful/
cp  the  frequent  male  name  "VStT  and  the  Sin.  VISIT
[Dalm.  130,  n.  i]),  Acts5i,  the  wife  of  ANANIAS,  q.v.
(10).

SAPPHIRE  CVSD  ;  CAn<J)6lpOC  [BAL]1),  men
tioned  as  a  much-prized  stone  in  Ex.  24 10  28 18  39  n
Job286i6  Cant.5i4  Lam.47  Is.54ti  Ezek.  126  lOi
2813  Tobitl3i6;  to  which  we  can  now  add,  from  the
self-evidently  correct  Hebrew  text,  Ecclus.  43  19  [of  the
hoar-frost],  '  he  makes  it  to  bloom  with  flowers  like
sapphire,'  and  in  N'T  Rev.  21 19,  where  R\'"'t-'-  has
'lapis  lazuli.'  The  marg.  rendering  just  cited  is
correct  ;  \\  herever  '  sapphire '  occurs  in  the  above
passages  we  should  mentally  interpret  'lapis  lazuli.'
That  lapis  la/.uli  was  the  sapphire  of  the  ancients  is
plain  from  Theophrastus  (p.  692)  and  Pliny  (HN
37s8/. ).  Theophrastus  states  that  it  is  uffirtp  ^yorcri-
Tracrroj  (as  it  were  sprinkled  with  gold  dust),  and
Pliny  says,  Inest  ei  (cyano)  aliquando  et  aureus  pulvis
qualis  in  sapphiris,  in  iis  enim  aurum  punctis  conlucet
(cp  xxxiii.  31  aurum  in  sapphiro  scintillat).  Such  a
description  would  be  quite  inappropriate  to  any  variety
of  the  modern  sapphire,  but  applies  very  well  to  the
lapis  lazuli,  which  frequently  contains  disseminated
particles  of  iron  pyrites,  easily  mistaken  by  their  colour
and  lustre  for  particles  of  gold.

Lapis  lazuli  was  so  much  prized  by  the  Assyrians,
Babylonians,  and  Egyptians  (see  LAPIS  LAZULI)  that
we  should  expect  to  find  it  sometimes,  or  even  often,
referred  to  in  the  old  Hebrew  writings.  We  must,
however,  omit  from  the  list  of  occurrences  Job 28 6  (see
below),  Cant.  5i4,2  and  Lam.  4?.  The  identification  of
sappir  with  this  stone  throws  light  on  the  description  of
the  appearance  of  the  Most  High  in  Ex.  24io(J)  and
Ezek.  1 26.  According  to  J,  where  the  divine  form
stood,  it  was  '  as  the  very  heaven  for  clearness,  like  a
paved  work  of  sapphire  stone'  (see  PAVEMENT);
according  to  Kzekiel,  the  base  of  the  throne  of  God
was  something  like  a  firmament  (see  (5),  above  which
was  a  sapphire-coloured  pavement  (see  Toy,  '  Ezekiel,'
SHOT).  In  fact,  the  '  gold  dust '  on  the  deep  blue
of  the  lapis  lazuli  made  this  stone  a  most  appropriate
symbol  of  '  this  brave  o'er-hanging  firmament,  this
majestical  roof  fretted  with  golden  fire.'

This,  however,  is  merely  a  plausible  interpretation  ;  the  text
does  not  expressly  refer  to  the  star-like,  gold-like  particles
which  add  lustre  to  the  deep  blue  of  the  lapis  lazuli.  It  has
been  thought  by  some  (Hitz.,  Bu.,  Du.)  that  such  a  reference  is
to  be  found  in  a  section  where,  if  anywhere,  we  should  certainly
expect  to  find  it,  viz.,  in  Job2S.  This  is  how  Duhm  renders
"'.  6, —

His  stones  are  the  place  of  the  sapphire,
Which  has  grains  of  dust  of  gold.

If  this  is  right,  we  need  not  have  hesitated  elsewhere  (see
OPHIR)  to  connect  'Ophir'  with  Ass.  <•/>-«  =  Heb.  1Et'.  But  the
truth  is  that  -|t;y  properly  means,  not  dust,  but  a  lump  of  earth  ;
JViBJ?  is  not  the  word  which  a  Hebrew  poet  would  have  chosen
for  the  '  aureus  pulvis '  of  which  Pliny  speaks.  The  passage
needs  very  careful  treatment.  TSD,  'sapphire,' should  be  rps
'silver.'  See  GOLD,  §  i,  col.  1750,  foot.

The  name  by  which  our  modern  sapphire  was  known
to  the  ancients  is  vdnivOos  or  hyacinthus,  the  stone
which  forms  the  eleventh  foundation  of  the  wall  of  the
New  Jerusalem  (Rev.  21  20).  See  JACINTH.  The
colourless  sapphire  may  perhaps  be  intended  by  the
haStnal  (halmis  ?)  or  farfi'I.  See  TARSHISH  (STONE
OF),  STONES  (PRECIOUS),  §§  $c,  (2),  n.  T.  K.  c.

SARA,  RV  SARAH,  i.  On  Heb.  11  n  see  SARAH,
§  i,  end.

1  T23  in  Tg.  is  KT'13?,  '*+«*>• See  Pott  in  .? AM/ 4  275.

-  In  Cant.  5  14  an  intolerable  hyperbole  is  removed  by  read
ing  C-r:S, 'red  coral';  in  Lam.47,  we  should  read,  'Their
skin  glitters  like  coral,  (even)  the  blight  colour  of  their  flesh'
("inN2  for  T23;  cp  LAMENTATIONS,  §  5).

4283


1.  Traditions,


SARAH

2.  Sappa  [BKA],  the  daughter  of  Raguel  and  the  heroine  of
the  book  of  TOUIT  [q.v.}  (Tob.  3  7/.).  Seven  of  her  bridegrooms
were  killed  by  the  evil  spirit  AS.MOUEUS  [q.v.],  and  she  finally
became  the  wife  of  Tobit.

SARABIAS  (CAP&BIAC  [BA1]),  i  Esd.  948,  in  Ezra
818  SHEREBIAH.

SARAH  (i"nw'p  §  44;  CApp&  ;  sara),  and  SARAI
CT^'  ;  C&p&  ;  sarai),  wife  of  Abraham.

There  is  but  one  reference  to  Sarah  in  the  OT  outside
the  Pentateuch,  viz.  in  Is.  51  2,  which  is  hardly  of

date ^ the »«?  of  Ezra;
ere  is  a  play  on  iwamm '  stones

and  bdnim  'sons';  cp  Mt.  89).  The  three  most
conspicuous  features  of  her  story  are:  (i)  her  twofold
relation  to  Abraham  as  his  wife  and  his  sister  (12  12/.
[J],  20  12  [E]),  on  which  see  §  2  ;  (2)  her  long  barren
ness  (llao,  16  1/.),  a  feature  paralleled  in  the  story  of
Rebekah  and  of  Rachel,  of  Samson's  mother  and  of
Samuel's,  and,  in  Babylonian  legend,  of  the  wife  of  the
hero  Etana  (cp  ETHAN)  ;  and  (3)  her  extraordinary
beauty,  which  is  mentioned  to  account  for  the  danger  from
which  the  destined  mother  of  Isaac  so  narrowly  escaped
(12io^  20).  The  change  of  her  name  from  Sarai  to
Sarah  is  related  (by  P),  together  with  that  of  Abram  to
Abraham,  in  connection  with  the  announcement  of  the
birth  of  Isaac  (17  15^)-  The  Priestly  Writer  avoids
attributing  unbelief  to  so  favoured  a  woman  ;  but  the
Yahwist,  with  perfect  simplicity  and  with  true  insight
into  the  heart  of  woman,  reports  that  Sarah  'laughed
within  herself  (18  12^!  ;  cp  ISAAC).  According  to  P,
she  died  at  Hebron  (282),  an  event  which  led  to  the
purchase  by  Abraham  of  the  cave  of  Machpelah  (cp
23,  25  10,  4931).  According  to  J,  if  24  67  is  correct,
Isaac  brought  his  bride  Rebekah  '  into  his  mother
Sarah's  tent,'  and  'was  comforted  after  his  mother's
death.'  But  the  text  is  plainly  incorrect,  and  must
originally  have  run  thus,  '  And  Isaac  brought  her  into
the  tent  .  .  .  and  Isaac  was  comforted  after  his  father's
death.  '  1

Reference  is  made  to  Sarah  in  Heb.  11  n,  in  i  Pet.  36  (cp
Gen.  18  12),  and  in  Gal.  421-31,  where  she  becomes  a  type  of  the
heavenly  Jerusalem  (cp  HAGAR,  §  3),  just  as  in  Is.  51  2  Sarah
appears  as  the  mother  of  the  true  Israel.  One  could  almost
venture  to  believe  that  the  writer  of  the  passage  in  Gal.  used  a
book  of  extracts  from  the  prophets,  in  which  chap.  51  (with  its
pointed  reference  to  Sarah)  and  chap.  54  (with  its  encouraging
address  to  childless  Zion,  soon  to  become  the  antitype  of  Sarah)
were  brought  into  close  proximity.

Various  opinions  have  been  held  as  to  the  meaning

of  Sarai, which, according  to P  (Gen.  17  15), was  the

„ ~  . . ,  earlier  name  of  Abraham's  wife  (see  Di.

le d °"  Gen' l-c')- II  is  Plausible  to  hold
that  Sarai  is  an  old  form  of  Sarah  2  («-  rr,

as  in  Arabic;  cp  Nold.  ZD.MG  40  183  42484;  Lag.
Uebers.  g*f.},  and  that  Sarah  means  'princess,'  or
rather  (through  Assyrian),  'queen.'  W.  R.  Smith,
however,  thought  that  Sarah  and  Israel  had  the  same
origin  (Kinship,  30),  and  to  those  who  question  the
mythological  origin  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  this
view  will  commend  itself  most.  Since  some  conjecture
must  be  offered,  we  may  venture  to  suppose  that  just  ns
Jacob's  marriage  with  Leah  symbolises  the  union  of  the
Jacob  clan  and  the  Levi  clan  (see  JACOB,  §  3),  so
Abraham's  marriage  with  Sarah  expresses  the  union  of
a  Jerahmeelite  clan  (omrK  for  crrax  ;  see  JERAHMEEL,
§  4  L>'])  with  a  clan  calling  itself  by  the  name  which
underlies  Israel  ;  thus  Sarah  would  correspond  to  Israel
as  LEAH  [</.v.  ]  probably  corresponds  to  Levi.  The
explanation  of  '  Sarah  '  as  '  princess  '  or  (Ass.  )  '  queen,'
is  usually  thought  to  be  paralleled  by  Milcah  =  Malcah,
'  queen,'  and  the  mythological  interpretation  of  'queen  '
as  'queen  of  heaven'  by  Assyrian  and  Babylonian
titles  of  goddesses,  especially  of  the  consort  of  Sin,
the  moon-god  of  Harran,  who  is  called  Sarratu  (Sumerian

, 1  See  We.  CH  29  f.  ; Kautzsch-Socin,  Genesis,  53  ; Bacon,
Gen.  150,  246.
-  Jensen,  7.  A,  1896,  p.  299.

4284


SAEAH

nin-gal}.1  The  present  writer's  objection  to  this  other
wise  plausible  view  is  that  he  regards  '  Milcah '  in  Gen.
1129,  etc.,  as  certainly  corrupt,  and  that  (if  we  feel
compelled  to  hold  that  there  is  only  one  Haran — viz.  in
the  north)  the  correctness  of  '  Haran'  seems  to  him  to  be
in  the  stories  of  the  patriarchs  also  open  to  suspicion
(see  HARAN  ii.,  MILCAH).  It  is  true,  Winckler  is  of
opinion  2  that  the  twofold  relation  of  Abraham  to  Sarah
as  husband  and  brother  is  undoubtedly  of  mythological
origin.  Following  Stucken,  he  regards  the  role  of
Abraham  as  analogous  to  that  of  Tammuz-Adonis  in
relation  to  Istar  (see  the  legend  of  the  Descent  of  Istar,
and  cp  TAMMUZ)  ;  Sarah  in  fact  is  the  Hebrew  Istar.
Their  father  is  Terah,  or,  more  probably,  Jerah,  '  the
moon '  ;  he  comes  from  one  centre  of  moon-worship,
Uru,  and  dies  in  another,  Haran  (see  TERAH).
But  the  textual  basis  of  this  hypothesis  is  not  less
doubtful,  or  rather,  being  broader,  even  more  doubtful
than  that  of  Jensen  already  mentioned.  Baethgen,
without  criticising  the  text,  is  equally  opposed  to  mytho
logical  theories  of  this  sort.  He  thinks  (Beitr.  157)
that,  as  applied  to  the  wife  of  Abraham,  the  name
Sarah  is  simply  an  appellative.  Both  Abu-ramu  and
Sarai  or  Saraia3  (Sa-ra-a-a)  occur  as  names  of  individuals
on  Babylonian  tablets.  But,  plausible  as  Baethgen's
view  may  at  first  appear,  it  is  not  really  probable.  To
hold  that  Abraham  and  Sarah  are  historical  characters,
is  a  perfectly  unnecessary  concession  to  apologetic
arguments,  which,  if  permitted  to  have  consequences,
would  destroy  historical  criticism  and  carry  us  back  to
the  unsympathetic  attacks  and  the  uncomprehending
defences  of  the  theologians  and  rationalists  of  the  pre-
critical  period  (cp  AKRAHAM).  We  are  therefore
driven  back  to  the  theory  first  mentioned.  The
marriage  of  Abraham  and  Sarah  symbolises  a  union
of  tribes.  Sarah  represents  the  Israel  clan  which  joins
a  Jerahmeelite  clan,  whose  centre  is,  according  to  our
text,  at  Hebron,  but,  according  to  a  corrected  text,  at
RF.HOBOTH  [t/.v.~\.  The  variation  of  tradition  as  to
Abraham's  relation  to  Sarah  is  exactly  parallel  to  the
variation  as  to  Xahor's  relation  to  Abraham  in  Gen.
1X24  and  27.

Von  Gall's  attempt  (Altisrael.  Knits  fatten,  57  f.)  to  combine
two  opposite  theories,  representing  Sarai  as  the  numen  of
Machpelah,  and  Sarah  as  the  consort  of  the  divinity  Abram,
implies  that  the  arguments  for  the  two  theories  are  equally
balanced,  which  is  hardly  the  case.  X.  K.  C.

SARAH  (!"nb,  pausal  form  for  PHE'),  Num.2646
AV,  RV  SERAH.

SARAIAS.  i.  (c&p&ioy  [BAL]),  i  Esd.  55  =
SERAIAH,  7.

2.  (o-apaiou  [AL]),  i  Esd.  8  i  =  Ezra  7  i,  SERAIAH,  7.

SARAMEL  (i  Mace.  1428),  RV  ASARAMEL.

SARAPH  (>)^',  a  kind  of  serpent  ;  see  SERPENT,
§  i  [9]  ;  CAIA  [B],  c&p&(p  [AL]),  a  name  in  an  obscure
Judahite  genealogy,  i  Ch.  422.

SARCHEDONUS  (c^xepAoNOC  [BN],  AAN  [A]),
Tob.  1 21  EV,  AVme-  ESAR-HADDON  ;  see  ACHIA-
CHARUS,  i.

SARDEUS,  i  Esd.  9 28  =  Ezra  10 27,  AZIZA.

SARDINE  STONE  (capAioc).  Rev.43  AV,  RV
SARDIUS.

SARDIS (capAeic), Rev.  In 814. The  oldest

1  Jensen, ZA, 1896, p. 299. Hence Winckler (GI 2  72)
regards  both  Abraham  and  Sarah  as  originally  lunar  deities.
This  is  methodical ;  only  the  mythological  interpretation  seems
to  the  present  writer  to  be  in  this  case  forbidden  by  the  results
of  a  careful  examination  of  the  text.

2  Gf  223  ;  cp  Stucken,  Astralmythen,  1  u.

3  Sa-ra-a is  given as the name  of  a  Jewish  woman  on  a
Babylonian  tablet  (K.  1274),  of  the  Sargonide  period,  translated
by  Johnston,  Assyrian  Epistolary  Literature,  Baltimore,  1898,
P-  iT4-

4285


SARDIS

form  of  the  name  in  Greek  is  SopSier  (Ionic),  accusat.  2apits;

the  Attic  form  is  SipSeis  ; hence  the  Latin

1. Geography Sardes  or  Sardis; the  later  Greek  form  is

and  history. 2<ip6i«  as  in  Ptol.  and  on  coins,  e.g.,  2ap6t9

'Aa-t'as  AuSc'as'KAAdfios  fi>)Tp67roA.is  (see  Head,

Hist.  Numm.  553).

Sardis  lay  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Tmolus  (mod.  Boz-dath],
on  a  spur  of  which  its  citadel  was  placed  (Herod.  1  84).
It  was  an  old  city,  perhaps  the  last  western  outpost  of
that  early  non-Aryan  empire  (of  the  Hittites?)  which
extended  to  Carchemish  on  the  Euphrates.  The  valley
of  the  Hermus  was  the  centre  of  a  monarchy  which  for
a  long  time  owed  allegiance  perhaps  to  the  Phrygian
kingdom  farther  inland,  when  that  arose  through  the
incoming  of  the  Aryan  Phryges  from  Europe,  according
to  Greek  tradition  (Herod.  773).  The  Cimmerian  inva
sion  which  broke  the  Phrygian  power  (about  720  B.C.)
enabled  the  Lydian  kingdom  on  the  Hermus  to  play  an
independent  part  under  the  dynasty  of  the  Mermnadee,
beginning  with  Gyges  (see  LVDIA).  Sardis  was  the
capital  of  the  Lydian  kingdom.1  Lying  as  it  did  on  a
strong  hill  about  4  m.  S.  of  the  river  Hermus,  command
ing  the  fertile  plain  (Strabo,  626),  and  the  commence
ment  of  the  old  Hittite  route  through  northern  Asia
Minor  (later  the  royal  road  of  the  Persian  empire),
the  city  was  marked  out  for  a  great  career.  In  addition
to  its  other  advantages,  the  gold-bearing  stream  of  the
Pactolus  flowed  through  its  agora  past  the  temple  of
Cybele  on  its  way  to  the  Hermus,  and  was  for  long  a
source  of  revenue  (Herod.  5  101  193;  Strabo,  I.e.}.  Yet
the  Greek  cities  on  the  coast  constituted  an  obstacle  to  its
progress,  and  held  the  chief  share  of  the  wealth  derived
from  the  trade  with  inner  Asia.  Hence  the  first  task
of  the  monarchs  of  Sardis  was  the  subjugation  of  these
cities,  and  especially  the  utter  destruction  of  Smyrna,
the  nearest  and  most  formidable  rival  of  their  capital.
Under  Croesus  (about  560  B.  C. )  Sardis  was  at  the  height
of  her  prosperity.  From  her  mint  were  issued  rudely
executed  electrum 2  staters  as  early  as  the  reign  of
Gyges  —  the  first  European  coinage  (Herod.  194;
Xenoph.  ap.  Jul.  Poll.  9  83) — and  later,  in  the  time  of
Croesus,  pure  gold  and  silver  coins  bearing  figures  of  the
lion  and  the  bull,  symbolical  perhaps  of  the  worship  of
the  sun  and  the  moon  (see  Head,  Hist.  Numm.  545/. ).
The  trade  of  the  city  must  have  been  largely  concerned  with
the  manufacture  of  woollen  goods.  The  art  of  dyeing  wool  is
said  to  have  been  invented  at  Sardis,  and  the  city  was  the  centre
for  the  distribution  of  the  woollen  goods,  the  raw  material  of
which  was  furnished  by  the  vast  flocks  of  Phrygia (Herod.  549).
We  have  frequent  allusion  to  the  excellence  of  the  dyed  stuffs  of
Sardis  (cp  Aristoph.  Pax,  1174  ;  Sappho,  frg.  19,  Bergk  ;  Athen.
2  30).

After  its  conquest  by  Cyrus,  Sardis  became  the
residence  of  the  Persian  satrap  (Paus.  iii.  9s  ;  cp  Anthol.
Pal.  9423).  During  the  three  centuries  following  the
death  of  Alexander  the  Great  its  history  is  obscure  ;  but
under  the  Romans  it  became  again  important.  It  was
the  centre  of  a  conventus  juridicits,  which  embraced
Philadelphia.  Its  position  made  it  a  natural  knot  in  the
Roman  road-system  ;  from  it  a  road  ran  NW.  through
Thyatira  (36  R.  m.)  to  Pergamos  ;  another  W.  to
Smyrna  (54  R.  m. )  ;  a  third  E.  through  Phrygia;  a
fourth  SE.  through  Philadelphia  (28  R.  m.)  to  the  im
portant  towns  of  the  Mreander  valley  ;  a  fifth  S\Y.  to
Ephesus,  crossing  Mt.  Tmolus  and  the  valley  of  the
Cayster  (about  63  R.  m.).3  We  have  in  this  fact  the
explanation  of  the  position  of  Sardis  as  one  of  the  Seven
Churches  of  Asia.  (Note  that  the  order  of  names  in
Rev.  follows  the  line  of  the  Roman  road,  N.  from
Ephesus  through  Smyrna  to  Pergamos,  where  it  turns
and  runs  down  S.  along  the  great  road  going  through
Thyatira,  Sardis,  Philadelphia  to  Laodicea,  taking  the
towns  in  their  true  geographical  order. )

1  Sardis  is  an  old  Lydian  word  meaning  '  year  '  (Joh.  Lyd.  39
[Rams. Hist. Geogr. of  AM  121]). The  modern name is
Sart.

2  Cp  Soph.  Antig.  1037,  TWO  SapSewi-  ifaticrpov. Cp  Herod.
ISO.

3  For  the  Roman  roads,  see  Ramsay,  Hist.  Geogr. rf  AAT

**1  f-

4286


SARDITE


SARGON


In  17  A.I).  Sarclis  suffered  fearfully  from  the  great  earthquake
that  ravaged  Asia  Minor  in  that  year  (cp  Antliol.  J'al.  it  423).!
She  received  a  subsidy  from  the  emperor's  privy  purse,  together
with  remission  of  taxation  for  a  period  of  five  years  (Str.  627  ;
Tac.  Ann.'l+i).  By  26  A.D.  the  town  is  again  in  a  flourishing
condition  (Str.  625,  calls  it  a  '  great  city  '),  and  vies  with  Smyrna
for  the  honour  of  erecting,  as  representative  of  the  Asiatic  cities,
a  temple  to  Tiberius  (Tac.  Ann.  455).

As  regards  the  reference  to  Sardis  in  the  XT,  there  is
little  allusion  to  the  special  circumstances  of  the  town.
The  thrice  -  repeated  mention  of  garments  may  have
been  suggested  by  the  staple  industry.  In  v.  i  the
words  '  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead  '
throw  a  light  upon  the  decay  of  spiritual  life  in  Sardis
about  100  A.  i).  (cp  v.  2)  —  perhaps  as  a  result  of  un
disturbed  mercantile  prosperity  leading  to  luxury  and
apathy  (v.  3).  In  84  the  phrase  '  which  have  not  defiled
their  garments,'  may  well  remind  us  of  what  we  hear  from
other  sources  of  the  voluptuous  habits  of  the  Lydians
(cp  Herod.  155  179;  ^Esch.  Pers.  41  ;  Athen.  1257).

w.  j.  w.


SARDITE  (nnp),  Xu.  2626AV,  RV  SKREIJITE.

SARDIUS.  i.  A  precious  stone  'odeni  (D"1X)  occurs
in  P  as  one  of  the  gems  of  the  high-priestly  breastplate
(Ex.  2817  39  10),  whence,  among  others,  it  is  assigned
by  an  interpolator  for  the  adornment  of  the  king  of
Tyre  (or  Missur?)in  Ezek.  28i3t-  The  EV  rendering
'  sardius  '  follows  (5  (ffdpdiov)  ;  Josephus  also,  in  de
scribing  the  sacred  breastplate,  has  ffdpdiov  in  11  J  v.  67,
but  in  Ant.  iii.  76,  ffa.p5ovv£,  'sardonyx.'  RV't-'-  gives
'ruby,'  but  with  doubtful  justification  (see  RUBY,  CAR
BUNCLE).  (rdpdiov  also  occurs  in  Rev.  21  20,  and  (so
Ti.  \VH  and  RV)  in  Rev.  43.  The  Hebrew  gem-name
'  odftn  is  usually  derived  from  E~IN,  '  to  be  red  '  ;  if  so,
the  carnelian  may  be  plausibly  identified  with  the  'odem
of  the  OT.  Probably  the  ancients  meant  this  identifica
tion,  though  the  sardius  in  modern  parlance  means  the
brown  chalcedony,  the  red  being  our  carnelian.  The
meaning  of  the  word  carnelian  is  obvious.  The  vivid
ness  of  the  red,  flesh-like  hue-  determines  the  estimation
in  which  it  is  held.  In  ancient  times,  as  in  our  own
day,  this  stone  is  more  frequently  engraved  than  any
other.  Pliny  (HN  37  7)  speaks  of  the  sardius  of  Babylon
as  of  greater  value  than  that  of  Sardis.  The  Hebrews
would  naturally  obtain  the  carnelian  from  Arabia.  In
Yemen  there  is  found  a  very  fine  dark-red  kind,  which
is  called  el-akik  (Niebuhr,  Beschreib.  142).  The  Arabs
wear  it  on  the  ringer,  on  the  arm  above  the  elbow,  and
in  front  of  the  belt.  Cp  STONES  (PRECIOUS)  §§

4.  *(i).  7-

This,  as  we  have  said,  is  the  current  identification.  When,
however,  we  refer  to  Ezek.  '27  16  where  among  the  articles
supplied  to  Tyre  (or  Missur?)  by  Edom  (so  Cornill,  Toy,  etc.,
read,  following  (0)  we  find,  close  together  niJDNT  and  "mD  (°r
perhaps  [see  RUBY]  -oisXthe  suspicion  grows  upon  us  that  (as  in
Job  28  is,  according  to  TARSHISM  [STONE]  §  3)  niCiO  springs  from
1~JO,  and  this  from  'D~\K,  '  Edomite  stone,'  and  "in  3  from

VXDrlTi  '•''•>  Jerahmeelite  stone  (for  a  parallel,  see  RUBY),  so
that  we  are  entirely  ignorant  of  more  than  the  name  of  the
regions  from  which  the  people  of  Palestine  derived  these  stones.
If  so,  all  renderings  must  be  purely  conventional.

2.  DIE', sokani, is in © of Ex.  25  6  [7] 809 trdpSiov. See
ONYX;  STONES  (PRECIOUS),  §§4,  />(3),  18.

3.  trdp&Loi/  occurs  also  in  <B  in  Prov.  25  n/;,  where  it  repre
sents  apparently  both r.aa  and cm,  but  really  perhaps  only
CrU  (see  co1-  499,  n.  i)-  T.  K.  C.

SARDONYX  (D^iT,  Ex.28i8  RV">s-)  in  modern
mineralogy,  is  a  name  applied  to  those  varieties  of  onyx,
or  stratified  chalcedony,  which  exhibit  white  layers
alternating  with  others  of  red  or  brown  colour.  The
brown  chalcedony  is  known  to  modern  mineralogists  as
sard  and  the  red  as  carnelian  (see  CHALCEDONY,

1  This  earthquake  destroyed  twelve  cities  of  Asia,  Plin.  HN
284  I  Tac.  Ann.,  I.e.,  where  see  nott-  in  Furneaux  ed.

2  The  Ok.  o-opfiioi/  too  has  been  thought  to  derive  its  name
from  its  colour  (cp  Pers.  serai,  'yellowish  red'?),  though  the
(  Jreeks  themselves  supposed  the  name  to  be  derived  from  Sardis,
the  place  where they  first became  acquainted  with  it. See
SARDONYX.

4287


SARDIUS).  The  simplest  and  commonest  type  of
sardonyx  contains  two  strata  —  a  thin  layer  of  white
chalcedony  resting  upon  a  ground  of  either  carnelian  or
sard  ;  but  the  sardonyx  of  ancient  writers  generally
presented  three  layers  —  a  superficial  stratum  of  red,  an
intermediate  band  of  white,  and  a  base  of  dark  brown
chalcedony.  The  sardonyx  has  always  been  a  favourite
stone  with  the  cameo-engraver,  and  the  finest  works
have  usually  been  executed  on  stones  of  five  strata.
Such,  for  instance,  is  the  famous  Carpegna  cameo,  in
the  Vatican,  representing  the  triumph  of  Bacchus  and
Ceres,  and  reputed  to  lie  the  largest  work  of  its  kind
ever  executed  (16  inches  by  12).  When  the  component
layers  of  a  sardonyx  are  of  fine  colour  and  sharply
defined,  the  stone  is  known  in  modern  parlance  as  an
'Oriental  sardonyx'  —  a  term  which  is  used  without
reference  to  the  geographical  source  whence  the  stone
is  obtained.  A  famous  ancient  locality  for  sard  was  in
Babylonia,  and  the  name  of  the  stone  may  be  of
Persian  origin  (see  preceding  col.  n.  2).  The  sardonyx
is  frequently  stained,  or  at  least  its  colour  heightened,
by  chemical  processes.  Imitations  are  fabricated  by
cementing  two  or  three  layers  of  chalcedony  together,
and  so  building  up  a  sardonyx  ;  baser  counterfeits
are  formed  simply  of  paste.  See  ONYX.

<mp<56i'vf  (Rev.  21  2ot)  does  not  occur  in  (P.  But  RVmg.
unaccountably  has  sardonyx  for  yahalom  (G^.T)  in  Ex.  28  18
(EV  'diamond'),  though  it  passes  over  Ex.  39  n  and  Ezek.
2$  13  without  remark.


SAREA (sAREstM, -IAM), 4  Esd.  1424, a scribe.
The  name  is  doubtless  the  same  as  SERAIAH  [<?.v.~\.

SAREPTA  (c&perrT*. [Ti. WH]), Lk.  4z6f  AV,
RV  ZAREPHATH.


SARGON


Claim  to  throne  (§  i).
Policy  (§  2).
Early  troubles  (§  3).
In  the  West  (§  4/1)
In  the  North  (§§  6-8).
The  West  again  (§  gf.).


The  North  again  (§§  11-14).
The  North-west  (§  15  f.\
Ashdod(§  17).
Babylon  (§  18).
Closing  years  (§  19).
Isaiah  (§  20).
Bibliography  ($  21).

Sargon (p^lp  ; ApNd. [BXAQF], c&pAf^> [Acl-

Theod. ],  CAPTION  [Symm.  in  Qm«-]  ;  Assyrian,  Sarru-

_.  . iikin ,  '  He  [the  god]  has  established  the

'. . , '  king')  was  the  successor  of  Shalmaneser

\nrone°  IV'  as  king  °f  Asf>'ria;  *' c  722-705.  He
is  often  called  ^arritkin  arku,  '  Sargon
the  later,'  to  distinguish  him  from  Sargon  of  Akkad,  one
of  the  earliest  and  grandest  rulers  of  Babylonia,  in  the
third  millennium  B.C.  Sargon  II.  had  apparently  little
difficulty  in  seizing  the  reins  of  power,  for  according  to
the  Babylonian  Chronicle  (A'H  2276  //.  29^)  Shal
maneser  died  in  the  month  of  Tebetu  B.C.  722,  and
Sargon  sat  on  the  throne  in  Assyria  on  the  22nd  of
the  same  month.  By  what  claim  he  succeeded  he  no
where  tells  us,  nor  does  he  ever  mention  his  father  or
ancestry.  His  son  Sennacherib  usually  claims  descent
from  him,  but  on  his  entry  into  Babylon  seems  to  have
put  forward  a  claim  to  descent  from  Gilgames  and  the
mythical  heroes  of  the  past,  through  a  long  line  of
Assyrian  and  Babylonian  kings.  Sargon's  grandson
Ksarhaddon  put  forward  a  claim  to  be  the  remote
descendant  of  Bel-bani  son  of  Adasi,  an  ancient  king  of
Assyria  not  otherwise  known  to  us.  The  sons  of
Ksarhaddon,  Asur-bani-pal  and  Samas-sum-ukin,  adopt
his  claim  to  royal  descent.  We  need  not  contemptu
ously  reject  their  claim,  since  it  may  have  come  to  them
through  Esarhaddon's  mother.  On  the  other  hand  we
are  bound  to  admit  his  right  to  be  called  mukln  isdi
mdti,  '  founder  of  a  dynasty. '  Further,  his  evident
partiality  for  the  old  capital  Assur,  which  he  invariably
styles  '  my  city,'  and  the  epithet  piru  Afsur.  '  offspring
of  Assur, '  so  often  applied  to  him  by  his  descendants,
point  to  his  having  come  from  that  city.

Sargon  II. certainly  represents  the  return  to  power

4288


SARGON

in  Assyria  of  the  old  aristocracy,  as  the  restorer  of  the

2  His  nolicv  nncient  burgher  rights  and  privileges
^  *'  in  the  old  capitals  Assur  and  Harran,
and  later  the  consolidator  of  his  empire  by  the  extension
of  like  freedom  to  the  cities  cf  Babylonia.  His  scrupu
lous  regard  for  the  claims  of  ancient  titles  to  land,
whether  temple  endowments  or  ancestral  domains,  and
his  careful  restoration  of  rights  taken  away  by  fraud
or  violence,  tyranny  or  conquest,  both  in  Assyria  and
(later)  in  Babylonia,  were  repeatedly  set  forth  by  him  as
justifications  for  a  turn  which  he  wished  to  give  to  his
own  name  Sarrukinu,  'the  true  king.'  The  fact  that
the  achievements,  which  later  writers  ascribe  to  Sargon
of  Akkad,  bear  such  close  resemblance  to  the  historical
events  of  Sargon  II. 's  reign,  has  tempted  some  to  doubt
the  historical  worth  of  the  earlier  parallels.  It  is  not  un
likely  that  Sargon  II.,  who  may  have  taken  the  name
Sarrukin  on  coming  to  the  throne,  deliberately  set  to
work  to  revive  the  glories  of  the  ancient  Sargon.

Sargon  II.  did  not  immediately  enter  into  full  posses
sion  of  the  empire  which  Tiglath-pileser  III.
j, . had  conquered  and  Shalmaneser

troubles. IV.  seems  to  have  retained. .The

change  of  dynasty  was  the  signal
for  a.  general  rebellion  of  the  outlying  tributary
states.  There  could  not  have  been  much  of
the  year  B.C.  722  left  when  he  was  acknow
ledged  successor  in  Assyria  ;  but  before  the
end  of  his  accession  year,  Merodach-baladan
II.,  a  Chaldcean  king  of  Bit  Yakin,  who  had
submitted  and  paid  tribute  to  Tiglath-pileser
III.,  had  moved  his  hordes  of  nomad  sup
porters  into  Babylonia,  and  in  Nisan  B.C.  721
sat  on  the  throne  of  Babylon.  The  army  of
Humbanigas,  king  of  Elani,  invaded  N.
Babylonia,  and  Sargon  had  to  meet  both.
Fortunately  Samaria,  after  a  '  three '  years'
siege,  had  just  fallen,  and  so  probably  released
an  army.  Sargon  fought  with  Humbanigas
in  the  rcbitu  of  Durilu,  and  both  sides  claimed
the  victory.  Merodach  -  baladan  seems  to
have  arrived  too  late  to  engage  in  battle.
Humbanigas,  either  incensed  at  this  lack  of
support,  or  too  shattered  to  renew  the  strife
even  with  such  reinforcement,  returned  to
Elam.  Sargon  did  not  pursue  him,  or
venture  to  attack  Merodach  -  baladan  ;  but
Durilu  and  all  N.  Babylonia  remained  in
Sargon's  hands.  Merodach-baladan  indeed
reigned  twelve  years  in  Babylon  and  the  S.  of
Babylonia,  in  spite  of  Sargon,  and  '  contrary
to  the  will  of  the  gods ' ;  but  never  did  he  venture
to  fall  upon  Sargon's  rear  whilst  he  waged  his  wars
incessantly  in  every  other  direction.  On  the  whole
the  advantage  lay  with  Sargon,  who  was  able  to  deal
with  his  enemies  one  by  one  and  crush  them  in  detail,
and  finally  to  turn  the  whole  force  of  his  mighty  empire
on  Babylon.

From  some  of  Sargon's  own  earlier  inscriptions  there
is  reason  to  believe  that  he  did  not  reckon  his  own

4.  Samaria  reign  from  RC'  722  but  from  RC'  ?20'
The  historians  of  Babylon  and  his  own

later  inscriptions,  however,  reckoned  his  regnal  years
from  his  acknowledgment  in  Assur  itself.  Left  un
disturbed  by  his  most  formidable  enemies  in  the  S.  he
turned  his  attention  to  the  reconquest  of  the  W.  In
the  account  of  the  capture  of  Samaria,  and  the  deporta
tion  of  27,290  men,  the  flower  of  the  nation,  Sargon's
annals  record  the  settlement  there  of  captives  from
other  lands.  In  this  the  scribe  surely  anticipates  what
occurred  later,  for  Sargon  had  won  no  victories  at  that
time.  Certainly  Samaria  was  in  a  position  to  join  the
cities  allied  with  Ilu-bi'di  in  B.C.  720.

Doubtless  encouraged  by  the  indecisive  appearance
of  Sargon's  battle  at  Durilu,  relieved  evidently  of  the
Assyrian  army  then  withdrawn  to  the  S. ,  and  urged  on

4289


SARGON

by  the  intrigues  of  Pir'u,  king  of  the  N.  Arabian  land
5  Hamath  °f  Mu?ri'  the  whole  West  seems  to  have
and  Gaza  struck  for  independence.  Ilu-bi'di  (or
lau-bi'di),  an  upstart,  probably  a  creature
of  Pir'u,  had  made  himself  king  of  Hamath.  Such
old  dependencies  of  Assyria  as  Arpad  and  Simirra  joined
him.  Damascus  and  Samaria,  only  lately  captured,
and  partly  no  doubt  peopled  by  exiles  from  other  lands,
who  had  nothing  to  lose  and  hoped  for  revenge,  joined
the  conspiracy.  Hanun  of  Gaza,  once  expelled  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.,  now  supported  by  Sib'e,  the  Tartan
(see  So)  of  Musur,  had  got  back  his  kingdom.
But  though  Ilu-bi'di  was  able  to  collect  a  vast  army  at
Karkar,  Sargon  seems  to  have  swept  them  away  with
ease.  Sargon  followed  up  Hanun  to  Rapihu,  where  he
and  Sib'e  were  defeated.  Hanno  was  captured  and
taken  to  Assur,  Sib'e  fled,  Rapihu  was  plundered.  Syria
and  the  West  remained  quiet  for  some  ten  years,  720-

711 H.C.

Sargon's  most  powerful  enemies  now  lay  in  the  N.


Sargon  and  his  principal  officers.

and NE. Already  Tiglath-pileser III. had  subdued

-y_. . ivlan  and  placed  there  a  vassal  king,  Iranzu.

Beyond that buffer state, however, lay

Zikirtu (Sagartia), probably pressed by the already

encroaching  Cimmerians,  if  not  themselves  an  advance

guard  of  that  horde  of  nomad  barbarians. Their  king

Mitatti  incited two  of  Iranzii's  subject  cities  to  rebel,

and  Iranzu  appealed  to  his  overlord  for  assistance. In

719  B.C.,  accordingly,  Sargon  captured  and  destroyed

these  cities  (Suandahul  and  Durdukku). Three  of  the

.  . cities which had been fortified against

7.  Armenia.  Armenia but  had  gone  over  to Rusa>

king  of  Armenia,  the  instigator  of  most  of  the  trouble

here,  were  captured  and  their  people  deported  to  Syria.

„,  , . In  the  next  year  Kiakki,  prince  of  Sinuhtu,

8.  laoai.  one  of  the  districts  jn  Tabal, had  omitted

to  send  tribute.  He  was  captured  and  taken  with  most
of  his  people  to  Assur.  His  land  was  added  to  that  of
Matti  of  Atun  (Tun,  Tyana),  which  was  subjected  to
_  ,  .  .  a  proportionate  increase  in  tribute.
9.  oarcnemisn.  Nex{  year_  Carchemish  was  dealt  with.

It  had  retained  a  shadow  of  independence,  whilst  its
neighbours  had  lost  theirs,  from  policy  on  the  part  of
Assyria.  The  Assyrian  monarch  was  content  with
loyalty  and  a  rich  tribute,  and  Pisiris  of  Carchernish

4290


SARGON

had  been  loyal  to  Tiglath-pileser  III.  Now,  doubtless
owing  to  fear,  he  had  allied  himself  with  Mita  of
Muski,  and  omitted  to  send  tribute.  He  was  deported
to  Assyria  and  Carchemish  was  peopled  with  Assyrians.
In  this  year,  Umma-nigas,  king  of  Elam,  died  and  was
succeeded  by  Sutruk-nahunta.  The  death  of  Iranzu,
king  of  Man,  reopened  the  north-eastern  question.

Aza,  the  son  of  Iranzfl,  who  succeeded  his  father,  was  murdered
by  Bagdatti  of  UmilcliS,  Mitatti  of  Zikirtu  and  a  ruler  of  Misianda
being  concerned  in  the  conspiracy,  and  Rusa  of  Armenia  being  a
supporter.  Sargon  promptly  marched  into  the  district,  captured
Bagdatti  and  flayed  him  alive  on  the  spot  where  he  had  murdered
Aza.  Ullusunu,  brother  of  Aza,  succeeded  him  on  the  throne
of  Man  with  Sargon's  consent.  But  he  clearly  distrusted  the
power  of  Assyria  to  protect  him  against  Armenia,  and  gave  up
twenty-two  of  his  cities  to  Rusa,  as  a  'present.'  Beyond  Man,
towards  Media,  lay  Karalla  and  Allabra,  two  small  buffer  states,
whose  kings  Asur-li'  and  Itti  had  been  subject  to  Assyria,  if
they  were  not  actually  Assyrians.  Ullusunu  fled  to  the  hills
and  left  his  capital  Izirtu  to  be  captured  and  burned.  Two
other  cities,  Zibia  and  Arma'id,  which  resisted  were  taken.  But
Sargon  had  no  intention  to  hold  permanently,  with  Assyrian
garrisons,  such  a  remote  dependency.  He  accepted  Ullusunu's
submission,  reinstated  him  as  king,  and  caused  him  to  resume
possession  of  the  cities  'presented,'  doubtless  in  fear,  to  Rusa.
The  allies  were  severely  treated,  Asur-li'  of  Karalla  was  slain,
his  people  deported  to  Hamath,  and  his  land  turned  into  an
Assyrian  province.  Itti  of  Allabra,  with  his  family,  was  de
ported  to  Hamath,  and  a  new  vassal  king  set  in  his  place.

Sargon  now  advanced  farther  E.

Surgadia, whose governor Sepa-.sarri had rebelled, was
captured  and,  with  Niksamma,  added  to  the  Assyrian  province
_, of Parsua. Bel-sar-usur,  governor of  Kisesim  in
10.  The \v.  Media,  was  captured,  his  city  made  an  Assyrian
Median colony  and  called Kar-Nabu. Then  a  number  of
Cities Median  cities,  Bit  Sagbat,  Bit  Hirmani,  Bit  Umargi,
Kilambate,  Armangu,  were  taken  and  constituted  a
new  province. Harhar,  whose  governor  Kibaba  had  been  ex
pelled  by  the  inhabitants,  was  captured,  repeopled  with  captives
from  other  lands,  renamed  Kar-Sarriikin,  and  made  the  capital
of  a  new  province. While  settling  the  affairs  of  this  new  district
Sargon received the tribute of twenty -eight Median city
governors.

These  events  are  related  under  716  B.C.  ;  but  the
scribe  seems  to  have  chosen  to  finish  the  story  of  the
Median  conquests  at  once,  rather  than  return  to  it  under
715  B.C.,  when  some  of  the  events  clearly  occurred.

All  this  while  Rusa  of  Armenia  had  continued  to
instigate  rebellions,  which  he  does  not  seem  to  have
openly  supported,  and  would  not  take
warning  by  the  fate  of  his  allies.  As
Ullusunu  had  deserted  his  cause,  he  fell  upon  the
twenty-two  cities  which  had  once  been  presented  him,
took  them  by  force  from  Man,  and  set  up  Daiukku,  a
subject  of  Ullusunu,  as  a  rival  king.  In  715  B.C.,
Sargon  put  down  this  new  kingdom,  deported  Daiukku
to  Hamath,  took  again  the  twenty-two  cities,  and  put
them  under  Assyrian  garrisons.  In  Hupuskia,  Sargon
now  received  the  homage  of  lanzu  of  Na'iri.  Tilusina
of  Andia,  to  whom  Rusa  had  given  the  twenty-two
cities,  was  now  captured.  So  at  last  Ullusunu  was  left
in  undisturbed  possession  of  his  land  as  a  vassal  of
Sargon's.  Harhar,  just  made  into  a  province,  had
already  rebelled  ;  so  it  was  again  reduced,  augmented  by
Assyrianised  territory,  and  strongly  fortified  as  a  garrison
against  the  Medes,  on  whom  a  yearly  tribute  in  horses
was  impose .1.

In  the  X\V. ,  MitA  of  Muski  (see  TUBAL  AND
MESHKCH)  had  annexed  some  cities  from  the  land  of

12 Musko- ^u6 'Cp HoRSK' § 3)- In 7i5 B-C.

'  '  Sargon's troops recaptured them. At

• i. • ' this time, probably, Sargon made his

influence  supreme  over  Tyre  and  extended

it  to  the  '  Ionian  Sea,'  perhaps  to  Cyprus.

In  Arabia  the  tribes  of  Haiapa  (cp  EPHAH,  and  see
A'AT^-l  146/1,  613),  Ibadidi,  Marsimanni,  and  Tamud
had  been  tributaries  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  They  had
neglected  to  send  tribute  to  Sargon  ;  for  how  long  does
not  appear.  He  now  sent  an  expedition  against  them.
They  were  easily  reduced  to  order  and  many  deported
to  Samaria.  Pir'u  of  Musur,  Samsi  queen  of  Arabia,
It'amra  of  Saba,  and  some  of  the  kings  on  the  sea

4291


11.  Armenia.


SARGON

coast  and  in  the  desert  sent  rich  tribute  of  gold,  precious
stones,  ivory,  incense,  spices,  horses,  and  camels.

In  714  B.C.,  Sargon  went  back  to  Man. Ullusunu
received him loyally. Dalta of Ellipi sent presents
from  the  S.  border  of  Media. Zikirtu


_, ,
13.  Deduction

of  Armenia.


waj.  then  attacked Three  fortresses


and  twenty-four  cities  were  taken  and
plundered.  The  capital  Parda  was  burnt,  and  then
Mitatti  with  his  people  disappeared.  Whether  they
migrated  to  the  N.  of  Armenia  and  joined  the  advancing
Gimirri  (see  GOMER),  or  were  swallowed  up  by  them,
or  returned  to  their  old  home  S.  of  the  Black  Sea,  does
not  appear.  Now  Sargon  turned  on  Rusa  of  Armenia
and  defeated  him  with  great  slaughter  and  carried  off
260  of  the  royal  family.  Rusa  rled  to  the  hills.  Sargon
then  went  through  the  regions  which  had  owned  Rusa's
sway,  burnt  and  pillaged  cities,  to  the  number  of  140,
augmented  the  dominions  of  Ullusunu  with  Zihardussu
and  Umildis,  and  reduced  Armenia  to  helplessness.
One  city  deserved  special  vengeance,  Musasir  ( Mushitzar),
whose  prince  Urzana  had  submitted  long  ago  to  Shal-
maneser  IV. ,  taking  an  oath  of  fealty  to  Asur,  but  had
turned  traitor,  and  gone  over  to  Rusa.

Musasir  was  approached  by  difficult  mountain  paths.  Urzana
fled  to  the  hills,  but  his  city  was  soon  taken.  Sargon  makes
much  of  this  capture,  representing  it  on  his  sculptures  at
Khorsabad.  Urzana's  wife  and  family,  6000  of  the  inhabitants,
and  an  immense  booty  of  mules,  asses,  cattle,  gold,  silver,  bronze,
precious  stones,  magnificent  garments,  were  carried  away  to
Assyria.  The  city  was  extraordinarily  wealthy.  Sargon  placed
large  portions  of  Armenia,  probably  all  the  S.  and  E.,  and  the
districts  accessible  from  Lake  Van,  under  his  own  rule,  garrison
ing  the  towns  and  appointing  Assyrian  governors.  Rusa,  in
despair  at  the  irretrievable  ruin  of  his  land,  committed  suicide,
'  like  a  pig.'

In 713 B.C., Sargon was recalled to Ellipi, Bit

Daiukku,  and  Karalli. The  inhabitants  of  Karalli  had

. expelled  his  delegate  and  set  up  Amitassi,

M  H 6r  ^>rother  of  Asur-li',  as  king. Sargon  put

^ e an down  this  rebellion  and  further  extended

Dnque  I  . ^ conquests m Media. The regions

named  are  of  the  highest  importance  for  the  early  history

of  the  Medes. The  Aribi  (named  by  Ptolemy  as  later

in  the  S. of  Gedrosia), the mighty  Mandai, were all

subdued,  and  Sargon  received  the  tribute  of  Ullusunu

of Man, Dalta of Ellipi and Xinib-aplu-iddina of

Allabria.

In  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  the  land  of  Tabal  had
been  conquered  and  its  king  deposed. Tiglath-pileser
had  set  Hulle,  a  man  of  humble  birth,  on


15.  Cilicia
and  Tabal.


the  throne, who seems  to  have been  a


faithful  vassal  till  his  death. Sargon  had

added  the people of Bit Burutas to his dominions.

When  his  son  Ambaris  succeeded,  Sargon  sent  him
j  presents  and  gave  him  his  daughter  to  wife  and  added
j  the  city  of  Hilakku  to  his  territory.  But  Ambaris  was

a  traitor,  and  was  involved  in  the  plots  of  Mita  of
i  Muske  and  Rusa  of  Armenia.  Sargon  now  deprived

him  of  his  throne,  made  his  country  into  an  Assyrian

province, and  deported Ambaris to Assyria  with his

family  and  chief  nobles.

In  712  B.C. Sargon  punished  the  intrigues  of  Tar-

hu-nazi  of  Meliddu. He  had  attacked  Gunzinanu of

_  Kamman, one  of  Sargon's faithful

16.  Commagene  ;  vassaR CUy  after  cky  was  cap.

Togarmara.  tured  Meljddu  the  capitai  fell,  Tar-
hunazi  was  besieged  in  Tulgarimme,  captured,  and
taken  in  chains  to  Assyria.  The  district  was  made  an
Assyrian  province,  a  number  of  fortresses  erected  against
Armenia,  and  against  Muski,  whilst  Meliddu  was
annexed  to  Kummuh.  Next  year,  seemingly,  Gurgum
had  to  be  pacified.  Here  Mutallu  had  slain  his  own
father,  Tarhulara,  and  set  himself  on  his  throne.  The
parricide  was  soon  put  down  and  carried  captive  to
Assyria,  and  his  land  made  an  Assyrian  province.

Once  more  trouble  arose  in  Philistia.  Azuri,  king  of
Ashdod,  had  planned  to  refuse  his  tribute,  and  had
begun  to  negotiate  alliances  with  the  neighbouring

4292


SARGON


SARGON


. ,  , ,
17.  Asnaoa.


states  of  anti-Assyrian  tendencies,  when  Sargon  deposed
him,  and  placed  his  brother  Ahimiti
on  the  throne  ^see  A.SHDOD).  "The

inhabitants,  however,  rebelled  under  the  leadership  of
one  Yamani,  a  common  soldier,  perhaps  an  Ionian
Greek,  or  a  man  from  Yemen,  and  Ahimiti  was  expelled
(see  §  20).  Then  Philistia,  Edom,  Moab,  and  Judah,
relying  on  Pir'u  of  Musri,  joined  the  rebellion.

Sargon  swiftly  sent  his  army  to  the  scene,  captured  Ashdod,
Gath,  Asdudimmu,  and  carried  off  their  inhabitants,  their
gods,  the  palace  treasures,  and  Yamani's  wife  and  children.
Yamani  escaped  to  Musur  ;  he  was,  however,  apparently  cap
tured  by  the  King  of  Meluhha,  and  sent  in  chains  to  Asur.  The
cities  were  rebuilt  and  repeopled  with  captives  from  other
quarters.  Again,  for  the  time,  the  W.  country  was  quiet,
having  received  a  warning  that  no  help  could  be  had  from
Musur.

Those  states  which,  though  hoping  for  Musur's
assistance,  had  avoided  hostile  acts,  seem  to  have  been
unmolested  by  Sargon.  It  is  true,  this  king  does  once
call  himself  musaknis  main  lauda  sa  asarsu  ruku,  '  the
subjugator  of  the  land  of  Judah,  whose  situation  is  far
off'  (KB  2  36  f.  ).  This  has  been  thought  either  to  arise
out  of  a  confusion  between  Israel  and  Judah,  or  to  refer
to  the  Syrian  land  of  Yaudi,  but  may  possibly  point  to
an  otherwise  unrecorded  submission  of  Judah,  con
sequent  on  the  fall  of  Ashdod,  in  720  B.C.  (See
ASHDOD.  )

Now  came  the  crowning  achievement  of  Sargon's
reign.  He  had  humbled  his  enemies  on  every  side,

_  _,  ..  -  secured  his  rear,  accumulated  vast
18  TnG  rfiliftf

' _ , .  treasure,  trained  a  veteran  army,  and

y  '  now  had  at  his  command  the  services
of  countless  slave  warriors  who  had  proved  their  valour
against  him  and  were  now  at  his  disposal.  He  turned
his  resistless  forces  against  MEKODACH-BALADAN,  in
Babylon,  who  had  not  been  able  to  conciliate  the
Babylonians.  His  nomad  supporters  had  been  allowed
to  possess  themselves  of  the  lands  and  property  of
the  old  inhabitants,  doubtless  as  a  reward  for  their
support.  Merodach-baladan  was  unable,  if  he  wished,
to  win  the  affections  of  his  subjects.  They  looked  to
Sargon  to  follow  the  examples  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  and
Shalmaneser  IV.  ,  and  so  to  restore  the  old  privileges  and
rights.  Sargon  first  attacked  the  allies,  Aramaic
peoples  on  the  borders  of  Elam.  Such  tribes  as  the
Gambuli,  Ru'a,  Hindaru,  latburu,  and  Pukudu  were
subdued  and  formed  into  a  new  Assyrian  province  with
Dur-Nabu  for  its  capital.  Holding  this  region,  Sargon
was  safe  from  any  movement  on  the  part  of  Elam,  if
Sutruknahunta  had  cared  to  move.  When  Merodach-
baladan  sent  to  Elam  to  ask  for  his  help,  that  astute
monarch  accepted  the  presents,  but  gave  no  help.
Merodach-baladan  could  not  depend  upon  his  small
band  of  Chaldrean  retainers  to  face  Sargon,  and  fled
when  the  Assyrians  commenced  operations  in  Babylonia
by  the  capture  of  Bit  Dakkuri.

Merodach-baladan  seems  to  have  spent  the  winter  in
the  S.  ,  at  Ikbi-Bel,  which  he  fortified  with  the  greatest
care.  Sargon  made  no  haste  to  follow  him.  Sargon's
objective  was  Babylon.  The  inhabitants  of  Babylon
welcomed  him  as  a  deliverer.  They  went  out  in  a
great  procession  to  Dur-Ladinna,  the  capital  of  Bit
Dakkuri,  and  brought  Sargon  in  triumph  into  the  city
of  Babylon.  There  he  took  possession  of  the  palace  of
Merodach-baladan,  offered  the  regular  offerings  to  the
gods,  and  received  the  tribute  of  the  subjugated  Baby
lonian  states.  Then  he  set  himself  to  restore  order.
He  cleaned  out  and  rebuilt  the  ruined  canal,  from
Borsippa,  which  served  as  the  procession  street  for
Nabu  at  the  Nisan  feast.  Then  in  the  beginning  of  the
year  709  B.C.,  he  'took  the  hands  of  Bel'  and  was
legitimate  monarch  of  Babylon.

Next  month,  Aaru  of  709  B.  c.  ,  Sargon  resumed  his
campaign  against  Merodach-baladan.  The  latter  had
seen  all  his  allies  in  turn  surrender,  so  he  withdrew  to
his  ancestral  domain  Dur  lakin  on  the  Euphrates.
There  he  assembled  the  scattered  remnants  of  his  forces.

4293


He  had  carried  off  in  chains  some  of  the  notables
of  the  S.  Babylonian  cities.  Now  he  set  out  his  camp
under  the  walls  of  the  city  and  protected  it  by  a  wide
moat  filled  by  a  canal  from  the  Euphrates,  broke  down
all  the  bridges,  and  '  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  like  a
swamp  hawk '  awaited  Sargon's  attack.  Sargon  made
his  veterans  '  fly  over  the  waters  like  eagles. '  Merodach-
baladan's  army  was  again  defeated,  under  the  walls  of
the  city  ;  wounded  himself,  he  managed  to  escape  ;  but
his  camp  with  all  its  treasures  fell  into  Sargon's  hands.
The  city  was  soon  after  taken  and  destroyed.  The
captive  notables  were  released  and  reinstated  in  their
old  possessions.  The  old  temple  endowments  were
restored,  the  worships  renewed,  the  deported  gods
brought  back.  The  captured  districts  of  Bit  lakin  on
the  Elamite  frontier  were  resettled  with  captives  from
Kummuh,  and  their  inhabitants  transferred  there.
Fortresses  were  garrisoned  against  Elam,  and  the  old
kingdom  of  Bit  Yakln  became  an  Assyrian  province,
attached  to  the  governor  of  Babylon  and  Gambuli.

These successes secured Sargon further bloodless

triumphs. Upiri,  king  of  Dilmun,  in  the  Persian  Gulf,

_. . sent presents and an embassy of con-

19.  Closing  gratulation Mita of Mujkii vvho had

y  '  been  such  a  trouble  in  past  years,  and
was  now  hard  pressed  by  the  governor  of  Kue,  sent  in
his  submission,  while  Sargon  was  still  engaged  in
latburi.  The  kings  of  seven  Cyprian  cities  sent
presents.  Tyre  also  seems  to  have  desired  friendly
relations.

Sargon's  absence  in  the  S.  affected  other  states  some
what  differently.  In  708  B.C.,  Mutallu  of  Kummuh,
in  collusion  with  Argistis  of  Armenia,  Rusa's  son  and
successor,  threw  off  his  allegiance.  An  army  was  sent
against  him  ;  he  dared  not  meet  it,  and  rled.  His
family  and  possessions  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
conqueror.  Kummuh  became  an  Assyrian  province.
In  the  same  year  arose  troubles  in  Ellipi.  Dalta  had
proved  a  faithful  vassal ;  but  on  his  death  his  sons
Nibe  and  Ispabara  quarrelled  over  the  succession.
Nibe  obtained  assistance  from  Elam,  Ispabara  applied
to  Assyria.  An  Assyrian  army  soon  besieged  Nibe  and
his  Elamite  supporters,  captured  the  capital  Marubisti,
and  brought  Nibe  captive  to  Assyria.  Ispabara  was
duly  set  on  the  throne  as  an  Assyrian  vassal.

The  inscriptions  of  Sargon  extend  no  further,  and
his  last  three  years  are  somewhat  obscure.  He  died  in
705  B.C.,  some  think  by  the  hand  of  an  assassin.

Sargon  was  a  great  builder.  For  the  greater  part  of
his  reign  he  lived  at  Kalah,  but  he  was  all  the  while
building  the  magnificent  city  of  Dur  Sarrukin,  on  the
site  of  the  old  city  of  Maganuba,  in  the  rtbit  (see  RKHO-
BOTH-IR)  of  Nineveh.  The  vast  ruins  of  Dur  Sarrukin
with  its  palaces,  now  the  village  of  Khorsabad,  were
excavated  by  the  French  under  Botta,  Place,  Oppert,
and  others.  They  form  the  most  perfect  type  of  an
Assyrian  city  yet  known.  There  were  found  the  chief
inscriptions  which  give  so  full  an  account  of  Sargon's
reign.  For  a  full  description  of  the  wondrous  halls
with  their  long  series  of  sculpture  and  endless  detail  of
battle  scenes,  we  must  refer  to  Botta  and  Flandin.
Monument  de  Ninez'e.  Sargon's  inscriptions  are  full  of
descriptions  of  the  preparations  for  the  building  of  this
city.  He  ransacked  the  quarries  and  forests  of  Lebanon,
Amanus,  and  the  Syrian  hills  for  wood  and  valuable
stones  to  beautify  his  palace.  He  expended  the  vast
treasures  which  his  conquests  gave  him  in  its  construc
tion,  though  for  the  greater  part  of  the  time  his  swarms
of  captives  were  employed  there  in  forced  labour.  As
the  ilku  or  con<t!e  seems  to  have  ceased  in  Marheswan,
709  B.  C. ,  the  actual  building  was  probably  finished  then.
In  707  B.C.  Sargon  returned  from  Babylon  ;  on  the
22nd  of  Tesrit  in  that  year  the  gods  of  Dur-Sarrukin
entered  their  temples.

Sargon  also  built  and  restored  largely  at  Kalah  and
other  cities  in  his  kingdom.  Nineveh  was  then  com-

4294


SARGON

paratively  insignificant ;  but  he  restored  the  temple  of
Nabu  there.  C.  H.  w.  j.

Is.  20 1  is  the  only  OT  passage  which  mentions  the

great usurper by name. The view that n"isc and

_  B'ID  often  stand  for  the  X.  Arabian  regions

20> *>arS°J1-1 ,,f  Misrim  and  Gush  (see  MIZRAIM,  GUSH,

ana  isaian.  2^  and  {he  tneory  that  cnBK|  .  Ephrain,/

is  sometimes  a  corruption,  or,  at  any  rate,  a  synonym
of  Vxam',  '  Jerahmeel '  (e.g. ,  in  Judg.  17 1  19 1  i  S.  1 1  ;
cp  RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM,  MICAH,  2),  oblige  the  present
writer  to  modify  or  even  reject  some  of  the  current
views  on  what  are  called  the  '  Assyrian  prophecies '  of
Isaiah.  According  to  his  theory  it  becomes  in  the
highest  degree  probable  that  the  danger  which  beset  the
state  from  N.  Arabia  was  as  much  in  the  mind  of
Hebrew  prophets  and  statesmen  as  the  danger  from
Assyria,  and  that  some  prophecies  which  have  been
thought  to  refer  to  Assyrian  invaders  may  refer  after  all
to  N.  Arabians.

i.  We  will  look  first  at  Is.  \Osff-<  and  specially  at
vv.  8-10.  These  verses  are  usually  supposed  to  refer  to
the  fall  of  Garchemish,  Calno  (?),  Arpad,  Hamath,
Damascus,  and  Samaria,  and  are  thought  to  indicate  as
the  date  of  the  prophecy  some  period  in  the  reign  of
Sargon  after  717  (fall  of  Carchemish).  This  appears
to  be  a  mistake.  The  places  referred  to  in  v.  9  are  prob
ably  not  to  the  N.  but  to  the  S.  of  Judali  :  Kir-cusham,
Jerahmeel,  Ephrath,  Maacath,  Cusham,  and  Shimron
— places  on  the  N.  Arabian  border,  of  the  two  latter  of
which  Isaiah  had  predicted  the  conquest  in  a  much  mis
understood  earlier  prophecy  (see  84,  where  probably
'  Dammesek  '  [EV  Damascus]  should  be  '  Cusham,'  and
'  Shomron '  [EV  'Samaria']  should  be  'Shimron').
This  critical  conclusion,  however,  does  not  force  us  to
give  up  referring  Is.  10  $ff.  to  the  reign  of  Sargon.  The
prediction  of  Isaiah  in  84  (as  we  can  now  understand
it)  was  fulfilled,  at  least  to  a  moderate  extent,  not  by
Tiglath-pileser,  but  by  Sargon,  who  was  perhaps  starting
on  his  Arabian  campaign  (see  above,  §  13)  when  the
prophet  put  dramatically  into  the  mouth  of  '  Assyria '
the  boastful  exaggerations  of  Is.  108-io.

•2.  In  passing  on  to  Is.  20,  it  is  almost  enough  to
refer  here  to  ISAIAH  [PROPHET],  §  5,  [BOOK],  §  9,  and
for  monumental  evidence  to  the  well-known  passage  in
Sargon's  cylinder  text  (AY?2 64  ;  Intr.Is.  120),  relative  to
the  treasonable  designs  of  Philistia,  Judah,  Edom,  and
Moab,  and  the  inability  of  Pir'u,  king  of  Musri  (so
Winckler),1  to  help  them.

Something  may,  however,  be  said  about  the  names  of  Azuri,
king  of  Ashdod,  his  brother  Ahimiti,  and  the  popular  nominee
Yamani  which  the  present  writer  regards  as  probably  N.  Arabian
ethnics  ;  for  Azuri  cp  Azariah  and  Azareel,  where  the  final  -ak  and
-(e)el  are  separate  additions,  and  for  Ahimiti  cp  Ahitfib,  which  is
commonly  misunderstood,  and  springs  from  an  ethnic,  most
probably  RehObOthi,2  while  Yamani  (hardly  '  Ionian ')  may
perhaps  be  grouped  with  such  popular  Hebrew  corruptions  of
the  ethnic  '  Jerahmeel '  as  j'C^,  %r3' (Yamin,  Yemini).  Winckler
(k'A  TW  70,  n.  i)  compares  Yamani  to  Omri.  Now,  in  the
present  writer's  opinion,  OMRI  (y.f.)  was  of  Jerahmeelite  origin,
and  from  Joab's  time  onwards  (cp  ZEKUIAH)  adventurers  from
the  Negeb  made  their  way  to  power  through  their  ability  in
warfare.

3.  Now, too, we  can  understand better Is.  281-4,
which  describes  the  fall  of  the  '  proud  crown  '  of  certain
'  drunkards  '  — surely  not the unfortunate  brethren  of
Isaiah in Samaria,  but the  tyrannical princes of  the
southern  Ephraim — i.e.,  Jerahmeel  ; the  place  intended
is  probably  the capital  of  the  land  of  Jerahmeel,  by
which  so much  harm had  been done to Israel and
Judah. The  Jerahmeelites, however, must have  sent
tribute in time to  avert the dreaded punishment of
captivity  ;  the  prophecy  of  woe  was  unfulfilled.

4.  The  attempt  of  Sayce  to  explain  several  passages
of Isaiah (e.g. , chaps.  1 10s_f. 22 1-14 and partly
36  / ) with reference to the supposed invasion of

1  Musri,  etc.  (MyG,  1898,  1 281  and  25; fCATf?)  70; cp
MIZKAIM,  §  2/1.

2  The  Hebrew  name  AHIMOTH  (y.v.)  most  probably  has  the
same  origin.

4295


SATAN

Judah  by  Sargon  lacks  adequate  exegetical  and  monu
mental  basis.  On  these  passages,  see  Intr,  Is.  especi
ally  3/  (with  the  references).  Even  if  'subjugator'
(mustikniS,  see  §  17)  pointed  to  a  submission  of  Hezekiah
to  Sargon  in  720  B.C.,  this  would  not  serve  as  an
explanation  of  the  strong  language  of  Isaiah,  who
speaks  (in  so  far  as  the  language  is  really  his)  of
invasion  and  devastation.  T.  K.  c.

In  his  Keilschrifttcjcte  Jargons  (2  vols.  1889)  Winckler
rearranges  the  material  published  by  Botta,  Place,  Oppert,  and
others,  and  gives  a  full  bibliography.  His
21.  Literature,  own  articles  (A  Of-',  passim)  and  his  mono
graph,  Musri,  Meluhha,  Main  (Ml  'G,  1898,
i  and  4)  are  the  chief  additional  sources.  Sargon's  Annals  are
chronologically  arranged.  The  Babylonian  Chronicle  gives  a
brief  imperfectly  preserved  summary,  and  the  Canon  lists  supply
a  few  more  particulars.  The  letters  sent  to  Sargon,  or  his  son
Sennacherib,  by  the  governors  or  generals  will,  when  completely
published  by  Prof.  R.  F.  Harper,  add  greatly  to  our  knowledge
of  events,  but  are  not  yet  available.  On  the  whole,  we  are
better  informed  about  Sargon's  reign  than  about  any  other
portion  of  Assyrian  history.

The  chief  inscriptions  of  Sargon  are  given  by  Winckler,  Die
Kcihchrifttexte  Sargons,  Leipzig,  1889.  For  the  literature  see
there  p.  1-3,  also  A"/>  255.  Winckler  has  added  several  texts  in
his  Samnilting  von  Keilschrifttexten,  2,  on  which  see  his  AOF,
passim.  For  a  fuller  text  of  K.  1989  see  Johns,  Assyrian  Deeds
ami  Documents,  no.  809.  For  the  History  see  now  Rogers,
History  of  Babylonia  ami  Assyria  2  148-182,  as  well  as  the
Histories  in  ASSYRIA.  For  a  view  of  events  in  Armenia  in
Sargon's  reign,  of  uncertain  date,  probably  during  his  stay  in
Babylon,  see  article  by  R.  C.  Thompson,  in  AJSL,  July  1901.
C.  H.  W.  J.  §§  1-19,  21  ;  T.  K.  C.  ,  §  20.

SARIB  (T~lb(),  a  place  on  the  S.  border  of  Zebulun,
Josh.  19  10  12  ([e]ceAe«  [rcoAa],  ceAAoyK  [B]  [ecoc],
c&p6iA.  c^piA  [A],  cApeiA.  [c]<Np[e]iA  LL]  ;  Pesh.
Ashdoa'].  Reading  TIC',  we  may  place  the  site  at  Tell
Shadiid,  on  the  N.  edge  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  12
m.  S.  of/^(Conder,  PEFMZjo).

SARON  (C&POON),  Acts  935,  RV  SHARON.

SAROTHIE  (cApcoGei  [B],  -9ie  [A],  om.  L),  a
group  of  children  of  '  Solomon's  servants'  (see  below)
in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  EZRA  ii.,  §  9,  §  8c],  one
of  eight  inserted  in  i  Esd.  634  after  Pochereth-hazzebaim
of  ||  Ezra  2s7=NTeh.  759.

According  to  the  ordinary  view,  an  explanation  would  be
hazardous  (for  the  two  views,  see  NETHINIM  and  SOLOMON'S
SERVANTS).  If,  however,  riD^t?  is  '  Salmah  '  and  c'JTJ  's  a
corruption  of  Q'jn'N,  then  we  have  a  right  to  look  to  the  N.
Arabian  borderland,  and  '  Sarothei  '  (<E»B),  like  '  Sophereth  '
and  '  Shephatiah,'  may  be  a  corruption  of  'nS~S,  Sfirephathi  (see
ZAREPHATH).  T.  K.  C.

SARSECHIM  (D'Spllr  and  D»3D-lfc»—  the  Western
and  the  Eastern  readings  respectively),  apparent!}'  the
name  of  a  Babylonian  prince  (Jer.  393  NABoycAX^p
[BXA],  -C&P&X  [Q],  CApCAxeiM  [Qm*>'-]).  Schrader
(KAT^  416)  offers  no  explanation.  Giesebrecht  thinks
that  the  preceding  '  Nebo  '  (in  MT)  should  form  part  of
the  name  (cp  ©),  and  that  the  name  thus  produced  is  a.
corruption  of  NEBUSHASBAN  (q.v.  ).  The  hypothesis,
however,  that  Jerahmeelites  and  Edomites  took  part  (to
say  the  least)  in  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  suggests  our
reading  n'c:3  "ib>.  '  the  prince  of  the  Cushites  (of  N.
Arabia).  '  For  the  context  see  NERGAL-SHAREZER.

T.  K.  c.

SARUCH  (cepOYX  [Ti.  WH]),  Lk.335  AV,  RV
SERUG.

SASH  (Dn-ttTp),  Is.  820  RV. See  GIRDLE,  4.


SATAN. Satan  appears  in  the  OT, as a  distinct
superhuman  personality,  onlv  in  three passages  (Zech.
3  Job  1  2  I'Ch.  21  1),  all  of  which  are


1.  Occurrence
inOT.


post -exilic, the earliest dating from


519,  the  last  from  about  300  B.C.
In  Ps.  1096  (see  Cheyne),  as  also  probably  in  Ecclus.
2127  (see  ECCLESIASTICUS,  §  19),  the  term  is  used  of
a  human  adversary  or  opposer.  So  far  as  the  OT  is
concerned,  three  points  require  discussion  ;  the  meaning
and  usage  of  the  term  (§  2),  the  origin  of  the  belief
(§  3),  and  its  development  (§  4).

4296


SATAN

The  root  (stn),  which  belongs  to  the  old  Semitic  stock
{cp  Ar.  stn),  signifies 'to  oppose  another  (by  putting

2  Meanine  oneself  in  his  way )• ' The noun  I015'  'sAt-iln
° occurs  in the early Hebrew Literature  ;
and  use. •  , -, »T ,

m  a  passage  like  Nu.  2222  32,  the  original

sense  is  still  clear — 'The  angel  ...  set  himself
in  the  way  to  be  a  sdtdn  to  him  (Balaam)'  ;  else
where  the  original  sense  is  less  prominent  (see  i  S.  294
2  S.  1922  [23]  i  K.  64  [18]  11  1423  25,  cp  Sitnah,  Gen.
2621).  In  Ps.  1096  the  word  is  used  of  an  opponent  at
law,  an  accuser.  It  is  with  this  last  shade  of  meaning
that  has-Sdtdn,  '  the  Satan,1  is  used  in  Zech.  3  if. ,  where
for  the  first  time  the  word  becomes  the  official  title  of
a  distinct  personality  ;  in  Job,  where  the  word  is  also
used  with  the  article,  the  usage  is  similar  ;  but  in  Ch.
the  article  disappears,  the  word  virtually  becomes  a
proper  name  and  the  original  sense  probably  loses
prominence,  although  here,  as  generally  elsewhere,  ©1!A
translates  the  term  by  5id/3o\os  ;  in  NT  both  the  trans
lation  and  the  transliteration  (Zarar'as)  are  common  ;
the  transliteration  occurs  in  the  LXX  (of  the  person  ;
sometimes  as  'Zardv,  see  Redpath)  only  in  (SA  at  Job
2s,  in  Aquila,  Symmachus,  and  Theodotion  in  Zech.  3i  ;
in  Aquila  also  in  Job  16.  The  word  used  as  a  common
noun  is  transliterated  in  r  K.  11142325  (with  variants)
and  also  in  two  or  three  places  by  one  or  more  of  the
later  Greek  versions.

It  has  often  been  suggested  that  Persian  influences
have,  if  not  produced,  yet  affected  the  development  of
o  Q  •  •  the  Jewish  belief  in  Satan.  That  the  name
of  h  If  ^atan  's  borrowed,  cannot  of  course  be
maintained.  It  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  pure
Semitic  word  in  early  use  among  the  Israelites.  Nor
can  it  be  asserted  that  the  position  of  the  Satan  at  all
closely  resembles  that  of  Angromainyu  (Ahriman).1
Angromainyu  is  an  independent  power  sharply  opposed
to  Ahura  Mazda,  the  good  power  ;  and,  like  him,
concerned  in  the  work  of  creation.  The  Satan  in  the
earlier  Hebrew  passages  is  completely  subordinate  to
Yahwe.  Still,  if  the  Book  of  Job  (including  the
Prologue)  is  post-exilic,  and  later  than  Zech.  1-8,  it  is
not  inconceivable  that  the  Persian  belief  in  Angromainyu
may  have  influenced  the  further  development  of  the
belief  in  Satan  as  we  find  it  in  Job — a  view  which  would
be  in  perfect  accordance  with  historical  analogy.  The
matter,  as  here  stated,  needs  a  more  thorough  investiga
tion  in  the  light  of  biblical  and  Avesta  criticism  (cp
ZOROASTKIANISM,  §  8).  But  at  any  rate,  the  ultimate
roots  of  belief  in  Satan,  as  well  as  of  the  belief  in  angels,
lie  in  the  early  popular  Israelitish  religion,  which,  how
ever,  of  course,  cannot  be  dissociated  from  the  religions  of
the  other  Semitic  peoples.  To  that  religion  the  '  sons  of
the  Elohim  '  (ANGELS,  §  2) — in  post-exilic  psalms  a  term
for  angels — were  apparently  native,  and  it  is  in  the
closest  connection  with  these  that '  the  Satan '  quite  clearly
appears  in  Job,  though  it  should  be  added  that,  unlike  the
sons  of  Elohim,  and  unlike  '  the  Satan  '  of  Zech.  3,  '  the
Satan  '  of  Job  1  n  is  a  cosmic  personage.  May  it  not  be
that  '  the  Satan  '  owes  his  origin  as  a  distinct  character
among  the '  sons  of  Elohim '  (or  angels),  partly  at  any  rate,
to  the  growing  tendency,  manifest  in  both  Zech.  and  Job,
and  even  as  early  as  Ezekiel  (cp  e.g. ,  40  3/-),  to  dis
tinguish  Yahwe's  attendants  by  their  functions  ;  and  may
not  at  any  rate  the  main  reason  why  he  gained  a  more
distinct  and  enduring  individuality  than,  e.g. ,  '  the  man
with  the  measuring  line'  (Zech.  2 1  [2s]),  or  'the  inter
preting  angel'  (Job  8823),  be  found  in  the  constant
presence  of  evil  and  the  increasing  desire  to  dissociate
it  from  God?  The  Satan,  at  least  as  far  as  the  kernel
of  the  conception  is  concerned,  may  thus  be  one  of  those
figures  due  to  the  crystallisation  of  temporary  functions,
which  had  long  before  been  recognised  as  performed  by
Yahwe  or  one  of  his  spirits,  into  permanent  personalities.
In  an  ancient  story  (Nu.  2222  ft)  the  mal'akh  Yah-wt

1  Cp  de  Harlez,  Les  origines  de  Zoroastrismc,  301-307.
4*97


SATAN

had  on  a  special  occasion  become  a  Satan  ;  now  a  single
personality  among  Yahwe's  attendant  spirits  permanently
appears  as  the  Satan,  whose  duty  it  is  to  test  men  or  to
discharge  God's  hostile  purposes  against  them.  If  we
would  fix  more  exactly  on  the  origin  of  the  Satan,  there
is  much  to  be  said  for  Marti's  suggestion  that  he  is  the
personification  of  the  self-accusing  conscience  of  Israel
(cp  Zech.  81-4)  ;  see  Theol.  St.  A'r. ,  1892,  pp.  208-245.
With  the  foregoing  discussion  cp  ANGELS,  §§  3  5.

The  development  of  the  doctrine  moves  along  two

lines  ; (a)  from  being  subordinate  to, Satan becomes

4 Develop-  (larSely)  independent  of  Yahwe  ; (&)  from

'  .  £  being  the  (not  necessarily  unjust)  accuser
belief  ^e  Becomes  tne  tempter  and  enemy  of
men.  In  NT  both  developments  are
complete,  in  OT  both  are  in  process.

(a)  In  Zech.  the  chief  marks  of  Satan's  subordination
are  the  rebuke  administered  to  him  and  the  complete
disregard  of  his  accusation,  though,  as  the  reference  tc.
the '  filthy garments  '  =  '  iniquity  ' shows, it was  well
founded. In Job this subordination is still clear  ;
throughout  the  book  the  angels  are  strictly  subject  to
Yahwe, and the Satan is virtually  one of  them  ; he
suggests  trying  Job  by  calamities,  but  has  no  power  to
inflict  them  without  Yahwe's  permission  or  in  excess  of
the  divinely  assigned  limits  (1 11-13  2s-;). Yet  germs
of  the  later  independence  of  the  Satan  can  be  discerned  ;
the  terms  of  l6/>  2  i/;  indicate  that,  whilst  closely  associ
ated  with  the  'sons  of  the  Elohim,'  he  is  in  a  certain
manner  distinct  from them ( '  the  Satan  came  also in
the  midst  of  them'): cp  Enoch  40y  ; again,  in  Zech.
(1 10  f.  65-7)  the  angels  are  sent  by  Yahwe  to  go  up  and
down  in  the  earth,  in  Job  the  Satan  appears  to  do  so
on his own initiative (note the question 1  -ja 22a),
although  the  idea  is  as  yet  by  no  means  that  of  i  Pet.
58  ;  and  finally  he  instigates  Yahwe  to  injure  Job  (2  36)
—  a significant feature  when  we contrast i K.  22 so,
where  it  is  only  at  Yahwe's  request  that  the  spirit  be
comes a  lying spirit to entice  Ahab. In i  Ch.  21 1
(  =2  S.  24 1)  the  independence  of  Satan  has  apparently
become  as  complete  as  it  ever  became  ;  whereas  in  Job
he  moves  God against  man, in Ch. he moves man
against  God. In  Wisd.  224  Satan's  independence of
and  opposition  to  God  is  so  well-established  that,  as  in
NT, men are  classified as  adherents of  God or  the
Devil  (ol  TTJS  eKeivov  [j.epidos  dWes).

(b]  The  view  of Satan as  tempter *  belongs to an
advanced  stage. Statements  attributing  temptation  to
God,  which  were  at  first  harmless, became  impossible
in  the  development  of  Jewish  theology  in  a  more  reflec
tive  age. Four  passages  which  illustrate  the  four  main
stages in the evolution may be quoted in proof of
this. Temptation  to  evil  is  in  2  S.  24 1  directly  attributed
to  Yahwe  ;  in  Job  1  f.  ultimately  to  Gocl,  but  through
the  medium  of  Satan  ;  in  i  Ch.  21  i  it  is  ascribed  directly
to Satan, and by the Chronicler's alteration of his
source,  tacitly  denied  of  God  ; and  finally  in  James  1 13
it  is  directly  denied  of  God. Except  therefore  in  the
very  latest  OT  passages  temptation  to  evil  is  not  incon
sistent  with  the  character  of  God  ; consequently  even
in  Job,  far  less  in  Zech.,  the  Satan  is  not  in  any  distinct
manner  morally  opposed  to  God  ; this,  at  the  earliest,
he  becomes  in  Chronicles.

This  is  the  main  point ;  how  much  anticipation  of  the  later
moral  distinction  can  be  discerned  in  Zech.  and  Job  is  an  open
question  ;  in  Zech.  it  certainly  seems  most  natural  to  see  in  him
simply  the  spokesman  for  the  sternly  just  demands  of  God  ;  but
the  narrative  of  Job  justifies  Davidson's  sentence,  '  He  shows
an  assiduity  slightly  too  keen  in  the  exercise  of  his  somewhat
invidious  function  '  {Job,  p.  7).

The  passage  already  quoted  from  Wisdom  illustrates
another  important  development  ;  the  Satan  is  identified
with  the  serpent  of  the  narrative  of  the  fall.  This

1  How  little  temptation  is  suggested  by  the  term  is  illustrated
by  Nu.  22  22  32.  So  far  is  the  angel  of  Yahwe,  who  becomes
for  the  nonce  a  Satan,  from  tempting  Balaam  that  he  actually
obstructs  him  in  an  evil  course.

4298


SATAN

identification  may  have  been  due  to  foreign  influence,
either  Persian  (see  Grimm  on  the  passage)  or  Alexandrian
(see  Toy,  Judaism  and  Christianity,  159,  167).  Com
pare  and  contrast  Enoch  696.  Another  late  identifica
tion — that  of  Satan  and  the  depraved  will — is  altogether
exceptional  (BabA  bath.,  16) ;  cp  ECCLESIASTICUS.

Before  passing  on  to  the  NT  doctrine  two  negative
points  may  be  noted  ;  in  OT  no  reference  is  made  to
angels  attendant  on  Satan;  'angels  of  evil'  —  i.e.,
angels  who  inflict  injury — are  still  directly  subject  to
God  (cp  Ps.  "849  cp  35s/.  and  earlier  i  S.  1614.^
Judg.  923;  see  ANGEL,  3),  nor  to  any  'fall'  or
'  punishment '  of  Satan.  G.  B.  G.

All  uncertainty  as  to  the  current  conception  of  Satan
ceases  when  we  reach  the  NT.  No  theory  of  dramatic
,  ,  „„,  or  poetic  personification  can  here  be  main
tained.  The  '  enemy  '  of  the  OT  is  now
individualised,  the  '  Satans  '  of  the  book  of  Enoch  are
now  unified.  Satan  is  now  the  distinctly  personal
(Ja.  4?)  originator  (2  Cor.  113  Jn.  844  i  Jn.  38  12),
instigator  (i  Thess.  3s  Mt.  4i^)  and  perpetuator  (Eph.
22)  of  sin,  and  the  cause  of  its  penalty,  death  (Jn.  844
Heb.  214)  ;  the  personal  head  of  the  realm  of  evil,  with
the  ministers  thereof  (Eph.  22,  ffouoio,  collective),  evil
bodily  (Mt.  1224  Lk.  13i6)  and  spiritual  (Eph.  2a  Jn.
1231  i  Jn.  38)  ;  and  the  antagonist  generally  of  God
(Mt.  1839  Acts  13  10)  and  of  man  (i  Pet.  58  Eph.  616
Lk.223i  Rev.  12 12).

Satan  appears  under  nine  distinct  names.

1.  a.px<av,  '  prince  '  (Synoptists,  TU>I>  SaijuofiW,  Mk.  3  22  etc.  ;
Jn., TOV  KOOVUOU  rovrov, 1231  ; Paul, TTJS  efoueri'as  TOV  ae'pos,

Eph.  '2  2  ; and  cp  Oebs  TOV  a.iJ>i'os  TOVTOV, 2  Cor.
6.  Names.  4  4, with  the  Kara.  TOV  aiiava.  TOV  /coerjuov  of  the
Ephesian  passage.

2.  6  neipd£ioi>,  '  the  tempter,'  Mt.  43  i  Thess.  3  5.

3.  5ia/3oAos,  'accuser,'  not  necessarily 'slanderer,'  of  those
who  sin through his temptation (cp Ka-rqyopos  TU>V  aSe\nf>Sn>,
Rev.  12 10), a title  confined to Satan, except when used of
human  slanderers  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles,1  but  generally  signify
ing  simply  (as  in  i  Ch.  21  i  and  everywhere  in  LXX),  the  '  enemy'
of  God  (Mt.  1839  i  Jn.  3  10)  and  of  man  (i  Pet.  5s);  see  Hatch,
Essays  in  Biblical  Greek,  45-47.

4.  £arai'a?(Hebrew  transliterated,  with  Grecised  form)  'adver
sary,'  NT  passim,  whether as  an  adversary  (i  Thess.  2  is),  a
tempter  (Mk.  1  13),  or  the  prince  of  the  demons  or  evil  angels
(Lk.  11  18  2  Cor.  12  7  [there  is  some  authority  for  the  form  2ard»
here  ;  see  Ti.]).

5.  £«A£e/3ouA  (/3«fe/3ov'A  [NR]), of  doubtful derivation and
signification  (see  BEELZEBUB),  a  name  for  Satan  in  the  Synoptists
alone,  and  solely  in  regard  to  demoniacal  possession  (Lk.  11  19
compared  with  Mt.  1226).

6.  6  f \9p6i,  '  the  enemy '  (Mt.  13  39  Lk.  10  19).

7.  o  Tronjpds, 'the  evil,  injurious one'  (Mt.  13 19, cp  rrvev-
fiara  noi^pd,  Lk.  ~  21)  Eph.  l>  16,  and  especially  i  Jn.).

8.  jSeAt'ap,  Syriac  and  Greek  form  of  BELIAL  (q.v.),  only  in
2  Cor.  615  (Christ  and Beliar, light  and darkness, God and
idols,  contrasted).

9.  6  o<J>is,  'the  serpent'  (2  Cor.  11  3),  and  6  o$is  6  ap\a.lo<;,
'  the  old  serpent,'  Rev.  12  9  (6  /caAoujafros  6ia|3oAos  Kai  Sarat/a?)
6  jrAai>u>i',  '  that  deceiveth  '(see  Wisdom  2  24  as  referred  to  above).
See  ANTICHRIST.

It  will  be  seen  that,  though  various  functions  are
here  and  there  suggested  by  these  names  and  passages,

7  Wo  k  tn<;-v  a'^  tend  to  l'le  same  issue'  the
'  maintenance  and  propagation  of  evil  ;
and  the  NT  writers  who  contribute  to  the  history  of
Satan  and  the  description  of  his  doings  in  no  wise  con
tradict  one  another.  If  we  draw  an  inference  from
what  is  said  of  evil  angels  in  2  Pet.  24  Jude  6,  Satan
was  not  originally  evil,  but  had  a  first  estate  which  he
did  not  keep,  leaving,  through  sin,  his  own  habitation.
His  sphere  of  dominion  was  now  the  air  or  firmament
(Eph.  612  22  Lk.  10i8  Rev.  12g),  whence  the  Syriac
etymology  of  Beliar  (in  Bar  Bahlul),  'lord  of  the  air. '
From  the  beginning  he  has  been  a  man-killer  (Jn.  844),
seducing  Eve  (2  Cor.  US),  and  bringing  sin  and  death
into  the  world  (cp  Wisd.  224,  not  opposed  to  Rom.
612),  and,  by  the  power  of  death,  keeping  men,  through
fear  of  it,  in  bondage  (Heb.  2i4/  ) ;  enticing  men  to  sin
(i  Cor.  7 5)  and  accusing  them  when  they  have  fallen

1  Not  used  in  any  of  the  commonly  called  Pauline  Epistles
except  in  Ephesians  and  the  Pastorals.

4299


SATYRS

(Rev.  12io);  trying  to  entice  Jesus  himself  (Synn.)
but  failing,  Jn.  1430,  cp  Heb.  4  15  2  Cor.  621;  inflicting
upon  men  misery  both  bodily  and  mental,  sometimes
by  'possessing'  them  with  his  'daemons'  (Mt.  1224),  at
other  times  apparently  by  direct  and  ordinary  disease
(i  Cor.  5s  2  Cor.  12  7).  He  is  the  prince  of  this  world
(Jn.  123i)  —  i.e.  ,  '  the  present  age  (aiwv)  with  all  its  evil  '
(Gal.  14)  —  and  as  'god  of  this  age'  he  blinds  the  un
believing  (2  Cor.  44),  and  is  prince  of  the  spirit  that  is
active  in  the  children  of  disobedience  (Eph.  22),  the
'children  of  the  devil'  (i  Jn.  3io);  and  by  deceitful
wonders  and  lying  prophecy  he  will  lead  men  astray  in
the  final  apostasy  (2  Thess.  29/1  Rev.  208).

But  though  Satan  is  opposed  to  God  (Ja.  4?),  and
the  '  authority  of  darkness  '  to  the  '  kingdom  of  the  Son

8.  No  dualism.  °f  G.od,^  l°ve'(CoL  1  x3),  -as  darkness
to  light  in  the  Parsee  antithesis,  —
there  is  no  Parsee  dualism  in  any  true  sense.  True,
Satan  is  not  often,  as  in  the  OT,  a  mere  angel  of  de
struction  used  by  God  (i  Cor.  5s  2  Cor.  127);  but,  on
the  other  hand,  he  is  no  more  independent  of  God  or
co-equal  with  him  than  is  man,  who  can,  as  he  chooses,
serve  the  one  or  the  other.  All  that  can  be  said  in  this
direction  is  that  the  Satanic  power  is  superhuman,  and
therefore  equally  superhuman  is  his  capacity  for  seduc
tion  and  destruction  (Eph.  612).  But,  though  Satan  is
'strong,'  Jesus  is  'stronger'  (Mt.  1229,  and  parallels);
he  can  spoil  Satan's  '  goods  '  (Mk.  827)  and  destroy  his
works  (i  Jn.  38)  ;  Christ  will  finally  bring  him  to  naught
and  rescue  his  bondsmen  (Heb.  214),  casting  him  and
his  angels  into  the  eternal  fire  prepared  for  them  (Mt.
2541  Rev.  20  10  Jude  6),  along  with  the  last  enemy
death  (i  Cor.  1026  Rev.  20  13).  This  deliverance  is,  in
principle,  already  begun  (Lk.  10i8/  Col.  1  13  i  Jn.
44  Jn.  1231  16n),  but  will  not  be  complete  till  the
Trapovcria  of  Christ  (Rom.  1620  i  Cor.  1526  2  Thess.  2
Rev.  20).  G.  B.  G.  ,  §§  1-4  ;  J.  M.  ,  §§  5-8.

SATCHEL  (Cnri),  Is.  822  RV,  in  2  K.  523  BAG  (i).

SATHRABUZANES  (cAGpABoyzANHC  [BA]),
i  Esd.  63,  EV  ;  AVmK-  SHETHAR-BOZNAI.

SATRAPS  (D^-npTIN,  and  JT,  ahatdarplnim,
-'n;  CATRATTAI,  but  CTpATHfOi  in  Esth.  3i2  [not
La]  ;  Vg.  SatrapfB  ;  AV  'princes,'  or  'lieutenants,'  RV
always  'satraps')  are  mentioned  in  Ezra  8  36  (<@
SioiKr/Tal)  Esth.  3  12  89  (©BAL^  OIKOVO/J.OI.)  9s  Dan.  32/  27
62-5  7/.  l  It  is  the  O.  Pers.  khsatrapavan  (khsatra,
'realm,  empire  '  +pd,  'to  protect'),  not  to  be  con
founded  with  the  Avest.  soithrapan,  which  has  a
different  meaning.  The  division  of  the  empire  into
satrapies  is  due  to  Darius  I.  Hystaspis.  Though  really
bound  to  an  implicit  obedience  to  the  king's  orders  and
controlled  by  other  officials,  the  satraps  grew  into  a
kind  of  viceroys,  who  exercised  in  their  provinces  an  all
but  sovereign  power,  and  in  their  household  imitated  the
royal  court.  See,  further,  PERSIA,  §  18,  SHERIFFS;
and  cp  A.  Buchholz,  Quastiones  de  Persarum  satrapis
(Leipsic,  1896).  c.  P.  T.


SATYRS  is  the  EV  rendering  of  the  Heb.
sl'irim,  in  Is.  1821  34  14  (RVms-  'he-goats'  ;  American

1  Meaning  of  RV  '  wild  g°ats>>  and  RV"'g'  in  Lev-

thete^m 17? 2Ch-lll5  (RV 'he-goats';  AV

'devils'). In  these  four  passages2  it

is  quite  clear  that  the  reference  is  not  to  the  natural

animal  —  the  he-goat  —  which  the  Hebrew  word  hi'tr  (an

abbreviation  for  the  fuller  and  frequent  locution  st'ir

'isstm)  generally  denotes  (cp  GOAT,  §§  i  [4]  5). It  is


1  <ra.Tpaita.i  does  not  occur  in  Dan.  32_/  27 77

2  And  in  2  K.  238  which  originally  spoke  of  c"!<J'B'.1  niD2  =
the  bamOth  of  the  seirim  (not  as  MT  n'nj'B:ri  =  the  gates);  so
Hoffmann  in  ZATIV,  1882,  p. 175,  subsequently  others  (e.g.,
Kautzsch). For post-biblical references to C'Vj's1, see ^'-
Schwab, '  Vocabulaire  d'Angelologie  '  (Academic  des  Inscrip
tions  10  [1897]  370  420  (s.irv.  c'vye1  anc'


4300


SATYRS

true  that  some  scholars  (e.g. ,  Hengstenberg  ;  similarly
Baethgen  in  Riehm,  HWBw  '  Feldgeister')  have  retained
this  meaning  by  explaining  the  sacrifices  to  the  sfjrim
referred  to  in  Lev.  and  Ch.  as  belonging  to  an  Egyptian
cultus  of  the  goat  (cp  Herod.  246),  borrowed  by  the
Hebrews  from  the  Egyptians  and  practised  by  them  in  the
wilderness  and  revived  by  Jeroboam  after  his  residence  in
Egypt.  But  (apart  from  the  consideration  that  these
two  references  are  exilic  and  post-exilic  respectively)  this
interpretation  fails  to  do  justice  to  the  passages  in  Isaiah.

The  ancient  tradition  (as  preserved  in  the  versions)  is  sub
stantially  consistent  and  substantially  also  correct.  In  all  four
passages  the  versions  agree  in  not  rendering  Sa'lr  by  the  equiva
lent  of  he-goat.  They  render  either  by  a  word  denoting  demon
or  false  god,  or  by  a  term  probably  implying  demons  though
signifying  directly  only  '  hairy  ' — a  meaning  which  the  Hebrew
word  possessed  (cp  Gen.  27  n)  and  out  of  which  the  use  of  the
word  for  he-goat  probably  sprang.  Thus  ©  renders  by  Sai/j.oi'ia.
or  na.Ta.ia  (in  2  Ch.  11  15  there  is  probably  a  'doublet';  TOIS
«i6ciAois  (tai  TOIS  jiaTcu'ois),  Syr.  by  si'iiil,  Tg.  pi's?,  Vg.  d&nion
or  pilosus  ;  cp,  further,  Field's  notes  in  the  Hexapla  on  Is.  13  21
and  34  14.

The  suggestion  of  the  versions  (see  above)  that  sd'fr
was  a  term  for  demons  or  a  particular  kind  of  demon  is
confirmed  by  the  contexts  of  the  five  passages  (including
2  K.  238)  already  mentioned.  Thus  in  Is.  34 14  LILITH
(ij.v.)  is  also  mentioned;  and  although  certain  natural
animals  (e.g. ,  wolves,  jackals)  are  mentioned  in  the  same
connection  both  here  and  in  Is.  1821,  they  are  not
domestic  animals  like  the  goat ;  moreover,  we  have  the
same  combination  of  actual  animals  and  demonic  beings
in  an  Assyrian  description  of  devastation  (G.  Smith,
Annals  of  Asur-bani-pal ;  see  Che.  on  Is.  132i).  The
association  of  demons  with  desert  places  was  a  prevalent
element  in  popular  belief  (cp  DEMONS,  §  3).  Note,
further,  that  the  sfirim  are  described  as  dancing  and
calling  to  one  another.  In  2  K.  238  Lev.  17  7  and  2Ch.
11 15,  where  the  bdmoth  of  the  sfirim  and  sacrifices
offered  to  them  are  mentioned,  the  term  may  be  used  in
derision  of  false  and  forbidden  objects  of  worship  in
general — for  which  abundant  parallels  could  be  cited.
In  Lev.  17?,  however,  the  association  of  the  seirim
with  the  '  open  field  '  (v.  5)  suggests  a  connection,  direct
or  indirect,  with  the  custom  or  rite  of  sending  a  goat  to
Azazel  on  the  day  of  Atonement  (see  AZAZEL).

It  remains  to  consider  how  far the  sH'irim  were a

clearly  defined class of  demons  and  what were their

2 Character sPec'a^  characteristics. We  have  really

i'stics  of  the  1'tt'e  more  than  tlle  etymology  to  guide
se'Irlm  US'  II  's  £eneralb'  assumed,  on  the
ground  of  the  usual  significance  of
sd'ir,  that  they  were  goat -shaped.  This  is  not  im
probable,  and  if  correct,  the  use  of  the  term  '  satyr '  is
sufficiently  appropriate  ;  only  it  must  be  remembered
that  we  have  no  reason  for  attributing  to  the  Hebrew-
conception  the  richer  details  that  characterise  the  Greek.
Some  (e.g. ,  Duhm  ;  Marti,  Gesch.  d.  hr.  Rcl.  236)
suggest  that  Azazel  (cp  above)  was  chief  of  the  it' trim  ;
we  might  then  compare  the  relation  to  the  Greek  satyr.
But  this  is  not  very  probable  (see  Cheyne's  paper  in
ZATW,  1895  :  and  cp  AZAZEL).  Wellhausen,  on  the
other  hand,  seems  inclined  to  limit  his  inference  from
the  etymology  to  the  hairiness  of  these  beings  ;  see
Heid.(^  i35/.  ;  (2>  151/1  where  some  Arabic  parallels
will  be  found.  If  sd'ir  (=demon),  in  spite  of  being
confined  to  exilic  and  post-exilic  literature  (for  which
there  may  be  sufficient  reason  ;  cp  DEMONS,  §  i),  is
actually  of  early  origin,  probably  it  merely  expressed
the  '  hairiness  '  of  the  demons  ;  but  if  late,  it  was  most
probably  chosen  on  account  of  its  secondary  sense  (goat)
because  these  beings  were  regarded  as  goat-shaped.
Cp  in  general  Boch.  Hieroz.  bk.  vi.  7  ;  Ges.  Jes.  4657.  ;
Baudissin,  St.\i-^ff.  and  the  article  'Feldgeister'  in
PREW  ;  Mannhardt  Wald-  u.  Feldkulte,  ch.  3  (§  8
refers  to  a  trace  of  Syrian  goat  spirits  in  a  story  of
lamblichus).  G.  B.  G.


SAUL


SAUL


Origin  (§  i).
Wars  (§  2/).


End  ;  character  (§  4  f.\
Family  (§  6).


Saul  p-INK',  sd'til,  as  if  'asked  for,'  §  56  ;  according
to  Jastrow  [JBL  19  (1900)  101]  '  devoted, '  viz. ,  to  Yahwe ;
but  see  below  [§  i,  midway]  ;  cAOyA  [BAL])  is  tradition
ally  regarded  as  the  first  king  of  Israel.  His  story  has
passed  through  phases  little  less  various  than  that  of
David,  with  which  it  is  so  closely  interlaced  (see  DAVID).
In  its  present  form,  indeed,  it  raises  insoluble  problems
both  of  history  and  of  character  ;  neither  the  outer  nor
the  inner  life  of  the  heroic  king  is  intelligible  to  us.
Reluctant,  therefore,  as  we  may  be  to  touch  narratives
which  are  universally  interesting — though  the  interest
partly  arises  from  their  enigmas — we  cannot  avoid  criti
cising  them,  and  we  may  be  well  assured  that  the  gain
which  \*ill  result  from  critical  thoroughness  will  be  far
greater  than  the  seeming  loss.  There  cannot  but  be  a
more  potent  attraction  in  narratives  which  can  be  read
more  nearly  as  they  were  meant  to  be  read  ;  and  if  the  his
torical  element  turns  out  to  be  less  than  we  have  supposed,
we  can  at  any  rate  use  it  with  some  confidence,  whilst  in
a  secondary  sense  even  the  less  historical  elements  are
of  documentary  value  for  the  period  to  which  the  tra
ditions  in  their  present  form  can  be  shown  to  belong  (see
SAMUEL  [BOOKS]).

The  traditions  agree  (and  we  shall  find  good  reason
to  accept  the  statement)  that  Saul  was  a  Benjamite  of

1  Oriein  Gibeah  (iS.9i  1Q26  1141534),  though
the  most  ingenious  of  our  modern  his
torians  (Winckler)  seeks  to  show  that  he  was  aGileadite.
The  short  genealogy  in  i  S.  9 1  represents  his  father  KISH
as  a  'son  of  Bechorath  '  (APHIAH  which  follows  is  a  cor
ruption  of  '  Gibeah'),  and  in  102i  Saul  ben  Kish  is  as
signed  to  the  family  called  MATKI  [</.r.],  while  in  2  S.
20  i  SHEBA  the  Benjamite,  David's  opponent,  is  called
ben  Bichri — i.e. ,  a  Bichrite  (cp  BECHEK,  and  see  below
on  the  'Bezek'  of  i  S.  118).  Taking  these  names
Bechorath,  Matri,  and  Bichri  together,  and  noticing
©L's  reading  paxeip  in  i  S.  9i,  it  is  difficult  not  to  see
that  Saul's  family,  according  to  the  tradition  under
lying  9 1  and  lOai,  was  known  as  Machirith  (cp
mi33  =  n'Y33  in  9i)  or  Jerahme'elith  (cp  §  6)  ;  cp
i  Ch.  829/1,  where  the  origin  of  Kish  is  traced  to
Maachah  (a  corruption  of  Jerahme'el).  In  other
words,  the  clan  and  family  to  which  the  first  king  be
longed  were  ultimately  of  semi -Jerahmeelite  origin.
Nevertheless  the  early  writers  were  quite  consistent  in
regarding  Saul  as  a  Benjamite,  for  the  tribe  of  Benjamin
(as  its  very  name  may  perhaps  indicate)  had  a  strong
Jerahmeelite  element  ;  this  is  suggestively  expressed  in
i  Ch.  7  7/.  where  (by  no  mere  arbitrary  fiction)  Jerimoth,
at  once  son  of  Bela  and  son  of  Becher,  is  recognised  as
a  Benjamite  ;  now  JERIMOTH  is  certainly  not  —'  excel-
sa '  [Ges.]  but  one  of  the  most  unmistakable  popular
corruptions  of  Jerahme'el.1

This  theory  suggests  an  explanation  of  the  name  of
Saul's  father  Kish,  which,  in  spite  of  the  very  plausible
connection  suggested  by  Robertson  Smith  (see  col.
2682),  is  perhaps  best  explained  as  a  corruption  of
Cush  (s^a)  or  Cushi  ('1212).  Cush  and  Missur  (Musri)
were  contiguous  regions  in  N.  Arabia  ;  if  there  were
Misrite  elements  in  Israel  (see  MOSES,  §  4),  there  were,
of  course,  equally  developed  Cushite  elements.

The  name  of  the  king  himself  does  not  admit  of  as

1  It  may  no  doubt  be  asserted  that  this  way  of  regarding  Saul
was  erroneous.  It  is  said  in  i  Ch.  7  i$f.  of  Macllir,  whose  wife
was  MAACAH  (  =  Jerahme'elith),  that  he  was  the  son  of  Mnnasseh,
and  Winckler  holds  that  Saul  was  not  a  Benjamite  but  a  Manassite
of  Gilead.  But  surely  the  right  view  is  that  there  were  both
northern  and  southern  clans  of  Machirite  (i.e.,  Jerahmeelite)
affinities.  According  to  i  Ch.  S  29-33  Kish  and  Saul  belonged  to
the  southern  Jerahmeelites  (MAACAH).  This  is  the  theory  ex-
pressed  above.

4302


SAUL

ready  an  explanation,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  very
, „  much misunderstood. The key to it is

'  'va  probably  to  be  found  in  i  S.  1  28,  where  the
'  name  'JXICB'  (Samuel)  is  expressly  made
equivalent  to  ^ixiy  (Saul),  and  connected  (cp  v,  20)  with
nj^ttv  (Id'al],  'to  ask.'  It  is  at  any  rate  plausible  to
suppose  that  Sfimu'el  and  Sa'ul  (also  Ishmael  and
Shobal?)  are  modifications  of  a  common  original,1  viz.,
the  southern  clan-name  Shema  (  =  Sheba,  @B  ffa/j.aa,
Josh.  192?)  with  the  afformative  *?  or  *?K.  It  will  be
remembered  that  elsewhere  Saul  (SAUL,  2  ;  SHAUL)  is
a  N.  Arabian  name,  given  both  to  a  Simeonite  and  to  a
Musrite  ;  also  that  Samuel,  according  to  tradition,  was
a  son  of  JEROHAM — i.e.,  belonged  to  a  clan  which  had
Jerahmeelite  (N.  Arabian)  affinities.  It  is  even  possible
that  the  narrator  who  worked  up  the  legends  respecting
Saul's  connection  with  Samuel  may  have  been  ignorant
of  the  seer's  real  name,  and  have  selected  for  him  one  of
two  variants  of  the  traditional  name  of  the  first  king.2

The  view  of  the  origin  of  the  name  '  Saul '  here  recommended
may  help  to  account  lor  the  fact  that  ancient  scribes  were  liable
to  confound  the  two  names  Saul  and  Samuel,  for  evidence  of
which  it  is  enough  to  refer  to  i  S.  11  7,  where  the  rival  readings
^IXt?  "inx  ('  after  Saul ')  and  SxiOty  ION  ('  after  Samuel ')  stand
side  by  side,  and  i  S.  28  12,  where  the  cry  of  the  '  witch  of  Enclor  '
is  said  to  have  been  called  forth  by  the  sight  of  'Samuel,'  a
palpable  error  (as  Perles  has  pointed  out)  for  'Saul.'3

The  true  name  of  the  first  king,  however,  has  prob
ably  passed  into  oblivion,  like  so  much  besides  connected
with  this  dim  far-off  figure.

The  true  name  of  Saul's  native  place  is  perhaps
recoverable.  It  was  most  probably  not  Gibeath-shaul
(EV  Gibeah  of  Saul),  but  Gibeath-shalishah  (ViNtr  and
nc'^B'  may  reasonably  be  taken  to  be  kindred  forms) ;  i.e. ,
Shalishah  was  the  name  of  the  district  in  which  this
Gibeah  was  situated.  Near  it  were  (a)  LAISH,  also
called  in  MT  Laishah  and  Zela  (both  corruptions  of
Shalishah),  and  (/>)  Gilgal  or  Beth-gilgal  —  i.e.,  very
probably  Beth-jerahmeel  (see  §  6).  Beth-jerahmeel4  (if
we  may  adopt  this  name  as  the  true  one),  which  was
apparently  a  walled  city  of  some  importance,  may  be
regarded  as  the  centre  of  Saul's  clan.  As  we  shall
presently  see,  it  was  the  city  which  this  hero  relieved
when  in  a  very  critical  situation  ;  it  was  also  the  place
where  his  married  daughter  (see  MERAB,  PALTI)  and
his  grandson  (see  MEPHIBOSHETH)  resided,  and  where
Sheba  the  Bichrite  took  refuge  with  his  clansmen  when
pursued  by  Joab.8  The  restoration  of  the  true  name
throws  a  bright  light  on  a  number  of  passages  (cp
GALLIM).

It  is  a  disputed  point  whether  or  no  Saul  was  the  first
to  realise  the  idea  of  kingly  government.  According  to

1C  Predecessors'  Winckler  ((;/256l57)-  the  stories  of
1  '  Gideon,  Abimelech,  and  Jephthah
were  brought  into  shape  as  justifications  of  the  claim
made  by  the  Gileadite  (?)  Saul  to  the  sovereignty  of
western  Israel  and  to  the  possession  of  the  religious
capital — Shechem.  This  theory  is  decidedly  ingenious  ;
but  it  is  more  probable  (see  ISRAEL,  §  10  ;  GIDEON  ;
but  cp  ABIMELECH,  2)  that  Gideon  was,  strictly

1  For  the  same  idea  somewhat  differently  applied  see  Wi.
GI  '1  224,  A'A  7W  225. This  scholar's  own  explanation  of  SlNE'
is  fully  set  forth  in  KA  T(3),  I.e. ;  the  Hebrew  name  (  '  asked  ')
is  the  literal  translation  of  bSlpurussl,  'the  oracle-god,"  a  title
of  Sin,  the  moon-god.

2  Cp  Sayce,  Hibbert  Lectures  (1887),  52. 'Sheba,'  too,  was
hardly  the  birth-name  of  the  Bichrite  mentioned  in  2  S.  20  i.

3  2ajxoi»)A.  represents  'piNtf  in  Gen.  46  10  (A), I  S.  11  13  (B*)
15  (HA),  15  12  (B),  while  SaouA.  represents  ^>N1P[?  in  i  S.  15  12
(B).

4  There  were,  of  course,  different  places  called  Beth-jerahmeel.
Cp  GALLIM,  SACK  (4).

5  The  passage  (28.  20  u  f.)  should  probably  be  read  thus,
'  And  Sheba  passed  on  to  Beth-jerahme  el,  and  all  the  Bichrites
(Jerahmeelites)  assembled  and  went  in  after  him. And  they
came  and  besieged  him  in  Beth-jerahme'el '  ;  hence  in  v.  18  ^x
should  be  ^xafrrv]. In  z;.  14  >!32B'(i7D;)  should  be  jnB>,  and
n^jt*  W^'  should  be  rtSwDnT  I  the  following  words  rt3J,'D  JVSl
should  be  S«2nT  n'3  (an  early  correction). Other  references  to
'  Beth-jerahmeel '  probably  underlie certain  corrupt words  in
Am.  1  3  Hos.  10  14  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

4303


SAUL

speaking,  the  first  Israelitish  king.  It  remains  true,
however,  that  Saul  is  the  first  king  of  a  section  of
the  Israelites  of  whom  fairly  definite  traditions  are  pre
served,  and  it  is  to  these  traditions,  not  all  equally  trust
worthy,  that  we  now  direct  our  attention.

Traditions  of  much  interest  respecting  Saul  have  come
down  to  us  from  a  school  of  writers  trained  under  pro-

,  _,  ....  phetic  influence.  According  to  these,

>ns<  it  was  a  seer  called  Samuel 1  who,  by
his  preternatural  insight,  recognised  in  the  son  of  Kish
the  destined  'captain'  or  'prince'  (ndgiJ,  see  PRINCE)
of  united  Israel  (i  S.  9i6).  This  patriotic  Israelite  (see
SAMUEL)  is  introduced  to  us  going  up  to  the  bdmdh  of
an  unnamed  city  to  '  bless  the  sacrifice '  and  partake  of
the  sacrificial  repast.  By  a  happy  accident — as  it
seems — Saul,  on  a  journey  in  search  of  his  father's
lost  asses,  appears  before  him,  and  timidly  asks  the
way  to  the  seer's  house.  At  once  Samuel  (who,  if  a
member  of  a  Jerahmeelite  clan,  would  perhaps  recog
nise  Saul)  discloses  his  identity.  He  treats  his  visitor
with  marked  consideration,  and  on  the  morrow,
in  strict  privacy,  communicates  to  him  a  divine  oracle
respecting  him. 2  At  the  same  time  he  solemnly  anoints  *
and  then  kisses  him  (see  SALUTATIONS).  Finally,  to
strengthen  Saul's  faith,  he  specifies  three  remarkable
experiences  which  the  favourite  of  heaven  will  have  as
he  returns  home.  One  was  that  he  would  meet  two
men  (see  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE)  who  would  give  news
respecting  the  lost  asses  and  would  mention  the  paternal
anxiety  of  Kish.  Another  was  that  three  pilgrims  whom
he  would  also  meet  (see  TABOR)  would  be  so  struck  by
his  bearing  that  they  would  salute  him  and  offer  him  a
present  of  two  loaves.  The  third  sign  was  that  Saul
would  meet  a  company  of  nUbl'im  in  a  state  of  frenzy
(see  PROPHET,  §  4),  and  would  be  seized  upon  by  the
spirit  of  Yahwe  and  pass  into  the  same  state  (calling  out
perhaps  for  the  advent  of  Israel's  war-god  to  lead  his
people  to  victory).  All  this,  we  are  told,  came  to  pass  ;
yet  it  was  not  this,  but  the  disclosures  of  the  seer  Samuel,
which  transformed  Saul's  nature,  and  made  him  a  true
king  (109).

In  about  a  month's  time  Saul  was  called  upon  to
justify  the  seer's  selection.  So  at  least  the  true  text  of
IP  Winckler'a  lS-llx  (preserved  by  ©)4  tells  us.
IT  Winckler,  however,  rejects  the  words

tneory.  vvhich  assert  a  month's  interval,  as  not
belonging  to  the  original  tradition.  According  to  this
scholar,  it  is  quite  a  fresh  account  of  Saul  and  his  origin
that  we  have  in  i  S.  lli-n,  the  original  story  having
been  recast  when,  to  soothe  patriotic  feelings,  the  Gileadite
hero  was  converted  into  a  Benjamite.  After  undoing
what  he  regards  as  the  work  of  the  later  editor  of  the
tradition,  Winckler  arrives  at  this  simple  statement  of
fact  which  he  considers  to  be  authentic.  Xahash,  king
of  the  Ammonites,  was  besieging  the  city  of  JABESH  in
Gilead,  and  pressing  it  hard.  By  a  bold  stroke,  akin
to  that  related,  Winckler  thinks,  by  anticipation  in
Judg.  7  (see  GIDEON),  Saul  relieved  the  city  (v.  n),
which  appears  to  have  been  his  birthplace.5  The
points  which  seem  to  Winckler  to  force  upon  us  the
view  that  Saul  was  a  Jabeshite  are  three — (i)  the  tra-

1  According  to  Winckler  (C/2i5i),  Zuph  in  Mt.  Ephraim,
whence  the  earlier  prophetic  legend  brought  Samuel,  was  within
the  ancient  limits  of  Benjamin. See,  however,  ZUPH.

2  The  relation  between  the  prince-elect  and  the  seer  reminds
us  of  the traditions  respecting Elisha as  a  king-maker  (i  K.
19  15  f.  2  K.  8  13  9  3). No  doubt  it  appeared  natural  to  the  pro
phetic  school  of  narrators. Observe  that  there  is  an  omission  in
the  MT  of  i  S.  10  i  (see  Var.  Bib.)  which  can  be  supplied  from
(5. The  sentence  dropped  out  by  homceoteleuton.

3  Whether  this is historical may  be  doubted  (see Smend,
RcL-gesch.ft  66,  n.  i).

4  iiaj. fyfvrj&T] ws /jLtra. /miji/a  (BA) ; Kal eyeVero  fiera fiTJi'a
TlUffwv  (L). MT  has  C"inC3 TVl  (<co.i. eyei^flij  <os  Kia^evuif  [L]);
(PL  points  to  a  Heb.  text  in  which  2>'"ir;D  and  cnn  both  had  a
place  at  the  end  of  i  S.  10  26,  giving  not  only  a  wrong  reading
but  a  wrong  connection. For  clearly  11  i  is  a  continuation  of
the  narrative  which  breaks  off  at  10  16. See  H.  P.  Smith.

5  So,  not  only  GI  2  but  also  KA  TW  227.

4304


SAUL

dition  in  i  S.  31 11-13  relative  to  the  pious  care  of  the
Jabeshites  for  the  bones  of  Saul  and  his  sons,  (2)  the
stand  made  by  Saul's  son  and  heir  ISHBOSHETH,  as  king
of  E.  Israel,  at  Mahanaim,  and  (3)  the  legendary  state
ment  in  Judg.  218-14  that  Jabesh-gilead  sent  no  warriors
against  the  offending  tribe  of  Benjamin,  and  (virtually)
recognised  the  right  of  connubium  enjoyed  by  Jabeshites
and  Benjamites.

Winckler's  conclusion,  however,  though  plausible
{cp  MANASSEH,  §  4),  cannot  well  be  admitted.  As  to
if  Chevne's  ^'  the  statement  in  Judg.  2l8-i4  does

tk  indeed  imply  the  currency  of  a  belief  in

*'  the  connection  between  the  Benjamite
king  Saul  and  Jabesh-gilead,  but  in  its  present  form  (the
text  is,  in  the  opinion  of  the  present  writer,  in  need  of
revision)  it  is  too  late  to  have  any  critical  value.  As
to  (2),  Ishbosheth's  stand  at  Mahanaim  could  only
prove  that  Saul's  sovereignty  extended  in  some  degree
to  Gilead.  As  to  ( i ),  the  statement  in  the  traditional
text  of  i  S.  31 11-13  is  impossible,  if,  as  the  present  writer
believes,  the  place  where  the  bodies1  of  Saul  and  his  sons
were  exposed  on  the  wall  was,  according  to  the  original
tradition,  not  Beth-shan,  but  some  southern  town,  such
as  Eshean  (Josh.  1652),  i.e. ,  perhaps  Beer-sheba'2  (cp
ESHEAN,  ASHAN).  Who  the  friends  of  Saul  really
were,  we  shall  see  later  ;  Jabeshites  of  Gilead,  they
most  certainly  were  not.

Saul  therefore  was  not  a  Gileadite  but  a  Benjamite.
The  difficulty  arising  out  of  the  improbable  geographical
statement  in  i  S.  9 3^;  (seeSHALiSHA,  ZUPH),  and  out  of
the  statement  in  the  traditional  text  (rejected)  of  i  S.
31 11-13  (so  far  as  it  refers  to  Beth-shan  and  the  Jabesh
ites),  must  be  met  by  stricter  criticism  of  the  text.
Underlying  '  Jabesh-gilead  '  there  must  be  the  name  of
some  place  easily  accessible  from  Saul's  home  at  Gibeah.3
What  that  name  is,  no  one  who  has  studied  the  errors
of  the  scribes,  both  in  MT  and  in  ©,  can  doubt  for  a
moment.  It  is  Beth-gilgal,  i.e.,  Beth-jerahmeel,  a  place-
name  to  which  we  have  already  been  introduced — the
city  intended  was  in  the  S.  of  Benjamin  near  Gibeah
and  Anathoth  ;  and  the  foes  who  threatened  the  city
and  all  Benjamin  besides,4  were  not  the  Ammonites  but
the  '  Amalekites  ' — i.e. ,  a  branch  of  the  Jerahmeelites
(pay  was  miswritten  for  pSny  —  SscnT  ;  cp  Judg.  813),
the  name  of  whose  king  was  Achish  (B"DN),  as  we  should
probably  read  for  '  Xahash '  (BTH  ;  see  NAHASH).  It
may  be  noticed  in  passing  that  the  danger  to  which  Beth-
jerahmeel  was  exposed  from  the  N.  Arabians  was,  in
the  opinion  of  the  present  writer,  not  always  averted  ;
in  Hos.  10 14  and  Am.  13  there  is  possibly  a  reference  to
the  cruel  conduct  of  the  Salmaeans  ( nearly  =  Cushites)  at
their  conquest  either  of  this  fortress  or  of  a  fortress
with  the  same  name  in  the  Negeb.  See  SALMA.

The  place  where  the  Israelites  mustered  in  obedience
to  Saul's  summons  was  Bezek  (i  S.  118),  which  on  the
supposition  that  the  distressed  city  was  in  Gilead  is
suitably  identified  with  Khirbet  Ibzik.  If  so,  there  will
appear  to  be  two  places  called  Bezek,  for  in  Judg.  l4/.
we  meet  with  a  Bezek5  which  is  undeniably  in  the  S.  of
Palestine  (see  BEZEK).

If,  however,  the  threatened  city  was  in  Benjamin,  and  the  foes
were  Jerahmeelites  from  the  extreme  S.,  it  is  probable  that
the  warriors  who  responded  to  Saul  were  from  Benjamin  and
from  the  territory  farther  S.,  and  that  the  mustering

1  On  i  Ch.  10  10  see  HKAD.

-  Not  unfrequently  in  P's  lists  we  find  a  corrupt  variant  of  a
place-name  presented  as  the  name  of  a  fresh  place.

3  This  has  a  close  bearing  on  the  criticism  of  Judg.  218-14
(referred  to  above).

4  i  S.  11  2  has  been  thoroughly  misunderstood  owing  to  textual
corruption. For  "lip33  we  should certainly  -ead  Tipp3. The
passage  then  becomes,  '  that  I  stop  up  to  y:>ur  loss  every  foun
tain  of  Benjamin  '  (cp  2  K. '2  25). Q  and  3  can  be  confounded  in
Aramaic  characters  ;  cp  <SBA's  [e]ia£eis  :n  i  S.  12  9  for  p;j<.

8  '  Adoni-bezek  '  in  Judg.  1  sff.  is  probably  a  combination  of
two  clan-names  'JIN  (from  <}ij; ;  see  PARADISE,  §  7)  and  -pa
(see  above).  Cp  '  Adonikam '  and  'Adoniram,'  where  '  kam '
and  'ram'  represent  fragments  of  'Jerahmeel.'

4305


SAUL

place  was  in  (or,  less  probably,  to  the  S.  of)  the  district
occupied  by  Saul's  clan.  Of  '  Bezek  '  we  know  nothing  ;  but  a
southern  clan-name  -3^  is  attested  by  the  name  fl<3T  and  by
the  place-name  ron3  (near  Tekoa).  Most  probably,  however,
we  should  read,  for  pj;;,  not  -pa,  but  133;  BECHEK  [f.t.]  was
in  fact  one  form  of  the  name  of  Saul's  clan.  The  proceedings  of
the  heroic  leader  thus  become  geographically  clear  ;  '  Gilgal '  in
i  S.  11  12-15  may  be  emended  into  'Jerahmeel,'  i.e.,  Beth-
jerahmeel,  the  name  of  the  central  place  of  Saul's  clan.

Naturally  enough,  such  an  important  event  as  the
relief  of  Beth-jerahmeel  (Jabesh-gilead)  led  to  the
1£  Kins'  of  rec°gnu'on  °f  Saul  as  king  of  Benjamin
Beniamin  ^'  '4  is  ri£htl>r  reSardecl  by  Driver  as  re-
J  "  dactional,  and  may  be  omitted).  Possibly
other  tribes,  too,  recognised  him  as  in  a  qualified
sense  their  king  by  sending  him  presents,  so  that
they  might  profit  in  time  of  need  by  his  proved
ability  in  warfare  ;  but  of  this  no  certainty  is  attainable.
The  thoroughly  antique  action  J  ascribed  to  Saul  in  i  S.
11?  has  been  placed  in  a  wrong  setting.  The  compiler
gives  no  hint  that  the  action  referred  to  made  the  war  a
holy  war,  and  he  represents  the  pieces  of  rlesh  as  having
been  sent  throughout  all  Israel.  It  is  not  likely,  however,
that  other  clans  besides  those  most  nearly  connected
with  Saul  and  those  which  were  in  equal  danger  from
the  Jerahmeelites  (on  the  significant  notice  in  1  S.  31?
[emended  text]  respecting  '  the  men  of  Israel  that  were
in  Jerahmeelite  Arabia '  see  §  4  c]  were  summoned  to
his  standard.  Saul  was  by  no  means  king  of  all  Israel ;
that  distinction  was  reserved  for  David.

Still  in  such  turbulent  times  even  this  moderate
dominion  demanded  all  the  energy  and  fervent
patriotism  of  the  ruler,  who  was  certainly  no  mere  lad
at  his  succession,  though  his  precise  age  is  not  recorded.'2
The  words  in  i  S.  11 7  '  whosoever  comes  not  out  after
Saul,'3  suggest  that  Saul  was  already  well-known  as  a
bold  warrior.  The  story  in  i  S.  9 3^,  which  presents
him  as  a  youthful  and  modest  dependent  of  his  father
Kish,  does  not  inspire  us  with  confidence  ;  indeed  the
whole  connection  of  Saul  with  an  individual  called
Samuel  is  historically  not  free  from  doubt.

According  to  the  tradition,  Saul  now  returned  to  his
home  at  GIBEAH.  From  i  S.  K?2  it  would  seem  that
_.,  one  of  his  first  regal  acts  was  to  collect  a

'  small  army  of  Israelitish  warriors.  Prob
ably  they  were  chiefly  Benjamites  under  the  leadership  of
Abner  ;  it  is  a  plausible  hypothesis  of  Winckler  that
Benjamin  was  at  that  time  by  no  means  '  the  smallest  of
the  tribes  of  Israel '  (i  S.  9 21),  and  that  its  territory  was
more  extensive  than  in  the  later  period,  after  it  had  been
conquered  (?)  by  David.4  This  view  of  the  composition
of  the  army  agrees  with  i  S.  226^  where  Saul  is  described
as  in  Gibeah,  surrounded  by  Benjamites,5  when  he  pro
nounced  an  unjust  sentence  on  the  priests  of  Yahwe.  It
is  probable,  however,  that  he  had  also  (like  David)  a
bodyguard  composed  of  foreigners,  if  rasim  (v.  17

1  For  the  archaeological  origin  of  the  custom  referred  to  see
WRS  Kel.  Sfiti.W  402,  who  illustrates  from- Lucian  and  Zeno-
bius,  and  notices  the  parallel  statement  in  Judg.  1929. The
narrative  in  Judg.  19-21  has  been  much  edited,  the  statement
referred  to  is  partly  connected  with  a  mythological  story  relative
to  creation  (see  SODOM,  §  9),  partly  with  an  antique  sacrificial  rite
(cp  Schwally,  Seniit.  Kriegsaltertiimer,  1  54). Those  who  par
took  of  the  sacrificial  pieces  of  flesh  which  Saul  sent  round  became
consecrated persons  whom  no  enemy  could  harm. The  later
compilers  of  the  story  of  Saul  had  forgotten  this  ;  but_it  is  the
duty  of  the  historical  critic,  so  far  as  he  can,  to  get  behind  their
compilation,  and  restore  the  original  setting  of  misunderstood
traditions.

2  i  S.  13  i  gives  no  sense. Most  critics  since  Wellhausen  regard
it  as  a  gloss,  and  read  "...  years  old  was  Saul  when  he  began
to  reign,  and  he  reigned  . .  .  years  over  Israel.' The  glossator
did  not  venture  to  fill  up  the  number  of  years. This  involves
regarding  »nt£'  before  C'JE1  as  a  corrupt  duplication  of  *yy. See,
however,  Driver  and  Liihr,  ad  loc. Klostermann's  theory  seems
too  complicated.

3  The  following  words  '  [and]  after  Samuel'  are  a  variant,  as
explained  already.

*  The  conquest  may  be  obscurely  referred  to  in  Judg.  M.
Similarly,  it  seems,  N5ldeke  (col.  536,  n.  3).

5  On  i  S.  22  6  see  TAMARISK  ;  on  '  ye  Benjamites,  v.  7,  see
Crit.  Bib.

4306


SAUL


SAUL


h T>T,-1- +

b.  Philistines.


•runners')  is,  as  the  present  writer  suspects,  a  mutil
ation  and  corruption  of  Zarephathlm  (Zarephathites).
These  foreigners,  however,  were  virtually  Israelites  ;
they  had  adopted  Israelitish  reverence  for  the  persons
of  the  priests  of  Yahwe,  whom  they  refused  to  massacre
at  the  bidding  of  the  enraged  king  (v.  17).  It  was
Doeg  an  'Aramite'  (see  i  S.  21  8  [7],  (S15*)1  who,  ac
cording  to  the  narrative,  out  of  hatred  for  David
performed  the  dreadful  act,  for  which,  after  David  had
come  to  the  throne,  a  stern  penalty  was  (not  indeed  by
David)  exacted  (z  S.  21).

The  historical  character  of  the  massacre  (apart  from
the  details)  cannot  be  doubted  ;  but  the  real  cause  of  it

is not clear- Had the Priestly clan

of  Gibeon ]ike Samu(/  (a £ypical

personage),  '  rejected  '  Saul  as  king  ?  Had  they
really  espoused  the  cause  of  a  pretender,  and  so
done  all  in  their  power  to  paralyse  Saul's  patriotic
activity?  However  that  may  be,  we  must  not  forget  the
arduous  nature  of  the  task  to  which  Saul  had  braced
himself.  He  had  to  put  an  end  to  the  disastrous  in
cursions  of  a  powerful  enemy,  the  name  of  which  is
given  as  Pelistim  (d\\b<j>v\ot)  or  PHILISTINKS  [?.*'.].
The  correctness  of  this  name  is  generally  accepted,  but
has,  elsewhere  by  the  present  writer  (see  PELKTHITES,
ZAKEPHATH),  been  questioned.  In  particular,  there
are  passages  in  the  narrative  which  is  commonly  used
as  evidence  for  David's  outlawry,  but  may  really  be  a
transformed,  distorted  version  of  a  tradition  of  a  struggle
between  Saul  and  David  (so  Winckler),  and  also  in  the
account  of  the  closing  scene  of  Saul's  life,  and  of  David's
subsequent  exploits,  which  force  the  present  writer  to
hold  that  the  Zarephathites  —  excluding  those  who  had  ex
patriated  themselves  and  joined  Saul's  bodyguard  —  were,
together  with  their  neighbours  the  '  Amalekites,'  the  true
enemies  of  Saul  and  for  a  time  at  least  of  David  after
him  (see  PELETHITES,  REHOBOTH,  ZAREPHATH).  In  a
word,  the  so-called  '  Philistines  '  are  Zarephathites,  and
their  centre  was  not  the  '  Philistian  sea-coast  '  but  the
NEGEB  [g.v.].

A  striking  account  is  given  by  one  of  the  narrators  of
the  opening  of  the  war  against  the  '  Philistines  '  (i  S.  13)
—  of  course,  before  the  massacre  just  referred  to.
Jonathan  (whose  relation  to  Saul  the  writer  assumes  to
be  well-known)  had  offered  an  open  insult  to  the
'Philistines'  (v.  3);  we  may  perhaps  suppose  that  it
was  an  insult  which  affected  their  religion.2  The
1  Philistines  '  mustered  in  force  to  avenge  it.  Affrighted
at  their  appearance,  the  Israelites  took  refuge  in
mountain-hollows,  or  crossed  over  into  Gad  and  Gilead.
From  the  camp  at  Michmash  (opposite  Geba  where  the
outrage  had  been  committed)  the  '  Philistines  '  plundered
the  country,  secure  of  meeting  with  no  opposition,
because  few  of  the  Israelites  had  any  weapons  (  i  S.
1819-22;  cp  FORK).  Only  six  hundred  men,  we  are
told,  remained  with  Saul  at  '  the  border  of  Gibeah  '  ;
but  one  of  these  was  no  less  than  Jonathan.  This  brave
man,  together  with  his  armour-bearer,  is  said  to  have
performed  a  most  audacious  exploit  (i  S.  14  ;  on  the  text

1  By  Aramite  we  mean  '  Jerahmeelite  '. There  is  some  reason
to  think  that  Doeg  was  one  of  the  c'jn  or  rather  Zarephathites
(cp  Gratz's  view,  col.  1124). For  some  new  evidence  see  Crit.
Bib. <5L  has  'ISovn-aios.

2  '  Garrison  '  (EV)  is  not  a  probable  rendering  of  TXJ. Like
3<jJ  in  the Hadad inscription found near Zenjlrli, the word
might  mean  either  '  prefect  '  or  '  pillar.' The  meaning  '  pillar  '
is  to  be  preferred  (cp,  however,  ISRAEL,  §  13). Jonathan  would
have  slain  more  than  one  person,  and  t7N33  seems  to  point  to
some religious insult. Probably  we  should read nS'l, '  he
shattered  '  (Klo.). A  sacred  pillar  seems  to  be  meant  ;  we  need
not  emend  3'!>p  into  J"OXS  (cp  JEHOSHAPHAT,  n.  2,  col.  2352  ;
PHOENICIA,  §  9). In  10  5  for  '  the  hill  of  God  '  (o'.l'jNn  njn  j)  read
D'^NCnT  nyi?  'Gibeah  of  the  Jerahmeelites.' 'Jerahmeelites'
and 'Zarephathites'  (='  Philistines  ')  are synonymous terms.
The  sacred  pillar  of  the  Zarephathites  (Philistines)  caused  the
place  to  be  called  'Gibeah  of  the  Jerahmeelites.' From  183  it
appears  that  Geba  is  meant.

4307


of  w.  4/.  see  MICHMASH).  His  object  was  to  surprise
the  outpost  of  the  .enemy,  whose  duty  it  was  to  watch
the  steep  ravine  between  Geba  on  the  S.  and  Mich-
mash  on  the  N.  (the  Wady  es-Suwenit).  The  two  men
went  secretly  down  into  the  valley  below  Geba,  as  if  on
their  way  to  the  caves  where  the  timid  Israelites  were
hidden.  There  is  in  fact  a  line  of  such  caves  on  both
sides  of  the  wady,  and  they  are  practically  impregnable
(cp  MICHMASH).  Greeted  with  scoffs  by  the  enemy,
who  noticed  their  first  movements,  Jonathan  and  his
follower  afterwards  disappeared  from  view,  and  climbed
up  on  the  other  side.1  The  Philistine  outpost  was
thrown  into  confusion  by  the  sudden  appearance  of  the
two  men.  Jonathan,  fatigued  as  he  was  with  his  climb,
smote  right  and  left,  and  his  armour-bearer  quickly
despatched  the  wounded.  The  '  spoilers  '  fled  in  dismay,
and  the  general  panic  —  so  the  legend  says — was
heightened  by  an  earthquake  (see  EARTHQUAKE).
Then  Saul,  who  had  (somewhat  strangely)  been  tarry
ing  under  the  pomegranate  tree  '  in  the  border  of  Geba '
(14a  ;  see  GIBEAH,  §  i  ;  MICRON),  arose,  and  discover
ing  the  absence  of  Jonathan  and  his  follower,  applied  to
the  priest  for  guidance.  Before  there  was  time,  however,
for  Ahijah  to  bring  forward  the  EPHOD  [q.v. ],  circum
stances  had  made  the  duty  of  the  slowly  moving  king  clear
to  him.  Promptly  he  led  his  little  band  against  the  dis
ordered  enemy.  At  once  those  Israelites  who  had  been
compelled  to  serve  with  the  '  Philistines '  withdrew,  and
joined  the  patriots.  The  '  Philistines '  were  seen  hurry
ing  wildly  towards  Bethel  across  the  watershed  and
down  the  steep  descent  of  Aijalon.  In  hot  chase  the
Israelites  followed  them.  The  story  is  vividly  told,
and  is  evidently  ancient.  How  far  is  it  trustworthy  ?
Certainly  it  cannot  be  a  pure  romance  ;  but  Winckler
has  called  attention  to  some  very  doubtful  elements,  and
to  these  the  present  writer  must  now  add  the  designation
of  the  oppressors  of  the  Israelites  by  the  name  of
'  Philistines.'

We  have  also  an  account  of  a  battle  between  the
Israelites  and  the  Philistines  in  the  valley  of  Elah
(rather,  ha-Elah),  or,  as  the  scene  appears  to  be
otherwise  described,  in  Ephes-dammim  ( i  S.  17  if. ).
The  chief  point  in  it,  however,  is  the  encounter  of
David  with  Goliath,  which  appears  to  be  a  reflection
of  the  story  of  Elhanan  and  Goliath  in  2  S.  21 19,  where
the  scene  of  the  combat  is  at  Gob  (  —  REHOBOTH).
Probably  *imek  hd-eldh  and  Iphes-dammim  are  cor
ruptions  respectively  of  '$mek  jerahmeel  and  'fmek
arammim,  synonymous  phrases  (arammim  = jerah-
me'elim]  for  the  valley  of  Jerahmeel  (  =  the  wady  el-
Milh  ?).  It  is  important  to  mention  this  here,  to
prepare  the  reader  for  the  change  in  our  view  of  the
localities  of  the  last  fatal  fight  ('Gilboa')  necessitated
by  our  criticism  of  the  text  (see  §  4).  As  has  been
shown  elsewhere,  the  period  as  well  as  the  scene  of  the
traditional  fight  with  Goliath  is  misstated  in  i  S.  18.

According  to  the  statement  in  i  S.  1447^,  Saul  had
various  other  wars  in  which  he  was  uniformly  successful.
It  is  doubtful  from  what  source  this  passage
is  derived.  Evidently  the  writer  is  an
admirer  of  Saul,  for  he  does  not  scruple
to  transfer  exploits  ascribed  by  tradition  to  David
(28.  812) 2  to  his  neglected  predecessor.  The  text  of
the  passage  needs  rectification,  and  should  probably
run  thus  (see  Crit.  Bib. } —

And  when  Saul  had  taken  the  kingdom  over  Israel  [he
fought  against  all  his  enemies  round  about,  against  Musur,
against  the  Amalekites,  against  Jerahmeel-Missur,  and  against
the  Zarephathites,  and  whithersoever  he  turned,  he  was

1  Cp  Miller,  The  Least  of  all  Lands,  104  ;  also  Conder,  Tent-
work,  '2  U4./C

2  2  S.  812 should probably run thus, or nearly thus  (see
Crit.  Bib.,  but  cp  DAVID,  §  8),  '  From  Aram,  and  from  Missur,
and  from  the  Amalekites,  and  from  the  Zarephathites,  and  from
the  spoil of  Hadad, the Rehobothite, king  of  Missur.' On
'Aram' (i.e., Jerahmeel), as an emendation of  'Edom,1  cp

JoKTHEEL,  §  2  ; REZIN  ; SALT,  VALLEY  OF  J ZAIR  ; ZOBAH.
4308


3.  Other
wars.


SAUL

victorious],  he  showed  valour  ;  he  smote  Amalek,  and  rescued
Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  his  spoiler.

Thus  in  its  original  form  the  passage  was  not  the
close  of  a  history  of  Saul  (Wellh.  CHz^f.},  but
rather  an  introduction  to  the  story  of  the  campaign
against  'Amalek,'  which  is,  in  fact,  the  only  war  of
Saul  described  at  any  length  in  our  traditions  before
the  tragedy  of  Mt.  '  Gilboa  '  (see  i  S.  15,  and  cp  AGAG,
BESOR,  HAVILAH,  SHUR,  TELAIM,  SAMUEL).

The  narrative  suffers  greatly  from  the  want  of  pre
liminary  explanations.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  the
bands  of  raiders  had  already  forced  their  way  to  Saul's
territory  ?  Or  should  we  rather  assume  that  the  clans
to  the  S.  of  Benjamin  had  appealed  for  aid  to  the  king's
generosity?  In  order  to  answer  these  questions  we
must  read  the  notice  of  Saul's  expedition  against
'  Amalek '  in  the  light  of  the  new  but  indispensable
theory  (see  above)  that  his  warfare  was  chiefly  with  the
Sarephathites  (Pelistim  being  a  corruption  of  Sar6-
phathim  as  'Amalek'  is  a  distortion  of  Jerahrne'eiim).
It  may  be  assumed  that  if  these  raiders  penetrated  into
Saul's  kingdom  (the  territory  of  Benjamin  was  then
perhaps  more  extensive  than  afterwards),  the  Amale-
kites  (Jerahmeelites),  whom  we  can  only  with  some
difficulty  distinguish  from  the  Zarephathites,  were  not
less  successful.  It  is  true,  the  details  respecting  Samuel
are,  from  a  critical  point  of  view,  questionable.  But
we  may  perhaps  accept  the  statement  (so  much  more
creditable,  rightly  considered,  to  Saul  than  to  Samuel)
that  on  a  certain  point  of  religious  tradition  the  seers
represented  by  Samuel  were  more  conservative  than  the
king.  The  statement  is  that  Samuel  was  highly  dis
pleased  because,  after  Saul  had  '  utterly  destroyed '
(c'nnn)  all  'the  warriors'  (cyn)  of  Amalek,  he  spared
Agag  and  '  the  best  of  the  sheep  and  the  oxen  '  (w.  8f. ),
thus  violating  the  fundamental  religious  custom  (see
BAN)  of  devoting  enemies  taken  in  war,  and  even  the
animals  which  belonged  to  them,  to  the  wrathful  God  of
Israel  (cp  i  S.  28 18).  Still  this,  even  if  correct,  was
surely  not  the  only  or  the  chief  reason  why  the  seer
(or  the  seers?)  broke  off  intercourse  with  the  king.  As
most  agree,  there  was  some  other  cause  for  the  breach
which  can  only  be  divined.

We  must  not,  of  course,  underrate  the  benefit  of  the
application  of  methodical  criticism  to  the  corrupt  proper
names  in  this  section  (ch.  15);  see  BKSOR,  HAVILAH,
SHUR,  TELAIM,  and  especially  JERAHMEKL.  Thus,  in
v.  2  we  should  do  well  to  read,  '  I  have  marked  that
which  Jerahmeel  did  to  Israel"  (the  hostile  section  of
the  great  Jerahmeelite  people  is  intended),  and  should
•  emend  'Amalek'  and  '  Amalekites '  throughout  ac
cordingly.  In  v.  12  the  word  '  Jerahmeel '  has  under
gone  fresh  transformations  which  obscure  the  narrative.
Not  improbably  we  should  read,  '  It  was  told  Samuel
(saying),  Saul  came  to  Jerahmeel,  and,  behold  he
destroyed  the  Jerahmeelites,  and  went  clown  to  Gilgal '
(i  S.  15 12;  see  Crit.  Bib.}.  These  gains  are  of  the
utmost  value  from  the  point  of  view  of  intelligibility.
It  is  to  be  feared,  however,  that  no  textual  criticism
can  make  the  narrative  quite  satisfactory  as  a  piece  of
history.  First  of  all,  the  success  of  Saul's  expedition
is  evidently  much  exaggerated.  If  the  '  Amalekites  '
had  really  been  so  completely  crushed,  we  cannot
believe  that  they  would  so  soon  have  recovered  from
their  overthrow.  Next,  the  rupture  between  Samuel
and  the  king  (as  was  remarked  above)  is  by  no
means  fully  intelligible.  H.  P.  Smith  considers  the
'  rejection'  of  Saul  by  Samuel  in  the  name  of  his  God
to  be  an  imaginary  justification  of  the  anointing  of
David  as  king  ;  if  David  was  to  be  anointed,  it  was
clear  that  Saul  must  have  been  rejected.  We  may  also
plausibly  hold  that  the  '  rejection '  seemed  to  the  ancients
to  account  for  Saul's  subsequent  calamity.  It  remains
true,  however,  that  the  cause  of  the  '  rejection '  given
in  i  S.  15  is  far  from  adequate.
As  an  additional  reason  it  was  related  (i  S.  13  7^-15*1)  that

138  4309


SAUL

Saul  had  offered  a  sacrifice  himself  instead  of  waiting  for
bamuel,  and  (;he  object  of  the  narrative  in  i  S.  2S4.2S  can
PSSjy  h^,ve  been  different)  that  before  the  fatal  struggle  on
Gilboa  haul  applied  to  a  necromancer  at  En-dor  (see  ENDOK  •
HAROD  WKLI.  OF)-an  act  of  infidelity  to  \  ahwe  which  naturally
deprived  Saul  of  the  protection  of  his  God.  A  modern  historian
(Kittel,  Hist.  2136)  suggests  a  more  critical  reason,  which  how
ever,  is  not  entirely  satisfactory.  He  thinks  that  the  estrange
ment  of  Samuel  from  Saul  may  have  been  caused  by  Saul's
continued  inattention  to  the  fate  of  the  ark,  and  his  want  of
comprehension  of  the  peculiar  religious  character  of  Israel.

It  is  usual  (in  spite  of  the  parallel  feature  in  the
legend  of  Alexander1)  to  accept  the  report  of  Saul's
4a  Saul's  morbid  melancholy  alternating  with  fits  of
melancholy  Passion  as  historical,  and  to  connect  with
J'  it  his  first  acquaintance  with  David  (cp
MADNESS).  Certainly  there  was  enough  in  the
manifold  difficulty  of  the  king's  position  to  affect  his
mind  injuriously  ;  but  the  circumstances  in  connec
tion  with  which  it  is  mentioned  do  not  inspire  us  with
much  confidence.  The  whole  story  of  Saul's  relations
with  David,  which  has  in  general  been  regarded  as
founded  on  fact  (see  DAVID,  §§  1-4),  has  received  a
great  shock  from  the  investigations  of  Winckler.  Apart
from  some  questionable  details  in  this  scholar's  criticism,
it  appears  to  be  at  any  rate  very  unsafe  to  follow  the
tradition  in  its  present  form.  That  David  early  became
attached  to  Saul,  partly  by  loyalty,  partly  by  a  family
tie  (cp  MKRAB,  MICHAL),  as  the  narratives  represent,  is,
in  the  light  of  Winckler's  criticism,  very  improbable.
David  appears  to  have  been  an  ambitious  freebooter
from  the  Negeb  who  sought  to  carve  out  a  realm  for
himself  (see  JUDAH,  §§  4/. ),  starting  first  of  all  from
'Adullam' — i.e. ,  the  southern  '  Carmel '  (Jerahmeel) —
and  afterwards,  when  that  attempt  was  baffled,  renewing
his  enterprise  from  Halusah  ( '  Ziklag  ' ).  Of  course,  to
say  this,  is  not  to  deny  that  he  may  have  possessed
some  attractive  qualities  in  which  Saul  was  deficient,
and  which  not  only  favoured  his  ambitious  schemes,  but
also  facilitated  the  idealising  process  of  later  narrators.
We  now  hasten  on  to  the  pathetic  closing  scene  of  the
life  of  the  hapless  king.

We  have  two  versions  of  the ancient  tradition  :  a,
chaps.  28  and  31  belong  to  one  document ;  b,  chaps.  27

46.  Last  battle,  f-^  f,nd  2  S"  1  -bfi°n^ranoth<;r-.2
In a  the  camp  of  the  '  Philistines is

placed  at  Shunem  ;  in  b  at  APHKK  [g.v.~\.  In  a  we
have  the  strangely  fascinating  story  of  the  '  witch  of
Endor'  ;  in  b,  a  great  deal  of  interesting  information
respecting  David,  who  was  at  that  time  at  Ziklag  or
rather  Halusah,  a  vassal  of  Achish  (or  Nahash?),  king
of  Gath  or  REHOBOTH  [q,v.~]  in  the  Negeb.  There  are
also  differences  between  the  two  accounts  relative  to  the
death  of  Saul.  Neither  of  the  two  stories  makes  it  clear
what  the  precise  object  of  the  'Philistines'  was.  An
able  geographer  holds  that  they  sought  'either  to
subjugate  all  the  low  country  and  so  confine  Israel
to  the  hills,  or  else  to  secure  their  caravan  route  to
Damascus  and  the  East  from  Israel's  descents  upon  it
by  the  roads  from  Bezek  to  Beth-shan  and  across
Gilboa'  (G.  A.  Smith,  f/G  402).  Hence,  when  Saul
had  taken  up  his  position  on  Mt.  Gilboa  (or  rather
Haggilboa  ya^jn),  which  is  taken  to  be  the  ridge  running
SE.  from  the  eastern  end  of  the  great  central  plain,  the
'  Philistines '  did  not  hesitate  to  attack  him  on  his  superior
position  (see  GILBOA  ;  HAROD,  WKLI.  OF).  To  dislodge
him  was  imperative,  because  from  Gilboa  he  could
descend  at  will  either  on  Jezreel  or  on  the  Jordan
valley.  Before  the  battle,  as  one  of  the  documents
states,  the  despondent  king,  who  neither  by  dreams,
nor  by  Urim,  nor  by  prophets  could  obtain  any  oracle
from  Yahwe  (28615),  applied  to  a  female  r.ecromancer
at  En-dor,  of  whom  he  had  heard  from  his  servants.
In  former  times  he  had  done  all  in  his  power  to  ex
terminate  such  magicians  from  his  realm  ;  but  now  he
relapsed  into  the  ancient  superstition  (see  DIVINATION,

1  Winckler,  C/2i72.
2  See  H.  P.  Smith,  Samuel,  Introd.  pp.  xxiv_/I


SAUL

§  4).  Accordingly  the  necromancer  called  up  the  shade
of  Samuel,  who  disclosed  the  terrible  fact  that  on  the
morrow  the  king  would  die,  and  his  army  would  be
worsted,  as  a  punishment  for  his  disobedience  in  the
matter  of  '  Amalek. ' 1  On  hearing  this,  Saul  fell  to  the
ground  ;  it  is  added  that  he  had  not  eaten  bread  the
whole  day  and  the  whole  night,  yet  he  could  hardly  be
induced  to  break  his  fast.  After  this  meal,  we  are  told,
Saul  and  his  servants  '  rose  up  and  went  away  that
night'  (2820-25).  It  is  impossible  to  decide  how  far  the
story  is  based  on  fact.2  As  it  stands,  it  appears  to  be
meant  as  an  explanation  of  Saul's  desertion  by  his  God
(see  §  3).  Whether  in  any  degree  historical  or  not,
the  narrative  is  highly  natural,  though  considerable
doubt  attaches  to  the  place-name,  En-dor  (see  ENDOK  ;
HAROD,  WELL  OF  :  and  the  criticism  below).

Thus  far  we  have  provisionally  assumed  the  correct
ness  of  the  MT. There  is, however, a  strong  prob-

4c  Emenda  ability  that  the  text  of  both  forms  of
tions  of  names.  the  trfilion  *  vitiated  by  a  great
misunderstanding,  and  that  here,  as
in  many  other  cases,  there  is  an  underlying  tradition
very  different  from  that  represented  by  the  text.  The
geographical  obscurity  of  the  present  text  of  i  S.  28  f.
31,  is  undeniable  ;  one  may  therefore  naturally  suspect
corruption.  It  is,  moreover,  difficult  to  believe  that  the
form  'Philistines'  is  correct  in  chaps.  28/  and  31,
when  close  by  (30  iS;  see  PKLETHITKS)  it  has  only
been  introduced  by  a  textual  error.  The  case  is  very
similar  to  that  of  a  passage  in  the  famous  elegy
(28.  120).  Whatever  we  may  think  of  '  Gath  '  (the
name  is  far  from  certain  —  see  RKHOBOTH),  we  can
hardly  say  that  the  mention  of  '  Ashkelon '  was  to  be
expected,  and  even  if  we  defend  '  Philistines,'  \ve
cannot  assert  that  '  uncircumcised '  forms  a  natural
parallel  to  it.3  '  Jezreel '  (i  S.  29  in)  needs  no  cor
rection  ;  the  place  intended  is  the  Jezreel  in  the
hill-country  of  Judah,  not  far  from  Carmel  (i.e.,
Jerahmeel),  to  which  David's  wife  Ahinoam  by  birth
belonged.  But  the  other  names  have  been  partly
corrupted,  partly  manipulated,  by  an  editor,  till  a  com
pletely  false  geographical  setting  of  the  narrative  has
been  produced.  The  scene  of  the  military  operations
has  been  supposed  to  be  in  the  N. ,  whereas  it  was  really
in  the  S.  It  is  not  the  least  of  the  arguments  for  the
correctness  of  this  view  that  it  enables  us  to  emend  and
explain  a  historical  notice  (r  S.  31  7)  which  has  been  a
great  trouble  to  commentators  (see  ISRAEL,  §  16,  and
cp  HPSm. ),  but  may,  with  the  utmost  probability,
be  read  thus  :- — '  And  when  the  men  of  Israel  who  were
in  Arab-jerahmeel  [i.e.,  Jerahmeel  in  X.  Arabia]  saw
that  the  men  of  Saul  had  tied  and  that  Saul  and  his
sons  were  dead,  they  forsook  the  cities  and  fled,  and
the  Zarephathites  came  and  dwelt  in  them.'  The  cities
referred  to  are  the  'cities  of  the  Jerahmeelites,'  where,
according  to  i  S.  3029,  'elders  of  Judah'  had  quite
lately  been  residing.

We  must  briefly  indicate  the  emendations  referred  to  ;
the  names  form  the  skeleton  of  the  history.  For  '  Shunem '
(cilz;  i  S.  2S4)  and  '  Beth-shan '  (JB- ri'3,  I  S.  31  10)  it  is  the
simplest  course  to  read  '  Eshean '  (|VE'X)  and  '  Beer-sheba '
(>'3S?  1x3)-  The  same  place  is  no  doubt  intended  by  both
forms;  see  ESHEAN.  Perhaps  pya  (29  i)  should  be  jiyoa,  'at
Maon.'  For  'Gilboa1  (y&i)  or  rather  Haggilboa  (je^;n)  we
should  restore  'Amalek'  (ptaj?)  or  ' Jerahmeel '  (VMDHT);
so,  too,  in  28.121.  For  'to  Aphek '  (npDN,"  29 1)  we  should
read  '  to  Gibeah '  (nyqj ;  the  same  error  is  probable  in
Josh.  15  53  ;  cp  also  rvBK  in  9  i  [see  APHIAH!)  ;  the  '  Gibeah  '  of
Josh.  1657  (see  GIBEAH,  i)  or  that  of  Judg.  7  i  seems  to  be
meant.  '  The  house  of  Ashtaroth  '  (jmnvy  n'3,  31  10)  should
probably  be  '  Beth-sarephath '  (nails  JV3),  better  known  to  us  as

1  Probably  the  original  tradition  represented  the  '  Amalekites  '
and the 'Philistines'  as  allied  on  this  occasion,  so  that  the
retribution  to  Saul  would  be  exactly  proportioned  to  his  guilt.

2  Stade  (Gl'l  1  255)  rejects  the  narrative ;  cp  Schwally,  Deis
Lebcn.  nack  dein Tmte,  73  f. Budde  and  Kittel,  on  the  other
hand,  accept  it  as  historical.

3  The  fourth  line  of  the  stanza  ought,  like  the  others,  to
contain  an  ethnic  name.

43"


SAUL,

'  Beth-pelet '  (2^5  n'3,  rather  rt^B  fl'3,  where  nSs  comes  from
riSIS  [see  PELKTHITES]);  the  situation  is  suitable.  'Jabesh-
gilead'  (§  i)  should  be  '  Beth-giigal ' ;  'Ziklag'  should  be
Halusah,  and  Endor  (-in  py)  should  be  En-'arad  (-ny  ;-y).
In  Judg.  7  i  En-harGd  is  combined  with  Gibcath-hammoreh  or
rather  Gibeath-jerahmeel  [see  MUKKII],  and  in  2  S.  23  257:  a
Harodite  and  a  Paltite  are  mentioned  together  ;  Arad  and  Beth-
pelef  ('  En-dor  '  and  '  Beth-ashtaroth  ')  are,  if  our  explanations
are  correct,  mentioned  as  in  the  same  district  in  the  narrative
which  contains  chaps.  21)  81.  To  pass  now  to  the  elegy :  the
true  names  in  2  S.  1  20  are  Kehoboth,  Halusah,  Surephathim,
and  Jerahme'elim.1

These, then, are in all probability the historical

circumstances  of  the  great  crisis. The  Zarephathites,

4rf  Saul's probably  with  the  aid  of  the 'Amalek-

death:'  Cheyne's  ites>  (CP  2  s- 16-)-  *ere  °n  l^ir
theory  march  northwards  ; David, lord  of

Halusah  (ZIKLAG),  narrowly  escaped
accompanying  them.  Saul  and  his  army  went  to  meet
the  enemy,  hoping  to  deal  them  such  a  blow  as
would  effectually  stop  their  incursions.  He  encamped,
shifting  his  position  from  Maon  by  Jezreel  (29 1,
emended  text)  to  the  hills  near  'Carmel'  (i.e. ,  Jerah
meel),  one  of  which  we  suppose  to  have  been
specially  called  Gibeah  or  Gibeath-jerahmeel.  It
was  at  this  Gibeah  (certainly  not  at  any  place  called
'Aphek')  that  the  Zarephathites  encamped.  Not
far  off  was  Arad,  whither  Saul  may  perhaps  have
gone  to  consult  a  necromancer  ;  Arad  was  presumably
one  of  the  'cities  of  the  Jerahmeelites'  (i  8.3029)
occupied  by  the  Judahites.  The  original  encampment
of  the  Zarephathites  was  probably  at  Beersheba,2  and  it
was  perhaps  on  the  ridge  which  runs  from  the  southern
'  Carmel '  WSW.  towards  Beersheba  that  the  fate  of
Saul  was  sealed.  The  Zarephathites  attacked  him
fiercely.  After  a  heroic  resistance,  he  gave  way,  and
bade  his  armour-bearer  thrust  him  through  with  a
sword,  on  account  of  a  critical  blow  which  had  been
dealt  him  by  a  great  stone.3  His  attendant,  however,
hesitating  to  do  his  bidding.4  the  hapless  king  is  said
(but  this  is  by  no  means  certain)  to  have  taken  his  own
life  (31 4).

A  different  tradition  is  reported  in  2  S.  1  (the  sequel
of  chaps.  29,  30),  where  the  fate  which  in  i  S.  31 4
Saul  is  said  to  have  deprecated,  actually  befalls  him
(cp  ISRAEL,  §  15).  An  '  Amalekite  '  (i.e. ,  Jerahmeelite),
who  'happened  by  chance  upon  Mt.  Gilboa'  (z>.  6,
EV),  but  who,  as  the  narrator  probably  means  us  to
suppose,  had  his  own  reason  for  being  on  the  spot,5
slays  Saul.  We  need  not,  with  Stade  (<7r/l2s8)  reject
the  story  altogether,  though  we  must  at  any  rate  admit
that  it  has  been  touched  up  by  the  writer  who  records
it.  Certainly  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  well-known
elegy  ascribed  to  David,  where  the  destined  successor
of  Saul  is  represented  as  forbidding  the  sad  news  to  be
published  in  Halusah,  lest  the  malicious  Jerahmeelite
women  should  triumph  (see  translation  in  col.  2334,
and  compare  i  S.  3l4<z,  'lest  the  Jerahmeelites  come
and  thrust  me  through  ' ).

In  this  connection  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  elegy  says
nothing  of  Saul's  'sons,'  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  fact
that  2  S.  21  12  speaks  only  of  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan
his  son.  Very  probably  the  statement  in  i  S.  31  2  respecting

1  For  r)3,  ninn  and pS??*,  D'P?H C'/^Jj- See  JASHEK,
BOOK  OF,  §  2.

2  Both  locations  (reading  '  Gibeah  '  for  '  Aphek,'  and  '  Eshean '
or  '  Beersheba ' for '  Shunem  ')  are  plausible  ; but  Beersheba
naturally  comes  before  Gibeah. Beersheba  was  doubtless  more
important  than  Gibeah  ;  hence  the  omission  of 'Gibeah'  in  one
document  and  the  probable  reference  to  Beersheba  in  31 10.

3  Read probably, in  v. 3,  imDlW1  rUZiS'na  C"lisn  ?.1K!»a'1
C]?"1!1'}  |'.?,  'and  those  who  cast  (stones)  with  engines  found  him,
and  they  crushed  him  between  the  thighs.' See  Che.  E.rp.T
11  137. We  can  now  see  the  full  force  of  Saul's  remark  to  his
armour-bearer, ?>. a,a, 'lest these Jerahmeelites come and
thrust  me  through,'  etc.  ;  O'^IJJ  (as  often  elsewhere)  should  be
D'SvCrrr- See  Crit.  Bib.

4  Unlike  the  armour-bearer  of  a  grandson  of  Merodach-baladan
in  a  similar  case  (A"/?  2  212/0.

5  The  'Amalekites'  (lernhmeelites),  as we  have seen,  had
possibly  joined  the  Zarephathites.

4312


SAUL

Abinadab  and  Malchishua  is  incorrect  (cp  §  6).  '  Abinadab  '
seems  to  the  present  writer  to  be  a  double  of  'Jonathan'
('  Nathan  '  and  '  Nadab  '  confounded),  and  '  Malchisua  '  to  be  a
development  (see  §  5)  of  '  Jerahme'el  '  (whose  name  is  misread
Ishbosheth).  The  latter  certainly  did  not  fall  on  the  field  of
battle.  On  the  contrary  he  lived  to  succeed  his  father  on  the
throne.  Tradition  not  impossibly  said  that  he  was  lame  (see
MEI'HIBOSHETH).

The  story  of  the  death  of  Saul  in  its  present  form  is
a  narrative  of  the  heroic  but  useless  sacrifice  of  the  king's
life  for  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  Philistines.
That  we  have  had  to  interfere  with  it  may  be  a  subject
for  regret,  but  not  for  surprise.  The  story  of  Saul  and
of  his  relations  with  David  was  of  course  told  and  re
told,  edited  and  re-  edited,  and  could  not  but  be
considerably  modified  in  the  process.  Textual  cor
ruption,  too,  naturally  increased  the  confusion.  The
story  becomes  to  some  extent  intelligible  only  when  the
textual  errors  have  been  removed  by  a  methodical
criticism.  We  have  also  to  consider  alterations  due  to
later  hands.  It  was  the  editor  who  placed  the  story  of
the  '  witch  of  Endor  '  where  it  now  stands.  Endor  (or
En-harod?)  is  in  the  N.  ;  l  but  the  scene  of  the  great
battle  was  in  the  S.  The  account  of  the  indignities
offered  to  the  bodies  of  the  king  and  of  his  sons  (vv.  9
10  ;  see  Exp.  7^10522),  however,  has  the  impress  of  truth,
and  we  can  well  believe  that  fierce  resentment  arose  in
the  city  so  gallantly  liberated  by  Saul.  All  night  the
warriors  of  Beth-gilgal  -  in  Benjamin  are  said  to  have
journeyed.  Not  the  northern  fortress  of  Beth-shan,  but
more  possibly  Beer-sheba  was  their  goal  ;  there  they
found  the  dead  bodies  of  the  heroes  fastened  to  the  city
walls.  Piously  they  took  them  down  and  brought  them
to  Beth-gilgal,  where  they  raised  a  fitting  dirge  over
them,3  and  gave  an  honoured  burial  to  the  bones
beneath  the  sacred  tree  (see  TAMARISK).  Afterwards,
we  are  told,  David  sent  his  warrior  Benaiah  4  for  them,
and  the)'  were  reinterred  in  the  family  grave  at  Shalisha
(not  'Zela')  near  Beth-gilgal  (see  ZELAH,  and  cp
RIZPAH).

There  is  a  third  reference  to  this  generous  action  in  2  S.  24^-7
which  needs  elucidation.  I'v.  4/'  5  should  probably  run  thus,  —
'  And  they  told  David,  "  The  men  of  Beth-gilgal  have  buried
Saul  under  the  Asherah  "  (nniTXrr  n[W  ;  cp  f  S.  31  13,  above).
And  David  sent  presents  (D'JbSff)  to  the  men  of  Jabesh-gilgal,'
etc.  In  v.  6  EV's  'will  requite  you  this  kindness'  should  be
'show  you  this  friendliness.'  David  sends  presents,  nominally
to  acknowledge  the  generous  act  of  the  men  of  Beth-gilgal,  but
really  to  induce  them  to  work  for  the  extension  of  his  sovereignty
over  Benjamin.  'Your  lord'  means  'the  lord  of  Benjamin,'
not  'the  lord  of  Gilead.'

The  impression  which  Saul  produced  on  the  later
editor  of  the  tradition  was  not  on  the  whole  favourable.

Hif  fi"e  P1^  Sifts'.  his.^^f
patriotism,  and  his  inextinguishable

courage  were  readily  acknowledged  (i  S.  10  23  /.  lln
187  17  32  /.  cannot  be  quoted  on  the  other  side);  but
we  also  hear  of  fits  of  passion  and  cruelty  (i  S.  2027-34
22  6-  19),  of  a  dangerous  religious  scrupulosity  (i  S.
14  36-45),  5  and  (cp  §  4)  of  sudden  accesses  of  a  disturb-

1  Of  course  there  is  the  possibility  that  dor  of  En-dor  (in  pj?)
may  have  come  from  'Arad  ("Hl'X  and  that  the  original  story  may
have  been  recast  in  accordance  with  a  later  view  of  the  scene  of
the  conflict. This  may  be  the  simplest  solution  of  the  problem.

2  Not  Jabesh-gilead  (see  §  i).

3  Reading  crt7  nsif'l  (Klo.  Budde). H.  P.  Smith's  objection
is  of  no  weight  ;  the  mourning  is  naturally  mentioned  before  the
burial  (Klo. refers  to  25  i 28  3). W. R. Smith's suggestion
(RSt-)  372),  that  the  burning  (iSTtJ"l)  may  have  had  a  religious
intention,  is  ingenious  ;  but  see  MOURNING.

4  2  S.  21  12  (B  ;  see  Klostermann,  ad  loc.

5  Saul,  it  appears,  had  tabooed  all  eating  before  sunset. The
only  person  who  tasted  food  was  Jonathan,  who  had  not  heard
Saul  impose  the  taboo. Yahwe  was  believed  to  be  offended  by
this  transgression. By  the  sacred  lot  (see  URIM  AND  THU.M.MIM)
Jonathan  was  found  to  be  the  culprit,  and  condemned  by  his
father  to  death. But  '  the  people  ransomed  Jonathan  that  he
died  not'  (v.  4;,  MT). How  this  was  effected",  we  are  not  told.
Ewald  supposes  that  it  was  by  the  substitution  of  another  human
life  of  less  value  ;  Kittel  (Hist.  2  116)  and  Driver  (note  ad  loc.)
modify  this  view. But  (P's  Trpocrevfaro  vrepi  points  to  the  read
ing  ?N  *?'S'l, 'and they acted as arbitrators concerning
(Jonathan),' i.e.,  they  mediated between Jonathan  and the

4313


5.  Saul's  character.


SAUL

ing  melancholy  (i  S.  16i4  18 10  199).  This  mental
disturbance  is  described  (in  18 10)  by  the  same  phrase
C?V  nVs)  that  is  used  elsewhere  for  that  heightening  of
the  physical  powers  under  the  influence  of  rage  against
Yahwe's  enemies  which  characterised  the  successful
great  warriors  and  athletes.  Was  it  a  melancholy
produced  by  a  wild  longing  for  battle  ? 1  Was  it  •  but
the  morbid  reflex  of  the  prophetic  inspiration  of  Saul's
heroic  period  '  ?  -  Does  the  story  of  the  witch  of  Endor
suggest  that  it  was  a  frenzied  anticipation  of  evil  for
Saul  himself  and  his  people  ?  Or  is  it  historical  at
all  ?  May  not  the  statement  be  due  to  the  influence  of
a  wide-spread  Oriental  tale  (see  §  4)  ?  At  any  rate  it  is
connected  with  statements  respecting  David  which,  if  our
criticism  is  justified,  cannot  be  even  approximately  correct.
Tradition  has  in  fact  been  at  once  too  kind  to  David
and  too  unkind  to  his  predecessor.  That  Saul  had
good  cause  to  oppose  David  has  been  stated  already
(§  4),  and  even  if  we  consider  the  loyalty  of  the  men  of
Beth-gilgal  (i  S.  Sin./)  to  be  largely  the  result  of
clan-loyalty  (since  Jabesh-gilead  =  Beth-gilead  =  Beth-
jerahmeel),  it  is  plain  that  nothing  had  been  done
by  Saul  which  seemed  to  his  fellow-clansmen  to  be
unworthy  of  a  great  Israelite.  Kittel  (Hist.  2 135^)
has  given  an  eloquent  and  sympathetic  portrait3  of  the
heroic  king  to  all  of  which  one  would  gladly  subscribe
if  the  historical  evidence  were  slightly  stronger.  The
chief  difficulty  connected  with  Saul  is  his  massacre  of
the  priests  of  Gibeon  ( '  Nob ' )  ;  but  we  cannot  say  that
we  know  the  circumstances  sufficiently  well  to  pass  a
peremptory  judgment.

The  best  attested  names  in  Saul's  family  are  those  of

his concubine Rizpah and his son Jonathan, unless

. ~ ., indeed  Jonathan  was  originally  represented

;  ..  as  Saul's  brother.4  ABINADAB  and
*'  MALCHISHUA,  however  (i  S.  31  2  ;  cp  i  Ch.
833  839,  and  see  above,  §  4),  are  suspicious.  Abi
nadab  is  probably  a  variant  of  '  Jonathan,'  Malchishua  a
corruption  of  'Jerahme'el  [bfine]  Sha'ul. '  The  names
of  the  two  sons  of  Rizpah  (2  S.  218),  Armoni  and
Mephibosheth,  are  also  doubtful.  Armoni  is  probably
a  corruption  of  '  Abinadab  '  ;  Mephibosheth  seems  to  be
borrowed  from  one  of  the  two  historic  '  Mephibosheths. '
Tradition  probably  did  not  preserve  the  names  of
the  two  hapless  sons  of  Saul  and  Rizpah.  The  present
writer  has  suggested  that  both  Eshbaal  ( i  Ch.  8  33 )  and
Ishbosheth  may  be  corruptions  of  Jerahme'el  or  Ishmael,
and  a  similar  origin  may  with  reasonable  probability
be  assigned  to  the  current  name  of  Saul's  grandson  (see
MEPHIBOSHETH,  and  cp  Crit.  Bib.}.

It  is  remarkable  that,  according  to  a  new  theory  which  fits  in
with  a  well  -  supported  theory  of  the  course  of  the  history  of
Israel,  no  less  than  eleven  of  the  personal  names  connected  in
MT  with  the  family  of  Saul  are  corruptions  of  Jerahmeel  and
Ishmael,  or  of  fragments  of  those  names.  These  are  —  MERAB,
MICHAL,  PALTIEI,,  ADKIEL,  MEPHIBOSHETH,  ESHBAAL,
ISHBOSHETH,  MERIBBAAL,  MICHA,  MACHIR,  AMMIEL.
This  theory  throws  doubt  on  the  genealogy  in  i  Ch.  8  33.^
939^,  which  was  possibly  inserted  to  gratify  a  post-exilic
family  professedly  descended  from  Saul.  It  is  obvious  that
some  of  the  names  must  be  variants  of  the  name  of  the  same
person;  also  that  the  names  Jerahmeel  or  Ishmael  were  given,
sometimes  at  least,  as  a  substitute  for  the  true  name  which  had
been  forgotten.  Jerahme'el  or  Jerahme'elith  was  in  fact  most
probably  the  name  of  Saul's  clan  (see  §  i),  and  Beth-jerahmeel
that  of  the  chief  seat  of  the  clan.  Here  probably  '  Mephi
bosheth '  resided,  not  in  'the  house  of  Machir,  the  son  of
Ammiel,  in  Lo-debar'6(2  S.  9  4).  See  §  i,  and  cp  MEHOLA-
THITE,  SHEBA.

sacred  custom  or  law.  So  Klostermann,  who  paraphrases,
'they  imposed  a  fine  on  Jonathan.'  [Winckler,  GI  2  163^,
assumes  a  mythological  basis  for  the  detail.  ]

1  Schwally,  Semitische  Kriegsaltertiimer,  1  105.

2  Budde,  Religion  of  Israel  to  the  Exile,  95.

3  See  also  Tiele,  Vergelijkende  Geschiedenis  van  de  Egypt,
en  Mcsopotant.  Godsdienstcn  (1872),  607  jjf.

4  This  is  a  startling  suggestion  of  Winckler  (GI  2  191),  based
on  2  S.  1  22./C Compare  the  doubt  (SoooM,  §  10)  whether  Lot
was  not  originally  Abraham's  brother.

5  The repetition of  the  elaborate  description in 28.05  is
suspicious. Note  here,  to  supplement  LO-DEBAR,  that  13  in
•m  I1?  may  have  arisen  out  of  jva>  and  m^  out  of  ny^J)  which

4314


SAVARAN


SCARLET


2.  (RV  SHAUL).  An  early  Edomite  king  (Gen.
8637/1  i  Ch.  1  48/1  ).  Was  he,  however,  an  Edomite  or  a
Jerahmeelite  ?  DIN  and  QIN  are  so  much  alike  that  we
may  choose  that  reading  which  best  suits  the  circum
stances.  On  the  whole,  DIN,  i-e-,  VxDriT  (Jerahmeel),
best  accords  with  the  notices  of  the  kings,  though  a
connected  examination  of  these  would  be  required  to
make  this  appear  as  probable  as  it  really  is.  To
suppose  that  this  Shaul  was  a  foreign  conqueror  and
founder  of  a  dynasty,1  is  a  serious  error.  Certainly  it
is  plausible  at  first  sight  to  identify  'the  river'  (in  the
phrase  '  Rehoboth  by  the  river  '  )  with  the  Euphrates
(see  Onk.  ),  and  to  compare  the  Rehoboth-Ir  of  Gen.
10  ii.  Sayce  (Hibb.  Lect.  55)  would  even  identify
our  Rehoboth  with  Babylon,  and  make  Saul  the
Hebraised  form  of  Savul  or  Sawul  (cp  §  i),  which
he  regards  as  a  name  of  the  Babylonian  sun-god  ;  2
Furrer,  however,  thinks  of  a  place  called  Rahaba,  on  the
W.  side  of  the  Euphrates  (Riehm's  H\\'B  1291).  But
all  this  is  even  hazier  than  the  speculations  about  Reho
both-Ir  in  Gen.  10  ii.  nnjri  and  Q-IXO  -TO  (Gen.  15  18)  may
both  mean  'the  stream  of  Musri,'  —  i.e.,  some  wady
in  the  Negeb,  perhaps  the  Wady  el-'Aris,  the  border-
stream  of  the  N.  Arabian  land  of  Musri  (see  EGYPT,
BROOK  OF  ;  ABEL-MIXRAIM,  but  cp  SHIHOK),  so  that
'Rehoboth'  is  er-Ruhaibeh,  the  RKHOBOTH  (</.*'.)  of
Gen.  -2622,  SW.  of  Beersheba.  Cp  BKLA,  PETHOR.
See  also  SHAUL.

See  WMM  As.  u.  Ettr.  134(^7'  2  115).  An  ancient  Egyptian
text  mentions  Ra-ph  and  R-hu-bu-ra-ti  next  to  Naharu  (the
'stream').  The  Robotha  in  Gebalene  (OS  28677;  14175)  is
not  to  be  compared.  T.  K.  C.

SAVARAN  (AYAP&N  [AtfV]).  i  Mace.  643,  RV
'  A  varan.'  See  ELEAZAR,  9  ;  MACCABEES  i.,  §  3  [2].


4-  Uxxi[i].

SAW.  The  saws  of  the  Egyptians,  so  far  as  known,
were  all  straight  and  single-handed  ;  but  the  double-
handed  saw  seems  to  have  been  known  to  the  Assyrians
(Layard,  Nin.  and  Bab.,  195),  and  we  suppose  from
the  reference  in  i  K.  must  have  been  known  to  the
Hebrews.  Cp  HANDICRAFTS,  §  2/  On  the  Egyptian
saws  see  especially  Petrie,  Temple  of  Gizeh,  \T$ff.
Petrie  infers  that  the  blades  of  the  saws  were  of  bronze,
and  that  jewel-points  were  sometimes  fixed  in  the  teeth.
Circular  saws  were  also  employed.  According  to
Schliemann  (Tiryns,  264  /.)  the  ancient  Mycenean  saw
took  the  form  of  an  ordinary  knife  or  blade.  See,
further,  Diet.  Class.  Ant.,  s.v.  '  serra,'  and  for  Egyptian
saws,  Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.lrii,  and  illustration,  1401  (nos.
7,  8).

The  OT  words  for  '  saw  '  are  :  —

1.  tnassor, "lili'D,  npiiav,  serra,  used for cutting wood,  Is.
10i5t.

2.  megerah, rnJO,  2  S.  12  31 [I i  Ch.  203/>(in  i  Ch.  20  3^-  it  is

usual  to  emend  nvija  into  rmTJD,  'axes,'  after  28.1231  [so
already  EV])  ;  used  for  cutting  stone,  i  K.  7  9  (e«  SiacmjjixaTOS
=  nyiJ32i  cp  0  6).  See  AXE,  6.

[There  is  a  remarkable  difference  of  expression
between  i  Ch.  20s  and  2  S.  1231.  The  i  Ch.  passage
has  rnssa  njj"i,  'and  he  sawed  (them)  with  saws'  (the
verb  corresponding  to  iitra),  bLfirpivtv  [<Jt)L  ^Kpurfv  ^c]
Trpiocriv  ;  Yg.  fecit  super  eos  tribulas  .  .  .  ita  ut  dis.
secarcntur  et  contererentur.  2  S.  1231  has  maaa  cb"i,
K.o.1  (drjKfv  e»'  T<j3  wpiwi  (&l-  Sifirpifffv  tv  irpiotn]  ;  Vg.
serravit.  That  the  Chronicler's  statement  gives  a  gross
caricature  of  David,  is  becoming  more  and  more  generally

was  u  corruption  of  ^3^3.  Cp  '  Jabesh-gilead  '  in  i  S.  11  for
'  Beth-gilgal.'  Also  that  -m  NS  in  Am.  (i  13  is  most  probably  a
corruption  of  nyS^  pp^  (Beth-gilead).  The  two  cities  conquered
by  the  Israelites  appear  to  have  been  Reth-gileacl  —  i.e.,  Beth-
jerahmeel  —  and  either  Mahanaim  or  Horonaim.  See  further
MAHANAIM,  and  cp  Crit.  Rib.

1  See  Buhl,  Gesch.  der  Edomiter,  47.

2  To illustrate Sayce's theory, see Schr. KA  7TO 576
(  =  COT  8256). Del.  Ass.  HWR  explains  savtullu,  'a  tree  or
|:!ant.' The  same  ideograph  elsewhere  =  niiru,  'light.'

4315


admitted,  and  G.  Hoffmann's  explanation  (  '  he  set  them
at  the  saw  and  at  the  iron  pickaxes,'  etc.)  gains  ground.
The  difficulties  in  this  explanation  are  referred  to  by
Driver  (TBS  228  /  )  ;  but  the  corruptness  of  the  whole
passage,  perhaps,  has  not  been  adequately  realised,
except  by  Klostermann.  That  able  critic's  restoration,
however,  does  not  produce  very  good  Hebrew.  If  we  take
due  account  of  the  three  verbs  N'xin,  CB"I,  and  vaym,  the
general  meaning  of  the  passage  ought  to  be  clear.  The
people  of  Rabbah  of  the  b'ne  Jerahmeel  (not  Rabbath-
ammon)  were  'brought  out'  from  their  city,  and
1  placed  '  in  other  parts  of  David's  realm  ;  so  he  '  made
(them)  to  pass  '  from  Jerahmeel.1  ,TUO  must,  therefore,
be  a  place-name.2  This  fits  in  with  other  results  of  a
more  searching  criticism  of  the  history  of  David  and
Solomon.  Cp  SOLOMON,  and  see  Crit.  Bib.

T.  K.  c.]

SCAB.  i.  31|,  gdrdbh,  Dt.  2827  AV,  RV  '  scurvy.'
See  DISEASES,  8.

2. ns1!",  yallepheth,  Lev.  21  20  22  22!. See  DISEASES,  4.

SCAFFOLD  (li»3,  BACIC,  basis]  in  EV  of  2  Ch.  613
denotes  the  specially-made  platform  or  stage  of  bronze
on  which  Solomon  stood  and  kneeled  at  the  dedication
of  the  temple.  Kiyyor  is  elsewhere  rendered  pot,  basin,
or  laver  ;  and  interpreters,  therefore,  have  been  led  to
suppose  that  Solomon's  platform  also  was  '  probably
round,  bowl-like  in  shape'  (so  BDB,  s.  v.  );  this,  how
ever,  is  not  a  likely  shape,  nor  is  it  suggested  by  the
terms  of  length,  breadth  (each  5  cubits),  and  height
(3  cubits)  in  which  its  dimensions  are  given.  Kloster
mann  followed  by  Oettli  (ad  loc.  ]  proposes,  therefore,
to  emend  to  p>3  (\/p3)  I  cp  (5,  Yg.  (cp  also  j|,  used

of  the  laver  ;  IVD,  itself,  is  sometimes  written  va).

With  the  measurements  cp  the  description  of  the  '  base  '  in
i  K.  "27  (see  LAVER,  §  i)  ;  four  (©,  Jos.  five)  cubits  long,  the
same  in  breadth,  and  three  (<B5,  Jos.  six)  high.  The  position,
too,  would  correspond  with  P's  statement  (see  LAVEK,  §  2),  as
also  would  the  inference  that  there  was  only  one  base  in  the
temple.  Finally,  it  should  be  noticed,  that  v^y  1CJ?'li  f°r
which  EV  has  'stood  upon  it,'  means  equally  naturally  'stood
by  the  side  of  it  '  (on  this  not  infrequent  use  of  ^y,  see  BDB  s.v.
756  a),  in  which  case  the  MT  li'3  may  refer  to  the  'laver'
itself,  and  no  emendation  is  necessary.

2- it^l'D,  AVmg-,  Neh.  9  4. See  STAIRS,  3.

SCALL  (pn3,  Lev.  13  30^:). See  LEPROSY,  §  2.

SCAPEGOAT  (!?|NJlf),  Lev.  168/!  AV,  RV  AXAZEL.

SCARECROW  (rrpoBACKANiON),  Baruch  670  [69].
See  GARDEN,  §  9  (end).  Ewald,  Graetz,  Giesebrecht,
etc.,  restore  the  'scarecrow'  in  Jer.  10s  (late),  and
RV'n£-  accordingly  renders  nrpo  ~>sn3,  '  like  a  pillar  in
a  garden  of  cucumbers.  '

SCARLET  is  used  in  EV  as  rendering  the  following
words  and  phrases  :  —

1.  sanf,  iyy  (Gen.  8828  and many  other  places), a
common  word  of  uncertain  etymology,  which  may  be
connected  either  with  Ar.  sana  —  according  to  Philippi
(7.D.MG  8279)  this  root  has  for  its  original  sense  '  to  be
bright  or  shining'  —  or  with  Ass.  Hinitu,  '  a  dyed  cloth.
The  plur.  sdnim  is  found  twice,  Is.  1  18  Prov.  31  21.

2.  The fuller sfni tola  '  atk (nySin  -jy, lit. '  worm-
scarlet1)  occurs  in  Lev.  14  (five  times)  and  in  Xu.  196.
3. Another  equivalent  phrase  is  the toldath  sani  (nyVw
•ir,  lit. '  scarlet  -worm  ')  so  frequent  in  Exodus,  as  well
as  (4)  the  shorter  tola (y^'m)  of  Is.  1  18  (EV  '  crimson  ')
and Lam.  4  5. 5. A Pu'al participle, mtthullaim
(c'yWr;,  derived  from  tola],  occurs  once  (Nah.  2  3  [4])  to
signify  '  clothed  in  scarlet.'  3


(v.  26), D^O  (»•  30),  and  p^o  (P. 31  ', prefixed  2
should  be  c)  all  probably  come  from  SKDm*-

2  miua  (cp  ASA,  6)  is  a  variant  to  m^D- Read,  perhaps,
a"W3  or  D'713  '(the  land  of)  the  Geshurites'  or  '  Girzites.

3  But  see  SHOE,  §  3,  and  cp  Crit.  Bib.


SCEPTRE

6.  ic6KKivos  in  Mt.  2"  28 Heb.  919  Rev.  17s  has,  no
doubt,  the  same  meaning  as  sdni,  of  which  it  is  <5's
rendering. See  CRIMSON.

7.  arglwdna,  KJijPN,  the  Aram, equivalent  of  p-nx,
is  in  Dan.  5  7  16  29  rendered  '  scarlet '  in  AV  ( AVme-  RV
4  purple'),  and  AVms-  suggests  the  same  rendering  for
the  Hebrew  word  in  Ezek.  27  7. See  COLOURS,  §  14  ;
PURPLE.  N.  M.

SCEPTRE,  i.  t33tJ>,  &bet,  cp  Ass.  sibtu.  In  Nu.
24 17  (EV)  we  read  of  a  'sceptre'  which  shall  smite
1  Terms  ^oab.  The  translators  apparently  take
'  sceptre '  as  a  symbolic  expression  for
'king.1  Here,  however,  as  also  in  Ps.  2p  (EV  'rod'),
stbet  seems  to  denote  rather  a  warlike  instrument — a
mace.  For  Egyptian  representations  of  such  a  weapon
see  Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.  l2i6/.  3  frontispiece;  some,  too,
will  remember  the  large  heavy  maces  of  limestone
with  relief  sculptures,  of  the  period  before  the  sixth
dynasty,  exhibited  lately  (1900)  in  London,  and  found
by  Mr.  Quibell  at  Kom  el-Ahmar  (Hierakonpolis).  An
'  iron  sebet '  is  referred  to  in  the  traditional  text  of  Ps.
2g  ;  such  a  weapon  was,  at  any  rate,  known  to  the  last
editor  of  the  Psalter  (cp  the  aiSypd-ri  Kopvvq  of  //.  7  140).
For  a  representation  of  Asur-nasir-pal  holding  a  short
staff  or  sceptre  see  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art  in  Ass.  2123;
and  for  another  of  Sargon  with  a  long  one,  see  SARGON.
In  Ps.  125s  'sceptre'  is  adequate  (so  RV,  AV  '  rod')  ;
in  Is.  14s  (EV  sceptre)  we  seem  to  need  'staff'  as  a
parallel  to  '  rod.'  Less  common  are  : —

2.  a'aiE*,  sarblt,  a  late  form  of  scbet,  perhaps  influenced  by
<TKT\irrpov  (Ko.  Lehrgeb.  2  152),  only  in  Estb.  4  n  0284.

3.  pphD, melwkek, V'ppn, Nu.  21  18  RVt  (|| ruyefti), Gen.
49  10  RV'(||  B3s?);  Ps.  607[8]  RV  (  =  Ps.  108s[9]  RV). In  all
these  three  passages,  however,  Cheyne  suspects  that  the  text  is
corrupt. In  Nu.  21  18  and  in  Ps.  60  7  [8]'o  has  probably  come
from  ^KSrtT  Jerahmeel(Che.),  and  in  Gen.  49  10  "Q  means  a  ruler
(read,  in  ||,  DSjr). See  SHILOH,  i,  Che.  Ps.P),  and  Crit.  Bib.  ;
but  cp  Moore,  Judges,  153  (on  Judg.  5  14).

As  to  the  form  of  the  sceptre,  it  is  plausible  to  hold
that  it  was  a  reminiscence  of  the  shepherd's  staff  or

2.  Form  PerhaPs  crook  (CP  Ass-  re'ii=r\y\  [i]  shep
herd,  [2]  ruler).  Koran,  Sur.  20 17 /.  maybe
quoted  in  illustration.  '  What  is  that  in  thy  right
hand,  O  Moses?'  Said  he,  '  It  is  my  staff  on  which  I
lean,  and  wherewith  I  beat  down  leaves  for  my  flock,
and  for  which  I  have  other  uses. '  We  find  the  shep
herd's  crook  (combined  with  the  whip  —  mistaken  by
Diod.  Siculus  [83]  for  a  plough)  as  an  emblem  of
Egyptian  royalty  and  vice-royalty ;  see  Erman,  Eg.
60,  63,  also  Wilk.  Anc.  Eg,  837'  (early,  and  Seti  I.)
and  8128  (Ah,  son  of  Athor),  1 183  (no.  7).  As  the
emblem  of  Hebrew  royalty  we  find  not  only  a  '  rod '  or
staff  (Ezek.  19  ii  14)  but  a  spear  (hanith,  from  hdndh,
'  to  bend,  curve,  bend  down  '),  i  S.  18io  226  ;  in  Is.  24
Joel  3 10  the  '  spear  '  is  parallel  to  the  '  pruning-hook, '
out  of  which  it  might  conceivably,  according  to  the
writers,  be  made.

To  illustrate  the  'golden  sceptre'  of  Esth.  4n  62  84,  see
Middleton  in  EB,  s.v.  '  Sceptre  '  ;  Diet.  Gr.  and  Rom.  Antiq.,
s.v.  '  Sceptrum  ' ;  and  Frazer,  Pans.  5  210  ff.

SCEVA  (CKGYAC),  'a  Jew,  a  chief- priest,'  whose
seven  'sons'  (or  disciples  [Baur])  practised  exorcism
at  Ephesus,  with  the  results  described  with  reference  to
two  of  them  (v.  16  a^oTtpuv,  but  TR  avrwv)  in  Acts
1914-17.  See  EXORCISTS.  Schiirer  thinks  that  dpxtfpfws
(gen.)  in  v.  14  means  'member  of  a  high -priestly
family. '  More  plausibly  we  might  read  ap\Luvvay^-yov  ;
the  tep&os  of  D  seems  too  slight  an  emendation.  As  to
the  name  Sceva,  it  may  be  a  Grsecised  Latin  name
(Blass).  T.  K.  c.

SCHOOLS. See  EDUCATION.

SCIMITAR  (AKINAKHC),  Judith  136  169  RV,  AV
'fauchion.'  See  SWORD,  WEAPONS,  §  i.

SCORPION  (Tjipr,  'akrdb,  CKORTTIOC).  Scorpions
are  especially  common  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  and  the

4317


SCORPION

desert  of  et-Tih  (cp  Dt.  815,  and  see  AKRABBIM),  and
the  Arabian  desert  generally.

'  Scorpions  lurk  under  the  cool  stones,'  says  Doughty  ;
'  I  have  found  them  in  my  tent,  upon  my  clothing,  but


1.  References.


never  had


hurt-


have  seen


many  grown  persons  and  children
bitten,  but  the  sting  is  not  perilous  ;  some  wise  man  is
called  to  "read  "  over  them  '  (Ar.  Des.  1  328  ;  Doughty's
statements  about  Arabia  must  not  be  taken  too  gener-
ally  I  CP  §  3)-  The  form  of  expression,  therefore,  in
Lk.  10  19  ('  I  empower  you  to  tread  upon  serpents  and
scorpions')  is  not  quite  so  striking  as  that  in  the  ||
passage,  Ps.  91  13  <g  (  '  Thou  shall  go  upon  the  asp  and
the  basilisk  '),  and  in  the  description  of  the  locusts  from
the  '  pit  of  the  abyss  '  the  weakest  part  may  seem  to
be  the  detail  of  their  '  tails  like  (those  of)  scorpions  '
(Rev.  9  10,  see  RV).  From  a  picturesque  point  of  view,
however,  this  detail  is  quite  in  place  ;  it  is  indeed  a
formidable  appearance  which  the  '  appendages  '  of  the
scorpion  present.

Ezekiel  apparently  likens  bitter  words  to  the  sting  of  a
scorpion  (Ezek.  26);  so,  perhaps,  Ecclus.  2(3  7.  In  i  K.  12  n  14
(2  Ch.  101114)  'whips'  and  'scorpions'  are  parallel,  but  the
'  scorpions  '  intended  are  worse  than  those  of  nature  (see  WHIP).!
In  i  Mace.  051  the  forcible  term  cncopTrt'Sia  ('little  scorpions')
is  used  for  instruments  for  hurling  darts  ;  cp  Cass.  Bell.  Gall.
725,  'scorpionem.'  The  term,  weakened  by  EV  into  'pieces'
(without  mg.),  arose  from  the  resemblance  of  part  of  the  instru
ment  to  the  uplifted  tail  of  a  scorpion.

There  is  also  a  reference  to  the  scorpion  in  Lk.  11  12,
which  needs  fresh  investigation.  The  saying  of  which,

2.  Criticism: 'Jl  L,k"  k  f°rms  Part'  occurs  also  in
Lk  11  12  /9-n  ; but there a hungry son

appears  asking  his  father  for  a  loaf,
or  a  fish,  confident  that  he  will  not  get  a  stone  or  even
a  serpent,  whereas  in  Lk.  (in  the  ordinary  texts)  the  son
is  also  represented  as  asking  for  an  egg,  sure  that  he
will  not  get  a  scorpion.  There  is  good  evidence  (cod.
B,  Vet.  Lat.  ,  Syr.  Sin.  )  for  the  omission  of  the  loaf  and
the  stone  in  Lk.,  and  Plummer  and  Jiilicher  accept  this
form  of  the  text,  the  insertion  from  Mt.  being,  it  is
urged,  more  probable  than  the  omission.  But  how  can
Lk.  have  been  satisfied  with  such  a  form  of  the  saying  ?
The  hungry  child's  first  request  is  for  bread,  and  the
connection  in  which  the  saying  stands  being  more
original  in  Lk.  than  in  Mt.  ,  we  have  a  right  to  presume
that  Lk.  did  not  omit  the  loaf  and  the  stone.  Hut  there
is  this  prior  difficulty  to  meet.  How  came  Lk.  to  sup
pose  that  one  of  the  antitheses  of  Jesus  was  egg  and
scorpion  ?  One  commentator  suggests  that  '  scorpion  '
may  mean  the  egg  of  a  scorpion  ;  another,  that  when
it  is  dormant,  a  scorpion  is  egg-shaped.  Tristram
passes  over  this  point,  and  remarks  (NHB\yx*)  that
Jesus  adopts  a  current  Greek  proverb,  '  a  scorpion
instead  of  a  perch'  dvrl  TrepKijs  ffKOpwiov)  ;  similarly
Jiilicher  (Gleichnisreden,  239).  But  if  we  compare  this
Greek  proverb,  we  are  bound  to  show  either  that  <^6f
can  mean  '  fish  '  or  some  kind  of  fish,  or  that  ubv  can
have  been  corrupted  out  of  some  Greek  word  meaning
fish.  The  second  alternative  alone  is  feasible  ;  (pov
may  be  a  corruption  of  6\j/ov,  which  does  not  indeed
occur  in  the  NT,  but  might  occur  just  as  well  as
fydpiov.-  The  third  pair  of  objects  thus  becomes
'fish'  (6\f/ov)  and  'scorpion'  (cr/oopTn'os).  These  are
variants  to  '  fish  '  (l^Ous)  and  '  serpent  '  (&<pis).  There
are  two  pairs,  not  three,  and  the  trouble  of  explaining
the  egg  is  removed.  '  Scorpion  '  is  probably  correct.

Scorpions  are  nocturnal  in  habit,  and  carnivorous,
living  on  the  juices  of  insects,  spiders,  etc.,  which  they

3.  Species,  etc.  kil1  uwit,h their p°in!.ed st-,ng  ^T&
on  the  last  joint  of  their  tail. When

the  animal  is  running  about,  the  tail  is  often  carried
turned  forward  over  the  trunk.  Scorpions  are  provided
with  a  pair  of  small  clawed  appendages  on  the  head,
and  these  are  followed  by  a  large  pair  of  nippers  or

1  The Q'aipj; may refer to scarifying instruments (Ass.
zukdkipu,  syn.  akralni)  ;  so  Uhnpfund,  BA  4  224.

2  Both  words  are  used  in  the  Greek  Tobit.

4318


SCOURGE,  SCOURGING

jointed  claws  which  resemble  those  of  a  lobster  and
which  serve  to  catch  and  hold  their  prey.  Behind
these  are  four  pairs  of  walking  legs.  The  sting  is  very
painful,  and  if  it  occurs  in  such  a  part  of  the  body  as
the  throat,  or  if  the  sufferer  be  out  of  health,  may  cause
death.

Zoologically  scorpions  belong  to  the  group  Scorpiones  of  the
Arachnida.  The  following  species  are  described  from  Syria,
Palestine,  and  Sinai,  Bulnus  australis,  B.  cmssuauda,  B.
bicoivr,  B.  judaicus  confined  to  these  regions,  B.  occitanus,  B.
quiitatiestriatMs,  Butheolus  melanurus,  Xtbo  kiereckonticus,
It.jhaxpes.  Numerous  other  species  are  recorded  from  Egypt,
Arabia,  and  Asia  Minor.1  T.  K.  C. ,  §  I  f.  \  A.  E.  S. ,  §  3.

SCOURGE,  SCOURGING.  See  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,
§  12.  The  words  are  : —

1.  ~i~.  stt,  i  K.  121114 a  Ch.  101114  Prov.  263 Nah.  3  2.
Metaphorically,  of  the  tongue  (Job  5  21),  and  of  a  divine  judg
ment,  Is.  10  26  ±5  15  (here,  of  invasion),  Job  V»  23. Cp  WHIP.

2.  EC's?,  sffftfjosh.  '23  13!  (metaphorically  ;  cp  '  plague  ').

3.  rrf2-  biAltorttk,  Lev.  li'io.t  AV  'she  shall  be  scourged,'
AV'mg.  (following  Mishnah)  'there  shall  be  a  scourging,'  RC"
'  they  shall  be  punished.'  RVnuj.  (probably  rightly)  'there  shall
be  inquisition  '  (i.e.,  judicial  inquiry).

The  NT  words  are  : —

4.  ficwrrif  (Mk.  3  io.  etc),  naoTtyooi  (Mt.  10  17,  etc.),  nao~ri£u
(Acts  -2-2  25). See  SYNAGOGUE,  §  4  (a).

5.  <fyxrx«AA6« (Mt.  2726 Mk.  15  15), .JpaycAAioi- (Jn.  2  15);
\*a.\..jiagiUi<,jia£tllum. Cp  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,  §  12.

SCREECH  OWL  (rvW>).  Is.34i4,  RV  'night-
monster.'  RV"^-  LlLITH.

SCREEN  i^C^;  erriCTTACTpON).  Ex.  2636;  see
TABERNACLE.

SCRIBE. To do  justice  to  this  heading  it  is not

enough  to  register  and  explain  the  three  Hebrew  words

, _,  rendered '  scribe ' in AV and RV taken

1.  16miS.  t  1-1-  T  i  r

together.  \\  e  are  bound  to  notice  the  fact
that  ©  sometimes  renders  TBJT  \s5ter}  as  well  as  ~sz
(sJfhir)  by  ypa.fjifJM.Tfi's,  and  to  consider  the  sense
which  this  queen  of  the  versions  gives  to  that  Greek
word.  The  two  Hebrew  words  will  illustrate  what  is
said  elsewhere  in  this  work  on  writing,  literature  (in  its
various  branches),  and  government  ;  in  studying  them
we  shall  see  how  sspfu-r  came  to  mean  '  theologian,'  and
sjftr  came  to  signify  '  official. '  The  strange  word  tiphsar
("£2t.  rendered  '  scribe  '  in  RV:"£-  at  Xah.  817,  will  also
have  to  be  considered  ;  the  discovery  of  the  meaning  of
this  word  suggests  literary  influences,  which  are  likely
to  receive  more  and  more  justification.

For  a  hardly  less  strange  word,  kartcnt  (;;;n-X  rendered
'  sacred  scribe  '  in  RYni£.  at  Gen.  41  8.  etc.,  see  MAGIC  (§  3);  the
rendering  of  RVmg.  is  not  very  probable,  and  has  no  ancient
support  (but  cp  Ges.-Bu.  s.-:).

Ssphsr  (Ass.  sapiru)  seems  to  be  a  denom.  of  sfpher
(Ass.  sipru),  and  to  judge  from  the  Assyrian  usage

2.  The  sopher  sf<^r  ma-v  ™®™&?  have  had  a  ve™l

,  • . , . wide sense, including everv sort of
and  soter.

message, and even permitting the

rendering  '  command. '  It  is  a  question  whether  sfyher
in  Tudg.  5 14  should  not  be  taken  in  accordance  with  this
(possible)  early  usage  as  '  commander' ;  but  to  this  we
will  return  presently.  The  root-meaning  of  sir.  on
the  other  hand,  is  '  to  write  ' ;  the  distinction  should  be
remembered—  sapjru  in  Ass.  =  •  to  send  ' ;  safdru  =  '  to
write,'  cp  Aram,  setdrj,  'document.'  In  Heb.  'to
write'  is  not  spr  (-IEC!  or  //rose*  I.  but  ktb  (2,1;)  (see
the  Lexicons),  a  word  not  found  in  Ass.  Presumably,
therefore,  ssphcr  <  also,  of  course,  scpher  ;  cp  EPISTOLARY
LITERATURE,  §  5)  and  fjffr  were  borrowed  from
Assyrian  or  Babylonian.  We  find  the  Ass.  noun  sjpint
used  as  a  syn.  of  aklu,  '  secretary '  ;  one  or  the  other
term  was  often  wanted,  for  the  most  different  classes
needed  secretaries  to  prepare  legal  documents  and  other
business  records.  So,  doubtless,  among  the  Israelites.
In  Judg.  5 14,  as  also  in  Is.  33 18,  we  meet  with  a  sopher
in  the  army  (the  Isaiah  passage,  being  a  late  literary
work,  may  be  used  as  a  Jewish  record).  There  were,

1  Kraepelin,  '  Scorpiones  u.  Pedipalpi,'  Das  Tkierreich,  8
Lief.,  Berlin,  1899.


SCRIBE

no  doubt,  different  grades  of  military  sephtrim  ;  the
highest  would  be  the  military  adjutant  who  enrolled  the
warriors,  and  who  might  even  (but  this  is  an  uncertain
inference1  from  a  K.  2019)  be  the  same  person  as  the
'  captain  of  the  host  '  (cp  Ass.  sapiru,  2.  '  ruler  ').  The
king,  too,  naturally  had  his  sephtr  (2  S.  817  20  25  2  K.
12io[n],  etc.),  EV"1*-  '  secretary  '  (see  GOVERNMENT.
§  2  1  ).  Only  twice  do  we  find  the  sing.  &jter  —  viz.  ,  in
Prov.  67  (between  kdsin  and  mdSil)  and  in  2  Ch.  26  n
(of  a  military  enroller,  syn.  with  sC'phfr).*  Repeatedly,
however,  the  Mffrim  are  mentioned  either  next  to  the
'  elders  '  of  the  people  (Nu.  11  16  Dt.  299  [io]  31  28  Josh.
833  23a  24i),  or  beside  the  'judges'  (Josh.  833  23a  24i
Dt.  16  18).  Proclamations  or  orders  in  time  of  war  were
made  known  through  them  (Dt.  20s  8/.  Josh.  1  io  82).

In  Ex.  6610,  etc.,  the  Israelitish  overseers  appointed  by  the
Egyptian  taskmasters  are  designated  sftfrim  ;  0  gives  ypoji-
^arcif  ;  cp  t&'s  rendering  of  sdtfr  in  Prov.  6  7,  TO*  eu-ayca^oira.
The  term  also  occurs  six  times  in  Chronicles  (i  Ch.  284  2629  27  i
2  Ch.  19  ii  26  1  1  34  13).  Evidently  sf  phi-rim  and  sfterim  were
synon.  terms,  and  could  be  used  of  any  subordinate  office  which
required  ability  to  write.  No  doubt,  too,  in  I  Mace.  5  42


Thus  the  later  Jewish  meaning  of  sophfr  (see  SCRIBES
AND  PHARISEES)  must  be  kept  carefully  apart,  when
„  T.*-  w"e  are  considering  the  old  and  very  slowly
-  forgotten  meaning  of  the  term.  When  the
,  ,  -  plur.  slpharim  took  the  new  sense  of  holy
writings  (Dan.  9z.  /3iJ\oi,  (5  Theod.  ),  it
was  natural  that  sc-phcr  should  come  to  mean  theologian
or  'lawyer'  (so  EV  for  ro/uxos).  But  the  older
meaning  was  precisely  that  which  was  most  natural  to
Alexandrian  Jews.  Both  under  the  Pharaohs  and
under  the  Ptolemies  a  '  scribe  '  was  a  government
clerk,  or  registrar  —  in  short,  an  official  (see  HISTORICAL
LITERATURE,  §§  3,  5).  He  was  not  a  theologian  ;
the  priests  were  the  theologians.  He  was  not  properly
a  military  man,  for  he  was  exempt  from  military  service.
Hence  in  Judg.  014  s?f>tf  sC'pher  (TSO  E:~)  becomes
5£7ry77<rea>s  7pa^areu>j  (<5B),  '  the  report  of  an  official  '(?),
and  in  Is.  33  18  scpkfr  becomes  ol  7pa^/iarjKoi.  Under
the  Ptolemies,  it  is  true,  the  term  •  scribe  '  received  a
military  colouring  ;  but,  for  clearness'  sake,  it  was
usual  to  fill  out  the  phrase  and  put  7/xt/u.uarei>s  TUV
fj.a\i/jMjv  or  r>2'i'  Svrdftewr.3

Svi-dfitif  is  actually  found  once  in  £,  which  gives  in  Jer.
5'2  25  (see  note  i)T<>ryp<m/iaTeo  rwr  SvrafLcuic,  reading  f*^^'"  "!?-•
The  term  ypanfiaTOfttTayayfvs  in  ®,  Ex.  182125  (not  in  B  in
these  two  passages)  Dt.  1  15  1<>  18  299(10]  31  28,  awaits  explana
tion  from  the  papyri.

The  third  and  most  difficult  word  remains  —  a  word

on  which  (5  throws  no  light,4  and  for  which  our  revisers

_. ,  in  their  uncertainty  give  two  renderings  —

pQsar. ,  marsnal  •  anci -scribe.' 'Marshal,'  no

doubt,  was  chosen  for  tiphsar  or  (  Xah.  )  tapfisar.  because

this  sense  suited  Jer.  51  27. But  it  can  be  shown  that  it

does  not  suit  Nah.  817,  and  in  Jer.  (I.e.  )  we  expect  the

name  of  a  country  ;  here  TDBC  is  probably  corrupt  (see

Crit. Bib.  ). In fact, tiphsar, as Lenormant first

showed,5  is  the  Ass.  dup-sarm, '  tablet-writer,6  which

1  MT  reads  here  N=V~  Ijr  ~?i:~,  but  C  presupposes  1EC,
whilst  L  reads  fEw  (TOC  iacVii')  and  Vg.  Scfhsr,  both  as  proper
names,  ""'r-,  too,  is  MT's  reading  in  Jer.  6225  (®  does  not  ex
press  •>£•).  '  Saphan  '  is  adopted  from®1-  (Kings)  by  Klo.:  'scribe
of  the  general  is  also  a  possible  rendering  in  Jer.,  and  is
preferred  by  Kamph.  in  Kau.  HS  and  Nowack  {A  rch.  1  360).
Otherwise  K^STl  "V  w"*"  be  a  gloss  (but  cp  Giesebrecht).

-  iP.  however,  gives  «PITJS  for  Zftrr.  •ypaiifiarcvt  for  ssfhcr.

3  Deissmann,  Bibelstvdifn,  106(1895).

4  In  Jer. <B  gives  /3<Ao<rrotrtts,  a  mere  guess(?); 5° Nah.
6 OTUUOCTO? ox>v,  which  seems  to  represent  ~;iv>  a  possible
variant  to  riZTKr which  in  «P's  Heb.  text  supplanted  -—  CB21-
owinj  to  the  similarity  of  7*1  to  •};•%

5  La  fangvt  primitive  tf(  la  Chald/e,  ^65  (1875)  :  Ktmites  mr
syllabaires  cunfif>rrmes,  i86(i8?6X So  Schrader.  KA  71J'  424.

6  Halevy  (Origins  de  la  eft:  Bat.  235  [1875])  compares  </*//*.
'  tablet,'  with  New  Heb.  *]3.  column  (of  a  scroll)  or  page. Cp
also  Syr.  dappd.  '  plank,'  '  board  '  (f.f.,  Acts  2?  44). Dupp*  also
=  '  letter'  ;  see  EPISTOLARY  LITERATURE,  \  5.

4320


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

is  of  Sumerian  origin,  but  occurs  countless  times  in  the
contract-tablets.  'See  TAKPELITES.  The  proof  of  the
correctness  of  this  explanation  is  that  a  similar  one  is
equally  needful  for  the  parallel  word  -puo  (EV  'thy
crowned';  so  Kimchi,  unsuitably)  which  is  perhaps
corrupt  in  one  letter  (i  for  -i),  and  should  be  read  r^iio
(so  P.  Ruben).  Mindidu,  like  dupsarru,  occurs  often  in
contract  tablets  ;  it  means  one  who  is  legally  empowered
to  measure  wheat,  dates,  etc.  These  two  officers  are
naturally  mentioned  after  the  merchants  (Nah.  3i6).

The  same  words  (tip/tsar  and  mindidu)  have  been  recognised
by  the  present  writer  in  Is.  33  18,  where,  for  D'VlJDfTOIt  "IE3  n'K
we  should  read  D'T^D  n'N  O'lDEQ  rVN,  '  where  are  the  tablet-
writers?  where  are  the  measuring  clerks?'  (Che.  SBOT  '  Isa.'
[Heb.]),  and  mindidu  is  probably  to  be  found  also  in  Zech.  96,
where  'a  mamzer  (EV  'bastard'  ;  see  MAMZER)  shall  dwell  in
Ashdod  'should  be  '  aininditishM  dwell  in  Ashdod' — i.e. ,Ashdod
shall  be  subject  to  Assyrian  (or  foreign)  civil  functionaries  (Che.
PSBA,  May,  1900).  This  is  at  any  rate  at  once  a  possible  and
a  suitable  explanation.  T.  K.  C.

SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

In  NT  (§  if.).  Earlier  history  (§§  11-16).

Name  and  position  (§  ?,/.).  Assida=ans  =  Pharisees  (§  17).

Character  and  beliefs  (§§  5-10). Later  history  (§§  18-20).
Bibliography  (§  21).

It  is  too  often  forgotten  that  the  gospel  narratives

make only incidental references to the Scribes and

1.  Incidental J"haTrisees- The  stern  reproofs  uttered

references by  Jesus against  their arr°Sant self-


inNT.


righteousness,  narrowness,  and  deaden


ing  spiritual  pride,  were  undoubtedly
well  deserved  as  applied  to  the  later  form  of  Pharisaism  ;
but  they  do  not  aid  us  in  discovering,  either  the  funda
mental  principles  of  the  school,  or  the  causes  which
produced  such  a  religious  development.  Our  present
object  must  therefore  be,  first,  to  ascertain  what  the
two  classes  of  Jews,  designated  in  the  NT  Scribes  and
Pharisees,  really  represented  in  the  current  theological
thought,  and  thus  to  determine,  as  nearly  as  possible,
the  character  of  their  party,  and  secondly,  to  trace
their  historical  development  clown  from  its  beginnings
at  the  time  following  the  Babylonian  exile.

The  usage  of  the  terms '  Scribes '  and '  Pharisees  '

throughout the Gospels shows that a conscious dis-

2 Usase  of  tmct'on  was  made  between  them,  as  may

'writers  ^e  seen'  for  example,  from  the  common
expression '  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  'passim.
It  is  significant  that  the  word  '  Scribe '  is  not  used  by
any  evangelist  with  reference  to  single  individuals.  It
is  in  every  instance  applied  to  a  literary  class,  as  in
Mt.  729  Mk.  1  22  (more  specifically  Mt.  15 1  Mk.  822  '  the
Scribes  who  came  from  Jerusalem,'  who  naturally  were
the  most  important  and  most  influential  members  of  the
party).  Where  single  scribes  are  meant,  the  writer
usually  designates  them  'some  of  the  Scribes'  (Mt.  $3
1238  Mk.  7i),  or  else  classes  them  with  the  Pharisees,
as  just  indicated.  On  the  other  hand,  the  term
'  Pharisees '  is  frequently  used  in  passages  where  the
writer  evidently  means  to  refer  to  individual  members
of  a  certain  school  (Mt.  9n  34  1221424  Mk.  21824,  etc.).
Josephus  also  refers  to  the  Scribes  as  '  those  learned  in  the
law  '  (iepoypa;uju.aT€(.s,  BJ  vi.  5  3),  and  as  '  expositors  of  the  law  '
firarptw  efr;yr;rai  v6fj.iav,  Ant.  xvii.  6  2),  whereas  by  the  term
'sophists'  (<7o<f>ia-Ta.f,  BJ  \.  882  ii.  \^BJ^.\  he  may  mean  the
members  of  the  distinctly  Pharisaic  party,  some  of  whom
taught  _  law.  Josephus,  who  uses  the  regular  expression
<j-api<ra.loi  much  more  often  than  any  of  the  other  terms,
neglects  to  inform  his  readers  (for  example  in  Ant.  xiii.  106)  of
the  close  connection  between  the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees,  prob
ably  because  it  was  too  well-known  a  fact  to  require  explanation.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  NT,  especially  in

the  many  speeches  of  Jesus  directed  against  the  Scribes

and  Pharisees,  the  term  '  scribes  '  (usually  ypa/j./j.a.Teis)  is

used  of  those  learned  persons  who  made  a  special  study

of  the  law  ( '  the  lawyers, ' J  Lk.  1 4  3  ; '  doctors,  teachers

of  the  Law,'  vofj.odiddffKa\oi,  Lk.  617  Acts  5  34),  and  that

the  expression  '  Pharisees '  always  means  the  peculiar  body

of  men  who  affected  to  live  according  to  the  letter  of  the

1  NofiiKot ;  cp  Mt.  22  35  Lk.  7  30  10  25  11  45  52  14  3.

4321


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

law.  In  spite  of  this  evident  distinction,  however,  it  is
quite  clear  that  wherever  the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  are
mentioned  side  by  side  in  the  NT  they  were  purposely
brought  together  as  the  representatives  of  the  same
intellectual  tendency  (cp  Mt.  620  1238,  etc.).  Further
more,  in  Mk.  26,  in  the  account  of  the  cure  of  the
palsied  man,  we  find  the  term  '  Scribes '  ;  but  in  the
parallel  passage  Lk.  621,  the  expression  'Scribes  and
Pharisees'  is  used  in  an  evidently  synonymous  sense.
Finally,  the  application  of  both  terms  to  the  same
school  of  thought  is  found  in  the  later  Jewish  literature,
where  the  earlier  Scribes  of  Maccabsean  times  are
generally  made  to  call  themselves  h&kamlm,  '  learned
men,'  but  are  also  referred  to  as  '  Pharisees,'  especially
in  passages  inspired  by  hostile  Sadducee  sentiment
( Yadaim,  4  6  ff.  ;  Bab.  Sot.  22/>}.  Cp  ISRAEL,


The  meaning  of  the  name  Pharisees  ($>apiffatoi)  is
perfectly  clear. Its  original  Heb.  form  o'tfrs,  ptrushn

3.  Name (Aram-  IT"1?  N^"??)  can  signify  only  '  those
Pharisees.  who  have  been  se'  apart'— i.e., from  the

mass  of  the  people  (pixrr  Dp).  The  op
probrious  sense  in  which  the  word  was  often  used  was
imposed  upon  it  by  enemies.  In  itself  the  term  means
simply  a  school  of  ascetics1  and  is  really  quite  in
harmony  with  the  general  character  of  the  Pharisees,
who  may  have  used  it  of  themselves  at  first.  Their
own  term  for  themselves  was  habi'rim,  '  brethren  ' —
that  is  to  say,  members  of  the  true  congregation  of
Israel.

Our  data  regarding  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  would
appear  to  indicate  that,  while  the  Scribes  were  a  class

4.  Relations of  literati  t*evoted  to  the  stud>'  and
of  Scribes exPosltlon  of  the  Law, the  Pharisees

and  Pharisees.  werf  ^ore  properly  a  distinct  religious
party,  most  of  whose  members  belonged
to  the  class  of  Scribes.  The  object  of  the  Pharisees
was,  clearly,  to  live  according  to  the  Law,  which  the
orthodox  Scribes  interpreted.  It  follows,  therefore,
that  from  the  very  inception  of  the  Pharisaic  party,  its
leaders  must  have  been  orthodox  Scribes.  As  the
Sadducees  also  followed  the  written  Law,  there  must
have  been  Sadducee  Scribes  as  well,  and  it  is  highly
likely  that  there  were  also  Scribes  who  belonged  to
neither  party.  This  explains  the  distinctive  expressions
'Scribes  of  the  Pharisees'  (Mk.  2i6  Acts  209);  'the
Pharisees  and  their  Scribes'  (Lk.  030),  from  which
it  is  evident  that  not  all  the  Scribes  were  Pharisees.
It  is  probable  also  that  some  of  the  Pharisees,
owing  no  doubt  to  lack  of  education,  belonged  only
nominally  to  the  scribal  class  and  practised  blindly  the
precepts  laid  down  for  them  by  their  more  scholarly
scribal  leaders.-  At  the  tin\e  of  Jesus,  we  almost
always  find  Scribes  in  judicial  positions  ;  thus,  where-
ever  the  high  priests  and  elders  are  mentioned,  the
Scribes  are  generally  included — without,  however,  any
specification  as  to  whether  they  belonged  to  the  Pharisees
or  the  Sadducees,  or  whether  they  were  merely  neutral
scholars  (cp  Mt.  1621  Mk.  1127  Lk.  922,  '  the  elders  and
chief  priests  and  scribes  '  ;  Mt.  20 18,  '  the  chief  priests
and  scribes, '  Lk.  20 1  .  .  .,  '  with  the  elders' ;  Mt.  2657
Acts  612,  '  the  scribes  and  elders  ').

It  is  certainly  an  error  to  characterise  the  Pharisees  as
a  religious  sect,3  because  that  word  implies  a  divergence

_ _, . in  creed  from  other  followers  of  the  same
,  , cult. Thiswas  distinctly  not  the  position  of

no a  sec  . thg  pjj,irjseeSi  ns  t]lev  were  reany  from  their

first  development  representatives  of  orthodox  Judaism

1  The  abstract  form  JWHS  is  used  in  the  sense  'abstinence,
continence,'  Yviit.  74 1>.

2  Wellhausen's  statement  (P/iarisfier  u.  Sadduciier,  n)  that
the Pharisees were the party of the Scribes needs some
qualification.

a  EV's  rendering  in  Acts  15  5  265  is  unfortunate;  <upe<Ti?
means  here  'a  party  which  professes  certain  philosophical  prin
ciples,'  in  fact,  'a  school.'  Cp  Sext.  Emp.  1 16.  See  HERESY.

4322


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

who  distinguished  themselves  from  the  mass  of  their  co
religionists  rather  by  the  Strictness  of  their  observances
than  by  any  deviation  from  accepted  doctrine.  The
words  of  Jesus  in  Mt.  232  clearly  prove  the  Pharisees'
position  ;  '  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat  ;
all  things,  therefore,  whatsoever  they  bid  you,  these  do
and  observe'  ;  but,  he  adds,  as  a  reproof  to  their  ex-
ternalism,  '  do  ye  not  after  their  works,  for  they  say  and
do  not.'  The  sole  object  of  the  Pharisees'  religious  life
was  to  fulfil,  regardless  of  consequences,  the  require
ments  of  the  law  which  they  believed  to  be  the  clearly
expressed  will  of  Yahwe.  According  to  Josephus,  when
Petronius  asked  the  Pharisee  leaders  whether  they  were
ready  to  make  war  against  Cnesar  without  considering
his  strength  and  their  own  weakness,  they  replied  :  '  we
will  not  make  war  with  him  ;  but  still  we  will  die  rather
than  see  our  laws  set  aside.'1  This  short  sentence
expresses  most  characteristically  their  fundamental
principles.

The  Pharisaic  dogmatic  peculiarities,  as  outlined  in
§  2/1,  all  tend  to  show  how  fully  their  religious  position
n  was  in  accord  with  orthodox  Judaism,  and

,  ,ma  '  to  what  an  extent  their  opponents  the  Sad-
oral  law.  ducecs  had  remained  behind  and  apart
from  the  current  religious  development.  The  chief  point
in  the  Pharisees'  code  wherein  they  differed  from  the
Sadducees  was  their  insistence  on  the  validity  of  a  mass
of  oral  tradition  (Mt.  15 2  Mk.  7  3)  which  had  accumu
lated  in  the  course  of  centuries  as  a  supplement  to  the
written  law.  The  Pharisees  held  that  this  traditional
matter,  regulating  and  explaining  the  observance  of  the
written  law,  was  as  binding  on  the  Israelites  of  every
generation  as  the  law  itself  (Sank.  11 3),  whereas  the
Sadducees  rejected  all  such  oral  traditions  and  held
strictly  to  the  written  Mosaic  ordinances  (Ant.  xiii.  106).
Herein  the  Pharisees,  rather  than  the  Sadducees,  repre
sent  the  natural  religious  development,  because  traditions,
both  oral  and  written,  recording,  for  example,  precedents
for  the  interpretation  of  the  law  are  a  necessary  and
logical  supplement  to  a  fixed  code,  and,  whilst  they
should  not  be  accorded  the  same  authority  as  the  code
itself,  are  undoubtedly  a  permissible  and  normal  growth.2
In  the  case  of  the  Pharisees,  however,  their  reverence
for  traditional  precepts  gradually  degenerated  into  a
slavish  regard,  first,  for  the  text  of  the  law  itself,  and,
secondly,  for  a  purely  arbitrary  supplementary  oral  code
which  had  exceeded  the  legitimate  functions  and  authority
of  tradition.

This  oral  matter  had  largely  originated  among  the  scribes
since  the  time  of  Ezra,s  although  most  of  the  literary  class  un
doubtedly  believed  that  it  descended  from  Moses.  They  conse
quently  even  went  so  far  as  to  lay  down  the  principle  that,  in
case  of  a  contradiction  between  a  written  and  an  oral  precept,
the  preference  must  be  given  to  the  oral.  Their  observance  of
law  and  tradition  became,  finally,  so  thoroughly  formal,  that  the
Pharisees  actually  seemed  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  contents  of
the  Law  in  their  endeavour  to  carry  out  its  demands  in  proper
form.

The  Pharisees  believed  in  a  resurrection  of  the  body
7  Resur  ancl  in  a  ^uture  state  °*  rewal"ds  and  punish-
rection  ments  (Acts2.38-  Jos-  ^>;A  xviii.  13).  _

The  resurrection  referred  to  in  Dan.  122  is  most
probably  confined  to  the  Israelites ;  probably  the  author  of  Daniel
did  not  believe  in  eternal  life  for  the  heathen.  The  resurrection
of  all  human  beings,  however,  is  announced  in  Enoch  '22,  and
was  the  prevailing  orthodox  dogma  in  the  time  of  Jesus.  The
author  of  Dan.  12  also  teaches  the  doctrine  of  future  rewards  and
punishments  for  the  Israelites,  and  for  the  first  time  uses  the
expression  '  everlasting  life  '4  (Dan.  12  2).

The  Sadducees  denied  both  resurrection  of  the  body
and  a  future  life  (Mt.  2223  Mk.  12 18,  Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  1  4).
See  SADOUCEES,  §  6.

The  Pharisees,  unlike  the  Sadducees,  believed  in  the

1  Ant.  xviii.  83.

2  Scharer  in  Riehm,  ffirR  1 1209.

3  The  oral  law  was  regularly  codified  in  writing  in  the  second
century  A.D. Cp  LAW  LITERATURE,  §  23.

*  It  is  identical  with  the  tiay  aiuii'ios  of  the  NT,  and  must  not
be  confused  with  cSljn  ~iy  C"rt  of  Ps.  1883,  'eternal  life'  for
Israel  as  a  nation.

4323


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

existence  of  angels  and  spirits  (Acts  23  8).  This  was  a
_,,  doctrine  which  had  been  part  of  orthodox
•  \  Judaism  since  the  days  of  Zechariah  (Zech.

"  7  17  ;  520  B.C.),  and  had  in  later  times  In

come  expanded  into  a  definite  hierarchical  system  (cp
Dan.  10  13  Tobit  12  15,  and  the  Book  of  Jubilees).  Here,
also,  the  Pharisees  were  undoubtedly  the  representatives
of  orthodox  opinion.  See  ANGELS,  DEMONS.

Furthermore,  the  Pharisees  held  in  general  the  doctrine
of  predestination,  which  was  a  natural  outgrowth  of
their  strict  literalism,  attributing  the  origin  of  everything,
even  of  evil,  to  the  far-seeing  wisdom  of  Yahwe.  Unlike
the  Essenes,  however,  they  made  a  distinction  between
such  actions  as  were  controlled  entirely  by  fate  (Yahwe's
will)  and  such  as  were,  to  some  extent,  directed  by  man's
will,  which,  according  to  their  theory,  was  permitted  to
operate  within  certain  fixed  limits  —  e.g.  ,  rb  irpaTTtiv  TO.
diKaia,  'to  choose  the  right'  (Jos.  BJ\\.  814,  Ant.  xiii.
69,  xviii.  13).  The  Sadducees,  on  the  other  hand,  held
that  man's  own  will  regulated  all  the  events  of  human
life  and  determined  his  happiness  or  unhappiness.

The  Pharisees  were  the  most  eager  cultivators  of
Messianic  ideas.  They  longed  for  and  awaited  the
temporal  Messiah  of  the  earlier  Israelitish  hopes  (see
MESSIAH).  They  therefore,  quite  naturally,  were  among
the  most  bitter  opponents  of  the  more  spiritual  teachings
of  Jesus,  which  they  regarded  as  a  dangerous  departure
from  their  point  of  view.  Their  ideal  of  a  personal
Messiah  may  be  gathered  from  Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  24  where
the  author  relates  that  the  Pharisees  were  involved  in  an
intrigue  of  Pheroras  against  his  brother  Herod,  and  that
they  sided  with  Pheroras,  in  order  to  accomplish  the
overthrow  of  Herod  and  place  Pheroras  on  the  throne.
This  statement  is,  without  doubt,  based  on  a  misunder
standing  of  the  Pharisees'  motives.

In  the  first  place,  the  prophecy  which  they  made  to  Pheroras
that  Herod's  government  and  dynasty  should  cease  was  uttered
quite  openly.  This  would  hardly  have  been  done  had  the
Pharisees  really  been  plotting  directly  against  Herod  with  the
aim  of  supplanting  him  by  another.  Secondly,  they  are  said  to
have  told  Bagoas  the  eunuch  that  the  new  king  would  have
control  over  all  things  and  would  be  able  to  restore  to  him  his
powers  of  procreation.  Such  a  statement  could  scarcely  refer
to  Pheroras,  a  mere  human  monarch,  but  was  plainly  an  allusion
to  the  expected  Messiah  whose  reign,  according  to  Is.  60,  should
be  a  time  of  miraculous  fruit  fulness.1  It  was  quite  natural  that
such  an  idea  should  arise  among  the  Pharisees  at  a  time  when
the  impious  Herod  was  sitting  as  an  usurper  on  the  throne  of
David.

Jesus'  frequent  and  bitter  denunciations  of  both
Scribes  and  Pharisees  because  of  their  intense  immov-


_.
9.  Detects.


able bigotry  and  cold formalism, show


verv  cieariy  ^eir  intellectual  attitude  in
his  time.  They  bound  heavy  burdens  and  laid  them
on  men's  shoulders  (Mt.  284  Lk.  1146)—  z.<-.  ,  they  laid
the  utmost  stress  on  a  minute  external  observance  of
details.  Such  a  formalism,  although  originally  the
product  of  a  true  desire  to  stand  in  the  right  way  and
follow  the  injunction  of  Yahwe,  was  certain  to  become
the  most  crass  externalism  in  a  very  short  space  of  time.
According  to  this  system,  the  man  who  fulfilled  to  the
letter  all  the  physical  requirements  of  the  law,  such  as
fasting,  wearing  the  prescribed  dress,  etc.  ,  was  technically
'righteous,'  quite  irrespective  of  his  true  inner  feelings.
This  position  is  admirably  illustrated  by  the  well-known
comparison  between  the  Pharisee  and  the  publican  (Lk.
189-14)  Such  externalism  could  only  breed  a  love  of
religious  show,  a  tendency  to  display  their  formal
'  righteousness  '  before  the  world,  and  was  certain  not
only  to  kill  all  appreciation  of  the  spiritual  meaning
which  underlay  the  various  forms  (Mt.  61  23s),  but  also
to  engender  a  spirit  of  casuistry  which  manifested  itself
whenever  the  strict  requirements  of  an  ordinance  became
unpleasantly  onerous.

This  cannot  perhaps  be  better  illustrated,  than  by
citing  the  extraordinary  means  adopted  by  the  later
Pharisees  to  obtain  a  greater  degree  of  freedom  on  the
Sabbath  than  was  allowed  by  the  written  law.

1  On  this  discussion  see  Wellhausen,  Phar.  u.  Sadd.  25.

4324


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

According  to  Jer.  17  21-24  (post-exilic)  it  was  forbidden  to  con
vey  or  carry  anything  on  the  Sabbath  from  one  place  to  another.
It  is  clearly  stated  in  Jer.  that  the  ordinance  refers,  not  merely
to  the  city  gates,  but  also  to  private  houses  out  of  which
nothing  might  be  carried.  The  Pharisees,  whose  tradition  used
the  word  resiith,  'district,'  to  define  the  limft  in  which  carrying
was  legal,  deliberately  enlarged  the  riSiitli  artificially  according
to  their  own  pleasure.  Thus,  if  it  was  desired  to  fetch  and  carry
on  the  Sabbath  within  the  limits  of  a  street  or  large  space,  they
barred  the  street  at  either  end  or  enclosed  the  space  on  four  sides
with  beams  or  cords,  thus  making  technically  a  legally  defined
limit  (rfsfit/i)  within  which  the  labour  of  carrying  or  loading
might  go  on  I1  Cp  SABBATH,  §  4,  notes.

It  is  not  surprising  then  that  Jesus  stigmatises  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees  as  hypocrites  '  who  paid  the  tithes
but  neglected  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law ' ;  '  men
who  cleansed  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  but
within  are  full  of  extortion  and  excess' ;  '  whited  sepul
chres,  which  outwardly  appear  beautiful  but  inwardly
are  full  of  dead  men's  bones  '  (Mt.  2823^  ).

The  following  Jewish  classification  of  the  Pharisees  is
an  interesting  confirmation  of  Jesus'  estimate  of  them.
Certain  Rabbinical  writers  divided  the


10.  Jewish
classification.


Pharisees  under  seven  heads  :  2  ( i )  the


shoulder  Pharisee,  who  wore  openly  on
his  shoulders  a  list  of  his  own  good  actions.  (2)  The
temporising  Pharisee,  who  begged  for  time  in  order  to
perform  a  good  deed.  (3)  The  calculating  Pharisee
who  said  :  '  my  sins  are  more  than  counterbalanced  by
my  many  virtues.'  (4)  The  saving  Pharisee  who  said  :
'  I  will  save  a  little  from  my  modest  fortune  to  perform
a  work  of  charity. '  (5)  The  Pharisee  who  said  :  'would
that  I  knew  of  a  sin  which  I  had  committed,  in  order
that  I  might  make  reparation  by  an  act  of  virtue. '  ( 6 )
The  God-fearing  Pharisee  (Job),  (j)  The  God-loving
Pharisee  (Abraham).

Of  these,  only  the  last  two  may  be  understood  in  a
good  sense.  In  spite  of  the  general  self-righteous  tone
of  the  party,  such  epithets  were  not  infrequently  applied
to  Pharisees.  It  must  not,  of  course,  be  supposed  that
every  member  of  the  party  was  of  necessity  a  spiritless
formalist,  dead  to  all  true  religious  feeling.  We  need
only  remember  the  case  of  the  righteous  Nicodemus,  and
especially  the  words  of  Jesus  already  quoted  (Mt.  232/i ),
confirming  the  Pharisees  in  their  principle  of  observing
the  law,  but '  attacking  their  insincere  and  external
manner  of  carrying  out  their  own  precepts.  Paul  him
self  boasts  that  he  followed  the  Pharisaic  ideas  regarding
the  law  (Phil.  85),  thereby  implying  that  he  recognised
the  authority  of  both  the  written  and  the  oral  law.

In  considering  this  subject,  it  is  necessary  to  seek  the

reason  why  the  Pharisees  enjoyed  such  an  ascendancy

P -oH-Vi over  tne  people,  and  to  examine  into  the

1 ., . causes  which  had  produced  such  a  lament-

j1 able  state  of  religion  among  the  Jews  of
party. the  tjme  of  jesus These  are  all  to  be

found  in  the  history  of  the  gradual  rise,  after  the  Baby
lonian  exile,  of  the  scribal  class,  and  in  the  account  of
the  development  of  the  distinctively  Pharisaic  party  from
their  ranks.

As  both  Josephus  and  the  NT  writers,  whose  state
ments  regarding  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  are  certainly
the  most  important  that  we  have  at  our  disposal,  were
familiar  with  this  school  of  thought  only  when  it  was  in
an  advanced  state  of  development,  their  account  is  of
use  chiefly  in  showing  the  character  of  the  party  in
later  times.  The  sources  which  are  most  instructive,
however,  for  the  study  of  the  origin  and  growth  of  the
scribal  party  are  the  OT  Apocrypha  and  the  Pseud-
epigrapha,  especially  the  Psalter  of  Solomon.  Besides
these,  the  canonical  books  of  Ezra,  Neh. ,  Dan.,  Ch. ,
and  Esther  are  of  great  value  in  indicating  the  beginnings
of  the  tendencies  which  produced  the  post-exilic  literary
and  religious  development.

It  is  useless  to  seek  the  origin  of  religious  parties  as
far  back  as  the  period  of  the  Babylonian  exile.

1  See  Schiirer  in  Riehm,  HW B  2  1207.
2  See  Levy,  NHWB  4  142.

4325


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

The  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Babylonians  had  of  course

completely  shattered  the  Jewish  political  organisation,  so  that

.  . whatever  differences of  thought  there  had

12.  Pre-eXlllC been  before  that  event  could  hardly  have.  sur-

times.  vived  in  a  concrete  form  under  the  radically

changed conditions which obtained after

wards. In  the  pre-exilic  days  the  people  had  been  led,  on  the

one  hand,  by  the  priests  and  priestly  families,  who  were  the  real

literalists  and  ritualists,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  prophets  who

claimed  to  speak  in  the  name  and  with  the  special  commission

of  Yahvve,  and  who,  as  spiritual  reformers  professing  to  guide

Israel  through  the  crises  of  her  history.l  were,  in  general,  opposed

to  the  more  formal  and  worldly  priestly  caste. As  it  is  impossible

to  trace  here  any  of  the  differences  between  the  Pharisees  and

the  Sadducees  already  noted,  the  rise  of  all  of  them  must  be

sought  in  the  post-exilic  times.

Directly  after  the  return,  we  find  the  people  divided,
as  shown  by  many  passages  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,

,  „ m  ... into  two  hostile  schools,  of  which  one

lo*  A  wo  exilic  i c -,- i  •  .  .

, .  approved  of  uniting  by  marriage  with

the  neighbouring  peoples,  especially
with  the  Samaritan  mixed  race  which  they  did  not
regard  as  heathen,  and  the  other  opposed  such  amal
gamation  most  strongly,  urging  the  necessity  of  keeping
Yahwe's  favoured  nation  intact  (cp  Ezra  9i/.  102  18^).
Both  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  were  most  zealous  upholders
of  a  strict  observance  of  the  law  (Neh.  8i_^.  i^ff.},
and  the  bitterest  opponents  of  the  tendency  mani
fested  by  all  classes  of  Jews  to  contaminate  themselves
by  foreign  alliances.  Ezra's  and  Nehemiah's  earnest
efforts  to  spread  a  knowledge  of  the  law  met,  therefore,
with  only  partial  success  (Ezra  Ids  Neh.  67  10-14  10  30,
etc.  ).  The  worst  offenders  against  their  injunctions  were
among  the  prominent  high-priestly  families  who  consti
tuted  the  aristocracy,  and  in  many  cases  had  already
allied  themselves  with  outsiders  seeking  admission  into
the  Jewish  nation  (note  the  relationship  in  Neh.  618,
between  the  Persian  official  Tobiah  and  a  prominent
Jew,  and  in  13  28,  between  Sanballat  and  the  son  of  the
high  priest  Eliashib).  It  should  be  said  in  all  fairness
that  the  position  so  strongly  taken  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah
was  not  necessarily  the  strictly  legal  one,  as  their
opponents  could  cite  many  precedents  from  the  earlier
history  which  justified  a  considerate  treatment  of  such
strangers  as  wished  to  live  at  peace  and  in  union  with
Israel  (Lev.  2422  Nu.  15i6,  etc.  ;  cp  STRANGER,  §  10).
In  fact,  in  the  earlier  law  it  was  only  marriage  with
the  Canaanites  that  was  expressly  forbidden  (cp  Ex.
34  16,  but  see  Judg.  36,  etc.  ).  This  being  the  case,  the
rise  of  two  post-exilic  parties  at  bitter  feud  with  each
other  can  easily  be  understood.  The  one  consisted  of
the  high-priestly  families,  the  real  aristocracy  (Ezra
10  18),  who  were  anxious  to  connect  themselves  with
another  aristocracy  in  order  to  increase  their  own  strength,
not,  as  some  scholars  thought,  to  form  an  anti-Persian
alliance.  The  pious  leaders,  on  the  other  hand,  were
the  strictly  Jewish  party,  who  sought  to  follow  the  Law
as  they  understood  it.  These  latter  formed  the  be
ginnings  of  the  class  of  scribes  whose  founder  was  Ezra
'  the  priest  and  scribe'  (Ezra  7n  Neh.  81).  It  should
be  remarked  that  the  Book  of  Ruth,  which  derives
the  house  of  David  from  a  Moabitish  stock,  is  now
considered  by  many  to  be  a  conscious  polemic  against
the  extreme  position  of  Ezra  with  regard  to  foreign
marriages  (but  cp  RUTH  [BOOK],  §7).

From  this  time  onwards,  a  circle  of  Jewish  scholars,
many  of  whom  were  of  priestly  2  (not  high-priestly)  race,
applied  themselves  with  increasing  de-


.  ,  .
14.  Juristic


yotion  to  the  study  of  the  ,aw  from  a


int8'  juristic  point  of  view.  Among  these
men  began  and  developed  the  system  of  oral  tradition
already  mentioned  which  eventually  took  rank  in  their
minds  with  the  law  itself.  Between  the  time  of  Ezra
and  the  period  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (520-175  B.C.)
the  differences  became  even  more  accentuated  between
this  student  class  and  the  aristocratic  high-priestly  party
whose  policy  of  associating  themselves  with  the  nobility

1  Cp  Briggs,  Messianic  Proh/>ecy,  26.

2  For  priestly  Pharisees,  see  Jos. Vit.  1^391  and  ln  the
Mishna,  ^EdUyBth  21/82;  Aboth  2  8  3  2.

4326


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

of  the  adjacent  or  dominant  heathen  people  (Samaritan,
Persian,  Greek)  remained  unchanged.  By  the  time  the
Grceco-Syrian  domination  began,  the  scholarly  class,
who  edited  and  circulated  the  historical  and  prophetical
Scriptures,  treating  them  from  the  same  minute  dogmatic-
ethical  point  of  view  as  they  did  the  law,  had  founded
many  schools.

Into  these  schools  gathered  great  numbers  of  students  who,  of
course,  assisted  in  promulgating  the  peculiar  orthodox  doctrines
already  described.  In  these  schools  it  was  especially  laid  down
as  the  imperative  duty  of  the  faithful  student  to  remember
accurately  the  principles  which  he  had  learned  and  to  transmit
them  with  equal  accuracy  to  others.  This  is  fully  illustrated  by
two  characteristic  maxims  of  the  Talmud  : — (i.)  'To  him  who
forgets  a  precept  it  is  accounted  by  the  scribe  as  if  he  had  deliber
ately  forfeited  his  life."  (ii.)  'Every  one  is  bound  to  teach  with
the  exact  words  of  the  teacher.'1  In  spite  of  these  prescribed
lines  which  the  faithful  student  should  follow,  we  find  the  caste  of
the  Scribes  at  the  time  of  Christ  divided  into  two  distinct  schools,
viz.,  the  school  of  Hillel  and  the  school  of  Shammai,  which
differed  from  each  other,  however,  more  on  minor  questions  of
interpretation  than  on  any  serious  points  of  doctrine.  In
general,  the  school  of  Hillel  was  more  lenient  than  that  of
Shammai  (cp  CANON,  §  53,  n.  3).

The  Scribes  were  undoubtedly  the  originators  of  the
Synagogue  service  which  was  a  natural  result  of  their
religious  position.'2  Separated  as  they  were  from  the
high -priestly  class,  the  teachers  in  these  synagogal
schools  developed  of  necessity  into  a  well-defined  inde
pendent  order  of  religious  leaders  called  Rabbis,  whom
Sirach,  writing  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  century
B.C.,  praises  most  heartily  (39-40).  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  Scribes  had  crystallised  into  a  distinctly
political  party  as  early  as  the  time  of  Sirach.3

The  first thing  which tended to turn  the  religious

students  called Scribes into a  fierce politico-religious

1 . .,  faction  was  the  attempts  of  Antiochus

seans. EpiphaneSi so  bitterly  stigmatised in

the  book  of  Daniel,  to  Hellenise  the  entire  Jewish
people.  In  this,  Antiochus  was  aided  by  the  aristocratic
party  which,  from  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  had
manifested  marked  phil-Hellenic  tendencies.  Among
the  opponents  of  the  Hellenistic  movement  we  find
a  party  calling  themselves  Assm.'EANS  [q.v. ]  or  the
'pious,'  and  representing  the  most  rigid  development
of  the  ideas  of  the  Scribes.

They  were  strict  observers  of  the  law  (i  Mace.  2  42),  and  in
particular  so  rigid  in  their  views  of  the  Sabbath  that  they  even
refused  to  defend  themselves  on  the  holy  day  (i  Mace.  2327?!).
That  they  were  ascetics  in  their  mode  of  life  may  be  inferred
from  i  Mace.  162^1,  and  that  they  were  evidently  a  well-
organised  body  is  seen  from  the  unanimity  with  which  they
acted  together  (i  Mace.  1 13).  See  ASSID^ANS.

It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  author  of  Daniel
shows  many  Assidsean  tendencies.  We  need  observe
only  the  stress  which  he  lays  on  the  necessity  of
observing  the  law,  and  the  indifference  with  which  he
regards  the  Maccabaean  rising,  calling  it  only  '  a  little
help'  (1134).  This  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  fact
that  many  of  the  Maccabasan  combatants  attached  more
importance  to  the  political  than  to  the  religious  aspect
of  the  question  at  issue.

The  reasons  for  the  rebellion  of  the  Assicl?eans  against

Antiochus  Epiphanes  must  not  be  confounded  with  those

Th which produced  the  popular  rising  of  the

, Maccabees. The  fundamental impulse of

* the Maccabasan rebellion was a pure

**' patriotism, a true  feeling  for  the  miseries

which  the  common people  were  undergoing ( i  Mace.

2j  ff.). The  Assidaeans  were  much  more  selfish  in  their

aims, as  they  were  perfectly  willing to recognise the

dominion  of  the  heathen  king, as  long  as  they  were

left  undisturbed in  the  observance  of  the  law. They

accordingly  took  part  in  the  contest  only  long  enough

to  insure  their  own  religious  freedom  and,  as  soon  as

this  seemed  safe,  promptly  surrendered  to  Alcimus  the

Hellenistic  high  priest.

1  See  Schiirer  in  Riehm,  H1VB  2  1453.

2  See  SYNAGOGUE. Cp  Sieffert,  '  Die  jiid.  Synagoge  zur  Zeit
Jesu,'  in  Beiutis  des  Glaubcns,  1876,  pp.  $>ff.\ also  Kuenen,
Over  lie  Mannen  der  Groote  Synagoge  (Amsterdam,  1876).

3  Cp  Sieffert,  R EW  13  220.

43=7


SCRIBES  AND  PHARISEES

The  statement  in  2  Mace.  146  that  the  Assidaeans  were  the
real  Maccabacan  war  party  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  data
in  i  Mace,  regarding  them.  In  order  to  explain  this,  Hitzig
(CrJ'"/4i7)  considers  i  Mace.  7  13  as  an  interpolation.  The
probability  is,  as  was  suggested  by  Sieffert  (A' AT-)  18223),
that  i  Mace,  was  written  from  a  Maccahaean,  and  2  Mace,
from  a  Pharisaic  point  of  view.  The  Pharisees  wished  to  claim
for  themselves  the  credit  of  the  Maccabaean  victories.  The
true  attitude  of  the  Assidaeans  is  probably  given  in.i  Mace.  7  13
(see  also  Wellhausen,  i.e.  pp.  y^ff.  ;  cp  MACCABEES  i.,  §  4).

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  these  Assidasans  were
practically  identical  with  that  party  of  the  Scribes x

17.  Assidaana  whi,ch  ?\ine  to  *£  called I>harisees
=  Pharisees  er  Johannes Hyrcanus (135-105

B.C.).  As  soon  as  the  Maccabcean
dynasty  had  become  established,  the  new  rulers  assumed
the  high-priesthood,  and  so  the  ancient  aristocratic  and
high-priestly  families  who,  up  to  that  time,  had  been
the  kernel  of  the  phil-Hellenic  party,  were  now  forced  to
relinquish  their  position  as  political  leaders.  They
retained  a  great  part  of  their  influence,  however,  as
party  leaders  of  their  own  faction  which  continued
under  the  name  Sadducees  with  essentially  the  same
principles.

At the time of Hyrcanus, we  find the Pharisees

18 Runture opposed  to  the Maccabajan or Has-

witn  monasan family, with whom during

Hasmonseans  the  reign  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  they
had  temporarily  made  common  cause.

It  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  this  change  of  attitude.  As
has  already  been  stated,  the  Assidaeans  cared  little  for  political
freedom  and  were  therefore  not  in  sympathy  with  the  Maccabees
as  to  the  main  issue.  It  was  only  natural,  therefore,  that,  as  soon
as  the  Maccabees  had  succeeded  in  founding  a  temporal  dynasty,
they  should  begin  to  drift  apart  from  the  stricter  scribal  religious
class  who  had  now  quite  evidently  assumed  the  leadership  of
their  own  party.  The  first  rupture  between  the  royal  family
and  the  Pharisees  occurred  in  the  reign  of  Hyrcanus  who,
although  himself  a  Pharisee  at  first,  deliberately  left  that  party
and  became  a  Sadducee  (cp  ISRAEL,  §  78).

The  son  and  successor  of  Hyrcanus,  Alexander
Jannreus  (104-78  B.C.),  inherited  his  father's  spirit,  and
waged  a  six  years'  war  against  the  now  powerful  Phari
saic  party.  On  the  death  of  Jannreus,  however,  his
widow  and  successor  Salome  Alexandra  (78-69  B.C.),
realising  the  futility  of  attempting  to  resist  the  Pharisees,
who  were  becoming  stronger  and  stronger  under  opposi
tion,  made  peace  and  allied  herself  with  them  (Ant.
xiii.  61).  It  was  at  this  period  that  the  Pharisees
gained  over  the  minds  of  the  people  the  ascendancy,
retained  without  interruption  until  the  days  of  Jesus,
which  appears  so  plainly  in  the  pages  of  the  NT.
Indeed,  their  opponents  the  Sadducees  never  again
became  prominent  as  a  political  party  after  the  advent
of  the  Romans,  who  in  63  B.C.  appointed  the  Pharisaic
Hyrcanus,  son  of  Alexandra,  as  their  vassal-king,  giving
him  the  preference  over  his  Sadducee  brother,  Aris-
tobulus  (cp  Ps.  Sol.  2).

The  Pharisees  now  appear  as  the  leaders  of  Jewish
national  religious  feeling,  although  they  must  not  be
,  Q  .  i  j  regarded  as  forming  the  kernel  of  the
'  people,  nor  as  being  the  people's  party.
This  is  true  in  spite  of  their  violent  opposition  to  Herod,
with  whom  the  Sadducees  had  allied  themselves.  The
Pharisees  naturally  hated  all  religious  oppression  and
were  therefore  on  the  people's  side.  Their  position,
like  that  of  the  earlier  Assidasans,  was  purely  religious,
however,  and  their  object  can  be  said  to  have  been
political  only  in  so  far  as  they  desired  to  establish  the
theocratic  idea.  The  Pharisees  hated  the  Romans,
therefore,  with  perfect  consistency,  because  it  was  from
them  that  the  anti-legal  exactions  came.  Extremists

1  Sieffert  denies  the  identity  of  the  Assjdaeans  and  Pharisees,
claiming  that  they  were  merely  alike  in  principle,  and  not
necessarily  the  same  party.  He  finds  it  therefore  impossible  to
trace  the  Pharisees  farther  back  than  the  time  of  Hyrcanus  {I.e.
226).  It  seems  quite  clear,  however,  that  the  party  divisions  of
the  Hasmonaean  period  were  merely  continuations  of  early
differences  and,  as  long  as  we  can  note  in  the  Assidaeans  the
chief  characteristics  afterwards  found  in  the  Pharisees,  there  is
every  reason  to  see  in  the  later  party  the  logical  development  of
the  earlier.

43=3


SCRIP

like  the  Scribes  refused,  accordingly,  to  pay  the  foreign
tax  and  were  consequently  in  a  constant  state  of
friction  with  the  Roman  provincial  authorities  whom
the  Sadducees,  ever  true  to  their  foreign  predilections,
supported.  It  cannot  be  said,  however,  that  the  later
Sadducees  like  their  phil-Hellenic  predecessors  were
entirely  anti-national.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  bigoted  theocratic
nationalistic  tendency,  which  the  Pharisees  never  ceased

20.  Rebellion.  V?  preach'  eventually  caused  the
disastrous  an ti- Roman  rebellion  that
ended  so  fatally  for  the  Jewish  nation.  Indeed,  accord
ing  to  Josephus  (BJ  iv.  3gfr,  Ant.  xviii.  1  i),  it  was
the  Zealots,  a  distinctly  Pharisaic  development,  who
were  the  instigators  and  ringleaders  of  this  movement.
It  happened  then  that  those  who  wished  to  lead  the
people  to  righteousness  and  to  the  realisation  of  the
Messianic  hopes  of  centuries  became,  through  their
own  blind  pride,  the  chief  instruments  in  the  downfall
of  their  nation  and  religion.  The  Pharisees'  bigotry
and  narrow  short-sightedness,  therefore,  which  Jesus
had  condemned  so  frequently  and  so  vehemently,  were
punished  in  the  most  terrible  manner  conceivable.

The  literature  on  the  subject  is  very  extensive. Among  the

modern  publications  the  following  should  be  mentioned  : — Cohen,

Les Pharisccns (Paris, 1877); Ewald,

21.  Bibliography.  Gesch.  dcs  Volkes  Israelis  357  ff.  476^
(1864);  Geiger,  '  Sadd.  u.  Phar.'  in  Jiid.

Ztschr.  1-Li.ff.  (1863);  Gfrorer,  Das  Jahrhundert  d.  Heils,
1  309.^  (1838)  ;  Gratz,  Gesch.  derjuden,®  71^  455^:  ^863) ;
Hamburger,  Realencycl.fiir Bibelu.  Talmud,\\.  1038^(1882);
Hausrath,  Neutest,  Zeitgesch.  \-]dff.,  Kriiger,  '  Beitrage  zur
Kenntniss  der  Pharisaer  u.  Essener'  in  Theol.  Quartalschr.
80431-96  ;  Kuenen,  De  Godsdienst  van  Israel,  'l^i.ff.  (1869)  ;
Volksreligion  und  Weltreligion,  206  ff.  (Berlin,  1883);  Reuss,
^^11496^;  Schenkel,  Bibellex.  4  518^;  Schiirer,  Gesch.
desjiid.  I'olkcs  im  Zeitalter  Jesu  Christi,  2  -ztfiff.  314^".  (1886)  ;
in  Riehm's  HWB  2  1205-1210  1451-54  (1894);  Sieflert,  PRE(1)
18210-44(1884);  Wellhausen,  Pharisaer  u.  Sadduca.er(i?,j^).

J.  D.  P.

SCEIP.  i.  E-1p^,  yalkut(^  Ass.  lakdtu  =  T\\h,  '  to
rake  together '  ;  or  Ar.  kal'at1"1,  '  pouch,  satchel,
knapsack'),  i  S.  174of  (cyAAorH).

2.  TTHPA,  Mt.  lOio  Mk.  68  Lk.  93  104  2235/.  (RV
WALLET).  A  scrip  is  a  pouch  or  wallet  used  by
shepherds  (Milton,  Comus,  I.  626)  ;  cp  CATTLE,  §  6.
But  the  yalkiit  was  also  used  by  travellers.  It  is
probably  the  7n)pa  of  Judith  10  5  13io  15  (EV  'bag'),  and
of  Mt.  10 10,  etc.;  aip1?'  or  (n)nySp  may  (Che.)  also
be  restored  in  Judg.  626  (MT  irr),  where  it  would  mean
a  household  box  or  bag  (see  JAEL).

SCRIPTURE,  SCRIPTURES.  i.  In  Dan.  10 21
the  seer's  supernatural  visitant  is  reported  as  saying,
'  I  will  show  thee  that  which  is  noted  in  the  scripture
of  truth  '  (AV),  or  rather  (RV),  '  I  will  show  thee  that
which  is  inscribed  in  the  writing  of  truth' — i.e.,  in  the
book  in  which  the  destinies  of  mankind  are  written  down
beforehand.  The  expression  stands  in  close  relation  to
the  growing  interest  of  the  later  Jews  in  the  '  last  things. '
Prophecy  in  the  grand  old  style  having  ceased,  it
became  necessary  to  look  to  the  source  of  all  true  know
ledge  of  the  future — viz. ,  to  God — or  more  specially  to
those  seers  and  sages  of  primitive  times  whom  Yahwe,
it  was  believed,  favoured  by  giving  them  special  revela
tions,  either  directly,  or  by  one  of  those  angels  who
'see  his  face'  (Enoch,  Seth,  Daniel,  etc.).  The  phrase
in  its  context  is  important  for  the  comprehension  of  those
late  writings  to  which  the  name  of  some  one  of  those
primitive  seers  is  prefixed.  It  is,  of  course,  related  to
such  an  expression  as  the  'book  of  life,'  or,  'of  the
living,'  Ps.  6928  [29],  cp  Dan.  12i,  but  very  much  more
closely  to  the  conception  of  the  '  heavenly  tablets '
(TrXd/ces  TOV  ofipavov,  see  Test.  xii.  Patriarch,.  \  Enoch,
81  -if. ),  which  are  the  Jewish  equivalent  of  the  tablets  of
Marduk.  The  idea  survives  in  the  popular  Jewish  view
of  the  Jewish  New  Year's  Day  (=the  Zakmuk  festival
at  Babylon),  according  to  which  God  holds  session  on
that  day  with  a  book  before  him  in  which  he  inscribes

4329


SCYTHIANS

the  fates  of  men  (Jastrow,  Karppe).  For  the  later
Jewish  references  see  Charles,  Enoch,  note  on  pp.  131/1,
and  for  the  origin  of  the  tablets  of  Marduk  see  the
Babylonian  Creation-story,  1 33  4 131,  and  the  first  myth
of  Zu,  KB,  vi.  pt.  i.  pp.  47  J£,  and  cp  Jastrow,  RBA
428,  540.

2.  al  ypafraC  (some  eighteen  times  in  NT— e.g.,  Jn.  5-tq of
OI),  see  CANON, §  2; ypa^ai  a-yiat, Rom.  1  2  ;  r/  vpcufm Mk
12  10  15  28  (?)  Lk.  4  21  Jn.  2  22  7  38  42  10  35  13  18  17  12  1!)  24  28  36  37
20 9 Acts  1  16 83235 Rom.43 9 17 lOn 112 Gal.3822 430

1  Tim.  5 18 Ja.  2823 4  5 i  Pet.  26 2  Pet.  1  20  ; Trio-a ypa^,
8  Tim.  8  16  ;  rd  tepi  ypa.fj.paTa  (AV, the  holy  scriptures' RV.
the_  sacred writings)  2  Tim.  3  15  ; cp iMacc.  129(Ta jSi/SAi'a
ra  ayia)  ;  2  Mace.  8  23  (TTJI/  iepotf  /3i'/3Aoj>).

Observe  that  in  i  Pet.  probably,  and  in  Jas. ,  Jn. ,  and

2  Pet. certainly,  7?  ypa<prj  is  used  of  the  Scripture  as  a
whole. In  2  Tim.  3  16,  however,  RV  is  doubtless  right
in  changing  AV's  '  all  scripture  (is  given  by  inspiration
of  God,  and  is)'  into  'every  scripture  (inspired  of  God
is also).' ypcKpTrj  means here, as also in Paul, any
single passage of  Scripture. '  The  writer shares the
Jewish view  of  the purely  supernatural origin of  the
Scripture in its strictest form, according to which
"  theopneustia "  is ascribed  directly  to  the  Scripture'
(Holtzmann, Lehrb. der NTlichen Theologie,e2.zf>i\.
Cp  the  Jewish  belief  in  the  heavenly  origin  of  the  Torah,
the  denial  of  which made  a  man  an '  Epicurean  '  or
apostate,  and  excluded  him  from  the  future  age  (Sanhe-
drln,  go  a).

SCURVY  (inS),  Lev.  2l2o  22  22  Dt.  28  27f  ;  see
DISEASES,  8.

SCYTHE.  For  Jer.  50 16  AV"'g-  (*?;»),  see  AGRI
CULTURE,  §  7.  For  Is.  2  4  Joel  3  [4]  10  Mic.  4  3  [all  AVmg.]
(nTDID),  see  PRUNINGHOOK.  For  2  Mace.  13  2  ('scythe-bear
ing,'  SpeTra.irri<f>6pa),  see  CHARIOT,  §  u.

SCYTHIANS.  The  LXX  contains  some  apparent
references  to  the  Scythians.

In 2  Mace.  447 Antiochus IV. Epiphanes  is  charged  with

such  injustice  as  would  not  be  found  in  a  Scythian  court,  and  in

1 51  if  'fl in  3  IVIacc-  7  5  the  servants  of  Ptolemy  IV.  Philo-

i.  ^iKVDT^s  in  pator  are  accused  of  cruelties  after  the  fashion

©  and  NT=  of  Scythians. The  city  of  BETH-SHEAN  (y.t:)

Scythian? is  called  Scythopolis  (Swe^v  TToAis;)  in  judg.

127  Judith  3  10 2  Mace.  12  297^ Symmachus

translated  C7'y  (Elam)  in  Gen.  14  i  9,  2,KvOiav.

Moreover  'Scythian'  (Z/ci'^s)  is  mentioned  with
'  barbarian  '  in  TR  of  Col.  3n.

It  is  not  certain  that  in  any  of  these  instances  the
reference  is  to  the  historic  Scythians.

Jason  of  Cyrene  in  the  days  of  Caesar,  and  the  author  of
3  Mace,  at  the  time  of  Caligula,  may  indeed  have  had  in  mind
such  descriptions  as  those  in  Herod.  462-69  or  some  proverbial
sayings  based  on  them.  It  is  also  possible,  however,  that  they
used  the  term  '  Scythians  '  only  as  a  synonym  for  '  barbarians. '
According  to  Georgius  Syncellus  (Chron.  1  405)  the  origin  of  the
name  Scythopolis  for  BETH-SHEAN,  also  known  to  Josephus  (A  nt.
xii-  85  [§  348]),  Eusebius  ((W23755),  and  others,  was  the  presence
in  that  city  of  a  body  of  Scythians  remaining  from  the  invasion  in
the  time  of  Psammetichus.  The  name,  however,  does  not  occur


..

an  enclave  in  Beth-shean  and  played  as  important  a  part  there
as  the  exiles  from  Cutha  seem  to  have  done  in  Samaria,  it  is  also
possible  that  the  name  is  due  to  the  settlement  of  some  people
deported  by  Asur-bani-pal,  such  as  the  Parthian  Dahae  (Ezra4g,
where  Hoffmann's  conjecture  tHp-n  is  more  ingenious  than  con
vincing).  Symmachus  may  have  used  Scythian  for  Parthian.


r Ka apapois, oos (cat e
seems  to  be  a  gloss  to  'barbarian.'

It  is  exceedingly  probable  that  in  MT  the  Scythians
are  referred  to  as  Ashkenaz1  ((5  Acrxavaf)  in  Gen.  10s
i  Ch.  16  Jer.  51  27.

1  [The  question  of  the  origin  and  meaning  of  the  name
'  Ashkenaz  '  and  the  related  names  needs  to  be  re-examined  in
connection  with  the  '  Jerahmeelite  theory.'  See  Crit.  Bib.  on
Gen.  102-4.]

4330


SCYTHIANS

Originally the Hebrew  word may  have been pronounced

ASkunza  (U3»K,  USiS'N,  !J3B>N,  IJ3C;K,  T33C*N) ;  it  is  as  Delitzsch

has  pointed  out  (see  ASHKENAZ)  identical  with

2.  Ashkenaz  Askuza  and Iskuza  occurring  in  Assyrian  in-

=  ScytMan.  scriptions  (see  §  6). In  the  Behistun  inscription

the  Saka  chief  Shuka  is  called,  in  the  Susian

version,  Iskunka. Already  Vater(CV/«w.,  1802,  p.  ioo)observed

that  a  name  beginning  with  Sc  would  be  suitable  on  account  of

the  prosthetic  A,  E,  or  I. The  essential  part  of  the  name  seems

to be Sku : cp 2<cu-Arjs, SKO-AOTOI, Sicou-Tratrts, Chinese Szii,

Persian Sa-ka. Askuza -Skuza is apparently the origin of

In  Gen.  10s  the  Scythian  is,  then,  regarded  as  a  son
of  the  Kimmerian  (GoMER,  Gimirra,  Gamir,  K.i/jLfj^pioi)
and  a  brother  of  Riphath  and  Togarmah,  whilst  in  Jer.
5 1  27  he  appears  as  the  companion  of  the  Mannoean  and
Urartasan.  The  author  of  Jer.  50-51  58,  whose  produc
tion  is  largely  a  patchwork  of  quotations,  seems  to  have
used  in  5127  some  old  writing  now  lost,  since  the  con
nection  of  MINNI  and  ARARAT  (^.v.)  with  Ashkenaz
reflects  a  definite  historical  situation  centuries  before  his
own  time  (cp  JEREMIAH  [BOOK],  §  20,  viii. ).  Whether
Riphath  and  Togarmah  were  current  designations  of
certain  countries  in  the  N.  at  the  time  of  the  priestly
editor  of  the  Pentateuch,  or  likewise  drawn  from  some
older  source,  must  be  left  in  doubt.

It  has  also  been  maintained  that  the  Scythians  are

alluded  to  under  the  names  Gog  and  Magog. Magog

a.  ri was  interPreted  as  Scythians  by  Josephus

3.  trogand ^{nL  L  6l  [-§  I23j)_  jerome, Theodoret,

agog.  and  others.  The  fact  that  Gomer  (Kim
merian),  Madai  ( Mede),  Javan  (Greek),  Meshech  (Moschi),
Tubal  (Tibarenes),  and  Tiras  (Tursa,  Tyrrhenians)  are
so  manifestly  names  of  famous  nations  renders  it  quite
certain  that,  if  the  word  has  been  accurately  transmitted,
or  formed  at  all  a  part  of  the  original  text,  Magog  must
also  represent  the  name  of  a  well-known  people.  It
must  be  confessed  that  the  absence  of  so  important  a
name  alike  in  cuneiform  and  classical  sources  makes  one
suspect  the  correctness  of  the  name.

This  has  led  Cheyne  to  suppose  a  dittography  of  "lOi  in  Gen.
102,  and  a  corruption  of  p~liO  in  Ezek.  38  f.  (see  GOG  AND
MAGOG,  n.).  The  interpretation  of  ARMAGEDDON  (y.r>.)  by  this
sjholar  is  indeed  as  plausible  as  it  is  brilliant.  It  seems  doubtful,
however,  whether  the  new-found  chthonic  divinity  will  be  of
service  in  Ezek.  38  (cp  textual  corrections  in  col.  3881,  n.  i,  and
for  the  opposite  view  that  a  great  historic  personage  is  reflected
by  the  Gog  of  Ezek.  38  see  §  5).  A  simpler  suggestion  as  to  Gen.
102  would  be  that  Magog  (3130)  was  miswritten  for  Gog  (313)
under  the  influence  of  '  Madai '  OtoX  as  a  consequence  of  a
changed  conception  of  Gog,  because  at  one  time  it  was  customary
to  contract  the  Assyrian  mat  Gag  into  Magag  (Streck),  or  as  a
designation  of  a  people  akin  to  the  Scythians  and  derived  from
Gog  (3130)1  such  as  the  Sarmatians  or  Massagetae.  It  is  interest
ing  that  Saadia  in  this  place  has  JIJN'  (ed.  Derenbourg),  the
customary  rendering  of  313  at  his  time  ;  cp  Kur'an  ~2\  96  and
Arabic  writers  quoted  by  Herbelot.  In  Ezek.  882,  'land  of  the
Magog '  (3130.1  flt<)  is  apparently  an  interpolation  (Stade),  and
in  Ezek.  396  the  original  seems  to  have  been  Gog  (©BQ).  [On
Ezek.  38  see  further  Crit.  Bib.}  In  Targ.  Jer.  1  to  Nu.  1126
31301  NS1M  JO  T^D  KD^Oi  'a  king  shall  arise  from  the  land  of
Magog,'  depends  on  Ezek.  38  2,  while  in  Targ.  Jer.^  31301  113
PI'ni7'rll  '  Gog  and  Magog  and  his  armies,"  313^1  is  probably  an
interpolation  ;  but  Magog  seems  to  be  the  name  of  a  king,  as  it
certainly  is  in  Targ.  Jon.  to  i  S.  2  10.

Amenhotep  III.  (Am.  Tab.  l^f.)  mentions  three
countries — Gag,  Hanigalbat,  and  Ugarit.  Hanigalbat
is  probably  Melitene,  and  Gog  is  likely  to  have  been
situated  NE  of  Commagene  (Streck,  ZA  15321).  A
people  called  Gag,  or  Gog,  was  thus  known  in  the
fifteenth  century  B.C.  Concerning  its  ethnic  relations
we  as  yet  know  nothing.  In  view  of  the  marked  Iranian
character  of  some  names  in  the  Amarna  letters  (see  §  13),
it  is  not  too  bold  an  assumption  that  Gag  may  have
been  a  forerunner  of  Askenaz  in  Anatolia  belonging  to
the  same  family.  Like  the  Muski,  the  Kaski,  the
Tubali,  and  the  Haldi,  the  Gagi  may  have  been  driven
X.  by  new  invaders  ;  and  it  is  significant  that,  in  the
days  of  Strabo,  there  was  a  province  Gogarene  im
mediately  K  of  the  territory  occupied  by  the  Moschi,
the  Colchians,  the  Tibarenes,  and  the  Chaldasans  (Geogr.
11 14,  pp.  452/1  ed.  Didot).  In  the  time  of  Asur-bani-


SCYTHIANS

pal  Gagi  still  lingered  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Urartu
as  the  name  of  a  chief  of  Sahi  (Cyl.  B.  4i/^).  That
the  memory  of  Gog  as  a  people  was  not  lost  is  shown
by  Rev.  '208.  Ewald  rightly  felt  that  the  phrase  'Gog
and  Magog'  was  not  the  creation  of  the  NT  apocalytic.
After  the  name  Gogarene  had  attached  itself  to  the
territory  occupied  by  Scythians,  at  least  since  the  be
ginning  of  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  Gog  naturally  was
understood  as  a  Scythian  people,  whatever  its  original
character  may  have  been.

As, according to K/.ek.  8817, the  coming of  Gog,
prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal,  had  been  predicted  by


4 '  K'ne1  Goe-  '
° °'


f°rmer  prophets,  Jerome  looked  for


such  a  prophecy  and  found  it  in  Nu.
24  7  where  <5  and  Sam.  with  Aq.  Sym.  read  '  his  king
shall  be  higher  than  Gog.  '  l  There  can  be  little  doubt
that  this  is  more  original  than  MT,  though  the  whole
verse  is  probably  a  late  interpolation.  [Cp  OG,  col.


=  Gog  of
Ezek.  38.


Peyron  (Sur  les  prophttes,  1693,  p.  136  f.)  called  attention  to
Am.  7  ic  where  &  read  'and  behold,  one  caterpillar,  king  Gog,'
and  made  this  passage  refer  to  a  Scythian  invasion.  Here,  too,
the  Hebrew  text  gives  no  satisfactory  sense,  and  Nowack  rightly
rejects  it  as  a  gloss.2  ©  probably  reproduces  more  nearly  the
words  of  the  glossator  ;  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the
original  read  jij  -|Sa,  'king  of  Gog,'  or  -jVcrt  J13>  'Gog,  the
king."  If  'king  of  Gog"  was  the  reading,  'Gog  theking,'and
with  it  'king  Gog'  himself,  may  have  originated  in  a  misunder
standing  of  this  marginal  comment  to  Am.  7  i.  But  the  idea  of
this  king  may  also  have  been  suggested  by  descriptions  of  Gagi,
ruler  of  Sahi,  given  by  some  of  Asur-bani-pal's  Syrian  colonists,
unless  it  should  ultimately  prove  to  have  its  roots  in  Babylonian
mythology,  where  a  divine  messenger  Gaga  figures  in  the  fnuma.
f/z/  epic,  3  2_f.  67.  That  the  descriptions  of  Jer.  4-0  and  Zeph.  '2
(see  §  6,  and  ZEPHANIAH,  §  4)  cannot  by  themselves  have  led
to  the  definite  conception  of  king  Gog,  is  sufficiently  evident
from  Jewish  and  Christian  exegesis,  which  so  long  has  been
satisfied  (but  see  §  27,  and  Crit.  Bib.)  with  seeing  in  these
passages  references  to  the  Chaldaeans  only.

That,  with  all  its  apocalyptic  character,  Ezek.  38-39
reflects  the  career  of  a  great  historic  personage,  was

5  Mithridatea  already  felt  by  Polychronius  (about  427
B8A.n.)  who  thought  of  Antiochus  III.
He  was  followed  in  this  by  Grotius,
whose  commentary  gives  a  detailed
application  of  the  text  to  the  history  of  the  Seleucid
king.  Winckler  most  ingeniously  interprets  the  prophecy
as  occasioned  by  the  career  of  Alexander  (A  Of''  2  idojf.  ).
But  neither  Antiochus  nor  Alexander  would  naturally  be
designated  '  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal,'  and  there  is
in  neither  case  any  motive  for  the  feeling  of  hostility
displayed,  whilst  there  is  evidence  of  a  different  dis
position  toward  these  kings  on  the  part  of  the  Jews.
The  present  writer  would  suggest  that  the  conqueror
whose  career  inspired  this  prophecy  is  far  more  likely
to  have  been  Mithridates  VI.  Eupator  Dionysus  of
Pontus.

Mithridates  alone  could  rightly  be  entitled  '  prince  of  Meshech
and  Tubal,'  his  seat  of  power  being  where  the  Moschi  and  the
Tibarenes  lived,  and  his  sway  extending  over  the  territory  once
associated  with  those  names.  None  could  more  aptly  be  con
sidered  as  the  coming  Gog  than  the  proud  conqueror  of  Scythia
who  reigned  over  all  the  coast-lands  of  the  Black  Sea  and  brought
from  the  farthest  N.  his  armies.  No  other  ruler  of  these  realms
had  with  him  Paras,  Cush,  and  Put,  Corner,  Togarmah,  and  the
extreme  N.  than  Mithridates,  whose  general  Pelopidas  could
justly  boast  of  the  Persian  auxiliaries,  Egyptian  ships,  Cappa-
docian  troops,  Armenian  contingents,  and  Scythian,  Sarmatian,
Bastarnian,  and  Thracian  hordes  that  swelled  the  king's  forces.
Mithridates'  dark  intrigues,  his  boundless  ambition,  his  insatiable
greed,  the  '  Ephesian  vespers  '  with  their  80,000  victims,  the
persecutions  of  the  Jews  in  Cos  and  elsewhere,  who  were  at  the
time  warm  friends  and  allies  of  Rome,  must,  in  88  B.C.,  have  filled
many  a  heart  in  Palestine  with  fear  of  an  invasion,  hatred,  and
abomination.  But,  in  an  age  of  eschatological  hopes,  the  con
fidence  could  not  fail  that,  should  he  invade  the  '  navel  of  the
earth  '  where  quiet  and  prosperity  had  been  restored,  and  prove
indeed  to  be  the  predicted  Gog,  he  would  there  meet  with  a
miserable  end.  By  the  sword  of  the  faithful  and  the  wrath  of
heaven  he  would  perish,  and  his  hosts  would  be  buried  during

1  MT  33N  •'  the  addition  of  the  prosthetic  N  may  be  explained
as  in  Arab.  Aj'iij  for  313  in  Ezek.  882  Ar.

2  [This  alternative  can, it  would  seem, be  avoided  by  the
course  suggested  in  LOCUSTS,  §  3  with  note  6. Cp  Crit,  Bib.
ad  lac.]

4332


SCYTHIANS

seven  months  in  '  the  Valley  of  the  Travellers  to  the  Sea  '  (<P  of
Ezek.  3l>  n),  whilst  for  himself  would  he  reserved  a  famous
sepulchre  in  Israel  in  this  vahcy  of  Hamon-Gog  (Esdraelon),
apparently  in  the  city  named  after  the  foreign  horde  Hamonah
(Scythopolis).  Thus  the  king  of  Scythia  would  be  buried  in  the
city  of  the  Scythians,  the  new  Dionysus  in  the  tomb  where
Dionysus-Oitosyrus  buried  Leucothea,  his  nurse  (Pliny,  5  74),  who
was  identified  with  Artimpasa,  the  Scythian  Diana  (Hegesippus
3i9).l

It  is  possible  that  already  Photius  understood  Jere
miah  as  referring  to  the  Scythians  in  622^

In  his  first  homily  on  the Russian  invasion  in  865 Photius

seems  to  regard  himself  as  speaking  of  the  same  northern  people

... that  the  prophet  had  in  mind. He  no  doubt

6.  Scytuians  shared  the  view  of  his  contemporary  Nicetas

in  Jer.  and who, in his life of Ignatius, speaks of the

Zeph  Russians  as  a  Scythian  people  {S.Kv8lav edvos

Ae-yojuei/oi  'Pws),  as  does  also  the  unknown  con-

tinuator of  Theophanes's chronography ; see '  De Russorum

incursione '  in  Lexicon.  Vindobonen.se,  ed. Nauck,  203  f.  and

xxiv.  f.

In  modern  times,  Cramer,  Eichhorn,  Dahler,  Hitzig,
Ewald,  and  most  recent  critics  have  seen  in  Jer.  4-6
Zeph.  2  original  references  to  the  Scythians,  though
admitting  subsequent  retouching  under  the  impression
of  Chaldaean  invasions.  It  has  seemed  to  them  im
possible  that  Jeremiah  should  have  feared  a  Chaldaean
attack  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah,  whilst  the  Scythian
invasion  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (lios^T)  seems  to
have  occurred  about  that  time.  In  JEREMIAH  [BOOK],
§  20,  i. ,  it  has  been  suggested  that  Chaldosan  designs
upon  Syria  may  have  become  apparent  already  in  625,
and  that  the  Scythian  army  may  have  contained  a
Chaldasan  contingent  by  virtue  of  the  agreement  between
Nabopolassar  and  the  Umman  Manda  prince  alluded
to  in  the  Nabuna'id  inscription.  That  view  must  now
be  somewhat  modified,  as  Winckler's  researches  have
rendered  it  highly  probable  that  the  Umman  Manda  in
this  case  are  the  Medes,  and  that  there  was  an  alliance
between  the  Askuza- Scythians  and  the  Assyrians.  A
prayer  to  Samas,  published  by  Knudtzon  (Assyrische
Gebcte,  no.  29),  mentions  the  request  of  Bartatua  of
Askuza  for  a  daughter  of  Esarhaddon.  Winckler
identifies  this  chief  with  Protothyas,  father  of  Madyas,
king  of  the  Scythians  (Herod.  1 103),  and  reasonably
supposes  that  there  was  effected  an  alliance  which  led
•Madyas  to  defend  Nineveh  against  Cyaxares.  If  Madyas
was  the  son  of  Bartatua  who  flourished  about  675,  he
is  likely  to  have  taken  just  such  a  part  in  the  events  of
625  as  Herodotus  indicates.  Phraortes  had  fallen  in  a
battle  against  the  Assyrians  625.  To  avenge  his  father,
Cyaxares  marched  against  Nineveh  and  invested  the
city.  It  is  as  natural  that  he  should  accept  the  aid  of
Nabopolassar  as  that  this  Chaldnean  usurper  should  be
eager  to  gain  an  alliance  with  him  by  sending  an  army.
In  this  predicament  Madyas  came  to  the  aid  of
Nineveh.  The  Medes  were  worsted  in  the  battle,  and
the  city  was  saved.  Another  ally  of  Cyaxares  and
Nabopolassar  had,  however,  to  be  dealt  with.  Psam-
metichus  had  long  been  encroaching  on  Assyrian  terri
tory.  Since  639  he  seems  to  have  laid  siege  to  Ashdod.
The  Scythians,  therefore,  went  on  from  Nineveh  to
invade  Egypt.  Their  ostensible  object  was  further  to
defend  the  endangered  interests  of  Assyria.  Hence  the
absence  of  any  record  of  violence  done.  Even  in  the
disorders  in  Ashkelon,  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  the
mass  of  the  army  took  no  part,  only  a  few  individuals.
Such  treatment  at  the  hands  of  Scythians  could  scarcely
be  expected.  Prophets  like  Jeremiah  and  Zephaniah
naturally  watched  their  approach  as  a  new  scourge  in
the  hand  of  Yahwe,  amply  justified  by  the  moral  con
dition  of  Judah.  That  these  hordes  should  quietly  come
and  go  in  peace,  having  received  their  tribute  from  Egypt,
they  could  not  dream.  This  line  of  conduct  finds  its

1  There  is  nothing  in  the  history  of  the  Hebrew  canon  that
forbids  so  late  a  date  ;  see  the  present  writer's  articles  on  the
canon  in  the  Jewish  Encyclopedia  and  the  New  Inter
national  Encyclopedia  and  'Daniel  among  the  Prophets,'
Hibbert  Journ.  vol.  i.  Nor  is  there  any  evidence  that  this
appendix  already  formed  a  part  of  the  book  that  no  doubt  was
translated  a  generation  earlier  (preface  to  Kcclus.).

4333


SCYTHIANS

explanation  only  in  the  political  relations  between
Scythians  and  Assyrians.  The  editor  of  Jer.  1-20  (see
JEREMIAH  [BOOK],  §  5/. )  had  an  important  landmark
to  go  by,  and  rightly  put  the  beginning  of  his  prophet's
ministry  in  the  memorable  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  (625).
Winckler  assumes  that  the  defence  of  Nineveh  by
Madyas  occurred  at  the  time  when  the  city  was  finally
1  Winckler's  destr°yed  (6o6)>  and  that  the  Scythians
criticism  were  then  routcd-  He  TOrrectly  ob
serves  that  a  parenthesis  begins  after
the  statement  of  the  appearance  of  Madyas,  and  con
cludes  that  only  the  beginning  of  Herodotus'  account
(1 10317)  and  the  end  of  it  (Iio6,  end)  were  drawn  from
an  older  source,  the  remainder  being  the  historian's  own
work.  But  the  parenthesis  only  tells  how  the  Scythians
happened  to  be  in  Asia,  and  the  narrative  manifestly
continues  with  '  Then  the  Medes  fought  with  the
Scythians '  in  1 104,  end.  The  rest  presents  only  one
difficulty,  which,  however,  may  be  satisfactorily  met.
If  the  twenty-eight  years  of  Scythian  rule  fell  within
Cyaxares'  reign  (625-585),  as  lioy  distinctly  affirms,
they  must  have  extended  from  625  to  597  ;  yet  the
capture  of  Nineveh  in  606  is  mentioned  after  the  re
covery  of  the  nations  ruled  before  625.  But  the
restoration  of  Media's  former  territory  is  not  unnatur
ally  mentioned  first,  even  though  it  had  not  been  fully
accomplished  before  597,  and  the  important  addition  of
Assyria  only  afterwards  with  emphasis,  though  occurring
already  in  606.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Scythia  lost
anything  but  an  ally  by  the  fall  of  Assyria.  If  the  king
of  the  Umman  Manda  in  the  Nabu-na'id  inscription  is
Cyaxares,  there  is  no  hint  in  that  document  of  a  Scythian
army  appearing  for  the  defence  of  Nineveh  in  606.
Had  the  Scythian  power  in  Asia  Minor  been  crushed  in
that  year,  it  is  not  likely  that  hostilities  between  Media
and  Lydia  would  have  been  so  long  deferred.  In  597
the  two  allies,  Media  and  Chaldasa,  seem  to  have  made
a  great  attack  upon  the  W. ,  Media  destroying  the
Scythian  power  in  Armenia  and  Cappadocia,  Chaldtea
humiliating  Egypt's  Syrian  buffer  state,  Judah.  They
were  still  united  when  in  586  Nebuchadrezzar  put  an
end  to  the  Judcean  kingdom,  and  the  next  year  secured
for  his  '  helper,'  Cyaxares,  an  honourable  peace  after  the
battle  of  the  eclipse,  Cilicia  being  then  the  heir  to  the
position  and  policy  of  Scythia.  Winckler's  hypothesis
apparently  makes  the  distance  too  great  between  Madyas
and  his  father  Protothyas,  and  does  not  sufficiently  re
cognise  the  importance  of  the  political  situation  in  625.
Such  doubts  concerning  the  first  siege  of  Nineveh  by
Cyaxares  and  its  attendant  circumstances  (already  ex
pressed  by  We. ,  Kl.  Proph.(^  I56(-',


8.  Jerahmeel-


160),  questions  as  to  the  reliability  of


ite  theory.  Jer  ^  (cp  JERFMIAH  [BOOK],  §  14),
and  particularly  a  searching  and  much-needed  criticism
of  proper  names  in  MT,  finally  led  Cheyne  to  look  for
an  invasion  from  the  S.  by  the  Jerahmeelites  instigated
by  Nebuchadrezzar  in  the  years  immediately  before  604
(see  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE,  §  40).  The  Jerahmeel-
ite  theory  unquestionably  promises  to  throw  much  light
on  the  obscure  history  of  the  Negeb.  That  the  Arabian
neighbours  of  Egypt,  as  well  as  the  peoples  E.  of
Judah,  should  have  been  inflamed  by  Nebuchadrezzar
is  altogether  probable ;  and  that  Jeremiah,  watching
these  repeated  raids,  should  have  felt  behind  them  the
master-hand  of  the  Chaldasan  is  not  incredible.  Nor
need  it  be  denied  that  pss  has  occasionally  been  under
stood  as  'the  North,' where,  in  reality,  a  place-name
was  intended.  It  is  even  possible  that  the  reports  of
the  prophet's  earlier  speeches  have  been  coloured  by  the
memory  of  more  recent  words  of  his  occasioned  by  such
raids  by  the  neighbours.  In  view,  however,  of  the
account  by  Herodotus  of  a  Scythian  invasion  of  Pales
tine,  following  the  relief  of  Nineveh  by  Madyas,  the
suggestion  in  a  cuneiform  letter  of  a  Scytho-Assyrian
alliance  already  in  the  time  of  Bartatua-Protothyas,  the
occasion  for  Scythian  interference  in  the  accession  of

4334


SCYTHIANS


SCYTHIANS


Cyaxares  forty  years  before  the  eclipse  of  585,  the  in
surrection  of  Xabopolassar,  dated  by  Ptolemy's  canon  in
625,  and  the  united  attack  of  Cyaxares  and  Nabopolassar
upon  Assyria,  and  the  assignment  of  these  prophecies  to
the  same  year  by  an  editor  apparently  dependent  on  an
early  biographer,  it  seems  safer  to  adhere  to  the  con
struction  of  the  history  given  above.  [See,  further,  Cril.
Bib.}

At  most,  little  knowledge  concerning  the  Scythians

could  be  derived  from  these  biblical  references. If  the

- .,  identification of  Askuza  is  correct,

j '  nel.  Orn\' the  Scythians  are  mentioned  in  cunei-

cia jai,  ana form  inscriptions  such  as  x  R  45  col_

Chinese  sources.  .^  and  £nudt^n|  Ass_  Geb£t  2g>

35,  in  a  manner  that  throws  light  upon  the  beginnings  of
Scythian  rule  in  Asia  Minor.

In  a  Persian  cuneiform  inscription  at  Behistfm,  Saka  huma-
varka,  and  Saka  tigrakhuda  are  referred  to  by  Darius,  who  also
speaks  of  the  '  Saka  at  the  ends  of  the  earth  '  in  a  hieroglyphic
list  of  nations  at  the  Suez  canal.  The  Scythians  are  not  men
tioned  by  name  in  the  Homeric  poems,  though  they  may  be
referred  to  as  tn-mjinoAyoi,  //.  13  5.  Strabo  (7  3)  quotes  a  direct
reference  from  Hesiod  ;  but  whether  this  was  drawn  from  an
otherwise  unknown  genuine  yrj?  Trepiofiosor  from  the  third  KO.TO.-
Ao-yos  written  about  600  B.C.,  as  Kirchhoff  emends  the  text,  is
uncertain.  About  600  B.C.  the  name  occurs  in  a  fragment  of
Alca:us,  and  that  is  probably  also  the  date  of  the  poem  of
Aristeas  of  Proconnesus.  ^Eschylus  refers  to  the  good  laws  of
the  Scythians  (Strabo,  I.e.),  and  Hecataeus  of  Miletus  gave
valuable  information  concerning  them.  The  most  important
source  is  Herodotus.  His  fourth  book  is  devoted  to  Scythia.
Much  of  his  knowledge  is  derived  from  native  Scythians  in
Olbia,  as  well  as  from  resident  Greeks.  Hippocrates  also  seems
to  have  visited  Scythia,  and,  like  Herodotus,  still  confined  the
name  Scythians  to  the  Scoloti.  Pseudo-Scylax  (about  337  B.C.)
and  Ephorus  begin  to  use  it  in  a  somewhat  wider  sense,
though  familiar  with  the  character  and  history  of  the  Scoloti.
Some  of  the  representations  in  art  of  Scythian  life  found  at
Kertsch  (Panticapreum),  Kum  Olba  and  Altun  Olba  (see  §  n)
belong  to  the  fourth  and  third  centuries.  The  Greek  inscriptions
of  Olbia  containing  Scythian  names  are  not  older  than  the  second
century  B.C.  Diodorus  adds  little  to  the  earlier  sources  ;  but
Strabo's  geography  throws  much  light  upon  the  Scythia  of  his
day.  The  changed  conditions  there  inspired  him  with  undue
scepticism  as  to  the  accuracy  of  Herodotus.  Trogus  Pompeius
in  Justin,  Ptolemy  the  geographer,  Polyaenus,  Ammianus
Marcellinus,  and  others  acquaint  us  with  some  facts.  For  the
history  of  the  eastern  Scythians  Ktesias  is  not  without  value.
Coins  give  the  names  of  Scythian  kings.  Of  great  importance
are  the  Chinese  writings  of  Sse-ma-tsien  (about  100  B.C.)  trans
lated  by  Brosset,  Jaurn.  As.  ii.  8  418^,  and  of  Panku  (about  80
A. D.),  both  because  of  their  sober  descriptions  of  lands  and
peoples,  and  because  of  the  aid  they  furnish  to  the  chronology.

Whilst,  in  historical  times,  there  have  been  important

centres  of  Scythian  life  in  Asia  Minor  and  in  Europe,

_  , in Margiana, Bactria, Kophene, and

'n  -  India, the people neither considered
migrations  >i  Uself  nor  was  regarded  by  others  as

tne  facytmans.  autochthonous  jn  any  Of  ;hese  lands.
Even  in  the  territory  between  the  Danube  and  the  Don,
which  might  properly  be  called  Scythian,  because  for  so
many  centuries  the  seat  of  a  Scythian  civilisation,  a
native  tradition  declared  the  Scoloti  to  be  strangers.
Many  indications  point  to  the  region  N.  of  Jaxartes,
between  the  Aral  Sea  and  Lake  Balkash,  in  modern
Turkestan  and  the  adjoining  Khirgis  steppe,  as  the
home  of  the  Scythians  in  the  days  when  their  immediate
Iranian  kinsmen,  the  Aryan  invaders  of  India,  were  still
their  neighbours  S.  and  SE.  in  the  old  Airyanem
Vaejo.  The  presence  of  Mongolian  and  Tibetan

tribes  on  the  NE.  and  E. ,  and  of  the  kindred
Massagetns  on  the  SE. ,  occasioned  by  the  expansion  of
Chinese  power,  gradually  forced  a  branch  of  the  people
across  the  Ural,  the  Volga,  and  finally  the  Don.  The
time  of  this  invasion  of  Western  Scythia  cannot  be
determined  with  certainty  ;  but  it  may  have  occurred  as
early  as  in  the  sixteenth  century  B.C.  (see  §  14).  Another
Iranian  people,  the  Kimmerians,1  occupying  the  land  so
far  S.  as  to  the  Danube,  were  gradually  driven  into  the
Crimea  or,  at  different  times  and  by  different  roads,
into  Asia  Minor.  The  Kimmerian  invasion  that

1  Such  names  of  Kimmerian  kings  as  Teuspa,  Tuktammi
(Auyfiafits  =  Avy£ajLu$,  Sayce)  and  Sandrakiatra,  occurring  in  the
seventh  century,  are  clearly  Iranian.

4335


followed  the  E.  coast  of  the  Black  Sea  in  the  eighth
century  was  probably  the  last.  Down  the  W.  coast  of
the  Caspian  Sea  the  Scythian  tribes  E.  of  the  Don
followed  and  established  themselves  E.  of  the  Kim-
merians  and  N.  of  Mannteans  and  Medes,  whence  they
apparently  extended  their  power  over  all  Armenia  and
Cappadocia.  Their  old  places  E.  of  the  Azov  Sea  were
taken  by  a  Median  people,  the  Sauromata;  or  Sarmatians,
possibly  not  before  the  return  of  Median  power.  On

the  plateau  through  which  the  Dniester  (Tyras),  the
Bog  (Hypanis),  the  Dnieper  (Borysthcnes),  and  the
Inguletz  (Panticapes)  flow,  and  so  far  as  to  the  Don
(Tanais),  the  Scoloti  took  possession  of  the  land,  some
settling  down  to  agricultural  pursuits,  others  retaining
their  nomadic  life.

The  arrival  of  Milesian  colonists  (Olbia  founded  about  650)
created  mixed  Gra;co-Scythian  tribes  such  as  the  Kallipidse  and
Alizones.  A  kindred  Thracian  tribe,  the  Agathyrsi,  was  sub
dued.  Northwards  the  territory  extended  into  Ukraine.  Be
yond  their  own  clans  in  that  direction  lived  Slavonic  tribes,  the
Neari,  the  Melanchlaeni,  and  the  Anthropophagi  (wrongly  so
called).  Up  the  Volga  there  were  the  Budinae  (Permians  '!),  and
across  the  Ural  the  Thyssagetse  and  Tyrkae,  Finnish  peoples,
whilst  E.  of  these  were  the  Turkish  Argimpaei  and  the  Tibetan
Issedones,  and  their  neighbours  the  Ariamaspae,  fighting  with
griffins  for  the  possession  of  gold.

The  Scythians  do  not  seem  to  have  been  driven  out
of  their  home  in  S.  Russia,  but  rather  to  have  been
absorbed  in  the  Sarmatian  and  then  in  the  Slavonic
tribes.

The  eastern  branch  of  the  people  was  not  allowed
undisturbed  possession  of  its  lands  N.  of  the  Jaxartes.
Already  in  the  time  of  Cyrus  and  Darius  a  part  of  the
Scythians  had  been  pressed  into  Margiana  (see  §  17),
and  at  the  end  of  the  third  century  another  part  was
forced  by  the  Massagetae  into  S.  Sogdiana,  and  some
what  later  into  Bactria.  In  Bactria  these  Scythians
found  only  a  temporary  home,  as  they  were  driven  from
there  by  the  Massagetre  (Yuechi) ;  but  they  maintained
themselves  longer  farther  east.

In  S.  Kabulistan,  Arachosia,  Drangiana,  and  Sakestan  (Kipin),
and  in  Kasmir,  Nepal,  and  Punjab  they  established  themselves.
Finally,  they  were  there  also  submerged  by  new  powers  and
absorbed  in  the  native  population.

That  the  Scythians spoke  an Iranian language, is

already  evident  from  Herod.  4 117,  where  the  Sauromatae,

__ -  a  Median  people,  are  said  to  speak  the

andSfc56  Sc>'thian  language  though  in  an  im-
.  ,.  perfect  manner.  The  Scythian  words

explained  by  Herodotus  are  manifestly
Iranian,  and  the  many  names  of  persons  and  places
recorded  by  Greek  writers  and  in  the  Olbian  inscriptions
leave  no  room  for  doubt.  It  is  the  merit  particularly  of
Zeuss  and  Miillenhoff  to  have  proved  conclusively  the
Iranian  character  of  Scythian  speech.  That  the  Eastern
Scythians  spoke  substantially  the  same  language  is
evident  not  least  from  the  names  of  the  Caka  kings  in
India(see  Hoffmann,  Syrische  Aktenpersischer Martyrer,
139^)-

An  occasional  Scythian  loan-word  in  a  neighbouring  Slavonic
or  Turkish  dialect  cannot  affect  this  result.  The  discussions  of
Neumann,  Cuno,  Fressl,  and  others,  who  have  tried  to  invalidate
the  arguments  of  Zeuss,  would  have  proved  quite  futile  even  if
their  philological  method  had  been  more  discriminating.  Still,
it  should  not  be  denied  that  neighbouring  dialects  of  the  same
family  have  a  tendency  to  shade  off  into  each  other.

For  determining  the  ethnic  relations  of  the  Scythians
the  pictorial  representations  on  objects  found  at  Kertsch,
Kum  Olba,  and  elsewhere  on  the  Kimmerian  Bosphorus
are  of  utmost  importance.

As  the  best  of  these  are  not  later  than  the  fourth  century  B.C.,
apd  were  probably  made  for  Scolotian  grandees  (see  Rayet,
Etudes  ifarchfolflgie,  196^),  they  may  be  taken  to  represent
fairly  the  Scythian  type.  The  similarity  to  Russian  mujiks,  in
dress,  hair,  beard,  and  general  appearance,  due  to  climatic  con
ditions  and  the  same  mode  of  life,  cannot  obscure  the  fact  that
the  features  are  essentially  Iranian.  If  they  all  should  prove  to
be  likenesses  of  Sarmatians,  as  the  later  ones  probably  are,  this
would  not  weaken  the  conclusion,  since  the  Iranian  character  of
the  Sarmatians  admits  of  no  doubt.

Through  Herodotus  we  know  that  the  Scythians  worshipped

4336


SCYTHIANS

Tahiti  ('ICTTI'T),  Vesta),  goddess  of  the  fire  ; Papasus  (probably
Papai or Babai,  Zeus),  the heaven-father  ;
12.  Religion. Api  (yr|),  the  earth  ;  Oitosyrus  (Apollo,  pos
sibly  descriptive  name  of  M  ithra),  the  Sun  ;
Artimpasa  (Aphrodite  Urania),  Venus  ;  Thamisadas  (Poseidon),
the  Sea  ;  Herakles  and  Ares.

The  Scythians  had  no  images,  or  altars,  or  temples.
Their  chief  sacrifices  were  horses,  which  they  offered  in
a  peculiar  manner  ;  but  prisoners  in  warwere  also  at  times
offered.  Only  the  god  of  war  had  a  few  great  shrines.
There  is  evidence  of  ancestral  cults.  Divination  by
rods  or  linden  bark  was  practised,  and  the  soothsayers
formed  distinct  classes.  A  comparison  with  Persian
divinities  and  religious  customs  shows  a  remarkable
similarity.  Whilst  a  heptad  of  divinities  occurs  ('A/3-
dapda),  there  is  no  trace  of  Ahura  Mazda.  Whether
any  of  the  E.  Scythians  accepted  the  Mazdayasnian  faith,
is  not  known.

Buddhism  may  have  made  some  progress  among  the  Sse  in
Kipin  and  Punjab;  but  the  Yuechi  king  Kaniska  (78  A. D.)
seems  to  have  been  the  first  monarch  officially  to  embrace  that
form  of  religion.

The  earlier Greek  writers speak in  terms  of  high

13.  Character  g^f.  of  the  character  °f  *e
and  civilisation.  S^thl™s-  giving  instances  of  their
justice,  sincerity,  love  of  truth,  and
sharp  intelligence.

It  is  possible,  however,  that  these  descriptions  have  to  some
extent  been  coloured  by  a  priori  reasoning  as  to  the  virtues  of  a
nomadic  life,  such  as  may  still  be  found  in  modern  works.  On
the  other  hand,  the  less  flattering  tone  of  later  authors  was,
no  doubt,  due  in  no  small  measure  to  their  confusion  of  the
Scythians  with  their  ruder  Slavonic,  Finno-Ugric,  and  Turkish
neighbours.  In  Roman  times,  the  conflicts  with  the  Sarmatians
naturally  added  bitterness  to  the  references  to  Scythians.

The  Scythians  probably  possessed,  in  addition  to  the
general  characteristics  of  all  Iranian  peoples,  some
qualities  peculiar  to  that  nomadic  life  so  large  a  part  of
them  continued  to  lead.  The  role  which  the  Askuza
played  in  Asia,  at  a  time  when  the  Assyrian  empire  had
reached  its  greatest  extent,  and  in  the  days  of  its  decad
ence,  indicates  a  somewhat  highly  developed  political
organisation  and  a  certain  adaptability  to  conditions  of
settled  life,  sagacity  as  well  as  energy,  diplomacy  not
less  than  enterprise.

In  Russia  the  long  contact  of  the  Scythians  with  Greek  civilisa
tion,  at  a  time  when  it  had  attained  its  very  highest  development,
could  not  but  exercise  a  profound  influence  upon  them.  The
antiquities  found  on  the  Kimmerian  Bosphorus,  now  in  the
Hermitage  in  St.  Petersburg,  amply  prove  what  the  tastes  of
Scythian  lords  were  and  what  enviable  means  they  had  of  gratify
ing  them.  One  class  of  these  finds  probably  represents  the  work
of  native  artists  trained  upon  Grecian  models.  These  Scythian
masters  produced  a  type  of  art  the  influence  of  which  maybe  traced
beyond  (N.  of)  the  Baltic.  Since  some  tribes  had  for  centuries
cultivated  the  soil,  and  large  numbers  of  Scythians  lived  in  cities,
many  nobles  undoubtedly  had  their  residences  built  by  Greek
architects.  King  Skyles  had  a  palace  in  Olbia.  Concerning
their  industrial  skill,  we  have  no  information,  except  that  they
excelled  in  metallurgy.  In  Bactria  the  Scythians  became  the
heirs  of  another  Greek  civilisation  ;  and  in  India  they  evidently
adapted  themselves  to  native  and  Greek  traditions,  not  without
themselves  exerting  an  influence  upon  the  life  of  Punjab  and
Sindh.

Concerning  the  period  in  which  the  Scythians  still
had  for  their  neighbours  in  the  Airyanem  Vaejo

A TT-  j.  (Vendidad,  i)  the  other  branches  of  the

14.  History :  \ . f ..'

earliest  Iranlan  family,  before  these  had  passed
.  ,  into  Sogdiana,  Margiana,  Bactria,  Hyr-
cania,  Herat,  and  Kabul,  we  possess  no
direct  information.  The  presence  of  Iranian  names  in
the  Amarna  Tablets  and  early  Assyrian  and  Egyptian
inscriptions  indicated  by  Ball  (PSBA,  1882,  pp,  424^),
Bezold-Budge  ( Tell  el  Amarna  Tablets,  1892,  p.  xiv),
Rost  (MVAG,  1897),  and  especially  Hommel  (Sitz.-
ber.  Bohm.  Ges.  d.  Wiss.  1898),  seems  to  show  that
Anatolia,  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  and  Elam  had  already
become  acquainted  with  some  members  of  the  Iranian
family  in  the  sixteenth  century  B.C.

According  to  the  native  tradition  of  the  Scoloti  found  in
Olbia  by  Herodotus  (4  7),  the  first  king  of  Scythia,  Targitaus,
reigned  1000  years  before  Darius  Hystaspis  'and  no  more."
We  have  no  means  of  determining  on  what  data  this  computa
tion  rests,  and  its  historical  value  appears  doubtful,  Targitaus
himself  being  probably  a  mythical  personage.  Hommel  con-

4337


SCYTHIANS

nects  this  story  with  the  accounts  of  a  Scythian  conquest  as  far
as  the  Nile  and  an  invasion  of  Asia  to  the  borders  of  Syria  by
an  Amazonian  queen  (Diodorus,  243  46).  and  regards  Strabo's
(15 1 6)  Idanthyrsus  as  a  mistake  for  Targitaus.  But  it  is
probable  that  the  accounts  in  Diodorus  are  only  reflections
of  the  invasion  in  the  time  of  Psammetichus,  and  that  Idan
thyrsus  has  in  Strabo  received  credit  for  the  work  accomplished
by  Madyas.  The  narratives  of  the  conquest  of  Scythia  by
Sesostris  (Ramessu  II.)  are  clearly  late  exaggerations;  but
Hommel's  notable  theory,  accounting  for  Iranian  names  in
Kadavaduna  (  =  Cappadocia,  a  country  closely  allied  to  the
centre  of  Hittite  power,  Melitene,  and  Cilicia ;  see  Miiller,
Asien,  288,335)  by_the  Scythian  character  of  its  people,  also
tends  to  explain  this  confusion  of  Hittite  and  Scythian.  The
people  called  Gag  may  prove  to  be  akin  to  the  Kimmerians  and
forerunners  of  the  Askuza.  As  regards  the  history  of  the
Scoloti  in  Russian  Scythia  before  their  contact  with  the  Greeks
in  the  seventh  century,  we  have  no  information.

From  tablets  inscribed  in  the  reign  of  Esarhaddon
(681-668)  we  learn  that  Scythians  had  established
15.  Asianic  rule  :  'heniselves  ;  f  L^e  Urumiah.
Protothvas  ar  1S  exPresse"  'est  tne  Scythians

Madvas  '  should  break  through  Manncean  into
Assyrian  territory,  the  chief  Ispakai
is  said  to  be  an  ally  of  the  Mannseans,  and  king
Bartatua  (Protothyas)  is  referred  to  as  seeking  an
alliance  and  the  hand  of  Esarhaddon's  daughter.  That
the  alliance  was  concluded  is  highly  probable,  since  in
625  Madyas,  Protothyas'  son,  came  to  the  aid  of
Assyria  by  defeating  Cyaxares,  who  was  besieging
Nineveh,  and  by  checking  the  advances  of  Psam
metichus  in  Syria.  In  consideration  of  these  services,
it  is  natural  that  the  suzerainty  of  Assyria  over  Urartu
acknowledged  by  Sarduris  III.  should  pass  to  Scythia,
and  that  such  states  as  Cappadocia,  Commagene,  and
Melitene  should  become  tributary.  What  the  relation
of  Cilicia  to  the  new  power  was,  it  would  be  interesting
to  know  ;  but  it  cannot  yet  be  discerned.  The  Median
border  states  Atropatene,  Matiene,  and  others  are
likely  to  have  been  subdued.  From  625  to  597
Scythian  rule  in  Asia  Minor  continued.  Then  the
power  was  broken  by  Cyaxares.  In  591  Scythian
refugees  from  the  Median  court  fled  to  Lydia  for  pro
tection  ;  but  Scythians  continued  to  live  under  Median
and  Persian  domination  in  Asia  Minor.  There  was  a
Sacastene  in  Cappadocia  as  well  as  in  Armenia.

Darius  claims  to  have  conquered  the  '  Saka  beyond
the  Sea.'  By  these  he  means  the  Scythians  N.  of  the
Euxine.  He  probably  also  refers  to


16.  Scythians
in  Russia.


them as the saka tigrakhuda, since


the  pictorial  representations  from  the
Kimmerian  Bosporus  show  that  these  wore  the  Phrygian
cap.  It  is  to  Darius'  campaign  into  Russia  in  512  that
we  owe  the  elaborate  account  of  the  Scythians  by  Hero
dotus.  That  Darius  marched  as  far  as  to  the  Volga
may  be  doubted,  and  some  other  points  in  the  narrative
are  manifestly  unhistorical.

There  is  no  reason,  however,  to  question  the  important  role
ascribed  to  Idanthyrsus,  through  whose  adroit  management  of
the  defence  Darius  was  frustrated  in  his  object.  His  father
Saulius  seems  to  have  already  impressed  himself  upon  the
colonists,  as  his  name  is  especially  mentioned.  No  events  of
any  importance,  however,  have  been  recorded  by  the  Greek
writers  before  Herodotus  who  refer  to  the  Scythians.  Whether
the  use  by  them  of  the  name  Scythian  (Sjcvflrjs)  shows  that  their
knowledge  of  the  people  was  derived  from  the  Askuza  of  Asia
Minor,  or  that  Sku-za  was  as  much  a  native  designation  of  the
people  as  Sko-lot,  cannot  be  determined.

The  Milesian  colonists  were,  of  course,  tributary  to
the  Scythian  suzerain  ;  but  the  relations  seem  to  have
been  cordial.

Only  when  a  king  like  Skylas  forgot  his  native  traditions  to-
the  extent  of  taking  part  in  the  Dionysiac  orgies  in  Olbia,  the
Scythians  resented  his  proceeding.  Friendly  relations  also  pre
vailed  between  Ariapeithes  and  Teres  of  Thrace,  in  the  beginning
of  the  fifth  century.  It  is  doubtful  whether  Spartacus  (438-432),
the  founder  of  the  Bosporanian  kingdom,  was  a  Greek  or  of  mixed
race.  There  are  some  indications  that  the  king  whose  skeleton
was  found  in  a  tomb  at  Kertsch  (Panticapsum)  had  Scythian
blood  in  his  veins.  The  Spartacida:  were  not  a  serious  menace  to
Scythian  power  in  the  fourth  century.  Danger  threatened  first
from  Macedonia,  whose  ambitious  ruler  Philip  invaded  Scythia
and  killed  in  battle  king  Ateas  in  339,  and  subsequently  from
the  Sarmatians  who  crossed  the  Don  and  made  themselves
during  the  third  century  the  most  important  people  in  the

4338


SCYTHOPOLIS

territory  once  claimed  by  the  Scythians.  In  the  beginning  of
the  second  century  the  German  Bastarnians  made  their  appear
ance.  A  Scythian  reaction  seems  to  have  occurred  under
Scilurus  who,  however,  was  defeated  by  Mithridates  VI.,
105  B.C.  After  Mithridates  (132-163)  had  conquered  the  country
N.  of  the  Euxine,  he  could  lead  armies  of  Scythians  as  well  as
Sarmatians,  Bastarnians,  and  Thracians  against  the  Romans.
Later,  the  legionaries  of  Rome  found  Sarmatians  as  soon  as
they  had  crossed  the  Danube.  Finally,  the  Scythians  were
absorbed  in  the  prevailing  Slavonic  population.

From their  old home the eastern branch of  this

people  was  also  driven  by  invaders  across  the  Jaxartes

„ , into  Chorasmia,  Margiarm,  and  Bactria.

S th ^  According to Ktesias, Cyrus fought
y  against these Scythians, and forced

Amorges  to  aid  him  in  his* war  upon  Croesus  (546).
There  is  probably  also  a  nucleus  of  truth  in  his  account
of  Cyrus'  war  with  the  Derbikkae,  though  he  has
wrongly  connected  his  death  with  this  war.  There
is  no  reason  for  doubting  the  substantial  accuracy  of
Herodotus'  account  of  his  death  in  the  war  upon
Tomyris,  queen  of  the  Massagetae,  though  there  are  as
usual  some  embellishments.  The  grounds  on  which
Duncker  rejected  this  story  are  quite  insufficient.

Darius  had  to  fight  with  Scythians  whom  he  designates  as
Saka  hutnavarka.  These  are  probably  identical  with  the
Amyrgian  Scythians.  Fressl  may  be  right  in  connecting  both
these  words  with  Margiana.  According  to  Fr.  Midler  (IVZKM
7  258)  they  are  the  '  Soma-preparing  Scythians  ' ;  but  Ed.  Meyer
(GA  3  no./)  doubts  this  interpretation.  Scythian  archers  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Marathon,  and  were  also  in  the  army  of
Xerxes.  Where  their  home  was,  is  not  indicated.  Alexander
came  into  contact  with  Scythians  only  after  he  had  crossed  the
Jaxartes  in  Sogdiana.  For  some  time  before  138,  Scythians  had
held  possession  of  Margiana.

Through  Chang-kian's  account  of  his  mission  (in  Ssematsien),
it  is  possible  to  trace  the  political  situation  in  Iran  in  128,  and
to  discern  some  of  the  events  that  led  up  to  it.  Pressed  by  the
Hiungnu,  a  Turkish  people,  the  Yuechi  (probably  Massagetse)


ng  defended  Uactna  aga
Mithridates  I.  in  160.  In  130  the  Scythians  took  most  of
Bactria  from  Heliocles.  But  they  were  in  their  turn  driven
from  Bactria,  and  fled  into  Kipin,  Kashmir,  Nepal,  and  India,
where  they  established  kingdoms.  Maues  reigned  in  Kipin
and  Punjab  (130-110),  Azes(no-8o),  and  Aspavarma,  Aziles,  and
Vanones  after  So.  Between  70  and  30  Spalahoras,  Spalag-
dames,  Spalyris,  and  Spalyrisis  reigned  in  W.  India,  though
their  power  was  much  limited  by  Hermaios.  They  were  finally
overthrown  by  Kadphizes  I.  (Kiutsiu-Kio),  the  founder  of  the
Yuechi  dynasty.  This  dynasty  (until  116  A.D.),  whose  most
famous  king  is  Kunishka  (70-90  A.D.),  was  also  designated  as
the  Scythian  (Caka),  and  the  Caka-era  begins  with  the  year
78  A.D.  The  E.  Scythians  were*  confused  with  their  kinsmen,
the  Massagetae,  and  other  neighbours  in  India,  as  the  W.
Scythians  had  been  confused  with  their  kinsmen,  the  Sar
matians,  and  other  neighbours  in  Europe.  In  India,  as  in
Afghanistan,  the  Scythians  were  absorbed  in  the  native
population.

(i)  On  the  biblical  references  see  the  commentaries  on  Genesis,
Jeremiah,  Zephaniah,  and  Ezekiel,  and  the  histories  of  Israel
[also  Crit.  Bib.\.  The  best  modern  history
18.  Literature,  of  Mithridates  of  Pontus  is  by  Theodore
Reinach  (jMithridate  Eufxitor,  1890).  (2)
For  descriptions  of  Scythia  see  especially  Ukert,  Geog.  derGriech.
un.i  Roiner,  3 2  ;  Reclus,  Geog.  Univ.;  Lindner,  Skythien  u.  d.
Skvthen  lies  Hcrodot,  1841,  and  especially  Neumann,  Die
HclUnen  im  Skythenlande,  1855  ;  Baer,  Hist.  Fragen,  1873,  and
Tomaschek  in  Berichte  d.  Wiener  Akademie,  1888.  (3)  The
most  important  works  on  the  language  are  Zeuss,  Die  Deutschen
und  die  Nachl>arsta»ime,  1837  ;  and  Miillenhoff,  Deutsche
Altertumskunde,  8(1892).  Fressl,  Die  Skythen-Saken,  1886,  is
not  sufficiently  critical.  (4)  For  the  antiquities  see  Stephani,
Antiquites  du  Bosplwe  Cimmcrien,  1854;  MacPherson,  An
tiquities  of  Kertch,  1857  ;  Neumann,  (see  under  2).  Rayet,
Etudes  d'archfologie  et  if  art,  1888  ;  Solomon  Reinach,  An
tiquites  du  Bosphorc  Cimmtrien,  1885.  (5)  For  the  history,
see,  in  addition  to  primary  sources,  Winckler,  Gesch.  d.
Altertums,  1878, (»)  243o^f. :  Gutschmid,  EBW,  artt.  'Scythia'
and  '  Persia,'  discriminating,  but  wrongly  excluding  the  eastern
Scythians;  the  suggestive  discussions  of  H.  Winckler,  AOF
\4,mJf.\  the  admirable  summaries  of  Ed.  Meyer,  GA,  especi
ally  3,  §§  fx>ff-  (1901);  Lassen,  Indische  Altertumskunde,
1847-1857 ;  Schroder,  Indiens  Literaiur  und  Cultur,  1887,
and  Lefmann,  Gesch.  des  Alien  Indiens,  1890.  N.  S.

SCYTHOPOLIS  (cKyecoN  TTOAIN),  2  Mace.  1229  ;
in  Josh.  etc.  BETH-SHEAN  [$.v.] ;  cp  HAMONAH.

SEA  (D*,  yam;  6AAACC<\).  See  GEOGRAPHY,  §  4  ;
also  DEAD^SEA,  GALILEE  (Sea  of),  MEDITERRANEAN,
RED  SEA,  SALT  SEA.

4339


SEA, THE  BRAZEN

SEA,  THE  BRAZEN  (ni';n?rt  D;  ;  THN
THN  XAAKHN  2  K.  25  13  Jer.  52 17  [om.  A]  i  Ch.  188),

1.  Size  and  THE  MoLTEN  SEA  (PV'°  D'?  : THN
form. 6AA&CC&N  [B],  T.  0.  AYTHN  [A],  T.  9.

XYTHN [L], I K.  ?23; T- 6. XYTHN

[HAL],  2  Ch.42),  or  simply  THE  SEA  (i  K.  744,  2  K.
1617,  2  Ch.  4 15),  the  large  bronze  reservoir  which  stood
in  the  SE.  angle  of  the  court  of  Solomon's  temple.  The
designation  '  sea '  is  explained  by  Josephus  from  the  size
(Ant,  viii.  3s;  dK\rj9r)  .  .  .  8d\a<r&a  5ia  TO  fdyeOos).
According  to  the  description  in  i  K.  723-26  the  'sea'  was
round,  measuring  10  cubits  (17.22  ft.1)  in  width  and  5
(8.61)  in  depth  ;  '  and  a  line  of  30  cubits  (<5I!AL  33
cubits)  compassed  it  round  about.'  These  numbers  are
of  course  only  approximate — not  given  with  mathematical
precision,  otherwise  to  a  diameter  of  10  cubits  would
have  corresponded  a  circumference  of  31.4159  . . .  cubits ;
failure  to  observe  this  has  caused  commentators  need
less  trouble.  The  capacity  of  the  '  sea  '  (i  K.  726  ;  ©BL
om. )  was  2000  baths=i6,oio  gallons  (see  WEIGHTS
AND  MEASURES,  §  3).  2  Ch.  gives  3000  baths  ( =  24,015
gallons),  certainly  an  impossible  figure,  even  that  of
i  K.  being  too  large  for  the  data  ;  a  hemisphere  of  the
dimensions  given  contains  only  6376  gallons  and  a
cylinder  10,798  gallons.2  Even  if,  in  view  of  what  is
said  about  the  12  oxen,  we  come  to  the  conclusion  that
the  '  sea'  must  have  been  more  or  less  cylindrical  in  shape,
not,  as  Josephus  (Ant.  viii.  3  5,  TO  i)/ju<r<j>aipiov)  will  have
it,  hemispherical,  we  can  hardly  suppose  it  to  have  held
much  more  than  (say)  7000  gallons.  There  is,  how
ever,  no  recorded  ancient  parallel  even  for  such  a
casting.  It  is  one  of  very  considerable  magnitude
(great  bell  of  Moscow  198  tons  ;  great  bell  of  St.
Paul's — largest  in  England — 17^  tons).  The  ancients
no  doubt  usually  did  their  large  castings  in  pieces  ;  but
where  possible  they  preferred  hammered  work.
Solomon's  '  sea'  may,  therefore,  it  has  been  suggested,
have  been  a  wooden  vessel  plated  with  bronze.  On  the
notice  in  i  K.  746  see  ADAM,  i  ;  and  for  a  different  view,
SUCCOTH,  2.

As  to  the  form  of  the  '  sea '  the  only  further  data  we
have  are  that  the  brass  was  an  handbreadth  thick,  that
the  brim  was  wrought  like  the  brim  of  a  cup,  like  the
flower  of  lily,  and  that  below  the  brim  ran  two  rows  of
gourd-like  ornaments  C'yps3  (see  GOURD,  end).  These
ornaments,  as  distinguished  from  those  of  the  brazen
pillars,  were  cast  when  the  sea  itself  was  cast ;  in  other
words  we  have  to  think  of  them  as  in  relief,  not  as
undercut.  The  sea  rested  upon  1 2  brazen  oxen  arranged
in  four  groups  facing  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens.

On  every  other  point  worth  knowing — the  height  of
the  oxen,  the  shape  of  the  basin,  and  so  forth — the
writer  is  silent.  Nor  are  we  told  in  what  manner  the
water  was  supplied  or  drawn  ;  one  naturally  thinks  of
the  temple  spring  or  a  conduit  from  it.

Klostermann  satisfies  our  curiosity  as  to  the  mode  of  filling
by  conjectural  emendation  of  i  K.  7  23  where  he  reads  'There
were  30  cocks  around  the  sea ;  20  were  under  the  brim  and
supplied  it,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  were  10  which  drained
it  ;  the  cocks  were  in  two  rows  and  their  flow  was  according  to
their  measure.'  The  Vss.,  however,  supply  no  sort  of  hint
towards  any  such  emendation.

According  to  the  Chronicler  (2  Ch.  46)  the  sea  was

1  [On  the  assumption  that  by  aminfih  is  meant  the  long  cubit ;
see  WRIGHTS  and  MEASURES,  §  i.]


Weigh 26f  tO.  _«  -. .  -

of  water,  and  this  would  weigh  2iJ  tons.  A  cylindrical  vessel
would  weigh  more  and  contain  more — but  the  spherical  shape  is
the  most  favourable  for  possibility.']

3  nSX3  ~\C'1J  in  i  K.  T  24  is  usually  rendered ten  in  a  cubit'
(so  RVrng.  and  AV),  and  accordingly  the  total  number  of  gourds


Benzinger,  ad  loc.).


4340


SEA  CALVES

for  the  priests  to  wash  in  (cp  Ex.  30 19)  ;  as  to  this,  all
2  Sieni-  °ne  can  say  's  *  tJie  arrangement  would
ficance  b°  in  the  hi£nest  degree  inconvenient  for
any  such  purpose.  Almost  inevitably  there
fore  one  comes  back  to  the  conjecture  that  the  sea  itself
had  a  symbolical  meaning,  as  well  as  the  oxen  on
which  it  rested.  The  oxen  are  to  be  explained  not  by
the  consideration  that  the  ox  was  the  principal  sacrificial
animal  (so  Riehm,  HWB,  s.v.  '  Meer,  ehernes')but
rather  by  the  symbolic  character  of  the  ox  as  repre
senting  deity,  in  Canaanitish-Israelitish  religion.  Kosters
(cp  Th.  T,  1879,  pp.  455^)  explains  the  sea  itself  as  a
symbol  of  the  subterranean  ocean,  the  tlhom.  He
recalls  the  many  traces  to  be  found  in  the  OT  of  acquaint
ance  with  the  Babylonian  creation-myth  and  the  struggle
of  the  gods  with  Tiamat  (cp  Gunkel,  Schopfung,  153,
and  see  DRAGON,  LEVIATHAN,  RAHAB,  SERPENT).
It  is  this  Tiamat — who  was  held  to  represent  the
waters  of  chaos,  and  to  have  been  vanquished  by  the
gods  —  that  according  to  Kosters  was  represented  by
the  '  sea '  upon  the  oxen  (these  last  symbolising  Marduk).
In  view  of  the  admitted  fact  that  the  Babylonian
creation-myth  determined  the  form  of  the  Israelitish
cosmogony,  one  cannot  deny  that  such  a  view  may  be
correct,  even  though  the  OT  itself  does  not  directly
support  it.  Cp  CREATION,  §§  13,  19,  22  ;  NEHUSHTAN,
§2.

[Gunkel  refers  to  the  apsu,  or  primaeval  sea,  made  by  king
Ursina  of  Lagas  and  the  tdmtu,  or  sea,  of  Agum  (1500  B.C.)  ;
cp  KB  iii.  113143;  Del.  Ass.  HWB  114;  Muss-Arn.  Diet.
80;  Jensen,  Kosmol.  233^,  511,  and  pi.  3.  See  also  Sayce
(Hibb.  Lect.,  1887,  p.  63,  and  RPV)  1  65),  who  points  out  the
connection  between  the  sea  and  the  large  basins  called  apsi  in
Babylonian  temples.  What  this  acute  scholar  did  not  remark
was  the  connection  of  these  basins  with  the  Babylonian
creation-myth,  in  which  apsu  (the  anaa-uiv  of  Damascius  ;  see
CREATION,  §  15,  end)  designates  the  ocean  which  'in  the  be
ginning  'was,  or  filled,  all  things.]

At  all  events  no  other  satisfactory  explanation  has
been  proposed.  How  the  worshippers  of  Yah  we  inter
preted  or  (if  it  came  from  Babylon)  adapted  this  symbol,
we  have  also  no  information  from  the  OT.  But  that
the  original  meaning  of  the  '  sea '  did  not  quite  accord
with  later  Yahwistic  ideas,  may  be  inferred  with  great
probability  from  the  fact  that  the  later  period  either
explained  it  in  an  impossible  manner  (so  the  Chronicler  ;
see  §  2,  begin. )  or  eliminated  it  altogether.  In  Ex.  30  18
40730,  instead  of  the  molten  'sea'  P  has  merely  a
brazen  laver  or  basin  (iva)  for  the  priests  to  wash  their
hands  and  feet.  So  also  the  post-exilic  temple  has
only  a  basin  of  the  same  sort,  not  to  be  compared  in
point  of  size  with  Solomon's  '  sea.'  In  Ezekiel  it  would
seem  as  if  the  temple  fountain  were  to  take  the  place  of
the  molten  sea,  which  does  not  otherwise  seem  to  be
represented  in  the  temple ;  in  its  place  we  find  a
fountain  to  the  E.  of  the  temple  (note  the  agreement,
partly  verbatim,  between  the  expressions  of  i  K.  7  39  and
of  Ezek.  47 1).  As  regards  this  fountain  too  we  can  see
that  it  is  not  primarily  intended  to  provide  an  arrange
ment  for  the  priests  to  wash  their  hands,  but  has  a
symbolical  meaning  (see  the  comm.  ad  loc. ).

Of  Solomon's  brazen  sea  \ve  are  further  told  that
King  Asa  took  it  down  from  off  the  oxen,  and  put  it
upon  a  pavement  of  stones  (see  PAVEMENT).  Like
other  brazen  appurtenances  of  the  temple,  the  oxen  were
made  available  for  paying  the  tribute  exacted  by  the
king  of  Assyria  (2  K.  16  17).  The  sea  itself  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  conquering  Babylonians,  who  broke  it  in
pieces  and  carried  off  the  fragments  (2  K.  25 13  16  Jer.
52 17  20 — where  the  twelve  oxen  also  are  erroneously
reckoned  among  the  spoils  of  the  Babylonians).

See_the  Archaeologies  and  Dictionaries,  also  the  commentaries
on  Kings  by  Thenius,  Keil,  Klostermann,  Benzinger,  and
Kittel.  See  also  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Sard.,  Jud.  etc.  1  258-264 ;
Phcen.  and  Cypr.  1289-292;  Renan,  Hist.  Peup.  Isr.  1i$t>f.
Consult  fig.  in  Masp.  Struggle,  no.  I.  B.

SEA  CALVES  (fan),  Lam.  43  AVme-,  RV  JACKAL  (i).
SEAL  (Dnin),  i  K.  218. See  RING,  §  i.
139  434i


SEDECIAS

SEALSKINS,  Ex.  25S  etc.  RV,  AV  BADGERS'  SKINS.
SEAMEW(f]np;),  Lev.  1]  ,6  Dt.  I4i5l  AV  Cracow.

SEA  MONSTER  (ffi*),  Lam.  43  AV,  AY'"g.  -sea
calves,'  RV  JACKAL  (q.v.,  i)  ;  cp  WHALE.

SEAT. See  THRONE.

SEBA  (Nip  ;  CAB<*  [BKAL,  etc.],  -T[B  once]  ;  in  Is.
43 3  COHNHN  [BNAQ],  cyHNHN  [F]  ;  in  Is.  45 14,
pi.  D'Nap,  EV  SAB/EANS  (q.v.}  c^EAeiM  [B],  CA-
Bd,eiN  [K*],  ceBcoeiM  [A],  ceBcoeiN  [Nc-ac-bQ*],

CABweiN  :  01  r'  CABA6IM  [Qme-]  ;  La*),  first  in
order  of  the  sons  of  Cush,  Gen.  10?  [P],  iCh.  19.
Mentioned  also  in  other  late  passages  —  e.g. ,  Is.  483
(with  Mizraim  and  Cush),  45 14  (in  pi.,  with  same  com
panions)  ;  Ps.  72io  (with  Sheba),  where,  however,
Bickell,  Cheyne,  Ps.W,  regard  it  as  a  later  insertion.
This  last  passage  may  simply  indicate  a  locality  in  the
far  S.  ;  the  other  passages  favour  Africa,  and  the
neighbourhood  of  Ethiopia  (but  cp  CUSH,  2).  Dillmann
(on  Gen.  10?)  thinks  it  safest  to  regard  Seba  as  a  branch
of  the  Cushites  or  Ethiopians  settled  eastward  from
Napata,  on  the  Red  Sea  or  Arabian  Gulf,  a  view  which
Baethgen  (on  Ps.  72 10)  and  Duhm  (on  Is.  43s)  accept.

The  name  is  not  found  in  Egyptian  ;  but  Dillmann  cites  TO
<ra£amKOi/  crrd/ia,  Ai/ur/v  2a(3a,  2a/3at  TroAts  evjueye07)s,  from
Strabo,  xvi.  48  10  and  SajSaorpiicbi/  crrdjua,  iraftar  770X15  (v  T<3
'ASov^i/cu  /coAn-a)  from  Ptol.  iv.  ~  if.  ;  Josephus,  and  many
following  him,  identify  with  Meroe  ;  but  this  does  not  seem  to  be
elsewhere  distinguished  from  Cush.  See  also  CUSH,  2  ;  MIZRAIM.

F.  B.

SEBAM  (D3LM),  Nu.  323  RV,  in  v.  38,  RV  SIBMAH.
SEBAT,  RV  SHEBAT  (LD2L",  Zech.  1 7). See  MONTH.

SECACAH  (HMD;  <MXIOZA  [B],  AIOX.  [Ba],
COXOX&  [A],  CX&X&  M),  a  city  in  the  wilderness  of
Judah  (Josh.  156if),  mentioned  between  Middin  and
Nibshan.  Assuming  the  ordinary  view  of  the  sites
mentioned  in  Josh.  15  6i/  (see  BETH-ARABAH),  we
might  suppose  Secacah  to  be  the  name  of  a  fort  erected
(with  cisterns)  on  the  plateau  above  the  W.  coast  of
the  Dead  Sea  to  keep  the  nomad  tribes  in  check  (cp
2Ch.  26 10).

The  caution,  however,  given  elsewhere  (MIDDIN,  ad  fin. ,)  may
be  here  repeated.  P  may  have  led  subsequent  ages  into  a  great
misunderstanding  by  putting  'En-gedi'  for  'En-kadesh.'
Secacah  was  probably  a  place  in  the  far  south  (Negeb)  ;  possibly
Khalasah  is  meant.  See  NIBSHAX.  T.  K.  C.

SECHENIAS (cexeMAC [AL]). i. i  Esd.  829  =

Ezra  8  3,  SHECANIAH,  2.
2.  i  Esd.  8  32  =  Ezra  8  5,  SHECAMAH,  3.

SECHU,  RV  Secu  (JOE?>),  a  corrupt  reading  in  i  S.
1922  (in  the  same  late  narrative  referred  to  under
NAIOTH).  In  the  place  so  called  in  EV  we  are  told
that  there  was  '  a  great  well '  (AV)  or  '  the  (well-known)
great  well '  (RV).  Unfortunately  tor  hag-gddol  cannot
properly  be  rendered  either  way.  <51!L  not  only  suggests
the  right  reading,  dor  haggoren  (pjn  for  'run),  'the
cistern  of  the  threshing-floor,'  but  also  completes  the
correction  by  the  very  appropriate  'SV2,  '  on  the  (bare)
height. '  A  treeless  height  where  there  would  be  cool
breezes  was  the  natural  place  for  a  threshing  floor  ;  cp
Jer.  4n  and  see  AGRICULTURE,  §  8.  (©,  £ws  TOV
c/ipearos  TOV  a\w  TOV  tv  Tip  cre<£«  [B],  e,  <pp.  TT/S  <5L
Trjs  iv  <re<t>i  [L],  (ftp.  TOV  /J.eyd\ov  TOV  ev  CTOK^W  [A],
Socho  [Vg.]. )  s.  A.  c.

SECRETARY  (ISID),  2  S.  8 17  EV»«-f  etc.,  EV
SCRIBE.

SECT  (Aipecic),  Acts 24 14  RV,  AV  HERESY.

SECUNDUS  (ceKOYNAoc  [Ti.  WH]),  a  Thessa-
lonian,  who  accompanied  Paul  for  (at  least)  a  part  of
the  way  from  Europe  on  his  last  recorded  journey  to
Jerusalem  (Acts  204).

SEDECIAS, RV Sedekias (ceAeKiAc). i- b.
4343


SEDUCERS


SELA


Maasias,  an  ancestor  of  BARUCH  [g.v.]  (Bar.  1 1) ;  cp  '  Zedekiah
b.  Maaseiah  '  Jer.  29  21  /.

2.  In  Bar.  1  8 ;  elsewhere  called  ZEDEKIAH,  i.

SEDUCERS,  RV  '  Impostors'  (r-OHTec).  2  Tim.  813.
See  MAGIC,  §  4.

SEER(nX"l,  i  S.  99;  nth,  2S.24n);  see  PROPHET,


SEGUB  (34JP,  ceroyB)-  i-  b.  Hezron  ;  father  of
JAIK  [q.v.~\  (iCh.22i/.,  cepoyx  LB])-  See  CALEB-
EPHRATAH,.  REUBEN,  §  n.

2.  The  youngest  son  of  HIEL  [?.».]  (i  K.  1634  ;  K.r.
yjy',  fcyovfi  [B  ;  om.  L]).  Cp  REUBEN,  §  u.  In  <5
of  Josh.  626  it  may  be  his  name  that  is  rendered
8ia<rij}0<;VTi  ;  the  translator  apparently  misread  yitff
(Aram.  '  to  save  ').

On  the  name,  see  NAMES,  §  57,  and  for  S.  Ar.  analogies,
Hommel,  Sudarab.  Affer-fiimer(iSgg),  21.  But  the  theory  that
it  is  an  ethnic  like  Jair,  Hezron,  and  Machir  is  attractive.  (T^
in  iCh.  22iyC  implies  Hi:?,  and  this  comes  probably  by  trans
position  from  "W3  (cp  SEKUG).  Abiram,  the  brother  of  2,  also
probably  bears  an  ethnic  name.  '  Ram, '  if  not  also  the  fuller
form  Abiram,  comes  (like  '  Jericho ')  from  QnV  =  ^KDn"V  (Che.).
See  Crit.  Kib.

SEIR  ("IT'J'),  the  reputed  ancestor  of  the  Horites
(Gen.  8620  /  iCh.  138/).  See  SEIR,  MOUNT.

SEIR,  MOUNT  (TIN?,  either  lit.  'hairy'  [Lag.
Vbers.  92],  or  trop.  'overgrown'  [No.  ZDMG^Qib^,  n.  2] ;  ©
always  (rrjeip,  except  Josh.  11  17  orjapo.  [A]  ;  127  creeipa  [AF],
ao-creeipa  [L]  ;  i  Ch.  IjS  OT)0tp  [A];  Ezek.  258  [om.  BQ]  ;  Dt.
passim,  Ch.  [except  i  Ch.  1  38]  crieip  [L]).

The  name  of  a  mountain  district  occupied  by  Esau  and  the
Edomites,  Josh.  24  4  (E),  Gen.  3(5  sf.  (P),  Dt.  2  5  etc. ,  but  by  the
Horites  in  Gen.  146  (on  text  see  especially  Buhl,  Edomiter,  28).
The  name  '  land  of  Seir '  ("l'V|if  {"IN)  also  appears  in  Gen.  32  4
(J)  363o(P  ;  where,  however,  <S  has  e&o;u  [ADEL,  B  lacking]),
and  (often)  simply  'Seir,'  Judg.  64  Gen.  33  14  16  (J),  Nu.  24  18
(JE  ;  where,  however,  &  has  Tjerav  [BAFL]),  Dt.  144  etc.

The  mountain  region  of  Seir  (mod.  es-fardA)  extends  15
or  20  m.  E.  from  the 'Arabah  (S.  from  the  Dead  Sea),
which  it  skirts  nearly  to  the  Gulf  of 'Akaba  (the  terms
'  land  of  Seir  '  and  '  Seir,'  are  sometimes  applied  to  the
plateau  W.  of  the  'Arabah)  ;  Zimmern  (7. A  6257  n.  13)
doubtfully  suggests  a  connection  with  the  district  of
Seri  mentioned  (with  Gindkirmil)  in  an  Amarna  letter
from  Jerusalem  (VVi.  AT?  5 182  [B  105]  26).  On  early
traces  of  the  name  Seir,  and  on  its  meaning,  see  EDOM,
§§  2,  3.  F.  B.

'  Edom '  and  '  Seir '  are  terms  which  are  often  used
interchangeably  as  the  designation  of  a  region  occupied
by  Esau  and  his  descendants  (Gen.  32s  36  i  Sf.  19  21  43
Nu.  24  18  Dt.  25829  Josh.  244).  '  Mt.  Seir,'  the  range
of  mountains  running  S.  from  the  Dead  Sea,  on  the  E.
of  the  'Arabah,  was  a  main  feature  of  '  Edom  '  (Gen.
146  36  8/.  Dt.  28  Josh.244);  but  'Seir'  (Gen.33i4
Dt.  144)  and  'the  land  of  Seir'  (an  ancient  variant  to
'the  country  [or  field]  of  Edom,'  Gen.  823),  are  terms
which  are  clearly  not  limited  to,  nor,  indeed,  are  com
monly,  if  ever,  identical  with,  '  Mt.  Seir '  in  the  OT
text.  Sometimes  vyty  '  Seir '  appears  to  be  miswritten
for  nisDi  'Missur'  [Che.].  The  practical  question
therefore  is,  What  portion  of  the  country  westward  of
the  'Arabah  was  included  in  '  Seir '  and  in  '  the  country
of  Edom,'  in  the  days  of  the  Israelites'  •  wanderings  ? l
Cp  EDOM,  §  5.  Trumbull  answers,  '  The  extensive
plain  es-Slr,  bounded  on  the  S.  by  Wady  el-Fikreh,  a
wady  which  ascends  south-westerly  from  the  'Arabah,
from  a  point  not  far  S.  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  separates
Palestine  proper  from  the  'Azazimeh  mountain-tract,
or  Jebel  Makrah  group.  The  northern  wall  of  this
wady  is  a  bare  and  bald  rampart  of  rock,  forming  a
natural  boundary  as  it  '  goeth  up  to  Seir '  ;  a  landmark
both  impressive  and  unique,  which  corresponds  with
all  the  OT  mentions  of  the  Mt.  Halak',  Kadesh-barnea,
99 /.2  Cp  HALAK,  MOUNT.


1  Trumbull,  Kadesh-barnea.  84  f.

2  See,  further,  Palmer,  Desert  of  Exodus,  404  (es-Sirr),  and
note  that Rowlands  (Williams,  Holy  City,  1 465)  had  already
connected  '  Seir '  with  es-Serr  (sic).

4343


SEIR,  MOUNT  (T1K?  in ;  Opoc  ACCAR  '  [B],
o.  Acc&pec  [Bab],  o.  cHeip  [A],  o.  cieip  [L]),  one  of
the  landmarks  on  the  boundary  between  Judah  and
Benjamin  (Josh.  15 10),  between  Kirjath-jearim  and
CHESALON  \q-v.\  and  therefore  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  rocky  point  of  Saris,  2  m.  W.  by  S.  from  Karyet-
el-'enab  (so  Robinson).  With  Saris  may  be  identified
the  Sores  of  ©,  Josh.  156o  (tupijs  [B],  ffwp-rjs  [A],  -etj
[L]) ;  see  Buhl,  Pal.  91  167,  and  BENJAMIN,  JUDAH.

SEIRAH,  but  AY  Seirath  (nrPWH),  the  place  to
which  Ehud  fled,  where  he  '  blew  the  trumpet  in  the
hill  country  of  Ephraim '  (Judg.  826,  ceT6ipco6&  [B],1
ceeipCOBA  [A],  CH RCO0A [L]).  The  name  has  greatly
puzzled  critics.2  Winckler  (Alttest.  Unt.  SSff-)  even
supposed  some  unknown  place  on  the  E.  of  Jordan
to  be  meant ;  in  GI  2 100  he  prefers  the  '  Mt.  Seir '  of
Josh.  15 10.  If,  however,  we  use  the  key  supplied  by  a
number  of  the  narratives,  in  which,  as  the  evidence
tends  to  show,  the  scene  has  been  transferred  from  the
Xegeb  to  the  tribal  territory  of  Ephraim,  we  shall  see  a
way  out  of  this  perplexity.  Eglon  was  king  of  Missur,
and  the  city  he  took  was  a  place  called  Jerahmeel — i.e. ,
either  Jericho  (see  JERICHO,  §  2)  or  more  probably  the
capital  of  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (possibly  Kadesh).
After  his  exploit  Ehud  escaped  to  Zarephath  (.injns),
and  mustered  the  Israelites  who  dwelt  in  the  southern
Ephraim  —  i.e.,  the  Jerahmeelite  highlands.  Ehud
himself  was  probably  a  Benjamite  of  the  Negeb.

T.  K.  C.

SELA,  or  (AY  2  K. )  Selah,  or  once  [see  §  2]  PETRA

(v?D,  nerpA  in  Is.;  J??E>n,  H  rrerpA  in  Judg.  2  K.),
Judg.  1  36  (RVme-)  2  K.  147  (EV)  Is.  16i  (AY"*  Petra)
42 ii  (Hitz. ,  Del.,  Duhm).  Commonly  supposed  to  be
the  Hebrew  name  of  the  later  city  of  Petra  (see  §  2).
The  name  of  Sela'  indeed  is  parallel  to  the  Arabic  name
Sal',  which  Yakut  gives  to  a  fortress  in  the  Wady  Musa,
where  Petra  stood  (cp  Nold.  7,DMG  25 259 ).3  Wetz-
stein  (in  Del.  fes.W  696 ff.}  thinks  that  Sela  is  another
name  for  BOZRAH  \_q.v. ]  ;  the  full  name  of  the  Edomite
capital  being  Bozrath  has-sela',  a  view  which  has  not
„.  .,  much  to  recommend  it.  Xor  is  the
'..  ji  «  i  simpler  view  that  a  city  on  the  site  of

•  OT  Petra  was  known  to  the  Hebrews  as  S(51a'
or  has-sela'  ('the  rock')  exegetically
tenable  ;  there  is  in  fact  no  city  called  S61a'  mentioned
in  the  OT.  See,  however,  EDOM,  §  7.

'  From  Sela','  (JPEnip),  in  Judg.  1  36  should  rather  be  '  from
the  rock"  (1^0?);  the  reference  may  be  to  some  striking  cliff
near  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  fitted  to  be  a  landmark,  such
as  that  now  called  es-Safieh  (so  Buhl,  Moore).  In  2  K.  147,
it  may  be  '  some  castle  on  a  rock  unknown  to  us '  (Kittel)  that
is  referred  to.  In  Is.  16  i  JPDC,  '  from  the  rocks  '  (collectively  ;
cp  Jer.  48  28),  is  generally  taken  to  describe  the  route  taken  by
the  Moabite  ambassadors,  which  would  run  through  the  rocky
country  of  Edom.  Is.  42  1 1  should  be  rendered  '  Let  the  inhabi
tants  of  the  rocks  (ySo  collectively)  sing  ' ;  cp  Ob.  3.  It  should
be  added,  however,  that  though  as  against  '  Sela' '  the  above
summary  of  current  interpretations  will  stand,  the  views  of  the
geography  of  the  texts  which  are  proposed  seem  open  to
question.  The  redactors  themselves  were  sometimes  the  authors
of  confusion  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

Of  all  these  passages  the  only  one  which  can  with
any  plausibility  be  thought  to  refer  to  Petra  is  2  K.  14?.
But  in  the  ||  passage,  2  Ch.  25 12,  we  only  read  of  a
1  rock,'  nor  does  Joktheel  occur  anywhere  as  the  name
of  an  Edomite  city  ;  JOKTHEEL  [y.  v.  ]  is  very  prob
ably  connected  with  '  Maacath  '  or  '  Jerahmeel. '  The
misinterpretation  (for  such,  as  Kittel  has  shown,  it  is)
arose  partly  from  the  supposed  mention  of  the  Edom
ites,  partly  from  the  comparatively  early  confusion
between  Petra  and  Kadesh.  Eus.  and  Jer.  (0528671
145g)  distinctly  assert  that  Petra,  a  city  of  Arabia  in

1  <BB's  <reTfipw8a  may,  perhaps,  be  a  corruption  of  rrtyfip<a6a
(T  and  T  confounded).

2  See  Budde,  Moore,  and  cp  van  Kasteren,  MDPl',  1895,
pp.  26-30.

3  WRS,  Ency.  Brit.,  art.  'Petra.'

4344


SELA-HAMMAHLEKOTH


SELAH


the  land  of  Edom,  surnamed  Joktheel,  is  called  Rekem
by  the  Assyrians  (so  Eus. ,  but  Jer.  'Syrians'}.  Still,
as  elsewhere  they  appeal  to  Jos. ,  they  may  not  be
speaking  here  on  their  own  authority.  Jos.  (Ant.
iv.  47  7 1)  says  that  Petra,  the  capital  of  Arabia,  was
called  apKt]  or  pfKffj.r)  from  its  founder  Rekem,  a
Midianite  king.  But  Targ.  Onk.  and  Targ.  Jon.
apply  opT  to  Kadesh-' barnea,'  Gen.  1614  20i.  Dpn
is  supposed  to  be  connected  with  ^/DJI,  '  to  stone '  ;  it
is  probably,  however,  as  applied  to  Kadesh,  a  corrupt
fragment  of  'Jerahmeel,'  whilst,  as  applied  to  Petra,  it
may  perhaps,  as  Wetzstein  suggests,  be  derived  from
the  Greek  prjy/jia,  '  a  cleft  in  the  rocks.'

Wellhausen  {De  Gentibits  [1870],  39,  n.  2)  doubts  whether
Kekein  as  the  name  of  Petra  is  derived  from  the  variegated
colours  of  the  rocks  about  Wildy  Miisa  or  from  a  tribe  dwelling
in  the  Edomite  region  called  Rekem,  and  virtually  mentioned
in  i  Ch.  244.  The  present  writer  is  convinced,  however,  that
the  KKKEM  of  Chronicles,  which  is  the  name  of  a  tribe  of
S.  Palestine,  is  really  a  mutilation  of  Jerahmeel.

See  Wetzstein  in  Del.  fsaia/i,(s)  696-707  ;  Buhl,  Cesch.  dcr
Edoiniter,  34-37  ;  Kittel,  //A",  on  2  K.  14  7  ;  Lury,  Gescli.  dcr
Edomiter,  2?>f.',  Robinson,  BR  '1 653^  (n.  36).  T.  K.  C.

Petra  (17  Tlfrpa  ;  cu  Ile'rpcu),  however,  which  gave  its

name  to  the  province  Arabia  Petnea  (17  /card  llerpav

p , 'Apa/3ta, Agathemerus), became famous

'  e  ra"  under  the  NABAT.-KANS  (q.v. );  but,  to  judge
from  the  advantages  of  its  situation,  it  was  doubtless  a
city  or  fortress  before  that  time.  Its  ruins  are  in  the
deep  valley  called  Wady  Musa  (from  its  connection  in
in  Mohammedan  legend  with  Moses),  which  is  in  the
mountains  forming  the  eastern  wall  of  the  great  valley
between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Gulf  of  'Akaba.  Wady
Musa  lies  just  N.  of  the  watershed  between  the  two
seas,  in  30°  19'  X.  lat.  and  35°  31'  K.  long.1  Travellers
coming  up  the  'Arabah  usually  approach  the  ruins  from
the  SW.  by  a  rough  path,  partly  of  artificial  construc
tion  ;  -  but  the  natural  entrance  is  from  the  E.  down  a
narrow  defile  more  than  a  mile  long  called  the  Slk
( '  shaft ' ).  The  Slk  is  a  contraction  in  the  valley  of  a
stream  which  comes  down  from  the  E. ,  rising  in  the
so-called  Fountain  of  Moses  ('Ain  Musa),3  and  passing
between  the  villages  of  Elji  and  'Aireh  (Palmer).  Both
these  places  are  ancient  ;  the  latter  is  the  fortress  Wo-
'aira  of  Yakut,4  whilst  Elji,  mentioned  by  Edrisi,  is  the
'Gaia  urbs  juxta  civitatem  Petram  '  of  the  Onomasticon.5
Below  these  and  above  the  ravine  the  characteristic
rock-cut  tombs  and  dwellings  of  the  Nabatreans  begin
to  appear.

Not  only  was  Petra  a  place  of  refuge  and  a  safe
storehouse,  it  was  also  the  great  centre  of  the  Xabatoean
caravan  trade.  It  was  the  place  where  the  Gaza  road
branched  off  from  that  to  Hostra,  Palmyra,  and  N.
Syria,  and  it  commanded  the  route  from  Egypt  to
Damascus.  From  Petra,  too,  there  went  a  great  route
direct  through  the  desert  to  the  head  of  the  Persian
Gulf.  Thus  Petra  became  a  centre  for  all  the  main
lines  of  overland  trade  between  the  E.  and  the  W. ,
and  it  was  not  till  the  fall  of  the  Nabatnean  kingdom
that  Palmyra  superseded  it  as  the  chief  emporium  of
N.  Arabia.

See  Leon  de  Laborde  and  Linant,  I'oyage  dans  f 'Arable
Pctree  (1830)  ;  Due  de  Luynes,  I'oyage  ^exploration  a  la  tner
morte  (s.a.)  ;  Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  440^;  Visconti,
Viaggio  in  Arabia  Petrea  (1872);  Libbey,  PEFQ,  1902,
p-  412./C  T.  K.  C. ,  §  I  ;  W.  R.  S. ,  §  2.

SELA-HAMMAHLEKOTH  (nip

1  The  latitude  and  longitude  are  taken  from De  Luynes's
map. Ptolemy,  who,  according  to  Olympiodorus,  spent  some
time  in  Petra,  and  doubtless  owes  to  this  fact  his  excellent  in
formation  about  the  caravan-routes  in  Arabia,  gives  the  latitude,
with  surprising  accuracy,  as  30°  20'.

2  Cp  Diod.  1097.

3  This seems  to  be  the  fountain  mentioned  by  Nowairi  (in
Quatremere's  Melanges,  84),  which  flowed  with  blood  and  was
changed  to  water  by  Moses. The  name  Od-dema,  which  gave
rise  to  this  legend,  may  possibly  be  a  relic  of  the  old  name  of
Edom.

4  Perhaps  also  the  'Irfim  of  Gen.  8643  [see  IRAM].
B  See  Tuch,  Gen.W  271  n.

4345


H  MeplcOeiCA  [BAL]  ;  cp  Driver's  note),  the  name
of  a  mountain  where  Saul  and  David  '  played  hide  and
seek'  (i  S.  2328/i).  Saul  hurries  along  on  one  side  of
the  mountain,  thinking  to  overtake  the  unseen  David,
and  David  on  the  other  flies  (as  he  thinks)  before  the
unseen  Saul.  There  is  danger  of  their  coming  into
collision,  which  is  averted  by  the  news  of  an  inroad  of
the  Philistines  ;  Saul  turns  aside  from  the  chase.  The
narrator  must  have  explained  Sela'-hammahlekoth  so  as
to  suggest  this  '  hide  and  seek '  game.  But  neither
'rock  of  divisions'  (EVme-),  nor  'rock  of  escaping'  (an
unjustifiable  rendering)  can  be  right.  Though  the
name  is  confirmed  on  the  whole  by  the  certainly  corrupt
form  n^'an  (see  HACHILAH),  we  are  almost  driven  to
suppose  that  the  original  form  was  rriShen  ySp,  '  the
rock  of  the  ml  fid  loth'  (circling  dances).  Meholah,  like
Hachilah,  may  come  from  'Jerahmeel.'  T.  K.  c.

SELAH  (i"PD)  occurs  seventy -one  times  in  forty
psalms,  and  three  times  in  Habakkuk  (83913).  Mostly

_  .  mT  it  occurs  in  the  middle  of  a  psalm  ;  but

1.  IJata  ol  Ml  in  four ]ms  /3  9  24  46)  also  at  the

and  versions.  , .

end. Usually  it  occurs  only  once  in  a

psalm  ;  but  there  are  several  cases  of  two  Selahs,  and
in  some  psalms  we  find  three  (3  32  46  66  68  77  140)  ;
Ps.  89  actually  presents  four.  In  55  20  [19]  57  4  [3]
Hab.  839  Selah  occurs  in  the  middle  of  a  verse.  The
accents  connect  it  closely  with  the  preceding  word  ;
Aq.,  Jer. ,  Tg.  also  imply  that  it  forms  part  of  the  text.
These  three  versions  take  it  to  mean  '  always '  (det,
semper  and  jugilcr,  j-a^yV,  but  also  NTin)-  So  Ps.  9  17,
Theod.  and  &\\os  give  det  ;  Quinta  et's  TOI)S  ct^wfas  ;
Sexta  dunravros.  (5,  however,  gives  Sid\f/a\fj.a,  a  word
of  somewhat  uncertain  signification  (Theodoret,  /ne'Xouj
fj.€Taj3o\7))  ;  it  occurs  more  frequently  than  the  Hebrew
'  Selah. '

Various  conjectures  as  to  the  etymology  of  Selah  have

been  offered  (see  Ges.  Thcs.  955  ;  and  the  commentaries

,  of  Delitzsch  and  Baethgen)  ;  even  a  Greek

2.  Use  and  Qrigin  ^dxXe)  has  been  suggested  (Paulus
meaning.  Cassel  .  see  Siegfried-Stade,  Lex.}. Parisot

(Rev.  bibl.,  Oct.  1899)  approves  the  theory  that  Selah
represents  a  musical  interlude.  Briggs  suggests  that
when  a  section  of  a  psalm  or  a  prayer  was  used  apart
from  its  context  in  liturgical  service  it  was  followed
by  a  doxology,  and  that  '  Selah  '  divides  a  psalm  into
sections  for  liturgical  use.1  By  an  inductive  process
Miss  E.  Briggs  arrives  at  results  of  much  interest  (AJSL
16 1-29).  These  partly  depend  on  the  correctness  of  the
MT  ;  but  Grimme  has  shown  that  in  some  cases  (and
the  present  writer,  Che.  Ps.W,  has  added  considerably
to  the  number)  the  rho  of  MT  is  due  to  corruption  of
the  text.

Attractive  as  the  view  that  rho  is  properly  a  musical
indication  may  be,  it  will  have  to  be  reconsidered  if

_  , the other so-called musical notes in

3.  Conjectured  the headings owe tnc,ir existence to

origin.  textual  corruption.  In  that  case  it
becomes  plausible  to  hold  that  n^D  is  a  corruption  of
sallem  (n^r),  'supplement,'  or  llsallem  (c^V)-  '  f°r
supplementing.'  The  note  may  either  be  a  direction
to  supplement  the  MS  at  a  defective  place  from  another
MS,  or  an  intimation  that  an  editor  at  this  point  has
made  an  insertion  in  the  psalms.  Possibly  the  old
traditional  interpretation  '  always '  points  to  a  reading
chy  or  ahyh,  which  was  itself  a  corruption  of  c?i?  or
D^V-  For  another  view  see  B.  Jacob,  ZAT[V\&i^gff-
As  to  the  meaning  of  <S's  6idi//aAjua :  for  the  opinions  of  the
Fathers  see  Suicer,  1  890  ;  Lag.,  Nova  Psalterii  GraciEdlttotas
Specimen,  10  ;  B.  Jacob,  ZA  TUr  16(1896)  173-181.  The  result
is  that  all  the  various  explanations  are  pure  guesses.  What,
then,  is  to  be  offered  in  place  of  them?  We  cannot  suppose
that  the  Alexandrian  translators  coined  5iai//aA^.a  ;  but  it  is  very


1  'An inductive study  of  Selah' (JBLlSi&ff.). Briggs
thinks  it  probable  that  nVo  is  an  imperative  cohortative,  'h
up  a  benediction  or  doxology.'

4346


SBLED

possible  indeed  that  Sidifi.  only  exists  through  textual  corrup
tion.  S<.xa.\l/a\fia.  and  di/d^/oA^a  have  been  suggested  (ap.
Schultens,  Lex.  in  LXX  [1820]  1  146),  but  neither  word  exists.
It  remained  to  suggest  that  fiidi//.  may  be  a  Grsecised  Hebrew
word  ;  cVc'*?  (see  above)  might  become  first  6a<raA^.a  and  then,
for  euphony,  iiai|/aAfia.  T.  K.  C.

SELED  (1^9  ;  AAc.  CAAaA,  [B],  c.  [A],  -eA  [L]),
b.  Nadab  b.  Shammai,  a  Jerahmeelite  ;  i  Ch.  230.

SELEMIAS  (i.e.,  Shelemiah). i.  (ceAe/VM&C  [BA])
i  Esd.  934  =  Ezra  1039  SHELEMIAH,  6.
2.  (Selemiam)  a  scribe  ;  4  Esd.  1424,  RV  Selemia.

SELEUCIA  (ceAeyKi*.  Actsl34,  Ti.WH  ;  i  Mace.
118).  One  of  the  four  chief  cities  of  northern  Syria
(the  others  being  Antioch  on  the  Orontes,  Apameia,
and  Laodiceia)  which  together  were  spoken  of  as  the
tetrapolis  of  Seleucis  (Strabo,  749).  They  were  the
foundation  of  Seleucus  Xicator  (died  280  B.C.).
Seleucia  lay  on  the  southern  skirts  of  Mt.  Coryphreus
(the  Fieria  of  Strabo,  751)  —  a  spur  of  Mt.  Amanus1  —
separated  from  it  by  a  ravine  (see  description  in  Pol.
659).  The  town  extended  to  the  sea,  and  was  sur
rounded  by  cliffs,  except  towards  the  W.  ,  where  the
site  was  more  open  ;  here  lay  the  mercantile  buildings
(e/MTTopela).  The  upper  town  could  be  reached  only,
from  the  seaward  side,  by  an  artificial  ascent  cut  in
the  rock  like  a  stair  (/cXt/xctKurrTji').  Seleucia  was  the
port  of  Antioch,  which  was  distant  16  m.  by  land  ;
the  distance  by  the  Orontes,  which  fell  into  the  sea
about  5  m.  to  the  southward  of  Seleucia,  was  still  greater
(Strabo,  751).  Being  strongly  fortified  (Strabo,  751,
epi'/ua  <i£i6Xo"yoi'  nai  Kpeirrov  (lias)  Seleucia  was  the  key
of  Syria  (cp  Pol.  5  58).  In  i  Mace.  11  8  there  is  a
reference  to  the  capture  of  '  Seleucia  which  is  by  the
sea'  by  Ptolemy  Philometor  VI.  (146  B.C.).  Its
remains  are  still  great.  In  consequence  of  the  resistance
it  made  to  Tigranes,  the  Roman  Pompeius  declared  it  a
free  city,  and  this  was  its  condition  in  Paul's  time  (Pliny,


Paul,  with  Barnabas,  sailed  from  Seleucia  on  his
first  missionary  enterprise  (Actsl34),  and  to  Seleucia  in
all  probability  he  returned  (Acts.  1426  ;  for  the  expression
'  sailed  to  Antioch  '  need  not  imply  a  voyage  up  the
river  :  cp  the  expression  '  sailed  away  from  Philippi  '
in  Acts206).  Probably  also  Paul's  passage  through
Seleucia  is  implied  in  such  places  as  Acts  15  39,  and
ISso  (with  which  contrast  the  land  journey  summarised
in  153).  In  this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  note
that  two  piers  of  the  old  harbour  bear  the  names  of
Paul  and  Barnabas,  with  whose  work  they  are  probably
coeval.  \v.  j.  w.

SELEUCnXS!

ALPHABETICAL  LIST  OF  KINGS

Alexander  II.  (§  17).  Antiochus IX.  Demetrius III.
Antiochus  I.  (§  3). (§  19).  (§  22).

Antiochus  II.  (§  4). Antiochus  X.  (§  Philippus  I.  (§  22).

Antiochus  III.  (§  7). 21).  Seleucus  I.  (§  2).

Antiochus  IV.  (§  9). Antiochus XIII.  Seleucus  II.  (§  5).

Antiochus  V.  (§  10). (§23).  Seleucus  III.  (§  6).

Antiochus  VI.  (13). Demetrius  I.  (§  Seleucus  IV.  (§  8).

AntiochusVII.(§  15). n).  Seleucus  V.  (|  17).

Antiochus VIII. Demetrius  II.  (§§  Seleucus  VI.  (§  20).

(§  18).  12,  14,  16).  Tryphon  (§  13).

Bibliography  (§  24).

1  Seleucidce  '  is  the  general  name  applied  to  the  kings
of  Syria,  who  were  so  called  from  Seleucus  I.,  the
founder  of  the  monarchy.  This  empire  is
-  alluded  to  as  '  the  kingdom  of  the  Greeks  '
in  i  Mace.  1  10  818,  and  in  the  phrase  'the  diadem  of
Asia'  in  i  Mace.  11  13.  The  Syrian  kings  claimed  to
rule  over  the  Asiatic  portion  of  Alexander's  empire,
and  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  every  country  from  the
Hellespont  to  India  ;  but  the  territorial  limits  were
gradually  reduced,  the  border-lands  of  India  being  first

1  Hence  the  town  was  called  2fAev«ia  Tliepi'a,  or  2eAeuKeia
•fi  tv  [Icepio,  to  distinguish  it  from  other  towns  of  the  same  name
(Strabo,  749)

4347


'


SELEUCIDCE

lost,  and  then  Asia  Minor  and  Egypt  effecting  their
withdrawal  from  Seleucid  sway.  Egypt  under  the
Ptolemaic  dynasty  became  in  fact  a  standing  rival,  dis
puting  with  the  Seleucidae  the  possession  of  Palestine.
The  hold  of  the  Seleueidas  upon  Asia  Minor  was  pre
carious,  owing  to  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the
Greek  cities  there,  and  the  rise  of  new  powers  (e.g.  ,
Pergamos  and  the  Attalid  dynasty).  Here  nothing  can
be  attempted  more  than  a  few  general  remarks  upon
salient  features  of  the  monarchy.  Syria  was  its  intel
lectual  centre  ;  for  Seleucus  abandoned  his  capital  at
Babylon  (which  was  in  truth  suitable  only  for  the
undivided  world-wide  empire  dreamed  of  by  Alexander),
and  transferred  his  permanent  abode  to  Antioch  on  the
Orontes  (see  ANTIOCH,  2).  This  transference  also  calls
attention  to  the  constant  striving,  as  constantly  thwarted,
of  the  Syrian  empire,  to  become,  not  so  much  a  military,
as  a  naval  power.  Its  wealth,  indeed,  came  from  com
merce,  which  partly  depended  upon  command  of  the  sea,
and  partly  also  upon  keeping  open  the  old  trade  routes
leading  into  inner  Asia.  The  latter  condition  was
found  to  be  more  easily  realised  than  the  former,  for
the  rise  of  Egypt  and  of  Rhodes,  with  other  powers,
prevented  the  realisation  of  the  designs  of  the  Syrian
dynasty.  As  regards  its  internal  characteristics,  the
Seleucid  empire  is  well  described  by  Holm  ((.Ik.  Hist.
ET4iiz)  as  an  artificial  creation  —  in  its  essence  an
attempt  to  found  in  the  E.  a  state  based  on  Greek
views.  '  That  Seleucus  tried  to  promote  the  Hellenising
of  Asia  in  the  spirit  of  Alexander  appears  from  the  many
cities  (about  75)  which  he  founded'  ;  and  the  progress
of  Greek  life  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  eventually  Syria
proper  breaks  up  into  a  number  of  city  communities
almost  entirely.  It  is  precisely  through  their  continua
tion  of  Alexander's  work  on  this  line,  of  controlling
Asia  by  a  policy  based  upon  a  preference  given  to  the
Graeco-  Macedonian  civilisation,  that  the  Seleucid*
come  into  violent  contact  with  the  peculiar  institutions
of  the  Jews.  It  was  especially  in  Seleucia  on  the  Tigris
that  the  Greek  life  of  Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia
centred,  to  such  an  extent  that  this  city  completely
overshadows  the  other  Greek  communities  in  these
regions.

Seleucus  I.,  Nicator  (312-280  B.C.),  one  of  the  best
of  Alexander's  generals,  was  made  chiliarch  by  Perdiccas
_ upon Alexander's death. Perdiccas


upon  the  Nile  by  Ptolemy  was  murdered
by  his  own  officers,  among  them  being  Seleucus.
Subsequently  Babylon  was  assigned  to  Seleucus  ;  but  he
was  soon  compelled  to  flee  for  his  life  from  his  satrapy,
to  avoid  Antigonus,  and  took  refuge  with  Ptolemy  (316
B.C.,  cp  App.  Syr.  53).  In  the  war  with  Antigonus
that  followed,  Seleucus  bore  a  distinguished  part,  at
first  as  commander  of  Ptolemy's  fleet,  and  afterwards
in  the  operations  in  Syria  which  culminated  in  the
battle  of  Gaza  (312  B.C.),  in  which  Demetrius,  the  son
of  Antigonus,  was  completely  defeated.  Seleucus  in
consequence  with  a  small  force  recovered  his  satrapy,
and  the  era  of  the  Seleucids  dated  from  the  capture  of
Babylon  (ist  Oct.  312  B.C.).

The  career  of  Seleucus  is  very  obscure  during  the  ten  years
which  followed  ;  his  name  is  not  even  mentioned  in  the  peace
concluded  in  311  B.C.  between  Ptolemy  Cassander  and  Lysi-
machus  on  the  one  side,  and  Antigonus  on  the  other  ;  but  the
record  of  that  peace  may  be  incomplete.  It  seems  clear,  at  any
rate,  that  Seleucus  was  left  to  extend  his  conquests  in  the  E.
undisturbed,  and  that  in  a  series  of  successful  campaigns  he
recovered  all  the  eastern  provinces  of  Alexander's  empire  between
the  Euphrates,  the  Oxus,  and  the  Indus.  He  was  obliged,
however,  to  acquiesce  in  the  cession  of  the  territories  beyond
the  Indus  to  king  Tchandragupta  (Sandracottus,  Strabo,  724)  in
return  for  five  hundred  war-elephants.

In  306  B.C.  Seleucus  followed  the  example  of  Antig
onus  and  Demetrius  in  adopting  the  title  of  '  king  '  ;
and  from  that  date  his  coins  are  so  inscribed,  whilst
Alexander's  types  are  gradually  abandoned  in  favour  of
new  devices,  such  as  his  own  head  with  bull's  horn  —

4348


SELEUCIDuE

an  emblem  of  divine  strength,  probably  also  bearing
allusion  to  the  story  told  by  Appian  (Syr.  57)  ;  as  an
adjunct  symbol  in  the  field  occurs  an  anchor,  the  badge
of  the  family  (cp  Justin,  154).

When  Ptolemy  Cassander  and  Lysimachus  again
combined  against  Antigonus,  Seleucus  also  joined  the
coalition,  and  was  largely  instrumental  in  winning  the
decisive  victory  at  Ipsus  in  which  Antigonus  fell  (301
B.C.  ).  Seleucus  consequently  received  a  great  extension
of  territory  —  all  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor  as  far  as  Phrygia
(with  the  exception  also  of  Cilicia).  Hence  the
Seleucidte  are  spoken  of  as  kings  of  Asia  (e.g.  ,  i  Mace.
86  ;  though  in  other  passages,  such  as  i  Mace.  11  13,
it  is  doubtful  whether  the  term  Asia  should  be  restricted
to  Asia  Minor).

Seleucus  reigned  over  the  largest  kingdom  that  had
been  carved  out  of  Alexander  s  empire.  The  direct
government  of  the  provinces  beyond  the  Euphrates  was
in  the  hands  of  his  son  Antiochus.  In  281  B.C.,  by  the
defeat  of  king  Lysimachus  at  Korupeclion  in  Phrygia,
Seleucus  became  heir  by  gage  of  battle  to  the  crowns  of
Thrace  and  Macedonia,  and  appears  to  have  intended
to  hand  over  his  Asiatic  possessions  to  his  son,  and
spend  the  remainder  of  his  life  (he  was  now  about
seventy-two  years  old)  as  ruler  of  his  native  country,
Macedonia,  from  which  he  had  been  so  long  absent.
He  set  out  for  Europe,  but  was  murdered  at  Lysimachia
by  Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  the  exiled  elder  son  of  Ptolemy  I.
Ceraunus  took  possession  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia  ;
Antiochus  succeeded  to  his  father's  Asiatic  sovereignty.

Seleucus  was  undoubtedly  an  able  administrator  of  what  his
generalship  secured  for  him.  He  was  a  patron  of  art,  fostered
trade,  and  by  his  foundation  of  many  cities  encouraged  the
spread  of  Hellenic  civilisation  through  his  dominions  ;  he  was,
in  fact,  perhaps  the  only  one  of  Alexander's  successors  that
showed  an  appreciation  of  Alexander's  true  policy  ('  I  should  be
inclined  to  call  him  a  true  disciple  of  Alexander,'  Holm,  Gk.
Hist.,  ET,4i3i).

Not  much  is  known  of  the  reign  of  his  successor,
Antiochus  I.,  Soter  (281-261  B.C.).  It  was  occupied
,  .  ,  _  partly  with  attempts  to  assert  himself

lo  ofti  UP  \  in  Asia  Minor-  as  a  prelude  to  making
(281-261  B.C.).  good  his  claims  to  the  Macedonian

crown,  and  partly  in  endeavours  to  render  effective  the
Syrian  rule  over  Ccelesyria,  as  against  the  claims  of
Egypt  to  those  territories  (the  so-called  First  Syrian
War).1  In  Asia  Minor  he  was  defeated  by  the
Bithynians,  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  ;  and  by
Eumenes,  king  of  Pergamum,  towards  the  end  of  it.2
The  intermediate  years  show  him  engaged  in  warfare
with  the  Gauls  who  poured  into  Asia  Minor  (277  B.C.)
and  founded  the  state  of  Galatia  (see  GALATIA,  §  i  ).  He
won  a  victory  over  them  (App.  Syr.  65),  and  in  consequence
assumed,  or  was  given,  the  honourable  title  of  Soter
('Saviour')  and  a  festival  was  founded  in  his  honour.  :i

In  261  B.C.  Antiochus  was  killed  in  battle  by  a  Gaul  (Celt);
but  whether  he  was  actually  then  fighting  the  Celtic  invaders  is
doubtful.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  brave  and  energetic  prince  ;
history  knows  nothing  to  his  discredit,  and  he  deserves  praise
for  his  attempts  to  carry  on  his  father's  Grecising  policy  by
means  of  city  foundations.

Antiochus  II.,  Theos  (261-246  B.C.),  son  of  the
_  preceding  and  Stratonice,  married

%tl24°6BUC  L  Lidice  .daughter  of  Antiochus  I.
(261-246  B.C.  ).  by  another  wife  (poiyjgn.  8so).


Practically  our  knowledge  of  him  is  confined  to  the  statements
that  '  he  was  a  debauchee  and  addicted  to  drink,  that  he  left
affairs  in  the  hands  of  unworthy  favourites,  that  he  waged  war
in  Thrace,  that  he  earned  his  surname  by  liberating  the  Milesians
from  their  tyrant  Timarchus,  and  that  he  was  generally  popular
in  the  cities  of  Ionia  '  (Holm,  op.  cit.  4  188).

Of  the  second  Syrian  war  which  he  waged  with
Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  we  know  little.  This  led  in
directly  to  his  death  ;  for  to  put  an  end  to  the  strife
Ptolemy  gave  his  daughter  Berenice  in  marriage  to
Antiochus,  who  put  away  Laodice.  After  a  time,
however,  Antiochus  changed  his  mind  and  recalled

1  Alluded  to  only  in  Paus.  i.  7  3.

2  See  Strabo,  624. It  occurred  near  Sardis.  _

3  See  decree  of  thanksgiving  from  Novum  Ilium,  CfG  3595  =
Hicks,  Manual,  no.  165,  with  notes  thereto  added.

4349


SELEUCID^E

Laodice,  who  immediately  poisoned  him  and  murdered
Berenice  and  her  infant  son,  and  her  own  son  ascended
the  vacant  throne.  It  has,  however,  been  suggested
that  this  dark  history  was  an  invention  of  the  Egyptian
partizans  of  Berenice,  and  that  Antiochus  really  died  a
natural  death.  According  to  the  traditional  interpreta
tion,  Dan.  116  refers  to  this  king  (Jerome,  in  loc.)  ;  but
the  text  is  corrupt  (see  DANIEL,  §  6/. ).

Seleucus  II.,  Callinicus1  (246-226  B.C.),  was  the
eldest  son  of  the  preceding  by  his  first  wife,  Laodice.

-  es«i«.,. ,„  TT From the moment of his accession
5.  Seleucus  II.  ,,  ,  TT

(246  226  R  r  ) "5e'eucus "• was engaged in  warfare

*  '''  with  Ptolemy  III. Euergetes,  who  in
vaded  Syria  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  sister  Berenice
(the  third  Syrian  War). This  war  is  as  mysterious  in
its course and results as the two previous conflicts
between Egypt  and  Syria. Ptolemy,  we  learn,  drove
Seleucus  beyond  the  Taurus,  captured  Antioch, made
himself  master  of  Syria  and  Phoenicia,  and  penetrated
even  beyond  the  Euphrates  ; the  Egyptian  successes  are
sketched  in  even  more  extravagant  terms,  which  make
them tantamount to the recovery of  all Alexander's
empire.2 Seleucus  summoned to  his  aid  his  younger
brother  Antiochus  Hierax,  promising  him  the  regency  of
Asia  Minor. Ptolemy  was  indeed  obliged  to  consent  to
a  peace  ;  but  Seleucus  soon  found  himself  at  war  with
his  own  brother  (Justin,  272). Antiochus  was  at  first
victorious,  with  the  help  of  the  Galatai  (Celts)  ; but  they
deserted  him,  and  when  their  co-operation  was  again
bought,  both  they  and  Antiochus  suffered  repeated  defeats
at  the  hands  of  Attalus  of  Pergamum,  who  seized  the
opportunity  of  the  strife  between  the two  brothers  to
strengthen  his  own  position  in  Asia  Minor. Ami'  elms
Hierax  was  at  last  driven  from  the  country  into  Egypt  ;
but  Ptolemy  imprisoned  him,  and  when  he  escaped  he
was  slain  by  brigands  (227  B.C.,  Justin,  27s).

Seleucus  apparently  owed  his  title  Callinicus  to  an  eastern
expedition  in  which  he  vanquished  Arsaces  of  Pai  thia  (Strabo,
;  513 ;  Justin,  41  4).  Afterwards,  however,  Arsaces  defeated
Seleucus  in  a  great  battle  which  the  Parthians  long  celebrated
as  the  foundation  of  their  independence.  '  The  title  to  the  sur
name  of  Callinicus  was  therefore  as  well  made  out  as  is  necessary
for  an  Oriental  monarch,  and  the  subsequent  foundation  of  a
city  called  Callinicum  in  his  hereditary  territory  on  the
Euphrates  by  the  hero  who  had  been  fortunate  enough  to
escape  from  the  Parthians,  no  doubt  made  a  great  impression  on
the  surrounding  inhabitants  '  (Holm,  op.  cit.  4  215).

In  226  B.C.  Seleucus  lost  his  life  by  a  fall  from  his
horse.

Seleucus III., Ceraunus, or Soter (226-223 B-c-  )•

was  the  elder  son  and  successor  of  Seleucus II. He

TTT invaded  Asia  Minor in  order to put

6/ooc  o^QUS \ down  Attalus. He  was  assisted  by  his

(226-223  B.C.). ski]ful  and  energetic  relative  Achrvus.

Soon,  however,  he  was  murdered  by  one  Nicanor  and  a

Gaul  named  Apaturius  (Polyb.  448).

Seleucus  III.  seems  to  have  left  a  son  Antiochus,  mentioned
only  in  an  inscription,  to  whom  are  attributed  coins  bearing  on
one  side  the  image  of  an  infant  Antiochus  (see  Head,  op.  cit.  640,
and  cp  CfG  4458,  and  Droysen,  Gt'xr/t.  d.  Hell.  iii.  'J  121).

Antiochus  III. ,  the  Great  (222-187  B.C. ),  the  younger

son  of  Seleucus  Callinicus  and  Laodice  (Pol. 5 40),  was

... . only  twenty  years  old  when  he  came  to

7.  Antiochus the  ,hrone_  and  for  some  time  he  was

III.  (222-187 entire]y under the influence of his
B-c-)-  minister  Hermeas. The  condition  of

Egypt,  then  governed  by  Ptolemy  IV.  Philopator,  a  weak
and  vicious  monarch,  invited  attack.  A  rebellion  in
Persis  and  Media  weakened  the  blow  ;  but  when  that
had  been  put  down,  and  the  king  had  freed  himself
from  the  evil  influence  of  Hermeas  by  executing  him
(Pol.  556)  the  war  with  Egypt  was  resumed.  At  first

1  He  was  also  called  Pogon,  the  Bearded,  fiom  his  habit  of
wearing a beard,  which,  like  Demetrius II., the  only  other
bearded  king  of  Syria,  he  probably  adopted  d  iring  his  sojourn
in  Parthia  (cp  Head,  Hist.  Nvmm.  639).

2  See the  Adule inscription preserved by Cosmas Indico-
pleustes  in  his Topogrciphia  Christiana  =  CIG 5127  (and cp
Jer.  on  Dan.  11  5  ; also  Polyaen.85o,  who  says  that  he  pushed


is  conquests  n<i\p<.  rrj?


4350


SELEUCID^]

Antiu'chus  carried  all  before  him,  and  made  himself
master  of  Phoenicia  and  the  territory  on  both  sides  of
the  Jordan  (Pol.  568  /.),  and  wintered  in  Ptolemais.  In
the  following  year,  however,  he  was  utterly  defeated  at
Kaphia,  the  most  southerly  Syrian  city  (217  B.C.),  and
compelled  to  cede  to  Egypt  all  Ccelesyria  and  Phoenicia.
In  the  meantime  Achitus  had  raised  the  standard  of
revolt  in  Asia  Minor,  and  it  cost  a  two  years'  warfare
round  Sardis  to  overcome  him  (Pol.  7  is/.  ).

Then  followed  an  expedition  to  the  east,  in  which
Partliia  and  Bactria  were  invaded  ;  these  successes
gained  the  king  his  surname  (209  B.C.  ).  When  Ptolemy
Philopator  died  and  Ptolemy  V.  Epiphanes  ascended  the
throne  (204  B.C.),  Antiochus  III.  combined  with  Philip
V.  king  of  Macedonia,  for  the  partition  of  the  Egyptian
kingdom  (Livy,  31  14  ;  Pol.  15zo).  In  pursuance  of  the
scheme  Antiochus  invaded  Coelesyria  and  Phoenicia,
and  overran  Palestine  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  83)  ;  and  though  a
diversion  caused  by  Attalus  of  Pergamum  enabled  the
Egyptians  to  reoccupy  Palestine,  they  were  defeated
(198  B.C.)  by  Antiochus  himself  near  the  sources  of  the
Jordan,  and  driven  out  of  the  country.  Jerusalem  itself
fell  into  the  hands  of  Antiochus  (Pol.  1639).  -^  peace
was  concluded  in  which  it  was  agreed  that  Epiphanes
should  marry  Antiochus'  daughter,  Cleopatra,  who
should  receive  Ccelesyria,  Phoenicia,  and  Palestine
as  her  dowry  (on  this  peace,  see  Holm,  op.  cit.  4339,
and  note  on  p.  368).  Antiochus  then  commenced
operations  in  Asia  Minor,  with  a  view  of  recovering  the
Greek  cities  there  as  a  whole,  and  more  especially  those
of  the  S.  and  W.  coasts,  which  had  long  been  reckoned
to  belong  to  Egypt,  but  had  recently  been  occupied  by
Philip  under  the  terms  of  the  secret  alliance  with  Syria
above-mentioned.1  The  defeat  of  Philip  by  the  Romans
at  Cynoscephalte  brought  Antiochus  also  face  to  face
with  the  power  of  Rome  (197  B.C.  ).

Antiochus  claimed  not  only  sovereignty  over  the
cities  of  Asia,  but  the  throne  of  Thrace  also,  in  virtue
of  the  victory  of  Seleucus  over  Lysimachus  a  century
before  him.  The  tension  between  him  and  Rome  was
increased  when  Hannibal,  a  fugitive  from  Carthage,
sought  asylum  at  the  Syrian  court  (App.  Svr.  4).
After  long  negotiations  \var  was  declared  between  the
two  powers  in  191  B.C.  The  decisive  battle  took  place
in  the  autumn  of  190  li.  C.  at  Magnesia  on  the  Hermus,
and  the  motley  host  of  Antiochus  was  utterly  defeated  ;
the  Roman  legions  were  never  actually  called  upon,  and
the  victory  which  gave  them  a  third  continent  cost  but
24  horsemen  and  300  light  infantry  (Momms.  Hist,  of
Nome,  ET,  iSSi,  2  270/1  ).2  Allusion  is  made  to
these  events  in  Dan.  llio,  and  i  Mace.  lioSo/  (see
ANTIOCHUS,  i).  Antiochus  was  compelled  to  renounce
all  his  conquests  X.  of  the  Taurus  range,  which  had  in
fact  always  been  the  boundary  of  effective  Syrian  power
in  this  direction  (Pol.  21  17  ;  Diod.  Sic.  29  10  ;  Livy,  37  45).
In  consequence  of  this  defeat  and  loss  of  prestige
Armenia  fell  away  from  the  Syrian  empire  (Strabo,
528).  In  187  B.C.  Antiochus  himself,  marching  into
Elymais,  at  the  head  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  in  order  to
plunder  a  temple  of  Bel  to  replenish  his  treasury  ex
hausted  by  the  enormous  war  indemnity,  was  slain  by
the  natives  of  the  district  (Strabo,  744).

Seleucus  IV.,  Philopator  (187-175  B.C.),  son  and
successor  of  Antiochus  the  Great,  came  to  the  throne  in
(l'fficu't  times,  when  Armenia  had
y  revoltecl  and  the  prestige  of  his


C)

country  was  dimmed. The  power  of


o
i.87

Rome  also overshadowed  the East, and freedom of
policy  was  almost  impossible. Thus  he  was  compelled

1  It  was  probably  at  this period, or perhaps earlier, that
Antiochus  sent  2000  Jewish  families  from  Mesopotamia  into  the
cities  of  Lydia  and  Phrygia,  securing  their  loyalty  by  grants  of
land  and  immunity  from  taxation. See  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  3  4.

2  '  With  the  day  of  Magnesia  Asia  was  erased  from  the  list  of
great  states  ; and never perhaps  did a  great power fall  .so
rapidly,  so  thoroughly,  and  so  ignominiously  as  the  kingdom  of
the  Seleucidae  under  this  Antiochus  the  Great  '  (Mommsen,  I.e.).

4351


SELEUCID^E

to  forego  the  opportunity  of  interfering  beyond  Mt.
Taurus,  in  assisting  Pharnaces  of  Pontus  against  Eumenes
of  Pergamum  (179  B.C.,  see  Uiod.  Sic.  2924).  Yet  he
concluded  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  Perseus  of  Macedonia.
With  Egypt  he  lived  outwardly  at  peace,  though  his
minister  HELIODORUS  (y.  v. )  interfered  in  the  affairs  of
Palestine.  One  APOLLUNIUS  (2),  son  of  Thraseas,  being
governor  (ffTpartfyo^)  of  Ceelesyria  and  Phoenicia,
induced  the  king  to  send  Heliodorus  his  chancellor
('  treasurer,'  AV)  to  plunder  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.

This  attempt,  and  the  supernatural  (?)  means  by  which  it  was
baffled,  are  related  in  2  Mace.  3  if.  (cp  4  Mace.  4  if.,  where
the  attempt  is  ascribed  to  Apollonius  himself).  In  175  B.C.
this  Heliodorus  murdered  Seleucus,  and  tried  to  seize  the
Syrian  throne,  but  was  driven  out  by  Eumenes  and  Attalus  of
Pergamum  (Appian,  Syr.  45  ;  Livy,  41  24).

Seleucus  IV.  left  two  children,  Demetrius,  who  subse
quently  ascended  the  throne  (see  §  it),  and  I^aodice.

Antiochus  IV7.,  Epiphanes1  (175-164  B.C.),  was  the

son  of  Antiochus III. and  Laodice  (daughter  of the

9.  Antiochus  Pricking  Mithridates  II.) After


IV.  (175-164


the  battle  of  Magnesia  he had been


B.C.).


sent  to  Rome  as  hostage  (Appian,  A'tv.

39).  At  Rome  he  remained  nearly
fourteen  years,  and  then  Seleucus  IV.  who  was  on  the
Syrian  throne  secured  his  exchange  for  the  heir  apparent,
Demetrius  (Appian,  Svr.  45  ;  cp  Justin,  343).

On  his  way  home  Antiochus  visited  Athens,  and  displayed  his
phil-Hellenic  sympathies  by  accepting  the  post  of  first  strategus
(o-Tpanjybs  ini  TO.  owAa,  see  coins  ;  cp  Reinach,  Rev.  ft.  Gr.,
1888,  p.  i63_/C).  He  also  contributed  to  the  completion  of  the
Olympieum  (Pol.  26 1),  and  placed  a  golden  aegis  over  the
theatre  (Paus. y.  12 4).  He  presented  gifts  to  the  temple  of
Zeus  at  Olympia,  and  to  those  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  and  Delos,
as  well  as  to  many  Greek  cities  —  Rhodes,  Cyzicus.  Tegea
(theatre),  and  Megalopolis  (contribution  to  walls).  His  favourite
cult  was  that  of  Olympian  Zeus  (cp  MAUZZIM),  to  whom  he
erected  a  temple  at  Daphne  near  Antioch  on  the  Orontes  (see
ANTIOCH,  2),  with  a  statue  which  was  a  replica  of  that  made  by
Phidias  for  Olympia.2  It  was  his  thorough-going  programme
of  Hellenisation  which  gained  him  his  notoriety  in  Jewish
annals  (Tac.  Hist.bZ'.  'rex  Antiochus  demere  superstitionem
et  mores  Grascorum  dare  adnisus').

While  he  lingered  in  Athens  Antiochus  received  news
of  the  murder  of  Seleucus  IV.  by  Heliodorus  and.  being
supported  by  the  king  of  Pergamum,  he  expelled  the
usurper,  and  gained  the  crown  in  defiance  of  the  rights
of  his  nephew  Demetrius  (Appian,  Syr.  45  ;  cp  Era'nkel,
I  user.  i>f  Pcrgamon,  1  160  ;  r  Mace.  1 10).  He  showed
himself  soon  even  more  enterprising  than  his  father.
For  the  death  of  his  sister  Cleopatra,  the  widow  of
Ptolemy  V.  Epiphanes  (173  B.C.),  opened  the  whole
question  of  the  ownership  of  Ccelesyria,  which  the
Egyptians  claimed  as  the  dowry  of  the  dead  queen  (Pol.
27'9),  whereas  she  had  only  enjoyed  a  portion  of  the
revenue  derived  from  that  country  (Pol.  28  20).  Antiochus
forestalled  the  Egyptian  attack  (2  Mace.  4  21).  At  the
end  of  171  B.C.  the  contending  powers  came  into
decisive  conflict  on  the  Egyptian  frontier  between  Mt.
Casius  and  Pelusium  (i  Mace.  1 17).  The  Egyptians
were  utterly  defeated.  Antiochus  even  secured  the
person  of  the  young  king  Ptolemy  Philometor,  and  was
himself  crowned  king  of  Egypt  at  Memphis.  There
was  a  Seleucid  party  among  the  Egyptians  themselves
(Diod.  30i4);  but  upon  the  withdrawal  of  Antiochus
(i  Mace.  ]  m  f. }  the  national  party  in  Alexandria  rose
and  placed  the  young  Ptolemy  Physcon  upon  the  throne
of  I£gypt.  Antiochus  therefore  invaded  Egypt  a  second
time  (2  Mace.  5 1  ;  Pol.  2819),  nominally  at  first  in  the
interests  of  Philometor.3  He  demanded  the  cession  of

1  'EfRc/ian;;,  'illustrious,'  called  also  "Eirifian/s,  'mad,'  from
his  actions, Pol.  26 1, Athen.  1052. On coins  his titles are
'E7ru|>anjs, Ni»CT)<^6(joi,  and  ©eos. Cp  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  65. See
ANTIOCHUS,  2.

2  The  figure  of  Zeus  Nicephorus  enthroned  appears  on  some
of  his  coins  in  place  of  that  of  Apollo. He  seems  to  have  con
sidered  himself  a  manifestation  of  Zeus  ;  and  perhaps  his  name
Kpiphanes  really  means  that. On  some  of  his  coins  his  own
portrait  occurs, in  the  character  of  Zeus. See  Head, Hist.
.iVwww.  641. The  nimbus  on  the  diadem  of  the  Seleucidae
originates  with  him. See  the  remarks  of  Holm,  Grk.  Hist.  4  399.

3  The  wars  of  Antiochus  IV.  with Egypt  are  complicated,
and  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  made  three  or  more  invasions  (so

4352


SELETJCIDuE


Pelusium  and  of  the  island  of  Cyprus  which  was  now
practically  his  through  the  treachery  of  Ptolemy  Macron
(2  Mace.  10 13).  Antiochus'  victorious  career  in  Egypt
came  to  an  abrupt  ending.  For  at  this  moment  the
Roman  victory  at  Pydna  (168  B.C.)  changed  the  whole
face  of  affairs  in  the  East.

Popilius  Laenas,  the  Roman  envoy,  a  harsh,  rude  man,
demanded  in  the  name  of  the  senate  that  Antiochus  should
restore  his  conquests  and  evacuate  Egypt  within  a  set  term.
Antiochus  asked  time  for  consideration  ;  but  the  envoy  drew
with  his  staff  a  circle  round  the  king  and  bade  him  answer
before  he  stepped  beyond  it  (Pol.  21'  27,  Livy  4612).  Antiochus
yielded.  'Like  Macedonia  in  the  war  just  waged  by  Perseus,
the  Seleucida;  had  made  in  the  war  regarding  Cpslesyria  a  final
effort  to  recover  their  earlier  power ;  but  it  is  a  significant
indica  ion  of  the  difference  between  the  two  kingdoms,  that  in
the  former  case  the  legions,  in  the  latter  the  abrupt  language  of
a  diplomatist,  decided  the  controversy  '  (Momms.  Hist,  of  Rome,
2309).

It  was  upon  his  return  to  Syria  after  finding  the  prize
of  Egypt,  so  nearly  within  his  grasp,  thus  forever  snatched
from  him,  that  Antiochus  committed  those  outrages  in
Palestine  which  earned  him  the  undying  hatred  of  the
Jews,  and  for  which  he  is  pilloried  in  the  books  of  Daniel
and  Maccabees  as  the  very  personification  of  impiety.
Already  upon  his  first  return,  in  170  B.C.,  he  had
captured  Jerusalem,  slain  and  enslaved  thousands  of
Jews,  entered  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  despoiled  the
temple  ( i  Mace.  1  2o/.  2  Mace.  5n/;  see  ANTIOCHUS  2,
JASON,'  MENELAUS).  Now  the  king  determined  to
carry  through  the  Hellenisation  of  Palestine.  A  royal
edict  made  the  practice  of  Jewish  rites  punishable  by
death  ;  the  temple  was  dedicated  to  Zeus  Olympics
(i68B.C.  See  i  Mace.  I4i/,  2  Mace.  6 1/.  I.1  These
persecutions  led  to  the  revolt  of  the  Maccabees.  The
outbreak  of  Mattathias  at  Modin  (167  B.C.)  seems  to
have  attracted  little  attention  at  the  capital.  It  was  not
until  the  death  of  Mattathias  and  the  assumption  of
leadership  of  the  movement  by  his  son  Judas  (166  B.C.  ),
who  defeated  several  detachments  (that  of  Apollonius,
i  Mace,  3 10  ;  that  of  Seron,  i  Mace.  813),  that  'his
name  came  near  even  unto  the  king,'  and  energetic
measures  were  taken  to  suppress  the  insurrection
(i  Mace.  827).  The  general  conduct  of  the  operations
was  entrusted  to  LYSIAS  (<j.  v. ),  'an  honourable  man,
and  one  of  the  seed  royal'  (i  Mace.  832);  but  the
victories  of  Judas  at  Emmaus  and  Beth-zur  secured  the
practical  evacuation  of  the  country,  and  gave  opportunity
for  the  purification  and  rededication  of  the  Temple
( i  Mace.  4  36  f. ,  2  Mace.  10 1  f. }.  Antiochus  was  unable
apparently  to  direct  upon  Judea  the  whole  force  of  the
empire,  before  which  the  Jewish  national  party  must
undoubtedly  have  succumbed.  He  was  engaged
beyond  the  Euphrates  (r  Mace.  837),  not,  as  the  Jewish
narrative  puts  it,  to  '  take  the  tributes  of  the  countries,
and  to  gather  much  money'  (i  Mace.  831),  but  more
probably  in  safe-guarding  his  frontiers  against  the  grow
ing  power  of  the  Parthians  (cp  Tac.  Hist.  58:  'rex
Antiochus  demere  superstitionem  et  mores  Grrecorum
dare  adnisus,  quominus  treterrimam  gentem  in  melius
mutaret,  Parthorum  bello  prohibitus  est').

The  sequence  and  extent  of  his  operations  in  this  quarter  are
unknown.  After  making  an  attempt  to  plunder  a  temple  of
Artemis  in  EI.YMAIS  (q.v.,  see  also  NANEA),  Antiochus  died  of
disease  at  Tabae  in  Persia  ;  some  said  that  he  died  mad  (Pol.
31  IT,  Appia.n,Syr.  66);  the  professedly  circumstantial  narratives
of  i  Mace.  6iyC  and  2  Mace.  9  if.  are  mutually  contradictory
and  of  no  historical  value  (cp  in  general  MACCABEES,  FIRST,
§  10,  SECOND,  §  2  f.).  When,  in  fact,  we  compare  the  last  episode
of  this  king's  life  with  that  of  his  father,  we  may  well  doubt
whether  the  tradition  is  not  a  confusion  partly  suggested  by  and
founded  upon  the  nickname  Epimanes  applied  to  Antiochus  IV.


Wilcken,  s.7j.  'Antiochus'  in  Pauly's  Realencyc.,e.A.  Wissowa),
or  only  two  (so  2  Mace.  5  i  ;  see  Mahaffy,  Emp.  of  the  Ptolemies,
336yC).  His  usurpation  of  Egypt  was  marked  by  the  Seleucid
anchor  on  the  copper  coins,  and  also  by  a  new  issue  of  copper
coins  with  his  own  name.

1  Perhaps  the  savage  outbreak  at  Jerusalem  upon  the  second
occasion  was  due  to  some  more  personal  grievance  than  mere
resistance  to  innovations.  The  nationalists  of  Palestine  may
have  been  in  part  responsible  for  the  delay  and  failure  of  his
Egyptian  expedition,  as  Mahaffy  suggests,  op.  cit.  341.

4353


in


B  c  \
''"


Antiochus  V.,  Eupator  (164-162  B.C.),  son  of  the
preceding,  was  either  nine  or  eleven  years  old  at  his
father's  death  (Appian,  Syr.  46;  Eus.
C'^'12")'  I"  '66  B.c.  Antiochus
Epiphanes,  on  the  eve  of  his  departure
to  the  east,  appointed  Lysias  '  to  be
over  the  affairs  of  the  king  from  the  river  Euphrates
unto  the  borders  of  Egypt,  and  to  bring  up  his  son
Antiochus,  until  he  came  again'  (i  Mace.  832/1  );  see
LYSIAS.  On  the  death  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  Lysias
declared  Antiochus  his  son  king,  with  the  title  Eupator,
'  on  account  of  the  virtues  of  his  father'  (i  Mace.  617;
cp  Appian,  Syr.  46).  The  young  king  and  his  guardian
then  led  an  expedition  to  the  relief  of  Jerusalem,  where
the  citadel  was  hard  pressed  by  Judas  Maccabseus.
The  armies  met  at  Beth-zacharias,  near  Beth-zur,  and
Judas  was  defeated  and  his  brother  Eleazar  slain
(i  Mace.  t>28/,  Jos.  ^4»/.xii.94i  but  2  Mace.  13i6/.,
representing  the  Jews  as  victorious,  is  clearly  unhis-
torical).  The  victory  of  Antiochus  enabled  him  to
invest  Jerusalem  (  i  Mace.  648^  ),  and  famine  was  already
doing  its  work  when  the  king's  troops  were  recalled  by
the  news  that  Philip,  the  foster-brother  of  Antiochus
Epiphanes  (2  Mace.  929),  was  approaching  Antioch
with  an  army  (i  Mace.  655^.  ).  Philip  had,  in  fact,
been  appointed  by  the  dying  Epiphanes  as  guardian  of
the  young  Antiochus  (i  Mace.  655).  Peace  was  made
with  the  Jews  on  the  terms  that  '  they  shall  walk  after
their  own  laws,  as  aforetime'  (i  Mace.  659;  2  Mace.
1823);  but  Antiochus  in  spite  of  this  destroyed  the
fortifications  of  the  city  and  imprisoned  the  high  priest
(i  Mace.  662,  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  87).  Returning  to  Syria,
he  found  no  difficulty  in  expelling  Philip  from  Antioch
(i  Mace.  663).  In  162  B.C.  Antiochus  himself  was
betrayed,  along  with  Lysias,  into  the  hands  of  Deme
trius,  the  son  of  Seleucus,  and  rightful  heir  to  the  Syrian
throne,  and  was  by  him  put  to  death  (i  Mace.  1  2  f.  ,
2  Mace.  14  i/.,  Polyb.  31  19  /.,  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  10  1  /  ).
See  ANTIOCHUS,  3.

Demetrius  I.,  Soter  (162-150  B.C.),  son  of  Seleucus
IV.  Philopator.

As  a  boy  he  had  been  sent  in  175  B.C.  to  take  his  uncle's  place

as  a  hostage  in  Rome  (Polyb.  31  12,  i  Mace.  1  10). When his

cousin  inherited  the  crown  which  his  father

11.  Demetrius  I.  Epiphanes  had usurped, Demetrius, who

(162-150  B.C.). n.acl tnen  ''ved nearly  twelve  years  prac

tically  a  state  prisoner  in  Italy,  begged  the

Roman  Senate  to  recognise  his  claim  to  the  Syrian  throne,  but
in  vain.  It  suited  the  Senate  better  that  a  mere  boy  should  rule,
rather  than  one  who  had  reached  his  twenty-third  year.  At  last
he  made  his  escape  in  a  Carthaginian  vessel  and  landed  in  Syria
(Jos.  Ant.x\\.\Qi,  2  Mace.  14  i).  There  seems  no  ground  for
the  opinion  that  the  Senate  really  connived  at  his  escape  (so
Holm,  Grk.  Hist.  4  416  ET).

After  putting  to  death  Antiochus  V.  and  Lysias  (see
above),  the  first  object  of  Demetrius  was  to  gain  the
recognition  of  the  senate  (Polyb.  324/  ,  Diod.  8129).
It  was  only  after  a  long  time  that  he  gained  the  grudg
ing  and  half-hearted  recognition  he  sought.  Timar-
chus,  who  under  Antiochus  Epiphanes  had  been  satrap
of  Babylon  (Appian,  Syr.  47),  revolted,  and  declared
himself  king,  and  ruled  Babylon  with  an  iron  hand.
Him  Demetrius  put  down,  being  given  for  this  service
his  title  Soter  ('Saviour')  by  the  grateful  Babylonians.
The  relations  of  Demetrius  with  the  Jews  are  sufficiently
set  forth  elsewhere  (DEMETRIUS,  i,  and  in  the  references
there  given).

The  foreign  policy  of  Demetrius  was  not  skilful  ;
indeed  it  is  difficult  to  see  the  object  at  which  he  aimed.
First,  he  attempted  to  get  his  sister  Laodice,  the  widow
of  Perseus,  married  to  Ariarathes  V.  of  Cappadocia,
possibly  in  order  to  form  an  anti-Roman  league  in  the
east.  Failing  in  this,  he  married  her  himself,  and  in
revenge  encouraged  a  claimant  to  the  Cappadocian
throne  in  the  person  of  Orophernes,  brother  of  Ariarathes
(Polyb.  3224).  The  only  result  was  to  raise  against
Demetrius  the  enmity  of  both  Rome  and  Attalus  of
Pergamum  (Polyb.  85).  Attalus  II.  in  return  supported
the  claims  of  a  pretender,  Alexander  Bala,  or  Balas,  to

4354


SELEUCID^E

the  Syrian  throne  ;  ALEXANDER  (</.?'. ,  2)  made  himself
out  to  be  a  son  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.

Alexander  Bala  appeared  at  an  opportune  moment,  as  Deme
trius  had  completely  alienated  his  subjects  by  his  tyranny  and
excesses  (153  H.C.),  whilst  at  the  same  time  he  had  given  way  to
love  of  drink,  the  hereditary  vice  of  his  house  (Polyb.  33  19).  In
addition  to  this,  an  attempt  to  secure  the  island  of  Cyprus  by
treachery-  had  indeed  failed,  but  had  earned  the  Syrian  monarchy
the  hostility  of  Ptolemy  Philometor  (Polyb.  33  5).  The  result
was  that,  though  a  party  at  Rome  (perhaps  that  of  the  Scipios)
was  favourably  inclined  to  Demetrius,  the  Roman  Senate,  upon
grounds  of  policy,  and  also  upon  more  sordid  grounds,  was
induced  to  recognise  the  impostor  Alexander  (Polyb.  33  18),  who
was  also  supported  by  Attalus  Ariarathes  and  Ptolemy  Philo
metor.  Consequently,  in  153  B.C.,  Alexander  appeared  with  an
army  in  Syria.

Both  Demetrius  and  Alexander  made  bids  for  the
favour  of  the  Jews,  who  were  now  under  Jonathan
(i  Mace.  10 if.).  The  king  recalled  his  garrisons  from
all  the  towns  except  Jerusalem  and  Beth-zur,  and  gave
Jonathan  power  to  raise  an  army  and  to  liberate  the
hostages.  The  various  taxes  and  royal  claims  upon  the
Jews  were  also  remitted  (see  the  instructive  list  given  in
Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  2  i.f. ). l  The  impostor,  however,  was
more  successful  in  appealing  to  Jonathan's  personal
ambition,  nominating  him  high-priest,  and  sending  him
the  insignia  of  royalty,  with  the  title  of  '  king's  friend  '
(cp  FRIEND).  The  decisive  battle  was  fought  in  150
B.C.,  and  Demetrius  fighting  heroically  was  slain
(Justin,  3")  i,  Polyb.  85,  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  24).  In  spite
of  the  fragmentary  and  obscure  character  of  the  record,
we  may  well  doubt  whether  this  Demetrius  was  not  one
of  the  most  gifted  of  the  Seleucid  dynasty  (v.  Gutschmid,
Iran,  43).

Demetrius  II.,  Nicator  (145-139  and  129-125  B.C.),
the  elder  of  the  two  sons  of  Demetrius  I. ,  had  been  sent

10  r»«~ ..-TT by h's father for protection to

12.  Demetrius  II.  .-.  • ,  .,

Cmdus when Alexander invaded
(first  reign : 0 . , ,

145  139  R  r  ]  Syria  (Justin,  802),  and  remained
there  for  some  years  in  exile  until  lie
became  aware  that  the  usurper  had  forfeited  the  goodwill
of  his  subjects  by  his  negligence  of  state  affairs  and  his
self-indulgence  ( Livy,  Epit.  50).  In  147  B.C.  he  landed
ou  the  Cilician  coast  with  a  force  of  C'retan  mercenaries
( i  Mace.  1067).  Ptolemy  VI.  Philometor  had  given
his  daughter  Cleopatra  Thea  ( '  one  of  the  most
impudent  women  produced  by  the  Ptolemy  line,  which
had  no  lack  of  such  characters,'  Holm,  Grk.  Hist.
4417)  in  marriage  to  Alexander,  and  at  first  came  to  his
assistance,  but  afterwards  transferred  his  favour  to
Demetrius  II. ,  to  whom  also  he  transferred  his  daughter.
Ptolemy's  1'oltc-fcu'f  was  accounted  for  by  a  story  that  Alex
ander  had  attempted  his  life  (i  Mace.  11  10)  ;  but  the  true  motive
was  probably  the  desire  to  take  advantage  of  the  intestine  strife
to  annex  at  least  Palestine  and  Crelesyria  (i  Mace.  11  i).
According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  xiii.  4  $f.),  Ptolemy  actually  at
Antioch  assumed  the  'diadem  of  Asia  '  (so  also  i  Mace.  11  &f.,
where,  however,  the  motive  assigned  for  Ptolemy's  conduct
differs).  On  this  episode,  see  Mahaffy,  Einp.  of  the  Ptolemies,
364/1

The  opportune  death  of  the  Egyptian  king  on  the
third  day  after  he  had  gazed  upon  the  severed  head  of
Alexander  Balas,  removed  a  formidable  rival  from  the
path  of  Demetrius  (iMacc.  lliS;  was  he  murdered?
Strabo,  751,  says  that  he  died  from  a  wound  received
in  the  battle  on  the  CEnoparas,  near  Antioch,  fighting
against  Alexander).  Having  thus  won  back  his  father's
kingdom  by  arms  he  received  the  title  Nicator  ( '  Con
queror'  ;  Appian,  Syr.  67,  wj  v66ov  TOV  yfrovs  &i>dpa
viKr)ffas).*  The  entire  country,  in  fact,  had  rallied  to
him,  with  the  exception  of  Judne.i,  where  the  ambitious
Jonathan  had  inflicted  defeat  upon  his  adherent  Apol-
lonius,  governor  of  Coelesyria  (i  Mace.  1069  f. ).
Demetrius  was,  indeed,  fain  to  purchase  the  acquiescence
of  Jonathan  by  confirming  him  in  the  high-priesthood,
and  by  the  abolition  of  taxes  (i  Mace.  \\mf. ),  and
the  surrender  to  Judaea  of  three  Samarian  districts.

When  peace  was  assured Demetrius  disbanded  the

1  See  the  remarks  of  Mahaffy,  P.ittf>.  of  the  Ptolemies,  iSz/

2  On  his  coins  he  also  calls  himself  Theos  and  Philadelphos.

4355


SELEUCID^E

native  troops  and  retained  only  his  Cretan  mercenaries.
This  led  to  risings  in  Antioch,  which  were  put  down  by
the  mercenaries  with  the  aid  of  3000  Jewish  troops  sent
by  Jonathan.  Confiscations  and  executions  alienated
the  goodwill  of  the  people  (i  Mace.  11  38/. ).  This
emboldened  one  Diodotus,  a  native  of  Kasiana,  brought
up  at  Apamea  on  the  Orontes  (Strabo,  752  ;  cp  id.
668),  to  declare  a  young  son  of  Alexander  Bala  king  as
Antiochus  VI.  Dionysus.1  This  was  in  145  B.C.  The
Jews  profited  by  this  revolt,  for  Demetrius  had  not
redeemed  his  promises  to  withdraw  his  garrisons  from
Judcea.  The  disbanded  troops  also  rallied  to  the
standard  of  his  rival,  and  Demetrius  was  compelled  to
evacuate  Antioch  and  to  retire  to  Seleucia  ( Livy,  Epit.
52)  or  to  Cilicia  (so  Jos.  Ant.\\\\.?n).  Jonathan  and
his  brother  Simon  mastered  all  southern  Syria  (for  the
details  of  the  operations,  see  i  Mace.  Il6o/!).

Seleucia,  near  Antioch,  remained  true  to  Demetrius,
along  with  Cilicia  and  the  eastern  provinces  generally,2  so

13.  Antiochus  VI.  that  the  -voung  Antiochus  never  ruled
(145  142  B  C ) °Ver "10rc than a sma" Part of
andTryphon Syria' His reign soon came to
(142-138  BC) 3n C aS  WaS murclered by

Diodotus, who  usurped the throne
under  the  name  of  Tryphon.

The  date  is  disputed  ;  probably  it  was  in  143-142  B.C.  ;  so  the
coins  (see  Babelon,  Roit  tie  Syrie,  731  f.  and  cp  i  Mace.  1831).
On  the  other  hand,  according  to  Josephus  (Ant.  xiii.5  n  ~  i)  the
murder  of  Antiochus  occurred  after  the  capture  of  Demetrius
by  the  Parthians.  (On  this  much  disputed  point  see  the
authorities  referred  to  in  Schiir.  Hist,  of  the  Jt-ius,  ET,  i.  1  177,
and  Cambridge  Bible,  First  Book  of  M.  in  I.e.).

The  usurper  made  himself  detested  for  his  cruelties.
Chiefly  he  alienated  the  sympathies  of  the  Jews,  and
earned  their  active  hatred,  by  the  capture  and  execution
of  Jonathan  when  he  had  all  but  established  the  inde
pendence  of  his  country  ( i  Mace.  1239/. ).

The  three  or  four  years  of  the  reign  of  Tryphon  are
almost  destitute  of  incident,  save  for  a  few  isolated
notices.  His  headquarters  seem  to  have  been  at  Cora-
cesium  in  Cilicia  Aspera,  a  robbers'  eyrie  on  a  pre
cipitous  crag  by  the  sea.  Strabo  (668)  attributes  to
him  the  rise  of  the  piratical  power  in  Cilicia,  which
afterwards  attained  such  extraordinary  dimensions.
The  generals  of  Demetrius,  in  Mesopotamia  and  Coele-
syria  at  least,  retained  their  ground  before  those  of
Tryphon,  whilst  Simon,  who  had  succeeded  to  the
leadership  of  the  Jews  (i  Mace.  138),  entered  into
negotiations  with  Demetrius,  who  granted  all  his
demands,  including  even  exemption  from  tribute
( i  Mace.  13s6/. ).  Though  the  Jews  thus  did  not  gain
absolute  independence,  but  had  still  to  recognise  the
suzerainty  of  the  Syrian  kings,  they  adopted  a  new  era,
and  Simon  ruled  as  ethnarch,  or  vassal  prince  (i  Mace
134i/  ;  cp  Justin,  8613).

At  this  moment  the  attention  of  Demetrius  was  diverted  to'
Babylonia,  where  he  had  to  face  a  new  peril. Mithridates  I.  of
_  Parthia,3  after  displaying  his  power  in  the

14.  DemetriUS  E., had conquered Media  (147  B.C.),  and
in  Parthia even  Seleucia  on  the  Tigris  two  years  later.

(139-129  B.C.).  The  Babylonians  appealed  for  assistance.
Demetrius  was  joined  by  the  Persians,  Ely-
mieans,  and  Bactrians ;  but  in  139  B.C.  he  was  defeated  and
taken  prisoner  by  the  Parthians,  and  carried  about  through
their  territories  as  a  show4  (i  Mace.  14  i,  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  ~  i,
Appian,  Sy>:  67.  The  actual  capture  was  due  to  treachery).
For  ten  years  Demetrius  remained  a  prisoner ;  but  very  soon
after  his  capture  his  treatment  improved,  and  he  was  even
given  the  king's  daughter  Rhodogune  to  wife.  Probably  the
promise  of  reinstallation  in  his  kingdom  would  have  been
realised  had  not  Mithridates  himself  died,  and  been  succeeded

1  The  coins  of  this  seven-year-old  king  also  bear  the  title
Epiphanes. His  mother  was  the  Egyptian  princess  Cleopatra
Thea. In  Appian,  Syr.  68,  he  is  wrongly  called  Alexander.
See  ANTIOCHUS,  4.

2  Cp  inscr. from Babylon  in  Zeitschr.  f. .Jssyr.Siio,  and
inscr.  from  Paphos  injourn.  of  Hellenic  Studies,  0(i8So)  230.

3  Mithridates  I.  reigned  174-136  B.C. He  calls  himself  on  his
coins  King  of  Kings,  the  Great,  Arsaces,  Epiphanes,  Euergetes,
Philhellen. He was the most considerable of  the Parthian
monarchs.

4  From  this  circumstance  he  was  called  mockingly  Seripides
(Eus.  Chron.  1  256).

4356


SELEUCID^E

by  Phraates  II.  as  Arsaces  Philopator  Epiphanes  Philhellen
(reigned  136-127  B.C.).  It  seemed  better  to  this  monarch  to
retain  Demetrius  in  order  to  be  able  to  use  him  in  case  of
threatening  circumstances.

Whilst  Demetrius  was  a  captive  in  the  hands  of  the
Parthians  (see  above,  §  14)  his  younger  brother  Antio-

IK A,,*:™!,,,,, chus  Sidetes,  who  owed  his  surname  to

15.  Antiocnus  ., ,- ... .  . ,

VII Sidetes  brought  up  at

(138-129  B  C  )  S'de  '"  PalnPhvlia  (see  SIDE),1  asserted
'''his  claims  to  the  kingdom  of  Syria
(i  Mace.  15i/).  He  was  now  sixteen  years  old.  His
attempt  succeeded,  perhaps  chiefly  because  he  was  joined
by  queen  Cleopatra  Thea,  who,  enraged  at  the  union  of
Demetrius  with  the  daughter  of  the  Parthian  king,
went  over  to  the  side  of  Antiochus,  and  surrendered  to
him  the  strong  tower  of  Seleucia,  near  Antioch,  which
during  all  these  years  she  had  held  for  Demetrius.

Tryphon  was  defeated  and  driven  into  the  Phoenician  town  of
Dora,  where  he  was  besieged. Thence  he  escaped  to  Apamea,
but  was  again  besieged,  and  compelled  to  end  his  life  by  his  own
hand  (i  Mace.  15  10  37  ;  Strabo,  668  :  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  7  2  ;  Appian
Syr.  6S).2

Antiochus  married  Thea  ( '  the  objectionable  but
evidently  inevitable  adjunct  of  the  Syrian  throne,'
Holm,  Grk.  Hist.  4419),  and  acted  very  vigorously  to
unite  again  the  severed  fragments  of  the  Syrian  kingdom
(Justin,  36  i ).  First  and  foremost  came  the  necessity
of  dealing  with  Palestine,  which  in  the  turmoil  of  the
past  few  years  had  absorbed  large  tracts  of  Syrian
territory,  and  attained  an  almost  completely  inde
pendent  position,  even  entering  into  diplomatic  relations
with  distant  and,  in  part,  hostile  powers  (i  Mace.  Wsgf.
I2i/  1416/24).  In  135  B.C.  Antiochus  invaded
Judaea  in  person.  Already,  three  years  previously,  the
Syrian  king  had  come  into  collision  with  the  Jews,
who,  under  Judas  and  John  Hyrcanus,  inflicted  a  defeat
upon  his  general  CENDEB^EUS.  After  the  assassination
of  Simon  and  two  of  his  sons  by  his  son-in-law
Ptolemy,  the  son  of  Abubus  (i  Mace.  16n/ ),  John
Hyrcanus  had  become  high  priest  and  prince  of  Judasa.
Upon  the  invasion  by  Antiochus  he  was  shut  up  in  the
citadel  of  Jerusalem  for  at  least  a  year,  and  then  forced
to  capitulate.  The  walls  were  destroyed,  hostages
demanded,  with  five  hundred  talents  indemnity,  and
tribute  for  the  cities  which  had  been  occupied  by  the
Maccabees  (Diod.  34i,  Justin,  36i,  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  82). 3
Syrian  suzerainty  over  Judaea  was  fully  asserted.

Next  occurred  the  final  attempt  of  the  Seleucidae  to
overthrow  the  formidable  Parthian  power  which  had
wrested  from  them  so  much  of  their  eastern  possessions.
In  130  B.C.  Antiochus  undertook  an  expedition  against  the
Parthians.  His  brother  Demetrius  was  still  in  their  hands,
having  twice  been  recaptured  when  he  attempted  escape.  Three
victories  gave  the  Syrian  king  the  possession  of  Babylonia,  and
brought  to  his  standard  all  the  peoples  who  had  been  reduced
under  the  Parthian  yoke.-*  Phraates  opened  negotiations  with
Antiochus  to  amuse  him,  while  he  prepared  once  more  to  try
his  fortune  in  the  field  (Diod.  35  15)  ;  more  effective  still  was  the
stroke  by  which  Demetrius  was  at  last  released  from  captivity
in  order  to  cause  the  withdrawal  of  the  Syrian  forces.  In  the
next_collision  with  the  Parthian  troops  Antiochus  fell,  bravely
fighting  (Appian,  Syr.  68  ;  Justin,  38  10).  His  entire  army  was
cut  to  pieces.

The  Parthian  king,  having  thus  won  the  victory  by
arms,  keenly  regretted  having  set  Demetrius  at  liberty

16.  Demetrius  [,see,§,14)'  and  tried  to  recaPture  him.

II Nicator  failed. He  tried  next  to  undo  his

(second  reign,  work  by  sendinS  into  s-vria  a  second


129-125  B.C.).


pretender,  a  son  of  Antiochus,  the  late


king,  Seleucus  by  name,  who  had  fallen
into  his  hands.  This  also  proved  of  no  avail.  Deme
trius,  however,  did  not  long  enjoy  his  change  of  fortune.

1  'In  Sida  urbe  educatus,  quapropter  Sidetes  utique  voca-
batur'  (Eus.  Citron.  1  255).  On  his  coins  Antiochus  VII.  calls
himself  Euergetes,  which  was,  therefore,  his  true  official  title.
Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  7  i  calls  him  SWTTJP.  See  ANTIOCHUS,  5.

'-On  his  coins  Tryphon  calls  himself  Bao-iAevs  avTOfcpdrajp,
which  no  other  Syrian  ruler  does.

3  This  Antiochus  was  not  hostile  to  the  Jewish  faith,  and  for
his  tolerance  was  called  Eusebes  ('pious'),  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  82.

4  For these victories Antiochus received the title Great
(Dittenb.  Syll0ge,(T-*  244  and  245,  Bao-iAe'ios  /ueydAov  'Ai/Ttox"",
cp  Justin,  38  10  :  '  Magnus  haberi  ccepit ').

4357


SELEUCIDAE

He  was  induced  to  enter  into  war  with  Egypt  on  behalf
of  Cleopatra  II.,  sister-wife  of  Ptolemy  Physcon,1  and
his  own  mother-in-law,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  Syria.
The  war  with  which  he  was  thus  threatened  Physcon
evaded  by  setting  up  Alexander  Zabinas,  a  pretended
son  of  Alexander  I.  Bala,  to  claim  the  Syrian  throne.'2

Supported  by  a  strong  Egyptian  army  the  pretender  invaded
Syria,  where  several  cities  fell  away  from  Demetrius.  The
decisive  battle  was  fought  in  125  u.c.  near  Damascus,  and
Demetrius  was  defeated.  He  fled  to  Ptolemais  to  his  wife
Cleopatra,  who  refused  to  receive  him,  and,  when  he  tried  to
enter  Tyre,  had  him  murdered  (Justin,  39  i,  Appian,  Syr.  68
Jo*.  Ant.  xiii.  93).

Little  is  known  of  the  rule  of  Alexander  II. ;  but  one
authority  at  least  passes  a  favourable  verdict.3  He

17.  Alexander  ??tered into friend'y relations  with
II and Hyrcanus,  influenced  largely,  no  doubt,

Seleucus  V.  by  the  desire  to  find  support  against
Egypt,  from  which  power  he  soon
became  estranged  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  9 3).  He  was,  in  fact,
not  left  to  enjoy  his  usurped  dignity  long  without
rivals.  Immediately  upon  the  death  of  Demetrius  II.,
Seleucus,  the  son  of  the  murdered  king,  laid  claim  to
the  throne,  only  to  be  murdered  after  a  few  months  by
the  infamous  Cleopatra  Thea,  his  mother,  who  was
indignant  that  he  should  have  taken  such  a  step  without
her,  and  without  sharing  the  power  with  herself.

Cleopatra  then  put  forward  the  second  son  of  Deme
trius  II.  as  heir  to  the  throne  ;  his  claim  was  also

18.  Antiochus  suPP°7d ^  Egypt Alexander II.

VIII  Grypus4  %vas  defeated  and  rted  to  Antioch,  and
(125'-96  B  C  ) then l° Seleucia (Diod. Sic.  35  28,

Justin,  39  2).  Finally  he  was  captured
and  brought  to  Antiochus,  who  had  him  put  to  death.
Thus  from  125  B.C.  Antiochus  reigned,  in  association
with  his  mother,  after  the  fashion  common  in  Egypt.
Their  joint  reign  lasted  four  years.5

The  queen-mother  was  thrown  more  and  more  into  the  shade,
especially  after  the  marriage  of  her  son  with  Cleopatra  Try-
pha:na,  given  to  him  by  her  father  Ptolemy  Euergetes  II.  as  a
pledge  of  Egyptian  support,  and  also  after  123  B.C.  by  the
victory  gained  over  Alexander  1 1.  (cp  Justin,  39  2  :  'Cleopatra
cum  huius  [sc.  Antiochi]  quoque  victoria  inferiorem  dignitatem
suam  factam  doleret ').  In  121  it.c.  she  tried  to  poison  him,  but
was  compelled  instead  to  drink  the  draught  herself  (Appian,
Syr.  69).

For some years  Antiochus  Grypus  reigned quietly,

and  then  there  arose  a  claimant  to  the  throne  in  the

10 A  „+;«„!,„„ Person of  his  half-brother  and  cousin

J.J7. .tt.IiblUCD.US . • ,  /TV \  c A • i  ITTT

IX  Cvzicenus  Antloc"us  (IX-)'  son  of  Antiochus  \  II.
(116  95  B  C  } •^detes  and  Cleopatra  Thea  (see  above,

§  15).  Antiochus  owed  his  surname  to
his  having  been  brought  up  at  Cy/icus  (his  title  on  his
coins  is  Philopator),  whither  his  mother  had  sent  him  in
129  B.C.  upon  the  return  of  Demetrius  II.,  her  second
husband,  from  his  Parthian  captivity  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  10  i).
The  poisoned  cup  with  which  his  mother  had  made
him  familiar  was  employed  in  vain  by  Grypus  to  remove
this  rival.  The  attempt  only  precipitated  the  inevitable
struggle  (116  B.C.).  In  the  first  important  battle  of
the  war  Grypus  was  victorious,  and  took  Antioch,
where  he  found  his  own  sister-in-law  Cleopatra  IV. ,  sister
and  divorced  wife  of  Ptolemy  Soter  II.  (Lathyrus);
having  been  expelled  from  Egypt  by  her  mother  (i.e.,
Cleopatra  III.,  Physcon's  niece  and  former  wife,  who
herself  married  Ptolemy  Soter)  Cleopatra  had  married
Antiochus  Cyzicenus.  By  command  of  her  sister,  Try-

1  Ptolemy  Euergetes  II.,  or  Physcon,  reigned  146-117  B.C.

2  Or,  according  to  another  and  more  probable  version  (Justin,
30  i),  he  claimed  to  be  an  adoptive  son  of  the  dead  Antiochus
VII.  Sidetes. He  was  really  an  Egyptian,  son  of  a  merchant
called  Protarchus,  though  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  9  3  calls  him  a  genuine
Seleucid. He  also  gives  the  title  as  Zebinas. It  is  translated
'  slave  '  (ayopa<7Tos)  in  Eus.  Chron.  1  257.

3  Diod. Sic.  35  22 (8445), T\V  yap Trpaos Kal <Tvyyi'iafj.oviKOS,
ert ie ec rais  o/ouAuus (cai (v rats eyrevfteri jrpo<7T)njs. uiv
X&piv  Si.a.<t>fp6vTios  vn-b  riav  TroAAwi/  r)ya.na.TO.

4  His  titles  are  Epiphanes  Philometor  (!)  Callinicus. The
name  Grypus  =  '  hook-nose  ' — a  feature  conspicuous  on  his  coins.
Grypus  is,  of  course,  not  an  official,  but  a  vulgar  title.

°  Coins  bear  her  portrait,  with  cornucopia;. Her  titles  are
Thea  and  Eueteria  ('  abundance  ').

4358


SELEUCID^]


SELEUCID^S


phaena,  the  wife  of  Grypus,  the  unfortunate  Cleopatra
was  put  to  death  (Justin,  39a).  Soon  the  scale  was
turned,  and  Grypus  was  defeated,  and  compelled  to
retire  to  Aspendus  (Eus.  Chron.  1257) ;  Tryphcena  was
put  to  death  in  her  turn  by  the  victor.  In  in  B.C.
Grypus  returned  and  won  hack  northern  Syria.  The
result  of  the  struggle  was  that  the  Syrian  empire,  now
sadly  shrunken  in  size,  was  partitioned  between  the  con
testants,  Grypus  retaining  northern  Syria  with  Cilicia,
and  Cyzicenus  taking  Phoenicia  and  Coelesyria  with  its
capital  Damascus.  Apparently  a  state  of  peace  did  not
long  continue ;  but  the  details  of  the  never-ceasing
warfare  are  hard  to  trace.

It  is  clear  that  the  brothers'  war  in  Syria  was  intimately  con
nected  with  a  similar  strife  in  Egypt,  where  also  Ptolemy
Alexander  and  Ptolemy  Soter  II.  were  at  enmity,  due  to  the
intrigues  of  their  mother  the  reigning  queen  Cleopatra  III.  (cp
Journ.  of  Hell.  Stud.  ((230  ;  Justin,  3il  4  ;  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  10  2  ;
and  see  Mahafify,  Empire  of  the  Ptolemies,  409^).  Grypus
held  with  the  party  of  Alexander,  and  by  way  of  attaching  him
more  closely  thereto  Cleopatra  sent  him  as  his  wife  her  youngest
daughter,  Selene,  beforetime  the  wife  of  the  exiled  Ptolemy
Soter  II.

The  confusion  in  Syria  was  an  opportunity  for  sur
rounding  powers.  In  103  B.C.  even  Rome,  by  the
victory  of  the  Prrctor  M.  Antonius  over  the  pirates,
gained  a  footing  in  Cilicia  (cp  Justin,  39s).  By  the
union  of  Laodice  (Thea  Philadelphus),  daughter  of
Grypus,  with  Mithridates  I.  Callinicus,  the  dynasty  of
Commagene  was  founded,  and  the  way  prepared  for  the
severance  of  that  kingdom  from  Syria  (cp  Mommsen  in
Athen.  Mitt.  127 /.).  The  Jews  also,  under  John
Hyrcanus,  who  had  practically  thrown  off  their  allegi
ance  since  the  death  of  Antiochus  VII.  (129  B.C.  ),
made  great  strides  forward,  investing  and  destroying
Samaria  (about  108  B.C.)  in  spite  of  all  that  Antiochus
Cyzicenus,  even  with  the  help  of  6000  troops  sent  by
Ptolemy  Soter  II.,  could  do  to  save  it  (Jos.  Ant.
xiii.  102/1).  Such  successes  as  the  Syrian  king  won
were  entirely  neutralised  and  torn  from  his  grasp  by  the
senatus  consultum  secured  by  Hyrcanus  bidding  '  Anti
ochus  the  son  of  Antiochus'  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  1022 ;  cp
id.  xiii.  92)  restore  all  his  Palestinian  conquests.

In  96  B.C.  Antiochus  Grypus  died,  or  was  murdered  by  Her-
acleon  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  184  ;  cp  Eus.  Chron.  1  259).  He  was
forty-five  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  left  behind  him
five  sons.

Seleucus  VI. ,  Epiphanes,  the  eldest  son  of  Antiochus
Grypus,  on  his  father's  death  laid  claim  to  the  un-

. „  ,  divided empire, and proceeded to

20  Seleucus  ,  • ,  • ,

VT ' . ,  assert  his  claims  by  arms. Antiochus

N^1  t  anCS  C>rzicenus  marched  into  northern  Syria
,  ^fj^x  against  him,  but  being  defeated  killed
'  B-t"'>  himself  in  the  battle  (Appian,  Syr.  69  ;
Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  184  seems  not  quite  accurate).  A  sketch
of  the  character  of  Antiochus  Cyzicenus  is  given  in  Diod.
8034.  We  are  told  that  he  had  to  wife  Selene,  the
Egyptian  princess,  who  had  been  married  to  his  rival
Grypus  ;  but  whether  her  marriage  to  Cyzicenus  occurred
before  or  after  the  death  of  Grypus  is  unknown.  For  a
few  months  Seleucus  VI.  was  master  of  the  whole  extent
of  the  Syrian  empire,  as  it  then  existed,  but  soon  he  was
expelled  by  a  rival,  Antiochus  X.  Eusebes,  Philopator,
the  son  of  Antiochus  Cyzicenus.  He  was  compelled  to
retire  into  Cilicia,  where  he  took  refuge  in  the  town  of
Mopsuestia  (mod.  Missis).

By  his  violent  and  tyrannical  behaviour,  and  his  extortions,
Seleucus  raised  the  inhabitants  against  him ;  they  fired  the
gymnasium  in  which  he  had  taken  shelter,  and  he  either  perished
in  the  flames,  or  slew  himself  to  avoid  a  worse  fate  (Jos.  Ant.
xiii.  184;  Appian,  Syr.  69).  'This  was  probably  in  94  u.c.
Mopsuestia  was  thereafter  razed  to  the  ground  by  Philippus  and
Antiochus  XL,  brothers  of  Seleucus.

'  Syria now presented the spectacle of, firstly, a

contest between two branches  of  the Seleucids, the

. , descendants  of  the  brothers  Demetrius

X  (g^B  C  ?  IL  and  Antiochus  VIL-  but  both
A.  ^34-8d  B.O.;.  havjng  tne  same  ancestress  [Cleo
patra  Thea],  and,  secondly,  of  squabbles  between  the
members  of  the  first  branch,  the  five  sons  of  Grypus  '

4359


(Holm,  Grk.  Hist.  4542).  The  confusion  prevailing  is
well  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  Antiochus  X.  married
Selene  who  had  first  been  the  wife  of  Grypus  and  had
then  married  Antiochus  Cyzicenus,  his  own  father.

First,  Antiochus  X.  had  to  meet  the  opposition  of
Antiochus  XI.  and  Philippus  I.,  the  third  and  the
second  sons  of  Grypus.  After  a  battle  on  the  Orontes,  in
which  Antiochus  X.  was  victorious,  Antiochus  XI.  lost
his  life  in  the  river  in  his  flight  (Jos.  I.e.  •  Eus.  Chron.
1261).  Philippus  then  assumed  the  royal  title,  and
held  part  of  Syria  (from  94  B.C.).  In  the  meantime,
Ptolemy  Lathyrus J  had  sent  for  Demetrius,  fourth  son
of  Grypus,  from  Cnidus,  and  had  established  him  as
king  in  Damascus.-  After  hard  fighting  Antiochus  X.
was  expelled  from  Syria  (or,  according  to  Josephus,
lost  his  life  in  battle  with  the  Parthians).

According  to  Appian  (Afitkr.  105)  this  Antiochus  was  alive
and  ruling  in  83  B.C.  when  Tigranes  (see  below,  §  22,  end)  made
himself  master  of  Syria.  If  this  is  true,  his  death  in  war  with
the  Parthians  fell  later  (it  had  already  occurred  in  75  B.C.).
Appian  (Syr.  69)  also  tells  us  that  he  married  Selene,  his  father's
widow.  His  son  was  Antiochus  XIII.  (§  23  ;  cp  Kuhn,  Beitr.
z.  Gesch.  tier  Seleukiden,  33./C).

In  what way  Philippus  and  Demetrius divided  the
kingdom  is  not  known  ; but  Demetrius  probably  ruled
22 Philimma Coelesyria and  Antioch. Soon hos-
T A  rC  tilities  broke  out  between  them. Deme-

I.  ana  Deme- .  , T

,  .  _TT  tnus  was  also  engaged  with  the  Jews,
is  ill.  who  jn  88  BC  called  him  in  to  aid
them  against  their  tyrant  prince  Alexander  Jannreus.
Demetrius  defeated  Jannaeus  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  14i/. );
but  in  the  moment  of  victory  Jewish  national  feeling
awoke,  and  6000  Jews  went  over  to  Alexander  from  the
army  of  Demetrius.  The  Syrian  king  must  have  shown
signs  of  desiring  to  reduce  Judaea  once  more  to  a  de
pendency  of  Syria.  Demetrius  then  turned  his  arms
against  his  brother  Philippus.  whom  he  besieged  in
Bercea.3  Straton,  the  ruler  of  Bercea,  who  supported
Philippus,  appealed  for  assistance  to  the  Arab  sheik
Azizus  and  the  Parthian  Mithridates.  By  them  Deme
trius  was  himself  beleaguered  in  his  camp,  and  com
pelled  to  capitulate.  He  died  in  honourable  confine
ment  at  the  court  of  the  Parthian  king  Mithridates  II.
(Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  14s).

After  the  capture  of  Demetrius  by  the  Parthians,
Philippus  made  himself  master  of  Antioch,  and  for  a
short  time  was  sole  ruler  of  what  was  left  of  the  Syrian
empire  (88  B.C.).  The  intestine  strife  was  soon  re
newed,  for  Antiochus  XII.  Dionysos,4  the  youngest  of
the  sons  of  Grypus,  claimed  the  throne,  and  established
himself  in  Damascus  (87/6  B.C.).  Philippus,  indeed,
shortly  afterwards  took  the  town  by  the  treachery  of  the
governor  Milesius,  while  Antiochus  was  engaged  with
the  Nabatrt'ans  ;  but  he  was  compelled  to  evacuate  it
again.  "When  Antiochus  resumed  operations  against
the  Arabians,  the  Jewish  despot,  Alexander  Jannreus,
attempted  to  bar  the  road  through  Judaea  by  construct
ing  a  great  wall  and  trench  from  Joppa  to  Capharsaba,
but  in  vain  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  lf>  i).  Ten  thousand  Arab
riders  surprised  the  forces  of  the  Syrian  king,  who,  true
to  the  traditions  of  his  house,  fell  fighting  bravely
(probably  about  84  B.C. ).

The  end  of  Philippus  is  doubtful.  In  83  B.C.  the  Armenian
king  Tigranes  was  invited  to  put  an  end  to  the  long  strife  by
making  himself  master  of  the  Syrian  kingdom.  Neither
Philippus  nor  Antiochus  X.  (if  they  were  still  alive  ;  see  above,
§  21)  could  offer  any  real  opposition,  and  Tigranes  made  him
self  master  of  the  entire  Syrian  kingdom  from  the  sea  to  the
Euphrates,  including  also  Cilicia  (Justin,  40  i,  Appian,  Syr.
48).  He  so  ruled  for  fourteen  years,  Syria  being  governed  by  a
viceroy.  In  6q  B.C.  the  connection  of  Tigranes  with  his  father-
in-law  Mithridates  of  Pontus  led  to  his  own  defeat  by  Lucullus.

1  Ptolemy  Lathyrus  =  Ptolemy  Soter  II.  (see  PTOI.EMY).

2  Demetrius  III., Eucferus  (95-88  B.C.). Euxaipos,  so Jos.
Ant.  xiii.  184, where, however, Niese reads  "Aicaipos. The
coins  of  Antiochus  X. bear  the  triple  title  Theos  Philopator
Soter,  or  else  Philometor  Euergetes  Callinicus.

3  A  town  E.  of  Antioch.

4  Dionysos'  coins  bear  also  the  titles  Epiphanes  Philopator
Callinicus,  the  title  Dionysos  being  also  sometimes  omitted.

4360


SEM

After  the  defeat  of  Tigranes,  Syria  did  not  all  at  once
... come into the possession of the

Y?TT A - K USi  Romans. The  royal  house  of  Syria
X1I1.  Asiaticus was  not  yet  extinct>  for  Antiochus  X.

»  B.C.). Eusebes and  Cleopatra  Selene had
left  a  son  Antiochus.

The  youth  of  Asiaticus  had  been  passed  in  Asia  Minor  (Justin,
402,  'in  angulo  Cilicia;  '),  from  which  circumstance  he  received
his  surname  (Appian,  Syr.  70).  This  Antiochus,  along  with  a
brother,  appeared  in  Rome  to  urge  their  claim  to  the  kingdom  of
Egypt,  then  under  the  sway  of  the  illegitimate  Ptolemy  Auletes.
This  claim  was  disregarded,  and  the  disappointed  princes  re
turned  home  by  way  of  Sicily,  where  Antiochus  was  robbed
by  Verres  of  a  rich  present  intended  for  the  Senate  (Cic.  I'err.
ii.  4  27).  This  was  about  72  B.C.  Three  years  later  Tigranes
had  lost  his  Syrian  possessions,  and  Antiochus  was  received
with  open  arms  as  the  heir  to  his  kingdom  (Appian,  Syr.  49).
Lucullus  recognised  his  claim.

In  65  B.C.  disturbances  broke  out  in  Antioch  (Diod.
frg.  34),  and  Philippus  son  of  Philippus  I.  was
encouraged  to  lay  claim  to  the  crown.  Thus  the  old
strife  between  the  two  rival  lines  was  renewed  in  the
third  generation.  The  Arabian  chief  Azizus  (cp  §  22)
supported  Philippus,  whilst  Sampsiceramus,  prince  of
Emesa  (Strabo,  753),  supported  Antiochus.  Into  the
details  of  the  strife  we  need  not  enter.  Pompeius,  who
had  taken  the  place  of  Lucullus  in  66  B.C.  ,  took  in  hand
the  reduction  of  this  chaos  to  order.  Antiochus,  on
requesting  to  be  acknowledged  as  the  rightful  heir  to
the  throne,  '  received  the  answer  that  Pompeius  would
not  give  back  the  sovereignty  to  a  king  who  knew
neither  how  to  maintain  nor  how  to  govern  his  kingdom,
even  at  the  request  of  his  subjects,  much  less  against
their  distinctly  expressed  wishes.  With  this  letter  of
the  Roman  proconsul  the  house  of  Seleucus  was
ejected  from  the  throne  which  it  had  occupied  for  two
hundred  and  fifty  years.  Antiochus  soon  after  lost  his
life  through  the  artifice  of  the  emir  Sampsiceramus,  as
whose  client  he  played  the  ruler  in  Antioch  '  (Mommsen,
Hist,  of  Koine,  4  135).  Syria  now  became  a  Roman
province  (63  B.C.  ).

Besides  the  special  articles  devoted  to  Antiochus,  Demetrius,
etc.,  and  collateral  articles,  in  the  present  work,  Schiirer's
Jewish  People  in  the  titne  of  '  Jesits  Christ,
24.  Literature.  ET,  should  be  consulted  for  a  sketch  of
Syrian  history,  and  for  the  authorities  there
cited.  The  literature  of  the  subject  is  extensive.  Most  impor
tant  are  P.  Gardner,  Catalogue  of  Greek  Coins  in  the  British
A[use^l>n  :  The  Seleucid  kings  of  Syria  ;  and  Babelon,  Rois  de
Syrie.  Extremely  valuable  are  the  articles  under  the  various
headings  Antiochus,  Demetrius,  etc.,  in  Pauly's  Real  Encyclo-
gaiiit:,  now  available  in  part  in  the  revised  edition  by  Wissowa  ;
in  it  will  be  found  the  fullest  collection  of  recent  authorities,  to
which  general  reference  must  here  suffice.  \y.  j.  \v.

SEM  (CHM  [Ti.  WH]),  Lk.  3  36,  RV  SHEM.


SEMACHIAH  (-liTpCD,  §  29),  one  of  the  sons  of
Shemaiah  b.  Obed-edom  (i  Ch.  26y,  c&Bxei&  [B],
CAM&XIA  [Ll'  -I  AC  [A]).  Cp  ISMACHIAH,  where  a
religious  meaning  is  suggested.  This  meaning,  how
ever,  seems  to  be  due  to  a  redactor.  The  neighbouring
names  are  surely  clan-names  of  the  Negeb  (cp  OBED-

EUOM). Cp  SlBBECAI.  T.  K.  C.

SEMEI (ce/we[e]i). i. i Esd.  933  =  Ezral033,

SHIMKI  (15).

2.  Esth.  11  2,  RV  SEMHIAS  ;  elsewhere  SHIMEI  (10).

3.  Lk.  826  (o-ejueeiv  [Ti.  WH]),  RV  SEMEIN,  a  name  in  the
genealogy  of  Jesus,  see  GENEALOGIES,  §  3.

SEMEIS  (ce/weic  [A]),  i  Esd.  923  RV,  AV  Semis
=  Ezra  1023,  SHIMEI,  14.

SEMELLIUS  (ce/v\eAAloc  [A]),  i  Esd.  2  16  =  Ezra
48  SHIMSHAI.

SENAAH  (HX3D),  Ezra  2  35;  HASSENAAH.
SENEH  (Hip), in  Neh.  83, i  S.  144. See  BOZEZ,

MlCHMASH, §  2.

1  As  no  coins  of  Asiaticus  are  extant,  we  do  not  know  his
official  title.  The  name  Asiaticus,  of  course,  belongs  to  the
some  class  as  Grypus,  Hierax,  etc.,  which  are  vulgar  in  origin,
not  official.  Possibly  the  official  title  of  this  last  of  the  Seleucid?e
was  Eusebes,  which  would  account  for  his  being  confused  with
his  father  by  our  authorities.

4361


SENNACHERIB

SENIR  n^y';  CAN[e]ip;  Sitnir;  Dt.  39  i  Ch.  523
Cant.  48  [cANieip,  N]  Ezek.  27s  [ceNeip,  B]),  or
sometimes,  incorrectly,  in  AV,  SHENIK  (Dt.,  Cant.).
Senir  (the  Amorite  name  of  Mt.  Hermon,  Dt.  I.e.  }  is
described  in  an  inscription  of  Shalmaneser  as  '  Saniru,
the  mountain  summit  at  the  entrance  to  Lebanon  '  (Del.
Par.  104)  ;  Ezekiel  says  that  the  Tyrians  (but  cp  TYRE,
§  i)  sent  thither  for  planks  of  fir-trees.  In  i  Ch.  $23
Senir  is  coupled  with  Mount  Hermon.  It  might  be  a
designation  of  that  part  of  the  Hermon-range  which  is
between  Baalbek  and  Horns,  and  was  known  by  the
same  name  to  the  Arabic  geographers  (e.g.,  Abulfeda).

Cp  A'ATft)  159;  Halevy,  REJ  20  [1890]  246;  Wetzstein,
ZA  TW  3  278.  _  See  HERMON,  SIRION,  and,  on  the  question
whether  there  is  once  or  twice  a  confusion  between  a  mountain-
range  in  the  far  N.  and  one  in  the  far  S.,  bearing  a  similar
name,  see  Crit.  Bil>.


SENNACHERIB1  (TnrttP  or  [2  K.  19  20]  3"imp  ;

ceNNAXHp[e]i/v\  [BNAQrj'-eiB  [Qn'K-  Is.  STsi],  -xeip-

1 Sources ^  ceNAXHp- l>  K.  18i3  A, 2  Mace.

for  history  8l9  V  "'  "Xeip'  [2  Macc-8l9  !»«•  V»;
J0ry'  3  Mace.  65,  V],  C6NHpHB[Is.36i,  Aq.];
Ass.  Sin-afoS-erba,  'Sin  has  increased  the  brothers  '),
son  and  successor  of  Sargon,  came  to  the  throne  on
the  1  2th  of  Abu,  705  B.C.  Sennacherib's  own  dated
inscriptions,  the  Taylor  Cylinder  being  the  latest,
give  the  events  of  the  first  fifteen  years  of  his  reign,
in  a  chronological  order,  but  arranged  according  to
campaigns,  not,  like  Sargon's  Annals,  according  to
years.  The  Canon  Lists,  of  the  second  class,  which
fix  some  definite  event  for  each  eponymy,  are  defective
after  his  first  year.  The  Babylonian  Chronicle,  which
was  exceptionally  full  for  this  reign,  deals  chiefly  with
what  concerned  Babylon.  The  Kings  List,  a  Baby
lonian  document,  records  the  succession  of  kings  who
ruled  in  Babylon  during  this  reign.  Some  statements
preserved  in  classical  authors  are  to  be  regarded  with
suspicion  until  they  are  brought  to  the  test  of  further
inscriptions,  still  unpublished,  of  this  king's.  The
many  contracts  of  this  reign  and  a  large  number  of
letters,  now  being  published,  give  many  incidental  refer
ences.  Hence  the  last  word  on  the  history  of  Sen
nacherib  from  the  Assyrian  side  cannot  yet  be  said.
All  that  can  now  be  done  is  to  summarise  the  present
state  of  knowledge.

Sennacherib  does  not  seem  to  have  been  in  a  position
to  proceed  to  Babylon  directly  after  his  accession  to  the
_,  . f throne  of  Assyria  and  there  '  take  the

tvT 1? A  hands of Bel,' or become legitimate

tne  Kingdom.  kjng  Qf  Rabylon_  p0]yhistor  relates
indeed  that  Sennacherib's  brother  reigned  there  at  first,
and,  on  his  death,  a  man  named  Hagises  reigned  for
one  month,  till  he  was  killed  by  Merodach-baladan,  who
reigned  for  six  months.  The  Babylonian  Kings  List
assigns  one  month  to  Marduk-zakir-ium,  who  may  be
Hagises,  and  then  gives  nine  months  to  Merodach-
baladan.  Whatever  means  Sennacherib  took  to  govern
Babylon  in  his  first  two  years  —  whether  he  ruled  by  a
saktiu  or  governor,  or  whether  he  really  sent  a  brother
to  act  as  sub-king  —  his  rule  was  thrown  off  by  an  up
start,  'son  of  a  slave.'  Merodach-baladan,  who  had
been  expelled  by  Sargon  in  721  B.C.,  although  a
Chaklnean,  was  evidently  more  welcome  than  Senna
cherib,  whom  the  Babylonian  Kings  List  calls  a  member
of  the  dynasty  of  Habigal.  According  to  Jensen,  this
means  simply  '  Great  Rascal.  '

Sennacherib's  own  inscriptions  ascribe  to  the  com
mencement  of  his  reign  the  active  hostility  of  Merodach-
baladan,  king  of  Kardunias,  the  old  name  for  Babylonia,
whom  Sennacherib  defeated  in  his  first  expedition.
Merodach-baladan  was  supported  by  an  army  from
Elam.  These  allies  were  defeated  at  Kisu  (now  Hymer),
about  10  m.  E.  from  Babylon.  Merodach-baladan  fled
alone  to  Guzumani.  Sennacherib  immediately  entered
Babylon  and  took  possession  of  Merodach-baladan's

1  For  a  portrait  of  Sennacherib  see  col.  729.
4362


SENNACHERIB

palace,  acquiring  great  spoil.  He  then  sent  after  Mero-
dach-baladan  an  army  which  searched  the  swamps  where
he  had  taken  refuge  ;  but  the  wily  Chaldcean  escaped.
Sennacherib  then  proceeded  to  conquer  the  country,  city
by  city.  He  seems  to  have  had  to  fight  with  a  number
of  tribes,  Urbi,  Aramu,  and  Chaldseans,  who  had
occupied  Erech,  Nippur,  Kisu,  HarsagkalamaandCutha,
and  boasts  of  having  captured  89  strong  cities  as  well
as  820  smaller  cities  in  Chaldasa.  On  his  return  to
Babylon  he  had  to  pacify  the  country,  and  rescue  it  from
the  hordes  of  Aramaean  and  Chaldaean  peoples,  who
would  not  acknowledge  him  as  king.

Sennacherib  enumerates  the  Tu'muna,  Rihihu,  ladaku,
Ubuclu,  Kipre,  Malihu,  (iurumu,  Ubulu,  Damunu,  Gambulu,
Hindaru,  Ru'a,  Ptikudu,  Hamranu,  Hagaranu,  Nabatu,  Li'tau,
Aramu.  The  number  of  his  captives  he  puts  at  208,000.  The
nature  of  these  tribes  is  indicated  by  the  spoil  taken  from  them  :
7200  horses,  11,073  asses,  5230  camels,  80,100  oxen,  800,500
sheep.  The  country  was  clearly  over-run  by  nomads.

It  is  evident  that  Assyria  had  completely  lost  control
of  the  country.  Sennacherib  had  to  reconquer  it.  The
Babylonian  Chronicle  and  a  fragment  of  the  Canon  List
place  a  conquest  of  Larak  and  Sarabanu  in  704  B.C.
This  doubtless  marked  the  commencement  of  the  recon-
quest.  But  the  campaign  clearly  lasted  beyond  702
B.C.,  when  Sennacherib  set  Bel-ibni  on  the  throne  of
Babylon.  This  prince  had  been  brought  up  at  the
Assyrian  court,  but  was  of  the  old  Babylonian  seed
royal,  for  all  the  sources  acknowledge  him  as  legitimate
monarch,  and  the  Babylonian  Kings'  List  ascribes  him
to  '  the  dynasty  of  Babylon,'  and  gives  him  a  reign  of
three  years.  He  was,  of  course,  a  vassal  king.

Sennacherib  assigns  to  this  period  the  submission  of
Nabu-bel-sumate,  kcpu  of  Hararati,  and  the  destruction
of  Hirimmu.  Some  of  Sennacherib's  inscriptions  follow
the  plan  of  presenting  together  the  events  connected
with  one  district.  Thus  we  learn  that  after  Bel-ibnt
had  proved  faithless  or  inefficient,  Sennacherib  once
more  marched  to  Babylon  and  deposed  him,  setting
Asur-nadin-Sum,  his  own  son,  on  the  throne.  The  Baby
lonian  Chronicle  places  the  pillage  of  Hararate  and
Hirimmu  in  702  B.C.,  and  associates  the  accession  of
Asur-nadin-sum  with  Sennacherib's  pillage  of  Akkad,
or  Northern  Babylonia.  Bel-ibni  was  called  away  to
Assyria.  It  was  probably  during  Sennacherib's  absence
in  the  West  that  Bel-ibni  became  disgraced.  Asur-
nadin-sum  was  acknowledged  king  in  Babylon  according
to  all  sources  ;  but  the  Kings'  List  assigns  him  to  the
dynasty  of  Habigal.  He  reigned  six  years,  699-693  B.C.

Sennacherib  owed  Elam  a  grudge  for  supporting
Merodach-baladan  against  him.  In  his  second  cam
paign,  as  he  calls  it,  before  September  702  B.C.,  when
the  Bellino  Cylinder  is  dated,  he  marched  an  army
towards  Elam.  The  Kassi,  who  had  once  furnished
the  ruling  dynasty  of  Babylonia,  about  1725-1155  B.C.,
and  a  neighbouring  tribe,  the  lasubigalli,  on  the  borders
of  Babylonia  and  Elam,  who  had  never  been  subjected
to  Assyrian  rule,  were  now  ravaged.  The  neighbouring
kingdom  of  Ellipi,  once  subject  to  Sargon,  was  also
pillaged.  As  in  Sargon's  case,  some  distant  tribes  of
the  Medes  sent  presents.  Sennacherib  boasts  that  his
predecessors  had  not  even  heard  the  names  of  these
peoples.  But  although  Elam  was  threatened,  it  does
not  seem  that  Sennacherib  made  any  direct  attack  this
time.  His  hands  were  soon  full  in  another  quarter.

How  long  the  West  had  been  in  rebellion  does  not
appear ;  but  Sennacherib  calls  the  campaign  in  which
he  proceeded  to  bring  the  West  to  submission  his  third.
This  is  ascribed  by  general  consent  to  701  B.C.  Bel-
ibni  was  settled  in  Babylon,  and  Sennacherib  was  free
to  attend  to  the  West  at  that  time  ;  but  we  have  no
explicit  statement  of  date  from  cuneiform  sources.  The
first  move  was  against  Tyre.  Eululfeus,  whom  Senna
cherib  calls  Luli  king  of  Sidon,  according  to  Menander,
as  quoted  by  Josephus,  had  gone  to  Citium  in  Cyprus
to  establish  his  authority.  He  was  thus  committing  a
technical  act  of  war  against  Sennacherib.  The  latter

4363


SENNACHERIB

does  not  state  the  grounds  of  his  quarrel.  But  doubt
less  all  the  West  had  become  very  backward  in  payment
of  tribute.  Sennacherib  says  that  Luli  fled  from  Tyre
to  Cyprus  and  that  all  his  country  fell  into  Assyrian
hands.  Great  Sidon  and  Little  Sidon,  Beth-zait,  Sarepta,
Mahalliba,  Usu,  Achzib,  and  Accho  are  named  as
fortresses  captured  from  Luli.  Sennacherib  set  up
Ethobal  as  vassal  king  over  a  new  kingdom  of  Sidon.
Tyre  he  could  not  reduce.

The  vassal  kings  and  semi-independent  rulers  of  Syria
and  Palestine  now  hastened  to  secure  exemption  from
pillage  by  tribute  and  submission.  Menahem  of  Samsi-
muruna,  Abdi-li'ti  of  Arvad,  L'rumilki  of  Gebal,  Mitinti
of  Ashdod,  Pudu-ihi  of  Ammon,  Kamus-nadab  of
Moab,  Airammu  of  Edom,  all  called  kings  of  the  Martu-
land,  submitted.  Sidka  of  Ashkelon  stood  out,  was
captured  and  with  all  his  belongings  carried  to  Assyria.
He  had  apparently  come  to  the  throne  by  a  revolution
which  had  expelled  Sarru-ludari,  son  of  Rukipti,  whom
Tiglath-pileser  III.  had  set  over  Ashkelon,  about  734
B.C.  Hence  he  probably  expected  no  mercy  if  he  sub
mitted.  Sarru-lftdari  was  reinstated.  Sennacherib  then
reduced  Beth-dagan,  Joppa,  Benebarka,  and  Azor  which
had  been  under  Sidka' s  rule.

The  nobles  and  people  of  Ekron  had  rebelled  against
their  king  Padi,  a  faithful  vassal  of  Assyria,  put  him  in
chains,  and  sent  him  to  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  to
keep  in  prison.  When  Sennacherib  advanced  against
Ekron,  he  was  faced  by  a  great  army  of  the  kings  of
Musur,  with  troops,  archers,  chariots,  and  horsemen
from  Meluhha.  This  army  he  defeated  at  Eltekeh,
capturing  the  sons  of  the  kings  of  Musur  and  the  generals
sent  from  Meluhha.  He  then  stormed  Eltekeh  and
Timnath.  Ekron  soon  submitted.  After  wiping  out
the  conspirators  and  enslaving  their  supporters  Senna
cherib  reinstated  Padi,  whom  he  says  he  '  brought  forth
out  of  Jerusalem. '

Sennacherib  then  proceeded  to  ravage  Judah,  captur
ing  forty-six  great  fortresses  and  smaller  cities  '  without
number,'  '  counting  as  spoil '  200,150  people.  He  does
not  claim  to  have  captured  Jerusalem.  He  says  of
Hezekiah,  'him,  like  a  caged  bird,  within  Jerusalem,
his  capital,  I  shut  in,  forts  against  him  I  raised,  and  I
repulsed  whoever  came  out  of  his  city  gate  and  tore  it
up'  ;  but  there  is  no  mention  of  capture.  The  captured
cities  were  annexed  to  the  dominions  of  Metinti  of
Ashdod,  Padi  of  Ekron,  and  Silli-bel  of  Gaza.  What
caused  Sennacherib  to  leave  Judah  we  are  not  told  ;  but
it  is  nearly  certain  that  troubles  in  Babylon  were  again
pressing.  The  army  left  behind  under  the  Tartan  and
Rabshakeh  would  be  well  able  to  carry  on  a  siege  ;  but
Hezekiah  would  not  push  matters  to  the  point  of  stand
ing  a  long  siege.  He  did  submit,  as  is  evident  from
the  tribute  which,  Sennacherib  says,  was  sent  after  him
to  Nineveh.  It  amounted  to  30  talents  of  gold,  800
talents  of  silver,  and  an  enormous  amount  of  precious
stones  and  palace  furniture, besides  Hezekiah's  daughters,
his  eunuchs,  musicians,  etc.  Sennacherib's  account  of
the  submission  seems  to  imply  that  it  was  the  I'rbi,
Arabs  whom  Hezekiah  had  received  into  the  city  to
strengthen  it,  who  really  gave  in,  and  so  forced  the
king  to  submit.  They  may  have  been  a  garrison  from
Meluhha.  These  events  are  recorded  on  Cylinder  B,
which  is  dated  in  the  Eponymy  of  Mitunu,  700  B.C.
That  the  account  is  complete  no  one  can  pretend.  It
makes  no  mention  of  Lachish,  although  the  celebrated
scene  of  Sennacherib  receiving  the  submission  of  that
city  shows  the  great  importance  attached  by  him  to  its
capture.  Whether  Lachish  was  one  of  the  forty-six
great  fortresses,  or  not,  it  seems  probable,  as  it  was
only  10  m.  or  so  from  Eltekeh,  that  it  was  captured  in
this  expedition.

What  was  the  exact  nature  of  Bel-ibnl's  fault  we  do
not  know  ;  but  Merodach-baladan's  activity  in  the  Sea-
land  and  the  unrest  of  Marduk-us£zib  in  Chaldasa
caused  Sennacherib  to  attack  the  southern  portion  of

4364


SENNACHERIB

Babylonia.  His  principal  enemies  fled.  Merodach-
baladan,  with  his  gods,  escaped  by  ship  to  Nagitu  on
the  Elamite  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf ;  but  his  brothers
and  the  rest  of  his  people,  whom  he  had  left  in  Bit
Yakin,  were  taken  captives.  Sennacherib  added  15,000
bowmen  and  15,000  pikemen  from  these  countries  to
his  army.  This  was  in  700  B.C.  Sennacherib  calls  it
his  '  fourth  campaign.'

Sennacherib  now  seems  to  have  considered  his  empire
thoroughly  subdued,  for  he  embarked  on  a  fancy  ex-
nth  pedition,  what  he  himself  calls  his  fifth
campaign.  It  can  have  brought  little
ca  p  g  .  profit(  but  ne  dwells  upon  it  with  evident
pride  and  delight.  Some  of  the  mountain  districts  of
Cilicia,  peopled  by  the  Tamurru,  Sarmu,  Ezama,  Kipsu,
Halbuda,  Kua,  Kana,  dwelling  in  cities  perched  like
birds'  nests  on  Mount  Nipur,  '  were  not  submissive  to
my  yoke.'  So,  pitching  his  camp  at  the  foot  of  Mount
Nipur,  with  his  bodyguards  and  picked  warriors  he  scaled
the  mountain  peaks,  leading  the  attack  in  person,  '  like  a
mighty  bull.'  He  goes  on  to  describe  the  hardships  of
this  raid  in  a  way  that  shows  his  own  love  of  fight
ing.  Then  he  turned  to  Mania,  king  of  Ukki,  at
the  Mount  Anara  and  Uppa  ;  then  against  parts  of
Cilicia,  Tulgarimmu,  and  the  borders  of  Tabal.  Every
where  he  succeeded,  pillaged,  burnt,  and  destroyed.
This  seems  to  have  been  in  699  B.C.  Although  there
seems  to  have  been  small  value  in  this  move,  Berossus
seems  to  have  known  of  Sennacherib's  war  in  Cilicia
and  ascribes  to  him  the  foundation  of  Tarsus.

In  his  sixth  campaign  Sennacherib  struck  out  a  com
pletely  new  plan.  Merodach-baladan's  elusive  tactics
had  repeatedly  foiled  his  enemy.  He  had  taken  to  the
ships,  for  which  the  Chaldaeans  were  famous,  and  escaped
to  Nagitu,  whither  Sennacherib  could  not  follow.  Now
Sennacherib  determined  to  strike  him  even  there.  So
he  set  his  captives  from  the  Phoenician  coasts,  skilled
shipbuilders,  to  build  ships  at  Nineveh.  These  he  took
down  the  Tigris  to  Opis,  dragged  them  overland  to  the
Arahtu  canal,  and  floated  them  on  the  Euphrates  at
Bit  Dakkuri.  He  then  embarked  his  bodyguards  and
picked  warriors,  stocked  the  ships  with  provisions  for
_the  men  and  fodder  for  the  horses,  and  sent  them  down
the  river,  while  he  inarched  beside  them  on  land,  as
far  as  Bab  Salimiti.  The  fleet  stretched  on  the  shore
of  the  river  to  the  shore  of  the  Gulf,  'two  kaspu.'  At
the  mouth  of  the  river  Sennacherib  seems  to  have  stayed
behind.  He  sent  on  his  fleet,  however,  and  after  five  days
and  nights  they  reached  a  point  where  he  caused  sacri
fices  to  be  offered  to  Ea,  god  of  the  ocean,  and  threw  a
gold  ship,  a  gold  fish,  and  an  alluttu  of  gold  into  the
sea.  The  landing  at  Nagitu  was  opposed  and  the  shore
was  difficult  ;  but  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ulai,  where  the
shore  was  practicable,  a  landing  was  effected  and
Sennacherib's  army  swarmed  out  of  the  ships  '  like
locusts.'  The  Chaldaeans  were  utterly  routed,  Nagitu,
Nagitu  Dihibina,  Hilmu,  Pillatu,  Hupapanu,  Elamite
cities,  were  captured.  The  gods  of  Bit  Yakin  that  had
been  carried  there,  the  people,  with  a  number  of  Elam-
ites,  and  immense  booty,  were  brought  back  to  Senna
cherib  at  Bab  Salimiti.  Sennacherib  added  to  his  army
30,500  bowmen,  30,500  pikemen.  The  rest  of  the  spoil
he  distributed  among  his  warriors.

In  this  campaign  Sennacherib  had  violated  the  terri
tory  of  Elam.  Istar-hundu  of  Elam  had  never  crossed
swords  with  Sennacherib  since  the  defeat  of  his  army
sent  to  support  Merodach-baladan.  Probably  he  was
regarded  by  the  more  warlike  spirits  in  Elam  as  pusillani
mous.  At  any  rate  in  699  B.C.  his  brother  Hallusu
imprisoned  him  and  took  the  rule  in  Elam.  How  long
Sennacherib  was  occupied  over  his  preparations  for  the
extirpation  of  Merodach-baladan  is  not  clear;  but  it
was  in  693  B.C.  that  he  pillaged  Nagitu,  Hilmu,  Pillatu,
and  Hupapanu.  This  invasion  was  at  once  revenged
by  Hallusu.  While  Sennacherib  was  triumphing  in  the
S. ,  the  king  of  Elam  made  a  raid  into  Babylonia,  cap-

4365


SENNACHERIB

tured  Sippara,  slew  its  people,  defeated  Asur-nadin-sum
and  carried  him  captive  to  Elam,  whence  he  seems
never  to  have  returned.  The  king  of  Elam  then  set
Nergal-usezib  on  the  throne  of  Babylon.  Nergal-usezib
at  once  set  to  work,  evidently  assisted  by  Elamite  troops,
to  occupy  the  country  in  Sennacherib's  rear.  In  Tam-
muz  he  occupied  Nippur.  He  attacked  Erech  and
pillaged  its  gods  and  people.  His  Elamite  allies  carried
off  the  gods  and  people.  This  was  on  the  first  of
Tesritu  ;  but  on  the  seventh  he  met  the  victorious  army
of  Sennacherib  returning  from  the  S.  and  was  defeated,
captured,  and  carried  off  to  Assyria,  after  a  reign  of  a
year  and  six  months.  This  was  in  693  B.C.  At  the
end  of  this  year  Hallusu  of  Elam  was  killed  in  a  revolu
tion  and  was  succeeded  by  Kudur-nahundi.  Senna
cherib  is  silent  as  to  the  troubles  in  Babylonia  and  the
fate  of  Asur-nadin-sum.  But  he  appends  to  the  account
of  the  sixth  expedition  the  statement  that  on  his  return
he  defeated  and  captured  Suzub,  son  of  Gahul,  who  had
seated  himself  on  the  throne  of  Babylon.  He  ascribes
this  revolution  to  the  Babylonians,  who  had  fled  with
Merodach-baladan  to  Elam,  and  had  returned  thence
to  Babylon.  Sennacherib  then  sent  an  army  against
the  Elamite  auxiliaries  while  he  apparently  pursued  his
way  to  Assyria.  His  army  defeated  that  of  Elam  and
slew  the  king  of  Elam's  son.

It  was  clear  that  Sennacherib  could  not  pass  over
such  conduct  as  Elam  had  shosvn.  In  his  '  seventh
campaign,'  Sennacherib  raided  the  land.  He  claims
to  have  captured  thirty-four  fortified  cities  and  an  end
less  number  of  smaller  towns,  '  the  smoke  of  their
burning  lay  over  the  land  like  a  cloud. '  But  Kudur-
nahhundi  would  not  meet  the  invader,  who  seems  only
to  have  ravaged  the  lowlands.  Sennacherib  states  that
the  king  of  Elam  returned  to  Madaktu,  a  mountain
fortress.  Thither  Sennacherib  determined  to  follow  and
root  him  out.  Kudur-nahhundi  abandoned  Madaktu
and  fled  to  Hidalu,  a  remote  mountain  fastness.  Sen
nacherib  attacked  Madaktu  ;  but  in  the  hills  \vinter
came  on  so  fast  and  the  storms  were  so  severe  that  he
could  not  press  the  assault,  and  returned  to  Nineveh.
Kudur-nahhundi  did  not  survive  more  than  three
months,  and  was  succeeded  by  a  brother  Umman-
minanu,  whom  Sennacherib  regarded  as  a  man  without
sense  or  prudence.

Sennacherib  with  his  plunder-laden  army  had  passed
Babylon  by  on  his  return  from  the  S. ,  and  though  he
had  captured  its  king  NeYgal-usezib  at  Nippur  and
driven  the  Elamites  out  of  Babylonia,  and  subsequently
raided  Elam,  he  had  not  yet  entered  the  capital.
Doubtless  his  first  efforts  had  been  directed  to  an
attempt  to  recover  his  son  from  Elam,  and  the  place
was  hateful  to  him.  Now,  when  he  would  enter
Babylon,  he  found  that  the  inhabitants  had  made
themselves  a  new  king,  Musezib-Marduk,  another
Chaldasan.  He  is  credited  with  reigning  four  years —
692-88  B.C.  Sennacherib  calls  him  a  felon  who  had
fled  from  the  prefect  of  Lahiri  and  had  collected  a
band  of  murderers  and  robbers,  and  taken  reluge  in
the  marshes.  When  surrounded  by  Sennacherib  before,
he  managed  to  escape  to  Elam  ;  but  when  he  found
there  only  danger  and  trouble,  he  had  come  back  to
Babylon  and  there  found  means  to  secure  the  throne.
He  broke  open  the  treasure-house  of  Marduk's  temple
and  sent  a  bribe  to  Umman-minanu.  The  latter  giving
no  heed  to  the  fate  which  Sennacherib  had  brought
upon  Elam  in  his  last  campaign,  received  the  bribe  and
assembled  an  immense  army,  drawn  not  only  from  Elam,
but  also  from  many  lands  which  had  once  acknowledged
Assyrian  power.  It  is  interesting  to  note  Parsua,  Anzan
(afterwards  the  land  of  Cyrus),  Ellipi,  Lahiru,  Pukudu,
Gambulu ;  also  Samuna,  son  of  Merodach-baladan.
The  forces  reached  Babylon  and  effected  a  junction  with
Musgzib-Marduk.  It  was  the  greatest  coalition  that
had  yet  faced  Sennacherib.  In  his  eighth  campaign  he
met  them  at  Halul£  on  the  Tigris,  and  the  chronicler

4366


SENNACHERIB


SENNACHERIB


waxes  eloquent  over  the  immense  array  that  faced  the
Assyrian  army.  They  were  '  like  a  great  swarm '  of
locusts.  '  The  dust  of  their  feet  was  like  a  heavy  storm
cloud  which  spreads  over  the  wide  heaven  about  to
break  in  downpour.'  The  account  of  the  battle  given
by  Sennacherib  is  a  masterpiece  of  description,  but  too
long  to  quote.  He  claims  to  have  defeated  his  enemies
with  tremendous  slaughter  and  terrible  butchery.  The
Babylonian  Chronicle,  however,  claims  the  victory  for
Elam.  At  any  rate  Sennacherib  returned  to  Nineveh  for
a  time.  It  is  not  clear  in  which  year  the  battle  occurred  ;
perhaps  it  was  in  691  B.C.  In  689  B.C.  (Xisan  the  I5th),
Umman-rninanu  had  a  stroke  of  paralysis  and  lost  his
speech.  Sennacherib  seized  the  opportunity  to  attack
Babylon,  which  was  without  Elamite  assistance.  On
the  first  of  Kislimu  the  city  was  taken,  Musezib-
Marduk  was  carried  away  captive  to  Assyria,  Marduk
himself  was  taken  to  Asur.  Babylon  was  sacked,
its  walls  razed  to  the  ground,  the  greater  portion
of  the  houses  burnt,  its  inhabitants  driven  out,  or  de
ported,  and  the  waters  of  the  Euphrates  turned  over
the  site.  For  eight  years  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  and
Ptolemy's  Canon  write  the  city  down  as  '  kingless. '

Some  time  after  this  Sennacherib  made  an  expedition
to  Arabia.  This  we  learn  from  a  notice  by  Esarhaddon.
Aduma  was  captured  and  the  gods  carried  off  to  Assyria.
Winckler  sees  in  this  an  excuse  for  postulating  a  second
expedition  of  Sennacherib  to  the  \V. ,  at  any  rate  to
Arabia  and  Egypt.  Several  fragmentary  inscriptions
have  been  published  which  are  consistent  with  the
supposition  that  there  is  a  cylinder  at  least  partly  pre
served,  which  narrated  events  occurring  after  688  B.C.
There  is  no  means,  however,  of  dating  the  events  until
the  remaining  historical  inscriptions  are  published.  The
reference  to  Azekah,  noted  by  Hommel,  may  belong  to
the  reign  of  Sargon.  Xo  convincing  evidence  from
cuneiform  sources  is  available  to  support  a  second
expedition  of  Sennacherib  to  the  W.  All  sources  are
silent  as  to  the  last  eight  years  of  his  reign.

Sennacherib was the maker of NINEVEH (q.v.}.

His inscriptions are very  full on the subject of  his

great  buildings  there. Some  think  that  it

*'  y  Y?e was  with  a  view  to  make  Nineveh  supreme

details.  that  he  humh]ed  Babylon  so  completely  ;
but  the  trouble  it  had  given  him  and  the  memory  of
his  son  amply  account  for  his  policy.

Besides  Asur-nadin-sum,  king  of  Babylon,  699-693
B.C.,  doubtless  Sennacherib's  eldest  son,  we  know  of  a
son  Ardi-B^-lit,  crown  prince  in  Nineveh,  in  694  B.C.;
Asur-suni-usabsi,  a  son  for  whom  Sennacherib  built  a
palace  at  Scherif  Khan  ;  Nergal-sum-(usur?),  named  in
693  B.C.  ;  Sar-etir-Asur,  whom  Winckler  would  make  the
Sharezer  of  2  K.  19s?;  and  ESARHADDON  (q.v. ),  who
succeeded  him.  The  mother  of  Esarhaddon  seems  to
have  borne  the  names  Zakutu  and  Nakia.  For  an
account  of  a  jewel  belonging  to  this  queen,  see  Scheil,
Rec.  dcs  Trav.,  and  see  the  article  ESARHADDON  for
her  role  as  regent  in  Assyria.  Her  sister  was  called
Abirami.  Sennacherib  also  left  a  daughter  called
Matte.

Sennacherib  was  murdered  by  his  son,  according  to
the  Babylonian  Chronicle,  and  the  Canon  Lists,  on  the
aoth  of  Tebetu,  682  B.C.  On  the  biblical  account  of
the  murder,  see  ADRAMMELECH,  SHAREZER,  and

NlSROCH.  C.  H.  W.  J.

With  regard  to  the  history  of  the  relations  between
Sennacherib  and  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  th'_-re  is  much
difference  of  opinion. The  chief  points


5.  Relations
with  Judah.


in  dispute  are  (i)  whether  the Hebrew


narratives,  except  where  they  coincide
with  the  cuneiform  record,  can  be  used  at  all  for
historical  purposes,  and  (2)  whether  these  narratives,  if
based  upon  facts,  relate  to  one  period,  or  to  two,  in
the  reign  of  Sennacherib.  That  the  first  of  the  three
portions,  into  which  Stade  and  his  successors  have
analysed  the  Hebiew  record,  agrees  in  the  main  with

4367


the  cuneiform  record,  is  obvious.  That  portion  con
sists  of  barely  four  verses  (2  K.  1813^  [from  n^yj-16),
and  probably  comes  from  the  royal  annals  of  Judah.
It  states  (so  too  Is.  36 1^)  that  Sennacherib  took
'all'  the  fortified  cities  of  Judah  (Sennacherib  himself
says  forty-six),  and  exacted  a  heavy  tribute  from  Heze-
kiah  as  the  price  of  forgiveness  ;  two  points  of  differ
ence  in  the  respective  accounts,  (i)  as  to  the  amount  of
the  tribute,1  and  (2)  as  to  the  place  to  which  the
tribute  was  sent  (Lachish?  Nineveh?),  need  not  be
dwelt  upon.  The  second  and  the  third  portion  (i.e. ,
ISiy-lQga  and  36 f.  199^-35),  however,  contain  several
statements  which  are  unconfirmed  by  Sennacherib.2
Thus  (i)  in  2  K.  19g  (Is.  37g) — i.e.,  in  the  second
narrative — we  are  told  that  Tirhakah  took  the  field
against  Sennacherib,  and  it  is  implied  that  this  stood
in  close  relation  to  the  withdrawal  of  Sennacherib  from
Palestine.  (2)  2  K.  19ss  (Is.  37 36)  tells  us  that  185,000
men  in  the  Assyrian  army  were  destroyed  in  one  night
by  pestilence — the  explanation  which  the  third  narrative
gives  of  the  failure  of  Sennacherib's  invasion  of  Judah.
(3)  2  K.  198  (Is.  378)  speaks  of  Sennacherib  as  engaged
in  the  siege  of  Libnah  when  the  news  respecting  Tir
hakah  reached  him — i.e.,  the  third  narrative  gives  the
prominence  to  Libnah  which  the  first  and  the  second  (see
2  K.  18 14  17  Is.  3(3a)  give  to  Lachish.  The  first  and  the
second  of  these  statements  are  commonly  supposed  to
be  confirmed  by  the  legend  in  Herod.  2141,  that  when
Zaj>axapt/3os,  king  of  the  Arabians  and  Assyrians,
invaded  Egypt  and  besieged  Pelusium  in  the  days  of
the  pious  king  Sethos,  field-mice  gnawed  the  quivers
and  shield-handles  of  the  invaders,  who  precipitately
fled.  Even  Winckler  and  Prasek  accept  this  view,  and
they  find  in  the  passage  of  Herodotus  a  support  for
their  theory  (which  is  accepted  by  Guthe  \liesch.  205]
and  Benzinger)  that  Sennacherib  made  a  second  expedi
tion  to  S.  Palestine  and  NW.  Arabia  (in  the  course  of
which  he  actually  besieged  Jerusalem)  some  time  between
690  and  68 1,  which  is  referred  to  in  the  third  narrative,
whilst  the  second  narrative  relates  to  the  expedition  of
701,  in  the  course  of  which  Jerusalem  was  only  blockaded,
not  besieged.

We  shall  do  well  in  considering  this  theory  to  put
aside  altogether  the  material  in  the  second  and  the  third
Hebrew  narrative,  for  a  close  examination  of  them
clearly  shows  that  they  are  parallel.  The  two  narra
tives  are  no  doubt  inconsistent  in  some  respects  ;  but
upon  the  whole  they  interlace  and  are  mutually  comple
mentary.  All  depends,  therefore,  on  the  justice  of  the
inference  drawn  from  Herod.  2 141.  Prasek3  conceives
himself  to  have  shown  that  the  St'thos  of  Herodotus  is
no  other  than  Tirhakah.  That  Egypt  was  a  member
of  the  coalition  against  Sennacherib  is  shown  by  the
presence  of  '  kings  of  Egypt '  at  the  battle  of  Altaku
(Schr.  KAT1®  302  f. ),  and  the  designation  of  Zavo-
Xapt/3os  as  '  king  of  the  Arabians  and  Assyrians '  is
thought  to  be  a  record  of  the  fact  (?)  that  after  his
successes  against  the  NW.  Arabian  tribes  Sennacherib
assumed  the  title  of  '  king  of  Arabia '  ;  lastly,  the
mouse  is  said  to  be  the  symbol  of  pestilence.  The
objection  is  threefold,  (i)  As  Winckler  has  shown,  it
was  the  kings  of  Musri  (D"ISD).  not  of  Egypt  (onsc),
who  fought  at  Altaku;  (2)  We  have  no  occasion  to
assume  that  '  Sethos  '  is  written  in  error  for  '  Tirhakah  '  ;
and  (3)  there  is  no  trustworthy  evidence  that  a  mouse  is
the  symbol  of  pestilence  (see  HEZEKIAH,  §  2,  col.
20^9).  The  second  of  these  criticisms  may  need  some
explanation.  The  reason  why  scholars  equate  Sethos
with  Tirhakah  is  simply  that  Herodotus  gives  his
Arabian  and  Assyrian  king  the  name  of  Zacaxa/"/8oy.
But  how  if  Herodotus  or  his  informant  has  made  a
confusion?  And  how  if  the  king  of  Egypt  really  in-


1  See  Winckler,  in  KATV)  342.

2  Cp  Intr.  Is.  229  ff.
3  Forschungen  zur  Gesch.  des  Alt.  2  n-zi.

4368


SENUAH


SEPHARAD


tended  was  Seti  (the  natural  equivalent  of  Sethos)  ? As
Brugsch  relates  :  l  —

'  The  wars  of  Seti  towards  the  E.  began  in  the  first  year  of
his  reign.  The  scene  of  them  was  the  districts  and  the  fortresses
on  the  territory  of  the  Shasu,  or  Bedouin,  "from  the  fortress
Khetam,  in  the  land  of  Zalu,  to  the  place  Kan'ana."  .  .  .  The
fortress  Kan'ana  was  stormed  by  Seti  and  his  warriors,  and  so
Pharaoh  became  the  lord  of  the  entire  Edomite  Negeb.'

The  name  of  the  Shasu  chief  is  not  given  us.  It  is
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  popular  tradition
caught  up  by  Herodotus  spoke  of  '  the  chieftain  of  the
Arabian  Shasu,'  and  that  this  became  to  Herodotus'
ears,  '  [Sennacherib]  the  king  of  the  Arabians  and
Assyrians.  '

The  result,  so  far  attained,  is  that  the  only  historical
accounts  of  the  campaign  of  Sennacherib  against  Judah
and  its  capital  are  to  be  found  in  the  cuneiform  inscrip
tions  of  Sennacherib  and  in  the  short  extract  from  the
Annals  of  Judah  (2  K.  18i33-i6).  But  how  is  the  rest
of  the  Hebrew  narrative  to  be  accounted  for  ?  We  are
not  bound  to  answer  the  question  here  at  length  ;  but
some  suggestions  must  be  given.  According  to  Marti
(/es.  259),  the  subject  of  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem
from  Sennacherib  attracted  imaginative  and  didactic
writers.  This,  indeed,  is  about  all  that  we  could
venture  to  say,  as  the  text  of  the  Hebrew  narrative  now
stands.  But  it  is  not  all  that  we  can  say,  if  we  give  due
weight  to  critical  considerations.  We  must  not  ex
aggerate  the  imaginativeness  of  later  Hebrew  writers,
but  rather  dig  deep  down  for  the  fragments  of  genuine
tradition  in  their  works.  This  is  by  no  means  a  hopeless
task  because  we  know  that  the  two  powers  constantly
present  to  the  minds  of  the  peoples  of  Israel  and  of
Judah  were  N.  Arabia  and  Assyria  ;  the  works  of  the
prophets  of  the  '  Assyrian  age  '  prove  this  conclusively.
We  have,  therefore,  something  to  direct  and  restrain  us
in  our  application  of  text-critical  methods.  Now  in
the  account  of  the  national  extinction  of  Judah  two
invasions  appear  to  be  combined,  an  Assyrian  and  a  N.
Arabian.  This  leads  us  to  suppose  that  such  may  have
been  the  case  in  2  K.  18  13-]  9  37.  The  king  who  invaded
Judah  may  have  been  a  king  of  Meluhha  —  the  same  who
sent  troops  to  fight  against  Sennacherib  at  Altaku,  —  •
and  the  Cush,  whose  king  interfered  with  the  invader's
progress,  may  have  been  the  N.  Arabian  Cush  (friendly
to  Judah?).  The  names  Sennacherib  and  Tirhakah
may  be  explained  on  the  analogy  of  the  erroneous
^avaxdpLfios  of  Herodotus.

The  pestilence,  if  at  all  historical,  may  have  attacked  the  N.
Arabian  army.  '  Nineveh,'  as  in  some  other  passages,  may
have  come  from  '  Jerahmeel,'  '  Nisroch  '  from  '  Nimrod,  '  Adram-
melech  '  from  'Jerahmeel,'  and  'Ararat'  (as  in  Gen.  84)  from
'Aram'  —  i.e.,  'Jerahmeel.'  The  object  of  the  Asshurite  or  N.
Arabian  invasion  would  be  to  form  one  strong  united  empire  in
opposition  to  Assyria.  It  may  be  added  that  the  much-disputed
and  badly  transmitted  prophecy  in  Is.  I2'2i-ij  refers  most  prob
ably,  not  to  an  Assyrian,  but  to  an  Asshurite  siege  of  the  Judahite
capital  (see  VISION,  VALLEY  OF,  and  Crit.  Bib.).

It  may  be  urged  in  objection  to  these  conclusions  that  fresh
inscriptions  of  Sennacherib  are  not  past  hoping  for.  That  is
true  ;  but  these  inscriptions  will  not  supersede  the  Hebrew
traditions.  To  attempt  to  write  the  history  of  the  Israelites
simply  on  the  basis  of  the  uncriticised  Hebrew  texts  and  the  un-
criticised  Assyrian  inscriptions  would  be  a  very  grave  mistake.

G.  Smith's  History  of  Sennacherib  gives  the  chief  events  with

the  original  texts. For  additional  small  items  of  information

see the Histories of Assyria, especially

6.  Literature. Winckler's GBA, R. W. Rogers'  History

of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  Winckler's  A  OF,

flxssiiit,  and Assyrian  Deeds  and  Documents,  passim.

c.  H.W.  j.,  §§  1-4,  6  ;  T.  K.  c.,  §  5.

SENUAH  (riN-IJp),  Xeh.  119  ;  in  83.  HASSENAAH.


SEORIM  (D'ny'),  the  name  borne  by  one  of  the
(post-exilic)  priestly  courses:  i  Ch.  248  (ceoopeiM
[BL],  -PIN  [A]).

SEPARATION.  On  the  water  of  separation  (*O
rn3),  RVmtr-  'water  of  impurity,'  Nu.  199.^,  see  CLEAN
AND  UNCLEAN,  §  17.

On  the  separation  of  the  Xazirite  see  NAZIRITE.

1  Gesch.  sEgyptetis,  458-460  ;  cp  EGYPT,  §  57.
4369


SEPHAR  pEp;  CCO^HRA  [AEL])  is  mentioned
in  Gen.  10  30  as  one  of  the  boundaries  of  the  territory
of  the  sons  of  Joktan.  It  has  not  been  identified  with
certainty.  The  usual  identification—  a  very  appropriate
one  —  is  with  the  aaw<papa,  aatfiap  of  Ptolemy,  Pliny,  and
the  Periplus  (i.e.,  the  ancient  Himyarite  capital  Zafar)  ;
this  again  is  held  by  Karl  Ritter,  Gesenius,  etc.,  to  be
the  same  with  the  seaport  of  Hadramaut,  near  Mirbat,
the  name  being  now  pronounced  Isfar  or  Isfdr.  The
possibility  of  this  may  be  granted  ;  but  it  is  still  uncertain
(s,ee  Di.  Ge>i.(6\  201;  Del.  Gen.  [1887],  228).  'The
mountain  of  the  East  '  is  too  general  an  expression  to
give  precision  to  the  undefined  geographical  terms  of
this  verse.  [On  the  textual  criticism  and  the  meaning
of  Gen.  1030  see  further  GOLD,  §  i  (c),  PAKVAIM.]

[See  also  Ritter,  ErMunefe,  14372;  Tuch,  Gen.W  212;
Sprenger,  A  lie  Geogr.  ran  Arabien,  185  ;  Glaser,  Skizze,  2437;
Bent,  Southern  Arabia  (1900);  A.  H.  Keane,  The  Gold  of
Ophir,  70.  From  Prof.  Keane  we  quote  the  following  lines  ;
his  work  only  appeared  as  the  article  OPHIR  was  passing  through
the  press.  '  Dhufar  [-Zafar],  as  Bent  tells  us,  forms  a  sort  of
oasis,  an  extremely  rich  alluvial  plain,  extending  some  sixty
miles  along  the  coast  a  little  to  the  W.  of  the  Kuria  Muria
islands,  and  cut  off  by  the  Gara  range  from  the  sandy  wastes  of
Hadramout.  Here  still  flourish  both  the  myrrh  and  the  frank
incense  shrub,  which  have  constituted  the  chief  industry  of  the
inhabitants  for  thousands  of  years.  .  .  .  The  harbour  of  Moscha,
now  nearly  blocked  by  a  sandbank,  is  still  deep,  and  extends
inland  about  a  mile  and  a  half,  and  there  are  many  ruins  about
it.  Here  we  have  the  Portus  Nobilis  of  the  Periplus'  (70  f.\
Here  Prof.  Keane  would  place  'the  elusive  Ophir.'  Moscha
'was  in  fact  the  port  of  Ophir,  which  itself  stood  a  little  inland,
round  about  the  head  of  the  inlet,  which  Bent  tells  us  is  sur
rounded  by  many  ruins  and  was  reached  "  from  Mesha  as  thou
goest  into  Sephar  "  '  (82).]  f.  B.  —  T.  K.  C.

SEPHARAD (TIED, in pause  for T)Sp [BUB]?

'


[Cja]  ;  Vg.  [in]  Bosphoro,  as  if  the  prefixed  i  were
radical).  If  the  text  is  right,  a  place  or  country  in
which  Jewish  captives  from  Jerusalem  resided  when
Obad.  15-21  was  written  (Obad.  20).  That  Sepharad
(or  Sephared?)  is  not  Spain1  (Tg.  Jon.  I'esh.  ),  nor
Sipar,  or  some  other  Babylonian  city  (Schr.  KA  7W
285  ;  cp  von  der  Hardt,  De  Sipphara  Babylonia  [1708])
need  not  now  be  shown.  Schrader  in  KAT^  445/.
identifies  it  with  Saparda,  a  region  in  SW  Media
towards  Babylonia  mentioned  by  Sargon  (cp  KGF
116-119).  This  view  is  also  accepted  as  most  probable
by  Fried.  Delitzsch  (Par.  249)  and  G.  A.  Smith
(  Twelve  Prophets,  2  176)  ;  it  harmonises  with  the  theory
that  vv.  io(is)-2i  are  to  be  referred  to  the  time  of  the
'Babylonian  exile."2  But  it  is  also  possible  to  identify
Sepharad  with  (^'parda,  a  province  of  the  Persian  empire
mentioned  in  two  inscriptions  of  Darius  between
Cappadocia  and  Ionia,  and  in  a  third  (Behistun)  at  the
head  of  the  list  of  provinces,  immediately  before  Ionia.3
In  the  Seleucidan  chronicles  from  Babylonia  this  name
is  applied  to  Asia  Minor  as  a  whole.  According  to
Winckler,  the  origin  of  the  Jewish  captivitv  of  Asia
Minor  is  to  be  referred  to  168  B.C.  (Antiochus
Epiphanes)  ;  if,  however,  the  tradition  of  a  captivity
under  Artaxerxes  Ochus  is  historical,  this  period  will
naturally  deserve  the  preference.  W.  R.  Smith  remarks,4
'  Lydia  was  a  great  slave-market,  and  Asia  Minor  was
a  chief  seat  of  the  Diaspora  at  an  early  date  (cp
Gutschmid,  Neue  Be  itr.  77).'

The  text  of-  Obad.  20,  however,  is  very  far  from  trustworthy,
and  the  context  does  not  favour  the  view  that  any  distant  place
of  captivity  or  indeed  (see  OISADIAH,  §  5)  any  place  of  captivity
at  all  is  referred  to.  We  expect  some  part  of  the  Negeb  to  be
mentioned.  It  is  not  too  bold  to  take  -n3D  as  a  dittographed
rt2"l!i-5  This  is  confirmed  by  (B's  reading  «t>p*da.  (so  the  Ar.

1  From  Sepharad  thus  explained  comes  Sephardim,  the  name
of  the  Jews  of  Spanish  origin.

2  Knudtzon  (.-iss.  Gebete.  nos. 8, n, 30)  has  also found a
Saparda,  NE.  from  Nineveh,  spoken  of  in  Esarhaddon's  time.

>  So  Silv.  de  Sacy,  Pusey,  W.  R.  Smith  (see  col.  3454).  Sayce
(Crit.  Man.  483),  Cheyne  (Founders,  312  /),  Wi.  ^^'2430.
Lassen  even  connected  the  name  Sardis  with  ^parda.

4  EBW,  art.  'Obadiah.'

'  Cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Ezek.  27  14  (nnis).  That  'D  in  Obad.  is
corrupt  is  recognised  by  Wellhausen  and  Nowack.

4370


SEPHARVAIM

version). 'Zarephathites  '  was  a  synonym  for  '  Jerahmeelites."
See  OUADIAH,  §  5  end,  n.  i.  •]-.  K.  C.


SEPHARVAIM lD\1"lBD  ; variously  ceTTd><\peiM.

-IN,  -eiN.  -OYAIM.  -OY&IN,  OYM&IN  [2  K.  1834,  B],

1  OT 'OyN-  ce4>({>ApOY<MM,  -OY&IN,  -OYN.

references. £TTI(l>ApOY<M/v\, endx  , eTT<}>&peNi.

6/V\4>ApiN cerrd>ApOYeM). whence  the

gentilic Sepharvites  (D*pDpn, 2  K.  17  3ia, Kt. in

v.  316  D^ISD). The  references  to  a  place,  or  places,

called 'Sepharvaim' are  in 2  K.  17z4 (cp 31), 1834

(  =  Is.  8619), 19  M  (  =  Is.  37i3). Taking  the  passages

as they stand, in contexts relating to the political

intercourse between Assyria  and Israel  or  Judah, \ve

may  venture  to  explain  them  provisionally  as  follows,

reserving  our  own  judgment  to  the  end.

1.  The  passage  2  K.  1832^-35  (Is.  8618-20),  which  is
plainly  an  interpolation  (see  Marti,  and  cp  Intr.  Is.  218),
seems  to  be  based  on  2  K.  19i3  (Is.  37  13),  which  may
refer  to  the  Syrian  city  called  in  the  Babylonian  Chronicle
Sabarain, which was destroyed by Shalmaneser IV.
(see  SIBKAIM).

2.  The  Sepharvaim  of  2  K.  172431  (in  which  passages
captives  of  war  appear  to  be  referred  to),  however,  is
more plausibly identified  l with  Sipar, or  Sippar, the
city of Samas the sun-god (StTr^apa, Ptol.  5  18  ;
2.nnrapr)i'£>i' TroXts, Abyden. ap. Eus.  Pr(sp. Ev.^^-C],
famous from its  association  with the  Deluge-story  as
given  by  Berossus,  and  regarded  as  one  of  the  mahazi
rabuti, or 'great capitals."2 This place  was one of
the  three  cities  which  maintained  the  great  Babylonian
revolt  against  Asur-bani-pal  the  longest. It  was  on  the

2  Assvrioloeical  lcft  or  eastern  bank  of  the  Euphrates  ;
i.  Assyri.  logical  th  k  identified  with  the

evidence.  , r  .  ,

mounds  of  Abu  Habba,  about  16  m.

SE.  of  Baghdad,  by  the  explorer  H.  Rassam,  who
found  here  a  large  stone  with  a  representation  of  the
shrine  of  Samas  and  short  inscriptions,  dating  from  the
time  of  king  Nabu-abla-iddina  (about  800  B.C.).  The
builder  of  the  temple  was  Naram-sin  (about  3750  B.C.),
whose  original  inscription  was  found  by  Xabu-na'id
(about  490  B.C.),  one  of  the  royal  restorers  of  the
sanctuary.  The  temple  was  held  in  high  honour  ;  one
of  the  most  constant  titles  of  Samas  was,  '  the  great
lord,  dwelling  in  E-bara,  which  is  within  Sipar'
(Pinches,  TSRA  8  b  164  /!  ).  But  there  was  also  a
second  divinity,  called  Anunit,  who  was  specially
worshipped  at  Sipar.  In  the  Synchronous  History
(2iS-2i),  Durkurigalzu  is  said  to  have  conquered  Sipar
of  Samas  and  Sipar  of  Anunitu  (fCfiligg;  Sayce,
TSBA2iji);  the  Anunitu  referred  to  was  the  consort
of  the  sun  -god.  We  must  not,  however,  use  this
statement  to  confirm  Schrader's  (very  natural)  explana
tion  of  AXAMMKI.KCH  (2  K.  l?3i)  as  =  Anu-malku,
for  if  Anu  (the  heaven-god)  were  designated  'king'
in  Assyria,  the  word  used  would  not  be  malku  (  '  prince  '  )
but  sarru.

Dr.  W.  H.  \Vnrd(Proc.  Am.  Or.  Soc.,  1885,  pp.  zgf.  )
thought  that  he  had  found  the  site  of  a  double  city  of
Sipar  (Sepharvaim,  dual?)  at  the  mod.  el-Anbar,  a  few
miles  from  Sufeira,  WNW.  of  Baghdad,  where,  from
the  appearance  of  the  ruins,  it  is  evident  that  a  canal
was  conducted  from  the  Euphrates  into  the  heart  of  the
city.  Dr.  Ward  found  there  a  small  tablet  on  which
three  or  four  Sipars  were  mentioned,  and  he  supposed
'Anbar  to  represent  at  once  Sipar  sa  Anunitum  and
Agan6  (Peters,  Nippur,  1  176  355  [Dr.  Ward's  diary]).
If  so,  Sipar  sa  Anunitum  was  a  more  considerable  city
than  Sipar  of  Samas  (Abu  Habba).  But  we  can  hardly
admit  that  the  duality  of  the  city  which  lies  under  the
mound  of  el-Anbar  is  made  out.  Most  probably  the
form  Sepharvaim  is  erroneous.  Either  the  editor  con
founded  'Sipar'  with  the  'Sepharvaim1  of  2  K.I  9  13,
or,  as  Haupt  proposes,  we  should  restore  the  reading

1  E.e.,  by  Wi.  Alt.  Unt,  101  ;  Benzinger,  KHC,  Kdn.  175.
2  SeeWi.  AOF2*,2o.

4371


SBRAH

D'D  ISO  (or  nsp),  Sipar  (or,  Sippar)  -maim  l  —  i.e.  ,  '  Sipar
on  the  stream.'  Cp  the  phrase  '  the  stream  of  Sipar,'
a  title  of  the  Euphrates  ('/.A  1  [1887],  p.  267).

There  is,  however,  a  threefold  difficulty  in  the  above
explanation  of  'Sepharvaim'  in  2  K.  1724.  (i)  The

3  Obiectiona Annals  °^  Asur-bani-pal  do  not  affirm
to  current l'lat  tne  k'nS  transpla"te(l  people  from

., -  Babylon, Kutu (Cuthah), and Sipar,

but  only  that  he  '  commanded  that  they
should  remain  alive,  and  caused  them  to  dwell  in
Babylon.'  '2  (2)  The  god  specially  worshipped  at  Sipar
was  neither  '  Adrainmelech  '  nor  '  Anarnmelech'  but
Samas.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  true  that
Sargon,  who  as  a  fact  brought  captive  populations  to
Samaria  (AY?  243  /.  20;  cp  SAMARIA),  did  not  and
could  not  includeanycaptives  from  Babylon,  Sepharvaim,
etc.,  for  the  excellent  reason  that  he  made  none  there.*
And  (3)  the  theory  in  question  requires  us  to  suppose
that  Avva  and  Hamath  have  been  introduced  into  2  K.
17  24  from  18  34  by  Rp,4  which  is  a  com  plicated  procedure.
The  question  of  Sepharvaim  is  therefore  no  simple
one.  At  present  there  is  no  current  theory  which

. ™  , satisfies the conditions of  the problem.

4  .textual m, .  ...

... .  I  here is  a  strong  a  priori  objection  to

distinguishing  the  Sepharvaim  of  2  K.
19  13  and  1834  (with  the  parallels  in  Is.)  from  that  of
2  K.  17  24  31,  and  there  are  three  considerable  difficulties
in  this  course,  two  suggested  by  Assyriology  and  one  by
literary  criticism.  Let  us,  then,  approach  the  subject,
bearing  in  mind  the  gradually  accumulating  evidence
for  the  apparently  destructive  but  in  reality  conservative
theory  that  many  passages  both  of  the  narrative  and  of
the  prophetic  books  have  been  recast,  ancl  provided
with  a  new  historical  and  geographical  setting.  It  is
by  no  means  an  impossible  view  that  the  passages  in
Kings  and  Isaiah  here  referred  to  have  been  recast  by
an  editor  to  suit  his  own  theory  of  the  course  of  later
Israelitish  history  (see  SENNACHERIB,  §  5).  This  view
implies  that  the  names  of  the  cities  mentioned  there
have  come  out  of  somewhat  similar  names  of  places  on
the  N.  Arabian  border  of  Palestine.

Sepharvaim,  like  Rezeph  in  2  K.  10  12  (Is.  37  12),  will  then  be
a  distortion  of  Sarephnth,  one  of  the  most  important  places  in
that  region  (see  ZARKPHATH),  or  rather  the  final  letters  c"|  (MT
C'l,  vayini)  are,  together  with  TJP  (MT  TJ'S,  '  to,  or  of,  the
city'),  J?;n  (MT  inn,  'Hena'?),  and  possibly  nij?l  (MT,  ,-njn,

'and  Ivvah'?),  representatives  of  SxDnT  (Jerahmeel).  It  is
noteworthy  that  the  god  worshipped  by  the  '  Sepharvites  '
receives  the  double  name  ~*?2T1N  and  iVcjJ,'  (2  K.I"  31).  In
the  latter  form  3  has  displaced  i  (cp  TQJ;  and  py)  ;  probably
the  best  intermediate  reading  is  "^EIK,  'be  original  of  which  is

surely  Sxsm'  (Jerabm.eel)-5  The  rite  of  sacrificing  children
was  apparently  distinctive  of  some  famous  sanctuary  in  Jerah
meel  (see  MORIAH,  and  cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Gen.  '2'22  Jer.  234  11  15).

The  other  passages  which  have  to  be  considered  in  this
connection  are  Ezra48-io(see  SHUSHANCHITES)  and  Is.  lOg  (see
Crit.  Bib.).  See  also  REZEPH.

See  especially  Winckler,  Alt.  Unt.  100-103  »  and  cp  Cheyne,
Exp.T,  1898,  p.  428y:  T.  K.  C.

BEPHELA(ce<J>HAA  [AN"  <=•»>],  c-  neAiNH  [K*V],
Vg.  Sephela),  i  Mace.  1238,  RV  'plain  country.'  See
SHEPHELAH  ;  also  JUDAEA,  col.  2617.

SEPTUAGINT.  See  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS,  §§46-55.

SEPULCHRE  ("Op,  Gen.  236  etc.;  MNHMCION,
Mk.  1646  etc.  ).  See  TOMB,  RESURRECTION.


SERAH  (rny,  in  pause  fTC',  AV  SARAH  in  Nu.
2646;  c&pA  [L]).  daughter  of  ASHER  [<?.v.,  §  4];
Gen.  46  17  (cAAp  [A],  C&PPA  [/>]),  Nu.  2646
[ttv.  30  CAP&;  BabAF])  =  i  Ch.  7so  (cope  [B],
[A],  -AA  [L]).

1  Cp  ©Bj  2  K.  1834,  tTew^>a.poviia.>.v.

2  KB  2  193  (foot)  ;  cp  K.i.  Kffn.  276.

3  See  Wi.  Alt.  Unt.  99.
*  Ibid.  101  f.

8  The  most  plausible  alternative  original  is  fns  '  Marduk  '
or  '  Merodach  '  (cp  NISROCH).  This  is  favoured  by  '  Nergal  '  in
the  same  list.  But  it  must  perhaps  be  owned  that  'Nergal'  is
only  a  little  less  doubtful  than  ADKAMMELECH  [g.v.].

4372


SEEAIAH

'Heber'  and  '  Malchiel  '  (  =  Jerahmeel)  both  point  to  the
south  (cp  ASHER,  §  4) ;  of  Asher's  original  settlement  in  the
Negeb  we  may  perhaps  still  possess  a  record  in  an  early  poem
(see  Crit.  Bib.  on  Judg.  5  17).  'Serah'  too  will  be  a  southern
ethnic  name  ;  cp  rni,  Zerah,  and  "UrtC'N.  Ashhur.  We  have
also  Sab.  proper  names  SKmii'V  7tt2frHE?i  mt^Ki  with  which  we
might  compare  grins'  (root,  'to  open?')  the  origin  of  which
need  not  be  discussed  here.

SERAIAH  (!TniM,  once  [Jer.  8626]  -inn'p',  §§  35,  80,
as  if  'God  strives'";'  c&pAl(\[c]  [ BAN LI."  Gray  \_HPN
236]  argues  from  the  apparent  formation  with  a  perf.
followed  by  ,T  that  '  Seraiah '  can  hardly  be  an  early
name.  The  formation  has  indeed  been  questioned,
though  perhaps  without  sufficient  reason.  It  is  suggested
that  the  name  has  been  adapted  from  an  old  ethnic ;  cp  nb1.
Note  that  in  i  Ch.  4 14  Joab,  b.  Seraiah,  is  called  the
father  of  Ge-harashim,  which  is  probably  a  distortion
of  the  ethnic  Geshurim,  or  of  Ge-ashhurim  [Che.]).

1.  David's  scribe  (2  S.  8  17  :  acra  [R]),  probably  miswritten  for
SHAVSHA  [y.v.].

2.  b. Azriel,  one  of  those whom  Jehoiakim  commanded to
take  Jeremiah  and  Baruch  (Jer.  8626  :  o-apea  [BN]).

3.  b. Tanhumeth, a captain, temp. Gedaliah (2 K.  25  23
Jer.  40  8).

4.  b.  Neriah  and  brother  of  Baruch,  mentioned  in
a  passage  (Jer.  51 59-61,  ffaipaia  [A*fort  once  v.  59],
ffapeas  [X  once  v.  59])  which  follows  a  prophecy
(50  51 1-58)  wrongly  ascribed  to  Jeremiah.  He  is  said
to  have  gone  up  to  Babylon  with  (or,  see  below,  from)
ZEUEKIAH  [?.*'.],  carrying  a  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  on
the  fate  of  Babylon,  which  he  was  commanded  to  bind
to  a  stone  and  cast  into  the  Euphrates,  as  a  sign  that
Babylon  would  sink  and  not  rise  again.  Seraiah  bears
a  title  which  AV  renders  '  a  quiet  prince '  and  RV
'  chief  chamberlain '  (so  AVms-,  Rashi,  etc.  ,-jrmp  IB-)-
'  Prince  of  Menucha '  (AVms-)  is  evidently  a  resource  of
despair;  Menucha  =  Manahath  (!)  i  Ch.  86.  Another
interpretation  is  'officer  of  resting-place'  =  quartermaster
(so  Hi.,  Gr. ,  Giesebr. )  ;  this  strangely  poetical  title  is
assumed  to  have  belonged  to  the  officer  who  arranged
the  halting-places  of  the  royal  train. 1  More  probably,
however,  Seraiah's  office  was  that  of  commissary  of  the
tribute  (nnrsrrnc-,  @,  Tg. ,  Gra. ,  Che.).  This  view
implies  a  further  correction  of  '  with '  into  '  from
Zedekiah.'  Note  that  Jeremiah's  interest  is  entirely
absorbed  in  Seraiah  (v.  61,  'when  thou  comest,  and
seest,'  etc.).

But  is  this  story  historical  ?  It  has  the  appearance
of  being  Haggadic,  i.e. ,  an  edifying  romance.  See
JEREMIAH  (BOOK),  §  17,  and  cp  Giesebrecht's  com
mentary.

5.  b.  Kenaz,  brother  of  Othniel  and  father  of  JOAB  2  (i  Ch.
4  IT,/,  a-apta  [A  7'.  14]). See  ad  init.

6.  b.  Asiel  of  SIMEON  (§  9  iii.),  i  Ch.  4  35  (aa.pa.av  [B]).

7.  A  chief  priest  in  the  time  of  Zedekiah,  who  was  put  to  death
by Nebuchadrezzar (2  K.  25  i^Jf. Jer.  52  24^ [BNAr om.l).
The  Chronicler  traces  his  origin  to  Eleazar  b.  Aaron  (i  Ch.  64^
[53°^D; he is  the  son  of  Azariah  b. Hilkiah  (n. 13),  and
father of  JEHOZAUAK [g.v.}. In Ezra"  iff. Ezra, who was
perhaps  not  even  a  priest  at  all,  is  made  a  son  of  Seraiah,  which
betrays  the  desire  of  the  priestly  redactor  to  bring  him  into  the
high-priestly  family  (cp  EZRA,  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  7  [iv.]). The
same  fragment  of  genealogy  springs  up again  in Neh.  lln,
where  Seraiah  b.  Hilkiah  is  called  CVPNrt  JT3  TJ3  (cp  2  Ch.
31  13),  cp  also  i  Ch.On,  where,  however,  the  name  is  replaced
by  Azariah. In i Esd.  65  2  Esd.  1 1 SARAIAS, EV  ;  but  RV
AZARAIAS,  i  Esd.  8  i.

8.  One  of  those  who  came  up  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel
(Ezra  2  2  apaias  [BA*?]),  in  Neh.  7  7  called  AZARIAH  (17). His
name  appears  in  i  Esd.  5s  as  ZACHARIAS,  RV  ZAKAIAS  (fapcuov
[B],  £apeov  [A]).

9.  Priestly signatory to the covenant  (see  EZRA  i., § 7) ;
Neh.  10  2  [3]; cp  12  i. In Neh.  12  12  the  house  of  Seraiah  is
first on the list, whence we infer that in the mind of  the
Chronicler  his  family  was  considered  to  be  of  great  importance,
and  perhaps  therefore  connected  by  him  with  Seraiah  (7). See
SAREA.  s.  A.  C.

SERAPHIM  (D^b,  cePAcJ>[e]iM,  -N  [BNAQF],

1  Several  Palmyrene  inscriptions  state  that  they  have  been
set  up  '  in  honour  of  the  leader  of  the  caravan  (nn'lB'D  3"l)  by
the  senate  and  people.'

140  4373


SERAPHIM

CAR.  [N*  once]),  supernatural  guardians  of  the  throne  of

1.  References Xahw6>  mentioned  and  partly  described

in  the  account  of  Isaiah's  inaugural
vision(Is.62-46/).  'Abovehim stood theseraphim'— *.*.,
they  seemed  to  tower  above  Yahwe,  who  was  enthroned
in  the  most  sacred  part  of  the  temple  (the  v:n).  Each
had  six  wings  ;  a  pair  covered  the  face,  another  the
loins,  and  the  third  served  for  flight,  when  Yahwe
sent  his  servant  on  some  errand.  Responsively  they
proclaimed  the  antiphon,  '  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  Yahwe
Sebaoth  ;  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory,'  and  so
powerful  were  their  voices  that  the  posts  (read  rvo-k)  of
the  doorway  trembled.  Then  one  of  the  seraphini  flew
to  Isaiah  with  a  '  hot  stone'  (see  COAL,  §  i)  from  the
altar  in  his  hand,  and  touched  Isaiah's  mouth  with  it,
as  a  symbol  of  the  purification  of  his  lips.  The
seraphim  are  not  mentioned  again  by  name  in  the
OT  or  the  NT,  though  in  Rev.  46-8  the 'four  cherub-like
beings  (fcDa)  sing  the  anthem  of  Isaiah's  seraphim.  But
in  Enoch 207  '  the  serpents  '  (dpdKovres,  Giz.  Gk.) — i.e.,
no  doubt  the  seraphim — are  mentioned  together  with
Paradise  and  the  cherubim  as  under  the  rule  of  Gabriel,
and  in  61 10  71  7  with  the  cherubim  and  the  ophanim  ;
the  latter  classification  also  occurs  in  the  Talmud  (cp
CHERUB,  §  1).  And  in  the  Slavonic  '  Secrets  of  Enoch  '
(first  edited  by  Charles)  we  find  not  only  cherubim  and
seraphim  mentioned  together  as  orders  of  angels  (20 1
21 1),  but  also  seven  six-winged  creatures  overshadowing
the  throne  of  God  and  singing  with  one  voice  (196
21 1),  who  are  obviously  the  same  as  the  seraphim  and
certain  flying  creatures  that  sing  called  Chalkadri
(  =  'crocodiles' ?  cp  COCKATRICE),  with  the  feet  and  tails
of  lions  and  the  heads  of  crocodiles,  mentioned  with
the  fabulous  Phcenix-bird  (12 1  15  i).  These  creatures
have  twelve  wings,  and  attend  the  chariot  of  the  sun  ;
evidently  they  are  a  modification  of  the  seraphim.

Passing  over  the  view  that  the  seraphim  are  merely

2.  Explanations.  ?'las?  <*'**&'  °r  '.noble'  angels

(Ar.  sarufa,  to  be  highj,  we  note
three  possible  views  as  to  the  original  meaning  of
the  name.

1.  Fried. Delitzsch  and Hommel see a connection
between  sdraphim  and  Sarrapu  (the  burner),  which  is
given  as one of  the names of the  Babylonian solar
fire-god Nergal 'in the land  of the west' — i.e., in
Canaan  (5  R.  46,  22,  c.d.  ;  Jensen,  Kosrnol.  62).

This  suggests  that  Reseph,  the  old  Palestinian  solar  fire-god
(CIS  1  38),  also  admitted  (as  Respu)  into  the  Egyptian  Pantheon,
may  possibly  in  early  times  have  been  called  Sarfiph.  If  Rekfib
(one  of  the  gods  of  Sam'al  in  N.  Syria)  were  really,  as  Halevy
thought,  the  same  as  KerCib,  'Cherub,'  this  would  supply  a
parallel.  The  Saraphim  (not  Seraphim)  would  in  this  case  be  a
mythic  rendering  of  the  supernatural  flames  in  which  this  god
revealed  himself  (cp  Cant.  S  6  Job  .07?);  the  form  which  they
took  would  naturally  be  that  of  the  lion  (cp  NERGAL).  And
Isaiah's  Saraphim  (?)  may  have  been  suggested  by  mythic  forms
which  perhaps  existed  in  the  temple,  similar  to  the  nergalti  or
colossal  winged  lions  with  human  heads  which,  like  the  colossal
winged  bulls,  guarded  the  portals  of  Bab. -Ass.  temples  and
palaces.  We  find  '  lions,  oxen,  and  cherubim '  mentioned
together  in  i  K.  7  29.

2.  Another possibility is that the Seraphim (not
Saraphim']  were  originally,  in  accordance  with  Nu.  218
Is.  1429, serpents; Arabian and Hebrew folk-lore
placed  flying  serpents,  with  burning  venomous  bite,  in
the desert, and Hebrew mythographers may have
represented winged serpents  as the  guardians  of  the
dwelling  of  the  Deity. The  place  of  honour  given  to
living  serpents in the  Egyptian temples, is  remarked
upon  elsewhere  (see  SERPENT,  §  3  [f.J),  and  though  to
Isaiah  the  seraphic  guards  of  Yahwe  have  assumed  a
higher  form  of  being  (see  SDOT, '  Isaiah,' 139), yet
no one who remembers the frequency  with  which  in
folk-lore  serpents  are  transformed  into  human  beings,
can  pronounce  such  a  development  impossible. It  is
true,  there  is  no  mention  of  the  seraphini  in  the  Hebrew
story  of  Paradise  as  it  has  come  do\\n  to  us. But  it  is
quite  possible  (see  PARADISE,  § u)  that  the  serpent

4374


SERAR

(ndfial)  who  held  discourse  with  the  first  woman  was
originally  represented  as  the  guardian  of  the  wonderful
tree  in  the  midst  of  God's  garden.  There  may  have
been  originally  only  one  seraph  just  as  there  may  have
been  only  one  cherub  (cp  Ezek.  281416  Ps.  18io[n]).

3.  It  is  also  possible  to  regard  the  seraph  as  a  nobler
development  of  a  bird  of  prey.  H.  G.  Tomkins  long
ago  suggested  a  comparison  with  the  Egyptian  sercf,
which  appears  as  the  guardian  of  graves  and  as  the
bearer  of  the  Egyptian  kings  to  heaven  on  their  decease.

The  se>-cf\f,  met  with  as  early  as  the  pyramid  texts  ;  in  a  late
papyrus  he  is  said  to  'seize  [his  prey)  in  his  claws  in  an  instant
and  take  them  above  the  top  of  the  clouds  of  heaven.'1  It  is  a
composite  animal,  and  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  the  Hebrew
cherub  and  to  the  ypvty  or  griffin  (part  lion,  part  eagle).

The  arguments  in  favour  of  the  second  of  these  views
preponderate.  It  is  against  the  first  that  we  find  no
trace  of  rpj»  as  a  divine  name,  and  against  the  third
that  it  leaves  no  real  distinction  between  the  seraph  and
the  cherub.  And  it  is  against  both  that  c'ST.v  is  so
much  more  naturally  rendered  '  serpents '  than  either
'  burning  ones '  or  'serefs.'  It  may  seem  strange  that
the  symbolism  of  the  temple  decoration  made  no  use
of  the  seraphim.  But  the  temple  did  contain  one
sacred  object  closely  analogous  to  the  original  seraphim
— the  so-called  'brazen  serpent'  (see  NEHUSHTAN).
Hezekiah  broke  it  in  pieces.  The  Jewish  and  Christian
imagination  did  something  better  with  the  seraphim
inherited  from  folk-lore  ;  it  transformed  and  ennobled
them.  See  CHERUBIM,  §  i.  T.  K.  c.

SERAR  (cep<\p  [BA]),  i  Esd.  632  RV,  AV  ASERER
=  Ezra  2  53,  SISKKA,  2,

SEREBIAS  (ecepeBi^c  [BA]),  i  Esd.  854,  AV-s-
=  Ezra8i8,  SHEREBIAH.

SERED  ("TlD;  cApeA  [BAFL]),  a  clan  of  ZEBULUN
(q.v.),  Gen.  46 14  (ce-  [A],  ecp-  [£>l  C6ACK  [L],  Nu.
2626),  whence  the  patronymic,  AV  SARDITE,  RV
Seredite  (Xu.  2626  ;  ^nSH  ;  o  CApeA[e]i  [BAFL]).

SERGIUS  PAULUS  (ceppco  n^yAu)  [Ti.WH]).
Acts  187.  See  PAULUS.

SERJEANTS  (Acts  1635  38,t  EV),  RV"«-  LICTORS.

SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT


Critical  presuppositions  (§  i).

In  Mt.  (§§  2-4).

In  Lk.  (8  S/).

Sermonic  logia  in  Mk.  (§  7).

Mt.'s Sermon a compilation


Transposition  in  Sermon  (§  9).


Beatitudes  and  Woes  (§  10).

Jesus  and  the  Law  (§§  11-13).

New  Law  (§  14^).

Finale  (8  16).

Audience  (§  17).

Historical  significance  (|  18).

Bibliography  ($  19).

The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  the  conventional  title
given  to  an  address  variously  reported  by  the  first
(Mt.  5-7.  dvejiij  eis  r6  6pos)  and  the  third  (Lk.  620-49)
canonical  evangelists,  assigned  by  both  to  the  early
Galilean  mission  of  Jesus.  The  remarkable  divergencies
and  as  remarkable  coincidences  between  the  reports
constitute  a  problem  of  some  nicety  which  is  bound
up  with  the  general  synoptic  question.  How  far
free  editorial  revision  upon  the  part  of  each  author
extended  in  the  case  of  these  reports  of  the  Sermon,
and  how  far  it  is  feasible  not  simply  to  reconstruct  the
original  address  as  that  lay  in  the  Mauhean  Logia
(=Q)  or  in  the  Greek  recensions  of  Q  used  with  other
material  by  each  writer,  but  also  to  estimate  its
historicity  and  actual  situation  in  the  life  of  Jesus  • —
these  are  questions  to  which  no  answer  can  be  attempted
until  a  firm  foothold  has  been  obtained  upon  a  critical
examination  of  each  report  and  a  comparative  analysis
of  their  contents.

Evidently unknown to the original Mk. ('  Ur-

i ri«<*5 i  Marcus '),  the  sermon  transmitted  in  O

i.  uribiCcii  prc-  ,  -iv  -i

suppositions.  seem,s  to  iaye  s'mp  y ? re

'to  disciples and  a  general  reference

io  the  Galitean period — to judge at  least from  the

1  Revillout,  Rfrme  fgyptiennc,  1881,  p.  86;  see  Proph.  /*.(*)
284,  (3)296.

4375


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

unfettered  way  in  which  Mt.  and  Lk.  make  a  place  for
it  in  their  narratives.

The  idiosyncrasies  of  the  reports,  too  marked  to  be  explained
from  the  separate  use  of  Q  by  each  editor,  necessitate  the
hypothesis  that  they  had  at  their  disposal  different  recensions
of  Matthew's  vernacular  logia-collection,  which  had  originated
in  various  circles  of  faith  and  piactice.  Translation  such  as
Papias  mentions  certainly  would  involve  editing  ;  the  fluidity  of
interests  in  the  primitive  church,  together  with  the  absence  of
any  definite  authority  upon  the  biography  of  Jesus,  exposed
evangelical  collections  to  considerable  vicissitudes,  even  before
they  came  under  the  free  but  neither  arbitrary  nor  doctrinaire
handling  of  an  editor  with  religious  aims  and  prepossessions  of  his
own  (see  GosrKi.s,  8§  120  /.),  to  say  nothing  of  the  diverse
needs  of  edification.  Upon  the  characteristics  of  the  recension
used  by  Lk.  see  P.  Ewald,  Das  Hauftprohlcm  der  Evang.-fragc
(1890),  2I2./C,  2i6f.  ;  Soltau,  Eine  Liicke  der  synopt.  Forschung
(1899),  3-5,  and  Feine,  Eine  vorkanon.  UebtrUeftnutg  des
Lucas  (1891),  I42/T

The  place  assigned  to  this  oratio  monlana J in  our

first  gospel  illustrates  the  literary  method  which  here  as

2 I Mt  • c'scwnero  leads  Mt.  to  produce  his  effects


setting.


by  means  of  massing  together  alternate


„


groups  of  incidents  and  of  sayings,  not
infrequently  taken  from  various  quarters  without  strict
regard  to  what  may  have  been  their  original  setting  or
chronological  sequence.

As  in  Mk.,  which  (substantially)  lay  before  Mt.,  the  baptism
and  the  temptation  of  Jesus  are  followed  by  his  return  north
wards  to  Galilee  and  the  choice  of  the  first  disciples  (Mt.  3i-4  22
=  Mk.  1  1-20).  So  far  the  two  writings  generally  agree.  But
whilst  Mk.  proceeds  to  narrate  the  healing  ministry  of  Jesus  in
detail,  Mt.  either  postpones  this  till  he  reaches  his  cycle  of
miracles  (Mt.  8  14-17  =  Mk.  129-34  Lk.  438-41)  or  omits  part  of  it
altogether  as  irrelevant  to  his  plan  (Mk.  1  35-38  =  Lk.  442^),
hurrying  on  to  elaborate  an  impression  of  Jesus  as  the  prophet
and  authority  of  the  new  religion.  The  description  of  a  preach
ing  tour  in  the  Galilean  synagogues,  which  fell  here  in  the
primitive  document  underlying  the  synoptists  (Mk.  1  30  =
Lk.  444),  is  expanded  by  Mt.  (423-25)  somewhat  vaguely1'  in
order  to  form  an  introduction  to  two  separate  cycles  of  (a)  in
struction,  and  (/>)  healing.  The  author's  plan  thus  is  to  repre
sent  Jesus  successively  as  teaching  and  preaching  (<5c8«<TKiui'  KO.L
Kt)pu<r<ru)>>  :  5-7)  and  as  healing  (OepoLirtt'iiav  :  8-i>34,  a  cycle,  for
the  most  part,  of  ten  miracles).  The  exigencies  of  this  method
postpone  to  the  latter  phase  all  the  incidents  narrated  in  their
proper  place  by  Mk.  (140-812)  and  Lk.  (5  i2-(5  n  17-19).  In
historical  order  these  ought  to  form  a  prelude  to  Mt.  5-7,  upon
which  they  serve  to  throw  occasionally  rays  of  light.

The  inner  structure  of  the  address  corresponds  in
part,  but  only  in  part,  to  its  setting.3  Out  of  the
crowds,  Galilrean  and  non-Galilaean,
who  thronged  Jesus  on  the  border  of
the  lake,  his  adherents  gathered  to  him  as  he  retired  to
the  hill-slope  (5  if.  }.  What  follows  is  represented  as  an
address  delivered  to  them  directly,  in  the  hearing  of  the
larger  throng  (728/i).  Jesus  seizes  the  opportunity  to
proclaim  vividly  and  openly  his  aims  and  methods  in  a
magna  charta  of  the  new  reign  of  God.  With  large
and  divine  utterance  (dcoi^as  rb  <rr6/aa  atfroO),  he  at
once  lays  bare  the  continuity  of  his  message  with  the
religious  tradition  of  the  people,  and  explicitly  differen
tiates  what  made  up  the  original  element  in  his  own
ideal  as  compared  with  that  of  current  Judaism.

The  address  opens  with  a  reflective  but  glowing  description  of
the  genuine  religious  character,  in  its  demands  and  privileges.
The  eight  beatitudes  ("13-10),  of  which  the  last  is  repeated  and
specially  applied  to  his  hearers  (5  i  iyC),  define  a  spirit  of  chastened
and  unselfish  devotion  towards  God  and  man,  rather  than  a

1  For  the  question  of  the  Sermon's  ethical  originality,  which
does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  present  article,  see  especially
Titius,  Die  NTlic/uLekrevon  tier  Scligkeit(V.mcTl\i^A,  1895),
197-199;  for  the  teaching  on  marriage,  ibid.  67-72,  and  on
man's  consciousness  of  God,  ibid.  114-117.  Further,  Ehrhardt,
Der  Griindcharakter  tier  Ethik  Jesu  i»i  I'crhciltniss  su  den
tnessiaiH.  IlojfTnun^cn  seines  Volkes,  etc.  (1895),  107^7

a  The  incident  in  the  Capernaum  synagogue  (Mk.  1  21-28  =
Lk.43i-37)and  the  flight  of  Jesus  (Mk.  l35-38  =  Lk.  442^)  are
both  omitted.

3  Jesus  as  the  deliverer  of  a  new  law  speaks  from  a  hill  at  the
opening  (5iyT),  as  at  the  close,  of  the  gospel  (28  16,  equally
vague).  Mt.'s  moderate  concern  for  chronology  renders  it  un
certain  how  far  an  expansive  passage  like  423-61  (Ss.  om.
424«)  rests  upon  some  hill-tradition,  or  is  derived  and  modified
from  the  narrative  of  Mk.  (see  the  doublet  f>35-10i).  Certainly
in  5  1  there  is  no  tinge  of  contempt  for  the  crowd  as  composed
of  \a.fjiai  <rupoit.€vu>v  (Chrys.).

4376


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

robust  attitude  to  the  world.1  But  Jesus  the  rabbi  hastens2  to
explain  that  his  ideal,  so  far  from  being  parochial  or  pusil
lanimous,  involves  an  unflinching  stand  before  hardship  and
duty  (5  13-16)  ;3  so  little  was  it  a  relaxed  method  of  piety,4  that
it  demanded  from  men  a  loftier  and  more  exacting  conduct  than
that  taught  or  practised  by  the  conventional  rabbinical  religion
of  the  day  (5  17-20). 8  This  avowal  naturally  suggests  the  new
and  final  attitude  of  Jesus6  to  the  Jewish  Law,  which  is  ex
emplified  with  brilliant  and  effective  paradox  in  five  or  six
crucial  instances  (5  21-48)  of  the  radical  antithesis  between  the
new  legislation  and  the  old  jurisprudence  with  its  ethical  limita
tions.  The  new  rests  on  motive  and  inner  disposition,  summed
up  in  ungrudging  charity  to  one's  enemies;  thus  Jesus  rounds
off  the  circle  of  thought  started  in  the  beatitudes,  cutting  up  the
poisonous  growths  of  evasion  and  quibbling  by  unconditional
precepts  of  incisive  brevity.

The  principle  of  inwardness  and  sincerity  is  then  expounded
(61-18),  pointedly  and  strongly  like  all  effective  principles,  in  the
shape  of  a  triple  antithesis  to  the  Pharisaic  praxis  of  almsgiving,
prayer,  and  fasting,  which,  by  their  externality,  develop  ostenta
tion.  Jesus  then  recurs?  to  the  positive  relation  of  man  to
God's  fatherly  providence  (6 19-34,  cp  5  45)  as  a  motive  for
singleness  of  heart  and  for  freedom  from  undue  worldly  anxiety
(cp  O.  Hpltzmanri's  Neutest.  Zeitgesch.,  1895,  p.  229).  The
loosely  joined  aphoristic  logia  which  follow  (in  7 1-20),  are
partly  resumptive  and  in  the  main  accessory  rather  than  vital
to  the  body  of  the  address.  Warnings  against  censoriousness
(7  1-5)  with  its  attendant  hypocrisy,  and  the  opposite  (though
less  common)  fault  of  an  undiscriminating  temper  which  is  blind
to  the  differences  of  men  (7  6) ;  an  encouragement  to  prayer,
based  on  God's  fatherly  goodness  (7  7-11) ;  a  reiteration  of  the
golden  rule  (7  12)  ;  a  call  to  personal  effort  and  independence  in
seeking  life  (7i.ij^);  a  warning  against  being  misled  by  false
prophets,  whose  conduct  is  to  be  made  their  test  (7  15-20) ;  these
lead  up  to  the  epilogue  (7  21-27),  'n  which  spurious  discipleship**
is  exposed,  and  (by  means  of  a  parable)  the  responsibility  of
hearers  and  the  wisdom  of  practical  obedience  to  Jesus'  com
mands  are  vividly  depicted.

In  style,  conception,  and  arrangement,  Mt.  's  elaborate

and  prolonged  Sermon  shows  traces  of  his  workmanship

4 Ch t  r anc^  characteristic  traits. It  is  a  com-

' .  *  "  position  rather  than  an  actual  address.

That  it  was  carried in  some  retentive

memory  as  it now  stands, is  a  perfectly  unmanage-

1  Achelis  ingeniously  traces  missionaries  (9)  and  martyrs  (10)
suffering,  the  latter  (n_/C)  generally,  the  former  inside  (12)  and
outside  (14-16)  Israel.  The  temper  of  ~'V.  3-10  resembles,  with
less  eschatological  emphasis,  that  of  passages  like  En.  5  7,  '  but
for  the  elect  there  will  be  light  and  joy  and  peace,  and  they  will
inherit  the  earth.'  Cp  Taylor's  Ancient  Ideals,  2  2577:  (1896).

^  The  connection  of  5  12  and  5  13  f.  seems  to  be  :  as  successors
to  the  noble  and  devout  company  of  the  prophets,  you  must  be
prepared  for  hardships  which  flow  from  an  open  stand  for
religion  among  the  people.  Fear  of  such  peril  is  not  to  deter
you  from  taking  your  place,  any  more  than  the  subtler  tempta
tion  of  false  modesty.  On  the  continuity,  of  which  Jesus  was
conscious  in  his  preaching  of  God's  reign,  between  himself  and
the  OT  psalmists  and  prophets,  see  Barth,  Die  Hauptproblemc
des  Lel'ens  Jesu,  58-67  (1899).

3  Zahn  (j£inl.  2  277  287)  actually  makes  5  16  the  theme  of  the
sermon,  emphasising  the  apologetic  aim  of  the  whole  Gospel  as
a  defence  of  Jesus  and  his  religion  against  current  Judaism.
Grawert  ingeniously  tries  to  detect  in  the  beatitudes  a  reversed
programme  of  contents  :  5io  =  5  11-16  69  =  617-26  68  =  627-37  *>7
=  638-48 66  =  61-34 55  =  "iy- 64  =  73-6  63  =  77-11.

4  The  curious  variation  of  5  15-17  in  an  early  Talmudic  story
('  I  am  not  come  to  take  away  from  the  law  of  Moses,  but  to  add
to  the  law  of  Moses  am  I  come,'  accompanied  by  '  Let  thy  light
shine  in  the  candlestick ')  is  supposed  by  Giidemann  to  have
been derived from Mt. 's Logia. Cp  Stuciia  Siblica,  157-59
(Neubauer), Philol. Sacra, 45 (Nestle), and Laible,  Jesus
Ckristtu  im  Talmud  (i1>f)-i),  62_/T

*  ^.^S  good  works  of v.  16  are  simply  the  higher  righteousness
ofv.  20,  which  (it  is  implied  in  w.  26  and  45)  reflects  and  repro
duces  on  earth  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  Father  in
heaven  ;  cp  Holtzm.  NT  Theol.  171  ij4_f.

6  Although,  in  conformity  to  the  historical  situation,  the  claim
of  Jesus  upon  the  personal  life  of  his  followers  is  not  emphasised
at  this  inaugural  period  of  the  ministry,  and  his  Messianic  role
is  still  obscure  (cp  onTzif.),  his  commanding authority  and
self-consciousness  are  evident  in  words  like  '  I  come  ...  I  say.'
Such  language  is  the  utterance  of  '  a  superhuman  self-conscious
ness  which,  as  the  secret  of  Christianity's  origin  and  growth,
must  be  grasped  first  and  foremost  as  a  fact.  ... It  is  quite  im
possible for us to conceive such an inner  life. Revelation,
redemption,  forgiveness,  help — he  has  it  all  within  himself  and
offers  it  to  those  who  yield  to  the  impression  of  his  personality '
(Wernle,  Anfdnge  tins.  Religion,  24^.  after  Baur).

7  Mt.  may,  however,  have  meant  619-34  to  continue  the  anti-
Pharisaic  polemic  (cp  Mk.  12  40  Mt.  23  25  Lk.  16  13^)-

8  To  imitate  God's  ungrudging  love  towards  men  (5  43-48)  or
to  obey  his  will  (7  21)  is  as  impossible  along  the  road  of  legal
crupulousness  (620)  as  it  is  for mere  profession  and empty
words. On  721-23  cp  the  (too  conservative)  essay  by  Schlatter
in Greifswalder Studien, 85-105  (1895). The citation in

4377


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

able  hypothesis.  The  well-known  habit  of  compiling-
material,  which  stamps  Mt. 's  Gospel,  is  legible  all
through  the  oratio  muntana  ;  earlier  and  later  logia  are
massed  together,  and  even  their  dexterous  union  cannot
obliterate  their  heterogeneous  nature  and  foreign  sites.1
Mt.'s  Sermon,  to  a  much  larger  degree  than  Lk.'s,  is
neither  consecutive  in  trend  nor  a  unity  in  time ;  in
ternal  evidence,  and  the  comparative  evidence  gained
from  Lk. ,  put  this  beyond  the  reach  of  doubt.  The
very  style  shows  how  the  source  has  been  worked  over.

In  Mt.  5-7  we  have  the  author's  favourite  'come  unto  '  (-npocr-
e'px<>Mat)  in  the  introduction  (like  Lk.'s  '  as  he  was '  [ev  T<!>  infin.]
Hi  etc.),  and  favourite  or  characteristic  phrases  throughout  the


(yei/j)#rJT<o  :  6  10,  not  in  Lk.  ;  Acts  1  20  05),  '  it  was  said  '  (e
621  etc.,  non-Lucan),  verbs  in  -even/  (njo-Teveu',  »rpo^)7;Tevet»',
4>ppcvcii/,  ayyapevfiv),  'go  thy  way'  (un-aye  :  624),  'whoever'
(OCTTII;:  63941  7  1524  =  0?,  Lk.648),  '  till  '  (e'u>5  :  61826),  'before
[men]  (e/xirpoo-0ei>  :  6  16  24  6  if.  1  6),  '  for  so  '  (OUTWS  yap  :  25815
5  12),  the  simpler  pron.  for  the  reflexive  (629  0  19),  Trpb?  TO  ('to')
with  infin.  (028  <j  i),  'that  .  .  .  may'  (OTTMS  [6  times]),  'as'
(uioTrep  :  62  etc.),  'it  is  profitable'  (<rvj*x<p€/>ci  :  5  29  /;,  non-
Lucan),  Trocrjpds  (-6V)  of  evil  (one)  =  537  39  613  (cp  13  1938;  Lk.
645  only  of  men),  Siapov  a  sacrificial  gift  (5  23  _/.'),  'raiment'
(ev&vfia.:  6z5  =  Lk.l223  Mt.t>28  7  15  etc.),  'in  danger  of
(tW^o?  :  52i_/?,  non-Lucan),  'altar'  (Ovfn.aa-rripi.oi>  :  bz^f,
23  18-20  35),  'be  hid  '  (/cpOtrTto  ;  5  14  etc.),  '  reward  '  (juto-fids  :  0  if.
etc.),  'only'  (^.ovov,  adv.:  647),  'swtar'  (ofivvia  :  63430  etc.),
'  profess  '  (onioAoyew  :  7  23  etc.),  'for  this  is'  (euros  ydp  :  83712;
cp  11  10  AV),  '  bring  ...  to  '  (Trpoa^epoj  :  5  2')f.  etc.),  '  hypocrite  '
(vTTOKpmjs  :  62516  7s),  '  wise  '  ((^pofijuos  :  i  24  etc.),  besides,  of
course,  the  famous  kingdom  of  heaven  (6310  etc.)  instead  of
kingdom  of  God,  and  the  distinctive  (except  Mk.  11  25)  usage  of
Father  (in  heaven,  or  heavenly)  as  applied  to  God  (j'our  Father
occurs  in  Lk.  only  036=^11.648  and  123o  =  Mt.  632,  besides
1232;  it  is  Matthsean).  Of  Mt.'s  120  hapax  legomena  the
Sermon  alone  contains  12  ((SaTToAoye'w,  (3pox»i,  c5taAAao-(ru>,  eipij-
poirotos,  fmopKfta,  evi'oe'aj,  ia>Ta,  icaTa/xai'Oorio,  Kpv</jatos,  fj.i\iov,
TroAvAoyt'a,  pa/ca,  op/cot  (plur.  =  vows,  633),  TrArjpoa)  (absol.),
fOviKOf  (5  47  ti  7  IS  17),  [J3ao-.  riav  avpaviov]  and  faariya  (5  39  20  67).
Phrases  like  on  (hat  day  (7  22),  Kpivtiv  -fj.a  -0-15  (in  sense  of
final  judgment,  52i_/C  7  if-)  are  more  frequent  in  Mt.  than  in
the  other  synoptics,  and  traces  of  the  apostolic  (Pauline?)  age
have  been  more  or  less  reasonably  found  in  expressions  such  as
(pya£.  ai>o/j.ia.v  (7  23),  avofiia.  (7  23),  aTroiAeia  (7  13),  StKaiocrvVrj
(56  etc.  '{  Lk.  1  75  in  OT  sense),  /txwpos  (622  726,  etc.),  cx/jetATJ-
fiara  (6  12),  Trapan-TuJ/iiaTa  (t)  14  f.),  irfpi<r<rfveiv  (620),  cyan-ay
TOV  (Ttpov  (0  24  Kom.  13  8),  etc.

Following  in  the  main  Mk.  's  order  during  the  narra
tive  of  the  Galilcean  mission,  though  with  one  char-
acteristic  (see  below,  §  9)  transposition
^,k  3y.I2  =  Lk  617-19,  Mk.  813-19  =
Lk  6l2.l6^  Nvhich  was  jntroduced  to
provide  an  audience  and  situation  for  the  non-Marcan
address  to  be  inserted  at  this  point,  Lk.  narrates  the
choice  of  the  Twelve  and  the  subsequent  position  of
Jesus  on  some  level  ground  where  he  was  surrounded
by  (a)  the  Twelve,  (6)  a  large  crowd  of  disciples,  and  (c)
a  large  multitude  of  non-Galilreans.2  Abbreviating
Mk.'s  account  of  Jesus  as  a  healer  of  diseases,  Lk.


_ _
5.  i

structure.


2  Clem.  4  accentuates  the  logion,  'even  though  ye  be  gathered
with  me  in  my  bosom  and  do  not  my  commandments,  etc."

1  Some  logia  would  by  their  nature  be  associated  with  certain
places  and  certain  people. Others  would  be  somewhat  timeless,
either  owing  to  their  repetition  or  to  their  less  local  content.
Introductory  and explanatory  comments,  by  way  of  setting,
must  have  been  retained  by  many  of  the  primitive  logia  in  pass
ing  from  oral  to  written  form,  just  as  earth  clings  to  the  roots
of  a  plucked  plant. But  a  comparison  of  Mt.  and  Lk.  shows
that  whilst  Lk.  frequently  found  no  setting  for  his  logia,  and
generally  tried to furnish  them  with  a  site, Mt.  is  much  less
concerned  to  preserve  the  local  and  chronological  position  even
of  logia  which  he  found  equipped  with  such  a  habitation. His
Sermon  consists  of  several  smaller  collections  of  logia,  already
compiled,  perhaps  in  part  by  himself,  for  catechetical  purposes.
These,  welded  more  or less  skilfully  together,  make up the
splendid  summary  of  the  Sermon  as  it  now  lies  in  the  gospel.

2  Mk.'s  Galilseans  and  (so  Ss.)  Idumaeans  are  omitted.  _  Just
as  the  force  of  Mt.  5  14-16  is  felt  when  one  realises  that  it  was
addressed  to  a  crowd  drawn  primarily  from  Galilee  (425),  that
traditionally  inferior  and  ignorant  province  (4  ijyO,  so  Lk.  s
omission  of  the  logion  from  his  Sermon  becomes  significant  when
one  recollects  that  he  wrote  for  a  public  in  the  Roman  empire
when  memories  of  the  desperate  part  played  by  Galilaeans  in  the
recent  war  (66-70  A.n.)  made  it  inadvisable  to  dwell  upon  their
connection  with  the  new  religion. Jerusalem  and  Judaea  bulk
largely  in  Lk.  2-3  ;  Lk.  alone  narrates  the  Galilseans'  punishment

4378


SERMON ON  THE  MOUNT

hastens  to  incorporate  an  address  of  his  to  the  disciples
(620,  not  to  the  Twelve).

The  address  opens  with  a  quartette  of  beatitudes,  apostrophis
ing  literal  poverty,  physical  hunger,  and  actual  tears  as  destined
to  secure  eventually  bliss  and  benefits  for  disciples  in  such  a

C resent  plight  of  social  want  and  oppression.  These  beatitudes
reathe  a  spirit  of  intense  sympathy  with  the  poor  and  down
trodden,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  third  gospel.  Dives,  for
example  (1(5 19-31),  is  not  sent  to  hell  simply  because  he  is  rich.
Yet  his  riches,  it  is  implied,  have  not  merely  aggravated  his
guilt,  but  proved  a  barrier  to  the  conduct  which  would  have
saved  him.  Better  without  them,  is  the  inference.  Better
bestow  them  in  alms  upon  the  needy.  Lazarus,  as  this  scriba
mansitetiidinis  Christi  assumes,  being  a  poor  man  is  pious.
Similarly,  in  the  good  time  coming,  Jesus  promises  a  complete
revolution  of  the  social  order,  when  the  destitute  will  receive
compensation  for  their  present  ills  J  (cp  the  deliberate  '  now '  [vvv]
repeated  in  v.  21  ;  '  is  '  [ecrnv],  v.  20,  implies  certain,  not  present,
possession).  As  (5  27  indicates,  ii>.  20-26  are  spoken  in  the  hear
ing  of  the  disciples  rather  than  addressed  to  them  directly.  They
represent  an  impassioned  monologue  addressed  to  two  general
classes  of  individuals  whom  Jesus,  here  'one  of  the  prophets'
indeed,  sees  in  his  mind's  eye.  Among  the  many  disciples
(jia#T)T<u)  standing  round  him,  there  were  probably  poor  men,
poor  by  circumstances  or  by  choice  (5  1 1),  hungry  people  (13  if.),
and  sufferers  (6  17^).  But  at  this  juncture  it  would  have  been
neither  an  appropriate  nor  an  exhaustive  description  to  classify
the  disciples  as  a  whole  under  these  categories.

This  is  corroborated  by  the  quartette  of  woes  (C37'1X),  in
which  the  reverse  side  of  the  picture  is  sketched  (Is.  58-23,  CP
(55 13-16).  Like  the  rest  of  what  is  peculiar  to  Lk.  in  the
Sermon,  it  is  mainly  concerned  with  the  perils  of  authority  (37/0,
popularity  (26),  and  especially  money  (24^  33 .A  381).  The
second  woe  is  unaccountably  omitted  in  Ss.  There  is  no  woe
corresponding  to  the  third  beatitude,  and  the  fourth  woe  is
addressed  to  the  disciples,  rather  than  to  an  objective  class,
thereby  resuming  w.  •zif.  and  paving  the  way  for  the  transition
in  z>.  27.  In  his  second  volume  Lk.  has  stories  illustrating  the
joy  felt  by  disciples  under  persecution  (623  =  Acts  5  41,  etc.),
while  at  the  same  time  he  points  out  that  popularity  is  not  in
variably  (Rom.  14  18)  a  proof  of  disloyalty  ((526,  cp  Acts  2  47;.
Although  the  first  three  beatitudes  and  woes  are  rather  external
and  eschatological,2  the  fourth  touches  a  deeper  note  of  experi
ence  ;  yet  all  are  controlled  by  the  same  sense  that  the  religious
question  is  bound  up  with  the  social,  as  the  OT  prophets  were
never  weary  of  reiterating.

In  quieter  tones  Jesus  now  proceeds  to  address  not  the  twelve
apostles  but  the  wider  circle  (61320)  of  his  disciples  or  im
mediate  hearers  ((5  277^),  passing  from  the  vehement  denuncia
tion  of  prosperous  and  proud  folk  into  a  persuasive  appeal  for
charity  and  forbearance  among  his  adherents.3  The  intro
duction,  '  But  I  say  unto  you'  (aAAd  iifi.lv  Ae'yoo),  where  '  you  '  is
defined  by  '  who  hear '  (rots  oxououo-ie),  corroborates  the  im
pression  that  hitherto  in  (3  20-26  Jesus  has  been  describing,  rather
than  addressing,  certain  types  of  men.  At  this  point  the  con
trast  is  almost  equal  to  a  dropping  of  the  voice.  The  substance
of  the  discourse,  in  its  second  phase,  is  love  to  one's  enemies  or
opponents.  According  to  Lk.,  this  humane  disposition  is  to  be
expressed  not  simply  in  blessing  and  prayer,  but  heroically  in
(a)  a  patient,  uncomplaining  endurance  of  violence  and  robbery,
and  in  (b)  lending  money  freely — so  freely,  indeed,  that  it  is  a
loan  merely  in  name.  As  usual,  the  question  of  money  bulks
largely  in  Lk.'s  mind.  He  represents  Jesus  as  counselling  the
disciples  in  effective  and  unqualified  aphorisms  never  to  make
money  an  occasion  of  quarrelling ;  if  it  be  stolen  from  them,
better  acquiesce  than  retaliate  and  attempt  to  recover  the  loss  ;
if  borrowed,  neither  money  nor  property  is  to  be  demanded  back.
To  this  passive  rdle,  an  active  side  is  added  ;  money  is  to  be
ungrudgingly  lent4  even  to  one's  enemies.  One  does  not  need


by  Pilate  (13  1-3)  and  the  false  charge  of  sedition  (0.71-0  TTK  T.
23  5)  made  against  Jesus  by  the  priests  ;  Galilee  plays  no  part
in  his  Resurrection  stories.

1  Lk.'s  Sermon  is  less  true  than  Mt.'s  to  the  normal  position
of  Jesus  towards  the  future  of  God's  reign  on  earth  ;  in  rightly
leproducing  the  somewhat  catastrophic  side,  which  Jesus  held
in  common  with  his  age,  he  fails  to  give  sufficient  prominence
to  the  inner  spiritual  side,  which  formed  the  real  contribution  of
Jesus  to  the  time. Hence  the  impression  left  by  his  Sermon  is
vivid  but  limited. See  Titius,  177^,  1857?

2  This  is  so  far  in  keeping  with  the  first  preaching  of  Jesus  in
Galilee,  which  echoed  the  eschatological note  of  the Baptist
(Mk.  1  14/1  Mt.  4 17  23  _/!). Both  '  holy  spirit '  (ayiov  Tri/eC^ta)  and
'fire'  (irvp)  are  in  the  Sermon;  but,  particularly  in Mt., the
gracious  heavenly  spirit  predominates,  even  although  Lk.  has
little  or  nothing  of  Mt.'s sweeping  anti-legal  criticism. Both
versions  are,  from  different  standpoints,  to  be  regarded  as  '  good
news'  (Mt.  4  2  0-

;i  The  connection  would  be  still  closer  if  the  wealthy
oppressors  of  ?"?'.  •a,/,  were  the  enemies  of  7'.  27.

*  On  the  religious  economy  of  alms  see  1(11-14,  and  contrast
1233  =  1822  with  Mt.Oig.  Like  the  Epistle  of  James,_  Lk.
reflects  the  trading  atmosphere  of  early  Palestinian  Christians  ;
the  dangers  presented  by  property  and  wealth  to  the  faith
(GOSPELS,  §  40)  are  vividly  present  to  his  mind.  See  Peabody's
Jesus  Christ  and  the  Social  Life  (1901),  197 '/.,  and  especially

4379


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

to  be  rich  in  order  to  be  robbed  or  to  lend  money  ;  but  it  is
obvious  that  reiterated  and  prominent  injunctions  like  these
would  lose  much  of  their  point,  if  the  society  to  which  they  were
addressed  consisted  of  poverty-stricken  outcasts.  This  enforces
the  view  that  ffzaf.  is  not  intended  to  describe  the  actual  con
dition  of  the  disciples  round  Jesus,  to  whom  (i  27  f.  is  spoken.

The  third  phase  of  the  address  (39-45)  opens  with  some  loosely

set  logia  ;  the  thread  upon  which  LV .  has  strung  them  seems  to

be  as  follows. Turning  from ones  duty  to

6. Char- enemies,  Jesus  dwells  on  the  duty,  especially
acteristics. of  teaching  and  instruction,  which  one  owes  to
the  brethren. To  give safe guidance  ((339  =
Jas.  5  19  f~)  one  must  be  clear -eyed  oneself; to  give  adequate
and  complete  assistance  to  the  untrained  and  inexperienced,
one must be equipped adequately first of all ((5  40). Self-
criticism  (f>4iy?)  is  the  necessary  prelude  to  any  sincere  and
useful  criticism  of  other  people. It  is  the  inner  state  of  a  man's
own  heart  (6  43-45)  that  determines  the  value  and  virtue  of  what
he  contributes  to  the  world. See  MINES  (col.  3098).

Finally,  the  epilogue  ((5  4*1-49)  in  parabolic  form  (which  '  might
constantly  inhabit  both  the  memory  and  the  judgment,'  Sir
Philip  Sidney)  sums  up  the  responsibility  of  hearers ;  a  stable
character  is  built  up  not  on  mere  verbal  admiration  of  the
teacher,  but  on  practical  obedience  to  such  commands  as  he
has  laid  down.

Whatever  be  Lk.'s  method  elsewhere  in  dealing  with
his  sources,  the  Sermon  exhibits  traces  of  considerable
freedom  on  the  part  of  the  editor,  whose  general
characteristics  of  style,  conception,  and  arrangement
are  fairly  conspicuous  in  620-49.  Not  merely  in  the
beatitudes  and  woes(Feine,  pp.  112-120),  but  through
out  the  whole,  the  Jewish-Christian  circle  reflected  in
Lk.  's  sources  becomes  visible  and  audible.  Whilst
Mt.  reflects  the  early  church  under  the  strain  of  opposi
tion  at  the  hands  of  Pharisaic  religion,  Lk.  reveals
indirectly  the  fortunes  and  hopes  of  Palestinian
Christians,  possibly  within  the  Jerusalem-church  (Feine,
pp.  142-145)  itself,  under  the  overbearing  rule  and
bitter  animosity  of  the  wealthy  Sadducees  (see  Kenan's
I' Antichrist,  chap.  3).  His  sources  vibrate  with  feel
ing  similar  in  many  points  to  that  felt  in  the  Epistle  of
James,  Hernias,  etc.1  Formally,  too,  his  pungent
report  of  the  Sermon  is  shaped  into  a  homily,  whereas
Mt.'s  is  built  up  out  of  didactic  pieces  used  by  catechists
of  the  apostolic  age.

In  the  Lucau  beatitudes  etc.  (0  20-26),  the  poor  (TTTOIXOI)  are
first  of  all  blessed  (as  already  in  4  18  Jesus  is  represented  as
quoting  Isaiah  (51  if.  and  placing  in  the  forefront  of  his  mission
— '  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor  '  [evayye\i(ra.<T&a.i  TTTIO^OIS]),
several  of  the  Lucan  hapax  legomena  occur  (e.g.  -j/eAoio  and
o-KipTcuo),  and  in  the  introductory  formula  (eirdpas  K.T.A.),  as
throughout  the  rest  of  the  address,  the  style  is  predominantly
Lucan.  Favourite  or  characteristic  Lucan  terms  recur  ;  e.g.,
K\a.ittv  (more  external  than  Mt.'s  irevBeiv),  Kara.  TO.  aura  iroietv
((123),  TrAoucrios,  vvv,  TrapaxArjo-is  (624  of  selfish  worldly  satis
faction,  as  opposed  to  messianic  bliss,  225,  cp  1625),  efiwirr^rj/jn
(625,  contrast  similarly  153),  ircirou  ((>2i  153),  iras  with  ptc.
(153047  etc.),  irAiji/  ((52435),  aTratreti'  ((5  30/1! 2  20),  aTroAa/u./Sarcii'
(1134),  KaQias  (636),  (coAjros  (638),  ojuouus  (631,  etc.),  (raAevu
(in  unique  sense  638),  exiriTrTisLV  (15  39,  cp  Mt.  15  14),  tStos  (041,
cp  Mt.  "4;  644,  cp  Mt.  1233),  epxeo-flat  "PO*  (*>47  I4**)?
ii7ro6ei'faj  ((5  47  12  5),  one  instance  of  his  preference  for  compounds
with  aim  (li  3«),  i<r^va>  [OVK]  ((3  48),  Se  <cat'  (()  39),  ei^ii  with^dative
(032_/),  the  Hebraism  iSov  yap  (('123,  etc.,  never  Mt.),  elvtvav
Se  ((5  39,  etc.  ;  Mt.  12  47  ?),  eljrev  7rapa£oA>j»>  ((5  30,  etc.,  only  Mk.
12  12),  ical  avros  ((5  20,  etc.),  irpo<Tf\>\err6a.<.  irepi  (628  Acts  8  15),
vi/uorosof  God(l  32  35  76  ;  ti  35),  the  common  Lucan  and  Pauline
constr.  of  the  article  (642  ;  only  in  Mt.  once,  73),  etc.  Notable
hapax  legeinena  are:  a7reA7rt£oi'Tes2  (•">  35),  iiirepeKxvvi'ia  (1138),
TTie'^o  (638),  TrArjjut^upyjs  ((5  48),  VKamia  (648),  fraOvvio  (IMS),  Ti6.
fleju..  ((5  48  14  25),  o-VfiTrtTrra  (li  49),  Trpocrprjyi'vfil  (li  48/?),  and  prjy/xa
(1149).  In  G27_/C  ex^poi  and  p.iarovvres  are  paralleled  a^  in  1  71,

L.  Paul's  study  (ZWT,  1901,  pp.  504-544),  'Welcher  Reiche
wird  selig  werden?'  Also  Hastings'  DB  4  19  f.

1  Cp  the  second-century  interpolations  in  Test.  Jud.  25  ;  »tai
ot  ev  TTTw\eta  5ta  Kvpioy  TrAovrta^croi'Tat  KO.\  ot  eif  TTf  eta  xopTao*-
Ori&oi'Tai  .  .  .  oi  Se  oure/Scis  7rei-0>jcroi)cri  (tai  a^xaprioAol  »cAau-
eroireu.  The  preceding  saying  (ot  ii>  AUTTT)  TeAevnjo-arTes
apaemjowTai  ev  XaP<?)  reflects  an  outlook  alien  to  either  of  the
synoptic  versions  of 'the  beatitudes— a  fact  which  incidentally
confirms  their  historic  verisimilitude.  When  the  Sermon  was
spoken,  Jesus  had  not  yet  emphasised  his  second  coining  or  even
his  death  ;  all  the  future  for  him  and  his  lay  within  the  horizon
of  his  lifetime,  as  yet  hardly  clouded  by  opposition  culminating  in
tragedy  or  delay.  Even  the  allusions  to  excommunication
from  the  synagogue  and  other  apostolic  ills  do  not  obliterate
this  primitive  feature,  although  they  qualify  it.

-  The  idea  is  one  of  several  anticipated  in  Ps.  Sol.  (cp  5  13^).
See  further,  on  the  meaning,  Reinach,  Revue  ties  etudes grecques,
1894,  pp.  52-58.

4380


7 Sermonic


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

and  ill-will  1  defined  as  speech  (icarap.)  and  act  (emjp.  cp  i  Pet.
8  16).-  Similar  phrases  recalling  the  apostolic  age  may  be  seen
in  the  use  of  Lk.'s  favourite  (eleven  times)  a-yco^  TrwO/aa  (11  13),
ayaOoiroieiv  (0  9  33  35,  never  in  Mt.  ;  cp  i  Pet.  2  15  20  36  17),  and
6epe\t.ov  (1148,  cp  i  Cor.  3  10,  etc.),  besides  phrases  like  '  Father  '
'  pitiful  '  (i)  36,  cp  2  Cor.  1  3),  irape^eiv  ((5  29),  ^dpis  (t>  32-34,  for
Mt.'s  /uucrtfos),  afiaprcoAoi  (generic  for  Mt.'s  fOvtxoi,  reAtoi/ai),
a^apto-Tos  (1535  =  2  Tim.  82  ;  cp  813  with  i  Tim.  4  i),  eAn-ifeti/
(1534,  etc.,  only  once  in  quot.  in  Mt.  122i),  and  blind  guides
(639—  Rom.  -  19,  which  is  perhaps  a  reminiscence  of  the  logion).
Similarly,  the  two  other  passages  (111-49-13  1222-34)  where
Lk.  has  reproduced  matter  included  in  Mt.'s  Sermon,  show
evident  traces  of  the  author's  style  in  favourite  or  characteristic
expressions,  such  as  :  —  ai/acrras,  avacrravrf^  (11  7./C),  Ka9'  ^jue'pa>>
(11  3),  n-pos  of  address,  very  common  in  Lk.  (11  i  1222),  elirev  8e
(11  2  1222),  TCS  with  a  noun  (11  i  12  16,  etc.,  only  once  in  Mt.
12  1  1),  <os  =  where(ll  i,  never  in  Mt.),  /SaAAdi/Ttoi/  (12  33),  cleat
with  prep,  and  art.  (11  i).

These  linguistic  phenomena  bring  Lk.'s  version  of
the  Sermon  into  line  with  the  rest  of  his  gospel.  It
cannot  be  said  that  Hebraisms  or  Aramaisms  are  at  all
characteristic  of  the  passage,  and  the  inference  is  that
Lk.  has  either  translated  from  Q  with  a  freedom  which
makes  his  rendering  something  of  a  paraphrase,  or  (as
is  more  probable)  that  like  Mt.  he  has  edited  and  in
part  rewritten  a  Greek  recension  of  Q.  In  this  Q,
to  all  appearance,  the  Sermon  lay  between  the  choice
of  the  Twelve  and  the  healing  of  the  centurion's  child  at
Capernaum  (Mk.  3  13-19=  Lk.  6  12-16  Mt.  8  5-13=  Lk.
7i-io).  Near  (NW.  )  Capernaum  and  about  midway
in  the  Galilcean  period  Jesus  may  be  conjectured  to
have  spoken  this  address.  It  is  much  less  probable
that  Lk.  had  before  him  not  merely  the  logia  but  also
another  independent  document  containing  a  discourse
which  he  confused  with  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.

In  three  instances  our  canonical  Mk.  contains  logia
equivalent  to  passages  in  the  Sermon  :  on  retribution
=  Mt-  (633/>)  7  2  Lk.  (123^)  638,
saltlef  salt  95oa  =  Mt.5^  Lk
1434,  and  on  a  forgiving  spirit  with
prayer  11  25  [26]=  Mt.  6  14  /.

The  presence  of  these  in  Mk.  may  be  due  to  a  redactor  of  the
primitive  '  Mk.,'  who  had  become  acquainted  with  the  logia;
certainly  the  first  two  Marcan  passages  occur  in  extremely
difficult  contexts  and  are  in  themselves  not  particularly  apposite,
whilst  the  third  is  distinctly  inappropriate  to  its  surroundings
(cp  Mk.  11  23  from  Mt.  17  20).  Even  were  this  hypothesis
rejected,  however,  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  presuppose
Mk.'s  acquaintance  with  Q.  There  may  have  been  identical  or
substantially  identical  logia  in  Q  and  in  the  Petrine  narrative
which  is  practically  equivalent  to  the  primitive  '  Mk.'  There
is  no  reason  to  believe  that  these  documents  were  mutually
exclusive,  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  occasionally  the
ame  logia  in  divergent  historical  settings  and  linguistic  shapes
lay  in  both:  *.*•.,  Mt.  5  29/8  (Q)=188./  Mk.  8434547;  Mt.
632  Lk.  !Ci8(Q)  =  Mt.  10g  Mk.  lOiiyC  Similarly  it  is  possible
that  even  within  Q  itself  logia  lay  in  two  different  connections
preserved  from  heterogeneous  traditions.  A  capital  instance
is  the  saying  on  the  lamp  and  the  bushel,  which  is  a  pendant  to
the  parable  of  the  seeds  (Mk.  4  21  =  Lk.  s  16,  Jiilicher,  Gleichnis-
reden  2  86  g-2  ;  cp  GOSI-EI.S,  §  134,  col.  1875),  and  also  connected
with  a  disciple-logion  (Mt.  015,  repeated  and  misplaced  by  Lk.
in  11  33).  This  seems  on  the  whole  a  preferable  hypothesis  to
that  which  would  confine  the  logion  to  the  former  setting  and
make  its  employment  elsewhere  by  Mt.  and  Lk.  an  arbitrary  dis
placement  and  application.  Mt.  7  iC-i8  and  1233-35  form
independent  variations  of  a  common  idea  rather  than  a  doublet,
and  passages  like  3io  =  7ig  87  =  1234  2833  may  reasonably  be
taken  as  reminiscences  by  a  younger  man  of  his  first  leader's
phraseology.  These  are  cases  where  pure  literary  criticism
requires  to  be  conscious  of  its  limitations.

Happily, in  the  absence  of  direct  parallels  4  to  the

1  Justin Martyr's  apology  is  offered  (1  5)  vTrep  TWI-  i<  iravTOS
•yeVous  at'Opiairiav  aSuccos  patrov^ei'iav  Kal  em/peafOjaeVwi'.

2  Similarly,  in  expanding  the  warning  against  censoriousness
('i37./C  Mt.  7  if,),  Lk.  redoubles  it  by  adding  KaT<xSi/ca<r0rJT<f  (of
which,  as  of  a7roAuo>  =  let  off,  Mt.  1827,  Mt.  is  content  to  give  a
practical  illustration  127),  and  presents  the  positive  side  as  the
soecial  form  which  appealed  to  him,  viz.  charity  in  the  sense  of
liberality or benevolence. The ground of  r>. 35 is shifted  ;
charity  now  is  advocated  as  certain  to  win  ample  return.

3  V.  30  is  textually  suspect,  however  (om.  D,  Ss),  and  with
•:>.  29  is  probably  placed  here  by  the  editor.

*  The  parallels  in  Jewish  thought  (e.g.  Hillel,  the  Essenes,
the  Pirkc  Aboth,  and  the  earlier  wisdom-literature,  including
the  negative  form  of  the  law  of  love)  may  be  seen  in  Wiinsche,
J.  Lightfoot,  Wetstein,  or  Rodrigues  '  Les  origines  eiu  Sermon
de  la.  Montagne  (for  Mt.  69-13  see  LORD'S  PKAYER),  and  are
worked  out  in  more  or  less  detail  by  critical  editors.  So  far  as

4381


9.  Trans
position  in
Sermon.


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

Sermon  in  the  fourth  gospel,  the  comparative  phenomena
8  Mt  '8  °f  the  th'ld  S°sPel  enable  us  sometimes
Sermon  a  t0  anal>'se  Mt-  s  version  of  the  Sermon,
compilation.  which  is  obviously  composite,  into  its
component  parts.  At  least  seven
passages  set  in  Mt.  5-7  appear  throughout  Lk. ,  although
differently  edited  and  applied,  in  connections  which  are
not  merely  superior  but  intrinsically  probable  from  the
historical  standpoint.  These  are  the  logia  on  (a)  coming
to  terms  with  an  opponent  (Mt.  6257  =  Lk.  1257-59),!
(6)  the  model  prayer  (Mt.  6g-i5  =  Lk.  11 1-4),  (c)  God
and  mammon  (Mt.  624=Lk.  1613),  (d)  worldly  anxiety
(Mt.  625-33  =  Lk.  1222-31), 2  (e)  encouragement  to  prayer
(Mt.  7  7-"  =  Lk.  11  9-13),  (7)  the  narrow  way  (Mt.
7i37  =  Lk.  1823  f. ),  and  (g]  the  final  rejection  (Mt.
72i-23  =  Lk.  1825-27). 3  Upon  the  other  hand,  it  must
be  admitted  that  Lk.  is  possibly  inferior  to  Mt.  in  his
setting  of  other  four  logia  which  occur  in  Mt.  5-7  (5 15  =
Lk.  1133,  5i8  =  Lk.  16i7,  53i7=Lk.  16i8,  6227  =Lk.
1134-36);  although  this  does  not  imply  that  even  Mt.
preserves  them  in  their  original  strata.  Two  instances
are  neutral — that  is  to  say,  Jesus  might  have  uttered  the
saying  upon  either  occasion  or  upon  both,  so  far  as
the  evidence  available  is  concerned  (Mt.  5i3=Lk.  1434,

Mt.  1234^).  In  three  instances  of  a  doublet  in  Mt.
affecting  the  Sermon  (6297  =1887  5 32=199  and  7ig  —
3 10  Lk.  89),  the  historic  probabilities  seem  to  favour
that  setting  of  the  logion  which  is  extra-Sermonic.

The  Sermon  also  exhibits  several  curious  instances  of
transposition  (e.g.,  the  temptation-narrative  Mt.  45-10  =
Lk.  4  5-12,  Jonah  and  Solomon  Mt.
124i7  =  Solomon  and  Jonah  Lk.  11317,
etc.)  in  passages  like  Mt.  540  (X<T.  .  .  .
.  tfj.dr.  )  =  Lk.  629  (Ifj..  K.  .  .  .  x-)>
54244  (liberality  and  prayer)  =  Lk.  628  30  (prayer  and
liberality),  6457  (sonship  and  reward)  =  Lk.  632-35
(reward  and  sonship),  Mt.  6197  (moth  and  thief )  =  Lk.
1233(thief  andmoth),  Mt.  6  197  33(treasure  in  heaven  and
seeking  kingdom)  =  Lk.  12297  33  7  (seeking  kingdom
and  treasure  in  heaven ) ,  Mt.  6  28  (neither  labour  nor  spin )  =
Lk.  1227  (neither  spin  nor  weave  [Ti.  WHm*f-]),  Mt.  7i6
(grapes  and  figs)  =  Lk.  644  (figs  and  grapes).  Such  trans
positions  occur  throughout  the  threesynoptists.  If  literary
variety  be  considered  too  artificial  a  motive  to  explain
their  phenomena,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  hypothesis
that  such  divergencies  grew  up  unconsciously  during
the  period  of  oral  transmission,  although  the  freaks  of

the  Sermon  is  concerned,  the  resemblances  only  serve  to
accentuate  the  profound  difference  between  Jesus  and  the
contemporary  piety  of  his  age,  even  when  he  is  using  the  latter's
language  and  developing  germs  already  present  on  the  higher
levels  of  the  OT  and  of  pre-Christian  Judaism.  Here,  from  the
historical  standpoint,  Jesus  appears  engaged  not  merely  in
clearing  away  accumulated  rubbish  to  permit  the  stream  of
piety  to  have  free  course,  but  in  opening  fresh  fountains  for  its
supply  as  well  as  in  disclosing  a  reach  and  flow  for  its  waters
larger  than  had  been  hitherto  imagined — much  less  attained.

1  As  Lk.  plainly  reproduces  the  original  setting  of  this  logion
(cp  Weiss,  Matth.  Ei>glm.  1587),  and  as  Mt.  521-48  represents
a  homogeneous  and  fairly  coherent  address,  it  is  probably  right
to  regard 5257 as  an interpolation  (e.g.,  Holtzmann, Bruce,
Reville). Its  insertion was  mediated  by  the  well-known  con
nection  of  debt  and  sin  in  the  ethnic  mind (Exp.T  10=4,  CP
Mt.  ti  12  i4/).

2  The  unique  '  the  nations  of  the  world  '  (TO.  e#n)  roO  Koa/xov  :
Lk.  12  30),  translating  an  Aramaic  or  Hebrew  rabbinical  equiva
lent  (DTiyn  nifiK,  Dalman,  Wortejesu,  1  1447^),  is  one  proof  that
Lk.  stands  nearer  than  Mt.  to  theoriginal  source. Lk.'s  retention
of  Lk.  12  32  balances  his  omission  of  Mt.  0  34. Similarly  the  un-
Matthsean  kingdom  of  God  in  Mt.  0  33  (as  in  12  28  HI  24)  shows
that  Q  is  reproduced  here  verbally,  as  by  Lk. ;  '  and  the  righteous
ness  '  (<cai  TT\V  Sue.  :  cp  Jas.  1  20)  is  an  editorial  explanation  (like
irpo>TOi<)  or  gloss  upon  'kingdom.' Even  were  the  variant  order
adopted  (his  righteousness  and  kingdom'),  still  '  kingdom  '  would
remain  as  the  predominating  term. Lk.  1231 is  plainly  more
faithful  to  the  original. Cp  Titius,  82.

3  Lk.  preserves,  in  an  altered  and  somewhat  expanded  form,
theoriginal  reference  to  unbelieving  Jews. Mt.,  who  applies
the  logion  to  antinomian adherents  of  Jesus  (possibly  ultra-
Pauline Christians), is obliged to use the sequel elsewhere
(8  u/:  =  Lk.  13  28yC),  as  it  would  not  have  suited  his  purpose  in
the  Sermon.

4382


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

memory  do  not  seem  quite  adequate  to  account  for
inversions  so  repeated.  Intentional  or  accidental,  they
are  to  all  appearance  destitute  of  significance.

Assuming  these  results  and  continuing  to  employ
the  largiT  report  as  more  convenient  for  the  purpose  of
comparative  analysis,  we  now  pass  to  its  divisions.  As
a  working  hypothesis  we  may  provisionally  surmise  that
the  original  scheme1  of  the  Sermon  in  Q  embraced  (a)
beatitudes,  (b)  a  statement  of  Jesus'  relation  to  the
Jewish  law,  followed  by  (f )  a  definition  of  his  own  nova
lex,  and  (d)  a  warning  against  unreal,  idle  adherence  to
it  and  to  himself.  If  Lk. 's  level  spot  (617)  meant  a
plateau  among  the  hills,  a  comprehensive  designation
of  the  Sermon  both  in  Lk.  and  Mt.  might  be  '  the
teaching  on  the  hill-side'  or  '  the  hill-teaching.'

(a)  The  divergence  of  the  beatitudes  in  style  and
spirit  accentuates  at  the  very  outset  the  general  variation

in rr,u  of  the  two  reports. Lk. 's  four  beatitudes

10.  I  he  ,., . ,.

v«~*.-4. j  are followed* by  four woes after Dt.

beatitudes  4l- , , ,,, J.  , .,

nnH  WOPS  2'  llf-)'< Mt-  s  eight"  stand  alone,  save

itlitl VVUcb. /•  ......

for  an  expansion  or  application  of  the
eighth.  Lk. 's  are  more  vehement  (sec.  pers.  plur. ),
Mt.'s  (exc.  5n)  employ  the  quieter  third  plur.  Lk.'s
order  (poor,  hungry,  weeping,  persecuted)  differs  from
what  verbally  corresponds  to  it  in  Mt.  (poor  in  spirit,
mourners,  meek,4  hungry  for  righteousness,  merciful,
pure  in  heart,  peacemakers,  persecuted),  much  more
his  general  atmosphere  and  colour.  The  original
Sermon  in  Q  probably  contained  beatitudes  and  woes  in
the  second  person  corresponding  to  those  preserved  with
somewhat  heightened  ascetic  colouring  by  Lk.  ;  their
number  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  with  any  certainty  ;
their  nature  is  as  elusive,  except  that  it  was  less  restricted
and  external  than  Lk.'s  report  (see  below,  on  the
audience).  Mt.  5uf.  =Lk.  622  f.  is  apostolic  in  its
present  form  (cp  for  my  sake,  the  Name,  and  terms  of
persecution5);  especially  in  Mt.  5n/.  it  is  a  comment
such  as  Mt.  loves,  added  here  to  lead  over  from  the
beatitudes  into  5 13-16.

As  the  crucial  instance  of  the  first  beatitude  indicates,  the
discrepancies  of  the  two  reports  run  back  not  only  to  the  pre
dilections  of  the  final  editors,  but  to  variant  renderings  of  the
vernacular  in  Q  :  trr<a\ai  and  raireivoi  are  (S's  equivalents  for
D'13y  in  Is.  fil  i,  a  passage  applied  by  Lk.  elsewhere  to  Jesus
and  his  career  (4  ij  /.,  where  Mt.  places  the  Sermon),  and  irpaeis
is  similarly  used.  Mt.'s  beatitudes,  therefore,  represent  varia
tions  upon  the  leading  idea  of  '  the  poor  being  blessed  ' — '  poor '
being  the  devout  lower  classes  in  the  main.  Lk.'s  rendering  is
truer  to  the  letter,  Mt.'s  to  the  spirit,  of  the  original.6  "No

1  Feine  ('  Ueber  das  gegenseitige  Verhaltniss  der  Texte  der
Bergpredigt  bei  Mt.  und  bei  Lk. ,'  JPT,  1885,  pp.  1-85)  finds
the  original  Sermon  in  Mt.  5  3-10  17  20-22  27^  33-48  6  1-6  16-18
7  1-5  12  15-1821  24-27.  The  Hebrew  and  Greek  reconstruction
attempted  by  Resch  (Avssercanon.  Parallcltt-xte,  1893-7,
262-65  81-102  H3yC  862-98  101-6;  Die  Logia  Jtsu,  1898,  pp.
18-29)  traces  the  Sermon  in  61-6  T.if.  20-22  27^?  31  3^--;5a  37-48
7  1-5  12  16-18  2O_/T  24-27  ;  whilst  Wendt's  outline  consists  of  Lk.
620-26  Mt.  617-20  21-24  27-293:  31-42  7  12  643-47  Lk.  034  Mt.
5  48  0  1-18  7  1-5  15-19  7  21  (Lk.  6  46)  24-27.

a  Fourfold  woe  in  En.  5*04-7.  Ss.  om.  Lk.  6  2511,  KanjpTiO'-
/ueVos  .  .  .  aurou  40,  and  softens  beatitudes  from  second  to  third
person  plural.  See  J.  Weiss,  Predigt  Jssu,  179-187.

3  Or  seven  (as  e.g.,  4  Esd.  7  78-99.  where  seven  woes  follow),  if
5  ioi>  (=63^)  is  supposed to  mean  a fresh  start. It is  quite
fanciful  to  see  a  counterpart  to  the  decalogue  in  ten  beatitudes
(I)elitzsch, Edersheim). On Mt.  63, with  its  secondary  form,
cp  Klopper,  ZWT,  1894,  pp.  175-191,  with  the  essay  of  Kabisch
in  St.Kr.  (1896)  195-215  ;  on  the  general  superiority  of  Lk.'s
report,  Adeney,  Expos.  5th  ser.  2361-376.

4  The alternative order (meek, mourners), even if better
attested,  would  not  affect  this  point.

8  There  was  a  reasonable  ground  for  anticipating  persecution,
although  Mt.  either  ignores  or  fails  to  emphasise  it,  in  the  recent
arrest  of  Jesus'  master  (Mt.  4 12),  as  well  as  in  the  conflict
which  had  taken  place  between  Jesus  and  the  religious
authorities  (JESUS,  §§  22_/I).  The  Sermon  by  no  means  portrays
the  flush  of  an  absolute  GaliUean  success.  See  §  6,  n.  i.

6  Lk.'s  fundamental  idea  is  (cp  Feine,  25-35)  that  no  satis
faction  will  be  got  in  the  present  age,  such  are  its  contradictions
and  oppressive  manners;  Mt.'s  view  is,  no  satisfaction  will  be
got  in  this  or  any  age  of  the  world,  since  the  inner  needs  of  the
soul  cannot  be  satisfied  outside  of  God.  Lk.'s  report  suits  the
original  situation  better.  But  Mt.'s  is  truer  to  the  central  teach
ing  of  Jesus;  his  beatitudes  give  rich  and  vigorous  expression
to  the  purest  ideal  of  the  Christian  consciousness,  even  although,

4383


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

doubt,  language  such  as  that  preserved  by  Lk.  would  appear
ambiguous  and  unsatisfactory  to  those  who  had  lost  touch  with
the  primitive  situation  in  which  the  words  were  spoken,  or  who
had  not  the  same  intellectual  sympathies.  Mt.'s  version,  figura
tive  and  traditional  in  its  use  of  language  hallowed  by  religious
associations,  would  appeal  to  a  larger  circle.

(b}  The  attitude  of  Jesus to the  Jewish  law  would

naturally  form  a  cardinal  topic  in  any  such  inaugural

11 Jesus address,  especially  as  popular  curiosity


and  the  law.


must  have  been  already  whetted and


misunderstanding  created  by  the  con
flicts  between  Jesus  and  the  religious  authorities.  The
prospect  of  a  revolutionary  attitude  upon  his  part  towards
the  law  must  have  stirred  hopes  and  fears  alike  un
founded.  But  the  original  form  of  the  passage  in  Q
seems  to  have  been  expanded  by  Mt.  and  abbreviated
by  Lk.  The  latter  had  an  obvious  motive  for  omitting
anti-legal  polemic  from  his  narrative  as  unsuitable  and
irrelevant  to  his  audience  ;  his  familiarity  with  most  of
the  logia  underlying  Mt.  5 13-16  17-20  21-48  is  proved  by
his  reproduction  of  several  elsewhere  in  more  or  less  apt
situations  (see  above,  §  8/. ).  Mt.  521-24  ^f.  31-48,  there
fore,  is  in  all  likelihood  substantially  reproduced  from
Q,  filled  out  by  the  incorporation  of  two  logia  from  other
places  (25/.  29/).1  From  this  passage  in  his  edition
of  Q,  Lk.  has  merely  taken  the  climax-  (i.e. ,  the  super
seding  of  retaliation  by  unstinted  love),  in  order  to  pre
serve  the  distinctive  assertion  of  the  new  law.  The
linguistic  variations  seldom  affect  the  sense  of  the  parallel
passages  materially.  Nor  does  the  catechetical  form  of
Mt.'s  version  with  its  careful  structure,  reproduced  from
the  church  catechism  of  Q,  imply  that  Jesus  did  not  use
such  a  method  of  instruction.  He  taught  as  a  rabbi.
The  apostolic  churches  arranged  and  used  his  sayings
for  catechetical  purposes,  but  in  this  Jesus  had  to  some
degree  anticipated  them  ;  the  five  commandments  of  the
lawgiver  in  Mt.  5  21^  may  well  be  a  specimen  of  the
preaching  which  Jesus  already  practised  in  the  syna
gogues,3  where  part  of  the  sen-ice  consisted  in  the  read
ing  of  OT  scriptures  from  the  law  and  the  prophets,
followed  by  comments  (Lk.  4 17,  cp  Acts  13 15;  Schiir.
Hist.  ii.  263/  81).  Cp  SYNAGOGUE,  §§8^

The  transition  from  the  beatitudes  into  the  relation  of
Jesus  to  the  law  was  probably  mediated  in  Q  by  logia
12  Mt  r  6  (COITesPon(^'ng  to  those  substantially
preserved  in  Mt.  513-16  17  20)  upon  the
sphere  and  function  of  those  whose  character  had  just
been  described,  as  well  as  upon  the  personal  attitude
assumed  by  their  leader  to  the  conventional  religion.
Whether  5 13-16  in  whole  or  part  belonged  to  the  original
Sermon  is  doubtful.  Were  the  Sermon  addressed  to  the
Twelve  (so,  e.g. ,  Hahn,  Resch,  and  [Lk.]  O.  Holtz-
mann),  the  passage  would  be  quite  in  line  with  1041,
where  the  Twelve  are  also  prophets  (cp  5 12  and  5 13).
Even  with  an  audience  of  many  disciples,  as  Mt.  and
Lk.  both  describe  the  scene,  the  appropriateness  of
the  passage  is  defensible  (the  prophets  as  in  Jas.  5io/. ).
The  connection  of  5 12(1^.623)  and  5 17  is  excellent;
but  the  intervening  sentences  may  have  been  an  aside

upon  critical  grounds,  they  may  not  justify  their  claim  to  be
regarded  as  the  prelude  to  the  historical  Sermon.

1  Possibly  v.^f.  are  also  foreign  to  their  context,  as  that
stood  in  the  original  Sermon. The  superior  position  of  5  32  at
IDg  might,  but  does  not  necessarily,  involve  that  &3iyC  did  not
belong  to  its  Sermonic  context. The  omission  of  5  47  (with  k,
Ss.)  would  contribute  to  the  terseness  of  the  context.

2  Thus  failing  in  the  Sermon  to  establish  (with  Mt.)  the  his
torical  continuity  of  Jesus  with  the  religious  tradition  of  the
past. He  had  done  this  already  and  otherwise  (4  io_/C). But
with  Lk.  the  disciples  of  Jesus  within  Judaism  have  'somewhrt
to  become'  rather  than  'somewhat  to  cast  off,'  in  taking  their
course  of  obedience  to  him.

3  On  the  significance  of  this  early  ministry  among  the  syna
gogues  of  Galilee  (Lk.  4  15  444  =  Mk.  1  39  Mt.  423),  which  was
interrupted  and  checked  by  the  scribes,  see  Bruce,  With  Open
Face,  8o_-io6  (1896). '  Great  temporary  popularity,  little  perma
nent  fruit'  sums  up  its  effects;  but,  as  the  Sermon  indicates,  il
enabled  Jesus  to  come  to  an  issue  with  the  current  legal  religion,
besides  inducing  him  to  turn  his  attention  specially  to  the  sus
ceptible  disciples  (fiaSrirai)  who  showed  some  capacity  of  mind
and  soul  for  the  new  teaching.

4384


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

(for  which  Mt.  has  prepared  by  the  words  rota  irpb
V/JLUIV),  after  which  Jesus  resumed  the  tenor  of  his  speech.
Function  depends  on  character,  and  privilege  implies
responsibility  ;  the  disciples  are  an  Israel  within  Israel,1
whose  raison  d'etre  is  to  permeate  the  people  as  a  whole,
instead  of  preaching  an  esoteric  piety  or  an  Essene-like
retirement.  The  horizon  of  Jesus  was  primarily  Judaism
at  this  period  (Rom.  167-9);  with  a  high  and  devout
consciousness  of  his  mission,  which  was  partly  to  be
achieved  through  his  adherents,  he  sets  himself  and
them  (in  these  logia)  to  the  regeneration  of  Judaism-'2
Whatever  be  the  origin3  of  1+6,  the  logia  13  and  i4<z
(15-16)  may  quite  well  have  lain  side  by  side  (otherwise
GOSPELS,  §  134)  in  the  original  (cp  the  Roman  proverb,
nil  sale  et  sole  utilius),  though  not  exactly  in  their  present
form.  The  traces  of  editorial  handling,  however,  do  not
affect  the  substance  of  the  passage  ;  its  parts  fit  in  here
at  least  as  well  as,  if  not  better  than,  in  their  arrangement
by  Mk.  and  Lk.  ;  and  as  a  whole  this  didactic  piece
vindicates  its  position  in  the  Sermon.  If  any  '  definite
historical  situation '  (Weizs. )  needs  to  be  sought  for  the
passage,  its  present  site  affords  a  motif  of  sufficient
psychological  and  historical  importance.

Whilst  5 17  20  is  not  only  an  authentic  saying  but  also

in  its  proper  place  as  a  vindication  of  Jesus  against  the

i  o TUT*  r  suspicion  of  laxity  and  undue  mildness

13. Mt.  0  17-20. • i  d  i_ i_- r  , •

raised4  by  his  free,  daring  attitude  to
the  law,  5  i8/l  is  widely  accepted  as  representing  a
Jewish -Christian  gloss  which  evidently  (cp  its  partial
retention  in  sharper  form  by  Lk.  1617,  Mt. 's  lura  being
secondary,  Dalman  4-5)  belonged  not  merely  to  Cjmt
but  to  Q.  See  GOSPKI.S,  §§  34. «,  112  c,  128  e  ;  Feine,
pp.  25-35  ;  also  Moffatt,  Historical  Xew  Testament
(«  1901,  pp.  645/1).

The  aim  of  the  OT  religion,  as  expressed  by  the  phrase  'the
law  or  the  prophets,' B  was  to  be  realised  by  Jesus  in  the  higher
Christian  'righteousness '  (SiKaioa-vvr)),  not  (as  i8_/T  imply)  through
the  permanent  validity  of  the  Mosaic  code  with  its  statutory  and
ritual  elements,  although  the  more  conservative  circles  of  Jewish
Christianity  believed  that  the  latter  was  not  merely  legitimate
but  essential  to  the  new  faith.  It  is  one  thing  to  say  that  the  law
contained  a  divine  revelation  ;  it  would  have  been  quite  another
thing  for  Jesus  to  say  that  the  Mosaic  law  (Leviticus  and  all)  with
its  injunctions  had  still  a  future  and  a  role.  The  very  qualifica
tions  and  repudiations  of  6  21-44  indicate  the  irrelevance  of  5  isf.
to  the  original  context.6  On  the  other  hand,  6  1720  define  not

1  5  14,  with  an  instance  of  Mt.'s  partiality  for  'the  world  '  (6
/totTfios),  reflects  (as  it  stands)  the  universalism  which  forms  one
trait  of  Mt.  Originally  in  Aramaic  the  logion  had  a  range  con
sonant  with  the  historical  situation  of  Jesus  and  the  disciples  (so
vrj?,  i3  =  land,  not  earth).  Cp  Dalman's  U'orte  Jesu,  1136144.
The  selection  of  the  twelve  shows  that  Jesus  already  contem
plated  a  vocation  on  the  part  of  his  disciples,  which  was  not
confined,  of  course,  to  the  Twelve  (cp  Lk.  839  Mk.  938).  Un
fortunately  Mt.,  who  preserves  the  logion  on  vocation,  omits  to
narrate  beforehand  the  incident  which  helps  to  elucidate  its
aptness.

-  It  is  needless, therefore, to  regard  5  13-16  (with Reville,
2128-130)  as  a  patriotic  address  to  the  Jewish  people  ideally
represented  by  the  crowd,  whom  Jesus  exhorts  to  be  faithful  to
their  historical  vocation  and  to  show  themselves  worthy  of  their
religious  superiority  to  the  surrounding  world. No  direct  preach
ing  as  yet  (except  for  the  Twelve? Mk.  1  17  =  Mt.  4  19); only
the  expression  of  an  upright  and  exceptionally  pious  life. Cp
Titius,  12-17.

a  The  Oxyrh.  Logion  7  ('a  city  built  upon  a  high  hill  and
established  cannot  either  fall  or  be  hidden ')  blends  5  14^  and
724_/C,  and  614-16  was  known  to  the  author  of  the  Pastorals
(i  Tim.  5  25)  as  well  as  to  Justin  (A  pal.  1  i<>).

*  Perhaps  already  in  his  younger  brother  James,  who  appears
in  tradition  (cp  von  Dobschiitz,  Die  urchristlichen  Gttneindtn,
uzf.  272_/  [1902])  as  an  austere  and  strict  Jewish  Christian;
certainly  jn  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  felt  themselves  re
sponsible  for  defending  the  faith  against  unsettling  tendencies.
Even  the  disciples  may  already  have  needed  a  warning  of  this
kind  against  rash  inferences  from  sayings  like  Mk.  L'  iic.

3  Unless  (Wernle)  '  or  the  prophets '  (»)  TOI/S  7rpo<|»;Tas)  be  an
editorial  gloss  (om.  Clem.  Horn.  3  51).  But  if  Paul  could  appeal
from  '  the  law '  to  '  the  law  and  the  prophets  '  for  anticipations  of
that  '  righteousness  of  God '  which  was  realised  in  the  gospel
(Rom.  821  f.),  surely  Jesus  could  have  done  the  same.  Chry-
sostom's  discovery  of  a  certain  reserve  and  guarded  tone  in  5  17
(oiKo>'o/iia  Aoywi')  is  imaginary.  On  '  the  righteousness  of
Christ's  kingdom  '  (Mt.  5  17  f.),  cp  Dods,  Expos.  4th  ser.  §^of•
i<5iy;,  also  Gardner's  Explor.  Kvangclica,  ig2.f.

*>  As  it  stands,  however,  5  17-20  reflects  Mt.'s  apologetic  temper,
especially  in  its  effort  to  show  the  Jews  of  the  Diaspora  the

4385


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

merely  the  theme  of  the  Sermon  but  the  permanent  attitude  of
Jesus  towards  possible  abuses  and  misunderstanding  of  hi:,  t«j»i<«;l
(cpKlopper,^/^"/',  1896,  pp.  1-23).  The  critical  attitude  which  a
reformer  linds  it  necessary  to  assume  towards  orthodox  opinion
and  habit  in  order  to  clear  the  road  for  positive  and  healthy  pro
gress,  is  generally  mistaken  for  mere  iconoclasm  ;  he  is  impugned
as  a  mover  of  old  landmarks,  and  one  of  his  first  and  hardest
duties  is  to  show  that  valid  change  and  advance  in  religion  only
knit  the  bonds  of  moral  claim  more  tightly  on  the  conscience.

(c)  The  abruptness  with  which  the  nova  lex  is  intro
duced  in  Lk.  (627-36)  contrasts  unfavourably  with  the

14  The  fine  climax  of  ^II-  (543-48), J  which  comes
new  law  after  a  smooth  and  clear  series  of  anti
theses  to  the  traditional  legislation  (21-42).

In  Mt.  643-48,  which  Mt.  has  correctly  preserved  as  the
kernel  of  the  Sermon,  the  new  '  righteousness  '  already  sketched
is  elucidated  with  respect  to  (i.)  murder  and  anger  (21-24)  ',  see
RACA  and  SvNEDRiu.M.'2  The  form  of  denunciation  (eVoxos  with
gen.  of  punishment  or  punishment's  source,  in  Mk.  829  of  the
crime)  is  said  to  be  common  in  inscriptions  against  guilty  persons
in  Asia  Minor  (Rams.  Exj>.  T\§$$f.)\v.  v^f.  reflect  Palestinian
Christianity  previous  to  70  A.D.  and  emphasise  the  duty  of  recon
ciliation  as  paramount,  superseding  even  the  claim  of  sacrifice.
Cp  Epict.  Diss.  'i  10,  'if  you  go  and  blame  your  brother,  I  tell
you,  you  have  forgotten  who  you  are  and  what  you  are  called  '
(i.e.,  a  brother).  The  same  inwardness  breathes  in  the  treatment
(ii.)  of  adultery  and  divorce3  (277:  3iyC)  ;  cp  GOSI-KLS,  §  145^;
MARRIAGE,  §  6.  (iii.)  Laxity  in  oaths  (33-37),  as  well  as  in
marriage,  had  already  been  checked  by  the  Essenes,  and  34  f,
is  a  Jewish  commonplace  (cp,  besides  Wetstein,  tui  loc.,  Charles
on  Slav.  En.  49  i,  also  Harnack  or  Conybeare  on  Acta  Apvllon.
6).  A  remarkable  parallel  from  a  pagan  inscription  of  the  Kata-
kaumene  is  cited  by  Rams.  Kxp.  T  10  109,  and  Doughty  (Ar.
Des.  1  364-269)  notes  the  frivolous,  lavish  use  of  oaths  among  the
Arabs,  (iv.)  'Retaliation  superseded  by  beneficence  '  (^8-42)  is
put  in  characteristically  Oriental  and  paradoxical  form,"  though
Epictetus  also  (Diss.  3  22)  teaches  the  cynic  to  practise  forbear
ance,  and  when  flogged  to  love  those  that  flog  bin  ,  even  yield-
ing  his  body  to  the  free  pleasure  of  anybody,  (v.)  Love  to  one's
enemies  (43-48),  with  prayer  for  them,  constitutes  the  distinctive
spirit  of  the  new  reign  (cp  v.  20  with  v.  46  f.)  ;  the  divine  ideal  is
magnanimity,  which  Jesus  inculcates  on  his  adherents  as  their
duty  ;  in  short  a  '  love  imperturbable  '  (Beyschlag),  which  is  not
deterred  from  serving  other  people  by  their  ingratitude  or  active
opposition,4  but  finds  its  motive  in  ardent  desire  to  be  like  God,
and  its  method  in  instinctive  activity,  not  in  punctilious  per
formance  of  set  duties.  See  LOVINGKINDNESS,  §  4,  and
NEIGHUOUR.

Lk.'s  indifference  to  the  critical  attitude  of  Jesus,
which  dictated  his  omission  of  the  logia  corresponding
to  Mt.  621-48,  leaves  him  with  a  report  of  the  nm'a  lex  (6
27-36)  which  is,  upon  the  whole,  less  admirably  arranged  5

spiritual  continuity  bet  ween  esteem  for  the  Law  as  an  ethical  code
and  devotion  to  Jesus  its  'end'  (re'Ao?) ;  see  Wernle,  ZNTW',
1900,  p.  i,-jf.  This  tendency  has  led  Mt.  to  preserve  traditions
and  logia  which  often  seem  rather  alien  to  the  catholic  spirit  of
his  own  mind.  See  Manchot,  J'rot.  Mannish.,  1902,  pp.  211-227.

1  '  This  is  not  by  any  means  an  ideal  such  as  could  be  derived
from  the  hopes  of  the  future  cherished  by  the  Jews,  or  from  their
law;  it  is  in  the  truest  sense  the  possession  of  Jesus  alone1  (O.
Holtzmann,  Lfbenji'su,  192). Whilst  this  is  true  of  048,  b+if.
is  not  unparalleled; cp,  e.g.,  Seneca  (de  Benef.kib, 'si  deos
imitaris,  da  et  ingratis  beneficia  ;  nam  et  sceleratis  sol  oritur,  et
piratis  patent  maria  '),  and,  earlier  still  in  Judajsm,  Ecclus.  4  10
('  He  as  a  father  to  the  fatherless.  ... So  shall  thou  be  as  a  son
of  the  most  High'). See  O. Holtxmann,  Neittcst.  Zeitgcsch.
(i8g5)226_/,  Lightfoot,  Philippians,  283-287,  and  //Cl6i-622i4_/T

2  On  622,  Field's  Otiutn  Norvic.  (pars  tertia,  1899),  3-5  ;  and
for  Lk.  635,  ibid.,  59. The  opprobrious  terms  of  Mt.  622  may
have  been  actually  thrown  at  Jesus  by  the  Pharisees  and  their
followers  in  the  heat  of  controversy.

3  When  these  are  treated  separately,  the  antitheses  against
the  Scribes  fall  into  two  sets  of  three  (&2iyC  27  f.  J,if-\  33  f-  38./C
43_/C),  followed  by  three  anti-Pharisaic  in  0  if.  $f.  i6_/T,  followed
by  three  others  in  1  if.  i,f.  12. It  is  doubtful  whether  this  trim
scheme  was  present  to  the  mind  of  the  editor  of  Mt.  ;  but  even  if
it  was,  the  arrangement  seems  artificial  rather  than  spontaneously
natural,  and  forms  one reason  for  doubting  whether  the  con
nection  of  <>i-i8  with  what precedes is anything more  than
literary. The  last-named  passage  is  certainly  less  spontaneous
than, e.g., Mk.  11  24  f.  2  1822. But  the  methods  of  Christ's
teaching  were  versatile,  and  whilst  the  passage  is  misplaced  and
possibly  edited,  it  seems  hardly  safe  to  argue  back  to  '  ecclesi
astical  piety'  as  its  basis  (Carpenter,  First Three  GosJ>elsW,
1890,  p.  356).

4  Another  genuine  reflection  of  this  evangelic  tradition  occurs
in  the  two  logia  (preserved  by  Jerome)  of  the  '  Gospel  to  the
Hebrews':  (a)  et  nunquam  la;ti  sitis,  nisi  cum  fratrem  vestrum
videritis  in  caritate,  (/<)  inter  maxima  ponitur  crimina,  qui  fratris
sui  spiritum  contristaverit. Jesus  left  it  to  common  sense  to
apply  the  logion  on  indiscriminate  charity  ;  the  necessary  quali
fication  is  explicitly  appended  in  Did.  1  6.

6  Resch  suggests  for  (5  40  a  place  in  the  address  at  the  Last
Supper  (after  Mt.  2028  Mk.  1045).  At  any  rate  639/1  is  irrele-

4386


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT


and  less  definite  in  content  (cp,  e.g. ,  sinners  for  pagans
and  tax-gatherers,  xpTjtTTo's  [635]  for  Mt.  545,  sons  of
most  High1  for  Mt.  648,  the  omission  of  538/1  4143).  He-
has  taken  Mt.  f>.|(<'  (in  its  logia  form),  expanded  it
(627^-28^),  and  reproduced  Mt.  644^-47  in  his  own  style,
substituting  for  45  logia  (629 /.)  roughly  answering  to
Mt.  5  39^-40  42.  Starting  afresh  from  5  44<z  he  expands
it  independently,  though  Mt.'s  climax2  (048)  becomes
with  him  a  transition  to  what  follows  (636/1),  and  love
is  not  thrown  into  relief  against  the  background  of
formalism.  The  variations  in  expression  are  seldom
significant  ;  the  main  alteration  of  colour  is  robbery
(Lk.  629)  for  legal  proceedings  (Mt.  5 40)  as  an  oppor
tunity  for  displaying  the  habitual  mood  of  disinterested
iove. 3

The  law  of  unflinching  love  carries  with  it,  as  a
corollary,  abstinence  from  censoriousness  (Mt.  7 1-5
15  Mt  61-18  Lk-(537/  4i/)-  Mt-.  however,  has  in
terpolated  two  long  sections  at  this  point :
3  34'  (i. )  an  exposure  of  the  Pharisaic  praxis
(61-18,  incorporating  unchronologically  the  Lord's
Prayer;  see  LORD'S  PRAYER  and  Gary,  114-120),
which  is  undoubtedly  genuine  but  misplaced,  and  (ii.)
an  appeal  against  worldly  anxiety  (625-34),  which  Lk.
(indifferent  to  the  former)  has  preserved  elsewhere  in  a
superior  context  (1222-31/1 ),  where  it  is  followed  by  the
more  positive  logion  on  heavenly  treasures  (1233/1  =
Mt.  619-21)  used  by  Mt.4  rather  aptly  to  connect  618
and  625.'  The  catechism  (i.)  upon  a  Christian's  duty
to  his  neighbour,  his  God,  and  himself  (expressed  in
rhythmic  form,  62-45/1  16-18),  which  has  a  title,6  61,
and  a  logion,  67-9(2,  introductory  to  the  specimen
prayer,  69^-13  (14/1),  describes  the  trinity  of  normal
religious  practices  for  an  early  Christian, — alms  (Ai,MS,
§  4;  COMMUNITY  OF  GOODS,  §  5  ;  cp  GASm.  HG  634),
prayer"  (see  PRAYER,  g§  6-7),  and  fasting  (FASTING,
§  4) — the  two  latter  combined  in  Did.  8  and  Test.  Jos.
3,  etc.  (ii. )  The  following  counsel8  of  idealism  formed
a  unity  in  Q  ( Lk.  1222-34  =  Mt.  6  19-34).  The  significant
element  in  the  material  peculiar  to  Lk.  is  /U.TJ  (t.eTtupi-
ficrde  (KV  '  Be  not  of  doubtful  mind  '  :  1229),  the  more


vantly  introduced  ;  its  logia  are  correctly  placed  by  Mt.  (15  14  =
Lk.  039,  1024/C  =  Lk.64o).  It  is  difficult  to  discover  (with  Hahn)
seven  commandments  in  627-38,  or  four  parables  in  639-49.

1  On  this  term  see  Che.  OPs.  &$/.,  Dalman,  162  f.,  HC\  342.

2  The  supposed  originals  gSt?  or  VDn>  of  which  re'Aetos  and
OiKTip/JLiav  are  held  to  be  variant translations,  do  not  seem  con
vincing. On  Lk.  's  superior  connection  in  6  36  37  see  Bousset  82yC

3  The  original  form  of  the  beatitudes,  the  presence  of  traits
denoting  social  oppression  and  an  atmosphere  of  strain,  even  of
worldly  perplexity,  together  with  the  absence  of  Mt.  6  25-34  from
the  Sermon,  render  it  impossible  to  regard  it  as  the  echo  of  a
Galilaean  idyll  with  pastoral  charm,  although  Mt.  lends  itself  to
this  impression  of  summer  teaching  among  the  hills. On  the
real  state  of  Galilee  and  its  population,  see  GALILEE,  §  6,  Schiir.
Hist.  ii.  1  3-5. It  is  remarkable  that  the  polemic  of  the  Sermon
omits  any  reference  to  the  Sabbath  question,  upon  which  the
bitter  enmity  of  the  Pharisees  had  already  come  to  a  head  against
Jesus  (Mk.  36  Lk.  611). Mt.  prefers  to  postpone  the  Sabbath
disputes  unhistorically  (12  1-8  9-14).

4  The  real  treasure(»>4  6  18)  is  secured,  not  by  ostentation,  but
by  inwardness  and  single-minded  devotion  to  God. Unfeigned
and undivided  desire  for  heavenly wealth (0  19-24)  is  sure of
satisfaction  (cp  Ja.  1  5-8),  whatever  else  fails.

8  The  gap  is  further  filled  up  by  means  of  logia  (622-24)
which — to  judge  from  their  erratic  and  less  happy  situation
(11  34-36  16  13)  in  Lk. — seem  to  have  had  no  historical  setting  in
Q.  See  EYE  (col.  1453),  also  Wernle,  Synoptische  Frag-e(iSgg),
74,  and  O.  Holtzmann's  Lebcn  Jesu  (280-2).  Mt.  624  is  echoed
in  i  Cor.  102oy?,  and  cited  in  2  Clem.  6  i,  Orig.  c.  Cels.  8  15.

6  The  possible  interpretation of  'righteousness'  (Sucatocrunj)
as  'alms'  (eAer)/Lio<run)  :  2  Cor.  t'9yC  =  Ps.  11-g)  would  make  61
specifically  part  of  62-4.

7  '  The house of  Clod abhors much speaking. Pray  thou
with  a  loving  heart  ;  the  petitions  of  all  are  in  secret. He  will
do  thy  business,  He  will  hear  that  which  thou  sayest,  and  accept
thine  offerings '  (from  the  Ani  papyrus,  Exp.  T  6  537). Prayer,
fasting,  and  alms  in  Tobitl2s.

8  Kpictetus,  in  urging  the  same  trust  in  providence,  adduces !
the  odd  consideration  that  runaway  slaves  (not  birds  or  flowers) j
get  a  livelihood  somehow  (D:ss.  1982'.). It  is  one  trace  of  a !
certain  historic  fitness  in  the  evangelic  sources  or  their  editors, I
that  figures  drawn  from  the  vine  (Judaea's  characteristic  plant)
are  confined  to  the  Jud«ean  ministry,  whilst  the  corn  flourishes
naturally  enough  in  the  Galitean  tradition. See  Bousset  44.

4387


accurate  because  simpler  form  of  31  (  =  Mt.  633),  and  32
(originally  between  Mt.  633  and  34).  Upon  the  other
hand,  1233  's  Lucan,  generalised  in  order  to  introduce
•what  follows  ;  26  is  possibly  editorial  (om.  D)  ;  while
Mt.  has  preserved  634  and  the  truer  Father  in  626.

Of  these  two  pieces  (i.)  is  less  certainly  than  (ii.)  foreign  to
the  original  Sermon;  Oi-6i6-i8  might  lie  conceivably  between
the  anti-Pharisaic  521-48  and  7  1-5  (so,  e.g.,  Neander,  Keim,
Weiss,  Feine,  Bruce),  but  it  has  all  the  appearance  of  an  inde
pendent  piece.  And  7  1-5  flows  readily  out  of  643-48 — so,  e.g.,
Kesch  after  Keim,  who  regards  6 19-34  as  the  nucleus  of  the
inaugural  popular  Sermon  (also  7  24-27)  which  he  strangely  sees
combined  with  a  later  sermon  to  disciples  on  the  Law.

In  637-42  Lk.'s  expansion  of  Mt.  1  ia  is  secondary
and  his  insertion  of  639 f.1  (between  38*:=  Mt.  lib  and
41  =  Mt.  7s)  only  confuses  the  original  context.  Other
wise  this  injunction  to  pursue  a  quiet,  inoffensive  life  (cp
Test.  Issach.  3)2  lies  visibly  enough  behind  the  sub
ordinate  linguistic  variations  of  the  two  reports,  and  in
Mt.  closer  to  the  original.  Jesus  speaks  in  the  figura
tive  and  proverbial  language  of  popular  wit  against  the
vice  of  censoriousness,  suggested  by  the  Pharisaic  type
of  character.  Lk.  thinks  rather  of  the  inner  life  of  the
churches,  and  applies  the  warning  specially  to  niggardli
ness  or  lack  of  '  charity '  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the
word  ( Ecclus.  29  io/.  etc. ).

The  loose  series  of  sententious  aphorisms  in  Mt.
7i-i43  has  no  connection  with  the  Sermon;  76  is
evidently  an  erratic  boulder  (possibly  apostolic),  7  7-11
should  follow  6g/.  (as  Lk.  \\gf.)  or  633/1,  and  7i2
connects  with  642  (as  Lk.  631:  Holtzmann,  Wendt)
better  than  with  7 1-5  (Weiss),  although  as  it  lies  it  is
meant  to  round  off  5 17.  Similarly  7^3_f.  belongs  to  a
later  context  (Lk.  1823 /. );  Mt.  has  inserted  it  here  for
dramatic  reasons  as  a  logion 4  suitable  for  an  opening
address,  adding  some  expansions  (77  away,  ei's  rr/i>
diru\fiav ,  17  cnrdy.  ei'j  T.  fayv}  to  bring  out  his  customary
eschatological  interest  (cp  Dalman,  130/1).

(</)  The  finale  of  the  Sermon,  a  warning  against
spurious  forms  of  discipleship  (Mt.  7 16^-27  =  Lk.  643-49),

.  _.  has  been  expanded  by  Mt.'s  insertion  of
,.'  .  an  apostolic  logion  against  false  prophets5
(7  15,  which  i6a  connects  with  what  follows)
and  another  logion  (721-23)  presented  by  Lk.  in  its  true
setting  (1326/1).  The  latter,  which  represents  Jesus  as
Messianic  arbiter  of  human  lives,  is  plainly  proleptic
and  cannot  have  been  uttered  before  16x6/1  ;  like
several  other  passages  of  the  kind,  if  not  apostolic  (cp
2  Ti.  219,  etc.)  it  is  an  unhistorical  anticipation  (at
least  in  its  present  form,  for  '  lord  '  [/a'/ue]  etc.  in  Lk.  646
may  represent  some  Aramaic  or  Hebrew  term  for
'master').  Cp  GOSPELS,  §  20  (iv. ).  On  the  other  hand,
Lk.  645  is  not  specially  homogeneous  with  its  context
(cp  Mt.  1235),  and  Mt.'s  opening  (7i6^-i8)  is  superior.
The  identity  and  outline  of  the  closing  parable  6  are  quite

1  Neubauer  quotes  a  Galilaean  proverb  similar  to  6  39  (Stitdia
Bil'lica,  152,  n.  3). 642  corresponds  to  Oxyrh.  Logia  i,  and
637  echoes  a  saying  of  Hillel. No  doubt  many  of  these  say
ings  were  suggested  to  Jesus  by  what  he  had  heard  on  the  lips
of  Galilaean  neighbours  and  during  his  recent  tour  throughout
the  synagogues.

2  Cp  Jas.  4  nyC On  Lk.  641  Cheyne  quotes  from  a  satirical
poem  in  the  Arabian  Hamiisa  5  37  :  'I  indeed  see  in  thine  eye  a
beam  set  across,  and  thou  marvellest  if  thou  beholdest  in  mine
eye  a  mote  '  {Exp.  T  4  402).

3  Resch  groups  76  with  a  later  set  of  logia  on  the  service  of
the  kingdom, following the agraphon 'be ye  wise bankers'
(ytVeo-Oe SoKipot TpairffiTai  : cp i Thess.  52ia)  and I  Thess.
621^-22. The  lapidary  style  of  Mt.  7  1-14  represents  one  char
acteristic  method  of  Jesus  as  a  teacher,  derived  from  the  gnomic
literature  of  Judaism  and  practised  by  most  rabbis  of  his  day.
The  other  method,  resembling  that  of  the  prophets,  was  a  longer
impassioned  harangue,  with  sustained  appeal  and  thrust. These,
with  the dialogue-method, represent the characteristic styles
adopted  by  Jesus,  the  Sermon  being  a  combination  of  the  first
two.

4  For  instances  of  this  famous  figure  in  the  first  century,  cp
Test.  Asher i, Test.  Abrah. n, and  Epict.  Diss.  2  ii  822;
for  the  roads  of  Galilee,  GASm.  HG  425  f.

5  Lk.'s  sole  mention  of  'false  prophets'  (\!/evSoTrpo<{>f/rai  '.  626)
refers  to  the  past ;  in  keeping  with  the  '  political '  or  social  ten
dency  of  his  eschatology,  he  omits  this  trait  in  describing  the
apocalypse  of  Jesus  (Mt.  2424  Mk.  1822).

B  According to  the Talmud  (Neub. Gtog. du Taint. 185,

4388


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

recognisable  under  the  characteristic  style  of  each  editor,
Mt.'s  version  being  superior  in  accuracy.  The  im
pression  of  originality  and  authority  produced  by  the
Sermon  (Mt.  Irtf.}  naturally  corresponds  to  the  weight
and  length  of  it  in  Mt. ,  who  has  transferred  to  this
place  what  Mk.  (122)  and  Lk.  (432)  narrate  as  the
result  of  Jesus'  earlier  teaching  in  the  synagogue.

Much  of  the  discussion  upon  the  audience  of  the
Sermon  is  misplaced.  The  dual  nature  of  its  contents
17.  Audience  ~now  touching  disciples  specifically,
now  broadening  out  to  the  public — •
together  with  the  deliberately  dual  description  of  its
hearers  (which  is  not  the  result  of  composite  tradition),
may  serve  to  indicate  that  too  rigid  a  distinction  is
usually  drawn  between  teaching  (Sidaxri)  and  preaching
(Kripvyfj.a)  at  this  early  period  of  Jesus'  ministry.  The
alternative  '  disciples  or  crowd  '  is  as  imaginary  as  the
harmonising  expedients  are  unsatisfactory.  A  solution  of
the  problem  is  visible  when  the  collocation  of  crowds
(&X^oi>  #X^OS)  and  '  disciples'  (/j.adrfrai)  in  the  description
of  the  audience  (Mt.  5i/.  TzSf.  Lk.  6ig/.  7i)  is  held  to
imply  that  in  Q  the  '  disciples '  were  not  the  restricted
inner  circle  of  the  twelve,  whose  election  preceded  the
Sermon,  but  a  wider  circle  of  adherents  more  or  less
devoted  to  the  new  prophet.  His  instructions  they
followed,  and  to  his  teaching  they  professed  attention
and  obedience.  This  ordinary  sense  of  '  disciples '
(fj.a0i)T-r}s ;  cp  Mt.  1024  Acts  62  etc.),  as  employed
if  not  retained  by  Mt.1  and  Lk. ,  would  cover  people  of
varied  enthusiasm  and  position  (cp  Mt.  1042  Jn.  666),
and  even  men  with  extremely  imperfect  ideas  of  what
their  new  faith  involved  (Acts  19 1-3).  The  characteristic
which  distinguished  them  in  general  from  the  ordinary
multitude  was  sympathy  with  the  propaganda  of  Jesus
— due  in  many  cases  to  gratitude  for  the  healing  re
ceived  from  him — as  well  as  a  disposition  to  favour  the
new  religious  leader.  Naturally  the  line  between
'  disciples  '  and  '  crowd  '  would  not  be  rigid  ;  although
there  had  been  a  certain  sifting  which  helped  to  define
the  groups  more  clearly,  they  did  not  always  lie  notice
ably  apart  as  yet,  like  oil  and  water.  Among  the
crowd  there  were  usually  some  who  were  attracted  by
other  motives  than  mere  curiosity  or  the  desire  to  range
themselves  behind  a  fresh  and  promising  and  popular
guide  ;  these  Jesus  in  the  Sermon  and  elsewhere2
designed  to  reach  and  win.3  Particularly  among  the
'quiet  in  the  land,'  susceptible  and  devout  souls  un
spoiled  by  the  hot  fanaticism  of  Galilee  with  its  semi-
political  zeal  for  God,  or  by  the  chilling  formalities  of

Stud.  Bibl.  1  52),  Galilaeans  were  noted  as  wandering  preachers
who  excelled  in  expositions  of  the  biblical  text,  couched  in
parabolic  form.  Whilst  Lk.'s  access  to  a  Jerusalem-cycle  of
traditions  or  even  sources  enables  him  to  give  Jerusalem  a  con
siderable  role  in  the  account  of  Jesus'  early  days,  as  indeed
suited  his  literary  predilections,  Mt.  singularly  ignores  the
capital.  So  far  as  Mt.  is  concerned,  Jesus  had  never  been
there  when  he  delivered  the  Sermon  ;  his  ministry  had  been
purely  Galilaean.  Jerusalem  in  Mt.  1-4  (cp  45)  is  merely  in
different  if  not  antipathetic  to  Jesus  (2  3),  though  susceptible  to
John  (3  5,  fromMk^lj).

1  Mt.'s  characteristic  'to  disciple '  {^a.6i]7fwiv  :  elsewhere  in
NT  only  in  Acts  14  21)  includes  ('2S  16-20)  instruction  in  the  words
of  Jesus  (e.g.,  5  2iyC)  as  the  norm  of  life  (cp  6  21-24)  ',  in  27  57
the  word  is  substituted  for  'awaiting  the  reign  of  God,'  in  the
description  of  Joseph  of  Arimatha^a,  and  the  important  logion
of  Mt.  1852 indicates  the continuity and advance  of  Jesus'
teaching  (Dalman,  57). Thus  the  conception  of  discipleship,
especially  in  Mt.,  corresponds  to  the  aim  of  the  Sermon  (as  in
Mt.  5-7)  ; it  means  adherence  to  the  teaching  of  Jesus  as  the
consummation  of  Judaism  and  the  independent  rule  of  a  new
faith. See  further  J.  Weiss,  Nach/olge  Christi  (1895)  2-13.

2  Cp  Mt.  23  i  and  Mk.  8  34  (Lk.  9  23,  yet  Mt.  16  24),  although
the  latter  allusion  to  the  crowd  has  its  own  difficulties  (Carpenter,
227,  Wrede,  Das  Messiasgeheimnis  in  den  Evangelien,  1901,  pp.
I3.8y^)- The less determinate conditions of Jesus' actual
ministry  may,  of  course,  have  been  somewhat  sharpened  in  the
process  of  tradition.

3  Even although Jesus is proleptically represented in  the
Sermon  as  Messianic  judge,  the  fidelity  of  the  evangelic  sources
appears  in  the  fact  that  as  yet  the  adherents  or  disciples  are
pointed not to  himself  but  to  God  as  the  supreme  object  of
imitation  (cp  Xen.  Mem.  i.  63,  oisn-ep  (cat rdv  a\\<av  Hpytav  oc
ii6a<TKaA<H  Toil's  jua#>)Tas  fitjiir;Tas  eavrtov  airoSeucvvovO'ii').

4389


SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT

the Pharisaic legalism, Jesus seems to have found
congenial  spirits.

This  unobtrusive  piety  of  the  'meek'  (C'"^1,  or  C":J?)  is
sketched  in  Enoch  108  7-10,  and  its  resigned  semi-ascetic  temper
breathed  through  circles  of  pre-Christian  Judaism  outside  Es-
senism  ;  see  Ps.  Sol.  5  13 /.,  the  Assiintftio  Jl/osis,  the  character
of  Simeon  and  Anna  in  Lk.  2  and  of  Nathanael  in  Jn.  145-49
(Rhees,ySL,  1898,  pp.  21-30),  and  the  later  niansueti  ct  quies-
ct'nti-s  of  4  Esd.  (1142),  with  the  suffering  lower  classes  of  James
(1  9  27,  etc.  ;  Spitta  on  Ja.  2  5).  The  picture  of  poor  and  needy
ones  sketched  in  the  earlier  wisdom-literature  and  apocalypses
of  Judaism  reveals  a  disposition  which  had  certain  affinities  with
that  of  Jesus  and  yet  was  capable  of  development  under  his
hands.  His  patient  endurance,  as  taught  to  these  people  in
the  Sermon,  was  equally  devout,  but  more  cheerful  ;  alert  rather
than  resigned.  With  the  quietists,  as  with  the  Essenes,  Jesus
stood  in  evident  if  partial  sympathy  ;  they  were  the  Gottes-
freunde  of  the  age.  Affinities,  however,  do  not  imply  alliance  or
dependence,  and  the  data  of  the  gospels  referring  to  the  Gali
lean  period  show  that  Jesus  drew  adherents  from  all  classes,
particularly  from  the  poor,  but  not  to  the  exclusion  of  that
middle  class  which,  as  Graetz  argues  (History  of  Jews,  ET
2i5r./),  was  not  conspicuously  lacking  in  piety  or  morals  and
might  have  echoed  honestly  the  young  ruler's  apologia  (cp  also
Mk.  12  32-34).  See  NAZARETH,  §  2,  POOR,  §  2.

At  any  rate,  the  Sermon  assumes  most  of  the  funda
mental  principles  of  the  religious  consciousness  ;  it  was
not  addressed  to  a  people  'sitting  in  darkness,'  much
less  to  the  twelve.  Neither  esoteric,  nor  official,  ner  a
call  to  repentance,  it  may  be  presumed  to  have  reached
an  audience  of  people  morally  disposed  (owing  partly  to
temperament  and  circumstances,  partly  to  his  preaching)
to  start  on  the  new  road,  if  they  had  not  already  started,
people  whose  cardinal  need  was  encouragement  and
instruction  upon  the  differentia  of  their  new  course.
That  Jesus  taught  the  contents  of  the  sermon  during  the
course  of  several  days  (Jiisus,  §  12),  is  not  impossible.
The  real  Sermon,  however,  is  short  enough  to  have  been
delivered  upon  one  occasion,  and  the  gospels  plainly
intend  to  convey  this  impression  of  a  single  address,
although  the  indefiniteness  of  Q  and  the  evident  absence
of  supplementary  oral  tradition  did  not  permit  them  to
sketch  any  concrete  situation  for  it  in  time  or  place.

Perhaps  the  outstanding  features  of  the  address,  from
the  point  of  view  of  historical  and  ethical  progress  in

18.  Historical  /Tuda;sm  8anc\  P1"1™1™!  ^^
significance  (IbRAEL>  §  93).  are  (a)  the  close  union
between  the  mutual  love  of  man  and
man,  and  the  devout  aspiration  of  the  soul  towards
God  ;  (b~)  the  genial  tenderness  with  which  the  con
ception  of  God  is  developed,  free  from  rabbinic
intellectualism  or  mere  nationalism  ;  and  (c)  '  the
spiritual  nomism '  (Toy),  which  conserves  the  moral
essence  of  the  Law  and  at  the  same  time  frees  it  from
legal  dryness  (JESUS,  §§  11-13,  I7/-)-  The  last-named
point  is  of  cardinal  importance  to  the  historian,  as  the
pivot  upon  which  the  relation  of  Jesus  to  Judaism  finally
turned.  '  The  expansion  of  the  law  quantitatively
amounts,'  as  Baur  remarked,  '  to  a  qualitative  differ
ence.  '  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  even  during
the  Galilaean  period  Jesus  was  conscious  of  issues  in
his  message  which  transcended  the  current  and  tra
ditional  environment  of  religion  among  the  Jews.  But
revelation,  like  nature,  is  never  brusque.  As  yet  the
transition  had  not  become  so  acute  as  it  did  at  a  later
stage,  and  one  main  concern  of  Jesus  in  the  Sermon,
while  defining  and  urging  the  new  revelation  with
perfect  decisiveness  (Brandt,  Die  Evangelische  Geschichte
u.  der  Ursprung  des  Christenthums,  1893,  pp.  449-
455),  is  to  avoid  needless  misunderstanding  and  prevent
his  freer  views  from  being  abused  to  the  detriment  of
morality.1  Both  in  the  apocalyptic  and  in  the  nomistic

3  Cp  L.  Jacob,  Jesu  Stellitng  zum  mosaischen  Cesetz  (1893).
The  sensitiveness  of  Jesus  upon  this  point  has  been  already
noticed  (see  above,  §  13).  Max  Nordau  quotes  Mt.  5  17  as  the  last
word  in  his  exposure  of  modern  Degeneration  (ET  1898,  p.  500);
it  is  to  him  a  profoundly  penetrating  maxim  upon  the  truth  that
'  whoever  preaches  absence  of  discipline  is  an  enemy  of  progress.'
The  preservation  of  such  logia  in  Mt.  and  Lk.  was  necessary  in
view  of  their  audiences  in  the  Diaspora  and  the  outside  empire,
to  whom  the  Law  was  an  ethical  ancient  code.  Now  that  the
Pauline  strife  had  pnssed,  the  later  generation  (cp  i  Tim.

439°


SERON

tendencies  of  the  age  he  found  support.1  Neither  of
these  wholly  anticipated  his  genius,  and  to  neither  did
he  yield  himself ;  yet  in  each  material  lay  ready  for  the
new  reconstruction  of  religion  to  which,  in  '  the  Sermon
on  the  Mount,'  Jesus  is  represented  as  having  for  the
first  time  seriously  addressed  himself.

In  addition  to  the  essays  and  monographs  already  cited,  con
sult  the  critical  editors  on  Mt.  (especially  Weiss,  Das  Matthiius-

cvang.  u.  seine  Lukasparalleleu,  1876,  pp.
19.  Literature.  I30/202/,  also  in  Meyer's  comm.,W  1898;

and Die  vitr  Evangelien tin  berichtigten
Text,  1900;  Schanz,  Komm.  iiber  des  ET.  det  heilig.  Mt.,  1879,


pp.  156-246;  Baljon,  Comni.  op  het  Ei>.  van.  Mt.,  1900),  or  Lk.

(Sch. in/,  t\~,ii>i»i.  fiber  das  A'z'v-  <'<'•>"  hei/ii;.  Lucas,  1883  ;  Godet,

Colin Campbell,


(Schanz,  Komm.  fiber  das  Evg.  des  keilif.  Lucas,  i
Comm. sur I  euangile  de  S.


Crit.  Studies  in  St.  Luke's  Gosf>cl,  1890,  pp.  2og/  ;  Halm,
Das  Evg.  des  Lukas,  1  [1892]  414  /  ;  J.  Weiss  in  Meyer's
Comm.,(<i)  1892;  i\.  Wright,  St.  Luke's  Gospel  [1900]),  or  both
(de  VVette,  Exe%.  Handbuch  zum  NT  1  66-113  '2  53-58  ;  Holtz-
mann,  HC  vol.  i.i8)  1901  ;  Bruce,  Expos.  Gk.  Test.  vol.  i.  ;  G.
L.  Gary,  Internal.  Hdbks.  to  JVT  [iqoo],  195-138),  besides  the
patristic  annotate™  of  whom  Augustine  (de  serinone  Domini  in
monte  ;  Bened.  ed.  torn.  iii.)and  Enthymius  Zigabenus  are  the
most  penetrating.  The  subject  is  handled  by  most  writers
upon  the  biography  of  Jesus — e.g.,  Keim,  Jesu  Ton  Nazara
(El')  8  12-39  281-335;  Nea»der,  Li/e  of  Christ,  1837  (ET),  pp.
240-256;  Didon, ,  Jesus  Christ,  1316-339;  Renan,  r'ie  de  Jesus,
ch.  10;  A.  Reville,  Jtsus  de  Nazareth  (1897),  229-60;  Weiss,
Leben  Jesu  (ET  2  139-162)  ;  and  O.  Holtzmann,  Leben  Jesu
(1901),  185-19?.  On  the  religion  and  ethics  of  the  Sermon,  see
Baur's  Das  Cliristenthum  u.  die  Christliche  Kirche  der  drei
ersten  Jalirhunderte  (1853),  ET  1  27-36;  Harnack,  Dogmen-
geschichte  (ETli54/);  Weizsacker  s  Das  apost.  Zeitalterft)
(ET),  I3s/  2j6/  55/;  Ritschl,  Die  altkatholische  Kirche
(1857),  S7/  ;  R.  Mackintosh,  Christ  and  the  Jewish  Law
(1886),  84-108;  Wellh.  Sketch  of  Hist,  of  Israel  ((3),  1891),
207/5  G.  H.  Toy,  Judaism  and  Christianity  (1890),  415/5
Denney  on  '  Law  in  XT  '  (Hastings'  DB  3  73-83)  ;  besides  Ecce
Homo,  chs.  10-13  ;  Edersheim's  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  the
Messiah,  1,  ch.  18;  Pfleiderer,  Das  Urchristenthum  (1887),
489-501,  cp  432-435  ;  Tolstoi's  famous  My  Religion,  chs.  1-6
(1884),  and  Havet,  Le  Christianisme  et  ses  origines  (1884),
4  42-60.  On  the  critical  question  add  especially  Holtzmann,
Die  Synoft.  Evang.  (1863),  174-178,  and  Neutestamentliche
Theologie  (1897),  1  150-100;  Bovon,  Neutest.  Theologie  (1893),
-J.77/;  H™ggsi  Messiah  of  Gospels  (1894),  IT  if.;  Bruce,  The
kingdom  ofC,sd($'i,  1893),  1-12  et  passim  ;  Bartlet  on  Matthew's
gospel,  Hastings'  DHS  296-305  ;  Robinson,  Saviour  in  Neuter
Lighten  1898,  92/  146/1  Wernle,  Die  Anfange  unserer
Religion  (1901),  23-69  et  passim;  Wendt,  Die  Lehre  Jesu
(l21,  1901  ;  and  generally  the  essays  by  Schiirer  (Die  Predigt
Jesu  in  ihrem  I'erhiiltniss  zum  AT,  1882),  Bousset  (/esu
Predigt  in  ihrem  Ge^ensatz  zum  Judenthum,  1892),  Balden-
sperger  (Das  SelbstbewusstseinJcsuW,  1892,  pp.  i28/).  Burton
('Ethical  Teaching  of  Jesus  in  relation  to  Ethics  of  Pharisees
and  OT,'  Bibl.  World,  1897,  pp.  198-208),  and  J.  Weiss  (Die
Predigt  Jesu  vom  Reiche  Gottes,(~)  1900).  Special  monographs
by  Jehnichen  (1786),  Pott  (1789),  Tholuck  ((»),  1872),  Achelia
(1875),  Steinmeyer  (1885),  Ibleken  (<-),  1890),  H.  Weiss  (1893),
Gore  (1897),  Heinrici  (Beitriige  zur  Gesch.  u.  Erklarung  des
NT:  -2,  die  Bergpredirt,  1899),  and  -F.  Grawert  (/)/<>  Bergpredigt
nach  Matt/n'ius  auf  ihre  iiussere  u.  innere  Rinheit,  etc.,  1900).
On  the  Sermon  in  the  later  literature  of  the  age  see  GOSPELS,
§§  83-107,  JAMES  (EHSTI.K),  8  33,  and  the  patristic  citations
collected  by  Resch  in  his  Parallel-Te.rte.  Prof.  B.  W.  Bacon's
thorough  monograph,  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount:  its  didactic
purpose  and  literary  structure  (1902),  and  A.  Wabnitz's  essay
on  the  Mount  of  the  Sermon,  Revue  de  'I  heol.  et  quest,  re  I.
1902,  p.  2&5/  were  published  since  this  article  was  written.

J.  Mo.

SERON,  the  commander  of  the  Syrian  army  belonging
to  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  who  was  defeated  by  Judas  the
Maccabee  at  Beth-horon  166  B.C.  (i  Mace.  3 13-24,
CHROON  [ANY],  cp  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  7i,  ypi-»o»  [Pesh.j,
seron  [Vg.]).

SERPENT.  Serpents  abound  in  Palestine,  as  well
as  in  Egypt,  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  and  in  the  Arabian

N  desert  (Doughty,  A r.  Des.  1  328). The  OT

'  writers  use  eleven  different  words  for  serpents

of  one  kind  or  another. It  is  often  difficult  to  determine

which  species  of  the  order  Ophidia  is  meant,  and  yet

could  regard  the  Law  with  equanimity,  and,  indeed,  it  was
advisable  to  emphasise  Jesus'  positive  approval  of  it  to  avoid
misconceptions.

1  The  apocalyptic  was  not  wholly  destitute  of  a  legal  basis,
for  a  right  to  the.  Messianic  blis?  frequently  was  traced  back  to
loyalty  to  the  Law.  Noi,  on  the  other  hand,  did  the  Law
entirely  reject  a  Messianic  outlook.  So  Ehrhardt  (37/)  rightly,
as  against  Baldensperger's  thesis.  See  further  W.  Mackintosh,
The  Natural  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  (1894),  133-
225,  and  Caird's  Ei'olution  of  Religion,  288/  I37/

4391


SERPENT

clearness  requires  that  we  should  vary  our  renderings,
and  not  translate  all  these  eleven  words  '  serpents. '

i-  njf'BH,  'epHek  (6<f»is  Job20i6  ;  dffirldes,  Is.  306;
paffL\l<TKos  [Acj.  ^xlSva"  Sym-  Th.  Aervtt],  Is.  59s  t),  EV
VIPKR,  which  is  also  the  rendering  of  £x'^"a  m  NT.
The  root  of  the  Hebrew  word  (and  its  cognate  in  Arabic)
HP -ans  to  utter  a  groaning  or  hissing  sound  :  the  verb
,-iys  occurs  once  in  OT  (Is.  42 14)  in  reference  to  the
groaning  of  one  in  pain,1  That  'eptieh  as  well  as  Ar.
afa  means  the  '  viper,'  was  shown  long  ago  by  Bocliart
(Hieroa.,  Bk.  iii. ,  chap.  2);  the  deadly  nature  of  the
viper's  poison  well  suits  the  allusion  in  Job20i6.
Objection  has  been  taken  to  the  mention  of  a  viper
issuing  from  an  egg  (Is.  69 5^)  :  but  it  is  to  be  re
membered  (i)  that  vipers  are  in  a  sense  oviparous,  the
young  being  hatched  at  the  moment  of  birth,  and  (a)
that  such  Hebrew  words  as  'epKeh  are  not  like  scientific
terms  for  genera  and  species,  and  may  easily  be  extended
from  the  animals  they  properly  denote  to  others  which
externally  resemble  them.

2.  ZoMle  'afhdr, -^  -^  (Dt.  32 24+),  and  z.  'Jres,
f"W  'Wit  (Mi.  7 17 1).  'they  that glide  on, or  into, the
earth' — a phrase which needs no comment. Cp
ZOHELETH.

3.  ndAdl, tyn: (many times : © everywhere o0u,
except  Job 2613  Amos93,  where  SpdKwv),  EV  '  serpent '
• — the  most  general  word  (probably  used  also  in  Ecclus.
25  15,  where  the  Greek  translator  has  so  strangely  taken
the  wrong  meaning  of  rds — '  head  '  should  be  '  venom  '
[see  GALL]).

Its  connection  with  the  verb  t^rn  (Gen.  30  27  44  5  15  Lev.  19  26
i  K.  '^033  etc.),  which  means  '  to  divine  by  omens,'  is  obscure  ;3
a  plausible  theory  is  that  of  Boch.  (Hieroz.  1  3),  that  the  verb  has
obtained  this  meaning  because  of  the  belief,  widespread  in
antiquity,  that  the  serpent  possessed  the  power  of  such  divination,
and  that  this  power  could  be  gained  through  contact  with  serpents
(as  in  the  case  of  Helenus  and  Cassandra)  or  by  partaking  of
their  flesh.  Against  this  it  is  urged  by  Robertson  Smith  (Journ.
Phil.  14  115)  that  the  noun  niiluis  is  confined  to  Heb.,  whilst  the
verb  is  common  to  all  the  Semitic  dialects  (cp  Barth,  KS,  48).
In  any  case,  considering  the  common  use  of  the  root  in  Arabic
and  Syriac  (ib.  ii3/),  we  cannot  suppose,  as  has  been  held  (e.g.
by  Lag.  Uebtrs.  188),  that  the  verb  is  a  denominative  from  mihiis
and  so  referred  primarily  to  whispered  incantation,  connected
with  the  idea  of  the  serpent's  hiss$  See  DIVINATION,  §  3  [3],

We  find  nabaf  combined  with  other  terms  in  the
phrases  (a)  nahaf  saraph,  »pfc>  t?m  (&<pis  6a.va.rCjv,  Nu.
216  ;  8(pis  SaKvuv,  Dt.  8  15),  '  fiery  serpent '  ;  see  below,
9;  (t>)  n.  barldh,  rna  e>m  (Job  2613  dpdKwv  dTrocrrdT'jjj
Is.  27 1  80t5  0ei>yu»'t),  AV  '  piercing  serpent,'  RV  '  swift
serpent ';  and  (c)  n.  'akallathon,  jinVpj;  c;m  (Is.  27 1,  &<j>i.s
<T/co\i6s),  'crooked  (RVm£-  'winding')  serpent.'  Both
epithets  are  applied  to  the  mythical  Leviathan  in  Is.  27 1 ;  *
the  reference  in  Job  is  similar.  See  LEVIATHAN*.

4.  aitsby,  'akSub  (Ps.  140s  [4], t  dffTrlSes,  cp  Rom.  813
[Aq.  probably  /3a<riXurKOsJ),  'adders.' This  word,  which
in  form resembles  the  word  v'^sy,  'spider,'  seems  in
the  Mishna  to  denote  a  kind  of  spider, perhaps  the
tarantula  (Lewysohn,  Zool. des Talmuds, 309  ; Levy,
NHWB,  s.v.},  and  was  so  understood  by  Rashi  in  the
single  instance  where it  occurs  in the  OT. But the
authority of  nearly all ancient versions (the Arabic
renders 'vipers')  and of  the  NT  citation  (Rom.  813)
is  in  favour  of  the  rendering  '  adders '  ;  and,  as  Bochart
has  shown  (Hieroz.  85),  this  rendering  harmonises  with
its  probable  derivation  from  the  root  represented  by  Ar.

1  In  Syr.  the  verb  is  used  for  the  bleating  of  sheep.

2  nahs  is the  Ar. term for  infnustut ; but whether it is
legitimate to  connect this with C'nJ  is doubtful. See We.
Ifcid.V)  147,  «.  i.

3  Lag.  (Mitth.  1  230  ;  cp  Barth,  ES  48)  identifies  JPHJ  with  Ar.
lianas. This  seems  very  plausible,  though  lianas  is  used  for
flies  and  worms  as  well  as  serpents  (cp  We.  fffid.*"*  152). A
shiny  black  serpent  (Zamenis  carbonaria)  of  Palestine,  often
carried  about  in  bags  by  dervish  serpent-charmers, is  called
hAnai(PEFQ,  Jan.  1894,  p.  a9/).

4  Smend  (/.ATM'^i\^)  thinks  that  two  different  creatures
(SpoLKtav  and  6$is)  are  meant. This  seems  unlikely.

4392


SERPENT

*akasa, to  'invert'  or 'turn  round,'  as  describing  the
motion  of  a  serpent. l  *"

5.  ]r\3,  ptihen  (d<T7r/j,  Dt.  32  33  [Aq.  jSacrtX/cr^os],  Job
20 14  Ps.  084  [5]  Is.  118  ;  dpdicuv  [Aq. ,  Sym.,  Th.  derius]
Job20i6;  ^auiXia/cos  [Sym.  probably  dcrTris],  Ps.91i3t2).
EV  '  asp  '  or '  adder. ' The  word  evidently  denotes  a
highly  poisonous  snake,  perhaps  of  the  cobra  kind  (cp
Arab,  bathan  ;  Forskal,  Descriptiones  Animalium,  15).
The  particular  sort  intended  cannot  be  determined. There  is
no  ground  for  connecting  the  name  (Boch.  3  5)  with  Greek  nvdiai'.

6.  yas, sdphd (Is.  142g,t Znyova. acririSwi'), AV
'cockatrice,'  RV  'basilisk,'  EVme-  'adder.' From  Is.
1429 it appears that  stphd denotes a more deadly
animal  than  ndhds,  though  itself  less  formidable  than
sdrdph  (see  Dillm.  ad  loc. ). The  Vg.  renders  regulus,
and  it  is  possible  that  the  fabled  '  basilisk '  is  intended  ;
but  the  '  asps'  brood '  of  the  LXX  seems  equally  likely.

7.  '3173*1  sipttoni  (tKjova  acrTriduv,  Is.  118; dcrrrides,
Is.  59s  ; Kepdo-TT/s, EV  'adder,' RVms- '  basilisk,'  Pr.
2832  ; 's  tr;rm,  60eis  [cp  no.  3]  BavarovvTes  [EV],  Jer.
8i73t), AV"' cockatrice,' RV 'basilisk,1 FA'"1*?- 'or
adder  '  except  in  Pr.  2832  where  '  adder  '  is  in  the  text.
Perhaps,  as  Tristram  (NHB  275)  and  Cheyne  suggest,  a
large  viper  like  Daboia  xanthina  (FFP  147)  is  intended
by  both  sipk'oniand  the  kindred  stphd .  CpCoCKATRiCE.

The  eggs  mentioned  in  Is.  685  are  an  objection  to  this
identification.  Hence  the  cat-snake  (Ailurophis  vivax,  now
called  Tarbopkisfallaj:)  has  been  suggested  by  Furrer  (////  "^(2)
1423(1) ;  and  this,  it  is  true,  may  formerly  have  extended
S.  of  '  N.  Syria.'  The  eggs  of  the  monitor  lizard  I'aranus
niloticus  (still  eaten)  would  produce  creatures  fairly  like  vipers.

8.  lisp,  klppoz (ex^os, Is.  34 15), AV 'great owl.'
Ar.  kafaza  means  'to  spring,'  and  Ar. kaffdz  (^lisp)
and  its  fem.  kaffdza  are  both  quoted  (P.  Smith, Tfies.
Syr. 1375, Lag. Uebers., 89)  as  meaning  a  kind of
serpent. The  etymology  would  suggest  some  rapidly
springing snake, such as F.ryx  jaculus  (FFP 146)  ;
though  the  kippos  cannot  be  either  this  or  (RV  Bochart,
•Ges. ,  etc. )  the  '  arrowsnake '  (aKovTias :  cp  Lucan,  6675
'  Arabum volucer  serpens ' and 9  822 'jac ulum  vocat
Africa'),  since  only  pythons  'hatch'  (Is.  I.e.}.

The  context  of  Is.  34  15  would  be  appropriate  to  any  ovi
parous  species ;  but  there  are  no  pythons  now  in  Palestine  or
Babylon,  nor  are  they  known  to  have  lived  in  Persia  or  Meso
potamia  in  historical  times,  being  confined,  with  one  exception,
to  the  Palaeotropic  and  Australian  regions  (cp  Houghton).

<&  and  most  ancient  interpreters  confused  kippdz  with  kippod ;
but  etymology  and  context  show  them  to  be  distinct.  AV's
'  great  owl '  is  not  supported  by_  etymology  or  ancient  tradition
(see  Boch.  ii.  3  1 1)  ;  but  there  is  force  in  the  contention  that  a
bird  is  suggested  by  the  description  (Houghton,  Acad.,  1886,
1  292,7;  ;  Post,  Hastings'  /?/:>' 3  637).

9.  tfiiy,  sdrdph  (NTu.2l8),  r^b  pro  (Nu.  216  Dt.  815),
and Fjsryp ppi?  (Is.  1429  306). The  rendering 'fiery
serpent '  of  EV  is  due  to  the  derivation  from  rj-ib,  '  to
burn  '  which  still  remains  the  most  probable  explanation
of  the  name.

The  name  thus  refers  either  to  the  fiery  appearance  of  the
serpent  and  especially  of  its  eyes'1  or  to  the  inflammation
caused  by  its  venom.  On  the  relation  of  the  saraphs  to  the
seraphim  of  Is.  Oa6,  see  below,  g  3  (e).

10.  l'2'By,  sfphip/wn  (eyKaOri/uievos,  Gen.  49i7t).  EV
renders  '  adder, '  AVme- '  arrowsnake, ' R Vms- '  horned
snake,'  the  Cerastes  (see  §  2  [6]),  cp  Ar.  siff.

11.  pan, tannin  (Ex.  7g  10  12), RVm£- 'Any large
reptile  '  ; Ps.  91 13  RV,  AV  '  dragon  '  ;  Deut.  32 33  (EV
'dragon'; Dr. 'reptiles'); cp  DRAGON.

As  we  have  seen,  snakes  are  no  rarity  in  Palestine,  a

1  For  final  3  cp  Ar.  iha'lal>  =  hyvt.',  'fox';  see  SHAALABBIM.

2  [In  Ps.  91  13 we may  doubt  the  combination 'lion'  (71"!;?)
and  '  adder,"  '  young  lion  '  (TB3)  and  '  dragon.' (P's  err'  do-rri&a.
presupposes  7HT  (cp  2  above),  and  in  Job  4  10  (B's  6pa«o>'Tio!'(for
D'TSD) presupposes  C'?J3,  an  otherwise  unknown  word  for  'asp  '
(Syr.  kurfa). — T.  K.  C.]

3  Here  Aq.  seems  to  render  Q'jJ?ss  in  one  edition  by  fta<ri\icr-
KOV;,  and  in  another  by  erKOTreiioi/Tas  ;  Sym.  by  Tro^pou's.

4  An  Arabian  poet  (Tarafa,  Muall.  83)  speaks  of  the  '  fiery
head  of  the  serpent '  [G.  Jacob,  Altarab.  Parallelen,  10]  ;  cp  also
Verg.  Aen.  2  210,  Ardentisque  oculos  suffecti  sanguine  et  igni.

4393


SERPENT

country  which,  by  climate,  soil,  and  geographical  position,
is  well  adapted  to  sustain  a  large  ophidian  fauna.  Tristram
2  Snecies  enumerates  thirty-three  species,  of  which
'  the  most  venomous  are: — (a)  The  A'aja
haje,  or  Egyptian  Cobra,  found  in  Southern  Palestine
and  common  in  Egypt.  Its  habit  of  swelling  and
flattening  its  neck  when  irritated,  and  gliding  along  with
its  posterior  two- thirds  on  the  ground,  its  head  and
neck  being  erect,  are  well  known.  It  usually  forms
part  of  the  stock  in  trade  of  snake  charmers,  and  it  is
said  that  the  cobra  is  readily  thrown  into  a  rigid  or
mesmeric  condition,  which  G.  St.  Hilaire  says  is  induced
by  pressure  applied  to  the  neck.  The  remaining
venomous  snakes  all  belong  to  the  family  Viperidze.
They  are  (l>)  Cerastes  cornutus  (fiasselquistii),  the  horned
viper,  which  is  exceptionally  poisonous  ;  it  frequents
the  sandy  deserts  of  South  Palestine,  and  hides  in  the
sand  or  in  the  hollow  caused  by  a  horse's  or  camel's
foot  (Gen.  49i7).  It  is  an  object  of  great  terror  to
horses,  and  is  thought  by  some  to  be  the  asp  of
Cleopatra.  (c)  Vipera  lebetina,  syns.  V.  euphratua
and  Daboia  xanthina.  (d)  J '.  ammodytes,  the  long-
nosed  or  sand-viper,  mainly  nocturnal  and  found  on
hills,  (e)  Echis  carinatus,  syns.  E.  arenicola,  found  in
the  desert  near  the  Dead  Sea.  It  is  said  to  produce  a
characteristic  hissing  or  grating  sound  by  rubbing  its
serrated  scales  together.  A.  E.  s. — N.  M.

(a)  The  art of  serpent-charming, still practised  in

Egypt,  Palestine,  and  India,  was  known  to  the  ancient

__ . Hebrews  (see  Ps.  58 4/.  Jer.  817  Eccles.

f  Ik  1 S1C>  d 10ir  Ecdus-12l3  Ja-  37>> who- how-

° th*?'  an ever' 'ike  the  Dervish  snake-charmers
y  *"' of to-day, found venomous serpents

deaf  to  incantations  (cp  PEFQ  Jan.  1894,  p.  29  f. ).
In  Ex.  7g-i2  (P)  we  hear  of  Moses  and  Aaron  turning
their  rods  (by  the  divine  power)' into  serpents,  and  the
Egyptian  magicians  (did  the  original  story  say,  '  the
magicians  of  Misrim  '  ? — see  MOSES,  §  6)  performing
the  same  feat.  The  converse  of  this  (serpents  stiffened
into  rods)  is  still  common  (see  above  on  the  cobra)  with
Eastern  jugglers.  J  however,  so  far  as  we  know,  only
told  of  Moses  turning  his  rod  into  a  serpent  (see  Ex.  4  3)  ;
its  supernatural  power  must  surely  (in  the  oldest  form
of  the  tradition)  have  excluded  the  competition  of  the
Egyptian  sorcerers,  though  it  is  true  that  in  the  end,
according  to  P,  '  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods.'
Cp  PLAGUES  (TEN),  §  4.

(6)  Another  element  in  Hebrew  folk-lore  was  probably
a  veneration  for  the  supernatural  character  of  certain
serpents.  Of  course  we  need  not  credit  the  Israelites
with  the  full  Arabian  superstition  respecting  serpents.
On  the  other  hand,  we  can  well  imagine  that  much  was
popularly  believed  in  Israel  which  has  found  no  record
in  the  OT  (the  names  Dragon's  Well,  Serpent's  Pool
[Jos.],  and  Zoheleth  confirm  us  in  this  view;  see
DRAGON,  §  4).  Those  who  regard  the  narrative  in
C  jen.  3  as  of  native  Palestinian  or  even  Jerahmeelite  origin
(see  §  4)  may  therefore  be  excused  if  they  look  for
illustrations  of  it  in  Arabian  folk  -  lore.  The  most
accessible  sources  of  information  are  Robertson  Smith's
Kel.  San.  (see  120,  133,  168  n.  3,  172),  and  Well-
hausen's  Reste  Arab.  Heid.^  152^

In  the  light  of  these  facts  it  becomes  very  natural  that  the
serpent  in  Gen.  3  (or  rather  the  Saifiiov  within  it)  should  know
the  qualities  of  the  fruit  of  the  sacred  tree.  He  might  indeed
conceivably  have  been  regarded  as  the  spirit  of  the  tree,  for  such
a  spirit  would  become  visible  in  serpent  form.  Or  until  lately  we
might  plausibly  have  held  that  he  was  originally  thought  of
as  the  protective  Sai^Mv  of  the  Havvah-clan  (serpent-clan  ;  on
Wellhausen's  theory  as  to  Eve,  compare  EVE,  HIVITF.S,  and
PARADISE,  §  12).  The  present  writer  now  regards  this  theory
(once  so  natural)  as  definitely  set  aside.  Not  less  certainly  may
we  affirm  that  the  serpent  of  the  Paradise  story  was  neither  a
shaitiin  nor  the  Satan — i.e.,  neither  one  of  the  pernicious  snake-
dromons  called  shaitans  nor  the  Jewish-Christian  Satan  who  is
the  shaitun  par  excellence.^-

1  According  to  Sprenger,  Goldziher,  and  van  Vloten  (in  Feest-
bundel  aan  Prof,  de  Goeje,  1891,  p.  38  /f.)  shaitan  is  an  old
Arabic  word.  This  is  extremely  plausible,  but  it  is  possible
that  corrections  have  been  introduced  into  old  texts  by  Moham-

4394


SERPENT

(c)  The  belief  (implied  in  Nu.  21 9)  in  the  power  of  a
serpent of  brass to check the  ravages of  venomous
serpents  can  also be illustrated from Arabic  sources.
Kazwini  (2373)  tells  of  a  golden  locust  which  guaranteed
a  certain  town  from  a  plague  of  locusts,  and of  two
bra/.en  oxen  which  checked  a  murrain  among  cattle.1
More  remote  is  the  consideration  that  the  serpent  was
the  symbol  of  the  divine  power  of  healing,  and  sacred
therefore  to  Asklepios.

(d)  The  belief  in  the  special  wickedness  of  a  person
who  has  died from  a  serpent's bite, ascribed to the
'barbarous' people of Melita in Acts  28  3-6, is well
illustrated  from  the  experience  of  Doughty  in  Arabia
(Ar.  Des.  l3i3/:).

(e)  On  the  flying  saraphs  of  Is.  1429  306  much  need
not  be  said. We  find them  again  in  the  dragons  of
Arabia  mentioned  in  4  Ksd.  1629,  where  their  wings  are
apparently  represented  figuratively  as  chariots,  and  their
hissing (so RV, reading  sibilatus  for  sic  flatus, with
Bensly)  is  said  to  be  borne  over  the  earth. They  are
among  those  fancy  creatures  with  which  folk-lore  peoples
desert  regions  where,  as  Asur-bani-pal  says,  '  the  birds
of  heaven  fly  not,  and  wild  asses  and  gazelles do  not
feed' (A09222i). To this day the  folk-lore of the
fellahin  of  Palestine  recognises  such  creatures  (PEFQ,
1894,  p.  30) — as  indeed  Herodotus  (275),  giving  credence
to  travellers' tales, had  long  ago  recognised  them  in
Arabia. Delitzsch  remarks  (Gen.PI  99)  that  the  '  Hying
seraphs ' have their counterparts in the SERAPHIM,
with  which  Wellhausen  agrees  (Ar.  Heid.W  153).

(f)  The  serpent  (nii//ds)  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,
mentioned  by  Amos  (9s),  might  also  until  lately  have
been explained from  Arabic  sources. The legendary
sea-serpent  or  tinnin  ( =  Heb.  tannin)  of  the  Arabs  is
described  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that  the  waterspout  is
the  phenomenon  referred  to2  (Mas  udi  1  266/1  ; Kazwini
li;}2/  ; Damirili86_/!). Recent investigations, how
ever,  leave  the  present  writer  no  doubt  that  the  '  serpent '
of  Amos  is  a  pale  reflection  of  Tiamat,  the  famous  mythic
enemy  of  the  Light-god3 (see  CREATION,  DRAGON). It
need  only  be  added  here  that  the  Babylonian  Tiamat  is
represented  in  two  forms  : (i)  as  a  composite  monster,
with  tail,  horns,  claws,  and  wings  ('like  the  mediaeval
devil,'  Sayce),4and  (2)  as  a  serpent,  and  that,  according
to  Fr. Delitzsch,5  the  serpent form considerably pre
dominated. As early  as 1500  B.C. we find  Tiamat
described in a Babylonian inscription as a '  raging
serpent '  6 — evidently  the  conception  is  similar  to  that  of
the  serpent-myth  which  had  almost faded  away  for  a
time  when  Amos  wrote,  and  when unknown  narrators
produced  the  story  of  the  brazen  serpent  in  the  wilderness
as  an  explanation  of  the  so-called  NEHUSHTAN  (g.v. ).

In  conclusion  we  have  to  speak  briefly  of  certain
other  serpent  myths,  and  to  return  to  the  subject  of
the  narrative  in  Gen.  3.  Such  myths  were  specially
abundant  in  Egypt  and  Babylonia.  Among  guardian
serpents  in  Egypt  may  be  classed  the  uraeus  (ovpaios,
Egypt,  'arat ;  asp  or  cobra),  represented  on  the  crowns
of  the  gods  and  of  the  Pharaohs,  which  was  endowed
with  a  mysterious  vitality,  and  was  supposed  to  vomit
flames  when  angry  ;  7  also  those  which  were  kept  in
shrines  in  temples8  and  were  the  embodiments  of  the

medan  scholars.  We.  (//<?/</.(-)  158)  compares  the  substitution
of  El  and  Bosheth  for  Baal— a  theory,  which,  however,  seems  to
need  some  qualification.

1  G.  Jacob,  Altarab.  Parallelen  z«m  AT  (1897),  p.  n.

-  WRS  (KS  176,  n.  3)  comparing  Ps.  148  7,  '  Ye  dragons,  and
all  deeps,' where  'dragons 'is  in  the  Hebrew  tanninitn.  But
the  reference  here  seems  rather  to  be  to  a  class  of  animals
(Gen.  1  21,  AV  'whales,'  RV  better  'sea-monsters').

3  Observe that  j'Jn, which in Ezek.  29  3 is  fitly rendered
'dragon,'  is  used  by  P  as  a  synonym  for  JE's  IPITJ. Cp  Ex.
T  9  10  12  (Spdicioi')  with  7  15  43  (6<£ts).

4  Smith-Sayce,  Chaldiean  Genesis,  113.

5  WeltschBpfungsepos,  126.
8  KB  iii.  1  143.

7  See  the  ode  to  Thotmes  III.  (/.  g_/C),  Brugsch,  GA  354;
cp  Maspero,  Dtncn  of  Civilisation,  265.

8  Cp  the  Hebrew  seraphim. The  second  of  the  two  hiero-

4395


SERPENT

tutelary  deities,  and  open-air  sacred  serpents  protective
of  districts,1  besides  the  fairy-tale  serpents  which
mariners  professed  to  have  seen  in  the  Fortunate  Isles.2
Besides  these,  we  hear  of  the  sacred  Sata-serpent  of  the  other
world,  which  describes  itself  in  these  terms,  '  I  am  the  serpent
of  many  years  ;  I  am  buried  and  born  (again)  continually  ;  I  am
the  serpent  at  the  utmost  ends  of  the  world  ;  I  am  buried  and
born  ;  I  renew  myself,  I  make  myself  young  continually. '»  Of
the  evil  serpent  Apopi  enough  has  been  said  elsewhere  (see
DRAC;ON).

In  Babylonia  it  is  sufficient  to  mention  the  symbolic
serpent  of  Ea  (the  god  of  the  deep  and  the  atmosphere),
who  was  early  connected  with  Babylon  and  the
Euphrates — itself  called  the  '  river  of  the'  snake. '  This
is  an  example  of  the  beneficent  serpent.  But  there  was
also  an  '  evil  serpent' — the  '  serpent  of  darkness '  and  'of
the  sea'— and  it  would  not  be  unnatural  if  this  serpent
of  darkness  were  often  identified  with  the  dragon  Tiamat. 4
We  now  return  to  Gen.  3.  Is  it  sufficient  to  explain
the  part  played  by  the  serpent  (ndAdf)  from  the  war
4.  Serpent  in  VV'th  hurtful  creatures  naturally  referred
Paradise  to  in  an  imagmative  picture  of  man's
early  state?  Surely  not.  In  the  story
on  which  Gen.  3  is  based  ( it  is  no  doubt  only  a  very  pale
reflection  of  it  which  we  possess)  the  serpent  must  have
been  a  mythological  one.  The  facts  of  Arabian  folk
lore  (see  §  3  b)  are  favourable  to  this  view,  and  Jensen
(Kosmol.  227)  finds  a  suggestion  of  it  in  the  Babylonian
Flood-story,  which  makes  Pir-napistim  give  a  fragment
of  the  sacred  plant  (called  '  In  old  age  the  man  becomes
young')  to  Gilgames,  from  whom  it  is  taken  by  a
serpent.  Here,  however,  the  serpent  (representing  the
jealous-minded  gods)  grudges  the  man  the  attainment
of  immortality  ; 5  the  connection  with  the  serpent  of
Gen.  3,  suggested  by  Jensen,  is  surely  as  precarious  as
the  theory  of  the  late  George  Smith  ( Chaldcean  Genesis,
ed.  Sayce,  88),  energetically  opposed  by  Oppert,  Halevy,
and  Tiele,  that  the  temptation  was  represented  on  a
certain  Babylonian  cylinder.  Indeed,  though  the  '  tree
of  life '  in  Gen.  2  3  (which  must  be  the  original  sacred
tree  [cp  Rev.  222]  of  the  Hebrew  legend)  is  of  Baby
lonian  and  not  Iranian  origin,6  it  by  no  means  follows
that  the  story  of  the  serpent  tempting  the  woman  comes
from  Babylonia.  We  have  as  yet  no  evidence  that  the
Babylonians  had  a  moralised  Paradise-story,  and  it  is
conceivable  that  the  writer  of  Gen.  '2 46-3 24  (one  of  the
later  Yahwists)  may  have  drawn  from  different  sources.
What  these  sources  are,  may  now,  with  some  confidence,
be  conjectured.  See  PARADISE,  §  6.

The  immediate  source  of  the  Paradise-story,  including  the  chief
details  about  the  serpent,  was  most  probably  Jerahmeelite — i.e.,
the  N.  Arabian  kinsfolk  of  the  Israelites,  a  part  of  whom  had
entered  Canaan  before  the  Israelites,  while  a  part  remained  in
N.  Arabia  and  in  the  Negeb,  where  they  became  to  a  large  ex
tent  the  religious  tutors  of  the  Israelites  (see  MOSES,  %§6fr.),  had
a  Paradise-story  upon  which  the  Israelitish  tale  is  based.  It  is
no  doubt  true  that  the  Phoenicians  (influenced,  as  Philo  of  Byblus
rightly  states,  from  Egypt)  recognised  the  serpent  as  the  symbol
of  wisdom  and  immortality  ;  7  but  this  does  not  warrant  the
theory  of  a  Phoenician  or  Canaanitish  origin  of  our  narrative.
And  if  an  ultimate  Babylonian  origin  for  the  detail  of  the  serpent
(as  a  friendly  adviser,  not  as  a  tempter)  be  thought  probable,
yet  we  need  not  look  to  the  Babylonian  Paradise  for  its  germ.
Ea,  the  god  who  formed  and  was  specially  interested  in  man,
and  who  was  also  the  lord  of  wisdom  and  bringer  of  culture  to
Babylonia,  was  imagined,  not  only  as  a  fish  (cp  the  culture-
bringer  Cannes8  in  Berossus),  but  sometimes  as  a  serpent.
A  primitive  form  of  culture-myth  may  have  reached


glyphic  papyri  from  Tanis  (ed.  Petrie  ;  Egypt.  Fund,  1889)  con
tains  a  list  of  all  the  sacred  titles  of  agathodaemon  serpents  in
the  larger  Egyptian  temples.

1  See  the  illustration  in  Maspero,  Dawn,  120.

2  See  the  tale  of  the  shipwrecked  mariner  (Maspero,  Conies,
135^0-

3  Brugsch,  Myth.  u.  Rel.  der  alien  Aegypter,  180,  cp  103.

4  See  Sayce,  Hibb.  Lects.  282^

5  Maspero,  Damn  ofCi^>,  p.  587.

8  Gaokerena,  the  Iranian  'tree  of  life,"  may  perhaps  be
ultimately  of  Babylonian  origin.

~  Eus.  Prtrp.  Ei'.  1  10  30  (on  the  serpent  called  Agatho-
dsemon)  ;  TO  (iaov  TO  Trvev^aTiKuirarov  navTiav  r<av  fpirfruiv  is  one
of  Philo's  phrases.

8  The  name  Oannes  probably  conceals  the  name  Ea  (so
Tiele).

4396


SERPENT,  BRAZEN

N.  Arabia  in  which  this  divine  serpent  brought  the
knowledge  of  useful  arts,  and  out  of  this  crude  material
Hebrew  moralists  may  have  constructed  the  episode  of
the  serpent  in  Gen.  3.  It  was  natural  that  the  sea-
serpeiit  (Ea)  should  become  a  land-snake,  and  that  its
divine  character  should  disappear.

At  any  rate,  the  serpent  is  not  to  be  identified  with
the  pernicious  serpent  called  by  the  Iranians  Azi-Dahaka,
which  '  sprang  like  a  snake  out  of  the  sky  down  to  the
earth  to  blight  (Ahuramazda's)  creation,'  nor  of  course
with  the  serpent  Ahi  or  Vritra,  which  is  a  pure  nature-
myth  of  the  ancient  Aryas  of  India.  We  must  not
therefore  illustrate  the  saying  in  Gen.  815  by  the  tempta
tion  of  Krishna  in  the  Bhagavata  Purana,  which  winds
up  with  the  overthrow  of  the  great  serpent,  or  by  the
slaying  of  Azi-Dahaka  by  Keresaspa. 1  It  is  a  similar
distortion  of  the  sense  which  identifies  the  shrewd  and
friendly  serpent  of  Gen.  3  with  the  Babylonian  dragon
of  chaos,  overcome  by  the  light -god,  but  allowed  to
work  ruin  for  a  time  in  the  latter  days  (Rev.  12g  ;  cp
DRAGON).-  The  curse  pronounced  upon  the  serpent
(Gen.  3 14/1 )  is  of  course  quite  separate  from  the  main
story.  When  the  divine  or  semi-divine  serpent  of  the
old  myth  had  suffered  partial  degradation,  it  was  natural
to  connect  the  action  by  which  (undesignedly)  it  had
injured  the  first  men  with  a  new  setiological  myth  to
account  for  the  physical  peculiarities  of  ordinary  serpents
and  the  truceless  war  between  serpents  and  men.  In
doing  so,  however,  the  narrator  clearly  implies  that
originally  the  serpent  had  been  erect  ;  this  was  a  survival
from  the  time  when  it  was  thought  to  be  divine.3

What  then  was  the  serpent's  offence  ?  It  consisted
not  in  ill-will  to  God's  noblest  creature,  man,  but  in
exciting  intellectual  pride  —  i.e. ,  in  aspiring  to  the
possession  of  divine  wisdom  and  of  that  eternal  life
which  goes  together  with  the  highest  wisdom.  It  is  this
pride  which  is  abased  in  the  serpent.  Man  on  his  part
is  to  keep  up  the  war  against  temptation  to  pride  as
vigorously  as  he  prosecutes  his  war  against  the  serpent,
now  become  his  deadly  foe.4  Such  was  the  moral
meaning  of  the  serpent-story  suggested  by  the  original
narrator.  The  unfortunate  corruption  of  the  text
indicated  and  perhaps  not  unplausibly  healed  elsewhere
(PARADISE,  §  n)  is  responsible  for  the  jungle  growth
of  inconsistent  interpolations  which  has  gathered  round
the  fairly  simple  story  of  Gen.  81-24.

On  the  symbolism  of  the  serpent,  see  Baudissin,  Stud.  Se»i.
Rel.  1  257-292  ;  on  Serpent-clans,  WRS  /.  Phil.  9  ggf.  ;  and
cp  Gray,  HPN  91,  114,  and  NEHUSHTAN.  See  also  Toy,
'Analysis  of  Gen.  2,  3,'  JBL,  1891,  pp.  iff.  ;  the  OT  Theologies
of  Schultz  and  Smend,  and  PARADISE,  §§  n,  13.  On  the
natural  history  consult  O.  Giinther,  Die  Refitilienu.  Atnphibien
von  Syrien,  Pal.  u.  Cyfern,  1880.

§ I/ N.  M. A.  E.  S.  J  §  3/. , T.  K.  C.

SERPENT,  BRAZEN. See  NEHUSHTAN.

SERPENT,  THE  OLD.  For  Rev.  12  9  see  APOCA
LYPSE,  §  41,  SATAN,  §§  6  (9)  7.

SERUG  (>nb;  cepoyx  [BAEL],  -r  [L  inCh.];
in  Lk.  835  cepoyx  [Ti-  WH]>  AV  SARUCH)  b.  Reu,  in
P's  genealogy  connecting  Shem  and  Abraham  (Gen.
1120-23  iCh.  126),  is  the  well-known  district  and  city

1  See  Pahlavi  Texts  (SEE),  1 17,  and  cp  Zend-Avesta,  26i.
Azi  Dahilka  is  said  to  have  been  bound  to  Mt.  Damfivend,
where  he  is  to  stay  till  the  end  of  the  world,  when  he  will  be  let
loose,  and  then  killed  by  Keresaspa.  Cp  Rev.  20.

-  Zahn  (Kinl.  2  600)  connects  the  mention  of  the  serpent  as
the  symbol  of  the  evil  one  (Rev.  12  9  202  ;  cp  2  Cor.  11  3)  with
the  reference  to  Pergamum  in  Rev.  212-17.  The  serpent  was
the  symbol  of  Asklepios,  the  god  of  healing,  who  was  specially
worshipped  at  Pergamum,  and  whose  commonest  epithet  was
<ru)7rjp  (also  6  (TutTr/p,  and  <rooT7)p  TO>I>  oAioi').  To  the  Christians
this  might  appear  a  diabolical  caricature  of  the  true  (TUITTJP  TOU
KOO>IOV.

3  Del.  WtltschSpfunesepos,  128.

4  '  Eating  dust '  (cp  Mic.  7  17)  need  not  be  taken  literally. It
may  be  a  conventional  expression  for  the  deepest  humiliation  as
in  Am.  Tab.  L  42  35, '  May  our  enemies  see  it  and  eat  dust '
(Wi.  AOF  1291). The  gloss  in  Is.  6625  (see  SBOT, 'Isa.')
seems  to  misunderstand  the  passage  in  Gen.  3. Dust  is  also
said  to  be  the  food  of  the  shades  (Descent  of  Istar,  obv.  1.  8) ;
this  too  may  be  a  hyperbole.

4397


SERVANT  OP  THE  LORD

Sarug,  between  Birejik  on  the  Euphrates,  N.  of  Car-
chemish,  and  the  two  cities  just  NE.  (Urfa,  i.e. ,  Edessa),
and  SE.  (Harran)  from  it,  both  on  the  river  Balih  (cp
Di.  Gen. ,  loc.  cif.,  and  reff. ).  Glaser  and  Hommel
(AHT  209)  connect  the  name  with  the  Aram,  district
Birtu  (fortress)  sa  saragiti  (cp  KB  liof.).1  F.  B.
SERVANT.  The  words  are  :  —

*•  ~mj>  VB*rf(mu»,  Tfa.iSdpt.ov,  oiKeYrjs,  0epan-u)i>,  6oOAos) ;  (a)
slave,  Gen.  12  16  39  17  Ex.  21  2  20,  etc.  ;  (b)  with  reference  to  a
king,  a  royal  official,  Gen.  40  20  2  S.  1024,  or  even  a  common
soldier,  2  S.  2  \zjf.  822  87.

2.  TIJE',  saklr  (fii<r0wTO?,  fuVdtot) 'hired  servant,'  Ex.  1245
Lk.  151719;  'hireling,'  Job  1  \f.  146  Mai.  3  5  Ecclus.  7  20  In.
lOizf.

3.  HJ7J, nd'ar  (irals, TraiWpioi/, Oepairui', SoCAos), properly
'boy,' Mad';  hence 'attendant,' 'retainer'  (1!DB); see  Nu
2222  i  S.  25  5  2S.2i4./,  etc.

4.  rntrp, wesarcth (Aetrovpyds, SiaKOvos, 0epdmav), better
rendered 'minister,' 2  S.  13i7_/C 2  K.  4  43, also Joel  1  9 217
(of  the  priests).

5- nhs  [Aram.]  (Aeiroupyds),  Ezra"  24.

EV  weakens  the  sense  of  nay  and  SoDXos  by  constantly
rendering  '  servant.'  Only  six  times  is  the  word  '  slave '
found  in  EV.  In  four  passages  it  renders  SoCXos,  viz. ,
Judith5n  14i3  18  i  Mace.  841.  In  Jer.  214  'home-born
slave  '  is  given  for  rra  T^,  and  in  Rev.  1813  '  slaves  '  for
adj/nara.

The  use  of  TTCUS  and  Traiddpiov  for  nay  hardly  needs
comment  ;  it  is  a  natural  extension  of  the  meaning  of
terms  which  are  more  strictly  equivalent  to  -iy:.  In
Mt.  89  we  find  SoDXos,  but  in  vv.  6  8  13  wait  ;  similarly
in  Lk.  77,  cp  7'.  3.  Of  special  interest  are  Acts  4  27  30
because  AV  there  renders  trcus  by  'child,'  in  spite  of
the  undoubted  reference  to  passages  in  II.  Isaiah  where
the  '  Servant  of  the  Lord '  is  spoken  of  in  ©  by  the
title  TTCUS,  corresponding  to  nay.  RV  correctly  sub
stitutes  'Servant';  the  phrase  is  'thy  holy  Servant
Jesus.'  See  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD.  It  is  also  note
worthy  that  where  'Servant'  (nay)  is  used  to  express
the  special  relation  of  Moses  (Ex.  1431  Nu.  12?/. )  and
of  Job  (JoblS  [A  ;  but  BS  TTCUS]  2s)  to  the  true  God,
(5  renders  by  Oepairuv  —  a  more  honorific  term  than
SoDXos.  Nevertheless,  in  a  similar  case  the  translator
of  Isaiah,  as  we  have  seen,  adopts  a  different  course.
Note  also  that  Joshua,  the  rntrp  ( Ex.  24 13,  EV  '  minister ')
of  Moses,  is  called  in  ©  6  7rape<rr?7K:ws  avrf.  On
diaKovos  and  \eirovpyos  see  DEACON,  MINISTER.

SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

Use  of  title  (§  i).  State  of  text  (§  5).

In  Jer.,  Ezek.,  II.  Isa.  (§  2/1). Jerahmeelite  theory  (§  6).

In  "Is.  42  49  5053  (§  4).  Literature  (§  7).

The  phrase  '  servant  (servants)  of  Yahwe '  (or  '  of
God ' )  is  applied  to  various  persons  and  groups  of
persons.

It  is  applied  to  Abraham  (Dt.927  Ps.  105642);  to  Isaac  and
Jacob  (Dt.  9  27) ;  to  Moses  (Dt.  34  5  Josh.  1  i  i  Ch.  (5  49  2  Ch.  24  9

Neh.  10  29  Dan.  9  1 1) ;  to  Joshua  (Josh.  24  29
1.  Use  Of  title.  Judg.  2s);  to  David  (Ps.  IS  and  3(3:  titles);  to

the  prophets  (Jer.  "25  254  e'c.);  to  Isaiah,
(Is.  20  3)  ;  to  Job  (Job  1  8  2  3  42  8),  and  even  to  Nebuchadrezzar,
(Jer.  [259]  276  43  to)  ;  of  the  usage  in  passages  of  Ezekiel  and
Is.  40-55  and  in  cognate  passages  of  Jeremiah  we  shall  speak
presently  (§  2).

That  the  phrase  is  honorific  and  not  disparaging,  is
obvious.  Precisely  so,  Mohammed  in  the  Koran  (Sur.
231)  is  called  '  our  (God's)  servant'  ;  plainly  the  highest
honour  is  thereby  supposed  to  be  conferred  upon  him.
There  is,  however,  a  lower  degree  of  this  honourable
estate.  A  '  servant '  of  God  is  primarily  a  worshipper
of  God.  By  sacrifice,  members  of  the  clan  or  the
people  were  brought  into  the  family  of  the  protecting

1  [Upon  the  theory  (see  Crit.  Bib.)  that  the  geography  of  the
Hebrew  documents  was  to  a  large  extent  misunderstood  and
misstated  by  the  redactors,  '  Serug  '  will  represent  a  clan  or  place
of  residence,  not  in  the  N.,  but  in  the  far  S.  Just  as  by  trans
position  -ihlnC'fN]  seems  to  have  become  Heres  (and,  in  MT  of
Is.  19  18,  Heres),  so  '  Geshur  '  (the  southern  '  Geshur  ')  may  have
become  '  Serug.' — T.  K.  c.]

4398


2 Jar  ?


SERVANT  OP  THE  LORD

God,  and  a  relation  was  established  which  might
almost  equally  we'.l  be  called  that  of  servants  l  and  of
sons  (cp  2  K.  10?  Mai.  817,  and  note,  with  Mozley,  the
sense  of  ownership  which  pervades  Abraham's  conduct
to  Isaac  in  Gen.  22).  To  be  advanced  to  a  higher
degree  of  service,  a  worshipper  of  Yahwe  must  receive
from  him  some  special  mission.  This  could  also  be  the
lot  of  a  whole  people.  A  time  was  doubtless  coming
when  all  mankind  would  become  the  worshipping
servants  of  the  true  God  ;  but  there  would  still  be  one
people  which  was  Yahwe's  servant  by  election  for  a
special  object  (cp  Is.  49i-6),  viz.  Israel.  In  the  olden
time,  the  people  of  Israel  was  God's  servant  only
through  its  highest  representatives  —  patriarchs  (typi
cally),  prophets,  and  the  idealised  David.  But  in  the
post  -exilic  age  the  noblest  portions  of  the  people
assimilated  more  and  more  the  elevating  idea  that
Israel  itself  was  in  the  highest  sense  Yahwe's  servant.
See  ISAIAH  ii.  ,  §  18  ;  cp  MESSIAH,  §§  3^

None of  the passages containing the phrase VMf
Yahwe  (Servant  of  Yahwe)  presents  any  special  diffi-

Clllty  except  Jer t25^  2'6  43  10'  and
some  of  those in Is.  40-55. These

passages  we  have  now  to  consider,  (a)  As  to  those  in
Jer.  relative  to  Nebuchadrezzar  (the  phrase  in  25  9  has
been  interpolated),2  there  is  of  course  nothing  peculiar
in  the  idea  that  the  movements  of  the  great  conquerors
known  to  the  Israelites  were  fore-ordained  by  Yahwe
(cp  Is.  10  5  f.  15  3726).  There  is,  however,  some  strange
ness  in  Nebuchadrezzar's  being  called  by  Yahwe  •  my
servant,'  considering  that  whatever  else  the  phrase
'  Yahwe's  servant  '  may  mean  in  any  special  case,  it
means  everywhere,  except  apparently  in  these  passages
of  Jer.  ,  Yahwe's  worshipper.  It  is  possible  for  moderns
to  find  good  points  in  Nebuchadrezzar  ;  3  but  there  is
no  evidence  that  the  Israelites  were  ever  tempted  to  do
so,  and  in  particular  that  they  ever  looked  forward  (cp
Is.  4036)  to  Nebuchadrezzar's  becoming  a  convinced
worshipper  of  Yahwe  ;  indeed,  the  narratives  of  Daniel
and  of  Judith  appear  to  make  this  king  a  symbol  of
the  opponent  of  the  God  of  the  Jews,  Antiochus
Epiphanes.  Besides  this,  it  is  probable  that  when  Jer.
27  (in  its  present  form)  and  43  were  written,  the  title
'  my  servant  '  was  already  a  standing  appendage  to
'Israel'  (cp  Jer.  30io  4627  f.).  Are  we  prepared  to
reconcile  the  double  assignment  of  this  title  to  Nebuchad
rezzar  and  to  Israel  by  the  assumption  of  Duhm  that
the  title  '  my  servant  '  was  conferred,  according  to
Hebrew  thinkers,  on  Nebuchadrezzar  for  the  period
during  which  Israel's  claim  to  be  Yahwe's  earthly  repre
sentative  was  in  abeyance  ?  There  surely  ought  to  be
some  more  satisfying  theory  than  this.4

(b~)  As  regards  the  passages,  Ezek.  2825  37  25'  Jer.
30  10  4627  Is.  418  42  igff.  43  10  44  1/  21  45  4  4820,
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  title  '  my
in  servant  '  is  here  applied  to  the  people

Ezek  J  r  °f  Israel  ^Is'  4l8  44al)  or—  the  synony-
amTn''  Isaiah  mous  term  —  Jacob  (Ezek-  Jer-  Is-
tt'  44  1/  45  4  4820).  It  is  also  plain

from  the  passages  in  Is.  40-55  that  the  title  suggested
this  idea—  that  Israel  was  not  only  devoted  to  the
worship  of  Yahwe,  but  also  '  chosen  '  by  God  to  receive
certain  unique  marks  of  favour  (||  "vna,  Is.  4820  454B
'called'  'formed,'  'made'  are  also  used),  beginning
with  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  journey  under
divine  guidance  into  Canaan  and  closing  with  the

1  On  the  use  of  Obed or Ebed in Hebrew, and 'Abd in
Arabic in the  formation of  proper names, cp NAMES, §  17  ;
We.  tfeM.P)  Iff.

2  See  Giesebrecht's  commentary.

3  See Rogers, Babylonia and Assyria, 2  352  f.  ; Che.
OPs.  280.

*  See  Crit.  Bi!>.  on  Jer.  27  6.

5  In  the  same  passage  occurs  the  phrase  '  my  servant  David  '
(i.e.,  the  first  of  a  new  line  of  Davidic  rulers,  as  8423).

6  So  in 659  '522  'Yrl3  is  a  synonym  for  "13J7. Cp  Sellin,
Studien  zur  Entst.  -gesch.  d,  jiid.  Gemeindc,  1  81.

4399


SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

deliverance  from  Babylon  (?)  and  the  wonderful  events
which  were  to  follow.  Did  the  title  also  suggest  the
idea  of  a  mission  entrusted  to  Israel  ?  It  is  true  that  in
41 11-16  Israel  is  descril>ed  as  a  conqueror  ;  that  in  443-5
it  is  promised  that  Yahwe's  spirit  (rua.fi)  shall  be  poured
out  upon  Israel's  offspring,  and  that  even  foreigners
shall  aspire  to  become  adopted  members  of  Israel,  also
that  in  43 10  f.  the  servants  of  Yahwe  whom  he  has
chosen  (read  nag)  are  called  upon  to  act  as  witnesses  to
the  prophetic  veracity  of  their  God.  But  these  state
ments  can  only  be  said  to  contain  germs  which  might
develop  into  the  idea  of  Israel's  mission  ;  upon  the
whole  the  Israel  of  these  passages  (and  of  the  cognate
ones  in  Ezek.  and  Jer. )  has  to  manifest  Yahwe's  glory
(cp  Is.  43y)  rather  by  being  than  by  doing,  and  to  re
ceive  God's  blessing  for  itself  rather  than  to  make  them
fruitful  for  other  peoples,  though  certainly  the  thre~
passages,  41n-i6  43io/  and  44 3-5,  if  read  in  the  light
of  other  passages,  seem  to  suggest  that  a  second  stage
in  Israel's  renewed  life  may  be  preparing,  characterised
by  earnest  activity  and  the  exercise  of  moral  influence.

Israel,  then,  as  it  passes  out  of  the  furnace  of
captivity,  receives  honourable  titles  from  its  God.  We
must  not,  however,  exaggerate  the  merits  of  the  bearers
of  these  high  titles.  Israel  is  highly  favoured  ;  but  the
description  of  Israel  in  Is.  40-55  is  by  no  means
altogether  idealistic.  First,  as  regards  the  past.  It
will  be  necessary  to  leave  out  of  account  the  strong
statement  in  42  24^,

'  Was  it  not  Yahwe — he  against  whom  we  sinned,
And  in  whose  ways  they  would  not  walk,
And  to  whose  law  they  were  not  obedient,'

and  also  the  stern,  damnatory  clauses  of  chap.  48,
inasmuch  as  all  these  are  certainly  later  interpolations,
and  are  therefore  only  interesting  for  the  history  of  the
expansion  of  the  prophetic  writing.  But  we  may  and
must  refer  to  402  4224/  4823-28  476  50 1  51 17,  as
implying  grievous  failures  on  the  part  of  Israel.  In
fact,  the  prophet  of  consolation  could  only  carry  out  his
object  by  making  the  calamities  of  Israel  intelligible —
i.e.,  by  reminding  Israel  of  its  earlier  infidelity  towards
its  righteous  God.

Nor  is  this  description  idealistic  as  regards  the  present.
According  to  the  Second  Isaiah,  it  is  weakness  of  faith
that  is  Israel's  chief  fault,  and  since  faith  is  the  stretched-
out  hand  which  receives  God's  blessings,  it  is  necessary
for  the  heralds  of  deliverance  to  arouse  men  out  of  the
torpor  of  despondency  by  rebuking  their  distrust  of
God.  To  Israel  at  large  '  it  seemed  as  if  Yahwe's
recent  action  had  been  aimless,  as  if  he  had  begun  by
spending  great  pains  on  the  education  of  Israel,  and
then  forgotten  Israel's  right  to  protection  (4027  49 14
6811-14),  and  as  if  the  source  either  of  Yahwe's  com
passion  or  of  his  heroic  deeds  had  been  dried  up,  so
that  he  tamely  "gave  his  glory  to  another  god"  (428
48 ii  6815).'  l  Kindly  and  persuasive  instructions  were
therefore  essential  to  prepare  the  exiled  Israelites  for
their  high  destiny.  Idealism  was  permissible  in  pictures
of  future  salvation,  but  not  in  descriptions  of  the  state
of  Yahwe's  people  either  in  the  past  or  in  the  present.

It  may  be  doubted,  however,  whether  such  kindly
persuasiveness  would  have  been  consistent  with  calling
the  whole  bod}' of  exiled  Israelites  •' blind  '  and  'deaf.'
The  commentators  seem  here  to  have  fallen  into  error.
They  tell  us  that  the  words  (42i8-2o,  RV), —

'  Hear,  ye  deaf;  and  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see.  Who
is  blind,  but  my  servant?  or  deaf,  as  my  messenger  that  I  send?
who  is  blind  as  he  that  is  at  peace  [with  mel,  and  blind  as  the
Lord's  servant?  Thou  seest  many  things,  but  thou  observes!
not ;  his  ears  are  open,  but  he  heareth  not,' —

refer  to  the  Israelites,  whom  Yahw6  reproaches  for  their
spiritual  insensibility  (chap.  29 18).  And  this  is
supposed  to  be  confirmed  by  438,  where  we  read
(EV),—

Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have  eyes,  and  the  deaf  that
have  ears, —

1  Intr.  Is.  243.
4400


SERVANT  OP  THE  LORD

a  difficult  passage  certainly,  as  the  differences  of  the
commentators  show.  It  must  be  remarked,  however,
that  in  42  16  the  Israelites  are  called  'blind'  in  quite
another  sense  ;  what  is  meant  there  is  simply  (to  use
Skinner's  words)  that  the  travellers  cannot  see  their
path.  It  is  surely  not  very  likely  that  the  Second
Isaiah  would  have  applied  the  same  epithet  to  the  same
people  in  two  different  senses  within  a  few  lines.

It  has  been  lately  pointed  out  (SSOT  '  Isa.  '  [Heb.]
131  /)  that  42  19  forms,  properly  speaking,  no  part  of
the  discourse,  but  is  a  gloss  on  the  words  '  deaf  '  and
'  blind  '  in  v.  18.  But  the  text  still  appears  to  require
some  criticism  in  the  light  of  fresh  researches  into  the
history  of  the  Exile.  Very  probably  the  gloss  or  glosses
already  recognised  should  run  thus  :  —

T\Vho  is  blind  but  the  Arabian,  and  deaf  as  the  Jerahmeelite?
Who  is  blind  but  the  Ishmaelite,  and  deaf  as  the  Arabian?

These  glosses  are  not  merely  an  attempt  to  save  the
credit  of  the  Israelites  ;  they  involve  a  correct  inter
pretation  of  v.  18.  The  persons  addressed  are  most
probably  the  N.  Arabian  captors  and  oppressors  of  the
Israelites  (cp  PROPHET,  §  27)  together  with  those  false
Jews  who  had  gone  over  to  their  side,  and  the  pro
phetic  writer  bids  them  learn  the  right  lesson  from  the
history  of  Israel  —  viz.  ,  that  those  who  disobey  Yahwe's
law  (one  of  the  chief  parts  of  which  was  a  prohibition  of
idolatry  —  cp  v.  17)  are  on  the  way  to  ruin.  As  for  438,
a  comparison  of  Ps.  115s/  135  16/.  suggests  that  the
'blind  people  that  haveeyes.'etc.  ,is  an  ironical  description
of  the  idols  of  Israel's  oppressors,  which  the  speaker  com
mands  to  be  brought  up  to  the  tribunal  in  order  that
their  claims  may  be  considered  (cp  41  21).  The  peoples
referred  to  in  43  9  are  probably  (as  in  the  former  case,
and  in  41  121)  those  of  N.  Arabia.  But  we  will  not
omit  to  warn  the  reader  that  these  criticisms  form  part
of  a  connected  radical  revision  of  the  text  which  is  here
made  use  of  under  the  pressure  of  grave  exegetical
difficulty.

It  is  only  necessary  to  add  that  the  strange  word  DW&
(mcsu/ldiii),  rendered  variously  in  RV  '  he  that  is  at  peace  [with
me],'  |  made  perfect,'  and  'recompensed,'  occurs  as  a  proper
name  in  2  K.  22  3  and  elsewhere,  and  has  already  been  recog
nised  as  a  distortion  of  the  Hebrew  ethnic  meaning  '  Ishmaelite  '
(see  MESHULLAM).

(f) We now turn to another group of  passages
(Is.  42i-4  49i-6  504-9  52i3-53i2)  in  which,  according  to
4  The  four some  critics, the  interpretation  of  the
great  Servant-  Phraf  .'  Servan1t  <*  Jahwfe  '  as  a  title  of
passages  •  el  1S  lnaPPllcable.  or,  if  applicable

Duhm  or'  at  a^1'  on'y  'n  a  restr'ctecl  sense  with
Budde  ?  reference  to  the  true  Israel.  These
critics  are  of  opinion  that  the  char
acteristics  of  the  personage  called  the  Servant  in  these
passages  differ  in  some  important  respects  from  those
of  the  Servant  (I.e.,  Israel)  spoken  of  in  the  passages
already  considered.  Some  of  them  go  so  far  as  to  hold
that  the  Servant  of  Yahwe  being  sometimes  apparently
distinguished  from  Israel,  and  sometimes,  especially  in
52  is-53  12,  being  described  as  only  an  individual  could
be,  we  have  to  look  into  history  for  some  great  religious
hero  who  might  conceivably  be  intended  in  these  striking
descriptions.  Sellin,1  Winckler,2  and  Kittel3  have
selected  Zerubbabel  ;  but  Sellin  has  himself  abandoned
Zerubbabel,  and  substituted  the  exiled  king  Jehoiachin
(cp  Rothstein,  Die  Geneal.  d.  Jehoiachin),  whilst
Bertholet4  explains  53i-na  with  reference  to  the
martyred  scribe  Eleazar  (2  Mace.  6  18-31).  Duhm,  how
ever  (Jes.  377  ;  ('-)  367),  holds  that  the  problem  which
engages  the  critics  is  insoluble,  and  that  Jewish  history
(so  far  as  it  exists)  knows  nothing  of  such  an  individual.

1  Senibbabel(T&<)<S). See  ZERUBBABEL.


3  Zur  Theologie  des  AT(iBgg)  2,  'Jesaja  53  und  der  leidende
Messias  im  AT.'

4  Zu  Jesaja.  53  ;  ein  Erklarungsversuch  (1899). Bertholet  's
theory  is  that  the  passage  52  13-58  12  is  made  up  of  two  small
poems  of  different  origin,  (a)  52  1-3-15  53n/'-i2,  in  which  the
typical  teacher  of  the  Torah  is  glorified,  and  (b)  03  i-n<t,  which
refers  to  Eleazar.

4401


SERVANT  OP  THE  LORD

But,  he  adds,  this  is  much  less  surprising  than  that  it
tells  us  nothing  of  an  Amos,  an  Hosea,  or  a  Micah,
and  that  we  do  not  know  the  name  of  the  Second
Isaiah.  His  own  view  is  that  the  hero  of  the  group  of
passages  referred  to  was  a  teacher  of  the  Torah,  who
lived  probably  (not  certainly)  between  the  Exile  and  the
arrival  of  Ezra  at  Jerusalem,  and  devoted  himself  to
true  pastoral  work  among  his  people,  but  was  seized  by
a  terrible  sickness,  and  after  death  shared  the  igno
minious  burial  of  criminals.1

It  may  be  noted  in  passing  that,  according  to  Ibn  Ezra
haadia  interpreted  the  whole  section  52  13-68  12  of  Jeremiah  a
hypothesis  which  Ibn  Ezra  finds  attractive  (Driver  and  Ne'u-
bauer,  Tkt  Fifty -third  Chapter  of  Isaiah,  'Translations,'  43)
while  not  a  few  moderns  suppose  that  the  colouring,  at  least
was  derived  from  the  idealised  life  of  Jeremiah.  Also  that
Kraetzschmar  thinks  that  Ezekiel  may  be  ibe  historic  model  of
the  suffering  and  glorified  servant,  referring  to  Ezek.  4,  where
Ezekiel,  by  divine  command,  bears  the  guilt  of  his  sinful  people
and  suffers  grievously  in  consequence  (Der  leidtnde  Cottes-
knecht,  1899).  The  present  writer  has  supposed  that  the  last  of
the  passages  in  question  was  'largely  modelled  on  the  Book  of
Job'  (Jtwisk  Relig.  Life,  1898,  p.  162).  2

It  will  be  clear  that,  from  the  point  of  view  repre
sented  above,  the  passages  in  question  differ  in  essential
respects  from  the  other  passages  of  Is.  40-55  relative  to
the  'Servant  of  Yahwe.'  If  this  is  a  fact,  it  is  alike
important  for  the  criticism  and  exegesis  of  II.  Isaiah
and  for  the  history  of  religion.  Of  late,  however,  there
have  been  signs  of  a  growing  reaction  against  Duhm,
whose  theory  had  at  first  won  considerable  favour.
Elsewhere  (ISAIAH  [BOOK],  §  18,  col.  2205),  a  view
has  been  taken  akin  to  that  of  this  able  critic.  But
fairness  requires  us  now  to  take  account  of  an  earnest
protest  (Minoritats-votitm)  raised  by  Budde3  against
Duhm's  theory — a  protest  with  which  Marti  in  his
commentary,  Giesebrecht  (Der  Knecht  fa/ires),  and
Konig  (The  Exiles'  Book  of  Consolation)  more  or  less
completely  agree.  It  will  then  be  our  duty  to  inquire
whether  there  is  any  way  of  approaching  the  subject
which  will  enable  us  to  remove  some  of  the  chief  causes
of  perplexity  in  earlier  investigations.

i.  Is.  42 1-4.  The  Servant  is  here  entrusted  with  a
mission  to  the  heathen  world.  The  method  which  he
employs  (so  Duhm  expounds  r.  2)  is  radically  different
from  that  of  the  prophets  ;  he  is  even  unlike  the  Second
Isaiah  in  his  avoidance  of  loud,  emphatic,  exciting
declarations.  His  task  is  simply  to  expound  the  Law
of  Yahwe  to  all  who  seek  it,  whether  Jews  or  heathen,
in  the  school  or  the  private  chamber,  at  Jerusalem,
especially  to  those  who  are  bowed  by  trouble.  He  is
destined  to  become  a  recognised  international  authority,
and  as  such  his  highest  aim  will  be  the  establishment  of
the  true  religion  on  the  whole  earth.  Duhm  thinks
that  in  order  to  be  just  to  this  description  we  must
suppose  the  poet  to  refer  to  an  individual,  the  greatest
and  most  influential  of  the  teachers  of  the  Torah.
With  this  result,  Sellin  (though  he  differs  from  Duhm
in  important  details)  agrees,  in  so  far  as  the  reference
to  an  individual  is  concerned.  Budde,  however,  pro
tests  :  '  We  ask  in  vain  how  such  things  could  be
stated  of  an  individual;  Is.  2  2-4  alone  is  sufficient
evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  conception  that  Israel
has  a  mission  of  instruction  to  the  heathen.'  Budde
thinks,  too,  that  the  following  verses  (42s-;)  confirm
this  interpretation.

For,  however  we  explain  the  difficult  py  jV"o(EV  'a covenant
of  the  people  ')  in  v,  6,4  it  is  plain  that  it  can  only  apply  to  the
people  not  to  an  individual,  and  in  spite  of  Duhm0  few  will


1  Das  J)uc/'i  fesaia,  'Einl.'  xviii.

2  Seinecke,  Der  Evangelist  des  A  T  (1870),  and  Hoekstra,
T/t.T,  1871,  pp.  1-56,  invert  the  relation. Cp  Kuenen, Th.T,
J^73i PP- 492'542 1 Davidson, Book of  Job (1884), Introd.
pp.  Ixvi^C;  Che.  Proph.  7f.(3)  (1884),  pp.  265-268.

3  I  TU^  I1-.J IT1! 1 \>",,1 U t: .  I »U«


,  .

4  See  Dillm.  Ki.  SHOT  (Heb.  eoo  (46),  and  Marti,  ad  Joe.

5  Duhm's  explanation  of  c'U  IIN  in  42  6  as  =  '  a  pattern  of  the
ther  states,  '  has  not  found  supporters. [During  the  correction  of


4402


SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

cloubt  that  the  phrase  in  the  parallel  line,  c-ij  im,  'a  light  of
the  nations,'  also  refers  to  the  Jewish  people  as  a  teacher,  as  in
41)6  014.  It  should  be  observed  that  4:!  5-7  and  614  are,  on
Duhm's  own  showing,  the  work  of  the  Second  Isaiah.  How,
then,  can  it  be  said  that  there  are  in  Is.  40-55  two  inconsistent
views  of  the  Servant,  which  must  have  come  from  different
writers,  one  much  deeper  religiously  than  the  other?  Such  is
Budde's  argument.

2.  Is.  49 1-6.  The  Servant  of  Israel  summons  the  dis
tant  peoples  to  hear  something  in  which  they  are  specially
concerned.  From  his  very  birth  he  has  been  singled
out  and  endowed  with  a  sharp,  incisive  speech,  such  as
befits  the  expounder  of  Yahwe's  word  (cp  Jer.  2829).
Till  the  right  moment  for  his  appearance  shall  come,  he
has  been  carefully  hidden  from  the  world  that  he  may
ripen  in  seclusion.  Such  was  the  honour  put  upon
him  ;  such  the  strength  which  was  at  his  disposal  as
Yahwe's  Servant.  But  his  recent  experience  has  been
so  sad  that  he  has  seemed  to  himself  to  have  lived  in
vain  and  to  be  near  his  end.  But  whenever  these
thoughts  have  plagued  him,1  tokens  have  come  to  him
from  above  that  his  God  both  justifies  and  is  rewarding
him.  And  now  a  fresh  revelation  visits  him.  The
God  who  had  originally  given  him  a  mission  to  Israel
alone,  now  extends  that  mission  to  the  Gentile  world.
It  is  Yahwe's  purpose,  not  only  to  restore  Israel  as  a
people,  but  also  to  save  or  deliver  the  other  peoples
through  the  Servant's  instrumentality.  The  restoration
of  the  twelve  Tribes  will  be  the  work  of  Yahwe,  but
not  a  purely  miraculous  work  (as  the  Second  Isaiah2
thought),  and  the  Servant  of  Yahwe  can  co-operate
with  him  by  persuading  as  many  Jews  as  possible  to
migrate  to  the  Holy  Land.  And  the  illumination  or
instruction  of  the  '  peoples  '  devolves  upon  the  Servant.
They  are  to  be  saved  from  destruction  by  becoming
converted  to  the  true  religion — that  of  Yahwe.  This  is
the  highest  function  of  the  Servant  (note  the  significant
Sj3:),  and  it  is  entirely  his — -except,  of  course,  that
Yahwe  himself  has  trained  and  equipped  his  servant  for
his  noble  work.

There  are  two  points  in  Duhm's  '  extended  discussion  '
of  this  passage  to  which  Budde  takes  special  exception  :
(i)  the  omission  of  '  Israel'  in  v.  3  as  an  interpolation,3
and  (2)  the  explanation  of  331^  (v.  5)  as  meaning  a
spiritual  bringing-back  of  the  Israelites  to  God  by  in
struction,  exhortation,  consolation.  On  the  first  point,
Budde  remarks  that  '  the  Servant  is  here  addressing  the
heathen  (v.  ia],  to  whom  he  is  under  obligation  to  state
his  name,  as  would  not  be  the  case  were  he  an  Israelite,
addressing  his  own  people '  ;  *?K1B"  is  therefore  simply
the  second  predicate  of  nnx.4  On  the  second,  he  points
out  that  in  Ezek.  39  27  Jer.  50 19  331;?  means  the  physical
restoration  of  Israel  from  exile,  precisely  as  yyr\.  He
also  emphasises  the  fact  that  the  active  and  the  passive
conceptions  of  the  Servant  are  combined  in  this  mono
logue  of  the  Servant,  just  as  they  are  in  the  undisputed
work  of  II.  Isaiah.  It  is  a  mistake  to  say  that  the
Servant  in  II.  Isaiah  plays  only  a  passive,  and  in
the  '  Songs  of  the  Servant '  only  an  active  part.  49  4/1
shows  that  the  Servant  in  the  '  Songs '  was  not  and
could  not  be  free  from  a  '  wise  passiveness '  ;  he  had  to
wait  for  Yahwe  to  recompense  him,  and  his  restoration
to  his  home  was  to  be  Yahwe's  work.  And  not  less
clear  is  it  from  49  iff.,  where  Yahwe  informs  the
Servant  (i.e.,  unquestionably,  Israel)  of  the  honour
which  he  shall  receive  as  the  result  of  his  successful
mission  to  the  nations.

the  proofs  appeared  Duhm's  second  edition,  in  which  he  comes
over  to  the  more  natural  view,  that  the  phrase  means  '  a  teacher
of  the  nations.'  The  parallel  phrase,  he  thinks,  is  Qy  nns>  'a
redemption  of  the  (Jewish)  people.'  See,  however,  §  5  (i).]

1  According  to  Duhm,  ?'.  4«  is  the  protasis  to  v.  46.  Most,
however,  e.g.,  Budde,  suppose  the  meaning  to  be  that  the
Servant  had  been  attacked  by  despondency,  which  he  overcame
by  calling  to  mind  the  faithfulness  of  Yahwe  (cp  40  io<$).

'-  Duhm  quotes  Is.  43  $f.  49  22.

•'  .Marti  also  retains  the  woid.

4  Budde  not  only  keeps  VNT8"  here,  but  inserts  3pjr  and
tr  in  42  i  from  (0  (sjs).

44°3


SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

3.  Is.  504-9. The  Servant  (whose  title,  however,  is
not  expressly  mentioned)  describes  the  persecution  which
he  has  suffered,  and  his  sure  confidence  that  Yahwe  will
soon  appear  to  put  down  his  enemies. In  the  preface
to this  monologue  he  represents himself  as  one  who
expounds  Yahwe's  word  (i.e.,  the  Torah?)  to  the  weary,
in  accordance  with  the  revelations  which  come  to  him
afresh  every  morning. The  collectivistic  interpretation
appears  to  Duhm  plainly  impossible.

To  this  Budde  answers  that  what  the  Servant  says  of
himself  in  007-9  agrees  with  what  Yahwe  utters  in  51 7 /.
as  an  encouragement  to  \.\\e  people ,  while,  he  might  have
added,  the  language  of  v.  6a  resembles  that  in  51  23
Ps.  1293.  And  even  if  the  monologue  of  the  Servant
makes  no  mention  of  a  mission  to  the  heathen,  who  art
indeed,  so  far  as  they  are  enemies  of  Israel,  to  be
destroyed,  yet  the  experiences  described  in  504/.  are
just  those  which  would  be  necessary  for  mission  work
among  the  heathen.  The  passage  is,  therefore,  not
inconsistent  with  the  other  passages,  and  Ley  and  Laue
do  wrong  to  omit  it  from  the  series  of  passages.

4.  Is.  52 13-53 12. Wondrous  is  the  contrast  between
the  Servant's  future  exaltation  and  his  past  humiliation.
See  the  kings  paying  reverence  to  him  whose  distorted
visage  once  struck  all  observers  with  horror  ! But  who
can  believe l  the  marvels  revealed  to  us  ? Only  those
who  can  see  the  invisible  operation  of  God  in  history
(53i). Mean were the circumstances in which the
Servant grew up, nor had his person any  external
attractions. For  society  apart  from  his  daily  vocation
he  cared  not  (cp  Jer.  15 17) ;  he  was  despised  and,  as  it
would  seem,  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  afflicted  with
sickness  and  with  pain. It  was  the  punishment  for  sin,
and  the  sufferer  not  only  knew  it  but  inwardly  gave  full
assent  and  consent  to  it. He  himself  was  innocent  ;  no
sins  of  speech  or  of  act  could  justly  be  imputed  to  him.
But  his  fellow-Jews  (including  the  poet)  assumed  that
such sins he must have committed, for was not
sickness the punishment of sin  ? And this man's
affliction  was  nothing  less  than  leprosy  (v.  s<z  is  meta
phorical); how  great, then, must  his  sin  have  been!
But  the  strange  truth was that for high reasons  the
punishment  deserved  by  the  Jews  in  general  was  diverted
to  this  willing  substitute. Before  this,  afflictions  may
have  fallen  on  those  guilty  ones  ;  but  they  had  no  moral
effect. The time came, however, when the  eyes of
men's  understandings  were  opened  to  the  meaning  of
the sufferings of the innocent one, and so '  by his
stripes  we  were  healed.' But  while  the  sad  spectacle
was  before  them,  the  poet  and  his  companions  confess
that  they  lived  purely  selfish  lives,  like  wandering  sheep.
The sufferer, too, was like  a sheep, but  in another
sense — he  bore  his  lot  without  a  murmur,  even  though
by  the  manifest  judgment  of  God  he  was  cut  off. His
dishonoured  body  was  laid  apart  with  the  wicked  and
the  deceivers,2  but  he  himself  was  graciously  released —
'  taken ' by  God  to  some  unknown  place  of  sojourn.
For  very  different  in  this  case  were  God's  thoughts  from
those  of  man. For  the  servant  himself,  those  sufferings
were a purification. He  was to come back to the
world,  to  reach  a  good  old  age  (cp  Job  42  12^),  and
see his  children  prolonging their days. Having had
his  innocence  recognised,  he  should  live  in  the  light  of
joy  and  prosperity.3 As  a  reward  for  his  atoning  work
he  should  '  inherit  among  the  great, and  divide  spoil
with the  strong' — a proverbial phrase meaning 'he
shall  hold  intercourse  as  an  equal  with  the  mighty  ones
of  the  earth. '

1  ppxn  »D ;  Duhm,  'who  can  believe?" The  imperfect  was
impossible ; it  would  have  denied  that  anyone  would  believe.
Marti, more plausibly, '  Who would have believed ' (cp
*??p  'O,  Gen.  21  7). See  also  Giesebrecht,  Bcitriige  zur  Jesaia-
kritik  (1890),  p.  159,  and  cp  Dr.  Tenses,  <3)  19.

2  Duhm  reads  the  Aramaising  p'srj?  for  the  difficult  T2>y.

3  Duhm's  radical  corrections  are  partly  based  on  (B's  icol  icvpiof
/3ovAcrcu  *a$apicmi  avrov  and  6ei£ai  aurcp  <i>u)5.

4404


SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

To  this  exegesis  Budde  objects  that  it  covers  over  the
variety  of  expressions  in  the  picture  of  the  Servant's
sufferings.  As  in  the  case  of  certain  psalms,  this  variety
seems  rather  to  point  to  a  metaphorical  description  of
the  distress  of  the  nation  in  exilic  or  post-exilic  times.
Still  more  conclusive  is  the  statement  in  w.  %>ff.  of  the
death  and  revivification  of  the  Servant.  Such  state
ments  are  common  in  the  later  literature,  beginning  with
Ezek.  37.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  try  to  make  the
description  fit  the  case  of  an  individual,  we  shall  find
ourselves  hopelessly  baffled.  Who,  for  instance,  are
the  long-lived  descendants  (jni)  whom  the  revivified
martyr,  himself  very  old,  is  to  see?  Are  they  literal  or
spiritual  children  ? 1  Both  solutions  have  insuperable
difficulties.  Surely  the  children  are  those  of  the  nation
personified.  It  is  true,  the  atoning  character  ascribed
to  the  sufferings  of  the  martyr  seems  to  most  to  imply
that  the  martyr  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  mass  of
the  Jewish  people.  Budde,  however,  affirms  this  to  be
impossible.  With  Hitzig,2  Giesebrecht3  (especially),
Wellhausen,  Konig,2  Marti,  and  [in  1899,  but  not  in
1893]  Smend,  he  takes  up  the  tradition  of  rabbis  such
as  Rashi,  Ibn  Ezra,  Kimhi,  that  the  confession  in  chap.
53  is  uttered  by  the  '  nations'  referred  to  in  52 15  ;  the
martyr,  therefore,  both  can  and  must  be  the  people  of
Israel.  One  important  part  of  his  argument  may  be
quoted  here  ;  he  is  meeting  Dillmann's  objection  to
Giesebrecht's  view  that  II.  Isaiah  always  makes  the  sin
of  Israel  the  cause  of  its  sufferings  (42  24^  4827  f.  476
50 1  ;  cp42is492s/.  51 5  23,  etc.).

'  Whatever  justifying  grounds  Yahwe  may  have  had  for  the
chastisement  of  Israel,  as  respects  the  heathen,  who  are  here  the
speakers,  not  these  grounds,  but  Yahwe  s  purpose,  comes  into
consideration.  Though  Israel  may  have  sinned,  yet  in  the  con
science  of  the  heathen  the  only  worshipper  of  the  true  God
appears  as  the  only  innocent  one.  But,  further  than  that,  it  is
a  well-known  fact  that,  compared  with  other  prophets,  II.  Isaiah
lays  very  little  stress  upon  Israel's  trespass,  that  the  tone  of
sympathy  predominates  throughout  and  strongly.  Nor  does  he
fail  to  state  expressly  that  Israel  has  suffered  more  punishment
than  its  sins  have  deserved.  He  hegins  his  entire  book  with  the
statement  [40  2]  that  his  people,  that  Jerusalem,  has  received  a
double  retribution  for  its  sins.  This  is  not,  as  Duhm  thinks,4
an  allusion  to  Jer.  16  18,  where  a  doubling  of  the  punishment  is
announced,  only,  however,  for  renewed  offences.  On  the  con
trary,  II.  Isaiah  distinctly  says  that  half  of  the  punishment  is
undeserved,  and  on  the  basis  of  general  prophetic  premises  we
have  a  right  to  ask  what  may  have  been  the  occasion  of  this
second  undeserved  portion  ;  and  when  we  find  the  figure  of
Yahwe's  Servant  already  introduced  in  41  8,  and  his  mission —
that  of  carrying  the  true  religion  to  the  heathen — stated  in  4'2  i,
we  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that  even  here  the  prophet  already
has  reference  to  the  suffering  which  was  indispensable  to  the
fulfilment  of  that  mission.  The  problem  of  theodicy  is  for  the
entire  century  the  really  vital  one.  The  people  solve  it,  not
without  a  feeling  of  bitterness,  by  applying  the  doctrine  of  suffer
ing  for  the  sins  of  the  fathers — i.e.,  for  the  sins  of  Manasseh
(Ezek.  18  2  etc.) — while  Ezekiel  tries  to  solve  it  by  enormously
exaggerating  his  accusations  in  an  endeavour  to  balance  guilt
and  punishment.  II.  Isaiah  alone  finds  a  really  satisfying  solu
tion  by  associating  with  the  cause  of  the  punishment  its  purpose,
and  we  can  understand  all  the  more  readily  that  this  solution
was  beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  masses  of  the  people,  as
well  as  of  most  of  its  leading  spirits,  because  his  hopes  and  pre
dictions  were  not  realised.  The  glorious  restoration  of  his
people  did  not  come  to  pass,  neither  were  its  sufferings  or  its
teachings  able  to  lead  the  heathen  to  Yahwe.'5

It  is  a  part  of  Budde's  theory  that  the  '  we '  in  chap.  53
is  not  a  collection  of  individual  men  but  01  individual
nations.  This,  according  to  him,  makes  the  marked
individualisation  of  the  people  of  Israel  more  intelligible  ;
the  same  individualisation  of  peoples  underlies  the  '  we. '
It  is  no  doubt  at  first  sight  fatal  to  his  theory  that  in
538  we  find  the  phrase  <gy  yvs?,  'for  the  rebellion  of
my  people '  (which  Kimhi  has  to  explain  as  referring  to

1  See  Di.-Ki.  fes.  456  (cp  461,  foot),  'such  as  are  brought  by
him  to  righteousness'  (v.  n  60 21),  'the  numerous  citizens  of  the
new  Zion  '  (54  if.  49  igf.).

2  Hitzig  and  Kunig,  however,  assign  53  i to  the  prophetic
writer.

3  Beitrcige,  146  ff.;  Knecht  Yahves,  59^,  l}ff-

4  So/es.  264. But  in  his  comm.  on  Jeremiah  (1901,  p.  141)
Duhm  maintains  that  the  writer  of  Jer.  16  18  lived  long  after
II.  Isaiah.

6  A  mer.  Jour.  ofTheol.,  1899,  p.  509  f.

141  4405


6.  Text.


SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

each  of  the  nations  which  will  unite  in  this  confession) ;
but  Budde  has  a  remedy — he  cleverly  emends  the  text.1
It  may  be  added  that  he  also  emends  the  text  of  52 13.
where  for  "?'3b"  he  proposes  to  read  VfTib'V  '  behold,
Israel  my  servant.'

According  to  Budde,  then,  there  are  points  of  con
tact  between  52 13-5812  and  the  undisputed  II.  Isaiah
which  forbid  the  assertion  that  two  different  views  of  the
Servant  are  represented  in  these  two  writings,  and  the
individualistic  interpretation  of  the  Servant  is  hardly  more
tenable  in  chap.  53  than  in  other  parts  of  the  prophecy.

See  also  Giesebrecht,  Beitriige  zur  Jesaiakritik  (1890),  146^,
a  'fundamental  work'  (Budde),  and  his  Der  Knecht  Yalives;
Konig,  The  Exiles'  Book  of  Consolation  (1899),  54-56  etc. :
Smend,  AT  Rel.-gesch.V)  355;  and,  against  the  nationalistic
theory,  Sellin,  Studien  zur  Entstehungsgeschichte  der  jiid.
Gemeinde  (1901),  1  34^  ;  Smend,  A  T  Rel.-gesch.^  257  f.

The  differences  of  interpretation  which  we  have  been
considering  are  largely  due  to  the  manifold  obscurities
of  the  text,  not  only  of  the  four  passages,
but  also  of  many  other  parts  of  Is.  40-66.
These  obscurities  may  in  turn  be  traced,  not  so  much
to  lacuna  in  the  Hebrew  lexicon  or  to  the  disturbing
effect  of  the  grandeur  and  novelty  of  the  ideas  on  the
mind  of  the  writers,  as  to  corruption.  In  the  four
passages  corruption  is,  according  to  Duhm,  specially
marked  in  504  52 14  53  io/.  Budde  also  fully  grants
that  '  the  second  half  of  chap.  53  has  suffered  serious
corruption  of  text '  ;  but  this  critic  impairs  the  value  of
this  concession  by  the  statement  that  '  the  only  corrup
tion  which  interferes  with  a  proper  interpretation  is  the
'ay  ('  niy  people  ')  in  v.  8  '  ;  this,  he  says,  '  admits  of  no
explanation  whatever  '  (510).  It  is  to  be  feared  that  any
considerable  approach  to  agreement  among  critics  will
be  impossible  as  long  as  this  comparative  confidence  in
the  MT  continues,  and  as  long  as  sounder  principles  of
textual  criticism  are  not  recognised  both  in  theory  and
in  practice.  It  is  not  that  a  large  number  of  acute
exegetical  suggestions  have  not  been  made,  but  a
decision  of  the  important  points  at  issue  seems  out  of
the  question  until  a  more  thorough  and  more  methodical
examination  of  the  text  of  the  whole  of  Is.  40-66  has
been  carried  through.

We  have  perhaps  been  so  long  accustomed  to  read
Isaiah  in  the  light  of  commentaries  that  real  obscurities
may  not  always  strike  us.

i.  Who  that  reads  Is.  42 1-4  with  a  fresh  mind  will  say
that  this  passage  is  easy  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  '  he
shall  not  cry  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard
without'  (v.  2)?  W.  E.  Barnes3  explains  the  first  part,
'  he  shall  not  cry  (his  war-cry),  nor  lift  up  (his  battle-
shout)  '  ;  G.  A.  Smith4  thinks  that  the  prophet  '  cannot
be  referring  to  the  means  and  art  of  the  service,  but
rather  to  the  tone  and  character  of  the  Servant ' ;  Sellin
(Studien,  18s)  sees  an  allusion  to  the  loud  publication
of  royal  edicts  ;  Duhm,  to  the  vehement  demeanour  of
prophets  ;  Marti,  however,  finds  the  renunciation  on
Israel's  part  of  a  political  role  among  the  nations.  Not
less  obscure  is  the  next  statement  (v.  3),

The  broken  reed  he  breaks  not  off,
The  failing  wick  he  quenches  not.

We  all  know  how  this  is  explained  ;  the  commentaries
with  one  voice  refer  to  the  Christian  ideal  of  the  pastoral
office.  But  what  place  has  this  here  ?  and  why  did  not
the  poet  express  himself  distinctly?  And  why  should
any  reference  be  made  in  v.  4  to  the  circumstance  that

1  Reading  irjtt?2D. ]}  was  dittographed  ;  13  became  C,  and  '
was  transposed. Giesebrecht's  emendation  (cp  G.  A.  Smith,  fsa.
2  349)  is  less  plausible.

2  Marti  approves. But  an  emendation  at  once  more  obvious
and  more  favoured  by  parallelism  is  n'^i",  'shall  have  success.'
Duhm  (/es.Pi)  unfortunately  adheres  to  Q?T.

3  Exp.  T  8  (1896)  29  ;  the  whole  passage  is  applied  to  Cyrus.
Sellin,  however  (Studien,  1  86),  thinks  it  a  designed  contrast  to
the  description  in  41  iff.,  which  is  usually  applied  to  Cyrus.

4  !s.  1 303  (so Delitzsch, Dillmann, Marti). Against  this,
however,  see  Sellin,  op.  cit.  84.

4406


SERVANT  OP  THE  LORD

the Servant himself  will never pass  through  the  sad
experience  of  the  persons  described  in  v.  3  ?

With  regard  to  426,  the  difficult  ay  rma  (KV  'a  covenant  of
the  people  ')  should  almost  certainly  be  D'DV  •  •  •;  the  uncertain
word  which  begins  the  phrase  should  most  probably  be  rnJOn1?  ;
thus  the  line  becomes,  '  for  an  ornament  (glory)  of  the  peoples,
for  a  light  of  the  nations ' ;  cp  13  18  40  13  (52  •*/.  See  Crit.  Bib.

2.  In  49  5  what  is  the  meaning  of  '  to  bring  back  Jacob
unto  him  '  ? Why  '  unto  him  '  ? And  how  can  '  Israel '
(v.  3)  have  been  'formed'  to  bring  back  Israel? And
how  can  the  restoration  of  Israel  be  referred  to  with
equal  elaborateness  twice  over in successive  stanzas?
Budde  (521)  proposes,  as  an  explanation  of  v.  5,  '  in  that
he  brought  Jacob  again  (out  of  Egypt)  to  him,  and  drew
Israel to  him  (into  the  desert).' This  at  any  rate  is
better than omitting the  words altogether  as  Giese-
brecht does. It is difficult, however, to interpret
33ic'i?  ('to  bring  back')  differently,  so  far  as  grammar
goes, from a't?.")1? in  v.  5, and  the  reference  to  Egypt
and  the  desert,  if  intended,  would  surely  have  been  at
least  hinted. The  grammatical  objection  also  applies
to Marti's rendering of  v.  scz, '  but now has  Yahwe
resolved,  etc. ,  to  bring  back  Jacob  to  himself,  and  Israel
will  I  gather. ' Next,  why  this  extraordinary  side  remark,
'and  I  was  honoured (pointing  152x1)  in  the  eyes of
Yahwe,  and  my  God  became  my  strength  '  ? The  words
are  clear  enough, but  not  their  sense  in  this  context.
Lastly,  what  is  the  meaning  of  '  too  insignificant  for  thy
being  to  me  a  Servant '  ? (-cy  '^  ^n'vria  *?£:)• A  most
awkward  and  improbable  construction  ! To  excise  'no
13V  '"?  as  a  g^oss,  is  hazardous. So-called  glosses  often
arise  out  of  genuine  readings  of  the  original  text.

3.  In  004-9  die  difficulty  is  almost  entirely  confined
to  71.  4 /". ,  where  neither  the  language  nor  the  thought  is
at  all  clear. At  first  we  seem  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  a
beautiful  thought,  and  the  phrase  '  he  wakens  mine  car  '
pleases  the  fancy. But  the  plural  'disciples'  (c'^eS)  is
strange,  and  the  phrase  so  pleasing  to  fancy  becomes
insecure  through  the  manifold  disorder  of  the  text  and
the obviously  corrupt  rnj?S Above  all, the  opening
stanza, which refers  apparently to the vocation of  a
prophet,  is  not  a  satisfactory  preface  to  the  description
of  persecution  which  follows.

4.  In  52 12-53 13  the  easy  passages  are  the  exception,
not  the  rule. Emendation  of  the  text  has  been  tried,
not  without excellent results. But  the  passage as  a
whole,  even  as  explained  by  Marti,  is  not  clear. There
is,  perhaps,  no  better  proof  of  the  extreme  corruptness
of  the  text  than  the  obscurity  of  53  ia  as  the  context  at
present  stands,  and  the  vehement  controversy  which  it
has  called  forth. In  spite  of  all  the  acuteness  of  Budde
and  (especially)  Giesebrecht,  it  remains  highly  improb
able  that  a  Hebrew  poet  of  the  late  exilic  or  early  post-
exilic  period  should  have  accounted  for  the  sufferings  of
Israel  on  the  ground  that  they  were  the  atonement  for
the  sins  of  the  heathen.

As  Skinner  justly  remarks  :  '  That  the  idea  of  Israel  suffering
for  the  good  of  the  world  is  foreign  to  the  OT  is  not  perhaps  a
decisive  argument  against  it,  for  there  is  a  truth  in  the  idea  (see
Rom.  11  ii  f.).  .  .  .  Hut  the  insuperable  objection  to  this  ex
planation  is  the  unnaturalness  of  the  assumption  that  the  speakers
in  53  iff.  are  the  heathen.  There  is  nothing  in  the  language  to
suggest  this  ;  and  the  religious  attitude  expressed  in  these  verses
is  such  as  no  prophet  could  have  attributed  to  the  heathen  world. ' l
If  another  proof  of  deep-seated  textual  corruption
is  required,  we  may  justly  refer  to  v.  9.  The  theory  that
the  great  sufferer  is  an  individual  rests  ultimately  (putting
aside  53 1)  on  this  passage,  and  the  difference  between
critics  is  perhaps  simply  this — that  while  some  say,  the
burial  so  emphatically  stated  in  v.  9  proves  that  an
individual  is  meant,  others  say,  v.  9  cannot  mean  what
it  at  first  sight  apears  to  mean,  because  the  more  natural
explanation  (viz. ,  that  in  chap.  53,  as  elsewhere,2  '  Servant
of  Yahwe  is  a  title  of  Israel)  presents  no  difficulty  apart

1  Is.  40-6(5  (Cambr.  Bible),  234.

2  To  assume that  the  nationalistic interpretation  has been
proved  for  the  three  preceding  passages  on  the  Servant.

4407


SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD

from  this  passage.  It  may  be  doubted,  however,  whether
either  position  is  sound.  On  the  one  hand,  very  little
importance  can  be  attached  to  the  traditional  text  of  any
part  of  w.  8-n  (or  12)  because  of  the  manifold  obscurities
and  the  more  than  probable  corruption  of  this  passage.
And  on  the  other,  the  parallelism  between  53^  and
Ezek.  37 12/.  is  incomplete.  In  Is.  53g  (if  correct)  the
point  is  not  so  much  the  burial  of  the  Servant  as  his
burial  with  the  wicked  ;  but  in  Ezek.  37i2/.  the  phrase,
'  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves '  is  simply  an
equivalent  for  '  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  Sheol.' 1

We  have  said  '  apart  from  v.  i,'  because  since  (as  we
have  seen)  the  confession  in  the  following  verses  cannot
be  assigned  to  the  heathen  nations,  and  since  the
parallelism  between  the  chief  expressions  in  the  con
fessions  and  a  number  of  psalms  which  cannot  reasonably
be  made  to  refer  to  an  individual  forbids  us  to  adopt
Duhm's  theory,  it  follows  that  the  speakers  in  [>3ijf.
must  be  the  Israel  within  Israel.  This  theory  is  indeed
impossible,  according  to  Budde,  who  thinks  that  the
whole  of  Israel  suffered  equally,  and  that  the  exaltation
of  the  Israel  within  Israel  could  not  make  an  impression
on  the  heathen  world.  A  fuller  consideration,  however,
of  this  theory  in  the  light  of  a  keener  criticism  of  the
later  history  of  Israel,  shows  that  the  whole  of  Israel
did  not  share  the  same  lot,  and  so  removes  the  apparent
ground  for  Budde's  objection.  We  have  therefore  a
right  to  set  aside  53 1,  and  to  refer  to  v.  g  as  the  only
solid  textual  basis  for  the  individualistic  interpretation
of  the  Servant  in  this  notable  passage.

How,  then,  shall  we  proceed  in  order  to  restoft  a  text

sufficiently  correct  to  admit  of  large  exegetical  inferences  ?

_ . The  methods  of  the  most  progressive  textual

D.  o  01*21X1- ...  ...

...  • criticism  are  good  enough  for  our  purpose;

.,  but  there  are  many  textual  possibilities  to

•''  which  we  could  not  open  our  eyes  without
the  clue  furnished  by  a  critical  examination  of  a  very
large  group  of  passages  outside  of  II.  Isaiah.  In
fact,  it  is  only  the  '  Jerahmeelite  theory '  which  will
enable  us  to  detect  the  readings  that  underlie  many
obscure  and  some  apparently  clear  passages  of  II.
Isaiah.  The  result  of  a  renewed  investigation  of  the
text  of  II.  Isaiah  closely  resembles  that  to  which  we  are
perhaps  being  driven  by  the  textual  phenomena  of  other
prophetic  writings  (see  PROPHET,  §§  35-45) — i.e.,  the
original  text  in  many  passages  had  a  different  historical
and  geographical  setting  from  that  which  now  appears,
and  our  exegetical  results  are  correspondingly  modified.
The  truth  is,  according  to  this  theory,  that  the
influence  of  N.  Arabia  on  Jewish  history  has  been
greatly  under-estimated.  In  particular,  it  was  in  N.
or  NW.  Arabia  that  the  mass  of  the  Jewish  exiles
languished,  and  even  after  the  fall  of  the  Babylonian
power  (commonly  supposed  to  be  the  great  source  of
trouble  to  the  Jews)  N.  Arabian  oppression  continued
to  be  the  chief  subject  of  complaint  to  Jewish  poets.

The  four  passages  on  the  Servant,  in  their  original  form,
would  seem  to  have  lacked  almost  all  that  we  are  wont
to  admire  in  the  adaptation  of  them  which  both  MT  and
(5  present  to  us.  The  ardent  universalism  which  dis
tinguishes  them  in  their  present  form  is  due  to  a  later
editor,  who  had  before  him  a  text  which  was  already
corrupt,  and  which,  apart  from  this,  did  not  answer  to
his  own  spiritual  aspirations.  Let  us  continue  to  read
them  as  they  stand  in  MT  and  ©  as  monuments  of  the
loftiest  pre-Christian  Jewish  piety.  When  such  a  purely
academic  thinker  as  Vatke  can  say  that  '  the  intuition  of
the  sufferings  and  glorification  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah
forms  the  most  remarkable  presentiment  of  redemption
in  the  OT,  and  so  is  a  prophecy,  not  a  prediction,  of
Christ,'  academic  critics  who  would  fain  be  also  men  of
the  people  may  surely  use  the  same  expressions,  for  the
people  see  in  chap.  53  a  prophecy  of  the  Jesus  of  the

1  Cp  Ezek.  82  22^  On  the  close  connection  between  the  con
ception  of  Sheol  and  that  of  a  burial-place,  see  ESCHATOLOGV,
§  10  ;  Smend,  A  T  Rcl.-gescli.V-)  152

4408


SERVANT  OP  THE  LORD

evangelic  tradition,  and  we  would  gladly  go  with  the
people,  as  one  of  them,  so  far  as  we  may.  Nor  need
we — from  this  point  of  view — any  longer  trouble  ourselves
to  translate  these  passages  with  an  extreme  exactness.

An  exact  translation  is  in  fact  often  difficult  and  sometimes
impossible,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  old  Jewish  editor  has  had
to  work  upon  an  already  existing  corrupt  text.  But  let  us  also  be
just  to  the  claims  of  critical  history,  the  results  of  which,  when
fully  mature,  must  be  for  the  good  of  the  religion  of  the  many
as  well  as  of  the  few.  This  requires  us  to  trace  out,  so  far  as  we
can,  the  original  form  of  these  familiar  but,  in  parts,  very  obscure
passages,  and  of  the  rest  of  Is.  40-titi,  not  as  a  mere  exercise  of
ingenuity,  but  for  this  important  reason — that  if  we  can  but  read
this  work  as  a  monument  of  its  own  special  time  or  times,  we
shall  understand  the  course  of  Jewish  history  as  we  could  never
have  done  before.  This  need  not  make  us  unappreciative  of
those  pious  and  most  unselfish  editors  of  old  time,  who  ventured
to  treat  their  Bible  as  a  living  plant,  still  capable  of  sending  out
fresh  shoots,  and  of  putting  forth  undreamed-of  flowers,  and  who,
as  some  will  say,  almost  transfigured  the  original  conception  of
the  Servant  of  Yahwe.

For  the  original  text  (see  Crit.  Bib. ,  'Isa. ' )  gave  a  much
less  advanced  conception  of  the  Servant  of  Yahwe.  The
title  here  is  a  personification  of  the  body  of  Jewish  exiles
in  N.  Arabia,  who  were  by  no  means  semi-Christians,
but  had  higher  religious  ideas  and  ideals,  and  cor
respondingly  greater  material  and  moral  hardships  to
bear,  than  their  brethren  in  Palestine.  The  poet  looks
forward  to  the  time  when  these  exiles  will  be  delivered
from  their  miseries  and  privations  and  become  the
recognised  leaders  of  the  regenerated  Jewish  people.
He  calls  (49i)on  the  Arabians  and  Jerahmeelites  to
take  warning  while  there  is  yet  time  (cp  Ps.  2 10,  emended
text).  Like  some,  at  least,  of  the  psalmists,  he  has  no
desire  that  all  Jerahmeelites  should  be  blotted  out  of
existence,  but  wishes  that  under  Jewish  rule  and  in  the
practice  of  the  true  religion  they  may  still  live  in  the
expanded  land  of  Israel,  and  be  saved  from  the  judicial
destruction  which  will  fall  upon  all  irreclaimable  foes  of
Yahwe.  At  present,  the  Servant  still  suffers  persecu
tion  ;  he  has  borne  it  without  a  cry  or  it  murmur  as
God's  appointment.  But  he  knows  that  his  '  justifica
tion  '  or  redress  is  at  hand  (508)  ;  indeed,  before  now,
under  prophetic  inspiration,  he  has  announced  (52 13-15)
the  coming  change  in  his  fortunes — an  announcement
which  his  kinsmen  in  Palestine  (those  '  rebellious  ones'
of  whom  the  poet  speaks)  received  with  contemptuous
incredulity  (53 1).  He  can  already  imagine  those  un
worthy  Israelites  confessing  their  blindness  and  folly,
their  wickedness  and  selfishness  (53  2-9).  And  again  a
prophetic  vision  comes  to  him.  He  sees  exiled  Israel
rescued  from  its  oppressors,  according  to  that  earlier
prophecy.  The  light  of  joy — a  joy  in  the  establishment
of  the  divine  rule  with  Israel  for  its  earthly  organ  (cp
42 1-4),  the  sight  of  an  offspring  'prolonging  its  days,'
and  enjoying  the  inheritance  of  Jerahmeel  and  Ishmael
• — these  are  the  varied  but  closely  connected  rewards
granted  to  him  (53 10-12).

Into  the  changes  of  critical  positions  which  this  view
necessitates  this  is  not  the  place  to  enter.  Nor  need
the  reader  be  assured  that  no  claim  to  an  immunity  from
error  is  put  forward  by  the  present  writer.  Details  may
doubtless  be  improved  ;  but  the  general  theory,  when
fully  assimilated,  will  be  found  to  stand  the  test  of  pro
longed  consideration.  Would  that  the  spade  of  the
explorer  might  bring  to  light  some  hidden  record  of  an
age  so  little  known  and  so  largely  misinterpreted  by
legend  !

Besides  the  works  named  in  col.  zm-jf.,  the  following  recent
treatises  on  the  criticism  and  exegesis  of  Is.  42  1-4  49i-6  604-9

and  52  13-08  12  (or  some  one  of  these  passages
7.  Literature,  separately)  may  be  here  mentioned  :  Schian,

Die  Ebed-Jakwe-LiederinJes.  xl.-lxvi.  (1895) ;
Laue,  Die  E.-J.  Licder  in  II.  Theil  des  Jesaia  exegetiscli-
kritisch  und  biblisch-theologisch  untersucht  (1898)  ;  Fullkrug,
Der  Gottesknecht  d.  Dt.-Jcs.  (1899)  ;  Laue  and  Fullkrug  have  a
certain  similarity  in  that  both  maintain  the  Servant  to  be  an
individual  ;  Fullkrug,  however,  does  not,  like  Laue,  identify
the  Servant  with  the  Messiah,  and  he  does  not  separate  the  four
'  songs '  from  the  Prophecy  of  Restoration  ;  Kraetzschmar,  Der
leidende  Gottesknecht  (1899)  :  Ezekiel  the  historic  model  of  the
suffering  and  glorified  Servant,  see  chap.  4.  Bertholet,  Zu
Jes.  liii.;  Budde,  The  So-called  Ebcd-Yahiveh  Songs,  etc.;

4409


SETH

Kittel,  Zur  Thcologie  des  A  T,  see  §  4  ;  J.  Ley,  '  Die  Bedeutung
des  Ebed-Jahwe  im  zten  Theil  des  Proph.  Jesaja,'  in  Stud.  u.
Krit.,  1899,  pp.  163^;  Sellin,  Serubbabel  (1898),  g6/~.  m/.\
Studien  zur  Enlstelningsgesch.  der  jiid.  'Gimeindc :  i.  Der
Knecht  Gottes  bei  Dt.-jes.  (1901)  ;  Giesebrecht,  Der  Knecht  d.
Dt.-jes.  (1902;  the  Servant -passages  originally  meditations
written  down  for  disciples  by  the  second  Micah  ;  the  Servant
himself,  a  personification  of  Israel)  ;  Rothstein,  Die  Genrnlogie
d.  Kon.  Jelioiacliin  (1902  ;  appendix  on  the  Messianic  reference
of  the  Servant);  C.  H.  H.  Wright,  'The  Pre-Christian  Jewish
Interpretation  of  Is.  52  53,'  Expositor,  3rd  ser.,  7  (1888)  364^".
401  jff.)  ;  Dalman,  Jesaia  53  das  rrophetemvort  710111  Siihnleiden
des  Heilsntittlers,^  (1891);  cp  also  Rosters,  Th.T,  1896,
PP-  591J7~-  T.  K.  C.

SESIS(ceceic[B]),  i  Esd.  934  =  Ezral04oSHASHAi.

SESTHEL  (cecSHA  [BA]),  i  Esd.  9 31  =  Ezra  10 30,
BEZALEEL,  2.

SETH,  rather  SHETH  (JVC* ;  CH6  I  SF.TI/),  son  of
Adam,  father  of  Enos,  and  grandfather  of  Cainan  or
Kenan,  according  to  the  Sethite  genealogy  (Gen.  53-8
[P]),  with  which,  so  far  as  his  relation  to  Enosh  is  con
cerned,  Gen.  426  (J)  entirely  agrees.  In  Gen.  425  (JR),
it  is  stated  that  'Adam  knew  his  wife  again,  and  she
bore  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Sheth  ;  for  (she  said)
God  has  set  for  me  another  seed  instead  of  Abel,  for
Cain  killed  him.'  (5,  however,  does  not  recognise  -'iy,
'again,'  and  inserts  inn],  'and  she  conceived,'  which
suggests  the  possibility  that  in  an  earlier  form  of  the
text  the  birth  of  Sheth  was  related  without  reference  to
the  existence  of  Cain.  Budde  (Urgesch.  154^)  thinks
that  the  text  originally  ran,  '  and  Adam  knew  his  \\ife,
and  she  bore  a  son,  and  named  him  Sheth,  for  "God
has  set  for  me  a  seed."'1  There  are,  however,  three
difficulties  in  this  view  ;  (i)  the  unnatural  use  of  j\y,
'  posuit  '  ;  (2)  the  use  of  DTI'JN,  'Elohim,'  instead  cf
rn,T,  '  Yahwe  '  (contrast  Gen.  4i,  though  here  ©  has  5ta
TOV  0eoO)  ;  and  (3)  the  improbability  that  Adam's
grandson  should  have  been  called  Enosh,  '  man,'  or  '  frail
man  '  (cp  ENDS),  assuming,  of  course,  that  '  Adam  '  and
'  Enosh'  are  the  two  familiar  Hebrew  terms  for  '  man.'
There  is  only  one  way  of  surmounting  these  difficulties,
viz. ,  to  criticise  the  traditional  readings  of  the  names.
DIN  (dddm)  or  m«n  (kd-ddam)  and  nin  (Hawwah)  have
probably  arisen  out  of  ^tjenv  (Jerahmeel)  and  rnn
\HorttK]  =.  rr'jNcnT  (Jerahmeelith)  respectively.  Cp
PARADISE,  §  iz(c).  These  parallels  suggest  that  '  Sheth  '
and  '  Enosh  '  are  also  corruptions  of  ethnic  names.  The
conjecture  that  B"I:K  (Enosh)  is  a  fragment  of  tajflDE^
will  surprise  no  one  who  has  had  experience  of  the
shifting  phases  of  '  Ishmael'  and  other  ethnic  names,
and  it  is  only  slightly  less  probable  that  ne'  (Sheth??)
is  a  fragment  of  "?Kna>  (  =  Eshtaol),  which  the  narrator
connected  with  ^rc',  'plant,  shoot'  so  that  'SviBJ  is
miswritten,  by  metathesis,  for  S'n-j.  It  is  a  part  of
this  theory  that  DTI^N  and  -inN  together  represent  S^cnr-2
The  passage  will  then  become,  '  And  Jerahmeel  knew
his  wife,  and  she  bore  a  son,  and  named  him  Shethaol,
for  (he  is)  a  shoot  (shttkil)  of  Jerahmeel.3  And
ShCthaol  in  turn  begot  a  son,  and  named  him  Ishmael ;
it  was  he  who  began  to  call  upon  the  name  of  Yahwe1
(see  ENDS).  Shethaol  is  possibly  the  eponym  of  the
population  called  in  MT  ESHTAOI,  and  ESHTAULITES,4
whose  seat  was  certainly  not  confined  to  the  lowlands  of
Judah.  The  etymology  is,  of  course,  quite  '  popular  ' ;
a  truer  connection  may  perhaps  be  supposed  with  the
widely-spread  clan-name  ^,vci,  Sha'ul  (see  SAUL).
Even  if  the  explanation  here  given  of  the  strange  name
Sheth  be  in  some  degree  doubtful,  the  discovery  of  the
true  name  of  Sheth's  son  at  any  rate  appears  on

1  So  Stade  (ZA  TW,  1894,  p.  262/),  Hohinger  (AY/C  '  Gen.'
57  [1898])  ;  Gunkel  (//A"  '  Gen.'  49  [1901]).

2  To  these  corruptions  there  are  abundant  parallels  through
out  the  OT  literature.

3  yT  is  here  taken  to  bean  insertion  of  Ju  necessitated  by  the
corrupt  readings,  already  in  existence, '7~n3>  and  inN.

•»  In  iCh.  253  the  Eshtaulites  are  connected  with  Kirjath-
jearim— i.e.,  not  improbably  Kirjath-jerahmeel.

4410


SETHITES

critical  grounds  to  be  nearly  certain.  Thus  understood,
the  name  supplies  another  beautiful  Israelitish  com
mentary  on  the  name  Ishmael  (cp  Gen.  16 n).  It  is  as
if  the  narrator  told  us  that  the  first  prayer  was  as  great
an  epoch  in  the  history  of  man  as  the  building  of  a  city.
See  SETHITKS.

Later  post-canonical  writers  knew  much  more  about  Seth.
His  wife  s  name  was  Azurii  (Jubilees,  4  1 i  ;  ed.  Charles,  32).
Both  he  and  his  descendants,  who  were  extremely  good,  had
that  heavenly  wisdom  specially  connected  with  the  name  of
ENOCH  [y.v.]',  see  Jos.  Ant.\.'2T,  (§§  68-71).  On  the  gnostic
sect  of  the  Sethians  see  Hirjpol.  Phitosopkvmena,  5 19 ;
Epiphan.  Adv.  liter,  xxxix.;  Lips.  Der  Gnosticismus,  sfin
\Vesen,  Ursprung  und  K>itu'ickelungsgang(i%(>o),  154;  Smith-
VVace,  Diet,  of  Christian  Biography,  ±8jf,

We  have  ventured  to  reject  the  plausible  conjecture  of
Frd.  Delit/sch  and  Fritz  Hommel  referred  to  in  the  next  article.
That  the  theory  connecting  Sheth  with  Suteh,  '  the  god  of  the
Hyksos, '  no  longer  needs  criticism,  is  obvious  ;  see  Lenormant,
Lfs  origines,  1  [1880]  217^,  and  on  the  other  side,  Ko.  PR  KM
163.  For  the  facts  relative  to  Set  and  Suteh  see  EGYPT,  §  52,
n.  2,  and  cp  8  16.

On  the  gradual  transference  of  the  functions  and  achievements
of  Enoch  to  Seth,  as  a  consequence  of  the  later  tradition  making
the  Sethites  the  representatives  of  goodness  and  the  Cainites  of
wickedness,  see  Charles's  note  on  Jubilees,  4  15.  T.  K.  C.

SETHITES,  the  name  given  to  the  descendants  of
Seth  mentioned  in  Gen.  5  ([').  We  shall  deal  with  this
subject  almost  entirely  as  one  belonging  to  the  history
of  early  Hebrew  beliefs  respecting  primitive  humanity  ;
the  intricate  study  of  the  later  exegesis  on  Gen.  5/1,  to
which  R.  H.  Charles  has  recently  made  such  valuable
contributions,  lies  too  much  apart  to  be  treated  here.
_  We  venture  to  begin  with  a  criticism  of

"...  .  ,  the  term  '  Sethites,'  which  presupposes
'  that  there  are  two  separate  genealogies
of  the  patriarchs — i.e.,  of  the  heroes  of  the  primitive
age.  Now,  we  may  readily  grant  that,  as  the  text  now
stands,  this  presupposition  is  not  destitute  of  plausibility.
Gen.  425/".  is  obviously  the  link  between  two  genea
logies  (Gen.  417-24  and  5),  one  of  which,  as  it  now
stands,  starts  from  a  son  of  Adam  named  Cain,  the
other  from  Adam  and  a  son  of  Adam  named  Seth  or
Sheth  (ntr,  at]Q}.  The  two  linking  verses,  in  their
present  form,  appear  to  account  for  the  double  genealogy
by  stating  that  Seth  was  born  to  fill  the  place  of  Abel.
When,  however,  we  look  into  the  genealogies  we
quickly  see  that  there  is  a  strong  affinity  between  them,
and  a  critical  examination  of  the  two  '  linking  verses '
shows  that  the  passage  is  no  longer  in  its  original  form,
but  has  undergone  both  corruption  and  editorial  expan
sion.  We  have  also  found  reason  elsewhere  to  suspect
that  the  story  of  Cain  and  Abel  and  the  Cainite
genealogy  came  from  separate  traditional  sources  (see
CAIN,  §  4;  CAINITES,  §2);  if  this  is  correct,  the
Yahwist  (J)  cannot  have  represented  Seth  as  a  substitute
for  the  murdered  Abel.  Instead  of  'Cainites'  and
'Sethites,'  therefore,  it  would  be  better  to  speak  of  the
members  of  the  two  parallel  genealogies  due  respectively
to  J  and  to  P.

It is the genealogy in Gen.  5 that is mainly to

occupy  us. We  may  assume  that  it  is  parallel  to,  and

_  in its present form later than, the

e-enealorv- geneal°g>' in Gen.  4. We may also

genealogy.  regard  Stade-s  view  (Akad.  Reden,  247)

i  s  origin. ag fajrjy probable, that in its  original

form  the  genealogy  in  Gen.  4  was  Sethiteaswell  as  Cainite,

that  r.  ?$/.  in  a  simpler  form,  including  the  words,  '  and

Enos  begot  a  son, and  called  his  name  Cain,'1  once

stood  before  4 17, also that in the  original Yahwistic

genealogy, of  which  we  possess  only  an extract, the

tenth  place  was  occupied  by  Noah.2 If  this  be  so,  the

1  It  may  be  presumed  that  this  represents  Stade's  meaning,
though  he  only  says  that  '  4  v^f.  once  stood  before  4  17  ff.'

2  Stade's  reconstruction of  the genealogy, however, which
makes  it  begin  with  Enos  and  close  with  Jabal  and Noah,  has
this  against  it — that  there  are  very  strong  reasons  for  holding
that  'Adam'  (rather  hii-adani)  and  'Enos'  are  not  the  forms
which  originally  stood  in  the  genealogy,  and  therefore  not  to  be
treated  as  synonyms  meaning  'man,'  or,  as  Stade  expressed  it,
that  Adam  and  Enos  are  '  doppelganger. '

44"


SETHITES

Israelitish  circles  represented  by  J  had  a  genealogy  of
primitive  heroes  which  agreed  in  all  essentials  with  the
genealogy  given  by  P.  We  may  put  the  two  lists,
harmonised  as  proposed  in  CAINITES,  §  12,  and  without
any  attempted  emendation  of  the  names,  over  against
each  other.

J. Adam  P. Adam

Sheth  Sheth

Enosh  Enosh

Cain  Kenan

Enoch  Mahalalel


Irad

Mehujael

Methushael

Lainech

Noah


Tared
Enocr


Methuselah

Lamech

Noah


Even  if  we  doubt  whether  the  genealogy  of  the
Yahwist  in  its  original  form  contained  as  many  as  ten
names,  it  is  a  fact  that  that  of  the  Priestly  Writer  (P)
has  come  down  to  us  with  ten,  and  it  is  natural  (when  we
consider  that  P,  as  often  as  he  can,  uses  old  material)
to  connect  this  with  the  fact  that  Berossus  places  ten
antediluvian  kings  at  the  head  of  the  history  of  Baby
lonia.  The  names  of  these  kings  (see  Miiller,  Fragm.
Hist.  Gr.  2499^.)  are  "AXwpos,  'A\dirapos,  'Anr)\wv,
'  A/j.fj.^vwv,  MfydXapos,  Adcopos,  Ei/eSuipaxos,  'Afj.ffj.\f/LVJs,
'tirtdprijs,  Ziffovftpos.  Now  the  solidarity  of  the  early
Oriental  culture,  under  Babylonian  influence,  was  such
that  we  could  not  be  surprised  to  find  some  of  the
names  given  by  Berossus,  in  their  original  forms  (when
these  forms  can  be  traced),  underlying  names  in  the  two
Hebrew  genealogies  which  lie  before  us.  The  idea  is
suggested  by  the  coincidence  of  number  between  P's
list  and  that  of  Berossus,  but,  of  course,  we  have  to
compare  the  names  in  both  the  Hebrew  lists,  so  far  as
they  seem  to  be  akin.

It  is  remarkable,  however,  how  extremely  few  of  the  Hebrew
names  can  even  plausibly  be  connected  with  names  in  the
Berossian  list.  To  compare  'A/iijAoj^  with  K'ijN,  'Enosh'  (so
Delitzsch,  Hommel,  and  even  Gunkel)  seems  plainly  wrong,
(i)  because  such  a  name  as  'man,'  as  the  proper  name  of  a
primaeval  hero,  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  ;  (2)  because,
if  D~IN  's  correct,  and  means  'man,'  it  is  not  likely  that  another
name  in  the  list  also  means  '  man  ' ;  and  (3)  because,  if  'AfujAwr
is  correct,  analogy  justifies  us  in  supposing  that  it  is  a  mutilated
theophorous  name  (Amil-_r).  But  we  may  at  least  provisionally
compare  (i)  'Aju.r;A<oi>  with  Mahalalel  (=  Mehujael),  assuming  the
final  syllable  f/("?N)  to  represent  some  Babylonian  divine  name,
and  (2)  'Aju.e/uujni/os  (  =  Amil-Sin,  'liegeman  of  Sin?')  with
Methuselah  (=  Methusael),  assuming  £elah  (nW')  to  t>e  a
Hebraised  form  of  sar/iu,  which  is  an  epithet  of  various  Baby
lonian  gods  (see  Ass.  HIVB  690*1,  CAINITES,  §  7).  Two  names
out  of  ten  in  the  respective  lists,  plausibly  but  not  certainly
combined,  are  perhaps  scarcely  a  sufficient  basis  for  a  theory
that  the  Hebrew  list  in  its  earliest  form  was  borrowed  from
Babylonia.1

It  is,  however,  still  important  to  ascertain,  if  possible,
whether  statements  made  in  either  of  the  Hebrew  lists
respecting  any  one  of  the  primitive  heroes  are  derived
from  Babylonian  lore.  That  Noah  who,  as  the  text
stands  (both  in  J  and  in  P  passages),  is  the  hero  of  the
Hebrew  Deluge-story  is,  in  virtue  of  his  connection  with
that  story,  parallel  to  Xisuthrus,  cannot  be  doubted.
Zimmern  (Beitrage,  116,  n.  a)  and  Gunkel  (Gen.  I2i/),
however,  add  a  comparison  of  Enoch,  who  '  walked  '
with  God  and  was  taken  to  God,  with  the  Ei'e5u>paxos
of  HavTipipXa  (=Sippar)  in  Berossus — i.e.,  En-me-
dur-anki,-  a  mythic  king  of  Sippar,  to  whom  the  guild
of  Babylonian  bdril  -  priests  traced  its  origin.  This
king  is  designated  '  the  favourite  of  Anu,  Bel,  and  Ea,'
and  said  to  have  been  '  called  (?)  by  the  gods  Samas
and  Adad  into  their  fellowship,'  also  to  have  been
initiated  into  the  '  secrets  of  heaven  and  earth  '  (Ritual-
tablet,  no.  24).  Now  it  is  true  that  both  Enoch  and
Ei'eSwpaxos  occupy  the  seventh  place  in  the  respective
lists.  This,  however,  is  not  important  ;  in  J's  list,  as

1  Gunkel  (//A"  'Gen.'  121)  omits Methuselah but includes
Kenan  (  =  Cain),  which,  with  Delitzsch  and  Hommel,  he  regards
as  a  translation  of  |3X  =  Bab.  ummami  (cp  Ges.i13)  s.r. |2N)-
The  number  two  therefore  remains.

2  Dur-anki  is  the  name  of  a  mythic  locality  (Zimmern);  cp
Jastrow,  RBA  539.

4412


SETHITES

it  now  stands,  Enoch  comes  third,  and  even  in  the
hypothetical  expanded  form  of  the  list  given  above  he
only  fills  the  fifth  place.  In  opposition  to  Zimmern's
learned  and  ingenious  theory  we  would  point  out  (i)
that  the  initiation  of  Enmeduranki  into  the  '  secrets  of
heaven  and  earth  '  is  by  no  means  as  distinctive  a  feature
as  the  deliverance  of  Xisuthrus  from  the  perils  of  the
Deluge.  For  other  mythic  personages  besides  Enme
duranki  enjoyed  this  initiation,  and  among  them  Xisu
thrus  himself,  as  his  name  (Atra-hasis,  '  the  very  wise  ')
implies,  and  as  his  fortunes  also  sufficiently  indicate.  It
was,  in  fact,  the  highest  form  that  the  divine  favour
could  assume,  and  it  is  only  natural  that  the  feature  or
'  motive  '  of  temporary  or  permanent  translation  to  the
abode  of  the  gods  should  characterise  different  myths
both  in  Babylonia  itself  and  in  the  various  countries
where  Babylonian  mythic  germs  were  deposited.  And
(2),  we  may  further  remark  that  probably  Enoch,  not
Noah,  was  the  hero  of  the  Hebrew  Deluge  -story  as
written  by  J  (see  §  3,  and  cp  NOAH,  §  i,  DELUGE,  §  17).
If  this  be  so,  there  is  scarcely  even  a  superficial  appro
priateness  in  the  comparison  of  Enmeduranki  with  the
Hebrew  Enoch.

Whilst  therefore  we  do  not  deny  the  possibility  that
those  who  (at  some  Hebrew  sanctuary?)  shaped  or  re
shaped  the  Hebrew  story  of  the  primitive  heroes  may
have  been  led  to  reckon  them  as  ten  (  P  certainly  made
ten,  and  J,  too,  may  perhaps  have  done  so)  under
Babylonian  influence,  we  cannot  say  that  there  is  any
strong  necessity  for  such  a  view,  and  all  must  admit
that  it  is  much  more  important  to  comprehend  the
statements  of  the  Hebrew  narrators.  One  of  the  chief
obstacles  to  such  a  comprehension  is  the  apparent
duality  of  some  of  the  heroes  mentioned.  At  first  sight,
there  seem  to  be  two  Cains,  two  Lamechs,  two  Noahs  ;
and  if  Budde's  theory  respecting  Gen.  4  17  (see  col.  623,
n.  3)  be  correct,  two  Enochs.

The  grounds  for  supposing  that  there  are  two  incon
sistent  pictures  of  Cain,  or  in  other  words,  two  Cains,1

~ -rv i-j. are given elsewhere (CAIN, 8 2). It
3 Duality
' _ . J is clear that the passage, Gen.  $2-i6a,

which  accounts  for  the  custom  of  exacting
klood  f°r  blood,  implies  that  Cain  is  a
nomad,  and  with  this  the  statement  in
v.  i6i>  partly  agrees,  for  it  states  that  Cain  (after  hearing
the  divine  sentence)  dwelt  '  in  the  land  of  wandering
(Nod),  eastward  of  Eden.1  In  (Jen.  4  17,  however,  this
hero  is  represented  as  a  city-builder,  in  other  words,
as  a  leading  promoter  of  a  settled  form  of  life  and  of
civilisation,  and  if  we  criticise  the  text  of  v.  ibb  in
accordance  with  the  results  attained  elsewhere  (see
PARADISE,  §*6)  we  shall  have  to  correct  the  enigmatical
Hebrew  text  of  MT  and  (5,  so  as  to  read  '  and  [Cain]
dwelt  in  the  land  of  Eden-jerahmeel  '  (py  pxa  [j'p]  ac;'i
^Mcm")  —  the  district  in  which  as  we  have  seen  Gen.  11  2
places  us.  We  need  not,  however,  deny  (cp  CAINITES,
§  3)  that  even  in  4  17  '  Cain  '  (j-p)  is  the  eponym  of  the
Kenites  (pp  Tp);  there  were  both  more  and  less  ad
vanced  branches  of  the  Kenites  and  Jerahmeelites  ;  hence
sometimes  these  tribes  are  spoken  of  as  nomads,  some
times  as  having  '  cities  '  (i  S.  30  29).

Are  there  also  two  Lamechs  ?  There  is  a  song
ascribed  to  Lamech,  in  which  the  far-reaching  sweep  of
tribal  vengeance  for  blood  is  eulogised2  (Gen.  i?3/.  )•
But  we  find  his  three  sons  taking  important  steps
forward  in  civilisation  ;  can  they  possibly  have  been
represented  as  the  offspring  of  a  fierce  nomad  ?  The
truth  is,  however  (as  comparative  textual  criticism
justifies  us  in  holding),  that  'Lamech'  (-cS)  is  one  of
the  popular  distortions  of  '  Jerahmeel.  '  Lamech  is

1  Gunkel  (Gen. 49)  actually  makes  four  Cains  :  (i)  the  son
of  the  first  man,  (2)  the  brother  and  murderer  of  Abel,  (3)  the
father  of  Enoch  and city-builder,  and  (4)  the  eponym  of  the
Kenites.

2  See  CAINITES,  §  &  ;  Nestle,  Marg.  59.


_ .
'


SETHITES

therefore  a  tribal  eponym,1  and  represents  both  the
more  and  the  less  advanced  sections  of  the  Jerahmeelite
race.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  P's  genealogy  Lamech
appears  as  the  father  of  Noah,  who,  not  less  than  Jabal
and  his  brothers,  is  a  '  hero  of  culture'  (see  NOAH).

For  certainly  there  are  two  Noahs — there  is  Noah
the  first  vine-planter,  and  there  is  Noah  the  head  of  the
one  family  that  was  rescued  from  the  Deluge,  at  least  if
we  are  content  to  follow  the  traditional  Hebrew  text.
That  the  unpleasing  story  of  what  happened  to  Noah
the  vine-planter  was  ever  told  of  Noah  the  hero  of  the
Deluge,  whose  earthly  history  was  bound  to  cease  with
his  marvellous  deliverance,  is  incredible  (see  NOAH),
though  certainly  it  can  hardly  be  called  very  probable
that  it  was  said  of  two  of  the  traditional  Hebrew  heroes
that  they  '  walked '  or  had  close  converse  '  with  the
Godhead  '  (Gen.  5 22  24  69).

How  to  remove  this  difficulty  we  have  seen  already
(§  2),  and  before  the  end  of  this  section  we  shall  return

4.  Why  sporadic  to  ^  subject'  t  fAt  P^esent  W1

Babylonian  account  for  the  singular  fact

influence? ,that  there  is  "°  distinctive'y  Baby-
Ionian  material  in  the  account  of  the

primrtval  heroes  (after  Adam)  except  in  connection  with
Enoch  and  Noah.  It  will  be  observed  that  while  Enoch
the  city-builder  and  Noah  the  vine-planter  are  certainly
tribal  heroes  (Noah  should  probably  be  era  or  pn:  =
Djn  or  pjtt,  cp  uenr,  Gen.  529,  and  Enoch  [Hanok]
appears  as  a  son  of  Midian,  Gen.  254  i  L'h.  133),-  the
hero  of  the  Deluge-story  in  its  present  form  is  obviously
not  a  mere  hero  ;  he  is  in  the  fullest  sense  an  individual.
How  is  this  to  be  accounted  for  ?

To  understand  the  bearings  of  this  question  we  must
remember  that,  with  the  possible  exceptions  of  Mahalalel
and  the  latter  half  of  Methuselah  (see  CAINITES,  §  7),
all  the  names  in  the  genealogies  of  J  and  P  are  de-
monstrably  of  non- Babylonian  origin,  and  with  the
increase  of  evidence  for  the  great  frequency  of  references
to  N.  Arabian  ethnics  in  the  OT  it  becomes  possible
and  even  highly  probable  that  '  Mahalalel  '  is  a  corrup
tion  of  '  'Jerahmeel'  and  '  Methuselah  '  of  'Ishmael.'
Thus  the  names  in  the  Sethite  and  Cainite  genealogy,3
when  restored  to  their  original  form,  become —

Jerahmeel  (7NDITV)
Eshtaol  (Sk'n^N)


Ishmael

Kain=  Kenites  Q'p)

Hanuch  (Tfun)

Arvad  (1V1N  =  Tnj' = -nj|  ?)

Jerahmeel  (VNCrnO
Ishmael  6»y2B")
Jerahmeel  (^NDrrv)
Nahman  (|Cn)

The  probability  of  most  of  these  restorations  is  very
high.  Both  P  and  the  Chronicler  in  their  lists  often
repeat  the  same  name  in  different  forms.  Even  if  one
or  two  of  the  restorations  be  doubtful,  the  present  writer
cannot  doubt  that  the  Sethite-Cainite  names  have  a  N.
Arabian  reference.  How,  then,  came  the  notices  of
Enoch  and  (?)  Noah  to  be  enriched  \\ith  Babylonian

1  It  is  of  course  very  possible  that  the  tribe  called  Lamech
or  Jerahmeel  really  took  its  name  from  a  deity. This  deity  was
probably  the  moon-god  Jarham  (rrv  with  the  Arabic  '  mima-
tion).' The  non-Semitic  divine  title  Lamga  (doubtfully  referred
to  in  col.  626)  need  not  be  relied  upon.

2  Enoch  also  appears  as  the  eldest  son  of  Reuben  (Gen.4t>9
Ex.  (5 14 Nu.  26s iCh.  63). Hut we can hardly doubt that
Reuben  was  originally  a  S.  Palestinian  tribe.

3  If  we prefer to hold  that Lamech-Jerahmeel's  son  in  J's
version  was  originally  Tubal[-cain],  we  are  still  constrained  to
admit  that  the  last  member  of  the  list  bears  a  N.  Arabian  ethnic
name. 'Jabal'  and  '  Jubal,'  like  'Abel.'  are  perhaps  also  most
naturally  viewed  as  corruptions  of  the  widely-spread  ethnic  name
'Jerahmeel.' 'Zillah'  (riSs)  maY  come  from  nsSn (Halusah)
"J^pi  (Ziklag);  Na'amah,  of  course,  =  Na'ami  or  Na'amani.
Adah  (my)  is  obscure  ;  perhaps  it  may  come  from  rmj?  1TJ7.


4413


4414


SETHITES

material,  as  if  they  were  individuals?  What  claim  had
Enoch  and  Noah  to  be  treated  with  more  respect  than
other  Nr.  Arabian  tribal  heroes,  and  raised  to  the  rank
of  individuals,  whose  wonderful  fortunes  gave  them  a
place  by  themselves  which  only  Elijah  in  a  later  age  was
privileged  to  share  with  them  ?  The  question  is  greatly
simplified  if  we  identify  Enoch  and  the  greater  of  the
two  Noahs  as  proposed  already  (CAINITES,§  6  ;  NOAH) — •
i.e.,  if  we  read  in  Gen.  68  (J),  'But  Enoch  (-pn)  had
found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  Yahwe,'  and  in  69  (P),
'  Enoch  was  a  righteous  man  .  .  . ,  and  Enoch  walked
with  God.'

The  theory  here  maintained  is  that  the  Hebrew  legend
of  primreval  times,  as  told  by  the  writer  or  writers  known
as  Jj,  had  no  Deluge — i.e. ,  they  accepted  the  Jerah-
meelite  legend  as  their  basis,  but  without  a  Deluge-
story.1  When,  however,  the  Deluge-story  was  adopted
from  the  Jerahmeelites,  and  converted  (under  direct
Babylonian  influence?)  into  the  story  of  the  universal
Deluge,  it  had  to  be  provided  with  a  hero  who  was
not  a  mere  tribal  eponym,  and  (for  a  reason  suggested
below)  '  Enoch '  was  selected  to  be  converted  into  an
individual,  and  even  to  assume  something  of  the  appear
ance  of  a  solar  hero,  as  was  fitting  for  the  hero  of  a
story  which  in  its  origin  was  most  probably  an  ether-
myth  (DELUGE,  §  18).  But  a  misfortune  happened  to
him.  At  an  early  period  (perhaps)  after  the  Deluge-story


SETHITES

probably  is  that  the  Enoch-tribe  was  a  branch  of  the  Jerah.
meeuttt,  and  like  the  Jerahmeelites  had  a  high  reputation  for
wisdom.  From  Ezek.  '2S  (see  Cri't.  Bit.)  we  gather  that^Jerah-
meel '  was  supposed  to  have  derived  his  wisdom  from  ElfihJm
in  whose  sacred  garden  he  had  dwelt  ;  now  from  Ezek.  14  14  20
we  learn  that  Noah  (i.e.,  Enoch),  Daniel  (i.e.,  Jerahmeel),  and
Job  were  classed  together  for  their  extraordinary  righteousness.
This  exceptional  goodness  implies  exceptional  wisdom.  The
first  Jerahmeelite  is  commonly  known  to  us  as  Adam  (see
PARADISE,  §  12),  but  it  is  very  possible  that  the  first  Jerahmeelite
was  also  in  some  sanctuaries  spoken  of  as  Enoch  (HanOk)  and
that  his  wisdom  (cp  Job  15  7/)  was  specially  eulogised  in  the
legend.

If  P  does  not  tell  us  much  about  the  fortunes  of  the
patriarchs — 'the youthful world's gray fathers' (H.

6  The  numbers.  Vaughan)  —  he is at least ful'y
acquainted with their ages. The

chronological  principle  which  underlies  the  numbers  in
P's  genealogy  has  not,  however,  been  found.  There
is  much  that  is  very  peculiar  about  them.  The  Baby
lonian  tradition  only  gives  the  number  of  years  that  each
king  reigned  ;  e.g.  the  first  king  Alorus  reigned  for  six
sari  =  36,000  years,  and  so  on.  The  enormous  numbers
assigned  arise  from  the  astronomical  training  of  the
scholars  of  Babylon.  The  Hebrew  system  in  P  gives
the  years  of  the  life  of  each  hero,  first  those  which  he
lived  before,  and  then  those  which  he  lived  after  the
birth  of  his  eldest  son.  Unfortunately,  the  three  great
authorities,  the  Hebrew,  the  Samaritan,  and  the  (5


MT

Sam.

LXX

Adam

130

800

930

130 800

93°

230

700

93°

Seth

I05

807

912

105 807

912

205

707

912

Enosh

90

8i5

9°5

90

8i5

90S

190

715

9°5

Kenan

70

840

910

70

840

910

170

740

910

Mahalalel

65

830

895

65

830

895

165

730

895

Jared

162

800

962

62

785

847

162

800

962

Enoch . .

65

300

365

65

300

365

165

200

365

Methuselah

187

782

969

67

653

720

187

782

969

(L  167)

(L  802)

Lamech  .

182

595

777

53

600

653

188

565

753

Noah

500

(95°)

500

(95°)

500

(95°)

To  the  flood

100

IOO

IOO

Total

1656

1307

2262

(L  2242)

£

had  been  committed  to  writing,  ~$n  became  corrupted
into  jn,  which  in  turn  was  editorially  altered  (under  the
influence  of  a  desire  2  to  work  the  story  of  Noah  the  vine-
planter  into  the  legend)  into  ru  (Noah)  or  en: 3  ( Naham  ?).
Thus  Enoch  lost  his  connection  with  the  Deluge,  unless
indeed  we  care  to  recognise  the  statement  of  Jubilees  423
that  Enoch,  in  Paradise,  wrote  down  till  the  wickedness
of  men,  on  account  of  which  God  brought  the  waters  of
the  flood  upon  all  the  land  of  Eden.'  But  at  any  rate
he  retained  his  superhuman  wisdom,  and  in  later  years
attracted  to  himself  more  and  more  mythical  elements
(see  ENOCH,  §  2).  Nor  were  the  earlier  traditionists
unfair  to  him.  When  the  list  of  ten  heroes  was  con
structed,  he  was  placed  (probably)  at  the  end  of  the
first  pentad,  while  Noah  or  Naham,  his  supplanter  in
the  Deluge-story,  was  placed  at  the  end  of  the  second.

The  reason  why  Enoch— alone  among  the  Hebrew  heroes —
was  raised  to  the  rank  of  an  individual  whose  fortunes  were
such  as  to  mark  him  off  from  all  the  rest  of  mankind,  is  plain.
It  is  not  enough  to  point  to  the  fact  that  the  Hebrew  root  of
Enoch  (-jjn)  means  '  to  train,  instruct,  initiate.' 4  The  real  reason

1  It  has  been  already  pointed  out  (DELUGE,  §  12)  that  accord
ing  to  ®  the  duration  of  the  Deluge  was  365  days  (a  solar  year),
corresponding  to  the  365  years  of  the  life  of  Enoch.

2  See  Budde,  Urgesch.  \  cp  NOAH.

3  Nahum  (cim)  probably  belongs  tc  the  same  group  of  names
(see  Crit.  Bib.).

•*  There  is  no  allusion  to  this  in  the  fragments  of  the  Hebrew
legend  preserved  to  us.  Gen.  6  8,  if  we  may  replace  -pn  for  ri3

4415


texts differ considerably, as the  accompanying table
will  show.1

It  will  be  noticed  that  ©  agrees  with  MT,  except  in
the  case  of  Lamech  (where  <S  and  Sam.  show  an  affinity),
in  the  totals  of  the  several  ages,  but  differs  from
MT  (except  as  to  Jared,  Methuselah,  and — almost —
Lamech)  as  regards  the  age  of  the  heroes  at  the  birth
of  their  first  sons.  <SL  is  peculiar  at  Methuselah.
The  result  is  that  in  (5  the  Deluge  is  given  as  in  the
year  of  the  world  2262  (<SL  2242),  but  in  MT  as  in
1656.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  any  longer  that  MT
is  nearer  to  the  original  than  <§.

Geiger  has  expended  great  learning  and  earnestness  in  behalf
of  the  numbers  of  MT.  But  most  critics,  since  Bertheau,  agree
in  preferring  the  Sam.  numbers  (with  which  Jubilees  agrees)
even  to  those  of  MT,  as  the  calculation  is  simpler,  and  the
deviations  of  the  texts  are  more  easily  explained  on  the  hypo
thesis  of  the  priority  of  Sam.  See  especially  Budde,  Urgesch.
lootf.

Comparing  the  Sam.  numbers  with  those  of  MT  we
find  that  for  the  first  five  patriarchs  they  agree.  After
that  Sam.  partly  adopts  much  smaller  numbers,  bring
ing  the  Deluge  into  the  year  of  the  world  1307.  Budde
thinks  that  we  may  draw  detailed  inferences  from  the
(see  above),  possibly  alludes  to  a  popular  etymology  connecting
"pn  with  jn,  '  favour  '  (Philo  actually  explains  the  name  as  \d.pi.<i
<rov,  cp  OS  1644Q).

1  The  first  column  on  the  left  gives  the  age  of  the  patriarch
at  the  birth  of  the  first  son  ;  the  second,  the  number  of  his
remaining  years  ;  the  third,  the  total.

4416


SETHUR

numbers  of  Sam.  For  instance,  Jared,  Methuselah,'
and  Lamcch  die  in  the  year  1307,  i.e.  ,  probably,  not
in  the  i£  months  of  this  year  before  the  rlood,  but  in
the  flood  ;  therefore  they  are  sinners.  Enoch  is  trans
lated  in  887,  because  he  walked  with  God—  i.e.  ,  was  not
a  sinner.  The  age  of  the  first  five  patriarchs  and  of
Noah  is  about  900  ;  the  earlier  deaths  of  Jared,
Methuselah,  and  Lamech  are  punishments  for  wicked
ness.  That  two  men  —  Enoch  and  Noah  —  '  walked  with
God  '  in  the  midst  of  sinners,  is  due  to  P's  religious
optimism.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  in  Sam.  all  the
earlier  patriarchs  are  witnesses  of  the  translation  of
Enoch.  Budde  even  finds  this  theory  confirmed  by  the
na^nes  of  the  patriarchs,  at  least  so  far  as  Mahalalel,
Jared,  Methuselah,  and  perhaps  Lamech  are  concerned  ;
but  in  this  he  goes  too  far.  He  also  conjectures  that
the  numbers  of  MT  (according  to  which  only  Methuselah
dies  in  the  Deluge)  were  substituted  for  the  original  ones
from  the  presupposition  that  the  Sethites  were  the  holy
line,  which  represented  the  theocratic  tradition,  as
opposed  to  the  Cainite.  These  glimpses  at  possible
speculations  in  Jewish  schools  (from  P  onwards  ?),  which
are  somewhat  in  the  style  of  the  Book  of  Jubilees,1  are
of  great  interest.  From  a  text-critical  point  of  view  the
evidence  supplied  by  Sam.  of  the  late  date  at  which
alterations  were  made  in  the  Hebrew  text  is  even  more
striking.  .

See  Bertheau,/Z>r23657_2f:;  Budde,  Urgeschichte,  89-116;
the  commentaries  of  Dillmann,  Holxinger,  and  Gunkel  ;  Kloster-
mann,  Neuf  Kirchl.  Zt.  5  208^  ',  Dillmann,  '  Beitrage  aits  dem
B.  der  Jubilaen  zur  Kritik  des  Pentateuch-Textes  '  (SAB,  1883,
PP-  323.^-);  ar>d  f°r  specimens  of  Jewish  speculative  additions
to  the  biblical  traditions,  Charles  on  Jubilees,  chap.  4,  in  his  com
mentary  (1902).  T.  K.  C.

SETHUR  (l-IDp,  §  56  ;  see  also  below  ;  CA0OYP
[BAF],  9&COYP  [L])'  an  Asherite  spy;  Nu.  1813  [14]

(P)-


'  Sethur  '  or  [I,]  Thesur  may  come  from  '  Pathros  '
which  is  most  probably  a  corruption  of  '  Zarephath  '  (nans),  a
place-name  of  the  Negeb  (cp  PATHRUSIM).  Sethur's  father  is
MICHAEL  —  i.e.,  Jerahmeel.  Cp  Sithri  [ZiTHRi].  T.  K.  C.

SETTLE,  meaning  in  English  a  seat,  bench,  or  ledge,
is  employed  in  Ezek.  43  14,  etc.  ,  to  render  mtlJ,  'dzdrdh,
which  in  the  prophet's  description  seems  to  denote  the
two  ledges,  '  the  smaller'  and  '  the  larger,'  between  the
base  and  the  hearth.  See  SHOT  'Ezek.',  Eng.  ad
loc.

SEVEN.  See  NUMBER,  §  5,  OATH,  §  i,  and  cp
BEERSHEHA,  §  3,  and  Wi.  <7/222i.

SEVENEH  (rUlD),  Ezek.  29  10  306,  RV,  AV,  RV»'g-
SYENE.

SEVEN  STARS. See  STARS,  §  y.

SEXTARIUS  (SecTHc),  Mk.  74AVm&-;  EV'pot.'
See  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES,  §  3.

SHAALBIM  (D^?!^*,  a  corrupt  place-name,  see
below).  A  site  in  the  territory  of  Dan,  mentioned
(Josh.  1842)  between  Beth-shemesh  and  Aijalon.

Judg.  1  35(eVo>foii]ai  aAwn-e/ces  [B'>-  vid.  AL],  fit  aiai  aAtoTnjxes2
[B],  and  #oAa(3eu/  [B  ;  om.  AL],  a  corruption  of  <ra.  [Aq.,  Sym.,
Theod.].  See  Moore,  ail  loc.).  i  K.  4  9  /3r)0aAa|txei  [B]~,  iv
craAajSetju  [A],  0aAa0eti;  [L],  but  in  Josh.  1842  Shaalabbin
(i'-iT.1-!  cra-[a]\af}«.v  [BL],  -/metf  [A]);  whence  the  patronymic
Shaalbonite  ('•pSjW  28.2832,  o-aAa/So^em)?  [BA],  o-aAa/Savi
[L];  i  Ch.  1133,  o-aAajS.ma  [AL],  0/j.ei  [B],  o-w/xei  [N].  See
HASHEM).

Some (including Conder and Steuernagel) identify

1  Cp  Jubilees,  4  30,  '  And  he  (Adam)  lacked  seventy  years  of
one  thousand  years  ;  for  one  thousand  years  are  as  one  day  .  .  .,
and  therefore  was  it  written  concerning  the  tree  of  knowledge,
"On  the  day  that  ye  eat  thereof  ye  will  die."  For  this  reason
he  did  not  complete  the  years  of  this  day,  for  he  died  during  it.'

3  From  this  rendering  it  has  been  inferred  that  Heb.  like  Ar.
had  a  noun  nSi'E'  (  =  fox)  as  well  as  ^>y\w.  So  evidently  W.  R.
Smith  (/.  riiif.  !>  92)  who  compares  the  Ar.  tribe-name  Tha'laba.
It  is  worth  considering,  however,  whether,  even  if  we  assume
that  ©  read  Q'aSj^,  we  ought  not  to  explain  aAcuTrexes  on  the
analogy  of  Gen.  17  4  where  OrnUN  apparently  =  p£J  2N.

4417


SHACKLES

with  Salbit,  3  hrs.  SE.  from  Ramleh  towards  Yalo
(Aijalon)  ;  the  situation  suits,  but  not  the  phonetic
phenomena  (see  Kampffmeyer's  article,  ZDPl'  15/.).
As  in  the  case  of  MAKAZ  [</.v.],  between  which  place
and  Beth-shemesh  Shaalbim  is  mentioned  in  Kings,
corruption  is  highly  probable.  We  have  the  place-
names  Sha'ul  (in  Gibeath-sha'ul),  Shu'al,  Sha'alim,  and
Shalisha,  and  it  is  difficult  not  to  class  Shaalbim  with
these.  In  i  K.  4g  ©I!  gives  ^T]0a\a/j.ei,  which  may
have  arisen,  not  out  of  a  misapprehension  of  3  in  e'sSye'
(which  <§A  takes  as  a  preposition),  but  out  of  a  true
sense  that  the  name  began  with  rr3.  It,  as  the  present
writer  thinks,  Beth-shemesh,  wherever  it  occurs,  is  a
distortion  of  Beth-cushim  (  =  '  a.  Cushite  settlement ' ),  it
is  reasonable  to  explain  Shaalbim,  not  as  '  place  of
foxes,'  but  as  Beth-sha'alim  ('place  of  Sha'alim'),  or
Beth-yishme"elim  ('place  of  Ishmaelites ') — surely  a
better  explanation.  T.  K.  c.

i  S.  9  4  RV,  AVSHALIM


SHAALIM  (D1

(q.v.}.

SHAAPH  (SITS?  ;  CAr&e  [B],  -rM>  [A],  C<\A(J>  [L])
occurs  twice  in  the  Calebite  genealogy  :  (i)  as  name  of  a  son  of
Jahdai  (i  Ch.  247),  and  (2)  as  name  of  a  son  of  Maacah  (i  Ch.
249).  In  the  latter  passage  he  is  called  father  of  Madmannah.

SHAARAIM,  AV  Sharaim  (Dy^K',  as  if  'two
gates,'  or  'place  of  a  gate');  see  NAMES,  §  107,  and
cp  the  expanded  ethnic  SHEARIAH.

i.  A  city  in  the  lowland  of  Judah  (Josh.  1536,
crcLKapfifj.  [B],  crapyap.  [A],  ere/Sop.  [L]),  which  Conder,
on  the  assumption  that  it  is  mentioned  in  i  S.  17  52  (so
Di. ,  Dri.  [?],  H.  P.  Smith  ;  but  ©HAL  T£v  Ty\^)  and
was  therefore  situated  W.  of  Socoh  and  Azekah  (see
i  S.  17 1),  has  identified  with  Tell  Zakarya,  a  huge
conical  hill  '  which  must  be  passed  by  any  one  escaping
to  Gath.'  The  site  of  GATH  (q.v.)  has  yet  to  be
determined,  however,  and  the  names  have  no  re
semblance  (but  cp  <5B).  Perhaps  Shaaraim  has  arisen
by  mistake  ;  i  S.  1 7  52  should  close  with  '  and  the
mortally  wounded  of  the  Philistines  fell  in  the  way  '  (the
rest  is  dittographed).  See  Exp.  T,  Aug.  1899,  and  cp
SOCOH.  H.  P.  Smith,  however,  retains  'Shaaraim.'
2.  See  SHARUHEN.  T.  K.  C.

SHAASHGAZ  (NEW),  Esth.  2i4. See  HEGAI.
SHABBETHAI  ('n3E;,  cp  Sin. TlTi."  (Eut. 370),


ppur  by  Hilprecht,  5th  century  F..C.


originate  in  ethnics  (Che.).]

i.  A  Levite  who  helped  Ezra  in  the  matter  of  the  foreign


Ezra  (Neh.  87;  UNA  om.,  o-a£a00acos  [L]):  in  i  Esd.  048
SABATEAS,  RV  SABATEUS  (a/Sratos  [B],  craftSaraias  [A],
<ra/3/3afcuo«  [LI).  .

2. '  Of  the  chief  of  the  Levites,  an  overseer,  possibly  identical
with no. i (Neh.  11  16; om. BNA, o-o/S/Sadatos [Nca.  mg.  sup.]


SHACHIA  (iTSb'tBiL,  Ginsb.];  some  edd.  NVD'J'
or  N'3b',  also  ,T3C>  and  ,T2»  ;  the  last  form,  i.e.,  Shabia,
is  favoured  by  ©ISA  :  tra^ia  [B],  <re(3ia  [A],  [but  ©L  o«x'<>],
and  is  perhaps  to  be  preferred  ;  perhaps  '  Yahwe  has  for
gotten,'  cp  Sxrill?,  Sab.  SNTiri  and  see  NAMES,  §  31,  though
names  of  this  type  may  quite  well  be  expanded  ethnics  [Che.].
Pesh.  reads  R  for  15  or  K),  a  name  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN
(y.v.  §  9  ii.  /3)  ;  i  Ch.  8  10  1.  See  JQR  11  107,  §  6.


SHACKLES

'/•-'.  3).


V)-  Jer.2926  RV,  RV'e-  COLLAR
4418


SHADDAI

SHADDAI  ('"Itr  ;  for  renderings,  see  NAMES,  §  117),

a divine name of disputed interpretation, given in

1 Biblical  RV""*'' wherever El  Shaddai (EV 'God

Almighty ' )  occurs  in  MT,  and  also  in  Is.

136  Joel  1 15  (EV  'Almighty').1

In  MT  Shaddai  occurs  more  frequently  than  it  does  in  RVnig.
—viz.,  in  Gen.  17  i  28  3  35  n  48  3  (all  P),  Ex.  t>3(P),  Gen.  43  14
(E),  4025  (Blessing  of  Jacob),  Nu.  24  4  16  (Balaam),  Ezek.  1  24
10s  Ruthl202i  Ps.  68  15  [14]  ill  i  Job5i7  (and  thirty  times
besides).  In  the  first  six  passages  and  in  Ezek.  10s  El  (God)  is
prefixed  ;  <-][?  *?x  should  also  be  read  in  Gen.  4925  (Ges.,  Ew.,
Di.,  Kau.,  Ball,  with  Sam.,  Pesh.,  Vg.,  and  some  MSS).

If  we  examine  these  passages,  we  shall  find  that  only
two  of  them  are  commonly  regarded  by  critics  as  pre-
exilic2 — viz.,  Gen.  4925,  and  Nu.  24416  (originally  no
doubt  w.  4  and  16  were  identical) — and  of  the  remain
ing  references  all  but  those  in  Ps.  91 1  and  the  four
prophetic  passages  (where  the  text  is  disputed3)  may  be
accounted  for  by  an  archaising  tendency  in  the  writers  ;
e.g. ,  the  author  of  Job  means  to  describe  a  primeval  as
well  as  a  non-Israelitish  society,  and  takes  the  divine
name  ne>  from  P  (in  its  present  form).  To  ascertain
the  original  meaning  of  Shaddai  we  must  therefore  con
fine  our  attention  to  the  two  pre-exilic  passages.  In
Gen.  4925,  which  is  more  certainly  pre-exilic  than  Nu.
244i6,  El  Shaddai  (?)  is  evidently  the  God  of  the  land
of  Israel,  viewed  especially  as  the  giver  of  fertility  ;  in
Nu.  244  l6  (see  v.  16)  he  is,  in  addition,  [El]  Elyon,  '  the
most  high  God,'  who  compels  a  foreign  soothsayer  to
bless  Israel,  and  will  make  Israel  victorious  over  its
foes.  What  sense  can  nt?  bear,  so  as  to  make  it  a
suitable  name  in  these  contexts  ?  We  must  of  course
remember  that  the  oracles  of  Balaam  are  Israelitish
poems.

Passing  over  plainly  inadequate  explanations  (see
NAMES,  §  117),  we  may  mention  three  as  at  any  rate  not

2  Th e unp'ausible ; it  is  the  third  which  seems

. ' ...  to  the  present  writer  preferable, (a)  A

plausible  ex
planations  connectlon  was  suggested  by  ^  rd.  Delitzsch
(Hebr.  Lang.  48)  with  sadit  =  sakfi,  'to
be  high'  (see  5  R.  28,  82  h),  and  sadu,  saddil,
'  mountain. '  Delitzsch  also  quoted  the  phrase,  Bel
Sadu  rabii  ('Bel  the  great  rock'),  and  Ilu  sadu  a,
'God  my  rock.'  In  Prol.  96,  retaining  MT's  point
ing,  he  suggests  the  meaning  '  the  exceedingly  high  '
(cp  ©  in  Psalms)  ;  but  the  sense  now  given  by  Delitzsch
to  the  divine  title  sadu  rabil  (see  Ass.  HWB  642),
viz.,  'great  lord,'4  is  apparently  more  defensible,  and
certainly  more  suitable  to  the  biblical  passages.  It
may  be  possible  that  sadu  in  the  sense  of  '  lord '  (or
'  mountain  '  ?)  is  cognate  with  the  Hebrew  divine  name
Shad  (?),  '  Lord,'  Shadi  (?),  'my  Lord.'  Frd.  Delitzsch
in  Job  renders  ••IB'  '  Allherr  '  (All-lord).  (6)  However,
it  is  not  less  possible,  with  Noldeke  and  G.  Hoffmann
(see  NAMES,  col.  3325,  n.  2),  to  read  np,  sedi,  still
rendering  '  my  Lord  ' ;  the  pronoun  would  refer  to  the
people  worshipping  the  divine  '  Lord  '  ;  cp  Baali  (Hos.
2i6  [18]).  (c)  Lastly,  it  is  possible  and  (in  conformity
with  the  present  writer's  estimate  of  P's  proper  names
elsewhere)  even  probable,  that  '-IE-  is  corrupt.  To  restore
the  true  name  with  certainty  is  impossible  ;  but  it  is
plausible  to  correct  He1  (MT  Shaddai)  into  "JXIB"  '  Israel'
(cp  Gen.  4925,  -\&  ^x  II  Tax)-  We  may  suppose  that
this  was  originally  written  by  the  Priestly  Writer  'i&\

1  <B  omits  in  Gen.,  Ex.  unless  the  genit.  of  the  pers.  pron.  is
taken  to  represent  it  (once  6  e^xos,  Gen.  4S)  25),  0eo9  in  Nu.  24  16
Is.  13  6  ;  in  Joel  1  15  ©  reads  -\y  for  »is»  '<  i"  Ruth  1  2oyC  6  iicafos
(L  omits  in  T.  20,  A  in  v.  21),  in  Ezek.  1  24  (B»Q  om.,  ©A  ;Kai'6?
(so  Theod.  in  Q),  10s  eraSSai ;  in  Ps.  68  15  o  en-cmpai'ios,  3i,  6
0*09  TOU  ovpavov  ',  in  Job  icuptos  nine  times,  Trai'ToxpaTiap  sixteen
times,  K.  Travr.  once,  txai/o?  three  times,  6  ra  TTO.VTO.  TroiTJcras  once.

-  The  pre-exilic  date,  however,  of  the  oracles  of  Balaam  is
questioned  by  Diehl  and  von  Gall.

3  On  Ps.  91  i  (and  68  15)  see  Che.  Ps.W In  Is.  136  Joel  1  15
'IC'O  ~\C3  should,  in  the  opinion  of  the  present  writer,  most  prob
ably  be  7KJTO*"  1B'3, 'like  destruction  wrought  by  Ishmael.'
In  Ezek.  1  24  10$  also  the  present  writer  believes  that  "incomes
from  Xxi"?:-"  (in  1  24  II  rrSon— i-e.,  SxDrrv)- See  Crit.  Bib.

4  Cp  Hommel,  A/fT  110,  '  The  word  sadu  has  come  now  and
then  to  mean  "  lord  "  or  "commander."  '

4419


SHAHARAIM

and  that  an  editor  misunderstood  this,  and  corrected  it
into  'IB--  That  in  all  the  passages  where  nr  occurs  the
writer  is  directly  dependent  on  our  1',  is  a  perfectly
defensible  proposition.  It  is  equally  plausible  to  hold
that  El-'elyon  at  any  rate  in  Gen.  141922  (see  SOUOM,
§  6  [f])  and  El-'olam  in  Cen.  2X33  are  corruptions  of
El-jerahmeel,  '  the  God  of  Jerahmeel. '  Cp  also  El-bethel
(Gen.  31 13  35?),  originally  perhaps  El-tubal  ;  TUBAL,
(q.v. )  is  an  ethnic  and  place-name  of  the  Negeb.

The  names  supposed  to  be  compounded  with  Shaddai  are
'"UP'Cyt  "IIN'TO.  and  "i!J'"Yl!>.  It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether
this  widely  accepted  theory  is  correct.  See  SHEDEUR,  ZURI-

SHADDAl.

Hommel  (AHT  \<x)ff.)  confirms  the  second  view  given  above
by  comparing  the  Babylonian  names  Ammi  -  satana,  Samsu-
satana  (dynasty  of  Hammurabi),  and  the  Assyrian  names
Marduk-sadua,  Bel-sadiia,  Bel-Harran-sadua.  That  -na  in  the
two  former  words  is  the  first  plur.  suffix  seems  highly  probable
(Jensen  compares  Old  Bab.  sudurana).  T.  K.  C.

SHADES  (D'H|n),  see  DEAD,  §  3,  and  REPHAIM.

SHADOW  OF  DEATH  (Hin^X ;  CKIA  GANATOY  ;
umbra  mortis},  or,  as  RV,  'deep  darkness,'  a  title  of
SHEOL  (q.v.}  in  the  Book  of  Job  (e.g.,  102i/  'the
land  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,'  ©  rNO(}>epOC  and  r-HN
CKoroyc  AicoNioy;  8817,  'the  Gates  of  the  [city  of
the]  Shadow  of  Death,'  ©  nyAtopOl  AAoy)-  Prob
ably,  too,  passages  like  Job  3s  24  17  (cp  ©)  Ps.  44 19  [20]
should  also  be  classed  with  these  passages,  and,  by
probable  correction  of  the  text,  Ps.  94 17  115 17  (see
below).  The  didactic  explanation  '  shadow  of  death '
proceeds  from  a  very  old  but  probably  incorrect  tradition.
It  suits  the  preceding  passages,  however.  Elsewhere
(e.g.,  Am.  58  [<S  ffKidv  without  Bavarov]  Job 3 5  Ps.  107
1014  Is.  9 1  [2])  'deep  darkness,'  or  rather  'gloom'  is
perhaps  more  favoured  by  the  context.

On  the  pointing  n?D7S,  or  fl'loVx,  see  Earth,  NB  259 c:  on
the  traditional  reading  nicSx,  Nold.  GGA  [18671456;  ZATW
17  [1897]  182  ff.  On  the  emendation  niC^s  for  nc^  (con-
jecturally  rendered  '  silence  ')  in  Ps.  94  17  115  17,  see  Che.  Ps.fy

SHADRACH  (^1"1L';  ;  ceApA\  [©BAQF  Theod.])
and  Meshach  (^"O  ;  M[C]ICAX  [©^Ql1  Theod. ]  -CAK
[A]),  names  given  at  Babylon  to  two  of  Daniel's  Jewish
companions,  otherwise  called  Hananiah  and  Mishael
(Dan.  I?  249  812  ff.}.  Very  un-Babylonian-looking
names.  The  termination  can  hardly  be  Aku,  a  name
of  the  moon-god  (so  Frd.  Del.  formerly,  but  see  now
Calwer  BL  575  b},  but  might  be  the  Elamite  name  Sutruk
(Lenormant  ;  Jensen).  If,  however,  we  admit  that  the
story  of  Daniel,  like  so  many  others  in  the  OT,  has  been
altered  by  a  redactor,  and  that  the  scene  of  part  of  it
at  least  lay  in  the  land  of  Jerahmeel,  we  may  conjecture
that  Shadrach  is  a  distortion  of  Asshur,  Meshach  of
Cusham,  and  for  completeness  let  us  add,  comparing
Rab-shakeh  from 'Arab-cush,  and  Rab-saris  from'Arab-
asshur,  Abed-nego  from  'Arab-negeb — i.e. ,  the  Arabia
of  the  Negeb.  Cp  NiSROCH.  T.  K.  c.

SHAFT,  i.  TJT,  yarek,  lit.  'thigh';  KAyAoc  :
Ex.  25 31  37  17  AV;  Nu.  84  'base'  RV.  See  CANDLESTICK,
§  2.

2.  nag,  kdndh, KaAojouVieos, Ex.  2631 37 17  RV ; 'branch'
AV,  see  CANDLESTICK,  §  2.

3.  {'[I,  his,  /3e'Aos  ;  Is.  49  2. See  WEAPONS,  §  2.

SHAGE  (n3B?,  var.  NJ£: ;  ccoAA  [BS]  CAfH  [A]
CAMAIA  [L]),  iCh.  l!34t.  See  JONATHAN  (5)  and
SHAMMAH  (4).


SHAHARAIM  (DnPIC5;  CAAPHA  [R].  -PHM  [A],
cecopeiN  [L]),  a  Benjamite  name  (i  Ch.88f).  Either
a  corruption,  through  Ahishahar,  from  Aher  (so  Marq.  ,*
see  BENJAMIN,  §  9,  ii.  a,  b]  or,  much  more  probably,  a
corruption,  equally  with  Ahishahar,  of  Ashhur,  a  name
which,  modified  as  Asshur,  designates  the  N.  Arabian
population  of  the  Negeb.  Cp  SHIHOR.  Shaharaim's


1  The  present  writer,  however,  believes  that
again  represents  *?NDnT>  '  Jerahmeel.  '

4420


again  and


SHAHAZIMAH

home  was  in  'the  field  [highland]  of  Moab,'  or  rather
'  of  Missur  '  ;  his  wives  are  named  Hushim  and  Baara —
i.e. ,  Cushim  and  'Arab.  T.  K.  c.

SHAHAZIMAH  (nrp'>TIB>,  Kr.,  but  nDIXnt?,  Ktb.,
whence  RV  Shahazumah),  a  place  on  the  border  of
Issachar  towards  the  Jordan- — if  the  text  is  correct
(Josh.  1922;  c&AeiM  KATA.  6&A&CC&N  [B],  c«\cei-
M*.9  K.  9.  [A],  CACeiMA  [L] ;  sehesima  [Vg.]  ;  sasima,
saasim  [OSP>80i8  152zi]).

Dillmann  supposes  a  place-name  Shahazim,  which  is  usually
connected  with  j'ntf,  'to  be  high  '  (Ges.-Bu.  (!•*);  cp  Gray,
HPN 95).  Analogy,  however,  favours  the  view  that  either  '%>
is  a  miswritten  form  of  the  following  word  c'Ct?  IV3,  or  tvcgf  in
'y>  3  i-s  a  corruption  of  the  name  which  underlies  'nc'-  Now
B'OB'  in  MT  is  sometimes  a  corruption  of  DC'3  or  D'B'S  (e.g.,
probably  Ps.  72  5  121  6),  &Q  of  ^3  (Ps.  76  7  [6]),  and  D'DID  of
C'p'ia  (Is.  6620,  Crit.  Bit.).  D'sne'  may  therefore  come  from
C'C'13,  either  directly  (n=D),  or  through  the  form  D'DID.
Similarly  Beth-shemesh  comes  from  '  Beth-cushim ' ;  in  z/.  38
it  is  grouped  with  Migdal-el  and  Horem,  both  of  which  names
come  from  '  Jerahmeel '  (virtually  a  synonym  of  '  Cush  ').  Old
Cushite  or  Jerahmeelite  settlements  are  meant.  T.  K.  C.

SHALEM  (D^L';;  £IC  C&AHM  [ADEL];  so  Pesh.,
Vg.  ;  Jub.  30  i  gives  '  to  Salem  ...  in  peace '  ;
Sam,,  DVB';  '  in  peace  '  RV),  Gen.  33 18.  Accepting
the  MT  and  AV's  rendering,  we  must  look  for  a  place
called  Shalem  near  Shechem,  where  in  fact  Robinson
found  a  village  called  Salim,  in  the  hilly  region  to  the  E.
of  the  Vale  of  Shechern.  No  such  place,  however,  is
mentioned  elsewhere,  and  many  prefer  to  render  '  safe
and  sound'  (Tgg. ,  Saad.,  Rashi,  Ges. ,  Di. ,  Del.  ;  cp
Sam. ).  The  truth,  however,  is  quite  different.  It  is
probable  that  the  geography  of  the  original  narrative  has
been  altered  by  the  redactor.  See  SHECHKM,  2.

'Came  in  peace'  is  not  natural.  Wellhausen  (C//(3)  317),
Kautzsch-Socin  (Gen.  78),  and  Ball  suspect  corruption.  C3C'i
however,  is  not  a  plausible  emendation  of  o^ty.  T.  K.  C.


SHALIM,  RV  Shaalim,  Land  of  Cff,  THC
I~HC  e&CAKeM  [B],  T.  r«  c&AAei/v\  [A],  THC  rnc
r&AAl  THC  TToAecoC  cep&AeiM  [L]),  iS.  94t-  Ac
cording  to  Ewald  (Hist.  819),  Wellhausen  (TBS  70).
Driver,  and  Lohr,  '  Sha'alim  '  should  rather  be  '  Shaal-
abbim  '  (a  Danite  place).  The  account  of  Saul's  route  is,
however,  by  no  means  clear,  and  '  Sha'alim  '  may  be  a
corruption  either  of  Shalishah  or  of  Shaul  (with  which
SHUAL  [(/.  v.  ]  may  also  be  connected  ;  cp  H.  P.  Smith) ;
in  this  case  the  second  clause  in  v.  4  disappears.

SHALISHA(H),  LAND  OF  (n&JS>B>  "N  ;  THC  rnc
CeA\A  [BL],  T.  p  C&AiCCA  [A]),  mentioned  in  the
description  of  the  route  taken  by  Saul,  after  leaving  his
home,  to  the  'land  of  Zuph'  in  the  hill-country  of
Ephraim  (i  S.  94).

The  name  Shalisha(h)  also  occurs  in  the  compound  place-
name  BAAL-SHALISHA  and  possibly  underlies  the  corrupt  words
ZELAH  and  ZELZAH  (qq.v.),  BARZILLAI  (see  MEFHIBOSHETH),
and  also  LAISH  and  LAISHAH  ;  on  the  affinities  of  the  name  cp
ASHER,  §  4,  ii.,  end.

The  district  referred  to  in  i  S.  94  would  seem  to  be
that  in  which  the  headquarters  of  Saul's  clan  were
situated — i.e.,  probably  Beth-gallim  (cp  GALLIM)  or
Beth-gilgal,  or  (originally)  Beth-jerahmeel.1  It  must
also  have  contained  the  place  called  Gibeah  of  Saul,
which  might  probably  with  equal  accuracy  be  called
Gibeah  of  Shalisha,  the  names  of  Saul  (Shaul)  and
Shalisha  being  perhaps  connected  (see  SAUL,  §  i,
MEPHIBOSHETH).  If,  therefore,  'Gibeah  of  Saul'  is
rightly  identified  with  Tell  el-Ful,  2%  m.  N.  of  Jeru
salem,  we  know  the  situation  of  the  Land  of  Shalisha.

The  geography  of  i  S.  94  has  caused  much  perplexity.  The
difficulty  lies  not  only  in  the  position  of  the  clause,  'And  he
passed  through  the  hill  country  of  Ephraim,'  but  also  in  the
final  clause  referring  to  -1"Q]  ["IN  (RV,  '  the  land  of  the  Ben-
jamites ').  'J'D'  j"IK  must  be  taken  together  with  '3'S'  E>'N  in
2  S.  20  i.  In  both  passages  'j'D'  K  very  probably  a  corruption  of

1  In  explanation,  see  MEPHIBOSHETH,  ROGELIM,  ZELZAH.
4421


SHALLUM


T>  and  tne  last  member  of  the  sentence  in  i  S.  9  4  is  to  be
regarded  as  a  correction  of  the  carelessly  written  first  clause,  so
that  the  whole  verse  becomes  (cp  SHALIM)  '  And  he  passed
through  the  Jerahmeelite  land  (i.e.,  the  district  of  Beth-Jerah-
meel),  but  they  found  them  not,  and  passed  through  the  land  of
Shalisha  (i.e.,  the  district  of  Gibeah  of  Saul),  but  they  found
them  not.'  For  a  parallel  to  the  emendation  of  D'"1ER~in  in
clause  i,  see  Josh.  2433,  and  cp  PHINEHAS  ;  and  for'another
view,  see  Marq.  Fund.  12,  n.  i.

BAAL-SHALISHA  (2K.  442)  has  been  considered  else
where,  and  the  identification  mentioned  will  still  perhaps
be  the  most  plausible  one,  even  if  we  explain  the
second  part  of  the  name  and  also  the  '  Gilgal  '  in  2  K.
438*  on  the  analogy  of  the  'Gilgal'  and  '  Gallim  '
disclosed  to  us  in  2  S.  04/.  1727  1932,  and  the
'Shalisha'  of  i  S.  94.  We  may  also  provisionally
hold  that  Shalisha  is  a  less  correct  form  than  Shaul
(cpSAUL,  §  i).  -r.  K.  c.


SHALLECHETH,  GATE  OF  (rOT),  apparently
one  of  the  gates  of  the  temple,  i  Ch.26i6f.  See
HOSAH  ii.  That  it  is  a  synonym  for  the  '  dung-
gate  '  (cp  RVmg-),  is  very  unlikely.  Cp,  however,
Thenius  on  2  Ki.  26  16.

SHALLUM  (D'V?t?,  either  from  a  clan-name  akin  to
Ishmael,  or  ='  retribution  [of  God],'  cp  §56  and  see
MESHULLAM  ;  analogous  are  iTVp^,  ITE^E'D,  and
Ph.  D^E>,  D^BTD,  D^B'»\  Palm.  NE^K'  [C&AMHC]
and  |D7K>,  the  Nab.  \ff?W  and  Sab.  D^D,  etc.,  cp
Berger  in  Rev.  d'Assyriol.  et  d'  A  rchiol.  1895,  P-  751
ceAAoyM  [BAL]).

i.  Son  of  Jabesh  (EV),  or  rather  'a  Jabeshite  '  (see
GINATH),  who  killed  Zechariah  b.  Jeroboam,  the  last  of
the  dynasty  of  Jehu,  in  IBLEAM  |y.z'.]  and  usurped  the
throne  of  Israel.  After  one  month's  reign  he  was  killed
by  Menahem  (2  K.  15  10-15;  fff\\ij/j.  [L]).  M'Curdy
(///M/1357)  sees  a  reference  to  this  in  the  statement  of
Zech.  118  that  Yahvve  '  cut  off  the  three  shepherds  in  one
month.'  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  justify  this  theory
(which  is  that  of  Hitzig  and  Ewald)  in  all  points  from
the  Hebrew  records,  and  the  view  that  Zech.  9-11  is  pre-
exilic  is  unsatisfactory  (see  ZKCHARIAH  [B<XJK],  §  5).
It  has  been  thought  that  Shallum's  bold  deed  may  be
referred  to  in  Hos.  10  14  (see  BETH-AKBEL,  but  cp
SALMAH).

2.  b.  Tekoa  (MT  TIKVAH,  q.v.),  i.e.,  a  Tekoite,  'keeper  of
the  wardrobe,'  and husband (©KA 'son') of the prophetess
Huldah  (2  K.  22  14  CTeAA^  [BL]  2  Ch.  34  22  creAArjfi  [BAL])  ;  see
below,  14.

3.  b.  Sismai,  a  descendant  of  Sheshan  (i  Ch.  2  40^)  <raA[A]ov>i
[BAL]). Kittel  (SHOT  ad  loc.)  illustrates  the  combination  of
1DCD  and  C1I7E'  by  (o-e<r^.aos)  'CDlol  J3  u?V7y3  '"  a  Ph.  inscrip
tion  from  Larnax  Lapethus  (CfSI  95);  but  cp  SISMAI.

4.  b.  Josiah  (Jer.  22n,  creAATj/u, i  Ch.  815  <raA[A]ou^i  [BA]),
generally  known  as  JEHOAHAZ  [q.v,].

5.  b.  Shaul,  of  SIMEON  (§  9), i  Ch.  425  ((raht/j.  [BA]  creAArjft
[L]  ;  sellum  [Vg.]).

6.  b.  Zadok,  in  the  genealogical  list  connecting  Eleazar  with
Ezra, i  Ch.  6  12  f.  [f>j8f.]  (craAajju.  [B],  Ezra  7  2,  craAou/n  [B])=
i  Esd.  8  i  (SALUM,  RV  SALEM  craA^/uov  [BA]  a  diminutive  ?)=
4  Esd.  1  i  SADAMIAS,  RV  SALEMAS. In  iCh.On  Neh.  11  ir
his  name  appears  as  MESHULLAM  (q.v.,  no.  7).

7.  b.  NAI-HTAH  (§  6),  i  Ch.  7  13  (<raAw;uwi>  [B],  ereAA^  [L]).
He  and  his  brother  are  called  'the  sons  of  Kilhah  '  (the  mother  of
Naphtali  and  Dan);  possibly  some  of  these  were  Danites  (see
Be. Chron.  ad  loc.). According  to  L  /SaAaaji  (for  Bilhah)  was
the  son  of  Shallum. The  name  appears  also  under  the  form
SHILLEM  2  (Gen.  40  24,  <rvAAT)^i,  niSe'  Sam.  Nu.  2049,  Di^B'  Sam.
o-eAAT)  [B],  <reAAr;/x  [AF]  cre[AJA7m  [L]),  whence  the  family  of  the
Shillemites (Nu. loc. cit. 'DW?,  'DlWi Sam. 6 o-eAA))M[e]i
[BAFL]).

8.  The b'ne Shallum  were  one of the six groups  of the
'children  of  the  doorkeepers  '  (Ezra  2  42  <raAouju  [B]  Neh.  745,
<raAouM  [BN])  in  i  Esd.  5  28  SALUM  (o-aAov/u  [A]  [B  om.]). Of
these,  three  (Shallum,  Akkub,  and  Talmon)  are  mentioned  as
individuals  in  a  list  of  doorkeepers  (i  Ch.  9  17,  craAiu/ii  [B  twice,
A  once],  <raAA<o|u  [A  once]). In  Neh.  1225  his  name  appears  as
MKSHULLAM  (q.v., no. 20, and see below,  no. n). '  Door-

1  On  <B's  reading,  see  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE.

2  As  the  versions  show  (here  and  in  nos.  4  and  10),  u7O  and
cVa>  are  very  closely  related,  cp  MESHULLAMOTH  (i).

4422


SHALLUN

keepeis  '  in  Ezra  2  42  Neh  7  45  should  probably  be  '  Asshurites,'
another  N.  Arabian  ethnic  (Che.).

9.  Shalkim  the  Korahite  (i  Ch.  9  19,  <raA<o/x(oi'  [B],  crn\iafj.'  [A]),
see  MESHKI.EMIAH.

10.  An  Kphruimite  <2Ch.  28  12  <rcAAr,^i  [BA]  -«t/a  [L]).

n.  A  door-keeper  (or  Asshurite?  Che.),  Ezra  1024  (-yeAA^/i
[BJ,  yatAAei/j.  [«],  <roAArjfi  [A],  <re.  [L])=  i  Esd.  025  SAI.I.UMUS
craAAov/ios  [B*i'A],  -/JLOV  [B^'c?]).  From  the  fact  that  Telem
(cp  Talmon)  occurs  alongside  his  name,  it  is  probable  that  he  is
to  be  identified  with  no.  8,  above.

12.  One  of  the  b.  Bani,  Ezra  10  42  (<raAovju.  [BN])=SAMATUS
t  Esd.934  (o-o^aros  [BA|).

13.  b.  HAU.OHESH  (l?ni?n),  one  of  the  repairers  of  the  wall  at
Jerusalem  (Neh.  3  12  (raA[A]ouja  [BA],  oaAou/a  [tf]).

14.  The  father  of  Hanameel  and  uncle  (TH)  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.
3-.J  [<P  3!)]  7,  o-oAw/ui  [BAQ],  o-aA/*<oK  [«*],  adnot.  eipjji/j)  [Q">g-]),
possibly  the  same  as  2  (above).

15.  Father  of  Maaseiah  (Jer.  35  [®  42)4  <rfAu>n  [BAQ],  atAw/i
[K»]  <rai  [Xc.a]).

SHALLUN  (f-1?^),  b.  COL-HOZEH  (</.f.  ),  ruler  of  the
district  of  Mizpah,  who  repaired  the  fountain-gate  and
part  of  the  pool  of  Shiloah  (Neh.  815;  <5'<NA  om.,
GMMUiN  [I-])-

SHALMAI (AV in Xeh.  7  48  =  Ezra 246f  ; 'D^i?

[  =  SALMAI  in  RV]  in  Neh.  with  no  varr.  [except  o-a/xaei  (K)
against  (roAa/iei  (B),  <reA/uei  (A),  <7eAe/i«i  (L)J,  and  in  Ezra,  Kr.
[Ba.  ;  the  usual  text  being  '0*70,  cp  <r«Aafi[e]t  (AL)]  ;  '^DS1  in
Ezra,  Kt.  [Ba.  ;  the  usual  text  being  'Sp:?  =  SHAMI.AI  (RV),
<ra/oiaai/  (B)]),  only  in  the  phrase  'the  children  of  Salmai,'  a
family  of  the  NKTHISIM  (see  EzKAii.,  §  10  «)•  The  name
suggests  a  foreign  origin.  In  lEsd.  630  the  corresponding
name  is  SUHAI  (<ru/3nei  [BA],  creAa^et  [L]).  Cp  SHELU.MIEL.

SHALMAN  (Hos.  10  14). See  BETH-ARBEL.


SHALMANESER  P
MAN&CC&P  [B]  ;  C&AM*.N&C<\P  [A],
[Avid-,  in  2  K.  18g];  CA.AM&NACC&P  [L]  ;  i"  Tob.
1213  is/,  Enemessar,  eNe/v\ecc*.poc.  -&p  [BNA]  ;
in  4  Esd.  1840  SALMANASAR,  Salmanassar),  named
as  king  of  Assyria  in  2  K.  l~3-6  ISg-n,  is  obviously
the  king  who  succeeded  Tiglath-pileser  and  preceded
Sargon.  Hence  he  must  be  identified  \vith  Sulmanu-
asarid  IV.  ,  successor  and  possibly  son  of  Tiglath-
pileser  III.  He  was  king  of  Assyria,  727-722  B.C.  He
seems  to  have  left  no  monuments,  probably  because
his  reign  was  so  short.  He  was  succeeded  by  Sargon  II.  ,
who  appears  to  have  founded  a  new  dynasty.  Very
little  is  known  of  him.  The  Babylonian  Chronicle,
KB  2276,  narrates  that  'he  sat  on  the  throne,  25th
of  Tebetu  [727  B.C.].  The  city  Samara'in  (or
Sabara'in)  he  destroyed  (cp  SAMARITANS,  §  2).
In  his  fifth  year  'Sulmanu-asarid,  in  Tebetu,  met  his
fate.  Five  years  had  Sulmanu-asarid  reigned  in  Assyria.  '
The  existing  copies  of  the  eponym  canons  give  the
names  of  the  eponyms  for  the  five  years  of  his  reign,
and  the  additional  information  that  in  the  first  two
years  there  was  no  military  expedition,  but  that  there
was  one  in  each  of  the  years  725-722  B.C.  Un
fortunately  the  objective  of  these  expeditions  is  not
known.  Some  of  the  standard  lion  weights  found  at
Kalah  bear  this  king's  name,  KBI^f.  A  boundary
stone  inscription,  published  by  Peiser  (Keilinschriftliche
Actenstiicke,  7  ff.},  refers  to  private  transactions  in  the
second  year  of  this  reign,  at  Dur-ili,  which  town  was
then  under  his  rule.  For  another  private  transaction  of
this  reign,  in  or  near  Nineveh  (?),  see  KB  4  108.  Sargon,
in  one  of  his  inscriptions,  accuses  Shalmaneser  of  forcibly
dispossessing  the  old  capital  Assur  of  its  ancient  rights
and  immunities  (see  Wi.  AOF  1402^).  It  seems
certain  also  that,  before  he  came  to  the  throne,  his
father  (?)  Tiglath-pileser  had  placed  him  as  his  lieutenant
over  the  city  and  district  of  Simirra,  conquered  in  738
B.C.  (see  Wi.  AOF  24).  That  he  actually  took
Samaria  is  rendered  doubtful  by  Sargon's  claim  to  have
done  so,  see  SAMARITANS,  §  2.  See  HOSEA  for  his
relations  with  that  monarch.

The Shalman of Hos. 10  14 has been identified (e.g.,
by Wellhausen, who regards v. 10 as an interpolation)

4423


SHAMGAR

with  Shalmaneser  IV. ;  against  this  see  BETH-ARHEJ.,  and  Crit.
Bit>-1  C.  II.  W.  J.

SHAMA  (1»OK? ;  C&MA0A  [BX],  C&MMA  [AL]),  b.
Hothan  the  Aroerite,  one  of  David's  heroes  (i  Ch.  11  44).
Cp  Elishama — i.e.,  probably  Ishmacl  (Che. ).  His
brother  is  Jeiel — i.e.,  Jerahmeel  [Che.]  (see  JEIEL,  2).

SHAMARIAH (nnipc', 2  Ch.  11. 9). See SIIE-

MARIAH  (2).

SHAMBLES  (Old  Eng.  scamel,  from  the  late  Lat.
scamellum,  a  small  bench),  though  now  generally  used
in  the  sense  of  a  slaughter-house,  formerly  signified  a
bench  or  stall  on  which  goods,  and  particularly  meat,
were  exposed  for  sale,  and  then  a  meat  or  flesh- market
(/cpeoTTuiXiov).  In  this  sense  shambles  is  used  in
our  later  English  versions  to  render  /xd/cf  \\ov  ( i  Cor.
1025),  the  Lat.  macelhtm,*  or  provision -market,  for
which  earlier  translators  have  'market'  (Tindale)  or
'  fleshe  market'  (Coverdale  and  others).  '  Shambles'  first
appears  in  the  Rheims  version  of  1582.  The  Roman
colonists  who  founded  the  Corinth  of  Paul's  day  (see
CORINTH)  in  all  probability  brought  the  name  with
them.3  The  salesmen  were  named  macellarii  and  dealt
not  only  in  the  flesh  of  domestic  animals  but  also  in
venison  and  other  game,  as  well  as  in  the  various
secondary  articles  of  diet  classed  by  the  ancients  under
the  head  of  fyov,  obsonia  (references  in  Marq.  Das
Privatleben  d.  Romer,  450  [1879]).

Dio  Cassius  defines  TO  uaKeAAof  as  rrjv  ayopav  ruty  oi^ujc
(01  18).  In  Athens  the  provision-market  (o^oirioAia)  was  divided
into  sections,  termed  «u»cAot  (circles),  and  named  after  the  special
wares  offered  for  sale,  tts  TO  o<f>ov,  ets  rov  olvov,  etc.  (Poll.  947
10  29).

In  i  Cor.  1025  the  Corinthian  Christians  are  advised
to  purchase  whatever  is  offered  for  sale  in  the  provision-
market  of  the  city,  asking  no  question  on  the  score  of
conscience,  '  for  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness
thereof.'  A.  K.  s.  K.

SHAMED,  RV  SHEMED  (10^),  b-  ELPAAL  (q.v.},
in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.,  §9,  ii.  8),  i  Ch.  812  ;
perhaps  same  as  Ishmerai  in  v.  18,  see  JQR  11 103,  §  i.
Recent  editions  (Ba. ,  Ginsb. )  read  not?,  in  preference  to
TCir  (final  d,  not  final  ;-) ;  the  latter,  however,  is  followed
by  ordinary  Hebrew  Bibles,  Pesh.  and  ©  (crr)/j.rip  [B],
ffefjL/j..  [A],  cra/ucurjX  [L]).

SHAME,  SHAMEFUL  THING  (n&'3n),  Hos.9to
Jer.  824  11 13.  See  IDOL,  §  3.

SHAMER  p»t:;),  i  Ch.  734.  AV  SIIEMER  (2  and  3).

SHAMGAR  ("I3OK5 ;  CA.M<M-&P  [Bl-  CAM€-  [L,  and
BA  in  Judg.  56];  Jos.  CAACAPOC,  CAM&r&POC  I  on
_  ,  „  the  addition  in  some  MSS  of  ©  after
1.  Juag..J3i.  judg.  16 31,  see  Moore,  'Judges,'  SHOT
[Heb.  ],  59).  An  early  Israelitish  hero,  Judg.  831  56;
or,  as  others  think,  a  foreign  oppressor  of  Israel  or  of
some  part  of  Israel  whom  the  writer  of  Judg.  3  31 ,  through
a  misunderstanding  of  the  allusion  in  Judg.  56,  mistook
for  a  patriotic  warrior.  The  notice  in  Judg.  831,  how
ever,  is,  according  to  the  most  recent  commentators,  a
very  late  insertion,  later  not  only  than  the  deuteronomistic
elements  in  Judges,  but  also  than  the  editor  to  whom  the
chronological  system  of  Judges  in  its  present  form  is  due.
It  stands  altogether  outside  that  system,  and  is  evidently
unknown  to  the  author  of  Judg.  4i,  which  connects  the
oppression  of  Jabin  with  the  death  of  Ehud.  The  author
of  the  notice  was  poorly  provided  with  suitable  details
for  a  fictitious  story  ;  he  takes  a  hint  (it  may  perhaps  be
held)  from  Judg.  15i4/,  where  a  similar  exploit  is

1  [For  other  references  see  Lehmann,  '  Menander  u.  Josephos
fib.  Salmanassar  IV. pt.  i.,'  Beitrage  zur  Alien  Gcschichte,
2  125-140(1902).]

2  Macellum  was  also  adopted  into  the  Hebrew  of  the  Talmud
and  Midrash  under  the  forms  p,j3D,  JyjTID,  etc.  (see  the  lexi
cons  of  Levy  and  Jastrow).

3  For  the  iiiaccUa.  of  Rome  see  art.  macclluni  in  Smith's  Diet.
ofGk.  and  Rom.  Antiy.(3<

4424


T H

• U  g.


SHAMGAE

assigned  to  Samson.1  When  we  consider  that  the  legend
(28.  23 u/. )  of  Shammah  ben  Agee,  one  of  David's
heroes,  has  also  been  influenced  by  the  Samson-story,
such  license  would  not  be  surprising.  Note  also  that
all  these  names  begin  with  ce*  (s/i-m).  The  chief  object
of  the  insertion  of  Judg.  831  would  be  to  explain  the
obscure  phrase  '  in  the  days  of  Shamgar  ben  Anath '  in
Judg.  56.

This  critical  theory  can  only  be  right  in  part.2  Certainly
Shamgar  ben  Anath  comes  from  the  song  in  Judg.  5  (in  a  corrupt
form,  so  far  as  v.  6  is  concerned).  But  the  late  writer  of  831
ventured  on  no  account  of  '  Shamgar's  '  exploits.  Unless  our
experience  elsewhere  is  altogether  illusory,  the  passage  (831)
has  suffered  both  by  corruption  and  by  editorial  manipulation.
On  the  analogy  of  similarly  corrupt  passages,  we  have  to  restore
it  thus  :  '  And  after  him  arose  Shamgar  hen  Anath  ;  he  smote
the  Pelistim  [Ishmaelites,  Jerahmeelites]  ;  he  also  delivered
Israel.'  The  corrector  of  the  MS  evidently  felt  that  '  Pelistim '
occurred  too  early  ;  he  wrote  in  the  margin  'Ishmaelites,'  'Jerah
meelites, 'as  alternative  corrections  for  '  PeliStim.'  '  Ishmaelites'
seems  to  be  the  right  word  ;  the  preceding  narrative  in  its  original
form  probably  closed  with  the  words,  '  and  the  land  had  rest
from  the  Ishmaelites,'  just  as  the  narrative  of  Jabin  or  Sisera
probably  closed  with  the  words,  '  and  the  land  had  rest  from  the
Arabians. '<*

But  who  was  the  true  '  Shamgar  '  (Judg.  56)  ?  Moore
(Judges,  1 06)  and  Marquart  (Fund.  3)  have  suggested
that  he  may  have  been  a  Hittite  king.
Sangara  was  the  name  of  a  (Hittite)  king
of  Carchemish  in  the  time  of  Asur-nasir-pal  and  Shal
maneser  II.  Moore  also  refers,  in  illustration  of  '  Sisera,'
to  the  numerous  Hittite  names  in  -sira  (e.g.,  Htasira,
WMM  As.  u.  Eur.  332),  whilst  Marquart  compares  the
name  Pi-siri(s},  borne  by  the  last  king  of  Carchemish
(cp  Del.  Par.  270),  and  Ball4  refers  (for  'ben  Anath')
to  Bur-anati,  the  name  of  the  king  of  Yasbuk  whom
Shalmaneser  II.  mentions  as  an  ally  of  Sangara  (KB
1159;  cp  ISHBAK).  The  song,  however,  is  so  often
corrupt  that  the  question  of  the  names  Shamgar  and
Sisera  needs  to  be  re-examined  in  connection  with  a
thorough  critical  revision  of  the  text  of  Judg.  5.  The
main  historical  result  of  such  a  revision  appears  to  the'
present  writer  to  be  that  the  foes  by  whom  the  Israelites
were  oppressed  were  N.  Arabians,  variously  called  Jerah
meelites,  Ishmaelites,  Cushites,  Asshurites,  and  Keniz-
zites,  and  that  v.  6  should  run  thus  :

In  the  days  of  Jerahmeel  son  of  Anak,5
In  the  days  of  Cusham  and  Ishmael.

IJSB'I  'Shamgar'  (?),  is  in  fact  a  scribe's  mixture  of
Sxi'SB1'  and  ^NanT,  and  the  scribe  himself  corrected  his
error, ^  while  NID'D  is  a  corruption  of  the  ethnic  name
Tii5;x,  '  Asshur, '  a  collateral  form  of  which  was  probably
"Wai  '  Geshur  '  (see  GESHUR,  2).  Now  perhaps  we  can
see  how  '  Jabin  '  and  '  Sisera '  both  appear  in  the  story.
'Jabin'  (<SA,  twice  Jamin)  is  one  of  the  corruptions  of
'Jerahmeel,'  so  that  the  king  of  Kenaz  (tap,  not  [5733),
whose  capital  was  Kadesh[-barnea],  might  equally  well
be  called  '  Jerahmeel '  and  '  Asshur. '  That  '  Sisera  '
represents  a  N.  Arabian  ethnic  name  may  also  be  pre
sumed  from  its  occurrence  in  the  list  of  the  families  of

1  Moore  points  out  (SHOT,  I.e.)  that  in  some  forms  of  <B  the
notice  of  Shamgar  stands  after  the  story  of  Samson,  and  con
jectures  that  this  was  the  original  place  of  the  brief  account.

2  Winckler  (672124),  too,  expresses  dissatisfaction  with  the
current  theory;  but  he  has  no  light  to  throw  either  on  831  or
on  56.

:i  There  are  quite  sufficient  parallels  for  these  and  the  preced
ing  emendations.  CB"  frequently  springs  out  of  St<j;csJ''>  and
chronological  statements  have  several  times  (e.g.,  Nu.  1433  Am.
2  10  5  25)  arisen  out  of  misread  ethnic  names.  See  MOSES,  §  n.
The  difficulties  arising  out  of  iD^D  (CP  ®)i  ancl  ou'  °f  tne  six
hundred  men,  who  '  have  always  taxed  the  credulity  of  the  com
mentators '  (Moore;  cp  Wade,  Old  Test.  History,  198,  n.  i),
now  disappear.

4  Smith's  DBP),  s.v.  '  Ishbak.'  '  Bur1  may  have  been  taken
by  the  scribe  to  be  =~\3  ('son');  cp  the  reading  proposed  in
col.  163,  n.  i.

6  n  and  p  confounded. But  cp  ANATH.

6  l}y<  in  ^,y<  »Q<3  represents  Sxcm1 ',  J?  stands  for  N.  The  rest
of  'nv  was  expelled  by  the  following  word  I'vin  which  resembles
^riT-  Line  2  now  appears  in  a  much  altered  form  in  v.  76.  See
Crit.  Bib.

4425


SHAMMOTH

the Nethinim (  =  Ethanim, 'men of Ethan'— a N*.
Arabian  region). See  SISERA,  and  Crit.  Bib.

Cp  G.  F.  Moore,  Judges,  105 /.,  142 /.,  and  'Shamgar  and
Sisera,'  in  Journ.  Am.  Or.  Soc.  196  159 ./  ;  Wi.  GJ  2  124  (&em-
ger,  two  divine  names).  T  K  C

SHAMHUTH  (n-inob1),  i  Ch.  278;  in  2  S.  2825
SHAMMAH  (5).

SHAMIR  O'pti').  i.  a  city  in  the  highlands  of
Judah  (Josh.  1548;  CAMeip  [B],  cAcbeip  [AL]).  It
may  possibly  be  identified  with  Umm  Somerah,  2000  ft.
above  sea  level,  2  m.  N.  from  'Anab  (cp  v.  50)  and  5  hrs.
SW.  from  Hebron.  •  So  GueYin,  Condei ,  Buhl.  But
note  ffCKpeip  of  ©AL.

2.  A  place  in  Mt.  Ephraim,  the  seat  of  the  clan  of
Tola,  in  Issachar,  see  ISSACHAR,  §  7  (Judg.  10 1 /.  ;
aa.IJ.fip  [BJ,  ffa/j.apfia  [AL]).1  A  site  to  the  extreme
N.  of  the  hill-country  seems  possible  (Moore).  But  see
TOLA,  where  it  is  suggested  that  we  should  transfer  the
tradition  of  Tola  to  the  Negeb.  Observe,  too,  that
Shimron  (q.v. )  is  both  a  name  of  Issachar,  and,  accord
ing  to  the  present  writer's  theory  of  Josh.  11 1  and
Am.  89,  etc.,  the  Negeb.  T.  K.  c.

SHAMIR  (Tr:£;,  Ktb.  -|-1O£;),  b.  Uzziel,  a  Levite
(i  Ch.  2424  ;  CAAAHp  [BA],  C6MMHP  [I-]).

SHAMLAI  (VDV,  Kt.  ;  "P^l",  Kr.  ;  CAMAAN  [B],
ceAA/v\[e]i  [AL]),  Ezra  246=  Neh.  648,  SALMAI.

SHAMMA  (N££'),  b.  Zophah,  in  a  genealogy  of
ASHER (?.&.,§ 4,  ii.),  iCh.  737(ce/v\[/v\]A[BL],  CA/V\M<\
[A]).

SHAMMAH  (nttL",  §  51  ;  abbrev.  from  SHEMAIAH).

1.  Son  of  Reuel  b.  Esau,  and  a  '  duke  '  or  '  clan  '  (?)  of  Edom  ;
Gen.  8613  17 i  Ch.  137  (o-o^e  [15ADKL1,  but  i  Ch.  1  37  vo^t
[A],  <ra/j.fj.a  [L],  and  Gen.  8017  <ro/j.ai  [D]). See  EDOM,  §  4.

2.  Son  of  Jesse  (see DAVID, § la,  n.)  ;  (i  S.  Itig, <ra.fj.a.  [B],
<rafj.fj.a  [A],  o-ajuaa.  [L]) ;  but  i  Ch.  2  13  RV  (AV  SHIMMA),  20  7
SHIMEA  (KypB;);  2  S.  183  cro^aa[BAL];  28.2121,  Kr.  SHIMEAH
(n^-tr); it. Ktb. and RV SHIMEI, 'yctr,  (re/u.e<?<.  [BA]  <ra/j.a.a
[L]). His  sons  were  JONADAB  and  JONATHAN  [q.v.]. See  no.  5,
below.

3.  b.  AC;KE  [<?.?'.],  one  of  David's  'first  three'  (28.  23nyT;
(Ta^tua.  [B], Ga.pij.eas  [AJ,  cranaias  [L]),  a  HAKAKITE  [q.~'.]  or
perhaps  an  AKCHITE  [?.?'.],  for  (E>KA  calls  him  6  apou^ouos,  (D1-
o  apa\i. The  exploit  attributed  to  him  in  2  S.  is,  with  slight
variations,  assigned  in  i  Ch.  11  \^,f.  to  Eleazar,  another  of  David's
'  first  three." In  L  he  appears  as  '  son  of  Ela,'  which  may  imply
identifying  him  with  Shimei,  son  of  Ela(i  K.  4  18  RV  ;  see  ELAH,
6). He  had  a  son  named  Jonathan. See  JONATHAN  (ben  Shage)
and  SHAMGAR,  §  i.

4.  A  Hararite  (a-a^vav  [B*b],  cra/xi'as  [B^  vid.  A] ;  <ra^aa  [L]  ;
see  also  JONATHAN  b.  Shage),  who  appears  in  2  S.  23  33  as  one
of  David's  thirty,  and  as  a  distinct  person  both  from  Shammah
b.  Agee  the  Hararite  one  of  the  '  first  three,'  and  from  Shammah
the  Harodite  also  one  of  David's  thirty,  is  really  to  be  identified
with Shammah  b.  Agee,  and  comes  into  the  list  in  2  S.  23  33
merely  as  father  of  JONATHAN  ('  ben  Shage  ')  [y.v.].

5.  The  HARODITE  \q.v.],  another  of  David's  thirty  (2  S.  2825  ;
0-aiju.a  [B],  <ra.fj.ij.ai  [A],  tra/aatas  [L]). In i  Ch.  11  27  the  name
is  SHAMMOTH  (n'lBC" ;  o-ajixawSIBN],  aa.jj.iae  [A],  <raju.|u.a)0  [ L]),  the
Harorite  (H'nniJ,  6  aSt  [BK],  Oa&i  [A],  apiapi  [L])  ;  and  in  i  Ch.
27  8  SHAMHUTH  (ninpC* ;  craAawf?  [B],  <ra/j.aia8  [AL])  the  '  Izrah-
ite,' which, according to Marquart {Fund. 19), stands  for
'rn?V  "liinn  nines?,  '  Shamhuth,  the  Harodite,  belonging  to  the
Zerahites  ' ;  see  ZERAH  (i).

SHAMMAI  Opt?,  §  52  ;  cp  SHEMAIAH).

1.  A Jerahmeelite  ; iCh.  22832 (<rajucu [B]; a^fcra^as  for
'  brother  of  Shammai,'  v.  32  [B], ax'ircwia  [A]  ;  a-afj.fj.ai  [A]
cre/ueei  [L]). See  JERAHMEEL,  §  2.

2.  'Son'  of  REKEM  (q.v.)  b.  Hebron,  and  'father'  of  Maon,
'  father '  of  Beth-zur  ; I  Ch.  2  44  f.  (<ra/uat  [B  only  once  L],  <ra^ifiat
[A  once]).

3.  Son  of  MEKED  [q.v.]  of  Judah,  by  his  '  Egyptian '  (more
probably  'Misrite')  wife;  iCh.  4i7_/  (a-efj-fv  [B],  <refj.iJ.ai  [A],
<rafj.L  [L]).

SHAMMOTH  (TVlE^),  i  Ch.  1127  =  28.  2825,  SHAM
MAH  (5).

1  The  fortress  Sanur,  with  which  some  have  identified
BETHULIA  [f.v.],  has  been  thought  of  by  Schwarz  for  Shamir,
but  can  hardly  have  come  within  Issachar.  Cp  Moore,  cut  lac.

4426


SHAMMUA


SHAMMUA  (IMtX",  perhaps  'heard,'  §  56,  but  cp
SHEMAIAH,  which  might  be  an  expanded  clan  name).

r.  A  chief  of  RKUBEN,  §  13,  end:  Nu.  184  (o-a/xouijA  [B],
<70/iaAi7)A  [A],  <jafj.fj.ov  [  F],  eraAajti))A  [L]).

2.  Son  of  David  (iCh.  144); see  SHIMEA  (2). In  28.614
SHAMMUAH  (AV).

3.  A  Levite  ;  Neh.  11  17  (<ranov[f]i  [BN*A],  <raM/xove  [Nc-a?]),
in  i  Ch.  9  16  called  SHKMAIAH.

4.  A  priest,  contemporary  with  Joiakim,  Jeshua's  successor  ;
Neh.  12  18  (om.  BN*A,  o-i-a^ove  [Nc-a  mK.  inf.],  (ra/uovf  [I.]).

SHAMSHERAI  (ntJDB>,  ICMACAPIA  [»].  CAMC.
[A],  CAMYAIA  [L]),  b.  JEROHAM  in  a  genealogy  of
BENJAMIN  (<j.v.  ,  §  9,  ii.  /3)  (i  Ch.  826!).  Should  the
name  be  SHIMSHAI  (q.v.  )?  Shehariah  (cp  Shihor,
Ashhur)  follows.  T.  K.  c.

SHAPHAM  (Dp?:5;  CAB<5,T  [B],  CA<!>AM  [A],  -N
[L]).  a  Gadite,  i  Ch.  5i2f.  Perhaps  originally  a  name
of  the  Negeb  (where  Gad  once  dwelt)  ;  see  SHAPHAT,
Si  PH  MOTH  (Che.  ).

SHAPHAN  (jSt?,  either  an  animal  name,  or  the  name
of  a  district,  borne  originally  by  a  clan  and  subsequently
by  individuals  [see  below]  ;  cAcpAN  [BAL],  but  in  2  K.
22  CACpCpAN  [BA]),  b.  Azaliah  b.  Meshullam,  a  scribe,
temp,  josiah,  who  was  sent  to  take  an  account  of  the
expenses  for  the  repair  of  the  temple  (  2  K.  22  3  ff.  ',  v.  3
C6(p4>AN  [A],  v.  14  CACpcpAG  [B]  =  2  Ch.  348.^  ;
v.  15^  ACA<J>  [A]).  It  was  on  this  occasion  (the
eighteenth  year  of  Josiah's  reign)  that  Hilkiah  the
priest  gave  him  the  newly-discovered  '  book  of  the  law  '
which  he  read  before  the  king  ;  see  JOSIAH,  and  cp
DEUTERONOMY,  §  2  end.  Shaphan  was  probably
aged,  since  he  was  soon  after  displaced  in  favour  of
Elishama  (Jer.  8612).  There  is  no  valid  reason  why  he
should  be  kept  distinct  from  Shaphan  the  father  of
Ahikam  (2  K.  22  12,  cp  Jer.  26  [<§  33]  24),  who,  in  turn,
was  the  father  of  the  well-known  GEDALIAH  [y.  v.  ]  (2  K.
25z2  |er.  39  [46]  14  40  [47]  5  [ib.  911  BNAQ  om.],
41  [48]  2  [<ra.(t>av  (Q"«-,  B«A  om.  )],  43  [50]  6  (BNAQ
om.  )]),  also  of  a  prominent  personage  called  ELASAH,
mentioned  together  with  Gemariah  b.  Hilkiah  (Jer.  29s),
and  possibly  of  the  JAAZANIAH  [y.v.]  mentioned  in
Ezek.  8  ii  (but  see  Kraetzschmar,  ad  loc.).

Ezek.  8  n^  is  such  a  remarkable  passage  for  the  history  of
Jewish  religion,  and  the  name  '  Shaphan  '  (in  '  Jaazaniah  son  of
Shaphan  ')  has  been  brought  into  such  close  relation  to  the  extra
ordinary  religious  rite  described,  that  we  shall  give  a  brief  con
sideration  to  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  onomatology.  (i)  The
precedence  among  theories  is  due  to  the  totemistic.  \V.  R.  Smith
(/.  Pkil.^cjjf,,  cp  AV«.  201)  sees  in  the  passage  'an  account
of  Gentile  or  family  idolatry  in  which  the  head  of  each  house
acted  as  priest.  And  the  family  images  which  are  the  object  of
the  cult  are  those  of  unclean  reptiles  and  quadrupeds  [?/.  10].
The  last  point  is  important.  The  word  i'py  is,  in  the  Levitical
law,  the  technical  term  for  a  creature  that  must  not  be  used  as
food.  That  such  prohibitions  are  associated  with  the  totem
system  of  animal-worship  is  well  known.  .  .  .  Thus  in  the  fact
that  the  animals  worshipped  were  unclean,  in  the  Levitical  sense,
we  gain  an  additional  argument  that  the  worship  was  of  the  totem
type.  And  finally,  to  clinch  the  whole  matter,  we  find  that
among  the  worshippers  Ezekiel  recognised  Jaazaniah  the  son  of
Shaphan  —  that  is,  of  the  rock  badger,  which  is  one  of  the  unclean
quadrupeds  (Dt.  14  7  Lev.  11  5),  and  must  therefore  have  been
figured  on  the  wall  as  his  particular  stock  -god  and  animal
ancestor.  It  so  happens  that  the  totem  character  of  the
skapkan,  or,  as  the  Arabs  Call  him,  the  ivabr,  is  certified  by  a
quite  independent  piece  of  testimony.  The  Arabs  of  the  Sinai
peninsula  to  this  day  refuse  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  ivabr,  whom
they  call  "man's  brother,"  and  suppose  to  be  a  human  being
transformed.  Were  a  man  to  break  this  rule  he  could  never  look
on  his  father  and  mother  again  (Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus,
198).'  To  this  G.  B.  Gray  (HPN  io^/.)  replies  that  even  if
with  VV.  R.  Smith  we  see  in  the  Shaphan  of  Ezek.  the  name  of
a  still  existing  totem  clan,  this  only  explains  the  clan-name
Shaphan,  and  leaves  personal  names  of  the  same  period  —  Huldah
(weasel),  Achbor  (mouse),  and  Shaphan  itself  in  2  K.  22  3  un
accounted  for  :  '  So  far  as  the  evidence  of  the  names  goes  the
occurrence  at  this  time  of  three  names  at  least  which  are  certainly
personal,  and  but  one  at  most  of  which  is  tribal,  does  not  favour
the  view  that  totem  clans  were  then  in  existence.  On  the  other
hnnd,  Ezek.  8  ii  testifies  to  the  worship  of  unclean  animals  at  about
this  period  ;  and  in  this  Robertson  Smith  saw,  not  without  good
reason,  the  survival  —  perhaps  rather  the  revival  —  of  superstitious

S'actices  originally  derived  from  totem  belief  and  organisation.'
. B.  Gray,  therefore,  with  Davidson  (Ezek.  56)  and  Cheyne
(Intr  Is.  368yC),  gives  only  a  partial  assent  to  W.  R.  Smith's


SHAPHAT

theory.  He  grants  that  in  the  late  regal  period  superstitious
practices  which  were  originally  derived  from  totemism  revived,
and  that  this  accounts  for  the  three  strange  personal  names  re
ferred  to;  this  is  all.  Jos.  Jacobs  (Studies  in  hibl.  Archtfol.
84^)  and  Zapletal  (Der  Totemismus  und  die  Relig.  Israels,
1901,  p.  73)  take  a  different  view  of  the  name  Shaphan,  which,
especially  in  Kzek.  8  n,  is  pronounced  to  be  a  contemptuous  in
vention  (as  if  '  Jaazaniah  ben  sliaphan  '  meant  '  Yahwe  hears  ben
rock-badger'),  indicating,  with  a  bitter  irony,  the  discrepancy
between  those  bad  practices  and  Israel's  true  religion.  The
director  of  the  ceremony  is  named  after  Yahwe,  and  yet  he  can
bring  himself  to  offer  worship  to  the  figure  of  an  animal  ;  the
prophet,  therefore,  calls  him  a  'ben  saphan,'  as  one  might  say
ben  KemOS  ' — i.e.,  a  worshipper  of  Chemosh.  All  these  scholars
presuppose  the  ordinary  text  and  the  usual  explanation  of  names
ending  in  n\  Of  the  inconsistency  of  supposing  that  a  man
whose  family  cultivated  totemistic  superstitions  with  such  ardour
as  to  call  some  of  its  members  by  the  name  of  the  totem,  and
others  by  names  which  not  only  contain  (as  is  held)  the  name  of
Yah  or  Yahwe,  but  even  express  a  true  moral  conception  of  the
nature  of  the  Deity,  they  appear  to  have  no  satisfactory  explana
tion.  (2)  A  second  theory  (the  present  writer's)  demands  a  more
searching  criticism  of  the  text  of  the  passages  containing  these
three  names  Shaphan;  Achbor,  Huldah,  in  connection  with  a
thorough  textual  revision  of  other  parts  of  the  OT.  The  result
is  (a)  that  not  only  the  history  but  also  the  geographical  and
personal  names  of  the  OT  are  found  to  be  monuments  of  long-
continued  N.  Arabian  influences.  From  the  time  (probably)
of  the  Amarna  Tablets  there  was  (we  may  suppose)  a  large
Jerahmeelite  element  in  the  population  of  Palestine,  especially
in  the  S.,  and  at  the  close  of  the  regal  period  (and  afterwards)
the  danger  to  Judah  from  the  side  of  N.  Arabia  was  so  great
that  numbers  of  Jews  fell  away  to  N.  Arabian  heathenism.
(i>)  What  Ezekiel  saw  on  the  wall  of  the  chamber  in  the  temple
precincts  was  '  the  form  of  every  idol  (lit.  abomination)  of  the
house  of  Ishmael'  C?KJ?D!T  JV3  jHptf"^D  n':3H  n3ni);l  the
material  on  which  the  current  theories  as  to  the  cult  of  the
worshippers  are  based  is  simply  due  to  a  late  editor,  who  had
perforce  to  make  some  sense  of  a  corruptly  transmitted  text,
'Ishmael,'  'Jerahmeel,'  and  'Mi.srim'  (cp  Ezek.  20  7  _/^,  1^'l?jl
D"li!D,  '  the  idols  of  Misrim,'  not  C^SD  'l,  '  the  idols  of  Egypt ').
The  worshippers  who  thus  profaned  the  temple  of  Yahwe  were
religious  men  ;  but  their  true  names  were  devoid  of  religious
significance.  'Jaazaniah  '  is  merely  an  expansion  of  Azani,  which
also  underlies  the  Rechabite  name  'Jaazaniah  '  (Jer.  35  3),  and
the  Jerahmeelite-Levite  name  'Azaniah'  (Neh.  lOg,  cp  Ezra
240).  The  final  n  is  simply  formative;  the  initial  «  may  be
editorial.  'Azan'  (px)  is  probably  a  place-name  (cp  px,  py,
also  Negeb  place-names).  '  Shaphan  '  seems  to  be  a  modification
of  '  Zaphan  '  (|S^),  which  can  be  shown  to  be  the  name  of  a  X.
Arabian  district,  and  appears  in  personal  Hebrew  names  such
as  [nl'jBs  (see  ZEI'HANIAH,  2-4);  cp  %:i2s,  Joel  2  20,  etc.
Similarly  '  Azaliah '  and  '  Meshullam,'  the  father  and  grand
father  of  Shaphan  in  2  K.  22  3,  probably  come  respectively  from
Asali  O^SK),  'a  man  of  Azal,' and  Ishmael  (Sxi'CB") ;  El'asah
may  also  come  from  '  Ishmael,'  and  '  Ahikam  '  from  '  Jerahmeel.'
Thus  the  Shaphan  connections  are  accounted  for.  For  com
pleteness'  sake,  it  may  be  added  that  from  this  point  of  view
'  Huldah  '  (m^n)  is  miswritten  for  7rn,2  and  that  ?m  (Rachel,
'sheep')  and  11335;  (Achbor,  'mouse')  are  early  popular  distor
tions  of  ^JtDnY-  But  the  reader  will  not  forget  the  warning
•na-vTO.  Se  &oKifj.df(Tf,  TO  Kakov  Ka.Te\eTe  (i  Thess.  5  21).  Cp
NAMES,  §  68,  and  last  section.

To  treat  this  subject  with  completeness  would  require
us  to  consider  the  right  interpretation  of  Is.  654  66317.
It  must  suffice,  however,  to  say  that  all  these  passages
are  beyond  question  deeply  corrupt,  but  that  the  re
dactor  has  proceeded  so  methodically  that  it  is  easy  for
any  one  who  knows  the  redactor's  methods  to  restore
the  true  text.  In  this  text  the  Jerahmeelites  are  clearly
mentioned  as  the  enemies  of  the  Jews,  and  no  reference
is  made  to  unclean  animals.  Cp  SWINE,  and  see
Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  c.

SHAPHAT  (ESS?  ;  a  corruption  of  some  tribal  or
place  name  ;  most  naturally  [cp  i]  of  nSV  =  Zephath —
i.e.,  n£"l¥,  ZAREPHATH  [^.^.]).  The  names  ELISHA-
PHAT,  JEHOSHAPHAT,  and  SHEPHATIAH  (rresr),  would
seem,  therefore,  to  be  modifications  of  a  traditional  older
name.

i.  A  Simeonite,  b.  Hori,  one  of  the  'spies'  (Nu.
13  st  [P]  :  ffa<f>ar  viot  <roi'p[e]i  [BA],  -av  ft.  ff.  [F],
cra<f>ad  vl.  ffovdpi  [L]).  'Hori'  may  mean  '  Horite,'

1  E'OT  probably  comes  from  ^xycB"  (written  too  soon),  nS,13!
and  perhaps  '^i^j  (if  this  is  not  a  gloss  on  j'~C')  from  ^NCnT  va
variant  to  SNyCB")-

2  Cp  nWli  Zech.  6  10,  c^n,  Z'-M  I both  =  ^>nem'  (Crit.  Bib.).

4428


SHAPHER

but  almost  more  probably  comes  from  Jerahme'eli  ; a
similar  origin  for  Shaphat  then  becomes  plausible.

2.  The  father  of  ELISHA  [y.v.]  (i  K.  19 1619!,  ffa<pa8,
ffa<f>a.T  [B  vs.  19  ;  AL]). His  residence,  Abel-meholah,
is  usually  thought  to  have  been  in  Issachar. But  if  the
arrangement in MT is correct, it was  when Elijah
'departed thence' (i.e., from Horeb)  that he  'found
Elisha  b.  Shaphat '  (i  K.  19 19). The  reader  will  prob
ably  be  aware (see KINGS [BOOK], §  8) that  critics
have  been  inclining  to  the  belief  that  MT's  arrangement
is  not  correct,  and  Kittel,  in  his  commentary  (HK 154),
gives  a  blank  space  between  v.  18  and  v.  19  to  indicate
that  a  section  of  the  narrative  has  been  omitted. The
matter,  however,  is  not  so  clear  as  to  require  no  recon
sideration. We know  that Elijah  had a close  con
nection  with  the  far  S.  of  Canaan  (see  PROPHET,  §  6).
It is  plausible, therefore, to  suppose  that Elisha  was
originally called, not '  b. Shaphat,' but either '  b.
SeTath  ' — i.e.,  a  Zephathite, or '  b.  Sefathi ' — i.e., the
son  of  a  Zephathite. In  the  former  case  Elisha,  in  the
latter  Elisha's  father  (a  more  probable  view),  was  re
presented as a man of Zephath or Zarephath who
had  established  himself  at  Abel-meholah  —  i.e.,  Abel-
jerahmeel  (cp  MEHOLATHITK). The  site  of  this  Jerah-
meelite  place  (cp  i  S.  8629)  we  do  not  know. The  site
of  Zephath  (or  probably  Zarephath)  has  probably  been
identified  :  see  ZAREPHATH.

3.  A late descendant of David (i  Ch.  3  22!  ; <ra<t>a0 [B],
<ra<$>a.T  [AL]). The  name  was  presumably  suggested  by  SHE-
PHATIAH,  i.

4.  A  Gadite, in Bashan  (i  Ch.5i2t;  (S, however  [laveif]  o
•ypajufxdrevs  [B],  [tai/ai]  6  yp.  [A]  ;  [iiuavi]  6  yp.  Kal  tra<f>av  [L]).
Here  6  ypa/j.n.aTevs  =  13b[n],  a  variant  to  BSE'. The  common
original  of  both  readings  is  'nan*, '  a  Zarephathite.' The  list

originally  referred  to  the  Negeb  and  w^  was  originally  JB>13
(Cushan).1

5.  The overseer of David's herds in '  the valleys  '  (i  Ch.
27  29!  ; <T(u<j>ai'  [15],  crta<j>a.T  [A],  tra^xiT  [L]). He  is  called  b.
Adlai ;  but  <Slu  is  possibly  a  corruption  of  cViy  (Adullam). A
Zephathite  or  Zarephathite  (if  Shaphat  =  Sephfithi)  might  easily
be  a  native  of  Adullam — i.e.,  Jerahmeel  (for  David's  connection
with  which  cp  again  i  S.  30  29).  i\  K.  C.

SHAPHER,  RVShepher,  Mount  pSB>™in,  'mount
of  glitter'?  see  SAPHIR),  a  stage  in  the  wandering  in
the  wilderness  (Nu.  3323/f  ;  cA(fo&p  [BL],  &pc<MbAp,
CApC&4>Ap  [A],  &pc&4>&9  [F]).  If  the  wanderings  were
in  N.  Arabia,  and  if  (as  has  been  rendered  probable)
P  is  apt  to  make  up  lists  by  combining  various  corrupt
variants  of  the  same  name,  the  neighbourhood  of
several  (probable)  corrupt  forms  of  Jerahmeel  suggests
that  nse>  (Shepher)  comes  from  riBis  ;  cp  aipn  "in  msD  .
('  to  Zarephath,  mount  Jerahmeel '  ?)  in  Gen.  lOsi.  Cp  ;
SEPHAR.  See  WILDERNESS  OF  WANDERINGS.

SHAPHIR  (Mic.  In),  RV,  AV  SAPHIR.

SHARAI  (ntT;  c^pioy  [B],  Apoy  [A],  c&poye
[N],  -&  [L]),  b.  Bani,  a  layman,  temp.  Ezra;  EzralC>4o
(||  i  Esd.  934  probably  ezcopA  [BA],  cApoy<\  [L],  see
EZORA,  MACHNADEBAI).  Cp  SHEARIAH.

SHARAIM  (D'rW),  Josh.  1536  AV,  RV  SHAARAIM.

SHARAR  (~n£>),  the  HARARITE,  the  father  of  AHIAM
[qq.v.]  (aS.2337t  [clARAI  [B],  [c]ApAA  [A],  notice
that  yiOC  precedes,  CAPAX^  ApeplMA  [L]  for  CApAX
O  Apepi)-  In  i  Ch.  11 35  his  name  appears  as  SACAR
([C]AXAP  [BNA],  ICCAXAP  [L] :  CP  ISSACHAR,  §  6,  end).
Some  of  these  readings  suggest  nib  (see  SERAH)  as  the
original ;  Marq.  (Fund.  21),  however,  thinks  of  33fe»  (see
SHOBAB).  T.  K.  c.

1  i  Ch.  5  11-17  is  a  record  of  the  settlement  of  Gadites  in  the
Negeb,  for  which  the  Chronicler  (v.  17)  claims  the  authority  of  a
list  made  in  the  days  of  Jotham  and  Jeroboam  II.  v.  n  places
their  home  '  in  the  land  of  Cushan  as  far  as  Halusah '  (?  see
ZIKLAG);  v.  16,  'in  Gilead  [the  southern  Gilead],  in  Cushan,
and  in  its  towns,  and  in  all  the  suburbs  (?)  of  Sharhon  (see
SHARON,  SHARUHEN),  to  the  point  where  they  end.'

4429


SHAEEZER


SHARE  (n^hnp,  n^nnO),  an  implement  mentioned
in  i  S.  13  200.  ;  in  vv.  zobsia  (where  it  is  rendered  'mattock').
That  it  was  a  dividing  instrument  of  some  kind  appears  from
the  etymology  ;  EV  seems  to  suggest  a  ploughshare,  but  this  is
represented  here  by  eth  (n«),  'coulter,'  elsewhere  rendered
'ploughshare.'  <8'i  Btpicnpov  .  .  .  Oepi&iv  (©A  wanting,  0epicr-
rrjpiov  .  .  .  0e/>t£eu>[L])  seems  to  suggest  some  reaping  implement.
See  AGRICULTURE,  §  3_/T

SHAREZER,  or,  more  correctly,  SAREZER  p¥N"lE>,
so  Ba.  Gi.  ,  cp  Del.  Complut.  Var.  16  ;  '.  .  .  protect
the  king'  ;  cp  NERGAL-SHAREZER).

1.  An  Assyrian,  perhaps  a  son  of  Sennacherib,  who,
with  Adrammelech  (perhaps  his  brother),  slew  that  king
(2  K.  19  37  Is.  3?38  ; aapaaap  [BAO],  ffa.pa.aa.  [LNAQ]).
It  is  urged  elsewhere  (SENNACHERIB,  §  5),  that  in  the
admittedly  composite  narrative  of  the  peril  from  '  Sen
nacherib  '  two  different  invasions  have  been  mixed  up,
and  that  parts  of  the  existing  narrative  relate  to  the  one
and parts  to  the  other. The  one  invasion  was, it  is
held,  the  well-known  Assyrian  invasion  of  Sennacherib,
the  other  an  invasion  of  a  N.  Arabian  people  sometimes
called  Asshur,  but  perhaps  more  correctly  Ashhur  (-nnu;N).
Whether  we  can  say  that  each  of  the  accounts  which
have  been  welded  together  relates  solely  and  entirely  to
one  of  the  two  invasions,  is  doubtful  ; but  it  is  at  any
rate  very  possible that the passage 2  K.  19  36  f.  =  Is.
37  37  /.  refers  to  the  death  of  the  king  of  the  N.  Arabian
Asshur,  who  was  said  (we  may  reasonably  hold)  to  have
perished  in  the  house  of  his  god  Nimrod,  by  the  sword
of  'Jerahmeel,  a  prince  of  Asshur  '  (read  -UB:N  ib  '"Ncnv
for  nsNnbi  ^BYIM)  ;  observe  that  in  2  K.  na,  '  his  sons  '
is  omitted. Upon  this  theory  the  form  Sarezer  is  due  to
the  editor, who  supposed  only  one  invasion, viz.,  the
Assyrian,  to  be  meant,  and  sought  to  adjust  the  geo
graphical  and  personal  names  accordingly. Still,  apart
from  this,  the  existing  name  Sar-ezer  inevitably  suggests
comparison  with  the  Ass.  sar-usur, '  protect  the  king.  '
Commonly,  but  not  always,  we  find  this  form  preceded
by  some  divine name  such as Bel, Nergal, etc. (see
Schr.  Die  Ass.  -Bab. Keilinischr.  , 156). It  has  been
noticed  already  (see  ADRAMMELECH)  that  Abydenus  in
Eus.  Armen.  Chron.  (Schoene,  1  35)  mentions  a  Xergilus
as  the  successor  of  Sennacherib. By  some  ingenious
combinations,  Hitzig  (Begriff  der  Kritik,  194^  [1831])
identified  Sarezer  with  this  Nergilus  (supposing  the  full
name to have  been  Nergal-sarezer  [-sar-usur]. This
view,  however,  though  supported  by  A.  v.  Gutschmid
and Schrader (KAT^ 330), is inadmissible, not
because  it  conflicts  with the  theory  mentioned  above,
but  because  (see  Wi.  ZA,  1887,  pp.  392^!)  the  words
of  Abydenus,  '  Deinceps  autem  post  eum  (Sinecheribum)
Nergilus  regnavit,'  are  misplaced,  and  refer  properly  to
Nergal-usizib,  who  was  a  Babylonian  king,  set  up  by
an  Elamite  invader  in  694-3  B-c-

We  might,  of  course,  suppose  that  the  Hebrew  writer  had  a
confused  recollection  of  the  murderer  and  successor  of  Evil-
merodach  who  was  called  Nergal-sarezer,  or,  with  W.  M.  Miiller
{ZA  TW\1  333),  that  the  name  Sarezer  is  a  mere  guess,  due  to
an  early  editor  who  was  struck  by  the  un-Assyrian  character  of
the  name_  Adrammelech  and  determined  as  well  as  he  could  to
Assyrianise  it.  Winckler,  however  (AOFZ^f),  thinks  that
Sarezer  may  be  a  distorted  form  of  the  historical  name  Saritir-
Assur.  This  name  was  borne  by  a  person  who  seems  to  have
claimed  royal  rank  ;  Winckler  supposes  him  to  have  been  the
brother  whom  ESAKHAUDON  [q.v.]  drove  from  Babylon  into  the
NW.  of  the  Assyrian  kingdom.  Cp  Exp.  7"942g  [1898].

2.  AV  SHEREZER. A  contemporary  of  Zechariah,
Zech.  72  (aa.pa.aap  [BNAQF]). The  name,  if  correctly
read,  seems  to  be  incomplete. Siegfr.  -Stade  would  read
Bel-sarezer, whilst Marti (in Kau. HS] prefers El-
sarezer  ;  that  is  to  say,  Siegfr.  -Stade  think  that  Sty  V^wa
is  an  arbitrary  expansion  of  Sb  ^2,  and  Marti  renders  the
text  '  the  house  (i.e.  ,  family)  of  El-sarezer  (Sb  W)  sent.'
If,  however,  we  are  right  in  explaining  REGEM-MELECH
(  =Raamiah)  as  a  corruption  of  Jerahmeel,  the  question
arises  whether  ^nn'3  may  not  be  a  corruption  of  ^in
(the  N.  Arabian  Tubal). In  this  case  we  can  hardly  read

4430


SHARON

'  *?a-  VB'jNi  at  the  end  of  the  clause  should  perhaps
be  jnc''i,  '  and  Jeshua '  (a  corruption  of  Shua  or  Sheba).
Render,  therefore,  '  Tubal,  and  .  .  .,  and  Jerahmeel,
and  Jeshua1  (Sheba)  sent  saying,'  etc.  But  what  is  the
name  underlying  Sarezer?  We  see  from  Zechariah's
answer  (Zech.  7s)  that  he  was  in  some  way  a  leader
and  representative  of  the  people.  Wellhausen  ( Kl.  fr. )
suspects  that  he  may  have  been  Zerubbabel.  This
cannot  be  correct ;  elsewhere  Zeehariah  calls  the  governor
by  his  usual  name.  It  has  therefore  been  suggested  (col.
574)  that  [Bel-]sarezer  may  be  the  same  as  Belsar  (an
impossible  name  till  we  add  -ezer=  Bab.  usur),  one  of
the  twelve  (?)  'heads'  of  the  Jews  of  Jud;t:a(see  GOVERN
MENT,  §  26),  according  to  a  well-attested  reading  (on
Ezra  2  2  Neh.  7  7  see  BII.SHAN).  Plausible  as  this  view
is  (cp  MELZAK),  the  conjecture  reached  elsewhere  that
the  principal  captivity  was  really  a  N.  Arabian  and  not
a  Babylonian  one,  makes  it  prudent  to  revise  it.  Just
as  SISERA  \q.v.  ]  comes  most  probably  from  Asshur,  so
Sarezer  may  be  a  corruption  of  Asshur  or  Asshuri.  A
later  editor,  imperfectly  informed,  may  well  have
Assyrianised  it,  as  W.  M.  Miiller  supposes  an  editor  to
have  Assyrianised  '  Adrammelech.'  On  the  objects  of
the  deputation  to  Zechariah,  see  Nowack,  and  cp  Jew.
Kel.  Life,  10,  17.  See  also  REGEM-MELECH.

T.  K.  C.

SHARON (|'lTJ;n with art.; Is.  339 o CARWN

[BXc'l'AQa],  avapiav  [N*J,  o  SaapojK  [Q*],  Saron  ;  Is.  35  2®  om.
Saroit ;  Is.  65  10  eV  TCO  Spi^ii  [BNAQ],  cainfestria;  i  Ch.  27  29
iv  Tii  Ao-eiSioi'  [B],  a-afxav  [A],  aa-apuiv  [L] ;  Cant.  2  i  TOV  TrtSiou
[BNAC],  cninfi;  Acts935,  TOV  trapiava.;  gentilic  'fi"wn,  o
o-apio^elin)?  [BA],  6  a<rap.  [L],  the  Sharonite).

A  plain  of  Palestine,  extending  from  the  Nahr  ez-
Zerka,  44  m.  southward  to  the  mouth  of  the  Nahr
Rubin,  by  which  and  by  the  Ramleh  Hills  (Abu
Shusheh,  756  ft.  in  height)  it  is  divided  from  the
Philistian  Plain.  It  was  famous  for  its  pastures  (iCh.
2?2g  Is.  65  10)  and  for  its  luxuriant  vegetation  (Is.  862,
Cant. 'Ji).  In  describing  the  desolation  of  Judah  a
prophet  of  woe  exclaims,  'Sharon  is  like  a  desert'  (Is.
33g).  The  name  Sharon  signifies  'level  country,'  but
this  only  implies  the  absence  of  conspicuous  heights  (cp
NAMES,  §  99  [A]).  Undulating  hills  occur  over  a  large
part  of  Sharon.  Some  are  well  wooded,  and  there  is  a
long  extent  of  park -like  scenery  in  the  neighbour
hood  of  Mukhalid  in  the  very  N.,  'where  groups  of
sindian,  the  ordinary  oak  of  Palestine  (Quercus  in-
fectoria ;  see  TEREBINTH)  are  dotted  over  the  rolling
plateau  of  red  semi-consolidated  sand  '  (Conder,  PRFQ,
1875,  p.  92).  These  groups  of  oaks  are  the  representa
tives  of  large  oak  groves.  There  is  Egyptological
evidence2  for  a  forest  in  Sharon,  and  only  an  extensive
woodland  would  justify  the  phrase  in  Is.  862,  'the
magnificence  (TH)  of  Carmel  and  Sharon.'  The  other
wise  strange  expression  of  (5  in  Is.  65 10  (6  dpvfj.6s  =
j'na'n).  which  agrees  with  the  phraseology  of  Greek
writers,  including  Josephus,3  is  thus  to  be  accounted
for.  Nor  must  we  overlook  the  statement  of  the
Itinerary  of  King  Richard  (4  14)  respecting  the  forest
of  Assur,  S.  of  the  Salt  River,  through  which  the
Crusaders  passed  in  1191  A.  u.  to  meet  Saladin  in
battle.4

The  '  Plain  of  Sharon '  is  divided  into  three  distinct
river  basins — those  of  the  Nahr  Zerka  (with  its  wild
moorland  and  marshland),  the  Nahr  el-Mufjir,  and  the
Nahr  Iskanderuneh  (the  Crusaders'  Salt  River).  The
southernmost  portion,  which  receives  the  Wadys  Budrus
and  Salman,  is  the  most  cultivated  and  attractive  ;  the

1  See  Ezra  2  2,  and  note  Zechariah's  answer  'to  the  priests.'

2  See  paper  by  Masp.  Etudes  .  .  .  dediies  a  M.  U  Dr.  C.
Leemans  (1885).

3  See  Strabo,  16,  Spvpbs  /ae'yas  TIS;  and  especially  Jos.  Ant.
xiv.  13  3,  Apufioi  Se  TO  \utpiov  KaAeirac ; BJ  i.  13  2, TOV  KaAov-
nevov  Apii/iby  ... TO  \upiov. Josephus_  (Ant.  xvi.  5  2)  also
speaks  of  a  fine  grove  (aXcro?)  near  Antipatris.

4  Cp  Archer,  The  Crusade  of  King  Richard,  146.

4431


SHASHAK

view  of  it  which  the  traveller  obtains  in  springtime  from
the  Tower  of  Ramleh  is  highly  enjoyable.  Spring,
indeed,  works  a  miracle  in  the  aspect  of  this  region.
The  richest  grass  and  the  brightest  Mowers  adorn  the
landscape.  Even  in  the  marshlands  the  tall  and  graceful
papyrus  (with  which  Friedr.  Delitzsch  too  boldly  identi
fies  the  Rose  of  Sharon)  is,  in  its  autumnal  flowering
time,  pleasant  to  behold.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
but  for  the  encroaching  sand  the  Plain  of  Sharon  would
give  a  rich  reward  to  the  agriculturist,  and  the  \\ords  of
Is.  65 10  would  be  verified,  '  Sharon  shall  be  a  fold  for
flocks. '

Eusebius  and  Jerome  describe  our  Sharon  as  extending  from
Ca:sarea  on  the  sea-coast  to  joppa;  they  give  it  the  name  of
<7'ipioi'a(.  They  also  mention  a  Sharon  between  Tabor  and
Tiberias,  which  they  imagine  to  be  referred  to  in  Is.  339  (OS
2906,  1546).  Later  writers  have  supposed  references  to  this
NE.  Sharon  in  Josh.  12  18  (see  LASHAKON)  and  Cant.  2  i  (see  2).

2.  A  district  between  Ml.  Tabor  and  Tiberias,  as  Delitzsch
and  Oettli  think  (Cant.  2  i,  'rose  of  Sharon'),  but  erroneously,
though  the  name  Sarona,  attached  to  a  village  in  the  region
called  Ard  el-Hamma  (see  Rob.  BR  3  237),  confirms  the  state
ment  of  Onom.  (see i)  that  a  second  Sharon  really  existed.
Delitzsch's  view  is  connected  with  the  theory  that  the  bride  in
Cant, was  a  Galilean  maiden  (see  CANTICLES,  §  6). Well
hausen  decides  against  it  because  the  '  rose '  (see  ROSE, i)  is
mentioned  in  Is.  35  if.  as  blooming  in  the  better-known  Sharon
(see  Che.  Proph.  Is.,ad  loc.). 'Rose  of  Sharon '  was  appar
ently  a  proverbial  phrase.

3.  A  region  (?)  on  the  E.  of  Jordan,  occupied  by  the  b'ne  GAD
(§  13,  begin.),  i  Ch.  5  i6t. <Z3AL  <raptav,  but  ©B  -yepian,  whence
Kittel  (SBOT  'Chron.')  deduces  fne'  =  p'-|£?,  Sirion. Stanley,
G.  A.  Smith,  and  Buhl,  however,  suppose  that  the  li»'D  or  table
land  of  Gilead  generally  (Josh.  13  9  17  21)  is  mtant. A  place
called  pE>  is  mentioned  in  Mesha's  inscription  (/.  13). But  that,
as  Noldeke  points  out,1  was  probably  farther  to  the  S. The
truth, however,  probably  is that i  Ch.  5 11-17 comes  from a
document  relating  to  the Negeb,  so  that  p-|i»  may  very  well
represent  prm?  (miswritten  SHARUHEN).  T.  K.  C.

SHARUHEN  (}rtW ;  01  &rpoi  AYTCON  [BAL]),  a
Simeonite  city  in  judah  (Josh.  196),  generally  thought
to  be  the  SHILHIM  (D'rpK' ;  C&AH  [B],  ceAeei/w
[AL]),  and  SHAARAIM  (D'HIK?;  Sam.  [i.  ITs*]  TCON
TTYAtoN  [BAL];  Ch.  cecopeiM  [BA],  c&ARIM  [I-])  of
the  corresponding  lists  in  Josh.  1632  (not  36)  and  i  Ch.
431.  It  is  plausible  to  suppose  that  Sharuhen,  not
Hebron,2  is  the  place  opposite  which,  on  a  hill-top,
Samson,  according  to  legend,  deposited  the  doors  and
posts  of  one  of  the  gates  of  Gaza  ( Judg.  163).  Certainly  a
spot  in  the  SW.  of  Palestine  is  more  likely  than  Hebron,
and  Sharuhen  has  this  recommendation  :  it  had  for  a
second  name  (if  i  Ch.  I.e.  is  correct)  Shaaraim — i.e. ,
'the  place  of  a  gate.'  The  legend  was  perhaps  to
account  for  the  name.  We  cannot  point  out  the  locality
intended  ;  but  it  is  tempting  to  identify  Sharuhen  (jirnWi
Sharhdn?)  with  Sarahan,  a  name  which,  in  the  Egyptian
inscriptions,  designates  a  fortress  of  some  importance  on
the  road  from  Egypt  to  Gaza.  For  a  time  Sarahan
was  occupied  by  the  Hyksos,  and  that  brave  warrior
Aahmes,  whose  tomb  has  furnished  an  account  of  the
war  of  liberation,  took  part  in  the  siege  of  it  (RP^BS,
Renouf ;  Brugsch,  GA  232,  cp  255).  The  place  is  also
mentioned  in  the  Annals  of  Thotmes  III. ,  at  the  opening
of  the  campaign,  which  was  distinguished  by  the  great
battle  of  Megiddo  (WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  158/1  in  KP
238  the  names  are  wrongly  read).  Cp  SHARON,  3.

See  also  WMM,  Ml-'G,  1898  ('  Studien  zur  vorderas.  Gesch.*),
p.  23.  T.  K.  C.

SHASHAI  (WV,  §  58  ;  cecei  [BSA],  ceNceip  [!<]).

b.  Bani,  a  layman,  temp.  Ezra  (Ezral04o).  In  iEsd.934,
SESIS  (<reo-[o-]€is  [BA],  o-e<re«i  [L]).  Parallels  suggest  tracing
this  name  to  '^3,  Cushite.

SHASHAK  (pW,  §  58  ;  CCOCHK  [A],  cic&x  [Ll  :
C60KHA  [B.  v.  14],  ccoiHK  [6,^.25]).  A  Benjamite
clan-name,  iCh.  81425  (see  BENJAMIN,  9,  ii.  b\  JQR

1  Die  Inschrift  ties  KSn.  Afesa,  1870,  p.  29.

2  The  letters  of  jnilC'  were  misarranged,  and  an  ill-written  y
confounded  with  or  altered  into  3. Cp  Ezek.  22  25 N%3j  f°r
KV>

4432


SHAUL

11  103  §  i).  Perhaps  a  distortion  of  cc;3,  Cusham,  which
suits  the  related  names.  Cp  Hushim  (Cusham),  son  of
Aher  (Jerahmeel)  in  i  Ch.  7  12.  T.  K.  c.

SHAUL  (>lXt?  ;  c&oyA),  the  same  name  as  SAUL
(*•«.).

1.  Name  of  a  clan  of  SIMEON  (§  9),  Shaulltes  (nnBDO  TWMJ
y^XB'n,  <raovA[e]i  [BAFL]),  Nu.  26  13,  where  the  equivalence  of
'son'  and  'clan'  is  evident. In  Gen.  46  10  Ex.  615  i  Ch.  4  24,
Shaul  is  Simeon's  son  ;  the  two  former  passages  add,  by  a  woman
of  Canaan  ((ra/uourjA  nibs  rrjs  XavaiaViSos  [AD],  <raovA  vi.  T.  \'
\D\j\,  Gen.  46  10;  6  eic  TTJS  4>ot»'i<r<r>)s  [BAF],  craovA  ot  eie  T.  <I>.
[L],  Ex.  615),  or  rather  perhaps  of  Kenaz  (IJJ3  for  fi'32,  as  in
Judg.  4  2, cp SHAMGAR, § 2, and often). The name is S.
Canaanitish  and N.  Arabian  (cp  SAUL, SHALISHA). SHIMEI
and Saul are both Benjamite names, and another 'son' of
Simeon  is  JAMIN  (one  of  the  best  established  modifications  of
'  Jerahmeel  '  [Che.]).

2.  A  Kohathite,  and  ancestor  of  Samuel,  iCh.  624(9]. ^n
i  Ch.  6  36  [20]  the  name  is  JOEL.

3.  (Gen.  86377:  iCh.  148/:). See  SAUL,  2.


SHAVEH,  VALE  OF  (mg>  pDl>  ;  THN
THN  C&yHN  [A]  .  .  .  c&YH  [D\J\],  the  place  where
the  king  of  Sodom  met  Abraham  after  the  latter's
victory  over  CHEDORLAOMEK  (q.v.  ),  Gen.  1417.  An
appended  notice  explains  it  as  'the  king's  vale'  (see
MELCHIZEDEK,  §  3).  Shaveh  can  hardly  mean  '  the
level'  or  'plain'  (on  v.  5,  where  (5AEL  again  gives
(rcunj,  see  SHAVEH-KIRIATHAIM).  Hommel  (AHT  151,
n.  i)  would  amend  nit?  into  mtr.  The  Vale  of  Shaveh
then  becomes  the  Vale  of  the  King  (Ass.  -Bab.  Sarri).1
More  probably  we  should  read  nsjp  nib,  '  the  highland
of  Maacath,'  and  the  following  gloss,  '  that  is,  Maacath-
jerahmeel.'  Cp  SODOM.  T.  K.  c.

SHAVEH-KIRIATHAIM  (D'JTni?  nit?';  eN  CA.YH
TH  noAei  [AEL]),  generally  explained  (e.g.  ,  EV"1^)
'plain  of  Kiriathaim'  (see  KIRJATHAIM),  Gen.  14s.
It  was  the  residence  of  the  EMIM  (q.v.  ).  nw,  however,
occurs  again  only  in  Gen.  14  17,  where  it  is  corrupt  (see
SHAVEH,  VALLEY  OF).  C.  J.  Ball  (Gen.  118)  suggests
here  rnb».  Read  probably  vyarn  nib',  '  the  highland
of  the  Rehobothite.  '  See  SODOM.  T.  K.  c.

SHAVSHA  (Xiritr, § 58; iCh.  18i6; IHCOYC

[B],  crous  [si,  trovo-a  [AL])  also  called,  less  correctly,  SHISHA
(i  K.  43,  NC"£;;  <ra/3a  [B],  <r<?icra  [A],  <B^-,  however,  tracfiar),
and  SHEVA  (28.2025,  W&  Kt.  K1B>,  Kr.;  trjo-ouj  [B],  KTOV?
[A],  croucra  [L]),  and  SERAIAH  (^~$',  "I  being  inserted  in  the
form  n't?,  2  S.  8  17,  atra  [B]).

Shavsha  was  David's  scribe  or  secretary.  His  name  is
either  =Bab.  savsu  =  samsu,  '  sun,'  ~  so  that  Babylonian
scribes  were  still  in  request  (Marq.  Fund.  22)  or  (cp
SHESHAI)  is  a  corruption  of  en  3  (final  N  as  in  jo's,
ZIBA).  Driver,  Wellhausen,  and  others  agree  in  reject
ing  Seraiah.  The  question  is  of  some  historical  import
ance  ;  which  country  influenced  David  most  —  Babylonia
or  N.  Arabia?  T.  K.  c.

SHAWL,  RV  for  nnBttD,  AV  'wimple,'  Is.  822.
See  MANTLE,  §  2  [3],  VEIL.

SHEAL(^;  CAAoyiA  [BN],  c&AA[AL]),  b.  Bani,
a  layman,  temp.  Ezra;  Ezra  1029  =  1  Esd.  9  30  (acraijAos  [BA],
euraaj)A  [L]),  EV  JASAEL,  RV  JASAEI.US.

SHEALTIEL (^N^X^ [but in Hag.  1  12  14 2  2


t?'],  as  if  '  I  have  asked  God/  §§  34,  56,  79,  but
this  is  doubtful,  since  7X  in  names  formed  on  this
model  may  be  formative  ;  we  expect,  according  to
this  theory,  a  gentilic,  and  'Eshtauli'  [see  ESHTAOL]
suggests  itself  as  the  genuine  name  instead  of  Shealtiel  ;

1  Wellhausen (TBS 202)  suggests mjJ'N, Asherah, as the
origin  ;  he  connects  this  view  with  a  very  difficult  explanation
of  2  S.  18  1  8,  where  he  makes  Absalom  take  '  the  pillar  (of  the
Asherah)  in  the  King's  Vale,'  and  set  it  up  in  his  own  behalf.

2  Cp  in  an  old  Aram,  bilingual  K'W3  (CIS  2  65)  =  Ass.  ki-
santas.

4433


SHEBA

CAAA0IHA).  b.  Jeconiah  'the  captive'  (see  ASSIR),
or  perhaps  Asshur  (-WR  ;  see  Crit.  Bib.  ),  according  to
i  Ch.  3  IT  ff.  the  uncle,  but  elsewhere  the  father,  of  ZKRUB-
BABEL  [y.v.]  (Ezra  3  2  [<8H  om.]  8  62  Hag.  li,  etc.).

In  accordance  with  (B  the  name  is  spelt  SALATHIEL  by  EV
in  i  Esd.  654856  62,  and  by  AV  in  i  Ch.  3  17  Mt.  Ii2  and
Lk.  827.  In  Lk.  he  is  called  'the  son  of  Neri,'  on  which
see  GENEALOGIES  ii.,  §  3.  In  2  Esd.  5  15  SALATHIEL,  RV
PHALTIEL,  the  'captain  of  the  people,'  is  an  uncertain  reading  ;
Pesh.  reads  '  Psaltiel.'  See,  further,  Ball,  I'ar.  Apoc.  {ad  Inc.).


[BA],

crapta,  <raapia  [L]),  b.  Azel  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.  g  9,
ii.  ft)  ;  i  Ch.  8  38  =  9  44. On  the  name  cp  SHAARAIM.

SHEARING  HOUSE  ("FjMrrV3),  2  K.  10  12  14  ;  Hcb.
BETH-EKED  (</.?'.  ).


SHEAR-JASHUB  (3-1E»  1N,  '  a  remnant  shall
return,'  §  23).  One  of  Isaiah's  sons  (Is.  7s).  See
ISAIAH,  PROPHET,  §  4.

SHEBA  (inp;  ;  CAMAA  [B],  c*Bee  [A],  CABe  [L]),
a  Simconitish  town,  Josh.  192  (SIMEON,  §  10).

It  is  omitted  in  a  very  few  MSS,  and  in  the  parallel  passage,

1  Ch.  428. Its inclusion makes the reckoning in Josh.  1'.'  6
inaccurate,  unless  for  jnilB'  we  there  read |.Tli?  with  (B  (see
SHAKUHEN). For  a  possible way  out of  the difficulty  see
JESHUA.

SHEBA  (tfTJ',  perhaps  from  Elisheba  [§  50]  ;  other
wise  explained  as  a  clan-name  =  Shema  [SOLOMON,
§2];  or  a  name  of  the  moon-god  [Wi.  G/  2  221]  ;  cp
mC'Tin,  BATH-SHEBA,  and  perhaps  Nab.  jmi",  CJS

2  115  ;  but  cp  SOLOMON,  §  2  ;  c&Bee)-

i.  Called  b.  Bikri  (Bichri)  —  i.e.,  a  member  (like  Saul
probably)  of  the  Benjamite  clan  BECHER  (cp  BENJAMIN,

§  9,  "•  £).

For  the  story  of  his  revolt  see  2  S.  20  (a/See  [A,  ?'~:  i,  7];
L  crajSee  uios  /3eSSa£i  avrip  apa^et  [Archite?1]).  «

David  was  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem  after  Absalom's
death,  and  a  fierce  quarrel  had  arisen  between  the  men
of  Judah  and  the  men  of  Israel.  Shcba  who  '  happened  '
to  be  near,  saw  his  opportunity,  and  called  upon  the
latter  to  secede  from  David  and  claim  their  inde
pendence.  The  spark  burst  into  a  flame.  All  Israel
took  the  side  of  Sheba  ;  'but  the  men  of  Judah  from
Jordan  2  as  far  as  Jerusalem  clave  to  their  king.  '  There
is  reason,  however,  to  think  that  the  description  is
influenced  by  that  of  the  great  secession  under  Jeroboam
(i  K.  12  16).  Sheba's  revolt  was,  no  doubt,  the  result
of  some  of  the  disintegrating  influences  which  afterwards
had  such  disastrous  effect,  but  David  who  had  just  made
his  peace  with  Israel  and  Judah  would  surely  have  been
able  to  prevent  a  revolt  on  such  a  large  scale  as  2  S.
202  indicates  (see  1941-43  [42-44]).  G  Unless  we  adopt  a
conjecture  made  elsewhere  (SAUL,  §  i),  the  statement
of  vv.  14-22  (where  BERITES  [i7.z'.]  should  certainly  be
emended  into  '  Bikrites  ')  shows  that  the  original  opening
of  the  narrative  has  been  lost.  What  we  know  for
certain  is  that  Sheba,  a  kinsman  of  Saul,  supported  by
his  clan,  made  a  bold  attempt  to  revive  the  Israelitish
kingdom.  He  sought  in  vain  to  stir  up  the  northern
tribes,  and  was  besieged  in  the  ancient  city  of  ABEL-
BETH-MAACAH  (q.v.  )  by  Joab.  The  walls  were  on  the
point  of  giving  way  to  the  attacks  of  the  besiegers  when
a  'wise  woman'  (cp  Eccles.  9i4/.  )  made  an  arrange
ment  with  Joab,  and  saved  the  city.  Sheba's  head  was


jji  'ike  the  proper  names  niN  a"d  inK
©A  i"  i  S.  9  i),  comes  from  ^NDnT-—


1  [Most  probably
in  i  Ch.,  and  vrO  (
T.  K.  c.]

2  From  the  context,  the  S.  border  of  Judah  must  be  intended.
It  is  probable  that  \ve  should  take  pT  here  to  be  the  nahal
Misrim  (see  EGYPT,  RIVER  OF,  and  cp  Wi.  GI  1  1  74  ;  A  OF  1  34,
and  Marq.  Fund.  74).

3  The  Bikrites  joined  Sheba,  just  as  in  a  similar  revolt  the
Benjamites  joined  Abner  (cp  2  25). The  passage  (20  14),  how
ever,  is  in  some  disorder. Perhaps  we  should  read  (transposing
a  and  b),  '  and  all  the  Bikrites  assembled  and  came  after  him,  and
they  passed  through  '  0"I?V.']),  etc.

4434


SHEBA

cut  off  and  thrown  out  to  Joab.1 Thus  the  revolt  was
crushed.

Cheyne,  however,  maintains  (SAUL,  §  i)  that  '  Abel-beth-
maacah  '  is  an  editorial  attempt  to  make  sense  of  a  corrupt
passage,  and  that  the  true  text  of  2  S.  20  i+/.  only  states  that
'Sheba  passed  on  to  Beth-jerahme'el,'  and  was  there  besieged
by  Joab.2  Beth-jerahme'el  (  =  Beth-gilgal)  is,  on  his  theory,
the  centre  of  Saul's  "clan,  where  Sheba,  like  Mephibosheth,
naturally  sought  refuge  in  distress.

The  story  of  the  revolt  is  contained  in  2  S.  20  1/
6/.  14-22.  Verse  3  seems  to  be  a  parenthesis,  introduced
to  connect  the  story  more  closely  with  the  episode  of
Absalom.  It  is  just  possible,  however,  that  this  connec
tion  is  a  mistake,  and  that  Sheba'  s  revolt  and  that  of
Absalom  happened  in  different  parts  of  the  reign  of  David
(similarly  Wi.  GI  1  173  2  192).  Verses  4/.  8-13  contain
a  confused  account  of  AMASA  \_q.v.,  i],  interspersed
with  notices  of  the  pursuit  of  Sheba  (cp  \ob,  136  with  jb}.
The  precise  relation  between  the  stories  of  Amasa  and
Sheba  is  not  clearly  indicated,3  and  it  is  not  at  all  certain
that  the  account  of  Amasa'  s  death  formed  part  of  the
earliest  narrative.

2.  A  Gadite,  i  Ch.  5  13  (<7ej3«  [B],  <ro/3a0e  [A]).

S.  A.  C.


SHEBA  (KaK>,  usually  C&B&  [BXA,  etc.,  L],  once
or  twice  a-aftav  [BAQEL],  cra/Sau  [E],  <7a|3eu  [A],  <ra/3ai  [B];  in
Job  6  19  (raftuiv  [BK*C],  acrefttav  [Avid.],  e<re/3u>j>  [Nc.a]  ;  ;n  ps.  72  15
rrj«  apapt'as  [BXRT];  on  Job  1  15,  see  below;  Syr.  sheba;
Ar.  sabii,  in  Sabajan  inscriptions  ^33,  Assyr.  sab'u;  name  of
people  D'tO;?,  Joel  38  [4s]  —  unless  with  Merx  we  follow  ©,
ai\fia\tairiav  [BxA]  in  reading  '3«?,  'captivity');*

One  of  the  sons  of  Joktan,  Gen.  1028  [J2],  i  Ch.  122.
He  is  the  eponym  of  the  well-known  Sabreans  (in  SW.
Arabia)  who  are  mentioned  also,  with  different  genea
logical  connections,  in  Gen.  10  7  [P]  and  25s  [JE?]  =
i  Ch.  1  9  32.  Whether  Jokshan  be  the  same  as  Joktan
or  not  (see  JOKSHAN),  we  need  not  suppose  two  Shebas,
a  N.  and  S.  Arabian,  connected  or  distinct,  still  less
three  (so  Knobel),  as  the  three  ethnographical  classifica
tions  (Gen.  10?  1028  25s)  are  probably  drawn  from
three,  certainly  from  two  sources.  It  is  doubtless  these
Sabreans  from  whom  Tiglath-pileser  III.  reports  that  he
received  tribute,  and  to  some  of  whose  settlements
Sargon  refers  as  being  tributary  (KA  TW  i45/.  ).  Their
queen  came  to  visit  Solomon,  with  camels,  gold,  and
precious  stones  (i  K.  10  1  4  1013  =  2  Ch.  9i  39  12)  ;  cp
'  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba,'  Ps.  72  10  (<&  dpd^wv,  but  cp
Che.t2)  ad  loc.);  in  Is.  606  'they  from  Sheba'  bring
gold  and  incense,  cp  Jer.  6  20  ;  in  Job  6  19  they  appear
in  caravans,  and  in  Ezek.  2722  (so  v.  23,  but  Co.  with
©  omits)  they  are  traders  in  spices,  jewels,  and  gold,  cp
Ezek.  38  13  Ps.  72  10  Is.  606  (burdened  with  a  gloss,  see
SBOT).  In  Joel  3  8  [48]  they  (plur.  D'K3»)  are  'a
people  far  off,  '  to  which  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Tyre
and  Sidon  are  to  be  sold  by  Judah,  in  judgment.  Job
1  15  represents  them  as  plunderers  ;  5  but  elsewhere  they
are  unknown  in  this  character.  It  is  to  this  people  that
the  Sabsean  inscriptions  are  due  ;  the  name  is  nao  in
Sabaean  (cp  CUSH,  2).

On  the  recent  discoveries  of  Glaser,  and  his  historical  infer
ences,  see  his  own  account,  Skiite,  2357^;  Sayce,  Crit.  I\Ion.
y)f.\  Sprenger,  ZDMG,  1890,  501  ff.  On  the  story  of  the

1  This  story  has  scarcely  a  mythological  basis  in  spite of
Winckler (672240) and Stucken (Astralmythen, 67); cp
Winckler's  theory  (above)  of  the  meaning  of  '  Sheba.'

2  Winckler  also  (G/2  240)  thinks  it  strange  that  Sheba  should
flee  as  far  as  Abel-beth-maacah.

3  ®L  in  v.  7  (icai  TraprjyyeiAd/  oirunu  avrov  A.  TU>  Aaw)  might
suggest  that  Amasa, when  ordered  to  collect  the  warriors  of
Judah,  took  a  number  of  men,  and  threw  in  his  lot  with  Sheba.
Otherwise  we  might  assume  that  his  death  was  simply  the  result
of  a  private  feud  between  him  and  Joab. The  wording  of  w.  10  12
reminds  us  of  that  of  2  8.223  (murder  of  Asahel). For  a  criticism
of  the  whole  narrative  see  AJSL  16  166-169  (1900).

*  On  the  name  cp  WMM,  '  Die  Sabaer  in  hieroglyph.  Texten,'
Ml'Gfr,  1898,  pp.  istf

5  ©  and Pesh., however,  find  no  proper  name  here  (ai^/iia-

A<DT«uofT€s  [BA],  ai\iJ.a\<oTtvira.i'Tts  [K],  ^  <*>  ^-  ^}  ;  cp  above
on  Joel  3s.

4435


SHEBNA

Queen  of  Sheba  cp  Stade, GlT\yx), n.  2; Ki. Hist.  2  189  ;
Wi.  6Y2266_/T;  Keane,  TheGoldofOphir,  112  f.  F.  B.

SHEBAH, RV  SHIBAH  (HMK*. 'seven'; perhaps
taken as equivalent to rwatJ', 'oath'), the  original


name  of  Beer-sheba  according  to  J  (Gen.  26  33  ; opKOC
[ADEL]). See  BEEKSHEBA.

SHEBAM  (D3{p),  Nu.  32  3,  RV  •  Sebam  '  ;  in  v.  38
SlBMAH.

SHEBANIAH  (  n*J2^  and  imaC?  either  for  •irVJaE',
'  Yahwe  has  brought  me  back  '  1  :  see  NAMKS,  §  39  ;  or
an  early  error,  found  also  on  seals  [cp  PEFQ,  1902,
pp.  2&3/.]  for  SHECANIAH).

1.  A  Levite(Neh.  §$/.',  BA°m-,  <rexei/ta«  [L]  —  i.e.,  Shecaniah  ;
in  z'.  5  the  <rafla.via.s  of  L  (but  cre\ei'ias  occurs  as  well)  seems  to
represent  rather  HASHABMAH  [^.».]).

2.  Priestly  signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  EZRA  i.,  §  7);  Neh.
104[5][<7]e/3<u<ei[B],[o-]a/3<u'ei[!r  Kc.a],  <re/3cu<i  [A],  /3<u«uas  [L]),
cp  12  14,  o-eveAtov  [Nc'am£-  inf-  om.  BK*A],  <re\evia  [L],  and  see
SHECAXIAH  (i)

3.  4.  Two names  occurring among the signatory Levites
(Neh.  10  10 era/Sapid [B], cre/Scwa [NA], <re\ei'iay [L], Z'.  12
o-e|3ovta[BNA] (ra/Sat-ias  [L]).

5.  A  priest  of  the  time  of  David  (i  Ch.  1624,  irVJDC',  o-ojui'ia
[B],  o-o/Si/eia  [N],  o-oujSei/io  [A],  o-a/Sana  [L]).

SHEBARIM  (Dn2K;n;  Sabarim).  The  point  to
which  (ty)  the  Israelites  were  chased  from  the  gate  of
Ai  (Josh.  7s).  Apparently  it  was  not  far  from  Ai,  for
it  is  added  that  they  were  '  smitten  on  the  slope
(descent).'  RVm£-  gives  'the  quarries';  'the  frag
ments  (of  rock)  '  might  be  better  (Di.  ).  But  surely  there
must  be  an  error  in  the  text.  <§'s  <rvveTpi\j/av  avrofa
(similarly  Pesh.  Tg.  )  presupposes  nac*  ;  cp  Bennett  in
SBOT.  Griitz  suggests  D'iNB'an-nK  IITTI  <JBSD  IBITI,
'  and  they  chased  those  who  were  left  from  before  the
gate.  '  But  cp  SHEBER.  T.  K.  c.

SHEBAT  (1331*'),  Zech.  1  7,  AV  SEBAT  ;  see  MONTH.


SHEBER  pap  ;  cABep  [B],  ce.  [A],  CAB<\p  [L]),

one  of  the  sons  of  CALEB  (q.v.)  b.  Hezron  by  his  concubine
Maacah  (i  Ch.  2  48).  Cp  SHEREHIAH,  which  may  be  an  ex
pansion  of  Shirbi  =  Shibri,  and  may  be  a  Negeb  name  (see  AJSL


SHEBNA  (N;2K,  §  51  [but  rm^',  2  K.  181826,
where  RV  has  SHEBNAH],  possibly  Aramaic  [Di.,  Ki.  ,
etc.],  or  rather  for  mat?  =  rt'jjtj1  [Del.]  ;  COMNAC.  but
COBNAC  [B]  in  Is.  863]),  a  chief  secretary  or  chancellor
under  Hezekiah  (2  K.  18i8  192  Is.  863  22  372).  Tradi
tion  identified  him  with  the  soken,  or  'high  officer1'2
(AV  'treasurer,'  RV  'steward'-  —  -both  renderings  are
guesses),  whose  arrogance  is  so  severely  denounced  by
Isaiah  in  the  only  passage  of  personal  invective  which
has  come  down  to  us  (Is.  2215-19  cp  Am.  71617).  The
fact  that  the  last  five  words  of  Is.  22  15  have  demonstrably
been  inserted  by  a  later  hand  renders  this  identification
doubtful.  So  at  least  Duhm  puts  the  matter.  But  the
strong  probability  is  that  nyyv  (so  read)  or  mys  and  -po
both  come  from  ••xys,  'Cushanite.  '  Shebna  was  certainly
a  foreigner,  and  most  likely  a  N.  Arabian.  Hezekiah
seems  to  have  sent  an  embassy  to  Pir'u,  king  of  the  N.
Arabian  Musri,  to  whom  Hanunu,  king  of  Gaza,  had
fled  for  refuge.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  n»n  •;c'2n,
'this  Cushanite,'  as  Isaiah  disparagingly  calls  him,
came  to  Jerusalem  in  connection  with  these  negotiations.
Isaiah  predicts  his  punishment.  He  was  bound  to  fall
at  last  ;  but,  according  to  the  traditional  theory,  he  only
fell  to  a  lower  post  in  the  king's  service  —  that  of  chief
secretary.  This  is  certainly  not  inconceivable.  Though
the  man  had  no  family  connections  at  Jerusalem,  he  may
have  been  too  useful  to  his  party  to  be  neglected,  and
the  Arabian  party  may  have  been  still  powerful  enough
to  dictate  the  choice  of  a  chancellor.  (See,  however,


1  In  this  case  one  would  expect  the  Hiphil  '33'
-  A  Phoenician  inscription  (CIS\  5,  p.  25)  speaks  of  a  sdkett  of
the  new  city  —  i.e.,  Tyre.

4436


SHEBUEL

AJSL  5  443.  )  The  next  point  to  mention  is  one  on
which,  until  quite  lately,  critics  have  been  agreed.  If
Is.  2220-25  is  the  work  of  Isaiah,  it  follows  that  the
prophet  hoped  great  things  from  a  change  in  the  grand
viziership.  The  day  when  a  king  would  reign  righteously
and  princes  would  rule  justly  (Is.  32  i)1  seemed,  if  we
accept  this  view,  about  to  dawn.  '  Hence  the  strong
language,  almost  Messianic  in  its  tone,  with  which  Isaiah
hails  in  spirit  the  elevation  of  his  disciple  Eliakim.  '  2

Further  criticism  has  convinced  the  present  writer  that
Is.  2220-25  is  a  late  addition,  or  rather,  vv.  20-23  form  an
additional  passage,  and  w.  24  25  another.  The  second
of  these  insertions  is  in  the  highest  decree  prosaic,  and
even  the  first  is  both  in  tone  and  in  style  un-Isaianic.
The  writer  of  vv.  20-23  probably  knew  no  more  than  we
know  ;  he  built  upon  the  very  scanty  material  contained
in  Is.  863  and  the  related  passages.  That  Isaiah  pre
sumed  to  nominate  a  grand  vizier  is  improbable  ;  that
he  would  have  expected  great  things  from  a  change  in
the  viziership  is,  to  those  who  have  followed  recent
criticism  of  other  parts  of  Is.  1-33,  still  more  improbable.
Lastly,  that  Eliakim's  career  was  cut  short  in  the  way
described  in  the  second  insertion,  is,  though  possible
enough  (cp  Che.  Proph.  Is.,  on  Is.  2225),  neither
affirmed  nor  contradicted  by  any  evidence  such  as  a
historian  can  receive.  Cp  Nowack,  Heb.  Arch.\y&
n.  3,  and  on  the  Shebna  question,  Kamphausen,  '  Isaiah's
Prophecy  against  the  Major  Domo,'  AJSL,  Jan.  1901  ;
Cheyne,  ibid.  ,  July  1901.  T.  K.  c.


SHEBUEL  (PN-U,  §  31  ;  coyBAHA),  a  Gershonite

(:  Ch.  -23  16,  o-oujSujA  [L]  :  2624,  uari\  [B],  crco/SujA.  [L])  ;  also  a  son
of  Heman  (1  Ch.  204).  <&  reads  <rov/3ar)A.—  i.e.,  Stjt3?B>,  SHUBAEL
(£.».).

SHECANIAH  (so  RV  ;  and  AV  in  i  Ch.  24  n  2  Ch.
31  15,  n^3t^,  and  twice  •IfPJSB',  perhaps  [see  §  35]
'  Yahwe  dwells  [among  his  worshippers],  '  or,  if  n  [whence
incorrectly  in]  is  formative,  a  gentilic,  by  transposition
from  'jc'D3  [Cushanite],  so  Che.  [see  SHEBNA];  ce\-
eiMIAtc]  generally).

1.  A  priestly  clan  in  post-exilic  times  (Neh.  123  eej/io  [«*],
*Xep/-  [Nc-a])>  whose  name  appears  incorrectly  as  SHEBANIAH,
•v.  14  (om.  BK*A,crexeA(.ov  [Nc.amg.  inf.]  cp  104),  with  Joseph  at
its  head. The  Chronicler  transfers  him  to  the  times  of  David,
when  he  holds  the  tenth  priestly  course  (i  Ch.  24  n,  icr^ai'ia  [B],
o-eicei/ta  [A])  ;  he  appears  again  in  the  times  of  Hezekiah  (2  Ch.
31  15  : i.-n^jy  <rexovi.ai<;  [BA]). It  is  noticeable  that  the  three
names  Shecaniah,  Mijamin,  and  Jeshua  are  common  to  the  three
lists  in  i  Ch.  24  7-18  2  Ch.  31  15,  and  Neh.  121-7. His  name  should
probably  be  read  in  Neh.  10  1,  in  place  of  ZEDEKIAH  (q.v.  5).

2.  A descendant of Zerubbabel (i  Ch.32i  f. cp Ezra  83
[rravaxiOL  B,  craxavLa.  A]  i  Esd.  829  [B  om.],  SECHENIAS)  ;  see
HATTUSH.

3.  b.  JAHAZIEL  (5),  of  the  sons  of  ZATTU  (Ezra  8  5,  om.  B,
trexoi'ias  [A],  cre^evLov  [L]  =  i  Esd.  832,  SECHENIAS).

4.  b.  Jehiel,  of  the  b'ne  Elam,  who  encouraged  Ezra  in  his
marriage  reforms  (Ezra  10  2); in  i  Esd.  892  [89],  his  name  is
given  as  JECHONIAS  (iex<mas  [BA],  a-e^ei'tas  [L]). The  differ
ence  in  the  readings  rests  on  a  substitution  of  i  for  p,  which  is
conceivable  in  an  older  alphabet.

5.  The  father  of  SHEMAIAH  [q.z>.~\  (Neh.  3  29,  fxfvla-  [B])-

6.  b.  Arah  (2),  father-in-law  of  TOHIAH  (Neh.  618).

SHECHEM  (D3B>  ;  cyxeM  [esp.  in  B]  CIKIMA  [esp.
in  AL]  ;  Sichem),  now  N  a  bins,  a  city  of  Palestine.

i Tj«»,4.-«««*- Eleven  hours  from  Jerusalem  on  the
1.  Identification

j  0.,  great north road  the  traveller  finds

and  Site. ?. ,r  . ,  . , .  . r

nimself  in  the  broad  upland  plain  of

Mahna  (1600  feet  above  the  sea),  with  Mount  Gerizim
on  his  left  ;  skirting  the  base  of  the  mountain  he
reaches  the  traditional  well  of  Jacob  (see  SYCHAR).
Here  the  road  divides  :  the  caravan  route  to  Damascus
continues  northward  by  the  village  of  'Askar  (Sychar),
and  so  to  Beisan  (Beth-shan)  and  Tiberias  ;  but  the
way  to  Samaria  turns  westward  into  a  fertile  and  well-
watered  side-valley  between  Gerizim  (2849  ft.  )  on  the  S.
and  Ebal  (3077  ft.)  on  the  N.  This  is  the  Vale  of
Shechem  or  Nablus  ;  it  is  in  fact  an  easy  pass  between

1  On  the  authorship  of  this  prophecy,  see  ISAIAH  [BOOK],  §  10.

2  Che.  Proph.  /j.P)  1  138  ;  cp  GASm.  Isaiah,  I3i8.

3  [A  study  of  the  names  with  which  Shecaniah  is  connected  in
the  lists  will  confirm  this.]


142


4437


SHECHEM

the  Mediterranean  and  Jordan  basins,  and  at  the  water
shed  (1870  ft. ),  where  the  city  stands,  i^  m.  from  Jacob's
Well,  is  not  more  than  100  yds.  wide.  Thus  Shechem
commands  both  branches  of  the  great  north  road,  and
several  routes  from  the  coast  also  converge  here  and
connect  with  the  ancient  road  from  Shechem  eastward
to  Kerawa  (Archelais)  and  es-Salt,  the  capital  of  the
Belka.  Cp  EPHRAIM,  §  4.  The  name  of  Shechem
(shoulder,  back)  accords  with  the  position  of  the  town
on  the  watershed,  and  the  native  name  in  Josephus's
time.  (Mabortha  [Naber]  or  Mabartha  [Niese]  BJ  iv.
8 1  ;  [Pliny,  //A"56i,  has  Mamortha]  means  simply  '  the
pass. ' )  The  situation  of  Shechem  at  the  crossing  of  so
many  great  roads  must  have  given  it  importance  at  a
very  early  date,  and  it  is  still  a  busy  town  of  some  20,000
inhabitants,  with  soap  manufactures  and  considerable
trade.  On  the  other  hand,  the  position  is  equally
favourable  under  weak  governments  for  brigandage.  It
was  about  their  practice  of  brigandage  that  the  Shechem-
ites  fell  out  with  ABIMELECH  (Judg.  925),  who,  however,
with  his  own  mercenaries  proved  too  strong  for  his
adversaries  (cp  GAAL).  Canaanite  Shechem  was  utterly
destroyed  ;  its  place  was  taken  by  a  Hebrew  city,  and
the  Canaanite  sanctuary  of  El-berTth  was  transformed
into  a  holy  place  of  the  God  of  Israel.  The  great  stone
under  the  famous  sacred  tree 1  at  the  sanctuary  (see
MOREH,  MEONENIM)  was  said  to  have  been  set  up  by
Joshua  (Josh.  2426  ;  in  Josh.  2425  @BA  has  SijAw),  and
Joseph's  grave  was  shown  there.2  All  this  indicates
that  Shechem  was  once  the  chief  sanctuary  of  Joseph,
and  so  we  understand  why  Rehoboam  went  to  Shechem
to  be  crowned  king  of  Northern  Israel  and  why  [if  the
traditional  text  is  correct — see  §  2]  Jeroboam  at  first
made  it  his  royal  residence  (i  K.  1225,  (5  TTJV  <TIKI/J.O.).
Politically  Shechem  was  supplanted  by  Samaria  ;  but
it  appears  to  have  been  still  a  sanctuary  in  the  time
of  Hosea  (69).  It  survived  the  fall  of  Ephraim  (Jer.
41  5)  and  ultimately  became  the  religious  centre  of  the
SAMARITANS  (q.v.)  ;  cp  Ecclus.  5026,  which  runs,  ac
cording  to  the  Hebrew  text,  '  The  inhabitants  of  Seir
and  Philistia,  and  the  foolish  nation  that  dwelleth  in
Shechem. '

The  Greek  name  Neapolis,  known  to  Jpsephus,  indicates  the
building  of  a  new  town,  which,  according  to  Eusebius  and
Jerome,  was  a  little  way  from  the  old  Shechem,  or  at  least  did
not  include  the  traditional  holy  sites.  The  coins  give  the  form
Flavia  Neapolis.  Neapolis  was  the  birth-place  of  Justin
Martyr,  and  became  the  seat  of  a  bishopric.  Five  Christian
churches  destroyed  by  the  Samaritans  in  the  time  of  Anastasius
were  rebuilt  by  Justinian  (Procop.  DC  sEd.  v.  7).  Remains  of
one  of  these  seem  to  survive  in  the  crusaders'  church  of  the
Passion  and  Resurrection  (1167),  now  the  great  mosque.  Nea
polis  had  much  to  suffer  in  the  crusades ;  it  was  finally  lost  to
the  Christians  soon  after  Saladin's  great  victory  at  Hattin.

Shechem  (Nablus)  is  highly  favoured  by  nature.  Nest
ling  between  the  two  sacred  mountains,  EBAL  and
GERIZIM,  and  embowered  in  luxuriant  vegetation,  it
cannot  fail  to  charm  the  traveller  approaching  it  from
the  S.  The  atmosphere  too  is  more  pleasant  ;  all
forms  of  life  rejoice  in  the  best  natural  '  gift  of  God '  in
the  East — running  water.  Truly  it  was  not  in  search
of  fountains  that  any  woman  of  Shechem  would  come
to  Jacob's  well,  for  '  fountains  seem  to  break  out  in  all
directions,  and  water  from  some  of  them  runs  through
the  streets  of  the  city '  (Robinson,  Later  Researches,  131).
A  map  of  the  Shechem  valley,  with  topographical  details,
etc. ,  will  be  found  in  PEFM,  vol.  ii.

There  has  been  much  resultless  discussion  of  that
singular  narrative  in  Gen.  34,  which  usually  serves  as
an  authority  for  the  early  history  of
Shechem.  The  whole  story  (even  if
distributed  between  two  writers)  is  so
improbable  that  to  extract  a  historical  element  from  it  is
just  as  difficult  as  to  suppose  it  to  be  a  pure  fiction.
The  problems  raised  by  critics  (see  DINAH)  are,  however,

1  Eus.  gives  the  tree  (terebinthus)  of  Gen.  35  4  (o-i)Ki;tiot«  [K])
a  place  in  Onom.  ;  and  from  it  probably  the  bishop  Terebinthius
in  Procop.  De  JEd.  5  7  had  his  name.

2  In  Josh.  2432  Kue.  and  Di.  read  ajn'l  for  the  difficult  r,Tl-

4438


SHBCHBM

not  insoluble  ;  they  settle  themselves  as  soon  as  we
apply  a  methodical  criticism  to  the  text.  The  whole
•story  of  the  circumcision  has  arisen,  as  in  the  case  of
the  Gibeath  ha-'araloth  l  (Josh.  63),  from  an  early  cor
ruption  of  the  text.  That  a  city  was  attacked  and
plundered  by  the  Simeon  and  Levi  clans,  may  be  ad
mitted  ;  but  the  name  of  the  city  was  probably  not
Shechem  but  Cusham-jerahmeel,  i.e.  —  it  was  one  of  the
chief  cities  of  the  Jerahmeelite  portion  of  the  N.
Arabian  territory  called  CUSH  or  CUSHAN  (  =  CUSHAM)

—  not  improbably  Halusah  (see  ZIKLAG),  if  it  is  right  to
identify  this  city  with  the  '  Laish  '  of  Judg.  1827,  which
afterwards  (for  a  time)  went  by  the  name  of  Dan.2

We  can  now  explain  two  obscure  passages  in  Genesis,  viz.,
(a)  Gen.  48  22,  where  Jacob  says,  '  I  have  given  to  thee  one
portion  (~\~,n  C3C'  \  ®  tnxifia  efai'peroi',  cp  Jn.  45)  above  thy
brethren,  which  I  took  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite  with  my
sword  and  with  my  bow.'  This  should  almost  certainly  be,  'I
give  thee  Cusham-jerahmeel,  which  thou  shall  take  from  the
hand  of  the  Jerahmeelite.'  Here  we  have  a  divine  promise  of
success  (to  Simeon  and  Levi)  in  the  war  against  the  JeraVimeelites,
for  which  no  place  could  be  found  in  the  transformed  story  now
found  in  Gen.  34.  3  (6)  49  5,  where  QTIK  probably  means  'hyaenas,'
and  the  second  line  should  run,  '  They  have  rent  (i^Ni  cp  Ass.
akiilii)  Cushan-jerahmeel.'  Cp  SWOKD.

It  is  true,  there  was  another  form  of  the  legend  of

the  acquisition  of  Cusham-jerahmeel. It  is  preserved

_.,  in Gen.  33  18-20, where it is possible

, that  v.  1  8  originally  ran,  '  and  Jacob  came

to  Halusah  (corrupted  into  mrS,  and  then

5es- into  D»^  =  oW),  a  city  of  Cusham,  which

is  in  the  land  of  the  Kenizzite,  [when  he  came  from

Harran,]  and  encamped  before  the  city,  and  bought  the

piece  of  ground,  etc.,  of  Cusham-jerahmeel  for  a  mina

of  Carchemish  ;  and  he  erected  a  massebah  there,  and

called  it  Bethel  of  the  Jerahmeelites.' Cp  KKSITAH,

Luz,  ZIKLAG. For  a  slightly  different  form of  the

emendation  see  Crit.  Bib.

There  are  yet  two  other  cases  in  which  Shechem  has
increased  its  reputation  at  the  expense  of  the  almost
forgotten  city  of  Halusah  in  '  Cusham.  '  The  first  is
in  the  history  of  Rehoboam's  accession  (see  RKHOBOAM).
The  second,  in  that  of  Jeroboam,  who,  as  MT  suggests
(see  §  i),  made  Shechem  his  royal  residence.  There  is
evidence,  however  (see  JEROBOAM,  §  i),  that  his  usual
residence  was  at  '  Tirzah  '  (see  TIKZAH),  and  it  does
not  seem  likely  that  he  moved  for  a  time  to  Shechem.
In  fact,  i  K.  1225  does  not  fit  in  at  all  well  with  vv.

26-33-

Probably  (see  Crit.  Bib.  )  the  original  reading  was  as  follows,

—  '  And  Jeroboam  built  Cusham  in  the  highlands  of  Jerahmeel,
and  offered  sacrifices,  and  the  children  of  Israel  presented  them
selves  (there). And he made  two  golden calves, and said,
Enough  of  your  going  up  to  Jerusalem  :  behold  thy  deity,  O
Israel,  which  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Misrim. And
he  set  them  in  Bethel  of  the  Jerahmeelites  [in  Dan  of  the  Jerah
meelites]. And  this  thing  became  a  sin,  for  the  people  went  to
commit  adultery  ('jXj^)  even  to  Dan.' Cp  Am.  8  14,  '  Those  that
swear  by  the  sin  of  Shimron  (plOt?  7~C'N3),  and  say,  As  thy
god,  O  Dan,  liveth  ;  and,  As  thy  nuiiifn  (either  Tpil  or  l^nc),

0  Beersheba,  liveth,'  etc.,  and  see  further  Crit.  Bib.

It  was  not  with  Shechem,  therefore,  but  with  Cusham
that  Jeroboam's  name  is  linked  in  true  history,  and

1  The  true  name  was  doubtless  Gibeath-jcrahmeelim. The
second  part  of  this  compound  name  became  \irfliin,  owing  to
the  effacement  of  part  of  the  original  word. Parallels  are  the
erroneous reading '  uncircumcised ('arelim) Philistines  ' (for
'Jerahmeelites Philistines,'  where one  of  the  two  words  is  a
gloss  on  the  other),  and  the  strange  stories  in  Ex.  4  24-26  and

1  S.  1825-27  (see  MOSES,  §  7,  with  n.  2).

2  The theory is that Halusah was first attacked by the
Danites,  who,  however,  sank  into  the  condition  of  a  protected
clan  (Gen.  34  31,  'as  a  harlot';  cp  Josh.  2i/>,  Rahab  the  harlot),
and ultimately became extinct. The disappearance of  the
Danites  is  thus  expressed  in the  most  probable  form  of  the  text
of  Gen.  358, 'And Dinah, Jacob's  eldest  daughter,  died,  and
was  buried  below  Bethel  '  ;  the  southern  Bethel  is  meant,  another
name  for  which  was  Dan  (this  supplies  the  key  to  i  K.  1229,  see
ZIKLAG). '  Dinah  '  is  a  collateral  fem.  form  to  Dan.


s  '  I  took  '  (TinpS)  is  clearly  wrong,  for  how  could  Jacob  say
that  he  had  conquered  the  city  in  the  persons  of  his  sons  Simeon
and  Levi  1  Holzinger  (Gen.  255)  acutely  remarks  that  v.  22
'.  refers  to  a  lost  version  of  the  legend,  of  which  E  gives  a  trans
formation  in  Gen.  34.'

4439


SHEEP

Cusham  may  mean  Halusah  (or  Dan)  and  Bethel,  Bethel
with  its  sanctuary  and  citadel  being  of  course  adjacent
to  the  city  of  Halusah.  The  Negeb,  therefore,  or  at
any  rate  the  greater  part  of  it,  cannot  either  in  Jeroboam's
time  or  in  that  of  Amos  have  been  in  the  possession  of
the  kingdom  of  Judah.

Nor  can  we  even  venture  to  assert  that  Shechem  was
the  place  where  the  great  national  assembly  was  held
which  determined  the  fate  of  the  people  of  Israel  for  all-
time.  It  was  only  afterwards  through  the  Samaritans
that  it  advanced  a  claim  to  be  the  religious  centre  of
the  land.  We  may  regret  these  results  ;  but  at  least
the  reader  will  admit  that  if  the  fame  of  Shechem  has
here  been  curtailed,  an  almost  forgotten  place  in  the
true  Holy  Land  of  the  Israelites  (see  PROPHET,  §  6)  has
been  restored  to  its  ancient  dignity.

See  Vogelstein,  '  Shechem  and  Bethel, '  JQR  4,  1892,  193^
W.  R.  S.— T.  K.  C.,  §  I  j T. K.  C. ,  §  2/.

SHECHEM,  TOWER  OF  (DDK'  ^HD.  Migdal-
shechem).  As  the  story  of  Abimelech  now  stands,
Migdal-shechem  was  an  unwalled  town  in  the  neighbour
hood  of  Shechem,  which  owed  its  name  perhaps  to  a
tower  (migdal]  that  stood  there,  and  would  appear  to
have  had  a  tern  pie  dedicated  to  El-berith  (Judg. 946/1  49).
But  the  original  story,  in  which  Abimelech' s  city
was  probably  not  Shechem  but  Cusham,  may,  it
seems,  very  possibly  have  had,  not  yyy  S'njp  'S#3  but
[c's>2]  D'^KCny — i.e. ,  'Jerahmeelites  [gloss,  Cushites].'
Observe  that  in  the  MT  of  vv.  6  and  20  the  '  men  of
Shechem '  and  the  '  house  of  Millo '  (see  MILLO)  are
co-ordinated.

The  original  story  probably  had  in  lieu  of  these  corrupt
phrases  '  the  men  of  Cusham '  and  '  the  house  of  Jerahmeel '  ;
the  latter  phrase  is  equivalent  to  'Jerahmeelites'  in  Judg.
9  4&yC  49.  '  The  house  of  El-berith  '  ( =  Baal-berith)  has  perhaps
come  from  'the  house  of  El-rehoboth '  (i.e.,  of  the  divinity  of
Rehoboth);  it  was  probably  very  near  Cusham  or  Halusah,  just
as  Penuel  was  close  to  Succoth  (GIDEON,  §  2).  See  SHECHEM.

T.  K.  C.

SHEDEUR  p-lN'Tr':  ceAioyp  [BFL],  eAioyp
[A]),  father  of  the  Reubenite  'prince'  Elizur  :  Xu.  1  5
2io  73°  (eAicoyp  [B*J.  ceAicoyp  [Bab].  eAicoyp
[A]),  35  (ceAloyp  [A  and  in  10i8])  ;  all  P.  See
PEDAHZUR.

Apparently  compounded  of  the  divine  name  >i:?  (Shaddai?)
and  -HN,  '  fire '  (§  43  ;  Mold.  ZDMG  15  [1860]  809,  n.  i  ;  Nestle,
Kigenn.  46);  Frd.  Delitzsch  (Prol.  96)  explains  'daybreak,'
from  Ass.  sad  uri,  but  improbably.  Rather  perhaps  miswritten
for  Wn«>,  'Suriel,'  a  variant  to  WTS,  '  Suriel '  (see  ZUR,
NAMES  WITH).  T.  K.  C.

SHEEP.  The  large  part  played  by  this  animal  in
the  life  of  the  people  of  Palestine  is  evinced  by  the  very
_  .  many  references  to  it  contained  in  their
literature.  The  sheep  was  domesticated
later  than  the  ox.  Mariette  found  no  trace  of  sheep
amongst  the  Egyptians  during  the  fifth  dynasty,  when
oxen  were  common.  The  avenue  of  rams  at  Karnnk  is
attributed  to  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  about  1700  H.C. ,
by  which  time  they  were  probably  domesticated.1  The
origin  of  the  domestic  variety  of  sheep,  usually  known
as  Ort's  aries,  whether  '  from  any  one  of  the  existing
wild  species,  or  from  the  crossing  of  several,  or  from
some  now  extinct  species,  is  quite  a  matter  of  con
jecture.  '  The  sheep  of  Palestine  at  the  present  day  are,
according  to  Tristram,  usually  pie-bald  or  skew-bald.2
They  fall  into  two  different  breeds,  of  which  by  far  the
commonest  and  in  many  places  the  only  one,  is  the
broad-tailed  sheep  (var.  laticaudata].  This  remarkable
animal  is  distinguished  by  an  enormous  deposit  of  fat  in
the  tail  (,-rW,  "EX.  2922  Lev.  89  etc.;  for  i  8.924  see
Dr. ),  which  sometimes  accumulates  to  such  an  extent

1  The  question  of  the  introduction  of  sheep  into  Egypt  has
been recently  advanced through  the researches  of  Thilenius
(Maspero,  Rec.  tie Travaux,  '22  199-212),  and,  more  especially,
of  Diirst  and  Gaillard  (op.  cit.  2444-76)

2  White as snow, e.g. Ps.  147 16; brown, Gen.  8033 (cp
COLOURS,  §  8);  flecked  and  speckled,  v.  32  (ib.  §  12).

4440


SHEEP

that  the  appendage  has  to  be  provided  with  a  small
sledge  on  which  it  is  borne.  Such  tails  have  been
known  to  exceed  50  Ibs.  in  weight,  and  are  esteemed
a  delicacy  by  the  Arabs.1  In  N.  Palestine  a  horned
variety  similar  to  the  Merino  is  now  found  ;  but  it
is  not  certain  whether  it  was  there  in  the  time  of
the  Israelites.  On  the  sheep  of  Arabia  see  Palgrave,
EB^I^b,  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1 426.

From  a  consideration  of  the  various  names  for  sheep  (cp  below,
§  2),  Hommel  (Saugethiere  b.  d.  Sent.  Volk.  250  f.)  concludes
that  among  the  earliest  Semites  the  sheep  did  nut  occupy  so
important  a  position  as  the  goat,  that  it  does  not  belong  to  their
oldest  domesticated  animals,  and  that  it  came  to  them  from
Central  Asia  by  way  of  Mesopotamia.  In  this  connection  it  is
interesting  to  observe  that  among  the  Indo-Germanic  races,  on
the  other  hand,  the  sheep  appears  to  have  been  the  first  animal
to  be  domesticated,  and  that  its  position  is  more  important  than
that  held  by  other  cattle  (O.  Schrader,  Indogtrm,  Altertuinsk.
s.v.  '  Schaf ').

The  Hebrew  words  which  have  to  be  recorded  are  :

1.  son  (TNX),  coll.  for small cattle,  sheep,  and
2. Terms,  goats':  ©  iroliJ.vi.ov,  cp  below  no.  16.

2.  seh  (ncOj  Dt.  144  etc.,  any  single  member  of
the  above. The  Egyptian  derivative  appears  to  be  used  of  the
fat-tailed  sheep,  ZDMG  41 629.

3.  ayil  (VN),  '  ram,'  as  opposed  to  ayytll  HART  (f.v.)  ;  on  the
two  words  see  esp.  OLZ,  1900,  col.  2o8_/^

4.  rtiAfl  6rn),  Gen.  31 38  32  15  Is.  53 7,  Cant.  6  et,  'ewe,'  the
Ar. rakhil, rikhl  (mod. rokhal, Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  429)  is
used  of  the  lamb.

5.  kar  (13),  Dt.  32  14, Is.  IGietc.  (©  apv6<;, epi^os), 'young
lamb,'  perhaps  from  idea  of  skipping  or  dancing. Also  'batter
ing-ram,'  see  SIEGE?

6.  kcieb  (3if'3  n3?'3,  also  C'33  nc'33 33),  a  lamb  of  one  or
two  years,  esp.  used  with  reference  to  sacrifices. On  the  Heb.
words  see  Hommel,  op.  cit.  235  n.  2  433.

-.  ttileh  (nsa),  Is.  40  ii  135  25  (<5  api/os),  an  older  lamb  (mod.
tulfy,  a  yearling,  see  Doughty,  1  429  2  269)  ;  see  TALITHA.
For  the  sake  of  completeness  we  should  add —

8-  ipj,  whence  naked,  a  sheep-raiser  or  dealer,  2  K.  3  4_  Am.
1  i  (also  7  14  with  We.,  Now.,  Dr.). Cp  Ar.  nakad,  'a  kind  of
small  sheep  with  very  abundant  wool'  (BDB),  and  see  MESHA,
col.  3042,  n.  7.

9-  IDNi  '  lamb,'  known  in  B.  Aram.  (Ezra  7  17),  Ar.,  Ass.,  and
Phoen.  (CfS  1  165,  e.g. — the  Marseilles  sacrificial  tariff) — not  in
Heb. Phoen.  also  is —

I°-  31X  {CIS  it.},  the  Canaanite  equivalent  of  the  common
Aram,  'erha  'sheep,  lamb.'

11.  'lambs of  the flock,'  Ecclus.473 ft^H 'J3> 'it- 'sons  of
Bashan ' (apvacri irpofiaTiav [BNA]) ; cp Dt.  32 14, and see
BASHAN,  §  2  end.

12.  kcsltdk,  Gen.  33  19  (AVmg-  'lamb');  see  KESITAH.
The  Greek  words  are  familiar  :

13.  a.fj.vo';,  Jn.  1  29,  etc.  ;  used  in  &  esp.  for  nos.  4,  6.

14.  apriv*,  Lk.  103,  etc.

15.  apviov,  Rev.  56  etc.  ;  used  in  (B  for  no.  6.

16.  npofioLTOv,  Mt.  9  36,  etc.  ;  in  &  esp.  for  nos.  i  and  2.
The  wealth  of  a  pastoral  and  nomadic  people  consists

largely  of  their flocks,  and the  very  large number  of

sheep  which  the  ancient  Hebrews  possessed
i  i  A,  i

is  shown  by  the  numbers,  perhaps  exagger
ated,  which  the  Hagrites  (i  Ch.  021)  and  Midianites
(Nu.  8132)  are  reported  to  have  lost  in  their  contests
with  Israel,  and  by  the  prodigious  numbers  which  were
sacrificed  at  the  dedication  of  the  Temple  and  on  other
occasions  (i  K.  863,  etc.).  See  SACRIFICE,  §§  33,  etc.
Except  on  such  occasions  the  sheep  were  seldom
slaughtered  to  provide  food,  though  a  lamb  or  kid  was
the  usual  dish  offered  for  the  entertainment  of  a  stranger
(cp  FOOD,  §§  8,  i4/. ,  CATTLE,  §  8).  The  best  pastures
were  in  S.  Palestine  (the  Xegeb,  Carmel  [i  S.  25],
Gerar  [Gen.  10 14],  Timnath  [ib.  8813],  and  the  plain  to
the  E.  of  Jordan  ;  see  CATTLE,  §  3,  and  cp  GOLAN,
col.  1748). 2  The  sheep  were  valued  chiefly  for  the  wool,
the  shearing  of  which  was  the  occasion  of  an  annual
festival  (see  WOOL).S  The  ewe's  milk  was  also  con-

1  Cp  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  502,  Herod.  3  113,  with  Rawlinson's
notes,  and  above,  col.  1514,  n.  2. According  to  Thilenius  (pp.
cit.  203),  it  was  introduced  into  Upper  Egypt  from  Asia  by  the
twelfth  dynasty.

2  Other  references  are  to  Shechem  (Gen.  34  28),  the  '  sons  of
the  East '  (ib.  29  zff.'),  Uz(Job  1  3,  42  12),  and  Egypt  (Gen.  12  16
Ex.  9  3).

3  Sheep-shearing,  it  may  be  noted,  does  not  go  back  to  primi
tive  times  ;  the  earlier  custom  is  to  pluck  the  wool  with  the  hands
(O.  Schrader,  s.v.  'Schaf,'  Hehn,  Kulturpflanzen  und  Haus-
thiere^)  515).

4441


SHEKEL

sumed  (see  MILK).  The  horns  of  the  Syrian  ram  are
as  a  rule  large  and  curved  backward  ;  they  were  used
as  musical  instruments  (Josh.  64)  and  as  receptacles  for
oil,  etc.  (i  S.  16  1);  cp  HORN.  The  skins  were  also
used  as  coverings  for  tents,  etc.  (see  TENT)  and  prob
ably  for  clothing  (Heb.  11  37).!  The  sheep  were  con
stantly  'moved  about  in  search  for  new  pasture,  and  it  is
customary  in  the  East  for  the  shepherd  to  lead  his  flock
(Jn.  lOs/  )  and  to  know,  and  often  name,  every  member
of  it.2  At  night  the  sheep  are  gathered  into  natural  or
roughly-made  folds  (see  CATTLE,  §  5  /  ,  GOAT,  §  3).
Sheep-dogs  are  used  less  for  herding  than  as  a  protection
against  wild  animals  (Doo,  §  i).

For  further  general  remarks  on  small  cattle,  see  CATTLE,
GOAT.

For  Sheep-fold,  see  CATTLE,  §  5,  and  for  Sheep-gate  (Jn.
5  2  AV  'Sheep-market'),  see  JERUSALEM,  §§  24  (col.  2424  end),
3°-

For  Shepherd,  see  CATTLE,  §  6  ;  on  the  figurative  use  of  the
word  ('  pastor  '  =  bishop),  see  MINISTRY,  §§  39^,  47^;  and  for  the
non-canonical  'Shepherd  of  Hermas,'  see  CANON,  §§  65,  72,
PROPHETIC  LIT.,  §  31,  and  SHEPHERD  OF  HERMAS.


SHEERAH  (rnNE>), iCh.


A.  E.  S.  —  S.  A.  C.

RV, AV SHEKAH


(q.

SHEET, i.  }HD,ja^«Judg.l4i2. See  MANTLE,  4.
2-  nnpDDi  mitpdhath,  Ruth  815  AVmg-. See  MANTLE,  3.
3.  bOovrj,  Acts  10  ii  11  5. See  LINEN,  i  and  9.

SHEHARIAH  (nnntf;  CARAIA  [BL],  CA*PIA[A]),
b.  Jeroham  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.  ,  §  9,  ii.  (3),
i  Ch.  826.

The  name  may  mean  either  '  Yahwe  is  the  dawn'  (§§  35,  44)
or  'the  Shahrite.'  Parallel  is  ZERAHIAH  [y.v.].  inr  occurs  as
a  place-name  in  Josh.  183,  etc.  (see  SHIHOR),  and,  with  K  pre
fixed,  as  a  clan  -name  in  i  Ch.  2  24  45.  Of  the  latter  form
(Ashhur)  AHISHAHAR  may  be  a  late  and  artificial  expansion,
just  as  Shehariah  is  a  late  and  artificial  expansion  of  Shahri.
Cp  also  HODESH  (  —  Shahar,  Ashhur)  in  i  Ch.  89,  and  the  non-
biblical  Hebrew  name  Sheharhor  (see  ZEPHANIAH,  2-4).  All
these  names  are  southern.  T.  K.  C.

SHEKEL3  (?$?*,  cp  sdkal,  'to  weigh';  ciKAoc,
ClfAoc)  signifies  either  a  weight  or  a  coin.  As  the
1  Uncoined  mvent'on  °f  coinage  dates  from  the
metal  seventh  century  B.C.  ,  and  no  coins  were
issued  in  districts  from  which  they
would  be  likely  to  penetrate  to  Palestine  before  the
time  of  Darius  Hystaspis  (522-485  B.C.),  all  biblical
references  to  shekels  or  any  kind  of  money  before  the
return  from  the  exile  must  be  understood  of  uncoined
metal,  for  which  the  scales  were  used  (cp  Gen.  23  16).
The  metal  was  usually  cast  in  ingots  (cp  the  meaning
of  kikkdr,  a  round,  cake-like  disc)  or  bars,  of  a  fixed
weight  (cp  i  S.  98),  or  may  have  taken  the  form  of
ornaments  of  which  the  weight  was  known  (e.g.  ,
Rebekah's  ornaments,  Gen.  24  22).  Any  such  piece  of
metal,  if  stamped  with  the  recognised  mark  of  the
government,  guaranteeing  its  quality  and  weight,  so
that  the  scales  could  be  dispensed  with,  would  rightly
be  called  a  coin  ;  but  the  custom  of  stamping  the  smaller
pieces  of  precious  metal  in  this  way  and  for  purposes
of  exchange  was  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  systematised
before  the  date  mentioned.

Of  the  many  weight-systemsemployed  in  antiquity,  only
three  can  seriously  claim  to  have  been  in  use  in  Pales-

2.  Palestinian  tine  in  early  times  <see  WEIGHTS  AND


weight-
systems.


MEASURES, §  4). These  are  known
as the gold -shekel standard (Ridge-


way's ox-standard), the Babylonian,
and  the  Phoenician  respectively,  the  Phoenician  being  a

1  Gr.  jr>)A.a>Tr;,  which  in  OT  renders  DTIX,  see  DRESS,  §  8.

3  On  the  shepherd's  life  cp  also  Doughty,  1  428  ;  '  there  is  none
will  take  up  the  herdsman's  life,  but  it  be  of  bare  necessity.'
The  statement  in  Gen.  46  34  is  not  directly  supported  by  the
evidence  of  the  monuments,  'but  the  keepers  of  oxen  and  swine
were  considered  in  Egypt  to  follow  a  degrading  occupation.
They  are  depicted  as  dirty,  unshaven,  poorly  clad,  and  even  as
dwarfs  and  deformed'  (Driver,  Authority  and  Arcli&ology,
5°/)-

3  A  list  of  the  passages  where  the  word  occurs  is  given  by
Madden  (see  below,  §  7),  15.

4442


SHEKEL

derivative  of  the  Babylonian.  The  chief  denominations
were  the  talent  (rd\avTov,  -irj,  Ktyxap,  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  6  7),
the  mina  (/j.va,  njo,  MANEH  [y.r.],  cp  Ezek.  45 12;  trans
lated  'pound'  in  i  K.  10 17  Ezra  2  69  Neh.  7  71/1  the
word  '  pound '  is  also  used  for  \irpa,  the  Roman  libra
of  5053.3  grs.  troy,  in  Jn.  12s  1939),  and  the  shekel.1
For  ordinary  purposes  the  talent  was  divided  into  60
minas,  and  the  mina  into  60  shekels  ;  but  for  weighing
gold  a  mina  of  only  50  shekels  and  a  talent  of  3000
instead  of  3600  shekels  were  used.  The  shekel  was  the
same  in  both.  Further,  payments  to  the  royal  treasury
in  Babylonia  were  calculated  on  a  slightly  higher  scale
(the  '  royal  norm')  than  ordinary  payments  (for  which
the  'common  norm'  was  used).  (This  difference  is
probably  alluded  to  in  28.  14  26 :  Absalom's  hair  weighed
'  two  hundred  shekels  after  the  king's  weight. '  Schrader
[KA  Z12'  142]  supposes  that  the  trade- shekel  weighed
more  than  the  money-shekel,  and  that  the  heavier  is
here  referred  to  ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  for
identifying  the  trade-norm  with  the  royal-norm.)  Next,
since  it  was  desirable  to  be  able  to  exchange  a  round
number  of  shekels  (minas,  talents)  of  silver  against  a
shekel  (mina,  talent)  of  gold,  and  since  the  ratio  of
value  between  gold  and  silver  was  inconveniently  13^  :  i,
a  new  shekel  (mina,  talent)  had  to  be  established  for
the  weighing  of  the  less  precious  metal.  Finally,  there
were  two  systems,  the  heavy  and  the  light,  in  the  former
of  which  the  denominations  weighed  twice  as  much  as
in  the  latter.

The  evidence  of  extant  Babylonian  weights,  checked
by  the  weights  of  coins  struck  in  later  times  on  derived
standards,  enables  us  to  obtain  the  following  series  of
weights  used  for  the  precious  metals  : —


ROYAL  NORM.

COMMON  NORM.

Heavy.

Light.

Heavy.

Light.

grs.  troy.

, grs.  troy.

grs.  troy.

grs.  troy.

Talent . .  777,780°

Mina  . . .  12,963"
Shekel . .  259.3'

Value  of  the  )

gold  shekel  V  3,457.3

in  silver  )

At*,  ten  pieces  )

of  silver  of  f

Or fifteen  )

pieces of  -

silver  of  J


345-73"
230. 5  r


6,481. 5/
1 29.63'-'

1,728.4
172.8°
115.2'


1378,690-*
.623P 6,311.5*

252.5'  126.23'


3,366.6
336.6?
224.4'


,684.3
168.4?


By  adopting  silver  units  of  the  weights  given  in  the  last
two  rows,  a  round  number  of  units  of  silver  (10  or  15)
could  always  be  exchanged  against  a  single  unit  of
gold,  provided  the  two  belonged  to  the  same  norm  and
system.  The  standard  according  to  which  ten  pieces
of  silver  corresponded  to  one  of  gold  is  known  as  the
Babylonian  or  Persic,  because  silver  coins  which  agree
with  this  standard  were  struck  by  the  Persian  kings
(who  adopted  it  from  its  Babylonian  source)  and  by
their  immediate  subordinates  ;  the  standard  reached
the  Greeks  overland  through  districts,  such  as  Lydia,
which  were  under  Persian  influence.  On  the  other
hand,  the  standard  equating  fifteen  pieces  of  silver  to
one  of  gold  was  adopted  by  the  great  Phoenician  trading
cities,  and  reached  the  Greeks  directly  by  sea  ;  hence,
it  is  known  as  the  Phoenician  standard.

What  evidence,  then,  have  we  for  the  use  of  either

or both of these systems in Palestine? A certain

3 Evidence number of extant weights (see

forlSne.  WKIGHTS AND MEASURES, § 4)

seem  to  suggest  that  a  low  form  of  the

Babylonian shekel was  in use  in Palestine. On the

other  hand,  the  literary  and  numismatic  evidence  points

to  the Phoenician  standard  having  been  used,  at  least

in  post-exilic  times,  side  by  side  with  the  other  system.

1  [See  also,  KESITAH.]
4443


SHEKEL

'  In  the  first  place,  we  know  (by  calculation)  from  Ex.
8825  /.  [P]  that  the  Hebrew  talent  contained  3000
shekels.  Again,  Josephus  (Ant.x\v.  7  1)  equates  the
mina  used  for  weighing  gold  to  2^  Roman  pounds  —
i.e.,  12,633.3  grs.  troy  —  which  is  very  near  to  the
heavy  gold  mina  of  the  common  norm  (g).  The  same
writer  (pp.  cit.  iii.  67)  speaks  of  a  sum  of  '100  minas,
which  the  Hebrews  call  idyxap,  which  being  trans
lated  into  Greek  means  rdXavrov.  '  If  we  take  the
mina  here  mentioned  to  be  the  gold  mina  (g)  of  12,623
grs.  (heavy)  or  6,311.5  grs.  light  (A),  we  obtain  a  talent
of  1,262,300  grs.  (heavy)  or  631,150  grs.  (light).  The
•soVir  part,  or  shekel,  of  this  talent  would  be  420.73  grs.
(heavy)  or  210.36  grs.  (light).  These  weights  are  some
what  lighter  than  the  normal  weights  of  the  heavy  double
shekel  and  shekel  (/)  of  the  Phoenician  standard  (common
norm)  ;  but  it  is  noticeable  that  the  earliest  coins  (double
staters  and  staters)  of  Sidon  and  Tyre  (issued  in  the
5th  cent.  B.  c.  )  seldom  rise  to  the  normal  weight  of
448.8  grs.  and  224.4  grs.,  the  effective  weight  being
usually  much  nearer  the  amounts  just  arrived  at,  and
rarely  rising  above  426  grs.  (213  grs.).  Again,  various
metrological  authorities  of  ancient  though  late  date  (see
Hultsch,  Metrolog.  Script.  Rel.,  Index,  under  TO.\O.VTOV,
17)  equate  the  Hebrew  talent  to  125  Roman  Ibs.  —  i.e.,
631,665.3  grs.  The  shekel  of  this  talent  would  be
2IO-55  grs-  Finally,  Josephus  (Anf.m.Sx)  equates
the  Hebrew  coin  called  crt'/cXos  —  i.e.,  the  silver  shekel  —
to  four  '  Attic  drachms.  '  '  Attic  drachm  '  in  his  day
was  equivalent  to  the  Roman  denarius,  which  was  fixed
by  Nero  at  ^  Ib.  —  i.e.,  52.62  grs.;  the  Hebrew  ffixXos
was  therefore  210.48  grs.  in  weight.

We  thus  see  that  the  Hebrew  shekel  weighed  from
210  to  210.55  Ers->  or'  on  tne  heavy  system,  420  to
421  grs.  It  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  shekel  of
224.4  Rrs-  (/)•  or  'ts  double,  in  a  slightly  degraded
form.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  shekel  of  the
Phoenician  standard  was  in  use  in  Palestine  at  a  com
paratively  early  period.  The  weight  of  the  heavy  gold
shekel  of  the  common  norm  (/)  being  taken  at  252.5
grs.  troy,  its  value  (at  the  present  rate  of  ^3  :  17  :  10^
per  oz.  of  480  grs.  paid  by  the  Mint  for  gold)  would
be  very  nearly  £2  :  i  :  o,  and  the  light  shekel  would  be
worth  about  £i  :  o  :  6.  The  Hebrew-Phoenician  silver
shekel  and  the  Babylonic-  Persic  silver  shekel,  being
reckoned  as  Js  and  ^  of  the  gold  shekel  respectively,
work  out  as  follows  :

Heavy.

Phoenician . . . £o  :  2  :  9
Babylonian . . . ^0:4:1 .0:2:0^

The  values  of  the  talent  and  mina  of  gold  and  silver  in
all  these  systems  are  :


Light.
£o  :  i  :  4


HEAVY.

LIGHT.

Ta

lent.  Mina.

Talent. Mina.

£

Gold . . .615
Phoenician  silver  . 41
Babylonian  silver  . 61

s.  d. £ s.  d.

3  O  O  IO2  IO  O

joo  6  16  8
;  o  o  10  5  o

£ s.  d. £  s.  d.
3075 o  o 51  5  o
205 o  o 384
307  10  o 526

It  is  curious  that,  although  the  mina  was  known  as
a  weight,  it  does  not  occur  in  any  pre-exilic  writings,
and  large  sums  are  expressed  in  talents  and  shekels
( Kennedy,  420).  A  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  Attic
method  of  reckoning  in  talents  and  drachms.

Early  in  the  (conventional)  post-exilic  period  the  Persian
coinage  of  gold  and  silver  was  introduced  by  Darius


4.  Early


Hystaspis. His gold  shekel, struck  on
known  to the


'  , .t. the  royal norm  (£), was

period  Greeks"  as  daric  (5apeu-6s).  The  deriva
tion  of  this  word  from  the  king's  name
has  been  disputed,  on  the  ground  that  it  could  not  be
formed  from  the  Persian  Ddravaraush ;  but  there  is  no
reason  why  it  should  not  be  formed  in  Greek  fashion
from  Aapetos.  Of  other  derivations,  the  only  plausible
one  is  from  the  Assyrian  darlku,  a  word  found  in

4444


SHEKEL


SHEKEL


contract-tablets  of  the  time  of  Nabonidus  and  Nebu
chadrezzar.  But  the  evidence  that  this  word  is  the
name  of  a  weight  or  measure  is  not  satisfactory  ;  Tall-
quist  (Die  Spr.  tier  Contr.  A'abu-na  ids,  66)  with  more
probability  regards  it  as  an  agricultural  product.  The
word  darkemon  (see  DRAM)  has  until  recently  been
connected  by  many  writers  with  the  word  daric ;  but
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  darkemon  is  a  weight,
and  possibly  the  same  word  is  found  in  the  Greek
5/xxxMTj  (see  DRAM,  and  with  the  spelling  D-JOII  of
the  Piraseus  inscription  cp  the  Cretan  dialectical  form
dapKvd ).

The  Greek  derivation  of  Spa^M1?  from  Spaa-tro^au.  is  probably
a  popular  etymology.  What,  however,  are  these  '  drams '  of
gold  mentioned  in  Chronicles-Ezra-Nehemiah  ?  Remembering
that  in  the  Greek  system  the  drachma  was  as  a  rule  the  nnl<io
part  of  the  talent,  we  should  suppose  that  half-shekels  were
meant  by  darkcmonim.  Now  the  weight  of  the  daric  (fi)  is  as  a
matter  of  fact  the  half-shekel  of  the  heavy  system  (z),  and  since
the  Hebrews,  in  weighing  both  gold  and  silver,  used  the  heavy
system  (see  the  quotations  from  Josephus  discussed  above,  §  3),
they  would  naturally  regard  the  gold  daric  as  a  half-shekel  of
the  heavy  system.  It  follows  that  although  the  words  darkemon
and  daric  have  in  all  probability  no  etymological  connection,
the  actual  pieces  of  gold  meant  by  darkemdnlm  were  as  a  matter
of  fact  darics,  or  pieces  of  the  same  weight  as  the  daric.

The  silver  coin  of  Darius  was  known  to  the  Greeks
as  the  crLyXos  (criKXos)  M^St/cos,  and  weighed  86.4  grs. ,
being  really  a  half-shekel  of  the  light  Babylonian  system
(royal  norm).  The  gold  daric  was  worth  twenty  of
these  silver  coins.  The  value  of  the  daric  in  modern
money  works  out  at  about  one  guinea,  and  that  of  the
siglos.  accordingly,  at  a  little  over  one  shilling.

The  Persian  governors  who  preceded  Xehemiah  in
his  office  exacted  from  the  people  40  shekels  of  silver
(Neh.  5 15).  It  is  hardly  possible  to  decide  whether

these  were  0-17X01  MT;-
diKoL  (which  as  we
have  seen  were  really
half-shekels)  or  whole
shekels  of  172.8  grs. ;
but  the  probability  is
in  favour  of  the  for
mer,  as  being  the
official  coins  of  the
Persian  Empire  at
the  time.

Both  daric  (Fig.  a)  and  siglos  (Fig.  b)  are  alike  in
types.  On  the  obverse  is  a  figure  of  the  Great  King,
wearing  the  Persian
head-dress  (kidaris)
and  robe  (kandys],
and  holding  in  his
right  hand  a  spear,
in  the  left  a  bow  ;  the
half-kneeling  posture
is  meant,  according
to  the  convention  of  FIG.  b.

early  art,  to  represent

running.  The  reverse  bears  only  the  impression  made
by  the  irregular  punch  used  in  striking  the  coin.

The  phrase  'shekel  of  the  sanctuary,'  or  rather
sacred  shekel '  (trkAos  6  07105,  <rTa#,uos  6  iiyios)  is  used
in  P  in  connection  with  gold,  silver,
copper  (?),  and  spices.  (For  this  sub
ject,  besides  Kennedy  422,  see  Zucker-
mann,  Talmud.  Gewichte,  \f.  15.)  In  spite  of  the  fact
that  the  sacred  shekel  was  used  for  gold,  as  well  as
silver,  there  are  serious  difficulties  in  the  way  of  accepting
Ridgeway's  theory  (Origin  of  Metallic  Currency,  273/.)
that  it  was  the  shekel  of  130-135  grs.  We  know
from  the  Mishna  that  sums  of  silver  money  mentioned
in  the  Pentateuch  are  to  be  regarded  as  reckoned  in
'  Tyrian  money' — i.e. ,  in  money  of  the  Phoenician
standard.  We  know  further  that  the  temple  tax  was
half  a  shekel,  and  the  tax  for  two  persons  could  be  paid
by  a  tetradrachm  or  stater  (q.  v. }  of  the  Phoenician
standard  (Mt.  17z4/. ,  where  the  collectors  of  the  tax
are  called  ol  TO.  Bidpax/J-a  \a,fJ.j3dvovTts).  It  follows  that

4445


FIG.  a.


5.  Phoenician
standard.


the  sacred  shekel  was  a  shekel  of  the  heavy  Phoenician
standard  (common  norm)  of  224.4  grs.  (/).  This  con
clusion  is  confirmed  by  the  statement  (Ex.  30i3,  etc.)
that  the  shekel  was  twenty  gerahs,  which  ©  translates
1  20  obols. '  The  obol  meant  by  @  was  presumably  the
Attic  obol  of  the  time  (£  of  the  drachm  of  67.28  grs. —
i.e.,  11.21  grs.)  ;  and  twenty  of  these  make  a  weight  of
224.2  grs.  Any  shekel  of  this  weight,  whether  struck
by  a  foreign  king,  or  struck  by  a  city  like  Tyre,  could


FIG.  c.

therefore  be  used  for  the  payment  of  the  tax  for  two
persons  ;  or  the  corresponding  half-shekel  (Phoenician
didrachm  of  112.2  grs.)  for  a  single  person.  The
half-shekel  here  illustrated  (Fig.  c)  was  struck  at  Tyre
in  the  year  102  B.C.  On  the  obverse  is  the  head  of
Melkarth,  the  Tyrian  Heracles,  crowned  with  laurel ;
on  the  reverse  an  eagle  standing  with  one  foot  on  the
prow  of  a  galley,  and  a  palm-branch  over  its  shoulder  ;
in  the  field  are  a  club  (the  symbol  of  Melkarth),  the
numerals  AK  (the  year  24  of  the  local  era),  and  the
monogram  of  the  official  of  the  mint  responsible  for  the
coin ;  around  is  the  inscription  TYPOY  I6PAC  KAI
ACYAOY — i.e.,  '(coin)  of  Tyre,  the  sacred  (city)  and
inviolable.'  The  weight  of  this  specimen  (106.9  grs.)
is  a  little  under  the  normal  («).  The  name  'sacred'
applied  to  the  shekel  of  this  standard  is  due  presumably
to  its  being  used  for  the  temple  tax,  for  which  shekels
of  any  other  standard  were  not  accepted.  Hence  the
presence  of  money-changers  in  the  outer  court  of  the
temple.  The  third  part  of  the  shekel  of  Neh.  10  32  is
probably  the  third  of  the  Phoenician  shekel  ;  the  third
is  indeed  a  more  usual  denomination,  both  in  the
Phoenician  and  in  the  Babylonian  standards,  than  the
half.

The  Jews  were,  as  a  rule,  content  or  obliged  to  use
silver coins of foreign origin, and the two series of

6  Silver  coins  s'lver  coins  issued  by  them  belong  to
'  periods  of  revolt  against  their  rulers.
A  famous  series  of  shekels  and  half -shekels  issued
during  a  period  of  five  years  has  been  most  usually
ascribed  to  the  time  of  Simon  the  Hasmonasan  ;  the
tendency  of  recent  criticism,  however,  is  to  give  them
to  the  time  of  the  first  revolt  against  Rome  (66-70  A.  D. ).


FIG.  d.

The  best  summary  of  recent  arguments  about  this
question,  which  does  not  properly  concern  us  here,  is
given  by  Kennedy,  429  ;  still  more  recently,  however,
Th.  Reinach  has  stated  his  inclination  to  revert  to  the
older  view  (Rev.  des  ttudes  grecques,  18213).  A
specimen  of  the  shekel  of  the  fourth  year  is  given  in
fig.  d.  On  the  obverse  is  a  chalice,  above  which  is  the
date  iB1  (for  T  rutr,  '  year  4  ')  ;  around  is  the  inscription
'••IOB"  Vpa"  ('Shekel  of  Israel').  On  the  reverse  is  a
flowering  lily  and  the  inscription  ntynpn  O'^m'  ( '  Jeru-

4446


SHELAH

salem  the  Holy  '  ).  The  weight  of  this  specimen  is  220
grs.

The  second  series  of  silver  coins  of  the  Jews  belongs
to  the  second  revolt  ;  they  are  shekels  and  quarter-
shekels  issued  by  Simon  Barcochba  and  '  Eleazar  the
High  Priest'  from  132-135  A.D.  These  coins  are
really  Roman  denarii,  or  tetradrachms  or  drachms  of
the  mints  of  Ccesarea  (in  Cappadocia)  and  Antioch  (in
Syria),  which  have  been  used  as  blanks  on  which  to
impress  Jewish  types  (Kennedy,  43O/.  ).

Both  these  series  are,  as  we  have  said,  exceptional,
and  the  ordinary  coinage  of  the  Jews,  from  the  time
of  John  Hyrcanus,  if  hot  from  that  of  Simon  the
Hasmonsean,  onwards,  consists  merely  of  bronze.

F.  W.  Madden,  Coins  of  the  Jews,  1881  ;  F.  Hultsch,  Gr.  u.

RSm. Metrologie.W 1882; W. Ridgewav,

7.  Literature. Origin of  Metallic Currency, 1892  ; Th.

Reinach,  Les  itwnnaies  juives,  1887;  A.  R.

S.  Kennedy,  in  Hastings'  DB  '2,  417  ff.  G.  F.  H.

SHELAH.  i.  rb&,  a  name  closely  resembling
SHILOH  (cHAcoM  [BADEF],  C|A-  [L.]).  the  youngest
of  Judah's  sons  by  the  daughter  of  the  Canaanite  Shua
(cp  Stade  GF/lisS,  and  see  JUDAH  i.  ,  §  2;  Gen.
885111426  [J],  46i2  [P];  Nu.  2620  CHACON  [BAL,  but
-COM  L.  v.  19],  i  Ch.  23  CHACON  [BL]).  The  clan  is
associated  with  Che/.ib  in  the  Shephelah  of  Judah  (cp
Cozeba  below,  and  see  ACHZIB  [i.]),  and,  apart  from
Gen.  38,  occurs  only  in  post-exilic  writings.  The
further  divisions  of  this  clan  are  given  in  i  Ch.  421-23
(cnAcoN  [L]).  The  passage  is  extremely  obscure
and  appears  to  represent  the  attempt  of  a  scribe  to
get  some  meaning  out  of  an  already  corrupt  genealogy.

Lecah  in  i<.  2ia  may  be  a  corruption  for  Lachish,  but  the
latter  half  of  the  verse  is  unintelligible.  A  reference  to  Bethlehem
in  v.  22«  is  not  improbable,  see  JASHUBI-LEHEM.  The  reading,
'  men  of  Cozeba  .  .  .  had  dominion  in  Moab,'  is  doubtful  ;  that
of  <BHA;  O'i  Karwxijcrav  .  .  .  ('who  dwelt  ...'),  is  much  more
reasonable.  Netaim  (n'Jffij)  and  Gederah,  v.  23,  seem  to  have
arisen  from  Etam  (QC'V.)  and  Gedor  ;  and  the  recurrence  of  both
names  in  i1.  3  f.  —  a  list  which  in  its  present  condition  is
fragmentary  —  makes  it  probable  that  in  v.  3<i  we  should  read
'Shelah,  the  father  of  Etam  '  (correcting  the  difficult  'y  '^K  n"?**)-1
See  ETAM,  2.  A  pre-exilic  reference  may  safely  be  rejected  ;
the  'ancient'  matters  spoken  of  need  not,  from  the  Chronicler's
point  of  view,  be  pre-exilic.  The  patronymic  is  Shelanite
('jWn,  Nu.  2620,  6  <rn\\iav\f\i  [BAFL]),  which  in  a  list  of
Judahite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  is  twice  written  Shilonite
(Neh.  lls,  a>7A.u)«  [B],  S-ei  Uxl,  r/A-i  [A],  o-ei  [L];  AV  SHII.ONI,
iCh.  9s;  'J^'lBNI  ;  ™v  o-r)A.u,,<[e]i,  see  EZRA  ii.,  §  5  [6],  §  15
[i]«).  The  former  pointing  with  a.  seems  better  (cp  Be.
Ke.).  Maaseiah  or  Asaiah,  to  whom  the  patronymic  is  here
applied,  appears  as  the  representative  of  Shelah  b.  Judah,  just
as  Athaiah  (Neh.  11  4)  represents  the  Perezite  division.  [Cp
Crit.  Bib.}  s.  A.  C.

2.  (nVr).  SALAH  AV  in  Gen.  and  SALA  AV  Lk.
835,  the  son  of  Arpachshad  and  father  of  liber  in  the
old  genealogy  of  the  Hebrews  (Gen.  1024  [R?],  11  13  f.
[P],  i  Ch.  1  18  [B  om.]  24,  <7d\a,  craXas  [L  in  Gen.  10]).
The  key  to  '  Shelah  '  is  of  course  Arpachshad.  If  the
latter  name  contains  Chaldrea,  Knobel  may  be  excused
for  seeking  'Shelah'  in  NE.  Mesopotamia.  If,  how
ever,  Arpachshad  comes  from  'Arab-Kadesh  or  -Cush
[see  UR  OF  THE  CHALDEES],  we  must  suppose  'Shelah'
to  represent  some  clan  in  the  Negeb.  In  accordance
with  JUDAH,  §  2,  we  may  assume  the  existence  of  a
Jerahmeelite  clan  called  Shelah  (see  SHELAH,  i),  of
Kenizzite  (not  Canaanite)  affinities,  and  related  to  Sha'ul,
of  which  Shelah  is  a  modification.  The  name  Methuselah
is  similarly  related  to  Methushael  ;  both  these  names
are  probably  modifications  of  Mishael  =  Ishmael.  It
now  becomes  not  impossible  that  Eber  (nay)  in  Gen.
1024  may  be  miswritten  for  'Arab  (Tiy),

To  derive  Shelah  from  'to  send,"  and  suppose  it  to  refer  to
the  departure  of  a  portion  of  the  tribe  of  Arpachshad  previous  to
their  'passing  over'  (see  EHEK)  the  Tigris,  is  absurd.  <S  (in
Gen.),  on  which  Lk.  835  is  based,  inserts  Cainan  before  Shelah
to  make  Abram  the  tenth  after  Shem  (see  Di.  Gen.  208).

T.  K..


Tsi'n  (v.  23)  may  spring  from  Beth-zur  or  perhaps  rather
ri  (ZioR  lay  to  the  SE.  of  Gedor).

4447


SHELUMIEL

SHELAH,  POOL  OF  (H^'H  D?"!?),  Neh.  3 15  RV,
AV  '  pool  of  SILOAH.'  See  SILOAM.

SHELANITES  C^tT),  Nu.2620;  see  SHELAH  (i).

SHELEMIAH  (njp^,  -irVpH"-  either  compounded
with  i"P  =  nii"l\  or  an  expanded  form  of  a  clan  name
borne  by  an  individual  [Che.],  see  SHALLUM,  SHKLA-
MIEL,  and  note  the  N.  Arabian  character  of  the  names
with  which  Shelemiah  is  associated.  To  illustrate  the

later  (?)  view  of  the  name,  cp  Palm.  n?D/y  [if  for
n^N'D'Pf  a  compound  of  the  goddess  al-Lat]  ;  ceAe-
Mioy)-  See  SELEMIA.

1.  b.  Cushi,  an  ancestor  of  JEHUDI  (g.v.)  Jer.  36  [®  43]  14,
in'OVc",  <roAa/xiou  [A].

2.  b.  Abdeel,  one  of  the  men  sent  by  Jehoiakim  to  take  Baruch
and  Jeremiah  after  Baruch  had  read  the  roll  in  the  king's  presence
(Jer.  36  [©  43]  26,  ^rroSff  om.  BNAQ).

3.  The  father  of  JEHUCAL  or  JUCAL  (q.v.),  temp.  Zedekiah
(Jer.  37  [44]  3  atieiciov  [«],  38  [45]  i,  irvoW')-

4.  b.  Hananiah,  the  father  of  IRIJAH  [q.v.}  (Jer.  44[37]  13).

5.  i  Ch.  26  14  ;  see  MESHELEMIAH.

6.  One  of  the  b.  Bani,  Ezra  10  39  (creAe/nia  [B],  -ei  [L],  -ios  [A],
-eta  [«])=  i  Esd.  9  34,  SEI.EMIAS  (<reAe/u.ias  [IJA]).

7.  Another  of  the  b.  Bani  (Ezra  1041,  irvc^E'i  creAtfila  [B],
•ias  [A],  -eia  [K],  <ra|u.aias  [LI),  omitted  in  the  parallel  passage
in i Esd.  9  34. It  is  interesting that the sequence of  names
here, Sharai  ('"IIP),  Azarel,  and  Shelemiah  is  almost  identical
with  the  names  in  Jer.  36  26  Seraiah  (n^jr),  Azriel,  Shelemiah.

8.  The  father  of  HANANIAH  (y.v.),  Neh.  3  30  (reAe^ua  [B],
-as  W,  o-ee^ia  [A]).

9.  A  priest,  a  keeper  of  the  storehouses  (Neh.  13  13,  creAe^ta
[B*A],  €A.  [Bb],  .eAe^ua  [N]).

SHELEPH  (f]7f^,  in  pause,  c&Aed>  [AEL]),  a  son  of
Joktan  (Gen.  1026,  om.  B  i  Ch.  1  2of),  has  not  yet  been
identified  ;  but  similar  names  are  not  uncommon  in  S.
Arabia.  Instances  are  Sulaf  or  Salif,  a  tribe  in
Yemen:  Osiander,  ZDMG\\i^/.;  Si  If,  Hal.  AM.
86  ;  Salf  [many]  :  Glaser,  425  ;  cp  also  a  district  Salfie  :
Niebuhr,  Arabien,  247  ;  and  see  other  reff.  in  Di.  Gen.
[Cp  SEPHAR,  and  on  'Joktan,'  see  Crit.  Bib.}

., .  F-  B-

SHELESH  (B7B> ;  zeMH  [B].  ceAAnc  [A],  ceAe/v\
[L]),  a  name  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHER  (q.v.,  §  4  ii.),
i  Ch.  7  sst.

SHELOMI  rpViJ'),  father  of  Ahihud,  a  'prince'  of
Asher  (Nu.  3427';  ceAeM<e)i  [BAFL]).  See  SHELU
MIEL,  and  cp  ASHER,  §  i.

SHELOMITH  (H^Vj',  interchangeable  wit
[see  below  5]  ;  cp  the  fluctuations  between  Meshillemith
and  Meshillemoth.  The  vocalisation  is  doubtful  [cp
SOLOMON,  §  i],  and  the  name  being  evidently  southern,
a  connection  with  either  Ishmael  or  Salman  may  be
assumed  [Che.]).

1.  bath  DIHKI  [q.v.],  who  had  married  an  Egyptian  (or,  perhaps,
rather Misrite, i.e., N. Arabian  woman),  and  whose  son  was
stoned  for  blasphemy  (Lev.  24  n: craAu>neiS  [BAF], <raAanei#
[Bab],  o-aA/xiS  [L]).

2.  Daughter  of  Zerubbabel  (i  Ch.  3  19;  o-aAwjuetfei  [B],  -0i  [A],
-laitf  [L]).

3.  A  son  of  Rehoboam  (2  Ch.  11  20  ;  efxju.100  [B],  a-a^nud  [A],
o-aA<u,iu0  [L]).

4.  b.  Josiphiah  one  of  the  b'ne  BANI  {q.v.,  2] :  read  in  Ezra  8  10
'And  of  the  sons  of  Bani;  Shelomith,  son  of  Josiphiah '  (IMWK
(TaAfi^oue  [B],  wi. fiaavi  <T«Aeinnov9  [A],  TUV  vl.  <ra\ip.ta6  [L]),
cp  i  Esd.  836,  which  gives  ASSAI.IMOTH,  RV  SAI.IMOTH  (ao-
<Ta.\iiLu>B  [A,  the  as  belongs  to  the  preceding  ftavi],  [vliav]  aaAi-
(icofl  [L],  Oarcasl  traAet^'S  [B]).

Among  the  Levites  we  hnd  (5)  a  Shelomith  b.  -Shimei,  a
Gershonite  Levite  (i  Ch.  23  9,  Kt.  nioW,  RV  Shelomoth,
aAo>eelfi  [B],  .raAu^ece  [A],  ./unO  [L]) ;  (6)'a  chief  of  the  b'ne
Izhar,  a  Kohathite  Levite  (i  Ch.23i8,  <ra\tanu>8  [BL  -if  [L],
craAovM«>0  [A]),  whose  son  was  JAHATH  (q-r.)  (i  Ch.  24  22,
nto'W,  EV  SHELOMOTH,  aaAoj/xwe  [BA],  -tfl  [L]);  and  (7)  a
Levite  descended  from  Eliezer  b.  Moses  (i  Ch.2625^,  RV
SHELOMOTH,  craAu^ioe  [BA],  -16  and  o-aAajiifl  [L]  f.  25.  ^l-
mc'?E'I  and  MT  in  v.  26).

SHELUMIEL fx&ftf ;  c&AAMmA  [BAFL]),  b.
ZURISHADDAI,  a  'prince'  of  SIMEON  (§  9  ii.  n.  ;  Nu.
1 6  2 12  7  36  (ffana\n,\  [F])  4i  10 19 1  [all  P]. In  Judith
4448


SHEM

8 1 his name appears as SAMAEL, RV SALAMIKL
(ffa\a/j.i7)\  [BA],  cra/xa/xt^X  [N]).

Apparently  the  name  means  '  El  is  my  health  '  (8§  37,  50) ;
really,  however,  it  may  come  from  'NaVi?  ',  la1?!?  Shalamu  is
the  name  of  a  N.  Arabian  tribe  allied  to  the  Xabatstans  (see
SALMAH,  SHALMAI).  •£•_  K_  ^

SHEM  (Dt* ;  CHM;  -w),  the  eldest  of  the  three
sons  of  Noah,  and  therefore  always  mentioned  first
(Gen.  632  6 10  7 13  9 18  10 1  i  Ch.  14)  ;  the  rendering  of
Gen.  102i  in  AV  and  RV"«-  is  certainly  wrong  (cp

JAI'HETH).

If  an  appellative,  Shem  will  mean  'name' — i.e.,
renown.  In  this  case,  if  in  Gen.  9  it  is  really  equivalent

1  Name  to  Israe^'  'l  mav  conceivably  denote  the  ruling
or  noble  class  (cp  Gen.  64  Nu.  16z  i  Ch.
524)  in  antithesis  to  the  aborigines,  who  are  called  in
Job308,  'sons  of  the  impious,  yea,  sons  of  the  name
less,  beaten  out  of  the  land'  (so  We.  CffW  13,  Bit.
Urgesch.  328 /).  There  is  a  strong  presumption,  how
ever,  that  the  name  of  this  important  patriarch  has  a
longer  history  and  a  more  recondite  meaning.  In  short,
the  legends  in  the  early  part  of  Genesis  being,  according
to  the  most  plausible  view,  Jerahmeelite  (see  PARADISE,
§§  6,  9),  and  '  Ishmael '  being  used  as  a  synonym  for
Jcrahmeel,  it  is  very  probable  that  '  Shem  '  is  a  modified
fragment  of  the  ethnic  name  Ishmael.

To  derive  (with  Goldziher)  from  ^yy  '  to  be  high,'  and  explain
_'the  high  one  '  or  even  the  '  Heaven-god,'  has  no  indication  in
its  favour.  More  probably,  Shem  is  a  shortened  form  of  a  name
like  SHEMUEL  (f.v.),  or  rather,  if  we  suppose  that  en  (Ham)  is  a
fragment  of  SNDrtT  (Jerahmeel),  Q^  (Shem)  has  arisen  out  of
a  fragment  of  ^xy^c"  (Ishmaer).

That  the  redactor,  who  here  as  elsewhere  emended  jjp(Kenaz)
into  jyjj  (Canaan)  supposed  cty  to  mean  '  Israel  is  possible
enough.  But  critically,  such  a  view  is  highly  improbable.  See
Gunkel  (Gfn.ft)  Ti,f.  [1902]),  whose  attempt,  however,  to  bring
what  is  said  on  Canaan  in  Noah's  oracles  into  connection  with
the  historical  situation  in  the  second  millennium  B.C.  seems  on  the
whole  premature,  in  the  absence  of  a  thorough  textual  criticism.

The  special  blessing  by  which  Shem  was  rewarded
is now often read thus  : 1 '  Bless,
O Yahwe, the tents of Shem  ('<  Tj-p
Ct?  '"?™)  ; let  Canaan  be  his  servant'  (Gen.  926  Jj).

It  is  more  plausible,  however,  to  think  that  v.  26  a
should  run,  ^nycy  ''  Tjna.  The  Jerahmeelites  were,  in
fact,  (see  MOSES,  §  14)  the  early  tutors  of  the  Israelites
in  religion.  Here  and  in  v.  27  the  underlying  original
text  apparently  spoke  of  Noah's  eldest  son  as  '  Ishmael. '
The  subjugation  of  Kenaz  (not  '  Canaan,'  as  the
traditional  text)  refers  to  matters  beyond  our  ken  (cp
KENAZ).  Another  writer  thinks  to  explain  'Shem'  to
his  readers  by  identifying  '  Shem  '  with  '  Eber '  (Gen.
102i).  Here  it  is  necessary  to  transpose  b  and  r,  and
read 'Arab  :  in  fact,  Ishmael  (Shem)  and  'Arab  are  nearly
synonymous.  On  all  these  subjects,  as  well  as  on  the
use  of  'Shem'  in  P  (Gen.  1022  11 10,  cp  i  Ch.  Ii724)
see  Crit.  Bib.  The  reference  in  Ecclus.  49  19  is  no  doubt
to  Shein's  important  genealogical  position.  A  late
Jewish  tradition  (adopted  by  Selden  and  Lightfoot)
identified  Shem  with  MELCHIZEDEK  (q.v.).  Cp
SETHITES.  T.  K.  c.

SHEM,  NAMES  WITH.  Two  Hebrew  names  have
been  brought  under  this  head — Semu'el  (Samuel)  and
Semida'  (Shemida).  The  former  of  these  is  compared
by  Winckler  (<7/li30,  n.  3)  with  Sumu-abi  and  Sumu-
la-ilu,  the  names  of  two  Babylonian  kings  of  the  third
millennium  B.  c. ,  whom  this  scholar  considers  to  belong
to  a  dynasty  of  western  Semitic  or  ratjier  Canaanitish
conquerors.  According  to  Hommel,  Sumu-abi  means
'  Sumu  is  my  father,'  and  Xumu  is  a  contraction  of
htm/iu  (htmuhu) — i.e. ,  'his  name,'  a  periphrasis  for
'God'  (AffT8$f.  88/.).  He  considers  that  Semu'el
and  Semida'  may  safely  be  explained  as  containing  this
element  siimhu.  It  seems  very  improbable,  however,
that  the  periphrasis  '  name  '  for  '  God  '  should  have  been
of  such  remote  antiquity  among  the  Israelites,  when  we

1  So  Schorr,  Gratz,  and  recently  Ball,  Holzinger,  Gunkel.
4449


2.  Traditions.


SHEMAIAH

recall  that  (see  NAME,  §  7)  it  is  specially  characteristic
of  the  latest  biblical  Hebrew  writing,  and  we  may
venture  to  follow  Jastrow  (JBL  19  105),  who  is  of  opinion
that  fumu  in  the  names  quoted  by  Winckler  and
Hommel  is  an  entirely  different  word  from  the  Hebrew
sem.

Perhaps  a  sober  criticism  of  these  ancient  names,  the  Baby-
Ionian  as  well  as  the  Hebrew,  may  lead  to  the  conclusion  that
etymologies  which  have  the  most  superficial  plausibility  are
generally  fallacious.  See,  further,  SHEMUEL,  SHEMIDA.

T.  K.  C.

SHEMA  (VOX?  ;  CAM[A]&  [BAL]),  one  of  the  cities  in
the  extreme  S.  of  Judah  towards  Edom  (Josh.  1626:
C&AM&&  [B]).  Cp  the  clan-name  SHEMA,  i.  It  is
not  included  in  the  list  of  Simeonite  towns  either  in
Josh.  19  1-6  or  in  MT  of  i  Ch.  428-31  (but  see  v.  28  ©),
but  in  the  former  of  these  passages  (Josh.  19  2)  we  find
SHEBA,  plainly  a  mere  variant  (cra/xaa  [B]  ;  but  <ra/3[e]e
[AL]),  and  in  ©  i  Ch.  428  we  find  <ra/xa  [BL],  -aa  [A].
The  connection  of  Shema  with  Simeon  seems  obvious.
The  Sheba  in  Josh.  192  was  probably  introduced  as  a
supplement  from  1526  after  the  calculation  'thirteen
cities  '  (v.  6)  had  been  made  ;  RV's  '  or  Sheba  '  is  too
bold.  See  further  JESHUA,  SIMEON,  §  10.

SHEMA  (ltt?K;,  §  50).  i.  A  Calebite  clan  which,  like
Korah,  Tappuah,  and  Rekem,  traced  itself  to  Hebron,
and  is  represented  as  the  'father'  of  Raham,  the  'father'
of  Jorkeam,  i  Ch.243/.  (cre^ao  [BA,  the  latter  omits
in  v.  43],  ffa.fj.cL  [L]).  Note  the  accumulation  of
'Jerahmeelite'  names,  and  the  place-name  SHEMA.

2.  A  clan  of  REUBEN  (§  13)  ; i  Ch.  58  (o-a/aa  [BA],  cre/ueei  [L]).

3.  b. Hushim  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  \q.v.,  §  9  ii.  j3]  ;
i  Ch.  S  13  (a-a.fj.0.  [BA],  aa|u.a.a  [L]),  obviously  the  same  as  Shimei
in  v.  21. See/p/T  xi.  103  i. See  SHIMEI  (8).

4.  In  list  of  Ezra's  supporters  (see  EZRA  ii.,  §  13  {/.})  ;  Neh.
8  4  (o-a/oicuas  [BNAL]).


SHEMAAH  (nrp'/'n,  whence  AVms-  HASMAAH),  a
Gibeathite,  father  of  AHIEZER  (i  Ch.  12  3  ;  AMA  [BN],
CAMAA  [A],  A.CMA  [L]),  see  DAVID,  §  nc.  The
Pesh.  presupposes  here  the  name  of  a  separate  hero,
VlJDan  n^yoty  '  Shemaiah  the  Gibeathite.  '

SHEMAIAH  (nynti,  also  -in^DL".  see  below,
either  a  religious  name  ='  Yahwe  hears,'  or  a  late  (?)
expansion  of  the  old  clan-name  "l^DL",  SHIMEI  [Che.]  ;
note  the  frequency  of  the  name  among  priests,  Levites,
and  prophets,  whose  historical  connection  with  the
southern  border-land  is  certain  ;  c&AAAl&[c])-  It  is
impossible  always  to  differentiate  accurately  or  (as  the
case  may  be)  to  identify  the  various  bearers  of  this
name.

1.  A  prophet  temp.  Rehoboam,  who  deprecated  war
with Israel (i K.  1222  =  2  Ch.  11  2 [ib. n'yar]), and
prophesied  at  the  invasion  of  Judah  by  Shishak  (2  Ch.
12s  7,  <ra/j.fj.aias  [B]). He  is  mentioned  as  the  writer
of  the  history  of  Rehoboam  (ib. v. 15),  cp  also  in  ©B
i  K.  12  (240,  ed.  Sw.).

2.  A  false  prophet  who  for  endeavouring  to  hinder
his work was sternly rebuked by  Jeremiah (Jer. 29
[<5  36]  24-32  [cra^eas  N  vv. 24,  si/.];  cp  JEKKMIAH
[BOOK],  §  17  ;  in  v.  24  irryctr).

He  is  styled  the  Nehelamite  («pSn:n,  cuAOjUeirT/c  [B],
e\afj.LTijv  [NAQ]),  which  reminds  us  of  rov  ev\ap.ti
applied  to  SHEMAIAH  (i)  in  (P's  [B,  in  L  e\a./MT-r)i>]
addition  to  i  K.  12  (?'.  240).  Probably  both  aiXa/xeiriji'
and  €v\afj.et  point  to  •c'rn  =  '^KCriT  '  Jerahmeelite  '
[Che.]  (cp  cS'n=SncnT,  2  S.  10i6  [Che.];  see  also
SIBRAIM).  The  prophet  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  in  i  K.
1129,  it  has  elsewhere  (see  SHILOH,  2)  been  suggested
by  Cheyne,  is  most  probably  a  man  from  the  Negeb.
So,  to,  in  the  intention  of  the  writer,  is  this  Shemaiah.

3.  Father  of  Urijah  of  Kirjath-jearim,  a  prophet  (Jer.  20  [©
83]  20,  in'l'SB'i  f-aa-fnv  fx]).

4.  Father  of  Delaiah,  a  prince  temp.  Jehoiakim  (Jer.  36  [©
43]  12,  o-eAe/uiov  [BAQ],  o-eSexiou  [«]).

5.  b. Shechaniah, a descendant of  Zerubbabel (i Ch.  822
<ra/uaa[B*once],  cre/uea[L]). This  is  also  the  name  of  one  of  those
who  repaired  the  temple  (Neh.  3  29,  ere/atia  [«]).

4450


SHEMARIAH


SHEMUEL


6  b.  Joel,  of  REUBEN  (§13)  (iCh.  5  4,  vtptti  [KL],  <r*ntiv  [A]).

7  b. Hasshub,  a  Merarite  Levite  (i  Ch.  9  14  cp  Neh.  11  15,
<rc;i«ias  [L]). See  13.

ti.  Father  of  Obadiah,  a  "Levite  belonging  to  Jecluthun
(i  Ch.  ft  16,  o-oficia  [H]  o-afiiou  [A|,  cp  Neh.  11  17  b).  See  13.

g.  Chief  of  the  b'ne  Elizaphan,  temp.  David  (i  Ch.  158
<rafj.fa<;  |x],  o-e/naia  [A],  "'.  1  1  <rajuai  [n],  atfi.ti.av  [A]).

10. b.  Nathaneel,  a  Levite  scribe  (i  Ch.  246,  <7a^/u.aiaf  [A]).

n.  b.  Obed-edom  (i  Ch.  264,  cra/unas  [A],  ;w.  6./C,  crafxat
[B  v.  7J,  o-aneia,  (re/^fia  (Al).  See  13.

12.  A Levite, temp.  Jchoshaphat (2  Ch.  17s,  cra^oua? [B],
(rajioj/tas  [AJ).

13.  A  son  of  Jeduthun  (2  Ch.  '29  14,  o-a/neias  [A]). Cp  7,8,11,
and  see  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  7  (ii.  </).

14.  A  Levite  house  temp.  Hezekiah(2  Ch.  31  15,  <rt>i«i  [HAL]),
probably  the  same  as  the  name  in  Neh.  10s  126  (BN*A  om.,
o-e/oifias,  Kc-a  '"«•  SUP-L),  JA.  18  (BN*A  om.,  o-e/ueia,  j«c-a  nig.  inf.L)
where Jehonathan is the head, 12  35 (where one Jonathan
b.  Shemaiah  is  named).

15.  A  Levite  of  the  time  of  Josiah  (2  Ch.  35  9,  cp  perhaps
SMIMEI,  31  12  ;  in  both  cases  Cononiah  precedes  as  the  name  of  a
brother). In  i  Esd.  lg  SAMAIAS  (<ra/u<uat).

16.  One  of  the  b'ne  Adonikam,  a  post-exilic  family  who  came
up  to  Jerusalem  with Ezra,  Ezra  8  13  (era/xaeta  [A]),  in i  Esd.
839  SAMAIAS.

17.  A  teacher,  Ezra  8  i6(o-«/meia  [A],  <re|u.eeiS  [L]),  in  i  Esd.  843
MAS.MAN,  RV  MAAS.MAS  (ju.aacr/u.ai'  [BA|,  cre/xeia  [L]),  repeated
in  v.  44  MAMAIAS,  RV  SAMAIAS  (om.  L).

1  8.  One  of  the  b'ne  Harim,  the  priestly  family  of  Ezra  10  21,  in
x  Esd.  !>2i  SAMEIUS,  RV  SAMEUS  (ftuuuos  [B],  o-a^aios  [A]).

19.  One  of  the  sons  of  HAKIM  'of  Israel'  (Ezral(>3i  <r«/ica
[it], crafxeia; [L]), in I Esd.  932 SABBEUS (o-a/3j3ata« [HA],
iruj»«ias  [L]).

20.  b.  Delaiah  b.  Mehetabeel,  a  prophet  temp.  Neh.,  bribed
by  Sanballat  to  hinder  the  Jews  from  building  the  wall  (Neh.
6  10  a-f^eei  [BN],  <re|iiei  [A]).

21.  22,  two  men  present  at  Ezra's  dedication  of  the  wall  (Neh.
12  34,  o-apcua  [BN],  <raa,i<uas  [A]  36).

23.  RV  but  AV  SAMAIAS,  'the  great,'  kinsman  of  Tobit  (Tob.
5i2yC,  o-e/neou  [B],  irffxeAiou  [}<],  <re|xeiou  [A],  the  Heb.  Vs.  ed.
Neubauer  has  jvClSc1)-


SHEMARIAH  (iT-)pP  and  [i  Ch.  125]  -
usually  [§  30]  explained  'whom  Yahwe  guards,'  but
probably  rather  a  modification  of  the  ethnic  SHI  MR  i
[?.»•];  CAM  ARI  Ate])-  2  Ch.  11  19  AV  [by  printer's
error?]  gives  SHAMARIAH).  All  the  occurrences
suggest  X.  Arabian  origin.  T.  K.  C.

1.  One of David's heroes, i  Ch.  12s (cra/u.apaia [B]). See
DAVID,  §  n,  (a)  (iii.),  col.  1030/1

2.  A  son  of  Rehoboam,  by  Mahalath  (  =  Jerahmeelith  [Che.]),
2  Ch.  11  19.

3.  4. Contemporaries  of  Ezra,  who  had  taken  foreign  wives,
Ezra  10  32  (-eia  [B],  -id  [NA]);  ?>.  41  (-eia  [BN],  -etas  [A]).

SHEMEBER  pIUX::''),  Gen.  142. See  SHINAB.


SHEMED  (~IP£),  i  Ch.  812  RV,  AV  SHAMED.

SHEMER.  i.  OP.t?;;  ceMHR,  CA/V\HR[B],  ce-  [A],
CGMAAHp  [L/D-  According  to  i  K.1624  Shemer  was
the  owner  of  the  hill  which  Omri  bought,  whence  the
place  received  the  name  of  Samaria  (['nsc').  See
SAMARIA.

2  and  3.  AV  SHAMER  (icr),  properly  a  clan-name
(see  Stade,  7,  A  T\V  5i66),  but  applied  to  real  or
supposed  persons:  a  Levite,  i  Ch.  646  [31]  (cre/m./uLrip)  ;
and  ben  Heber  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHER  [q.v.,  §  4  ii.],
i  Ch.  ?34  (fffWlP  [B],  ffwfj.-rip  [AL])  ;  in  v.  32  he  is
called  SHOMER  [</•"'•]•

SHEMIDA  (J?TP"'),  a  Gileadite  clan  belonging  to
MANASSEH  (§  9)  (Nu.  2632,  CYMACR  ;  Josh.  172,
CYM&peiM[B],  ce/v\ipAe[A],  cAMiAAe[L];  i  Ch.  7ig
AV  Shemidah  :  ce/v\eipA  [BA],  CAMGI^A  [I-]),  after
whom  the  Shemidaites  were  called  (NTu.  I.e.  *>irrpL!'n  ;
CY/v\A6p[e]l  [BAFL]).

May  we  venture  to  hold  that  CK'  here  is  a  divine  appellation?
See  NAMES,  §  43,  SHEM  [NAMES  WITH].  The  alternative  is  to
suppose  a  corruption  SNi'CC"-

SHEMINITH.  UPON,  RV  'set  to  the  Sheminith  '
(JVanDfrr^l?;  6»«ARU  in  Pss.  Ynep  THC  orAonc

©BNA  in  T  Ch.  ,  AMACeN6l9  ;  Jer.  super  octavo  [Ps.  fi  i],
pro  octam  [Ps.l2i];  eni  THC  orAoHC  [Aq.  ,  Ps.6i],
nepi  THC  OfAOHC  [©L  in  i  Ch.,  Sym.];  'I'g.
'on  the  lyre  with  eight  strings'),  a  technical  phrase

4451


relative  (according  to  the  ordinary  view)  to  the  musical
performance  of  certain  psalms  (Pss.  6  1'2  ;  cp  i  Ch.
1021).  Ewald,  Olshausen,  Winckler,  explain  'in  the
eighth  mode,  or  key '  ;  Gesenius  and  Delitzsch,  '  for
the  bass '  ;  Gratz  agrees  with  the  Targum.  It  is
admitted,  however,  that  these  explanations  are  pure
guesses,  and  the  most  plausible  view  of  other  psalm  titles
favours  the  assumption  that  the  text  is  corrupt.  Most
probably  n'J'OB'rr^y  is  a  corruption  of  c'j;vKS  '  of  the
Ethanites,'  or  better  of  O^tyOP^  '  of  the  Ishmaelites.  'l
We  thus  obtain  an  adequate  explanation  of  Sheminith
in  the  titles  of  Pss.  6  and  12,  and  probably  too  of  Gittith,
Neginath,  and  Shoshannim  (see  PSALMS,  B(X>K  OF,  §  26,
but  cp  Music,  §  9).  We  also  find  rrrcca-ty  in  i  Ch.
152i  where  it  seems  to  correspond  to  nio^y^y  at  the  end
of  v.  20.  Here,  however,  it  is  in  all  probability  a
corruption  of  the  name  SHEMIRAMOTH  (q.v.),  just  as
'Azaziah,'  which  Benzinger  (KHC  ad  loc.)  rightly
pronounces  suspicious,  is  virtually  a  misplaced  repetition
of  the  name  '  Aziel. '  These  two  proper  names  occur
close  by,  in  v.  20.

It  may  also  be  noticed,  since  the  commentaries  give  no  very
defensible  explanations,  that  nV3l7  (<8  TOV  [tv ]i<T\iicrai. ;  RV  '  to
lead  '),  which  follows  JVJ'DB'rr^V  in  i  Ch.  15  21  should  be  pointed
ns:?;  it  is  a  synonym  of  TCfl,  'continually,'  which  occurs  in  a
similar  context ;  see  PSALMS,  BOOK  OF,  §  26,  col.  3945,  n.  4.  The
other  mysterious  phrase  nicSjT ^j;  (RV  '  set  to  Alamoth  ')  in  15  20
comes  from  Q'ON1?.  a  mutilated  and  corrupt  form  of  C'^21
'psalteries.'  Cp  Ps.  26 4^,  where  C'O'JNJ  is  a  corruption  of
D'733,  'impious.'  T.  K.  C.

SHEMIRAMOTH  (T^OTD^),  a  Levite  name,  i  Ch.
15i82o  16s  2  Ch.  178  (here  Kt.  n'lP'Hpt!' ;  variously

ce/v\eipAM6o9,  CA/v\Ap[e]iM.,  CAMCIPAM.,  ce/vup.,
CIMlp.)-  According  to  Schrader  (A',-//1'2'  366)  equiva
lent  to  the  Ass.  name  Sammuramat,  which  occurs  as  a
woman's  name  on  the  monuments,  especially  on  the
statues  of  Xebo  from  Nimrud.  G.  Hoffm. ,  however
(Svrische  Acten,  137),  thinks  that  Shemiramoth  was
originally  a  place-name  meaning  '  images  of  Shemiram  '
(  =  Name  of  Ram  or  'the  Exalted  One'),  just  as
Anathoth  may  mean  '  images  of  Anath. '

'  Shem-ba'al  '  (name  of  Baal)  was  a  name  or  form  of  Astarte
(see  Inscr.  of  Eshmun'azar,  /.  48)  and  the  story  of  the  conquests
of  Semiramis  in  Upper  Asia  is  '  a  translation  into  the  language
of  political  history  of  the  diffusion  and  victories  of  her  worship
in  that  region.'  The  main  centre  of  this  diffusion  was  Bambyce
or  Hierapolis  (WRS,  '  Ctesias  and  the  Semiramis  legend,'
Eng.  Hist.  Rev.,  April  1887,  p.  317).

But  what  probability  is  there  in  either  of  the  above
explanations?  None  at  all,  if  the  analogy  of  other
Levitical  names  in  Ch.  is  to  be  trusted.  In  2  Ch.  178
it  is  specially  plain  that  the  names  among  which  this
strange  form  occurs  are  ethnics  (cp  GENEALOGIES  i.,
§  7s).  It  so  happens  too  that  the  form  which  appears
in  that  passage  suggests  the  true  explanation.  It  is
not  niDVDB1  (Shemiramoth?),  but  nirrnsB',  where  nisCre)
is  presumably  a  corruption  of  a  dittographed  »ic,  and
may  safely  be  disregarded.  SHIMRI  (q.v.)  is  a  good
Levitical  name,  according  to  the  Chronicler  ;  in  2  Ch.
29 13  it  occurs  just  before  Je'uel  or  Je'iel,  which  name
(i.e.,  Je'iel)  is  apparently  a  mutilated  form  of  Ja'aziel
(see  i  Ch.  15 18  16s).  niOTCC',  too  is,  in  2  Ch.
31 13,  worn  down  into  '  Jerimoth  '  (  =  Jerahmeel ).  On
'Shemiramoth'  in  i  Ch.  Io2o/  see  further  SHEMINITH.

T.  K.  c.

SHEMUEL  (TtpDfF,  CAMOYHA).  i.  i  Ch.  633  [t8]
RV  SAMUEL,  the  prophet  (see  SAMUEL).

2.  b. Ammihud, a chief  of  SIMEON (§ 8 iii., last
note),  Nu.  342o; (ffa\a/jur)\).

3.  b.  Tola,  of  ISSACHAR  (§7)  (i  Ch.  72  ;  icrafj.ovr}\
[B.  a  dittographed  i]).

The  name  is  difficult.  For  discussions  see  NAMES,  §  39,
where  '  bearing  the  name  of  God '  ir,  suggested  ;  Driver,  TRS
iT,ff.  (on  i  S.  1 20,  where  Gesenius's  explanation,  'name  of
God'  is  pronounced  'as  obvious  as  it  is  natural');  Hommel,

1  my  is  several  times  (^..f.Ps.92  n)  miswritten  for  7KpQ|r%
4452


SHBN

AHT,  ioo  ('his  name  is  God');  Jastrow,  JBL  10  [1900]  82  .#
('name  [  =  son]  of  God  ').  But  is  the  final  -el  really=  *?K,  'God'?
See  SAUL,  §  i,  SHEBUEL,  where  the  possibility  of  a  connection
between  Sa'ul  and  Semii'el,  and  between  SemCiel  and  Sebu'el  is
referred  to,  and  two  other  names  are  indicated,  belonging  per
haps  to  the  same  group,  Ishmael  and  SHODAL  (y.v.).  ®'s  form,
however,  in  2(also=MT's  SHELU.MIEL  [ff.v.])  suggests  a  com
parison  with  SALMAH  [y.v.].  Note  that  '  Ammihud  '  (see  2),  or
rather  Aminihur,  very- possibly,  like  the  shorter  form  Hur,  comes
from  Jerahmeel.  Father  and  son  both  seem  to  have  ethnic
names.  T.  K.  C.

SHEN  (|t?'n),  a  locality,  between  which  and  Mizpeh
Samuel  set  up  the  stone  Eben-ezer  (i  S.  7 12).  But
jB:n  means  merely  '  the  rock '  and  one  expects  to  find
some  known  and  specific  place  mentioned.  ©BAL  (r^s
TraXcuas)  and  Pesh.  point  to  the  reading  nae*'  (cp  2  Ch.
1819),  which  is  accepted  by  Wellhausen,  Driver,  H.
P.  Smith,  and  others.  See  JESHANAH.

SHENAZZAR  [RV],  or  [AV]  SHENAZAR  p-V^'),
a  son  of  Jeconiah  (Jehoiachin),  and  uncle  of  Zerubbabel
(r  Ch.  3i8;  aaveaap  [BA],  ffavaaap  [L],  sennaser,
senneser  [Vg.  ]).  His  name  is  variously  explained  as  a
mutilation  of  ii'Kl?3E'iC'  (so  Marq. ,  see  SHESHBAZZAR)
and  as  =  Sin-usur,  '  Sin  (the  moon-god),  protect  ! '  cp  on
an  Ass.  seal  ix-ims?,  Sin-sar-usur,  'Sin,  protect  the  king  ! ' l
CIS  288,  where  the  same  incorrect  Assyrian  pronuncia
tion  [c-  for  D,  see  SANBALLAT]  is  presupposed.  He  was
plausibly  identified  by  Howorth  (Acad.,  1893,  P-  17S)>
and  then  by  Kosters  (Herstel,  47),  Ed.  Meyer  (Ent.  des
Jud.  77),  Marquart  (Fund.  55),  with  Sheshbazzar.
Neither  of  the  Assyriological  combinations,  however,  is
quite  satisfactory,  and  the  other  names  of  sons  of
Jeconiah  are  explained  elsewhere  as  representing  gentilics
of  the  Xegeb.  This  suggests  that  ISN:C<  may  be  a  cor
ruption  of  -wity  (see  SHINAR),  which  is  itself  possibly  a
corruption  of  TU^ — i.e. ,  the  S.  Geshur.  See  SHESH-

BAZZAK.  T.  K.  C.

SHENIR  (TOb*),  Dt.  39  AV,  RV  SENIR.

SHEOL  (?tetjJ»).  The  origin  of  the  Hebrew  term
for  the  world  of  the  dead  is  not  a  mere  question  of
archaeology  ;  we  cannot  but  expect  it  to  throw  light  on
the  early  religion,  or  superstition,  of  the  Hebrews.
Possibly,  if  not  probably,  it  has  an  Assyrian  origin.
According  to  Frd.  Delitzsch  formerly  (Par.  121  ;  Prol.
47  145  ;  Heb.  Lang.  20)  the  Assyrian  word  correspond
ing  to  S661  is  Su'alu  ;  he  was  followed  by  A.  Jeremias
(Bab. -ass.  Vorstell.  62)  and  Gunkel  (Schopf.  154).
Jensen,  however  (Kosmol.  222 ft),  denies  the  existence
of  such  a  word  as  su'alu,  and  Zimmern  (in  Gunk.
Schopf.  154,  n.  5)  says  that  certainty  has  not  yet  been
attained.  Delitzsch  himself  omits  su'alu  in  his  Ass.
H  WB,  and  Schwally  (Das  Leben  nach  dem  Todc,  89,  n.  2)
assents  to  the  decision  of  Jensen.  A  critical  re-examina
tion  of  the  four  relevant  passages  in  Assyrian  vocabularies
was  urgently  called  for.  This  has  been  given  by  Jastrow
(AJSL 1 4 165^ ),  who  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  Jensen's
position  is  untenable,  and  interprets  the  Ass.  su'alu  as
'  the  place  of  inquiry  ' — i.e.,  the  place  whence  oracles  can
be  obtained.2  Provisionally  we  may  be  content  with
this  at  any  rate  possible  explanation,  remembering  that
one  of  the  Babylonian  terms  for  'priest'  is  sailii  (lit.
inquirer),  and  that  the  Hebrew  saal  is  frequently  used  of
consulting  an  oracle  (e.g. ,  Judg.  1 1  Hos.  4 12  Ezek.
21  21  [26],  etc. ).  We  may  venture  therefore  to  hold  that
when  the  primitive  Hebrews  used  the  name  ShSol  they
may  have  thought  of  the  power  of  the  dead  in  the  under
world  to  aid  the  living  by  answering  their  inquiries.
In  course  of  time  the  priestly  representatives  of  the
established  religion  would  naturally  succeed  in  checking
this  practice.  Of  primitive  Hebrew  religion,  however,

1  [The  provenience of  this seal is  unknown. Cp  also  the
parallel  formation  is  ID  1DN  (  =  Asur-sar-usur,  ib.  250),  '  Assur,
protect  the  king  ! '— s.  A.  c.]

2  For  Jastrow's  views  on  the  stem  saal  (whence  both  su'tilu
and  Se'61)  see  his  article  mJBL  19  [1900],  pp.  82.^

4453


SHEPHAM

we  have  in  fact  very  little  direct  evidence  ;  survivals  of
it  may  be  found  in  later  superstitious  usages,  and  this
is  nearly  all  that  we  know.  Nor  must  we  suppose  that
all  the  dead  had  power  to  furnish  oracles  to  the  living.
This  power  was  an  element  of  divinity,  and  it  was  prob
ably  only  heroes  like  Ea-bani,  who  appears  to  Gilgames
(Jensen,  Mythen  und  Epen,  263  ;  Jastrow,  RBA  511  ;
Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civ.  589),  and  like  Samuel  (i  S.
287^),  who  were  consulted  for  oracles.

To  the  later  Hebrews  Sheol  appeared  like  a  monster
which  '  enlarged  its  greed,  and  opened  its  mouth  with
out  measure'  (Is.  014  ; cp  Hab.  2s  Prov.  272o  30is/.).
Its  leading  characteristic  is  darkness  (Job  102i/. );  it
is  the  land  of  dust — -\sy  ('dust'),  can  indeed  be  used
as  a  synonym  for  S'IN^  (Sheol),  see  Job  17 16  20  n  2126
Ps.  30 10 [9]. Like  the  Babylonian  Aralu  it  was  far  below
in  the  earth  (Job  118  26s,  etc.). Hence  "?iKC>, Sheol
and  iia  (pit)  sometimes  receive  the  epithets  rvrirw  or
ni'nnn,  '  nether  '  (Dt.  3222  Ps.  8613  887 [6]) ;  ancfheaven
and  Sheol  are  the  farthest  opposites  (Is.  7n  Am.  92  Ps.
1398). Silence  as  a  rule  reigns  supreme  (see,  however,
Is.  14  10). It  is  a  land  whence  there  is  no  return  (Job
7 10)  ; so  too  the Babylonians  called it irsit la tart,
'  the  land  without  return  '  (for  other  names  see  Jensen,
Kosmol.  215-225). Still  it  was  a  land  of  order  ; it  was
figured  as  a  city  with  gates  (Is.  38 10  Ps.  9 13  [14]  107 18
Job  8817), and both in the gospels (Mt.  16i8, cp
HADES)  and in the  Talmud the same  conception  is
found. On the state of the dwellers in Sheol, see
DEAD,  ESCHATOLOGY  (references  on  col.  1390  f. ),  and
on  the  whole  question see  Jastrow, Religion  of  Bab.
and  Ass.,  560,  606  ff.  ; Charles,  Eschatology  ;  Schwally,
Das  Leben  nach  dem  Tode,  59-66  ;  A.  Jeremias,  Bab.-
ass. I'orstelliingen  •vom  Leben  nach  dem  Tode,  106-126.
The  following  is  the  description  of  the  Babylonian  Hades  at
the  opening  of  the  '  Descent  of  Istar '  {KB  6  i,  p.  81)  : —
To  the  land  without  return,  the  earth  . .  .
['Set']  Istar,  the  daughter  of  Sin,  her  ear.
The  daughter  of  Sin  '  set '  her  ear
To  the  dark  house,  the  dwelling  of  Irkalla,
To  the  house,  from  which  he  who  enters  never  emerges,
To  the  way,  going  on  which  has  no  turning  back,
To  the  house,  into  which  he  who  enters  is  without  light,
When  dust  is  their  nourishment,  clay  their  food,
They  see  not  light,  they  sit  in  darkness,
Dust  (rusts)  on  door  and  bolt.

SHEPHAM  (DSt;,  'a  bare  height '?—§§  75,  99),  as
the  text  of  Nu.  34  io/.  stands,  is  the  name  of  a  point
on  the  ideal  eastern  border  of  Canaan,  mentioned  with
HAZAR-ENAN  [c/.v.~\  and  RIBLAH  [</.''•];  like  Riblah,
it  is  unmentioned  in  the  ||  passage,  Ezek.  47 15-18.  Van
Kasteren's  identification  of  it  with  Ofdni,  on  the  upper
course  of  the  Nahr  er-Rakkad,  SE.  of  the  lake  called
Birket  Ram  (Baed.  <2'  266),  is  not  one  of  his  best  (AVz'.
Bibl.,  1895,  pp.  23-36),  and  his  argument  to  prove
that  the  'Aphamiyd  of  Sam.  and  Targ.  Jerus.  is  derived
from  Shepham  is  more  ingenious  than  convincing.
This  and  similar  names  are,  according  to  the  present
writer's  theory,  distinctively  '  Jerahmeelite '  or  S.  Ca-
naanitish  names  (Shephupham  [i  Ch.  85  Shephuphan]
and  Shuphamite,  Nu.  2639;  Siphmoth,  i  S.  3028  ;
Shuppim,  one  of  the  sons  of  Aher  =  Ahiram  =  Jerahmeel,
i  Ch.  7 12;  Shiphmite,  i  Ch.  27 27).  This  confirms  the
view  that  the  geography  of  Nu.  34 1-15  and  of  Ezek.
47 13-21  has  been  edited,  with  the  view  of  expanding
the  limits  of  the  region  referred  to.  This  editing,  for
which  many  parallels  can  be  given  (e.g. ,  Gen.  10
Nu.  1821-25  Dt.34i-3  Josh.  11  28.  24 1-9),  would  not
have  been  possible  if  some  of  the  names  in  the
original  document  were  not  found  in  more  than  one
part  of  the  country.  A  Riblah  and  a  Hamath  for
instance  doubtless  existed  in  the  far  N.,  but  it  is  not
at  all  likely  that  a  Shepham  was  to  be  found  there.
The  real  Shepham  was  apparently  on  the  E.  border  of
the  land  of  Kenaz  (the  original  document  must  have
spoken  of  '  the  land  of  Kenaz '  [?jp],  not  '  the  land  of
Canaan'  [JJ;H]),  between  Hazar-enan  (Hazar-elam  =

4454


SHEPHATIAH


SHEPHERD  OP1  HERMAS


H.-jerahmeel?)  and Riblah  or  perhaps  rather Harbel
(=the  city  of  Jerahmeel). See  RIBLAH,  SHIPHMITE.

(i0i(AL  in Nil.  ;(4  iaf.  gives  <reir<l>a/j.af>  [I0';  in  r>.  10,  -fia]. In
7/.  ii  ap  belongs  to  the  following  word  /3>)Aa  [read  op/3r)Ao|  ;  V.  10 I
has  been  adjusted  to  v.  n.)  T.  K.  C.


SHEPHATIAH  (n;pa,  and  liTEi^'  in  nos.  4,  5,
6,  apparently  '  Yahwe  judges  '  [§  36],  cp  DQw'i'T  ;  C&-
<J><vr[e]lA  [BXAL]).  [It  may  be  safer  to  hold  the  name
to  be  corrupt.  In  i  the  names  of  David's  wives  and
children  being  in  several  cases,  as  it  seems,  corruptions
of  tribal  names  (e.g.,  Abigail,  Absalom,  Haggith,  Abital,
Ithream,  Kglah),  and  a  name  compounded  with  -iah
being  quite  isolated  in  this  list,  we  are  bound  to  explain
Shephatiah  if  possible  as  a  tribal  name.  According  to
analogy  it  may  well  be  an  expansion  of  <BEI?  =  'nss,
—  i.e.,  '  belonging  to  ZEPHATH'  (see  SHAPHAT).  This
theory  explains  all  the  occurrences  of  the  name.  In
2  the  companions  of  Shephatiah  are  of  'Jerahmeelite'
origin  (see  PASHHUR)  ;  for  4,  cp  the  Calebite  HAREPH,
and  see  HAKIPH  ;  and  in  the  case  of  3,  5,  6  and  9  the
names  Reuel,  Michael,  Maachah  and  Mahalaleel  are  all
corruptions  of  Jerahmeel.  With  regard  to  7,  it  must
be  clear  that,  like  the  b'ne  Arah  and  the  b'ne  Klam,  the
b'ne  Shephatiah  were  of  Jerahmeelite  origin  ;  cp  Neh.
114,  and  see  PEREZ.  Read  '  b'ne  Sefathl.  '  T.  K.  c.]

i.  b.  David  and  Abital  (2  8.84  i  Ch.  3  3,  o-a/Sai-eia  [B],
<Ta>t>aOia  [A  in  Sam.],  cratftana^  [A  in  Ch.  and  L]).  See  DAVID,
§  'I,  "•

•2.  b.  Mattan,  who  with  others  sought  to  put  Jeremiah  in  prison

<Jer.  38  [45]  i,  o-a^avias  [BKA],  tra^ar  [Q*],  -las  [Qmtf-]).

3.  AV SHEPHATHIAH,  b. Reuel,  father of Meshullam, of
BENJAMIN  (§  9  [iii.])  ;  i  Ch.  Os.

4.  A  HARUPHITK  [q.v.],  one  of  David's  warriors  (i  Ch.  12s,
irraSC',  o'a'/"1Tias  [L]). See  DAVID,  §  n,  n.  c.

5.  b.  JEHOSHAPHAT,  king  of  Judah  (2  Ch.  '21  2,  in'SEC',  <r<x$a-
reias  [B],  -ias  [l!t>AL]). The  name  follows  Michael  (see  above).

6.  b.  Maachah,  a  Simeonite  ruler  (i  Ch.  27  16,  l.TCESI',  cra<#>a-
Tias).

7.  The  b'ne  Shephatiah  were  a  post-exilic  family  numbered  at
372  (Ezra  24,  acra<j>  [15],  Neh.  "9);  the  record,  however,  in  Ezra
88,  wherein  the  b'ne  Shephatiah  with  Zebadiah  at  their  head
amount  to  80  in  number,  is  far  more  plausible  (see  EZRA-NEHE-
MIAH). The  name  appears  as  SAPHAT  in  i  Esd.  69  (om. B,
ao-a.<j>  [IV«-l»nrf.],  a-a<j>ar'  [A]),  and  as  SAFHATIAS  in  i  Esd.  8  34
(<TO<j>OT<r>v  [B],  A  om.,  <ra(f>a.Tiov  [I.]). See  introduction,  above.

8.  A  groun  of  '  Solomon's  servants  '  (see NETHIXIM)  in  the
great  post-exilic  list  (see  EzRAii.,§9); Ezra  2  57  =  Neh.  7  59  =
i  Esd.  5  33,  SAI-HETH,  RV  SAPHUTHI  (craipva  [B],  -v8i  [A]).

9.  One  of  the  b'ne  Perez,  a  son  of  Mahalaleel,  and  ancestor  of
Athaiah  (Neh.  11  4,  a-a^anov  [L]).

SHEPHELAH,  THE,  or  LOWLAND  [OF  JUDAH]

(n^D^'H;  see  PLAIN,  7;  ©  has  ce4>HA<\  in  z  Ch.
2«3io[AV  'low  country,'  RV  'lowland'],  Ob.  i9[cA(}>HAA
Q'"e-,  AV  'plain,'  RV  'lowland'],  Jer.  3244  [AV  'valley,'
RV  '  lowland'],  33i3  [om.  A,  AV  '  vale,'  RV  '  lowland'],
also  in  i  Mace.  1238  [X*V  cecb.  TTeAl  NH.  AV  Shephela,
RV  '  plain  country']),  a  part  of  the  territory  of  Judah,
between  the  hill  country  (see  JUDAH,  HILL-COUNTRY
OF),  and  the  Mediterranean.  On  the  geographical  use
of  the  term  see  G.  A.  Smith  (HG  202  f.  ),  who  concludes
that  '  though  the  name  may  originally  have  been  used
to  include  the  Maritime  Plain,  and  this  wider  use  may
have  been  occasionally  revived,  the  Shephelah  proper
was  the  region  of  low  hills  between  that  plain  and  the
high  Central  Range.'  The  cities  of  the  Shephelah  are
enumerated  in  Josh.  1533-44  ;  vv.  45-47,  which  mention
Philistine  towns  as  in  the  Shephelah,  are  probably  a  later
insertion  (cp  Oxf.  Hex.  2346).  Eusebius,  however
(OS  296  10),  describes  this  district  as  the  plain  (wediov)
lying  round  Eleutheropolis,  to  the  N.  and  the  W.  ,  and
Clermont-Ganneau  and  Conder  (Tentwork,  277)  state
that  they  have  discovered  the  name  in  its  Arabic  form
Sifla  about  Beit-Jibrin  (Eleutheropolis).  (5  also  gives
treSiov  (see  Dt.  1  7  Josh.  11  2  128)  and  i]  irfdiv/i  (see  Josh.
9  i  1040  Judg.  19,  etc.)  for  n^sr,  and  a  larger  use  is
favoured  by  Dt.  1  7  Josh.  9  1  i  K.  1027  2  Ch.  26  10,  so  that,
even  if  the  low  hills  behind  the  maritime  plain  were  the
most  important  part  of  the  Shephelah  on  account  of  the
towns  situated  there,  we  can  hardly  deny  that  theo-

4455


retically  the  maritime  plain  was  included  in  the  reference
of  this  geographical  term  (see  Buhl,  Pal.  104,  n.  164).
The  RV  has  taken  great  pains  to  carry  out  a  systematic
rendering  of  shffhlla.lt  by  'lowland.'  Compare  the  following
passages:  Dt.  1  7  Josh.  W  I  1040  11  2  16  (bis,  (£*»,  TO.  raittiva.,
(5'U-  TO.  nf&ivd  the  second  time),  12s  1033  Judi:.  19  i  K.  1027
iCh.  27  28  2Ch.  1  151127  26  10  28  18  Jer.  17  2>  (&»  >TJ?  jreiu^?)
8244  33  13  Ob.  19  Zech.  77.  Perhaps  if  RV  had  given  the
plural  form  '  lowlands,'  it  might  have  been  more  illuminative  to
the  reader,  for,  as  G.  A.  Smith  (203)  remarks,  the  Scottish  low-
lands,  like  the  Shephelah,  are  not  entirely  plain,  but  have  their
groups  and  ranges  of  hills.

SHEPHER  P2y;),  Nu.  33 23/,  AV  SHAPHER.

SHEPHERD  OF  HERMAS.  Under  the  name  of
lloifj.rii>  (Pastor,  '  Shepherd  '),  with  which  from  an  early

i XT-~. date  the name  of  Hernias  came to  be

1.  Name :

transmission  connected-  a  bo?k  °f  some  slze-  originally
,  , , written  in  Greek,  has  come  down  to  us
from  Christian  antiquity. At  one  time
greatly  read,  and  even  for  a  while  regarded  as  canonical,
it  afterwards  fell  very  much  into  the  background  with
out,  however,  being  wholly  lost  sight  of.

The  Greek  text,  though  still  without  the  concluding  portion
Sim.  ix.  303-x.,  was  first  brought  to  light  comparatively  recently
(1856).  A  Latin  version,  the  Vulgate,  was  published  as  early
as  1513  by  Faber  Stapulensis ;  an  Ethiopic  by  Anton  d'Abbadie
in  1860.  Ever  since  Cotelier's  time  (1672)  the  work  has  been
wont  to  be  included  in  editions  of  the  so-called  Apostolic
Fathers.  We  now  know  the  Greek  text  of  l-'is.  \.-Mand.  iv.  36a
from  the  Codex  Sinaiticus  edited  by  Tischendorf  in  i£62  ;  the
contents  of  the  rest  of  the  work  (apart  from  the  concluding
portion  already  spoken  of,  and  certain  lacuna;)  from  the  so-called
Athos  MS  of  which  three  leaves  are  now  in  the  University
Library  at  Leipsic  (since  1856)  and  six  still  remain  in  the
Monastery  of  Gregory  on  Mt.  Athos  ;  that  of  Si»t.  2  7-10  4  2-5
from  an  old  papyrus  now  in  Berlin,  formerly  at  Fayyum,  de
scribed  by  U.  \Vilcken  in  1891  ;  that  of  other  fragments,  we
have  known  for  a  longer  period  from  the  citations  of  ancient
writers.

Valuable  help  can  also  be  obtained  throughout  from  two  Old
Latin  versions,  the  Vulgate  and  (since  Dressel,  1857)  the  Pala
tine,  as  also  from  the  Ethiopic.  For  the  establishment  of  the
original  text,  since  the  edition  of  Anger  and  Dindorf,  1856,  who
at  first  were  led  astray  by  Simonides  (afterwards  proved  to  be  a
forger)  but  were  ultimately  put  upon  the  right  track  by  Tischen
dorf,  as  he  in  his  turn  was  corrected  by  Lipsius,  specially
meritorious  services  have  been  rendered  by  A.  Hilgenfeld,
i866(2|,  i88i<3),  1887;  O.  de  Gebhardt,  1877;  J.  Armitage
Robinson,  A  Collation  of  t lie  Athos  Codex  of  the  Shepherd  of
Hennas,  1888  ;  F.  X.  Funk,  Patrcs  Apost.,^  1901.

The  Shepherd,  in  view  of  its  contents,  is  usually  divided
into  three  parts,  entitled  respectively  (i)  Visions,  (2)
_.  .  .  Commandments,  (3)  Similitudes.  The
printed  editions,  in  fact,  all  follow  each
other  in  giving  five  Visions,  twelve  Commandments,  and
ten  Similitudes.  This  division,  however,  is  hardly
accurate,  and  it  would  be  better  to  say  that  the  book
in  the  form  in  which  it  has  come  down  to  us  consists  of
Visions  ('Opdcras)  or  Revelations  ('AiroKaXv-^fis)  of
which  the  first  (l-'is.  It)  can  be  regarded  as  an  intro
duction  to  those  immediately  following  ( I  'is.  1  2-4)  and
the  last  ( l-'is.  5)  as  an  introduction  to  the  immediately
following  series  of  Commandments  and  Similitudes  (ai
ffTO\al  Kal  TrapafioXai  :  Aland.  1-12,  Sim.  1-8)  to  which
is  added  an  appendix  called  '  The  rest '  (TO  ?re/>a  ;
Sim.  9)  and  a  conclusion  (Sim.  10).

So  far  as  the  form  of  the  book  is  concerned,  Hernias,
a  former  slave  of  a  certain  Rhoda  in  Rome  to  whom

o I?  _ j his  father  had  sold him, and  who had
3 .  r  orill  3*11(1 f  .,-*-,

. , afterwards  come  into  the  service  of  the

Christian  church,  now  comes  forward  as
a  writer,  relating  certain  things  that  have  happened  to
him  and  what  he  has  seen  and  heard — or,  in  a  word,
what  has  been  revealed  to  him.

As  he  was  walking  outside  the  city  'to  the  villages,' — «s
Koi^ias,  as  the  Greek  text  has  it,  for  which  the  printed  editions,  after
a  conjecture  of  Dindorf,  wrongly  read  ei?  Kou/uat,  '  to  Cumae  '
— he  falls  asleep  and  there  appears  to  him  the  woman  whose
slave  he  formerly  had  been  and  whom  he  had  not  been  able  to
seek  in  marriage  (I 'is.  1  i).  Afterwards  the  church  appears  to
him  at  longer  or  shorter  intervals  (a  year,  or  less) ;  first  in  the
form  of  an  old  woman  (I 'is.  1  2-4  ;  cp  3  10-11),  next  with  a  more
youthful  aspect  (l'fs.2',  cp  3  12)  ;  again,  as  quite  young  (I 'is.
3  i-io  ;  cp  13)  ;  finally,  as  a  maiden  in  wedding  attire  (I 'is.  4).

She  reveals  to  him  the  future  and  expounds  with  regard  to  it
the  will  of  God.  She  gives  instructions  and  shows  visions  which

4456


SHEPHERD  OF  HERMAS

have  reference  to  the  necessity  for  repentance  while  yet  the
building  of  the  tower,  symbolising  the  church,  is  still  unfinished,
or  rather  suspended  for  a  while — in  other  words  while  yet  God
affords  the  opportunity  to  repent,  an  opportunity  which  ere  long
will  cease  with  the  coming  of  the  last  great  persecution.  After
these  revelations  (Vis.  1-4)  Hermas  relates  how  the  angel  of  re
pentance  appears  to  him  in  the  form  of  a  shepherd,  as  previously
(Vis.  24  3  to)  in  that  of  a  young  man,  and  bids  him  write  down
'commandments  and  similitudes  '(Vis.  5).  The  twelve  command
ments  which  follow  relate  to  faith  in  God  ;  a  life  void  of  offence,
full  of  compassion,  love  of  truth  ;  chastity  ;  long  suffering  ;  our
attendant  angels,  good  and  bad  ;  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ;  abstinence
from  all  that  is  evil ;  prayer  without  ceasing  and  with  unwaver
ing  confidence  °,  two  kinds  of  sadness  ;  two  kinds  of  spirit ;  two
kinds  of  desire  (Mand.\-\'2\  The  eight  similitudes  which  follow
teach  us  how  here  we  have  no  continuing  city  ;  how  the  rich  can
be  helped  by  the  prayer  of  the  poor  ;  how  the  righteous  and  the
wicked  cannot  at  first  be  discriminated,  but  will  ultimately  be
separated  (Sim.  1-4)  ;  how  useful  fasting  is  ;  how  good  it  is  to  keep
far  aloof  from  luxury  and  temptation  ;  how  indispensable  is
chastening  ;  how  many  are  the  varieties  of  saint  and  sinner  (Sim.
5-8).  Next,  by  way  of  appendix,  is  set  forth  in  new  images
that  which  the  Holy  Spirit  that  spoke  with  Hermas  in  the  form
of  the  church  had  showed  him.  They  are  revelations  vouchsafed
to  him  by  the  Shepherd,  the  angel  of  repentance,  with  reference
to  those  who  are  saved  (Sim.  9).  To  round  off  the  whole,  yet  a
further  earnest  admonition  is  given  by  the  angel  who  had  sent
the  shepherd  ;  a  last  exhortation  to  repentance  in  accordance
with  the  precepts  of  the  now  completed  work  (Sim.  10).

The  form  in  which  the  whole  is  clothed,  far  from
being  simple  or  natural,  is  artificial  in  the  highest
_,  -  degree.  It  sets  out,  apparently,  with
.  .5  .  f111  the  intention  of  relating  what  has  passed
between  two  known  persons,  Rhocla  and
Hermas.  The  names  are  reminiscent  of  a  Christian
woman  Rhoda,  mentioned  in  Acts  12 13,  and  of  a
Christian  slave  at  Rome,  Hernias,  mentioned  in  Rom.
1614.  Here  they  become  representatives,  the  one
(Rhoda)  of  the  church  in  various  successive  forms,  the
other  as  one  devoted  to  her  service,  and  one  of  her
followers  and  members.  '  Hernias '  soon  goes  on  to
speak  with  poetic  freedom  like  a  Paul,  a  James,  a  John,
a  Barnabas,  a  Clement,  an  Ignatius,  a  Polycarp,  in  the
epistles  handed  down  to  us  under  their  names,  as  if  he
were  the  recognised  elder  and  faithful  witness  addressing
himself  with  words  of  warning  and  admonition  to  his
'house,'  his  'children.'

The  original  unity  of  the  work  in  its  present  form,
although  frequently  called  in  question  since  Hase  (1834),

_ ..  ,  cannot  be  denied. Even  less,  however,

Unity  ana  can  ^e  existence  of  inconsistencies  and
composition.  contradictions  and  other  marks  of  inter
polation,  adaptation,  and  redaction  be  disputed.  These
point  to  it  having  been  a  composite  work  made  up
from  earlier  documents.  Not  in  the  sense  (so  Hilgen-
feld,  1881  ;  Hausleiter,  1884  ;  Baumgartner,  1889  ;
Harnack,  1897)  of  its  being  a  combination,  effected  in
one  way  or  another,  of  two  separate  works,  entitled  re
spectively  '  Visions  '  and  '  Commandments  '  and  '  Simili
tudes  '  by  one  author,  or  by  more  than  one  ;  nor  yet  (so
Johnson,  1887 ;  Spitta,  1896  ;  von  Soden,  1897  ;
Volter,  1900  ;  van  Bakel,  1900)  in  the  sense  of  its
being  the  outcome  of  repeated  redactions  of  an  originally
Jewish  writing.  Rather  in  the  sense  of  being  a  second
edition  of  the  original  Shepherd,  a  bundle  of  '  Command
ments  and  Similitudes '  from  the  pen  of  but  one  writer
who  laboured  on  the  whole  independently,  yet  at  the
same  time  frequently  borrowed  from  the  books  which
he  had  before  him.  It  is  not  possible  to  distinguish
throughout  between  what  he  borrowed  from  others  and
what  we  ought  to  regard  as  his  own.

The  writer,  who  comes  forward  as  if  he  were  an  older

Hermas,  the  contemporary  of  Clement  ( I'is. '2*  3),  must

not  be  identified  with  him  of  Rom.  16 14

6.  Author. nor  yet  with  a y0unger  onej brother  of

Pius  I.,  bishop  of  Rome  140-155,  who  is  referred  to  in
the  Muratorian  fragment.  The  real  name  of  the  author
remained  unknown.  From  his  work  it  can  be  inferred
that  he  was  an  important  member,  perhaps  even  a  ruler,
of  the  Christian  church,  probably  in  Rome.  A  practi
cal  man.  No  Paulinist,  nor  yet  a  Judaiser  in  the
Tubingen  sense,  but  rather  a  professsor,  little  interested

4457


SHEPHUPHAM

in  the  dogma  of  the  Christianity  that  was  already  in
process  of  becoming  Catholic,  in  the  days  svhen  it  was
grappling  with  the  ideas  and  movements  that  had
originated  with  Montanus.  One  who  attached  much
value  to  revelations  and  yet  was  very  particularly  in
earnest  about  the  need  for  quickening,  for  the  spiritual
renewing  of  the  Church,  for  which  reason  he  laid  peculiar
stress  upon  the  possibility  of  a  second  conversion.  This
possibility  would  ere  long  come  to  an  end  at  the  close  of
the  present  period  ;  even  now  many  were  denying  it  as
regarded  those  who  once  had  received  baptism,  though
others  hoped  to  be  able  continually  afresh  to  obtain
the  forgiveness  of  their  sins.  There  is  nothing  that
indicates  the  merchant  supposed  by  Haniack-Hilgenfeld.

In  date  the  author  is  earlier  than  Eusebius,  Athan-
asius,  Origen,  Tertullian,  Clement  of  Alexandria,
_  .  Irenajus,  but  later  than  the  apostles  and
'  a  e'  their  first  followers,  the  martyrs  and  leaders
of  the  church,  such  individuals  as  '  Hermas '  and
'Clement'  (I'is.  24  3).  Later  than  the  first  great  and
flourishing  time  of  the  church  (the  history  of  which  can
already  be  divided  into  different  periods,  and  the
spiritual  renovation  of  which,  in  conjunction  with  the
revived  expectation  of  Christ's  second  coining  is  regarded
as  imperatively  needful)  ;  in  the  days  when  the  spiritual
life  of  Christians  was  being  stirred  by  Montanistic
movements.  Therefore,  certainly  earlier  than  180  A.  n. ;
yet  not  much  earlier,  nor  yet  much  later,  than  about  the
middle  of  the  second  century.  Perhaps  some  chrono
logical  truth  may  underlie  the  tradition  that  '  Hermas '
was  a  'brother'  of  Pius  I.  (140-155  A.D.  ).

The  work  was  from  the  first  intended  for  reading
aloud  at  the  assemblies  of  the  church  whether  in  larger
p  or  in  smaller  circles  (I'is,  243).  Its

d  1  value,  at  first  placed  very  high  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  interests  of  edifica
tion,  but  afterwards  almost  wholly  lost  sight  of  in
Christian  circles,  has  in  recent  years  in  spite  of  the
diffuseness  of  its  contents  come  anew  to  be  recognised.
Not  to  be  despised  as  a  praiseworthy  production  in  the
field  of  edifying  literature  it  is  still  more  to  be  prized  as
a  valuable  contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Christi
anity  that  was  widely  spread  and  held  as  orthodox
about  the  middle  of  the  second  century.

A.  Editions.— ¥.  X.  Funk,  Patres  Apostolici,^}  with  prolego
mena  and  notes,!1)  1901  ;  also  (in  shorter  form)  Apost.  I'ater,

1901  ;  O.  de  Gebhardt  and  A.  Harnack,
9.  Literature.  Hermce  Pastor  (= Pair,  Apost.  Opera,  iii.),

1877,  with  introduction  and  notes  ;  also  in
smaller  edition,*4)  1901.  Cp  above  ;  also  CANON,  §§  65,  72  ;
PROPHETIC  LITERATURE,  §  31  ;  HKR.MAS.

B.  Translations. — English: Roberts, Donaldson, and
Crombie,  in  Apostolic  Fathers  in  Ante-Nicene  Library,  1867  ;
Lightfoot,  Apostolic Fathers, 1891. German  :  J. C. Mayer,
1869. Dutch  : Duker  and  van Manen,  Oud-Christcl.  Lett.:

geschriftcn  tier  ap.  I'aders,  with  introduction  and  notes,  i.  1871.

C.  Discussions. — In  addition  to  those  already  referred  to,  see  G.
Kriiger,  Gesch.  d.  altchr.  Lit.  1891;,  §  12,  and  '  Nachtrage,'  1897,
p.  12  ;  Th.  Zahn,  Der  Ilirt  Hernias,  i86S  ;  also  Einl.  i.  d.  NT
1,1-)  1900,  pp.  298,  430-8,  '2  104,  154  ;  J.  M.  S.  Baljon,  Gesch.  v.  d.
Kb.  de  Nl's.  1901,  p.  451  ;  G.  Uhlhorn,  s.v.  '  Hermas'  in  />A'.£'(3)
7  (1899)  714-718  ;  C.  Taylor,  The  Witness  of  Hennas  to  the  l-'our
Gospels, 1892 (cp  van Manen, Th.T, 1893, pp. 180-194); A.
Hilgenfeld,  '  Hermse  Pastor'  Novmn  Testamentum  extr.  Can.
rec.,Wl 1881, (3) 1887  ; P. Baumgartner, Die Einlu-it des
Hennas-Bucks,  1889  (cp  van  Manen,  Th.T,  1889,  pp.  552-550);
E. Spitta,  Zur  Gesch. u.  Lift. d. Urchristentuitis,  2,  1896,
pp.  241-437;  A.  Harnack,  Chronol.  1897,  1257-267,  437-8  (cp  H.
von  Soden,  TLZ,  1897,  pp.  584-7)  ;  D.  J.  E.  Volter,  Die  I'isionen
des  Hermas,  die  Sibylle  u.  Clemens  von  Rom,  1900 ;  H.  A.  van
Bakel,  De  Compositie  van  den  Pastor  He»iue,  190.0.

W.  C.  v.  M.

SHEPHO ('"IS"'), b. Shobal, b. SEIR  : Gen.  8623
(ccocj) [A], cwcbAN \D\.\ coop [li])  =  i  Ch.  1 4o
Shephi  C'DCT;  co>B  [''].  coocbAp  [A],  c&mbei  t1
<5DL's reading in Gen. suggests comparison with
SHEPHUPHAM  (-AN). Cp  also  SHUPPIM,  SHAPHAN.

SHEPHUPHAM,  AV  Shupham  (DD-1DL"  :  see  SHE-
PHUPHAN),  a  son  of  BENJAMIN  (§  9  [i..])  in  Nu.
with  patronymic  SHUPHAMITE  (q.v. )  ('P~P-1"'

4458


SHEPHUPHAN


.  .  COO(J)ANI  [AF],  CO(}>AN
y',  §  75  ;  CJray,  HPN  95,  but


AHMOC  o  cu>(J><\Nei

• • • CO(J>A.NI  [L]|-

SHEPHUPHAN

the  suggestion  '  serpent  '  may  be  as  fallacious  as  that
of  '  rock-badger  '  for  SHAPHAN  ;  another  form  is
SHEPHUPHAM),  b.  Bela,  b.  BENJAMIN  (§  12),  i  Ch.  85

[15J> COO(J><\N K<M &XIR& tAl- C6TT-

Cp  AHIKAM,  SHEPHO,  SHUPHAM,  SHUI>-
PIM,  SHAPHAN.

SHERAH,  or  rather,  as  RV,  SHEER  AH  (iTJJJjP,
CAARA  [A],  CAP&A  [I-]'-  ©B  [€N  6K6INOIC  TOIC
K&TAAoiTTOic]  and  1'esh.  connect  with  "IKS^,  Niphal
'to  be  left'),  a  'daughter'  of  KPHKAIM  (§  12)  (i  Ch.
724(1)  who  'built'  the  two  Beth-horons  and  UZZEN-
SHERAH  (i  Ch.  724*.  i"nNL"~j-TX,  RV  UZZEN-SHEERAH).

In  v.  24/'  <5L  gives  rfpa'a.a.Spa  (for  T)p<raapa?).  ®"A  makes
Shera  (<rr>jpa)  and  Rephah  (ft.  24)  sons  of  oyir  (Uzzen).

Conder  suggests,  as  the  site,  Bet  Slra,  a  village  2  m.
SW.  of  the  Lower  Beth-horon  (Mem.  3  16).  But  can
we  implicitly  trust  the  name  ?  [The  name  Ephraim  fixed
itself  not  only  in  central  but  also  in  southern  Palestine,
where  it  is  perhaps  more  original,  and  some  of  the
names  in  the  genealogy  have  an  unmistakable  N.
Arabian  affinity.  Sheerah  may,  therefore,  be  a  corrup
tion  of  ITON  '  Ashhur,  '  which  turns  out  to  be  a  N.
Arabian  tribe-name  (cp  Geshur).  Heres  in  '  Ir-heres'
(see  HERES,  MOUNT)  seems  to  have  the  same  origin
(Crit.  Bib.).  —  T.  K.  c.  ]  For  pn  (Uzzen)  we  should
probably  (cp  <§'•)  substitute  vy  'city,'  and  refer  to
Judg.  135.  Cp  EPHRAIM,  §  12.  Beth-shemesh  or  Ir-
shemesh  is  a  curiously  parallel  name,  if  '  shemesh  '  comes
from  '  cushim  '  (see  SHAALBI.M).  See,  however,  NAMES,
§  99,  where  'ear  (=earlike  projection)  of  Sheerah'  is
suggested  as  the  possible  meaning  of  Uzzen-sheerah  ;  cp
AZNOTH-TABOR.

SHEREBIAH  (  rP3")"-',  §  39,  but  form  seems  doubtful,
<rapaj3ia[s]),  a  post-exilic  priest  and  family  (EzraSiS  ap\>jj>
[HA],  iv  apXrj  o-upoiua  [I,],  r:  24  crapaia.  [BA],  Neh.  S7S»4
apa/3ia  [B,  where  <rapa/3ia  represents  SnEUANIAH,  erapajSaia  [A],
95  om.  ©BNA,  10  12  [i3Kapa|3ia  [B],  ^aflapta  [n*vid.],  li.8).  In
i  Esd.  847  the  name  appears  as  ASEBEBIA,  RV  ASEBEBIAS
(acrejSr^iai'  [BA],  tv  ap\f)  cnxpotna.  [L]),  cp  HASHAIIIAH,  7  ;  in  v.
54,  ESEBRIAS  R\'  ESEKEHIAS  (fo-tpejSiai/  [BA]),  and  i  Esd.  '.'48,
SARABIAS,  o-apapias  [A*viil.].  Many  of  the  companion-names  on
the  lists  are  obviously  ethnics  (Che.).  See  SHEBEK.

SHERESH  CTC'  ;  coypoc  [B],  copoc  [A],  cbopoc
[L]|,  a  Machirite  name  in  a  genealogy  of  MANASSEH
(§  9  [ii.])  ;  i  Ch.  7i6.f  See  PERESII.

SHEREZER  p>'NTJ'),  Zech.  7  2  AV,  RV  SiiAREZER,2.

SHERIFFS  (X'.riSR  <5  TOI'S  eV  ^oiviuv  Kara  xupav,
oi  4ir'  f£ot'<r.  [also  Theod.  ]),  EV's  rendering  of  a  Bibl.-
Aram.  official  title  (such  at  least  is  the  prevailing
opinion)  in  Dan.  32/i  It  has  been  generally  connected
with  the  Ar.  afta  'to  advise'  (whence  the  participial
'mufti'),  and  accordingly  translated  'counsellor'  (cp
RV"1*?-  ,  '  lawyers  '  ).  A  still  more  far-fetched  suggestion
is  to  read  NTI2^  =  viraroi  'consuls'  ;  for  the  n  instead  of
B  Gratz  (.\fG  WJ  19  347)  compares  p-iD3DS  =  if/a\Tripiov.
Another  scholar  says,  '  possibly  a  mutilated  form  of  a
Pers.  title  in  pat  "chief"'  (Bevan,  Dan.  80),  and
Andreas  (Marti,  Gram.  Dibl.-Aram.,  Glossary)  suggests
N'ns:i  denpftaye,  'chiefs  of  religion.'  Nor  does  this
exhaust  the  list  of  theories.

Can  no  step  in  advance  be  taken?  Only  by  those  who
recognise  that  many  narratives  in  the  OT  have  been  remodelled,
so  far  as  the  geographical  and  historical  background  is  concerned.
It  will  become  probable  to  any  who  adopt  the  present  writer's
theory  that  the  supposed  official  tittles  in  Dan.  82  are  really  N.
Arabian  ethnics.  One  of  these  ethnics  ("nnjj'N,  Ashhurite,  mis-
written  'VICTIM)  passed,  tinder  the  editor's  hands,  into
hrbgnpriM  (see  SATRAPS).  Another  ('mm  Rehobothite)
appears  three  or  four  times  in  corrupt  variants.  The  last
of  these  variants  x'ncn  has  probably  come  from  K*mm  through
the  intermediate  form,  which  occurs  earlier  in  MT's  list,
Nr\ln2:  '  All  the  rulers  of  the  province  '  is,  of  course,  an
editorial  insertion,  the  incorrectness  of  which  is  shown  by  v.  4,
where  the  herald  addresses  'peoples,  nations,  and  languages.'
Cp  SATRAPS.  X.  K.  c.

4459


SHESHAN

SHESHACH  Cni'*??',  as  if  'humiliation,'  cp  "pC*  'to
crouch')  is  generally  explained  as  a  cypher-form  of
'Babel'  (Babylon),  which  indeed  is  given  instead  of
'Sheshach'  by  Tg.  (Jer.  2526  51 41).  In  Jer.  2526  the
whole  clause,  and  in  51 41  '  Sheshach,'  is  omitted  in  (5
(Q'"K-  adds  in  2526,  nal  /3a<n\ei>5  Z^crax  irifTcu  &TXCITOS
avrdov,  and  in  51 41  inserts  o  etcra/c)  ;  Cornill  follows  (5,
and  so  too  Giesebrecht  in  0141,  whereas  in  2526  this
scholar  retains  'Sheshach,'  but  regards  w.  25 f.  as  an
interpolation.  But  would  a  late  glossator  acquainted
with  the  Athbash  cypher  (in  which  «  =  n,  a  =  »,  etc. )  have
used  it  in  interpolating  a  prophecy  ascribed  to  Jeremiah  ?
and  what  reason  was  there  for  using  a  cryptogram  ?
'Explication  desesper^e  assurement '  (Renan,  Rapport
annuel  de  la  soc.  asiatique,  1871,  p  26).  As  to  51  41,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  '  Sheshach '  should  be
omitted  ;  it  mars  the  beauty  of  the  elegiac  metre  (see
LAMENTATION).  To  prove  this  let  us  put  5023  and
5l4i,  both  elegiac  passages,  side  by  side  : —

(a)  How  is  cut  asunder  and  broken  |  the  whole  earth's

hammer !

How  is  become  a  desolation  |  Babylon  among  the
nations !

(b)  How  is  [Sheshach]  taken  and  surprised  |  the  whole

earth's  praise  !

How  is  become  a  desolation  |  Babylon  among  the
nations !

As  to  Jer.  2526,  we  must  view  the  passage  in  connec
tion  with  the  whole  list  of  peoples  in  w.  18-26,  and
carefully  criticise  the  text.  The  list  begins  with  Judah.
Next  comes  Misrim  (so  read  ;  cp  MIZRAIM),  Arabia,
Zarephathim,  .  .  .  Edom,  Moab,  Ammon,  Missur  (a
repetition,  hid  under  '  Tyre  and  Zidon  '),  Dedan,  Tema,
Buz,  Zarephathim,  Arabia  (thrice),  Cushanim,  Zimri
(=Zimran),  Jerahmeel  (Elam  and  Madai),  Zaphon,
Jerahmeelim,  Cush-jerahmeel  (repetitions) ;  then  at  the
close  something  which  by  editorial  manipulation  became
'  and  the  king  of  Sheshach  (?)  shall  drink  after  them.'
„  The  view  of  Lauth  that  '  Sheshach '  is  a  Hebraisation  of
Siska,  a  Babylonian  district  which  gave  its  name  (?)  to  an  ancient
Babylonian  dynasty,  according  to  Pinches's  reading  (but  see
Pinches  himself,  TSSA,  1881,  p.  48),  is  untenable.  Winckler
(GRA  67  /  328;  AOF\^^ff.\  and  Sayce  (KJW  1  13)  read
Uru-azagga.  The  Athbash  theory  is  equally  wrong.  On  this
and  on  similar  cyphers  see  Hal.  Mel.  245  (his  theory  is  peculiar);
and  cp  LEH-KAMAI.  T.  K.  c.

SHESHAI  (^'l",  §  58,  cp  SHASHAI  ;  cec[c]ei
[BFL]),  one  of  the  b'ne  Anak,  perhaps  an  old  Hebronite
clan-name  (Nu.  1822  C6M6I  [A],  Josh.  15 14  coycei
[BL],  -A.I  [A],  Judg.  liof  reQQl  [A]M  see  ANAKIM.
Sayce  (Crit.  Mon.^  204)  combines  the  name  with  Sasu
^TIDC'  (the  Egyptian  name  for  the  Syrian  Bedouins).
But  ©m-  in  Josh.  15  14,  and  the  fact  that  DID  is  frequently
miswritten  &13,  may  suggest  '  Cushi '  ('ris)  ;  'Anak'
itself  may  come  from  '  Amalek  '  =  '  Jerahmeel '  (Che. ).
See,  however,  SHESHAN,  JERAHMEEL,  §  2/3.

SHESHAN  (\&V,  §  58  ;  some  MSS.  fl"'P  [Kenn.] ;

COGCAM,  CCOCAN  [B], COOC&N  [A], CICAN  [L]),  whose

daughter  married  his  servant  JARHA  (q.v. )  and  became
the  head  of  an  interesting  genealogical  list  ( i  Ch.  234-41 ).
See  JERAHMEEL,  §  2/1  The  names  may  contain  authentic
tradition  (Gray,  HPN  2347. )  ;  at  all  events,  it  is  quite
independent  of  the  (possibly  tribal)  genealogy  in  w.  25-33
(cp  v.  33  f>),  where  Sheshan  appears  as  the  son  of  Ishi  and
father  of  Ahlai  (v.  31).  The  natural  presumption  that
AHLAI  was  his  daughter  has  no  evidence  to  support  it.
Indeed,  since  it  is  probable  that  Jarha  was  not  so
much  an  '  Egyptian '  as  a  Musrite,  and  since  the  name
Sheshan  is  reminiscent  of  the  old  Hebronite  SHESHAI
[?•«'.].  it  may  be  conjectured  that  we  have  here  an
allusion  to  the  introduction  of  Hebronite  and  Musrite
blood  into  the  Jerahmeelites  (see  HEBRON).1  Whether,

1  That  is  to  say,  the  fact  that  the  Jerahmeelites  married  into
the  older  inhabitants  of  Hebron,  is  expressed  in  genealogical
fashion  by  saying  that  Jarha  married  a  'daughter  of  Sheshan  '
(cp  DAUGHTER,  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  i).  It  is  possible  that
Sheshan  (in  spite  of  the  philological  difficulty)  mav  have  been
connected  with  sasu  (x/nDcOi  tne  Egyptian  designation  for
Bedouins  (cp  EDOM,  §  2).

4460


SHBSHBAZZAR

indeed,  '  Jarha  '  was  supposed  to  be  etymologically  akin
to  Jerahmeel  (as  a  hypocoristicon)  is  a  matter  for  con
jecture.  S.  A.  c.

SHESHBAZZAR  (>V3W,  §  83  ;  CACABACCAPOC
[A,  in  Kzra  o  16  -up'],  cra/Sao-apjjs  [L] ;  but  B  in  Ezra  1  8  o-a/3ai"
aerap,  o  14  {iayacrap  //'.  16  crap/3ayap.  In  i  Esd.  2  12  15  SANA-
BASSAK,  <rcu'a|u.a<ro'apa>,  (ja/xavaffffapou  [BJ,  <rapa/3a<7-<rapos,  &a.[ia.
[A],  <ra(7a£aAacn7apos  [L],  /'i.  ti  18  20  ;  SANABASSARUS,  trafiavacr-
<7<xpos  [B  in  7P.  18],  /Sacrcrapw,  era/ota/Sacro'apoi',  B  Z/.  20,  A,  L,
o-ao-a^aAacro-apos,  ->)«),  the  first  governor  of  Judah  under  the
Persians,  Ezralsn  5i4i6f.

Van  Hoonacker  (Acad.,  Jan.  30,  1892,  Nouvelles
Etudes,  94  /". )  acutely  explained  the  name  as  —  Bab.

1  Name Samas-bil(or  -bal?)-usur — i.e. ,  '  O  Sun-god

protect  the  son '  ;  cp  Zao(r5oKX'"os  (see
ADRAMMELECH).  So  Che.  Acad.,  Feb.  6,  1892,  Well-
hausen  (1894),  and  doubtfully  Guthe  (1899).  But  the
Greek  forms  point  to  the  name  of  the  Moon-god  Sin  as
the  first  element  in  the  name.  The  only  difficulty  in
this  view  is  the  yj  for  Ass.  s  ;  but  this  is  hardly  insuper
able.  Accepting  @'s  form  Sanabassar  for  Sheshbazzar
we  are  enabled  to  accept  the  very  plausible  identification
of  San(a)bassar  with  Shenazzar  (i  Ch.  3 18),  first  proposed
by  Imbert  (1888-89),  ar>d  accepted  by  Sir  H.  Howorth,
Renan,  and  Ed.  Meyer  (Ent.  des  Jud.  Jiff.}.  Upon  this
hypothesis  San(a)bassar  was  not  identical  with  Zerub-
babel  (so  van  Hoonacker,  Wellhausen),  but  his  uncle
and  predecessor.  That  SANBALLAT  (q.  v. }  and  the  first
governor  of  the  Jews  should  have  had  names  com
pounded  with  Sin  would  be  a  striking  coincidence.  But
though  this  may  have  been  the  learned  redactor's  mean
ing,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  original  narrator  intended
it.  The  chief  captivity  may  have  been  in  N.  Arabia.
In  this  case  the  first  part  of  the  name  Sheshbazzar  would
represent  en  3  (Cush  in  N.  Arabia)  ;  the  second  part
might  possibly  come  from  naii  (Zarephath).  Cp
SHENAZZAR,  ZERUBBABEL.

In  Ezra  18  Sheshbazzar  is  called  loosely  'prince  of
Judah'  (rrfliTj*  weo)  ;  in  5 14  he  is  called  'governor'

2  Notices (nP?^ t'le  same title  which is given  to

Zerubbabel  in  Haggai  (1  i  14  2  2  21).  He
is  said  to  have  received  from  Cyrus's  official  the  sacred
vessels  which  Nebuchadrezzar  had  taken  away  with  a
charge  to  deposit  them  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  when
it  had  been  rebuilt.  In  5i6  TATTENAI  (q.v. )  mentions
that  the  foundations  of  the  temple  had  been  laid  by
Sheshbazzar.  Kosters  (Hersfel,  33)  admits  that  he  is
probably  a  historical  personage,  and  that  he  bears  a
Babylonian  name,  but  thinks  that  he  was  a  Persian,
and  that  the  Chronicler  introduces  a  Shenazzar  into  the
genealogy  of  Zerubbabel  from  interested  motives.  That
Sheshbazzar  brought  back  the  sacred  vessels,  and  laid
the  foundations  of  the  temple,  Kosters  denies.  On  the
two  latter  points  see  Intr.  Is,  pp.  xxxv,  2817^,  but
bearing  in  mind  the  possibility  that  different  views  of
the  land  of  the  captivity  and  of  the  circumstances  attend
ing  the  gradual  lightening  of  the  burdens  of  the  Jews
may  have  been  taken  by  the  narrator  and  the  redactor
respectively.  But  cp  Meyer,  Ent.  des  Jud.,  pp.  75  ff.  ;
Guthe,  (7/Y245;  Winckler,  KAT^^  285,  with  refer
ences  (Sheshbazzar  a  son  of  Jehoiachin)  ;  and  see  EZRA
AND  NEHEMIAH  [BOOKS],  §  7.

The  identification  of  Sheshbazzar  and  Shenazzar  (Shen'assar)  is
questioned  by  Lohr  (Thcol.  Rundschau,  1 181  ff".),  but  justified
by  Ed.  Meyer  (ZA  TW\%  343 ;/),  who  refers' to  the  different
pronunciation  of  the  sibilants  in  Assyrian  and  Babylonian,  and
explains  the  differences  in  the  reproduction  of  these  names  by
differences  of  pronunciation.  T.  K.  C.

SHETH  m'J;,  CH0).  i.  Nu.  24i7f,  regarded  by
AV,  RVms>'-,  (5,  Vg. ,  Pesh. ,  as  a  proper  name,  on  the
assumption  that  Seth  the  son  of  Adam  is  intended  ;  this
is  in  fact  the  old  Jewish  tradition — the  '  sons  of  Sheth  '
are  the  'sons  of  men'  (Onk. ),  the  'armies  of  Gog'
(ps.-Jon. ).  The  assumption  is  untenable;  but  at  any
rate  Sheth  must  be  a  proper  name.  The  sceptre  of
Israel,  we  are  told,  'shall  smite  the  temples  of  Moab,
and  the  crown  of  the  head  of  all  the  sons  of  Sheth.'

4461


SHEWBREAD

The  name  might  come  from  the  Suti,  the  Syrian  Bedouins
mentioned  in  the  Amarna  Tablets.  But  in  the  parallel
passage,  Jer.  4845,  we  find  JINC*  for  nt?,  and  this  suggests
}8te),  'Cushan'(cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Am.  22).  For  ijc-,c,
'  Moab,'  read  probably  -njtc,  '  Missur  '  (cp  MOAB,  §  14).
The  Misrites  or  Cushites  were  among  Israel's  chief  foes.
Most,  however,  with  Dillmann,  interpret  nsr  (rim??)  in
the  sense  of  '  tumult '  (so  RV).

2. i  Ch.  1 1,  RV  SETH  (f.v.).  T K C

SHETHAR  ("IJTJ'),  in  Esth.  1 14,  MT,  one  of  the
1  seven  princes '  at  the  court  of  Ahasuerus.  ©'s

CApCAGAlOC  [BSLr],  CApecGeoc  [A]  seems  to  re
present  both  SHETHAR  and  TARSHISH.  According  to
Marquart  (Fund.  69),  Shethar  comes  from  vamv,  with
which,  however,  compare  the  O.  Pers.  Hiydtis  'joy.'
This  presupposes  the  accepted  view  that  the  scene  of
the  Esther-story  was  always  laid  in  Persia,  and  that
consequently  the  names  may  be  expected  to  have  a
Persian  appearance.  For  another  explanation  see
PURIM,  §  3,  and  cp  TARSHISH.

SHETHAR-BOZNAI,  RV  SHETHAR-BOZENAI  (in^

^tl3.  C6.6ApBOYZA.NA,  -AN  [B],  -NAI-  -NG  [A],  0Ap-
BoyzANAIOC  [L]).  The  name  of  a  Persian  (?)  official,
mentioned  with  Tattenai,  Ezra  536  6613  i  Esd.  63
(ffaffpapovfamis  [BA],  -/3wf.  [L])  7  (-povpf.  [B],  -/3oi£
[A],  -jSwf  [L])  627  7 1  (-jSouf.  [BA],  -|8wf.  [L]),  AV
SATHRABUZANES.  Four  explanations  may  be  men
tioned  ;  the  fourth  assumes  that  underlying  the  present
narrative  there  is  an  earlier  story  of  the  relations  between
the  Jews  and  the  A".  Arabian  governors.

(i)  Shethar-boznai  may  be  a  corruption  of  '3imrc  =
Mi^po/Jouj'd^s.Old  Pers.  'Mithrobauzana' — i.e. , '  having
redemption  through  the  Mithra. ':  (2)  Marquart  takes  a
different  view  (Fund.  53  f. ).  He  equates  ->nE>  with  Old
Pers.  Cithra  ('seed,'  '  brilliance')  and  quotes  names  com
pounded  with  this  word.2  (3)  Winckler  (Kohut  Semi  til-
Studies,  34/),  however,  considers  that  'jnn  int?  may  be
the  title  of  an  official  (e.g. ,  chief  clerk  of  the  chancery),
and  compares  the  inscription  on  a  weight  from  Abydos,
where  NBDD  K~\ro  is  attested  as  such  a  title.  In  this  case,
for  nne>  we  must  read  inb.  But  the  second  part  of  the
title  seems  incorrectly  transmitted.  Winckler's  reason
is  that  '3  'jy  is  not  followed,  as  we  should  have  expected,
by  a  description  of  the  office  of  the  person  so  called.
(4)  Upon  the  theory  mentioned  above,  it  is  at  any  rate
possible  that  -\rx>  comes  from  trssnn  (TARSHISH  [q.  v. ]),
the  original  of  which  may  be  n*g;j<,  and  »jtu  from  *yy\$.
'  Asshurite '  and  '  Cushanite '  are  two  N.  Arabian
ethnics,  used  perhaps  as  personal  names.  See  Crit.
Bib.  T.  K.  c.

SHEVA  (Kl£;).  i.  b.  Caleb  b.  Hezron,  the  '  father  '
of  MACHBENA  (i  Ch.  249 ;  araov  [B],  -A  [A],  <roue  [L]).

2.  2  S.  2025  (Ktb.  tty?) ;  see  SERAI  AH  (i).

SHEWBREAD  (D'Of  H  Dr6),  Uhem  hap-panim,  lit.
'bread  of  the  face'  or  '  presence-bread'  (R\"mK-).  See
SACRIFICE,  §§  14,  340  ;  RITUAL,  §  2  ;  TEMPLE,  §
16,  and  ALTAR,  §  10  (8).

©  aproi  roO  TTpocrwTrou  (i  S.  21  7  [6]),  a.  [Trjs]  7rpo#e'crea>j  (Ex.
40  23  [where  cnS  occurs  alone],  2  Ch.  4 19),  a.  T.  7rpo<T</>opas
(i  K.  748),  a.  <?>/<07n'ovs  (Ex.  25  30);  Vg.  panes  propositionis.
With  the  exception  of  i  K.  (!!  2  Ch.  4  19),  and  i  S.  only  in  P.

Other  expressions  are  (a)  lehem  hat-tdnilil,  -ppnn  Cn1?,  EV
'the  continual  bread '(Nu.  47  [P],  oi  aproi  oi  Sia  Trarros) ;  (i^)
/.  ham-ma  araketh,  i  Ch.  9  32  (AV'"tf-  '  bread  of  ordering  '),
•ma'areketh  I.  2  Ch.  13  n  (a.  T.  7rpo0e'<rews,  Vg.  as  above);  (c)
I.  kodes,  i  S.  21  5  ('  hallowed  [RV  "  holy  "]  bread  '  ;  a.  a-yioi).


Zimmern  (Beitrcige  zur  Kcnntniss  Jer  Bab.  Rcl.,  K


yiot).

Vituals-


1  So  Andreas,  in  Marti,  Bibl.-aram.  Gram.  87;  E.  Meyer,
Ent.  d.  Jud.  32. Mi0poj3ov<Ta>T)s  occurs  in  Arrian,  i.  163,  Diod.

3122.

2  In  the  address  of  the  letter  of  '  Tattenai  the  governor  beyond
the  river  and  Shethar-boznai '  (Ezra  5  6),  the  verb  in  MT  is  in
the sing., and the suffix in arH33 is also sing. Marquart
suggests that Shethar-boznai may have come in from the
subscription.

4462


SHIBAH


SHIBAH  (HrTJ'},  Gen.  26 33  RV,  AVSHBBAH  (?.».).

SHIBBOLETH  (nfitty),  the  word  which  the  fugitive
Israelites  mispronounced,  so  falling  into  the  trap  set  for
them  by  the  Gileadites  (Judg.  126).

<0B  renders  fin'ov  &r)  <TTOI\VS.  Being  unable  to  reproduce  the
s/i  in  thibbtltth,  the  translator  chose  o-rayus,  where  or  was
found  rather  difficult  to  pronounce.  ('And  he  said,  Sibboleth,'
remains  untranslated.)

So  the  French  betrayed  themselves  by  their  pro
nunciation  of  ceci  and  ciceri  in  the  Sicilian  vespers,
1 3th  March,  1282  (Hertheau).  An  analogous  story  is
related  by  Doughty  (Ar.  Des.  1 155).  When  the  Druses
came  on  to  slay  Ibrahim  Pasha's  troops,  a  grace  was
accorded  to  the  Syrians  in  the  force.  '  O  man,  say
Gamel.'  Every  Syrian  answered  Jemel  (J  as  in  French,
whilst  in  parts  of  Egypt  J  is  pronounced  as  G).  So  the
Damascene  soldiers  were  saved.

On  the  phonetic  point  involved  in  the  narrative  see  Marquart
Z A  Til'  8  (1888)  151  ff.,  and  cp  G.  A.  Cooke  in  Hastings'
Dti,  s.-<.

SHIBMAH  (nCOb»),  Nu.  32  38  AV,  RV  SIBMAH
(?.*.).

SHICRON,  RV  SHIKKERON  (JVYjJt?;  (eic)  coKXcoO
[B],  (eic)  AKK&PU>N<\  [A],  (eic)  C&X&PCJONA  [L] ;

Sechrona  [Vg.  ]),  at  the  western  end  of  the  N.  boundary
of  Judah,  Josh.  15n,t  apparently  between  Ekron  (&K-
K&PCON)  and  Jabncel.

SHIELD.  The  most  ancient  defensive  piece  of  armour
was  the  shield,  buckler,  roundel,  or  target.  The  weapon
varied  greatly  in  make,  form,  and  size,  therefore  bore
a  variety  of  names.

1.  sinntih, H3S  (v/pS,  '  preserve,' '  protect ');  most  commonly
rendered  Supeds,  Si'patos,  but  also,  some  five  times,  ottKov,  in  the

sense  in  which  that  word  is  used  by  the  Greek
1.  Terms,  historical  writers;  cp  on-AiTrjs;  Vg.  scutum,  but

also,  less  properly,  clypeus.  This  was  a  large
shield  which  is  commonly  found  in  connection  with  spear,
and  was  the  shelter  of  heavily-armed  infantry  (i  S.  17  7  41  etc.)  ;
it  is  also  used  figuratively  of  Yahwe's  favour  and  faithfulness.
We  hear  of  this  shield  being  borne  in  front  of  the  warrior  by  a
Shield-bearer  (rrwn  Kb-:;  i  S.  17?  RV).

2.  nuigcn, [jp (\/]33, 'cover,' 'defend'); most commonly
rendered  Ovpeds,  but  also  occasionally  dtrjn's  and  jre'An),  scutum.
This was  a buckler,  or smaller  shield,  which,  from  a similar
juxtaposition  with  sword,  bow,  and  arrows,  appears  to  have  been
the  defence  of  the  light-armed  infantry  and  of  chiefs  ;  it  is  used
figuratively  also  of  the  scales  or  scutes  of  leviathan  ;  as  a  metaphor
for  a  king  or  ruler  (Ps.  t>9  18  [19]  Hos.  4  18  Ps.  47 giro]),  etc.

3.  si>lierah, mnb, Ps.  91 4t. A  doubtful  word. A second
word  for  'shield'  in  the  same  line  of  the  stanza  is  improbable.
<B  reads  KvK\u><rei — i.e., 'J32D*,  which  Whitehouse and Che.
Ps.C-)  adopt.

4.  Klet,  a~?V. The  derivation  and  meaning  of  this  word  are
both  obscure. In  28.  87  ^At'Sioc  (reading  mjfii?)  and  in  ||  i  Ch.
187  (cAoios  (also  reading mj's?); in 2  K.  11  10  Tpicrero; [BA],
6dpu [L], but in |j 2Ch.  289  oirAo.  (L  Sopv,  aeriris,  and  oirAa)  ;
Cant.  4  4  /3oAi'6c«  ;  Jer.  61  (-JS)  1 1  ^ape'rpas.

5.  k'iddii,  ['ITS. See  JAVELIN,  5.

6.  0vpe&s,  Eph.  0  16  (metaphorically,  of  faith).1

Among  the  Hebrews,  as  among  other  peoples  at  an

_  , early  stage  of  development  (cp  Evans,

2.  form,  etc. Anc_  Brongg  impjemf,,ts  Of  Gtm  #„•/_

343), shields  were  no  doubt  at  first made  of  wicker-

1  [Tothese;  according  to  some  (Baethgen,  Kirkpatrick),  should
be  added  n^,  'tgiilih.  In  Ps.  409[io],  where  MT  has
rP?jy,  properly  'waggons'  [EV  'chariots'],  (5  has  flupeovj,  and
Tg.  j'S'Jg,  'shields.'  But  in  Nu.  31  50  Ezek.  16  12  S'jy,  'agil,
means  'a  ring, 'and  it  is  not  probable  that  the  Psalter  should
contain  two  words  for  'shield  '  (see  3)  found  nowhere  else  in  the
OT.  On  the  assumption  that  in  Ps.  40  and  elsewhere  (see
PSALMS,  §  28)  the  Jerahmeelites  or  Edomites  are  the  foes  chiefly
referred  to,  Cheyne  (f's.ft)  would  read  ^KDm' IJDi  corrupt
forms  of  'rrv  often  present  j  instead  of  n-  Cp  Ps.  70  3  [4],  as
restored  in  /'j.(2),

He  has  broken  the  quiver  of  Cusham,

The  shield  and  the  sword  of  Jerahmeel.  T.  K.  C]

4463


SHIELD

work,  wood,  or  hide.  The  leather  coverings  would  vary
in  thickness  ;  a  single  hide,  if  suitably  prepared,  some
times  serving  as  well  as  a  double.  At  a  later  date  the
wooden  framework  was  bordered  with  metal.  The
partial  employment  of  metal  would  soon  suggest  the
discarding  of  wood  almost  (or  quite)  entirely.

In  Egypt  the  shield  'was  most  commonly  covered
with  bull's  hide,  having  the  hair  outwards,  like  the
laseion  of  the  Greeks,  sometimes  strengthened  by  one
or  more  rims  of  metal,  and  studded  with  nails  or  metal
pins,  the  inner  part  being  probably  wickerwork  or  a.
wooden  frame,  like  many  of  those  used  by  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  which  were  also  covered  with  hide '  (Wilk.
Anc.  Egypt.  1 198 /. ).

We  may  infer  that  the  early  Israelites — or  at  any
rate  the  Canaanites  —  borrowed  the  forms  in  use  in
Egypt.1  Their  common  shields  would  therefore  be  a
kind  of  parallelogram,  broadest  and  arched  at  the  top
and  cut  square  beneath.  They  were  of  wood  covered
with  leather  ;  a  late  prophet  (Ezek.  39 9)  speaks  of  them
as  easily  burned.

The  sinnah  was  most  likely  what  in  the  feudal  ages
would  have  been  called  a  pavise,  for  such  occurs  on  the
Egyptian  monuments.  Sometimes  such  a  weapon  was
above  5  ft.  high. 2  An  example  of  an  Egyptian  weapon
of  the  kind  is  to  be  seen  in  Erman's  picture  (Life  in
Anc.  Egypt,  524  ;  see  also  Wilk.  Anc.  F.gvpt.  1202)  of
a  soldier  of  the  Middle  Empire.  The  body  is  not
protected  by  other  armour — a  fact  which  suggests  that
in  ancient  times  the  shield  was  large  in  proportion
as  other  defensive  armour  was  lacking.  This  shield
resembles  a  Gothic  window  in  shape.  Shields  of  such
dimensions  must  have  been  made  of  light  material.
During  a  march  they  were,  at  any  rate  in  the  time
of  Rameses  II.,  hung  over  the  soldiers'  backs  (see
Erman,  546).  At  a  later  date  the  Assyrian  pikemen
carried  an  '  enormous  shield,  sometimes  round  and
convex,  sometimes  arched  at  the  top  and  square  at  the
bottom  '  (Masp.  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  627/1  )•  But
the  Assyrians  had  shields  of  all  sizes.  Layard  (Nineveh
and  Babylon,  p.  193  f. )  found  bronze  shields  at  Nimroud.
They  were  '  circular,  the  rim  bending  inwards,  and
forming  a  deep  groove  round  the  edge. '  They  had  iron
handles,  '  fastened  by  six  bosses  or  nails,  the  heads  of
which  form  an  ornament  on  the  outer  face  of  the  shield.
The  diameter  of  the  largest  and  most  perfect  is  2  feet
6  inches.'

The  lighter  shields  mayperhaps  have  been  soaked  in  oil
(28.  I  21,  but  see  col.  2334,  and  cp  Lohr,  ad  loc. ,  Is.  21  5,
yet  see  Duhm,  who  keeps  the  text,  though  declining
the  usual  interpretation,  and  Crit.  Bib.,  where  the  text
is  criticised),  '  in  order  that  the  weapons  of  the  enemy
might  the  more  readily  glide  off  them'  (Dr.  77?.Si83).
As  to  the  source  whence  shields  were  procured,  one
must  have  recourse  to  conjecture.  It  has  been  sug
gested  (Kitto,  Cycl. )  that  '  hippopotamus,  rhinoceros,
and  elephant  skin  shields  7iiay  have  been  brought  from
Ethiopia,  and  purchased  by  the  Israelites  in  the
Phoenician  markets  ;  such  small  whale -skin  bucklers
as  are  still  used  by  Arabian  swordsmen  would  come
from  the  Erythmean  Sea.'  In  Nah.  24  shields  'made
red'  (with  copper,  according  to  Nowack)  are  spoken
of ;  but  the  text  is  too  doubtful  to  be  trusted.  Among
the  '  Hittites '  one  of  the  three  occupants  of  a  chariot
bore  a  small  shield  with  which  he  protected  him
self  and  the  others  (see  CHARIOT,  col.  729) ;  on  the
other  hand,  the  single  chariot-soldier  of  Egypt  had  to

1  In  a  picture  of  a  '  Philistine  '  ship  of  war  given  by  Maspero
(The  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  701)  the  combatants  carry  small
round  shie'lds.  In  the  picture  of  the  storming  of  Dapuru,  the
fortress  of  the  Kheta,  given  in  Erman  (Anc.  Egypt,  533),  shields
of  various  shapes  and  sizes  are  well  illustrated.

-  Cp  Hewitt,  Ancient  Armour  in  Europe:  'besides  the
ordinary  Northern  shields,  we  sometimes  find  them  represented
of  so  large  a  size  as  to  cover  the  whole  person.'  Hewitt  points
out  that  the  same  kind  of  shield  is  to  be  seen  in  Egyptian,
Assyrian,  and  Indian  monuments  (77),  and  that  '  the  Chinese
still  (1855)  »se  a  large  round  shield  of  cane- wicker '  (it.  note  m).

4464


SHIGGAION

protect  himself  as  well  as  manage  his  chariot  (Erman,
Anc.  Egypt.  550).  During  the  Assyrian  and  Persian
supremacy  the  Hebrews  may  have  used  the  square,
oblong,  and  round  shields  of  those  nations,  and  may
have  subsequently  copied  those  of  Greece  and  Rome.
High  personages  might  have  shields  of  precious  metals
(iS.  176  i  K.  14z7  [brass],  2  S.  87  i  K.  10i6/  1426;
cp  i  Mace.  14  24  15 18  [gold];  the  exaggeration  in
I  Mace.  6  39  cannot  be  added  ;  shields  partly  of  brass  or
gold  seem  to  be  intended).

To facilitate  their management the  shields had a
wooden  or  leathern  handle,  and  they  were  often  slung


3.  Management.


over the neck by  a  thong. With


the  larger  kinds  a  testudo  could  be
formed  by  pressing  the  ranks  close  together  ;  and  while
the  outside  men  kept  their  shields  before  and  on  the
flanks,  those  within  raised  theirs  above  the  head,  and
thus  produced  a  kind  of  surface,  sometimes  as  close  and
fitted  together  as  a  pantile  roof,  and  capable  of  resisting
the  pressure  even  of  a  body  of  men  marching  upon  it.
We  learn  from  Erman  (529^  )  that  when  the  soldiers  of
the  first  army  of  Amon  [Amen]  pitched  their  camp,  they
arranged  their  shields  to  form  a  great  four-cornered
enclosure.

To  break  the  force  of  a  blow,  '  bosses  '  or  6fj.<f>a\oi
were  attached  ;  cp  dawides  6fj.(pa\6effcrai  (Horn.  //.  448).
But  whether  such  '  bosses  '  are  really  referred  to  in  Job
1526,  where  MT  (and  consequently  EV)  makes  the
wicked  man  '  run  upon  '  God  '  with  the  thick  bosses  of
his  bucklers,'  v|3D  '33  '3J,'3,  is,  to  say  the  least,  doubtful.
The  whole  verse  has  a  suspicious  aspect.

Shields  were  hung  upon  the  battlements  of  walls
(Ezek.  27 ii,  if  the  text  is  correct  [but  cp  Crit.  Bib.},
Cant.  44  [?],  cp  i  Maec.  457),  and,  as  still  occurs,  chiefly
above  gates  of  cities  by  the  watch  and  ward.  In  time
of  peace  they  were  covered  to  preserve  them  from  the
sun,  and  in  war  uncovered  ;  this  sign  was  poetically
used  to  denote  coming  hostilities,  as  in  Is.  2'26  etc.

Besides  the  works  mentioned  above,  use  has  been  made  in  a
few  instances  of  the  article  'Arms'  in  Kino's  Bib.  Cyclop.

M.  A.  C.

SHIGGAION  (|V|L';),  Ps.  7i  (title).  The  traditional
Jewish  view  (cp  Aq.  a.yv6rj,u.a,,  Sym. ,  Theod.  vw£p  dy-
potas)  connects  it  with  n:s',  sdgah,  'to  wander,'  sup
posing  an  'error'  of  David  (see  IGNORANCE,  SINS  OF)
to  be  referred  to,1  whilst  Rodiger,  Ewald,  Delitzsch,
and  others  explain  it  as  '  dithyramb '  on  the  same
etymological  theory  ({RrsxAR  sjnlpiy  t^aAjUos).  More
plausible  would  be  'a  prophetic  rhythm'  (nyp  =  yw;
cp  Ar.  saj'n,  the  rhyming  prose  of  the  Arabian  kahins
or  diviners).2  Ps.  7,  however,  is  not  in  the  Hebrew
or  in  the  Arabian  prophetic  style,  nor  is  its  tone
more  prophetic  than  that  of  other  psalms.  Zimmern
(Busspsalmen,  i  ;  cp  Hal.  Rev.  St!in.,  1894,  p.  i)
connects  Shiggaion  with  Sigfi,  the  name  of  a  class  of
Babylonian  hymns  ;  but  fig&  is  properly  '  vehement
lamentation'  (Del.  Ass.  H\l'B),  a  description  which
does  not  apply  to  Ps.  7.

In  Hab.  3  i  the  plur.  Shigionoth  (rnTJB*,  Aq.  Sym.  [eVt]  a-ypor)-
juaTujy  ;  Vg.[f>ro}ignorantiis;  AVi'S'-  'variable  songs  or  tunes')
is  plainly  an  error  for  rn'£E'!S  (see  SHEMINITH,  UPON).  The
clever  suggestions  of  Gratz  (nyjj  YB')and  Wellhausen  (rn3'33)(<-'P
<pi;NAo;  ^6T^  ,,55^  .  aiSO)  ;n  ps  §0]  j7;  t;t]e)  fa;j  to  jo  justice
to  the  facts.  Gratz  neglects  Vl? '.  Wellhausen  changes  jy  into
3,  and  gives  n:'3:  a  plur.  form  and  a  meaning  to  which  it  has  no
right  (see  NEGINAH,  but  cp  HABAKKUK  [BOOK],  §  8).

T.  K.  C.

SHIHON  O'WL''),  Josh.  19 19  AV,  RV  SHION  (q.v.).
SHIHOR  OF  EGYPT,  RV  Shihor  [The  Brook]  of

Egypt (iCh.  13s,  n;ni'D  "rin'i?  [anb]  bpiuv  aiyv'nrou [BxAL]),

1  See  the  Midrash,  and  cp  Field,  Hc.r.,  cut  loc.

2  See  Wellh.  Ar.  Heiet.W  130  ; Hoffm.  ZATH'Z*),  and  cp
PROPHET,  §  13. Hitzig  on  Ps.  7  i  makes  the  above  comparison,
but  combines  with  it  an  arbitrary  theory.

3  '3  (like  '3)  may  proceed  from  an  original  Q.


SHIHOR  OP  EGYPT

or  '  SHIHOR  (RV  THE  SHIHOR),  which  is  before  [i.e.,  eastward
of]  Egypt  '(EV,  Josh.  13  3,  DnsD  '3!J-ty  TVK  "rirran,  Airb  TTJS
aoiKijrov  [pO'l?;?]  TJJS  Kara  Trpdaun-oi/  aiy.  [BAL]),  Is.  283,
Shihor  (nriB*;  (xeTa/3dA<oi/  =  nnc  [BNAQ]),  Jer.  2  18  (-fine',  yjju^
[BKAQ],  o-uop  [Qmg.]).

The  position  of  the  Shihor  question  was  until  lately
as  follows.  In  Is.  283  Jer.  2i8  either  the  Nile,  or  more
strictly  (I-'rd.  Del.  Par.  311)  the  Pelusiac  arm  of  the
Nile,  seemed  evidently  to  be  intended,  which  appeared
to  make  it  probable  that  in  iCh.  13s  Josh.  133  also
the  reference  was  to  the  Nile.  This  required  the
assumption  that  both  the  Chronicler  and  RD  gave  an
idealistic  extension  to  the  SW.  frontier  of  Canaan.  It
was  urged,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  Nu.  34s  Josh.  164
iK.86s  2K.  24?  Is.  27  iz  the  S.  or  SW.  frontier
specified  is  the  cnso  *?m  (MT),  which  is  supposed  to  be
the  Wady  el-'Aris  (see  EGYPT,  RIVER  OF),  and  accord
ing  to  Franz  Delitzsch  and  Kautzsch-Socin  this  wady  is
also  referred  to  in  Gen.  15 18  as  the  D'nsp  "in:  (MT).
Were  there,  then,  two  Shihors?  Steuernagel  removes
the  difficulty  in  part  by  reading  -a-en,  'the  desert"
instead  of  -.irrB-n,  'the  Shihor'  (see  <jj$),  in  Josh.  183,
and  Benzinger  does  the  same  for  i  Ch.  13s  by  supposing
that  a  thoughtless  scribe  substituted  -v\'v  for  D'-IXD  Sm
(cp  iK.86s) — i.e. ,  the  Wady  el-'Aris.  In  Is.  23s  Jer.
2 18  the  reference  to  the  Nile  has  been  pretty  generally
admitted.  All  that  remained  was  to  get  a  probable
explanation  for  Shihor.  The  existence  of  the  name
SHIHOR-LIBNATH  in  the  territory  of  Asher  seemed  to
favour  a  Hebrew  meaning  ;  and  it  was  thought  that
'  Shihor  '  might  mean  '  the  dark-coloured  turbid  stream,'
in  allusion  to  the  black  mud  of  the  Nile  (cp  the  native
name  of  Egypt,  Kernel,  'the  black  land,'  EGYPT,  §  i).
Hommel,'  however,  in  1897  (AHT  244),  changed  the
position  of  the  Shihor  question,  by  showing  that  in  all
probability  there  was,  to  the  SW.  of  Canaan,  a  land  of
Asshur  or  Shur,  extending  from  the  Wady  el-'Aris  to
the  region  of  Beersheba  and  Hebron,  and  pointed  out
the  striking  parallelism  between  '  the  Shihor  which  is
before  DHsa '  in  Josh.  13s  and  'Shur  which  is  before
D'lSD  '  in  Gen.  25 18.  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  explain
"in?:  (Geshur)  as  '  simply  a  contraction  of  Ge-Ashur  or
G^-Shur. '  The  present  writer's  investigations  are  in
the  main  independent  of  those  of  Winckler  and  Hommel,
though  stimulated  by  the  earlier  writings  of  these
scholars.  He  is  of  opinion  that  the  true  name  of  this
region  is  neither  Geshur  nor  Asshur  but  Ashhur  (out  of
which  the  other  forms  arose),  and  that  Shihor  is  a
cognate  of  this,  also  that  Ashhur,  Asshur,  or  Geshur
acquired  a  wider  reference  than  Hommel  has  indicated.

The  theory  of  the  present  writer  is  that  this  term  occurs  in
many  passages  of  the  OT  as  practically  synonymous  with
Jerahmeel,  and  we  can  well  believe  that  the  C'PSD  Wn  (if  tn's
phrase  may  be  taken  to  mean  '  the  wady  of  Misrim  '—  i.e.,  of  the
Arabian  Musri),  was  also  at  an  early  period  called  the  wady  of
Ashhur,  and  at  a  later  time  the  wady  Shihor  (a  modification  of
Ashhur,  cp  SHEHARIAH);  between  i  Ch.  185  and  i  K.  865  there
will,  therefore,  if  these  views  are  correct,  be  no  inconsistency.

A  fair  estimate  of  this  theory  is  only  possible  in  connection
with  a  thorough  methodical  study  of  the  OT,  or  at  least  of  the
greater  part  of  it,  from  the  point  of  view  indicated  at  the  end  of
the  article  NAME.  There  is  little  reason  to  suppose  (see  Crit,
Bib.)  that  the  result  will  be  adverse  to  the  theory.

It  should  also  be  emphasised  that  the  critical  investiga
tion  here  referred  to  supports  the  view  that  Winckler's
explanation  of  the  name  c'TXD  as  the  N.  Arabian  Musri
in  the  phrase  c'HSD  *?m,  and  in  a  large  number  of
passages  besides  those  which  contain  this  phrase,  is
correct.  Hommel's  more  recent  theory  that  TIXD  (i.e.,
according  to  him,  Mosar  or  Masor)  means  Midian — i.e. ,
the  NW.  Arabian  coast  from  Leukekome  to  'Akabah,
is  closely  akin  to  that  of  Winckler,  who  regards  Musri
as  the  name  of  a  N.  Arabian  kingdom,  in  vassalage
to  the  more  powerful  Minaean  kingdom,  and  peopled
by  the  race  called  Midian  (cp  KA  7~i:!'  143).

We  have  still  to  ascertain  whether  Is.  283  and  Jer.
2i8,  critically  regarded,  are,  or  are  not,  consistent  with
the  theory  respecting  Ashhur,  Asshur,  or  Geshur,  stated

4466


SHIHOR-LIBNATH

above, (a)  Is.  283,  as  it  now  stands,  is  fairly  rendered
by  RV  :—

'  And  on  great  waters  the  seed  of  Shihor,  the  harvest  of  the
Nile  ("lit*'),  was  her  revenue  ;  and  she  was  the  mart  (?)  of
nations.'

With  the  exception  of  Duhin  all  commentators  have
admitted  that  Shihor  here  means  the  Nile,  though  Dill-
mann  noticed  the  awkwardness  of  the  style  here  and
elsewhere  in  the  poem,  which,  together  with  the  occur
rence  of  '  Kasdim  '  (Chaldaeans)  in  v.  13,  suggested  his
theory  that  the  original  work  (z'v.  1-13)  was  recast  by  a
later  hand  (cp  Intr.  Is.  139-143).  Duhm,  however,
thinks  that  the  writer  means  the  Shihor  on  the  S.  border
of  Asher  (see  SHIHOR-LIBNATH),  '  which,  according  to
Gen.  4920  (Ezek.  27  18),  supplied  Zidon  with  corn  and
the  like.'

He  regards  TIN'  (no  tin  ®)  as  an  incorrect  gloss.  Duhm
speaks  of  '  Zidon  '  rather  than  '  Tyre,'  because  155  in  TT.  s(?)8  is,
in  his  opinion,  miswritten  for  JITS-  Marti  assents  to  this,  but
thinks  that  the  gloss  (-IIN>)  Is  correct,  and  that  'Shihor,'  after
all,  does  mean  the  Nile.  If,  however,  it  is  highly  probable  (see
PROPHET,  §  35^)  that  the  geographical  names  have  been  trans
formed  by  an  editor  in  very  many  of  the  prophecies,  it  becomes
at  once  probable  that  here,  as  elsewhere,  "IS  should  be  "llfC,  and
J'wx  either  j^lD  or  perhaps  11Jf3.  In  this  case  we  can  hardly
doubt  that  "ITO  (Shihor),  which  is  not  understood  by  (S  to  be
the  name  of  a  river,  or  even  a  proper  name  at  all,  should  be
either  D'inD,  'merchants'  (so  ©),  or  rather  liriw'X,  'Ashhur.'
£I"S5"in  'n  ff  •  i  6  10  has  the  same  origin  (see  TAKSIHSH),  whilst
TIN'  presumably  comes  from  TJ-I.  At  any  rate,  the  presence  of
"ins?  a"d  ins  close  together  points  to  the  existence  of  much
uncertainty  as  to  the  right  reading  of  the  word  which  underlies
both  words.

(b)  In  Jer.  2i8  the  prophet  reproaches  the  Jews  for
being  continually  on  the  road  to  ms3,  '  to  drink  the
water  of  Shihor,  '  and  to  Asshur,  '  to  drink  the  water  of
the  river.'  Most  think  that  ryixD  means  '  Mizraim  '—
i.e.,  Egypt  —  and  that  'Asshur'  is  the  great  kingdom
whose  capital  was  Nineveh.  But  in  the  context  (v.  16)
we  only  read  of  the  '  sons  of  Noph  and  Tahapanes.  '
Either  then  '  Asshur  '  is  superfluous,  or  it  denotes  the
same  country  as  c'iss.  In  the  latter  case  onsD  must
mean  the  N.  Arabian  Musri,  and  ejEnni  f\i  ('Noph  and
Tahapanes'??)  must  be  corrupt.1  Clearly  this  is  pre
ferable  ;  the  quatrain  in  r.  18  must  not  be  mutilated.
'  Shihor  '  and  '  Asshur  '  are  ultimately  the  same  name,
but  'Shihor'  has  already  become  differentiated  from
'Asshur,'  and  means  the  cnso  nnj  ((ien.  If)i8).2  That
<5  in  ?'.  18  reads  yrjuv  (Gihon)  instead  of  'Shihor'  is
hardly  of  importance  for  textual  criticism.

It  does,  however,  prove  that  the  Greek  translator  did  not
understand  Shihor,  and  therefore  substituted  for  it  a  name
which,  owing  to  a  misinterpretation  of  Gen.  2  13  (where  '  Cush  '
becomes  '  Ethiopia'),  he  supposed  to  be  a  Hebrew  name  for  the
Nile.  It  is  no  objection  to  our  exegesis  that  in  v.  36  iitt'N  is
represented  as  distinct  from  c"~li2,  for  in  r.  18  the  right  reading
probably  is,  not  TifN  (Asshur),  but  -iinc'N  (Ashhur).

The  above  is  written  independently  of  Hommel's  later  in
vestigations  (A  ufsc'itze,  3  i  [1901])  as  well  as  of  Winckler's  more
recent  writings.  Hommel  holds  that  in  Josh.  13  3  and  in  i  Ch.
13s  'the  Shihor'  is  inaccurately  put  for  the  '  nahal  Mosar.'
He  derives  'Shihor'  from  'Shihon,'  which  he  identifies  with
Seihan,  the  Arabic  name  of  one  of  the  rivers  of  Paradise.  The
'  Gihon  '  is  the  '  river  '  (in:)  of  Asshur  (or  as  he  points  it,
Ashur—  i.e.,  Edom)  ;  this  he  identifies  with  the  Wady  Sirhan
(reckoned  with  the  Euphratean  stream  region),  the  Hiddekel
(as  he  thinks)  of  Gen.  2  14.  Hommel's  statements  are  crilicis'ed
unsympathetic-ally  by  Kcinig,  Fiinfneue  amlnsche  Landschafts-
namen  im  A  T  beleuchtet  (1902).  -j-  K.  C.


SHIHOR-LIBNATH  (T\*  -|irre>  ;  ceicoN  [B],
c[e]iu>p  [AL],  KAI  AAB&N&6  ;  Sikor  ef  LabanatK),
apparently  near  Carmel  on  the  S.  boundary  of  Asher
(Josh.  1926f).  The  ancients,  including  Eusebius  and
Jerome  (OS  275  23  1862),  distinguished  two  places
called  respectively  Shihor  and  Labanath.  Since,  how
ever,  SHIHOR  [</.  v.  ]  occurs  elsewhere  only  as  the  name

1  Read  Sxcm'  mns:  :  see  NAPHTUHIM.

2  Kven  if  the  Wady  of  Ashhur  and  the  Wady  of  Musri  were,
strictly  speaking,  distinct,  some  laxity  in  a  Hebrew  writing  is
intelligible.

4467


SHILOH

of  a  river,  the  moderns  prefer  to  take  Shihor-libnath  as
a  compound  phrase  meaning  '  the  Shihor  of  Libnath.'
There  may  have  been  a  place  near  called  Libnath,  and
Hommel  (AHTz^)  ingeniously  conjectures  that  the
Asherites,  who  originally  dwelt  between  Egypt  and
Judah  (cp  ASHER,  §  i),  called  the  stream  which  marked
the  S.  boundary  of  their  territory  by  the  name  of  Shihor
in  memory  of  the  Nile.  '  SHIHOR  '  [q.  v.  ],  however,
does  not  mean  the  Nile.  It  is  more  probable  that
just  as  fei3  (Carmel)  comes  (according  to  the  present
writer's  theory)  from  ^KDnT  (Jerahmeel),  so  -iirre'
(Shihor)  in  Josh.,  as  well  as  elsewhere,  comes  from
•nriB'K  (Ashhur),  and  that  both  names  indicate  that  the
sites  called  '  Carmel  '  and  '  Shihor  '  had  been  origin
ally  occupied  by  Jerahmeelites  and  Ashhurites  (a  dis
tinction  without  a  difference  ?)  respectively.  There  were
probably  other  places  called  Ashhur  (  Heres,  for  instance
[see  HERES,  MOUNT])  ;  one  of  them  was  near  Libnath,
or  belonged  to  a  Laban  or  Libnah  clan.  See  SHIHOR.

From  the  earlier  point  of  view,  Dillmann's  identification  of
'the  [river]  Shihor  of  Libnath'  with  the  Nahr  e/-Zerka  (i.e.,
'the  dark  blue  river,'  a  little  to  the  N.  of  Csesarea,  appeared
plausible  (but  cp  Buhl,  Pal.  105).  J.  D.  Michaelisand  Gesenius
(T/ies.  1393)  thought  of  the  river  Betas  (now  Nahr  Na'man,  S.
of'Akka),  from  the  fine  sand  of  which,  according  to  Pliny,  glass
?!  '  transparence  '  ?>)  was  made.  T.  K.  C.


T),  Josh.  15  u  RV,  AV  SHICRON


SHIKKERON


8HILHI  (*n?t',  §  52),  apparently  the  name  of  the
father-in-law  of  king  Jehoshaphat,  iK.2242  (ce/V\eei
[B],  CA\AA&  [A],  ceAeei  tL  >n  163o],  2Ch.  203i
(cAAei  [HA],  ceAeei  [L]),  but  really,  as  the  ceMeei
of  <J?»  in  i  K.  2242  (from  ceAeeiM  =  SHiLHiM  [q.v.~\)
shows,  the  name  of  the  birthplace  of  Azubah,  the  king's
mother.  The  majority,  if  not  all,  of  the  names  of
Jehoshaphat's  brothers,  together  with  his  own,  suggest
a  family  connection  with  the  Negeb.  Cp  HALLOHESH.

T.  K.  c.

SHILHIM  (D'r6t;;).  A  city  of  Judah  '  towards  the
border  of  Edom,''  Josh.  1532  (c&AH  [B],  ceAeeiM
[AL]).  Perhaps  the  same  as  SHARUHEN  (<}.r.};  cp
also  Shaaraim  (Buhl,  Pal.  185).  Azubah,  bath  SHILHI
(q.v.  ),  was  probably  a  native  of  Shilhim  (see  SHILHI).

T.  K.  C.

SHILLEM  (Ok").  Gen.  4624,  SHILLEMITES
OpWn),  Nu.  2649;  in  i  Ch.  7  13  SHALLUM,  7.

SHILOAH,  WATERS  OF  (r6crn  SP),  Is.  86. See

SlI.OAM.

SHILOH  (iW,  Judg.  21  21  Jer.  7  12,  &B>,  Judg.  21  19

i  S.  1  24  821  Jer.  "1214  26g  41s,  but  here  ®»xQ  craAij/u.,  ©A
o-aAwju.,  cp  SALEM  ;  Ps.  78  60;  n1?^*  thirteen  times  ;  <n)A<o,  -loji,
-u>v  ',  Jos.  triAoOs  and  eriAw).

A  town  of  Ephraim,  where  the  sanctuary  of  the  ark
was,  under  the  priesthood  of  the  house  of  En  (q.v.  ).
1.  Ephraimite  Accordin&  to  i  S.33  15,  this  sanctuary
tnwn  was a  tabernacle,  but  a  temple  with

doors.  Josh.  18  1  [P],  however,  has  it
that  the  tabernacle  was  set  up  there  by  Joshua  after  the
conquest.  In  Judg.  21  igf.  the  yearly  feast  at  Shiloh
appears  as  of  merely  local  character.  Shiloh  seems  to
have  been  destroyed  by  the  Philistines  after  the  disastrous
battle  of  Ebenezer  (cp  Jer.  "1214  2669;  see  ISRAEL,
§  1  1  ).  The  position  described  in  Judg.  21  19  (cp  OS
]f)2i)  gives  certainty  to  the  identification  with  the
modern  Seiliin  lying  some  2  m.  ESE.  of  Lubban
(Lebonah),  on  the  road  from  Bethel  to  Shechem.
Here  there  is  a  ruined  village,  with  a  flat,  double-topped
hill  behind  it,  offering  a  strong  position,  which  suggests
that  the  place  was  a  stronghold  as  well  as  a  sanctuary.
A  smiling  and  fertile  landscape  surrounds  the  hill.

Cp  PRIEST,  $  2;  077CI2)  268-271;  L.  W.  Batten,  'The
Sanctuary  at  Shiloh,'  JBL  19  [1000]  29-33  ;  Graf,  De  templo
Silonensi;  and  Aug.  Kohler,  Bibl.  Gesch.  li.  1  12  f.  \v.  R.  s.

4468


SHILOH

That  there  was  a  Shiloh  in  the  territory  of  Ephraim,

2 Probable  'S  Ululcmal)le- II  is  probable,  however,

Benjamite that  there  was  anotner  Place  with  at  least

town a  s'm''ar  name.  m  Benjamin,  which  was

confounded by  later  writers (Jer. , Ps. )

with  the  northern  Shiloh.

ITVi  l^t?.  ar"l  .tW',  are  all  regarded  by  the  present  writer  as
connected  with  7*NB>  (Shaul)  and  tyty  (Shalishah),  names  of
Edomite,  or  rather  Jerahmeelite,  origin,  which  were  not  confined
to  one  part  of  the  country.  He  sees  reason  to  think  that  the
names,  both  of  Eli  and  of  his  two  sons,  connect  Eli's  family  with
the  Jerahmeelites,  and  there  is  evidence  in  the  genealogy  of
Samuel  connecting  his  family  with  the  same  N.  Arabian  stock  ;
indeed  the  name  of  Samuel  (see  SAUL,  §  i)  may  appear  identical
with  the  Jerahmeelite  name  of  Saul.

It  is  very  possible  that  the  sanctuary  of  the  ark  was
in  the  Benjamite  not  in  the  Ephraimite  Shiloh  (or  rather
Shalishah  ?) ;  also  that  in  the  original  narrative  from
which  Josh.  18 1  (cp  I95i  21 2  22912)  is  derived,  the
place  intended  was  Shalishah  in  Benjamin.  We  can
now  probably  understand  aright  the  statement  in  Judg.
1831  that  the  shrine  containing  Micah's  graven  image  re
mained  '  all  the  time  that  the  house  of  God  was  in  rbw. '
Laish  or  Dan  was  not  improbably  the  famous  city  of
Halusah  in  the  Xegeb  (see  MICAH,  §  2),  and  of  course
shared  the  fortunes  of  the  sanctuary  in  Benjamin  which
contained  the  ark.  The  question  also  arises  whether
the  enigmatical  statement  about  the  '  daughters  of
Shiloh'  in  Judg.  21  igf.  does  not  really  refer  to  a
southern  city.  In  SHILOH  ii.  it  has  been  argued  that  in
all  probability  nW  (EV  Shiloh)  in  Gen.  49 10  has  been
corrupted  out  of  nc'-j?  (Laishah),  which  in  turn  is  a
popular  distortion  of  Halusah.  It  is  possible  that  the
place  near  which,  according  to  the  narrative,  the
capture  of  wives  was  effected  by  the  Benjamites  was
really  Laishah — i.e. ,  Halusah.  The  transformation  of
names  in  Judg.  21 19,  which  this  theory  presupposes,  is
not  stranger  than  similar  transformations  which  we  have
assumed  elsewhere.  Bethel  is  the  southern  Bethel —
containing  the  sanctuary  of  Halusah,  Shechem  should
bj  Cusham  (see  SHKCHKM),  and  Lebonah  is  a  southern
Libnah  (cp  Nu.  33  20/).  Cp  also  MELCHIZKDEK.

Not  only  the  names  Eli,  Hophni,  Phinehas,  but  also  Ahitub,
strongly  favour  the  view  that  the  family  of  Eli  was  Jerahmeelite,
.  and  to  some  extent  make  it  natural  to  place  the  sanctuary  of
the  ark  in  one  of  the  territories  known  as  Jerahmeelite.  For
3'DTIN  ('n  accordance  with  types  of  corruption  which  we  have
often  conjectured)  is  probably  from  JVnrn,  'Rehoboth,' or  Tnarn.
'  Rehobothite, 'a  view  which  is  somewhat  confirmed  by  the  famous
reading  of  (Ba  in  i  S.  4  21,  ova^apxaftu,0,  if  we  may  take  it
(nearly  as  We.,  col.  2144)  as  nurn  'IN.  'Alas,  Rehoboth!'  It
is,  in  fact,  not  improbable  (as  i  S.  14  3  [see  below]  shows)  that
113::  'N  (Ichabod)and  31BTIN  (Ahitub)  are  ultimately  the  same
name.  The  corruption  of  jmm  into  mcTlx  is  not  worse  than
many  assumed  corruptions,  while  the  other  corruption  -1133  -N
would  be  suggested  by  pious  sentiment.  Both  corruptions,
it  will  be  noticed,  imply  the  dropping  out  of  i  from  what
we  may  assume  as  the  original  name— At-.,  rram  'IN,  '  Oi-
rehoboth.'  May  we  then  assume  that  there  was  a  Rehoboth
close  to  the  Shalishah  in  Benjamin  where  the  sanctuary  of  the
ark  may  be  best  supposed  to  have  been?  It  is  better  to  hold
that  '  Rehoboth  '  and  '  Jerahmeel '  were  used  as  synonyms.  A
clan  of  N.  Arabian  origin  might  indifferently  be  called  '  Reho
bothite'  and  'Jerahmeelite'  (see  REHUHOTH).  Thus  an
Ephraimite  site  for  the  sanctuary  of  the  ark,  though  believed  in
by  later  writers,  becomes  more  and  more  improbable.

i  S.  14  3  runs  '^yp  Dm'B'ja  TI33"N  TIN  31BTm-|3  rtTIN-
There  are  many  parallels  for  the  view  tnat  -r>23  «N  is  a  variant
to  31E.T1N  !  TIN  would  be  inserted  as  a  link  when  the  variant
made  its  way  into  the  text.  Note  the  warning  Pasek.

T.  K.  C.

SHILOH  (JVC?  ;  on  versions  see  below),  a  proper
name  in  EV  of  Gen.  49  10.

In  the  '  Blessing  of  Jacob'  (Gen.  49 1-27  ;  cp  GENESIS,
§  4,  end)  it  is  said — between  the  comparison  of  Judah


1 Text  and


to  a  ''on' and  l^e  Poet'c  description  of


versions.


the  flourishing  vine-culture  in  his  territory

.  .  ,.

—  that the  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from

Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until
Shiloh  come  ;  and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the
people  be,'  into  which  rendering  of  AV,  however,

143  4469


SHILOH

RV  introduces  the  alterations  '  the  ruler's  staff'  for
•a  lawgiver1  (transferred  to  RV'B-),  'obedience'  for
'gathering,'  and  'peoples'  for  the  archaism  'people.'
RV"'«-  also  gives,  '  Till  he  come  to  Shiloh,  having  the
obedience  of  the  peoples,'  and  records  the  ambiguous
reading  iW>.  The  Hebrew  of  MT  is  :  _

.•mvo  Bat?  -no;  N"?

T^JT  pap  ppnci

frta*  N3;-'3  iy

:  D'sy  nn,T  i1?]

Ginsburg  gives  as  Kre  I1?'!:',  which  is  a  rare  spelling  of  the
place-name  Shiloh,  if  it  is  not  rather  meant  to  signify  '  his  son  '
see  note.

A  critical  conspectus  of  the  diverse  interpretations  of
this  passage  would  require  many  pages  (for  this  we  may
refer  to  the  special  monographs).1  We  can  only  give
such  references  to  ancient  or  modern  hypotheses  as  may
save  the  student  from  committing  himself  to  untenable
or  precarious  views,  and  justify  the  offering  of  a  new
interpretation  based  upon  a  critical  examination  of  the
text,  and  confirmed  by  the  study  of  some  important
historical  passages  elsewhere.  It  is  not  enough  to  rest
in  interpretations,  however  widely  prevalent,  which  have
an  insecure  textual  basis  ;  we  are  bound  to  attempt  to
lift  the  exegesis  of  this  much  disputed  passage  to  a  higher
level,  and  to  free  it  from  the  uncertainties  of  theological
or  semi-theological  controversy.

The  ancient  renderings  that  chiefly  concern  us  are  :  —

1.  (B  (and  Theod.):  OVK  e«Aei'v//ei  apx<uv  ef  'lov&a.  icai  rjyov-
/u.ei/0?  eic  Ttav  ju.r)pwi<  avrov eio?  av  fA0T)  TO.  airOKfifjLeva  aiiToJ,  Kal
ainb?  Trpoo-SoKia  efiviav. Several MSS  have  o>  aTroKeircu,  a  few
b  aTTOKfirai  auroi  or  o  aTroKeirai. The  rendering  IK  TWV  /j.t)piav
O.VTOV  is  one  of  the  signs  that  the  interpretation  of  the  passage
was  influenced  by  Dt.  L'S  57. irpoo-SoKia.  suggests the  reading
rPpfl. On  TO.  O.TTOK.  avr<Z,  see  below.

2.  Aq. OVK  ai'acmjtreTai o-KTJTrrpoi'  an-b  'I. Kai aicpij3a£o|uei>os
O.TTO jieTafu  irooiai'  avrov fio? af eAOr; . . . Kal avT<Z  <rv<mjju.a
Aacoy.  Sym.  ov  Trepttupe^TJcreTai  efoucna  atrb  'I. ...

3.  Pesh.  (a).


'  The  staff  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  the  interpreter
from  between  his  feet,  until  he  cometh  to  whom  it  belongs,  and
for  him  do  the  peoples  wait.'

(/')  Aphraates  (ed.  Wright,  320)  instead  of  last  three  words.


'  [to  whom  belongs]  the kingdom,  and  for  him  do  the  peoples
hope.'

4.  Tg.  Onk.

. N12D1 mi,T  JT312  fa^K'  T2J?  nj"  N1?

•TTTI  Nn't'O  *n"i  ny  NoSy  ty  'mp  'Jaa
:  N'ccy  pirntr  ,T^I  RmaTO  NM

'  The  wielder  of  power  shall  not  pass  away  from  the  house  of
Judah,  nor  the  scribe  from  his  sons'  sons  for  ever  until  that  the
anointed  one  come  to  whom  belongs  the  kingdom  and  to  him
shall  the  peoples  submit  themselves.'

We  have  first  to  ask,  Can  Shiloh  be  a  proper  name,
as the Reformation Versions mostly suppose  ?  - As
2 Shiloh Driver has vvc11 observed, '  no ancient
not  a  proper  yersion'  a"d  indeed  no,  known  authority
name  several centuries  after  the  Christian

era,  implies  the  Massoretic  reading,  or
sees  in  the  passage  a  proper  name.  It  is  true  that  it
was  generally  interpreted  in  antiquity  of  the  Messianic

1  Chr.  Werliin,  De  laudibus  Judte  (Havniae,  1838);  S.  R.
Driver,  'Gen.  49  10  ;  an  exegetical  study,'  Journ.  Phil.
14(1885)1-28.  The  former  takes  Shiloh  to  mean  'peace-
wringer'  —  i.e.,  Solomon;  the  conclusion  of  the  latter  scholar  is
Driven  in  the  text  in  his  own  words.  These  monographs  may
>e  supplemented  by  the  notes  of  Delitzsch,  Dillmann,  Gunkel,
and  Ball,  in  their  works  on  Genesis.  Cp  also  G.  Baur,  Gesch.
i'r  A  litest.  \Veissagung  (1861),  227-200.

-  Driver  traces  this  rendering  to  Seb.  Miinster  (1534),  who
jives  '  quousque  veniet  Silo.'  Pagninus  (1528)  gave  '  Messias  '  ;
Luther  (1534),  '  der  Held.'

4470


Shi  h'
0 '


SHILOH

or  ideal  future  of  Israel  ;  but  this  sense  was  reached  in
virtue  of  the  general  context  of  the  passage,  and  not
through  a  proper  name  Shiloh.'  Indeed,  a  proper
name  meaning  Poace-bringer  (which  is  the  sense
postulated  for  the  proper  name  Shiloh)  can  certainly
not  be  derived  from  *Jrbv,  '  to  be  quiet,  careless,
secure  '  ;  the  phrase  we  should  have  required  is  ct*?y  •&•,
'  prince  of  peace  '  (cp  Is.  QS  [6]),  or,  if  the  text  of  Mic.
04[s]  is  correct,  ciSe*,  'peace'  —  i.e.  ,  [Konig,  Styl.  21]
'  auctor  pacis.  '  *

Those  who  (likeDelitzsch,Dillmann)defend  the  render
ing,  'until  he  come  to  Shiloh,'  see  a  reference  to  the
assembly  of  the  trilxjs  of  Israel  held,  ac-
cordingto  P'  at  Shiloh  (Josh.  18.),  when

'the land had  been subdued before
them.' They  take  aac>  to  mean, not

the  royal  sceptre,  but  the  staff  of  the  chieftain  or  leader,
exactly  like  ppro  (if  this  word  really  means  '  staff  of
authority');  so  that  the  passage  will  mean,  'Judah
shall  continue  to  be  the  valiant  leader  of  the  tribes  of
Israel,  till,  the  peoples  of  Canaan  having  been  subdued,
they  can  celebrate  the  victory  by  a  solemn  religious
assembly  at  Shiloh.'  This,  however,  puts  too  much
into  the  simple  phrase  'until  he  comes  to  Shiloh,'  and
•v.  ioii  conveys  the  impression  that  the  victory  over  the
'peoples'  is  the  victory,  not  of  all  the  tribes,  but  of
Judah.  Moreover,  rt7'e'  is  not  one  of  the  recognised
ways  of  spelling  the  place-name  '  Shiloh,'  and  it  is  even
doubtful  whether  the  Massoretes  intended  to  favour
this  interpretation.2

Hence  some  good  critics  adopt  the  old  reading  nW

or  i?:?  (see  <S). According  to  Driver, the  rendering

. j~,  j- '  till  he  whose  [it  is]  shall  come'  would

. ,  ,  °  afford  an excellent sense, but is  not
unacceptable.  f  .,

reconcilable with the absence of  the

subject  in  the  relative  clause.  '  Perhaps,'  he  adds,  '  we
should  fall  back  upon  the  original  LXX  construction,
and  render  "Till  that  which  (or,  he  that)  is  his  shall
come,"  and  regard  the  clause  as  an  indeterminate  ex
pression  of  the  Messianic  hope,  which  was  afterwards
defined  more  distinctly.  '  The  reading  i^c>  is  also
adopted  by  Wellhausen  (Gesch.  1375,  n.  i,  but  cp  CH
321),  Stade  ((',}'!  1  159,  n.  5),  Ball  (doubtfully),  Briggs,
v.  Orelli,  Holzinger,  Gunkel.  It  is  thought  to  be  pre
supposed,  not  only  by  €5,  but  also  by  the  language  of
Ezek.  21  32  [27],  ssirsn  i7"C:x  N3")J?,  '  until  he  come
whose  right  it  is.'

If,  however,  raan-o/c.  aura!  is  a  genuine  rendering.  irr  cannot  be
the  whole  of  the  text  which  the  translator  had  before  him.  The
present  writer,  therefore  (7/itV/.  Rev.  cited  at  end),  suggested
17  n?;"  or  (as  Ronsch  before  him)  17  Ci:'"'.  Most  probably,  how-
ever,  l5  simply  made  the  best  of  the  obscure  reading  iVc1',  a  reading
unworthy  of  acceptance,3  and  clearly  a  fragment  of  some  longer
word.  171  1:B'  would,  in  fact,  be  intolerable.  As  to  Ezek.
21  32,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  the  prophet  was  thinking  of
Gen.  49  10.  Very  possibly  the  reading  i?C'  was  suggested  by  a
misleading  reminiscence  of  Estkicl.*

But  if  the  passage  is,  at  any  rate  in  the  larger  sense,
Messianic  —  and  this  is  generally  assumed,  because  of
the  reference  in  d  to  a  universal  empire,  —  what  are  we

1  Kunig, however  (I.e.), qualifies  his statement  by  an 'at
least  '  in  the  next  sentence. There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that
the  text  needs  emendation  (see  MICAH  [Boos],  §  5,  e).

2  A  favourite  Jewish  interpretation of  H?'B'  (found  in  Ibn
Janah  and liinihi)  was  '  his son  '  (cp  Talm. 7'7C>,  Ar.  salil,
'extractus,  filius');  e.g.,  Tg.  ps.-Jon.  paraphrases  <U3  vyj,  'his
youngest  son,'  an  interpretation  which,  according  to  Driver,  is
'perhaps  embodied  in  the  Massoretic  pointing.'

3  It  is  usual  to  find  in  i?r  a  deliberate  affectation  of  mystery.
But  it  is  more  than  mystery  ;  it  is  grammatical  obscurity. In  a
solemn  benediction  like  this,  nothing  but  Ezek.'s  EEC'Sn  17-Tj-x
would  be  tolerable,  if  a  veiled  reference  to  the  legitimate  king  of
Judah  were  intended.

*  See  Volz,  Die  vorexil,  J  ahiveprophetie  vnd  der  Messias,
83,  n.  i.

4471


meaning.


SHILOH

to  read  in  place  of  nh'&  or  rhv  or  1757?  Matthew
Hiller  (OS,  1706,  p.  931),  Lagarde  (OS(V295,  6W-)
368),  the  present  writer  (op.  cit. ),  as  an  alternative,  and
Bickell  (C'armina  VT  met  rice,  1882,  p.  188),  took
rrV'e'  to  be  a  contracted  form  of  rh'tttr,  '  he  whom
Judah  prays  for';  cp  perhaps  Dt.  387,  where,  accord
ing  to  Gunkel,1  'bring  him  to  his  people,'  means
'  bring  the  Messianic  king  to  his  people. '  This  is  at
any  rate  more  plausible  than  the  idea  that  n7'B>  should
be  nSr  or  rho  (Vg. ,  '  qui  mittendus  est'),  with  which
compare  the  view  of  Grotius  (col.  1803)  that  Jn.  9;
identifies  '  Siloam  '  with  '  Shiloh. '  But  is  the  passage
before  us  really  Messianic  ?  Critics  who  in  our  day
hold  this  view,  generally  regard  Gen.  49 10  as  a  later
insertion.  This  is,  of  course,  a  permissible  hypothesis  ;
but,  on  different  grounds  from  those  of  Gunkel,  we  are
compelled  to  reject  it.

The  truth  is,  we  believe,  that  the  text  of  the  passage
in  its  context  requires  a  much  more  thorough  examination
before  we  can  proceed  to  exegesis. There
5.  The  re- are  serious  difficulties  both  in  v.  10  and
stored  text  jn  Vf  ,,yr rjoes  ppnp mean 'staff  of
authority '  ? and, if  not, how can B3C'
be  parallel  to  it? Is  rSji  pzn,  however
it  be  explained,  at  all  natural? And  is  nnj3'  a  sound
reading? Then,  in  v.  u, is  nniD  correct,  and  are  such
expressions  as  these  possible — •'  he  washed  his  garments
in  wine,  and  his  clothes  with  the  blood  of  grapes'  ? In
v.  12 is >7'73n  correct?2  and is not the  whole verse
superfluous  ?

By  a  careful  criticism  the  present  writer  has  elsewhere
reached  the  following  text : —

rni.Tip  BSE*  •UD^'k? A  champion  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,
1H11JI  pso  pi7TO1 Nor  a  marshal  from  between  his  bands,

nr'^  D2T'"3  '}# Until  he  tramples  upon  Laishah,
C'7XCrn'  j^l'DC1'']  171 And the Jerahmeelites are obedient

unto  him.3

Verse  it  may  here  be  passed  over  with  the  remark
that  it  probably  continues  the  description  of  the  conquest
of  the  Negeb  by  Judah,  and  that  Heb^  p»a  D23  should
probably  be  7NJ,'D^'  'J3  car,  '  he  shall  subdue  the  b'ne
Ish.ma.el,'  the  proof  of  which  is  that  in  v.  12,  which
should  certainly  be  read  7KSITV  7Kj.cc"  ':3  c'7Ncrn',  the
true  text  contained  a  correction  of  the  miswritten  words
in  ?'.  10.  See  Crit.  Bib.  Laishah,  considered  already,
may  be,  as  we  have  seen  (SHILOH,  i),  Halusah,  one
o'f  the  most  important  cities  of  the  Negeb.  Who  the
Jerahmeelites  are,  we  also  know  ;  they  are  the  same
as  the  Zarephathites  or  '  Pelethites '  (the  Philis
tines  of  MT)  who  were  the  chief  enemies  of  Israel
in  the  days  of  Saul  and  the  early  period  of  David.
If  this  theory  be  adopted  there  is  no  reason  for  the
hypothesis  of  interpolation.  Contrary  to  the  prevalent
opinion,  the  whole  of  the  blessing  of  Judah  is  continuous.
Beginning  with  a  description  of  the  fierce  and  fearless
courage  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  it  goes  on  to  prophesy
that  judges  or  champions  of  Judah's  rights  (the  rights  of
the  strongest)  will  never  be  wanting  till  its  troublesome
neighbours,  the  Jerahmeelites  or  Zarephahthites,  have
been  conquered, — a  conquest  which  in  the  original
song  was  described  in  some  detail.

The  theory  suggested  with  regard  to  nh'v  throws  a
fresh  light  on  i  K.  1129,  where  (see  JEROBOAM  i.,  end)

'  Genesis,  436,  (2)  424.  The  singular  theory  connected  with
this  interpretation  cannot  be  here  discussed.

2  Contrast  Prov.  23  29.

3  For  the  confusion  of  Bar  and  BEb',  cp  28.77 iCh.  176
(parallels  in  We.  TBS  170);  and  for  the  sense  'ruler,"  marshal,'
see  (5  and  Onk. For  the  correction  nni,  cp  K.NSKTN,  8  i  £(on
7iT  ;  Sam.  here  V7:i). For  DIP,  cp  SHOT  on  Is.  41  25. In  d
iy2E"  fell  out  through  the  vicinity  of  words  (c*2j;=n7T)  con
taining  virtually  all  these  letters. Cp  also  JERAHMEEL,  §  4.

4472


SHILONI

the  true  text  perhaps  said  that  Jeroboam  had  just  come
from  Misrim,  or  rather  Ishmael,  where  he  was  'found'
by  the  prophet  Ahijah  the  Shilonite.  Was  Ahijah
really  an  Ephraimite  prophet  ?  It  is  more  natural  to
suppose  that  he  was  of  a  place  much  nearer  to  the  N.
Arabian  land  from  which  Jeroboam  had  come,  viz.  ,
of  Laishah  (i.e.,  Halusah),  a  name  which  we  have
found  to  have  been  altered  by  a  scribe's  error  into
Shiloh  in  Gen.  49  10.

The  literature  of  Gen.  49  10  is  extensive.  See  the  works  of
Oehler,  Schultz,  Smend,  Riehm,  Delitzsch,  and  Briggs,  on
Israelitish  religion,  and  the  commentaries  of  Tttch,  Delitzsch,
Kalisch,  Diljynann,  Holzinger,  Gunkel  ;  the  Genesis  (Heb.  text)
of  C.  J.  Ball  in  SHOT;  Pusey,  Daniel  the  Prophet,  254-256;
Cheyne,  '  A  disputed  prophecy  in  Genesis,"  Theolog.  Review,
12300-306  (1875),  and  Proph.  /.f.l1)  [1881]  2  189^.  ;  Briggs,
Messianic  Prophecy,  f)^Jf.  (1886)  ;  and  especially  the  three
discussions  (Werliin,  Driver,  Baur)  already  mentioned.

T.  K.  C.

SHILONI  (*&*»>),  i  Ch.  9  5. See  SHELAH,  i.
SHILONITE  (yW,  »3tf>*?>,  and  i&V  [Neh.  11  5];

CHAu>N[e]lTHC)-

1.  Gentilic  from  rtrty  Shiloh,  used  with  reference  to
the prophet Ahijah (temp. Jeroboam I.), i  K.  11  29
12  15  1029  2  Ch.  929  10  15. See  SHILOH  ii.  (end).

2.  In  a  post-exilic  list, miswritten for  ':S't?  (i  Ch.
9s)  and  «j'?e>  (Neh.  2s)  —  i.e.  'Shelanite.' See  SHELAH.

SHILSHAH  (n^;;  c^AeiCA  [BA],  ceAeMCAN
[L]),  b,  Zophah,  a  name  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHER
(q.v.,  §  4  ii.  ),  i  Ch.  ?37f.  Cp  SHUAL,  2.

i.  Brother  of  David. See


SHIMEI  C^Dii',  a  gentilicium  of  JWEC  [see  \VRS,
Journ.  Phil.  996];  ce/v\e[e]i)-  i.  t>.  Gera  of  BAHURIM
(tf.v.  ),  a  Benjamite  of  the  house  of  Saul  who  cursed
David  as  he  fled  from  Absalom1  (2  8.165-13).  On
David's  return  after  the  death  of  Absalom  Shimei  is  said
to  have  been  the  foremost  of  the  '  house  of  Joseph  '  to
go  down  (with  a  thousand  Benjamites),  to  welcome  the
king.  In  return  he  begged  for  forgiveness  (2  S.
1916-23).  In  David's  last  words,  however  (i  K.  28/!  ),
the  king  charges  his  son  to  put  Shimei  out  of  the  way,
as  a  proof  of  his  wisdom  (see  DAVID,  col.  1034,  n.  i  ;
Ki.  Hist.  Ii8i,  but  cp  Wi.  (7/2247).  Upon  his  acces
sion,  Solomon  permits  Shimei  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem
on  certain  conditions  (see  KIDRON,  §  2),  which  after
three  years  Shimei  violates,  ostensibly  in  order  to
recover  two  slaves  who  had  fled  to  Achish  king  of

1  In  i  K.  2s,  however,  no  mention  is  made  of  David's  being  a
fugitive  on  account  of  Absalom.

4473


SHIMEA  (Xrip,  §  51)
SHAM  HAH.

2.  Son  of  David  [y.v.,  §  n,  n.]  (i  Ch.Ss)  cra.fj.av  [B],  craft-aa
[AL]  ;  but  2  S.  5  14,  i  Ch.  144  JN3C',  SHAM  ML-  A  ;  <rap.jiiovs,  <ra/u,aa
[B]  ;  cra.nfji.ovf,  crafj.fi.aov  [A]  respectively  ; cra.fj.aa  [L  til's]  ',  i  Ch.
144  o-Ofiaia  [«]).

3.  A  Merarite  Levite  ;  i  Ch.  630  [15]  ((ro/uea  [B],  crafjLO.  [A],
(Ta/j-aa  [L]).

4.  A  Gershonite  Levite  ;  i  Ch.  639  [24]  (cra/j-aa.  [BAL]).

SHIMEAH.  i.  (nr»B>  [kri],  §  51),  brother  of
David.  See  SHAMMAH.

2.  (nx£e!),  b'.  Mikloth  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  [f.v.,
§  9  ii.  i],'i  Ch.  832  (tre^aa  [B],  crafj.ea  [A],  cra^aa  [L]),  but  i  Ch.
038,  CNCtr,  Shimeam,  cra/xaa  [BxL],  a-a^a  [A].  See  JQR

11  IIO-II3, §§ IO-I2.

SHIMEATH  (ni|DB>  [Bit  Gi.],  cp  7TW  and
NAMES,  §  78,  ieMoyA.6  [BAL]),  father  of  jozachar
(2  K.  1222  [21])  called  by  the  Chronicler,  according  to
MT  and  ©^  (2  Ch.2426;  CAM<\  [Ii]  ;  CAMA6  [A];
CAMA6.0  [L]).  an  Ammonitwj  (cp  SHOMER).  In
(5KA,  however,  it  is  Shimeath's  son  that  is  Ammonite.
Possibly  '  Ammonite  '  stands  for  '  Jerahmeelite  '  (Che.  ).
See  SILLA,  SHIMRITH.

SHIMEATHITES  (DWplT  ;  c<\MA9ieiM  [BA],
-9eiN  [L]),  i  Ch.  255.  See  JABEZ.


SHIMEON

Gath1  (rather,  of  REHOHOTH).  He  is  slain  by  Benaiah
at  the  royal  command  (i  K.  2 36-46).  The  exact  course
of  events  is  not  free  from  doubt,  but  this  at  least  is
clear  :  Shimei  was  a  leader  of  the  Benjamites  who  was
politically  dangerous,  and  it  is  likely  that  he  really
sought  to  draw  Nahash,  king  of  Rehoboth,  into  his
schemes.  Nahash  may  in  fact  very  possibly  have  been
displeased  at  the  coup  d'etat  which  had  made  Solomon
his  suzerain.  On  the  '  legend '  of  Shimei,  cp  Winckler
((/'/,  I.e.),  and  see  below,  nos.  2  and  10.

2.  Shimei  and  Rei  and  the  gibborim  who  belonged  to
David  are  enumerated  among  those  who  did  not  join
Adonijah  in  his  attempt  on  the  throne  (i  K.  1  8,  cra/xcuas
[L]). It  seems  best  to  assume  with  Winckler  (G/,  I.e.]
that  Shimei  i.  is  intended,  while  REI  (q.v.)  may  be=Ira,
a  kohen  or  perhaps  soken  ( '  minister ')  of  David,  mentioned
in  2  S.  2026. Stade,  however  (Gyilzgj,  n.  i),  thinks
that  they  were  two  officers  of  David's  bodyguard  ;  the
fact  that  the  two  names  do  not  occur  elsewhere  in  i  K.
1  only  shows  the  fragmentariness  of  our  knowledge  of
the times. Some think  that one  of  David's  heroes,
SHAMMUAH (3) or Shimei, may be meant  ; Ewald's
suggestion  that  David's  brother  Shammuah  (or  Shimeah)
is  intended  is  unlikely  (see  RADDAI).

3.  b.  Elah,  high  officer  of  Solomon  in  Benjamin  (i  K.  4i8;
om.  B,  0-eju.eet  [A], cra.fj.a  [  L]). See  SHAMMAH,  3.

4.  2  S.  21 21,  cra/xaa  [L]  AV  SHIMEAH,  see  SHAMMAH,  2.

5.  b. Pedaiah  ; brother of  Zerubbabel (i Ch.  3 19 om.  B),
perhaps  the  same  as  SHEMAIAH  (?/.  22).

6.  b.  Zaccur,  of  SIMEON  (§  9  ii.)(i  Ch.426/;),  who  had  sixteen
sons  and  six  daughters,  and  is  described  as  the  father  of  an  im
portant  clan  (gt-ns)  which  overtopped  all  others,  but did  not
equal  the  b'ne  Judah  (within  whose  territory  it  was  settled) ;  cp
perhaps  Shemaiah,  ?'.  37.

7.  b.  JOEL,  of  REUBEN  (§  13),  i  Ch.f>4  (crafj.ee  [L]);  cp  v.  8,
Shema  (<re,ueei  [L])  b.  Joel.

8.  AV  Shimhi,  a  Benjamite,  the  father  of  Adaiah,  Shimrath,
and  BERAIAH  [q.v.,]  (i  Ch.82i  crafj.aei.6  [B],  o-ajucu  [A],  in  v.  13
called  SHEMA  [y.v.,  no.  3]). See  AIJALON.

9.  A  Ramathite,  or  man  of  Ramah  ('ncnn,  b  ex parjA. [B],
6  pajuaSaio?  [AL]),  one  of  David's  officers  who  was  '  over  the
vineyards'  (i  Ch.  2727). Which  of  the southern Rainahs is
meant,  is  unknown. ©K'S  par/A  may  spring  from  'Jerahmeel1
(Che.).

10.  b.  Kish,  a  Benjamite,  an  ancestor  of  MORDECAI  (Esth.25
.  .  .  TOV  crejaeeiou [BNLPJ,  .  .  . TOV crefj.ei.ov [ALa]) ; in the
apocrypha  of  Esther  (11 2)  crefj.eei.ov  [B],  crefj.eiov  [NLa^],  SEMEI,
RV  SEMEIAS. Shimei  is  here  evidently,  like  Kish,  a  clan-name ;
a  reference  to  the  person  who  '  cursed  David '  is  out  of  the
question.

11.  Shimei  occurs  frequently  in  the  later  writings  as  a  son  of
Gershon  b.  Levi  (Ex.(3i7  [AV  Shimi]  Nu.3i8,  i  01.617(2]).
He appears  in i  Ch.(i  as the  son  of  Jahath,  z>.  42  (27),  with
which  contrast  i  Ch.23gyr  where  he  is  the  father  of  Jahath;
again  in  v.  29  [14]  (croju.<fei  [B])  Libni,  who  elsewhere  is  his  brother,
appears  as  his  son,  and  both  are  Merarite  Levites. He  is  the
founder  of  the Shimites  (AV)  or  more  correctly  (with RV)
Shimeites  (Nu.  3  21  : 'J'as'ri  ;  TOV  o-ejueec  [B,  om.  F],  .  .  .  crejaei
[AL]). What is meant' by 'the Shimeites' (so RV ; AV
'Shimei,'  "J'Dirn  ; but  (5  and  Pesh.  have  'Simeon')  in  Zech.
12 13,  Nowack  pronounces  to  be  unknown. Baudissin  {Pricster-
thum,  248),  however,  thinks  that  the  above-mentioned  Shimeites
of  Gershon  are  meant. [For  a  revision  of  the  text  of  the  whole
passage,  without  attempting  which  probably  no  single  detail  can
be  understood,  see  Crit.  Sl6.]

12.  One  of  the  sons  of  Jeduthun  (i  Ch.  25  17  : [o-]e|ue6i [B],
croupei  [L]),  whose  name  should  be  inserted  in  v.  3  with  ©EA
(but  ©L  ie£5pet)  to  make  up  the  full  number  six.

13.  A  son  of  Haman  (2  Ch.  29  14).

14.  A  Levite.  Ezral023  (cra/uov  [BA],  -ovS  [N]);  in  i  Esd.023
SEMIS,  RV  SEMEIS  (  crei/crecs  [B],  cre/ifis  [A]).

15.  One  of  the  b.  HASHUM  (Ezral033);  in  i  Esd.932  SEMEI.

16.  One  of  the b. BANI (Ezra  10  38); (pBNA,  however,  for
BINNUI,  SHIMEI,  reads  'the  sons  of  Shimei,'  but  (JM-  uioi  /Socvti
cr. In  i  Esd.  934,  SAMIS,  RV  SOMEIS  (cro/i«t?  |BA]).

S.  A.  C.- — T.  K.  C.

SHIMEON  (I'WpE?),  Ezra  10  31  =  i  Esd.  9  32  SIMON
CHOSAMEUS  (CIMCON  XOCAMAOC  [B],  .  .  .  OMAIOC
[A]).

1  [Note  that  Achish  is  called  'ben  Maachah.'  Maachah,  like
Ahiman  (which  (PL  has  instead  of  '  Maoch  '  in  i  S.  27 2),  may

el.


SHIMMA


SHINAB


SHIMMA (NL'P:."). 1 Ch.  2i3 AV, RV (better)

SlILMEA. See  SlIAMMAH.

SHIMON  (JOT,  cp  §  77  ;  C6M€[|]CON  [BA],  CAMI
[L]),  a  name  in  the  Judahite  genealogy  (i  Ch.  42of).

SHIMRATH  (rnpp:.  §  78  ;  CAMARAO  [BA],  -pe,
[L])  of  BKNJAMIN  (§  9),  assigned  to  the  b'ne  SHIMKI
(iCh.  8ait).

SHIMRI  ('1PP';  CAMAR[e]i  [AL]),  a  N.  Arabian
and  S.  Palestinian  ethnic  ;  the  original  seat  of  the  clan
seems  to  have  been  called  Har-shimron,  according  to  a
very  necessary  emendation  of  Am.  6 1 ,  '  Woe  unto  the
secure  in  Ishmael,1  the  careless  in  Har  [mountain  of]-
shimron  ;  cp  PROPHETS,  §  35,  SHIMRON.

1.  Of  SIMEON  (§  9  iii.)  [cp  MEUNIM],  i  Ch.437  (a-a^ap  [B],
-lou  [A]).

2.  Father  (or  clan?)  of  Jediael  (from  Jerahmeel?),  one of
David's  heroes,  i  Ch.  11  45  (crafiepei  [BN]).

3.  AV  SIMRI,  a  Merarite,  eponym  of  one  of  the  'courses'  of
the  door-keepers,  i  Ch.  2l>  10  (<f>uAa<r(joi'Tes  [BA],  cranapt  if>.  [I.]).

4.  A Levite,  one  of  the  sons  of  Elizaphan  [cp  ZfiPHANIAH],
2 Ch.  29 13 (fo/x/3pei. [BJ, erafi/3pi [AL]). See also SHO.MEK,
SHIMKITH.  T.  K.  C.

SHIMRITH  (JV-ltpt?;  CAMARI0  [A],  COMAICOO
[B],  CAMIRAMOOO  [I-]).  As  the  text  stands,  the
mother  of  one  of  the  murderers  of  Joash,  described  as
'  the  Moabitess,'  2  Ch.  24^6  (rr3Nia.i) ;  cp  JEHO/ABAD,  i.
The  ||  2  K.  122i  [22]  has  SHOMKK  (i).  More  probable
than  either  reading  is  SHIMKI  (</.r. ).

Similarly  read  '3Nisrt,  or  rather  (the  confusion  between1  3N1D
and  11XD  being  so  frequent)  '"^'S'X  The  '  Shimrite'  clan  was  in
fact  located  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (cp  Am.  61,  see  SHIMRI,
ad  init.}.  ©,  however,  reads  '3N1CH,  applying  the  title  to
Jehozabad.  Cp  SHI.MEATH.  X.  K.  C.

SHIMRON  (I'riP'J'; CYMOOON [B]), a place in
Zebulun,  mentioned  between  Nahallal  and  Idalah  and
Bethlehem (2), Josh.  19i5 (cEMRCON

tAL]).  idaiah(6»  «,*,**.

meel)  may  be  only  a  variant  to  Beth-
lehem  (i.e. ,  Beth-jerahmeel).  At  any  rate,  if  possible,
we  need  a  site  between  Ma'lul  (NAHALLAL)  and  Beit-
lahm  (BETHLEHEM,  2).  Such  a  site  we  have  in
Semumyeh,  the  Simonias  of  Josephus  ( Vit.  24),  the
Simonia  of  the  Talmud  (Neub.  Geogr.  189);  according
to  Tomkins,  the  S'mana  of  Thotmes  III.,  nos.  18  and
35  (AV'<-' 044.46),  with  one  of  which  (35)  E.  Meyer
(Glossen,  73)  identifies  the  Samhuna  of  Am.  Tab.  2264.
As  the  text  of  Josh.  11 1  ff.  now  stands,  we  are  led  to
assume  that  Shimron  (ffop.tpuv  [AFL])  was  anciently  a
royal  city,  and  that  its  king,  together  with  those  of
Hazor,  Madon,  and  Achshaph,  was  defeated  by  Joshua
beside  the  '  waters  of  MEKOM.  '  The  same  royal  city  is
evidently  referred  to  in  Josh.  1220  as  Shimron-meron
(puna  [[TO  Kr.]  j'npsy  ;  /3a<nX^a  ffi'fj.owi>,  ft.  p.ap.pu6  [B],
ft.  ffap.puv,  ft.  <f>a<rya,  ft.  papuv  [A],  ft.  [ff~\ap.apuv  [L]).
<5,  however,  does  not  recognise  a  compound  name  ;
certainly  Meron  must  be  wrong.2  Either  it  has  simply
arisen  through  dittography  or  (S.  A.  Cook)  it  is  a  variant
of  '  Madon'  in  v.  19  (see  MADON)  which  has  found  its
way  into  the  text.3  If  Josh.  11 1  ff.  is  to  be  our  guide
in  locating  Shimron,  Muhlau's  identification  of  it  with
es-Semuriyeh,  about  i  hr.  N.  from  Accho  (Riehm,
HWD;  Bad. -Socin)  deserves  attention,  though  the

1  '  Ishmael '  here  =  '  Jerahmeel' — i.e.,  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb.
See  Crit.  Bib.  on  Am.  6  i.  '

'*•  The  proposal  of  Frd.  Delitzsch  (Par.  287)  and  Halevy  (REJ,
1881,  p.  12)  to  emend  the  name  into  nc'C'Ci? —  i-e.,  Samsi-
muruna,  a  place  whose  king  is  mentioned  by  Sennacherib  at  the
head  of  the  Canaanite  tributaries  (cp  MENAHEM),  fails  to  take
account  of  the  easy  development  of  glosses,  etc.

3  [In  support  of  this  view  we  may  refer  to  the  treatment  of
the  second  part  of  the  name  in  (0  and  Vg.  ©HA  om.  Madon,
i'.  19,  and  read  fiajupmS  or  fj.apiair  (for  Meron),  v.  20,  as  a  separate
name.  ©L  and  Vg.  read  only  '  Shimron '  in  the  latter  verse,
and  evidently  found  '  Madon  '  (Aofiopwv)  in  z:  19.  There  seems
to  be,  therefore,  an  identity  between  '  meron '  and  '  Madon,'
which  latter  name,  as  shown  under  MADON,  should  probably  be
read  with  -.  instead  of  -\. — s.  A.  c.  J

4475


modern form rather suggests Shamir (Sta. ZATW
5 167).

The  question,  however,  has  been  raised  in  Crit.  Bib.
whether  the  textual  problem  is  not  more  complicated


2.  Larger


than  critics  have  supposed. As  the  result


Droblems  °f  a  close  examination  of  the  text  of  Judg.

involved.  4  5  .and  ^osh'  n  "  is  there  held  that  the
original  scene  of  the  events  related  was  more
probably  in  the  S.  of  Palestine.  The  names  throughout
having  become  corrupted,  they  were  editorially  emended
under  the  influence  of  a  later  historical  view  respecting
the  conquest  of  Canaan.

Jahin,  it  is  held,  comes  from  Jamin — a  popular  distortion
of 'Jerahmeel,'  a  suitable  name  for  any  king  of  Hazor.  'Canaan'
(jyja)  in  Judg.  4  2  5  19  (as  in  Gen.  106,  and  a  number  of  other
passages)  was  originally  '  Kenaz '  (TJJ3) ;  by  'Achshaph'  (Josh.
Ill)  was  ^ probably  meant  'Cusham'  (see  CUSH,  2),  and  by
'Shimron1  the 'Shimron'  referred  to  in  Am.  0  i  (see  SHIMRI).
'  Madon'  or  rather  '  Marom  '  (Eus.  papuin)  can  equally  well  be
accounted  for  on  this  hypothesis.  It  is  the  place  referred  to
in  the  phrase  ciTD  'D,  cp  n3D  'o  (Judg-  5 19).  Both  these
phrases,  if  the  scene  of  the  war  was  in  the  S.,  come  from
>"UD  V3> '  w-aters  of  Migdol ' (or  rather  [cp  SHECHEM,  TOWER  OF]
of  Jerahmeel),  a  phrase  parallel  to  [^'3  ^m,  '  the  torrent  of
Cushan.'  So  Crit.  Bih.  Cp,  however,  MEROM,  WATERS  OF.

T.  K.  C.

SHIMRON  (pips?,  §  10  ;  properly  a  place-name?
see,  however,  SHAMIR,  2;  o-o/Lifa]pofi  [BAF]),  one  of  the  (four)
sons  of  ISSACHAR  (§  7),  Gen.  40  13  (£a/u/3pa/u.  [A],  -a.v  [D],  tran-
/3pa  (cai  (arfpiv  (L])=  Nu.  26  24  (a^/Spai/  [A],  -ft.  [L]),  I  Ch.  7  I
(a-efitpiav  [BJ,  erojujSpac  [L]  [AV  Shimrom,  but  AV  of  1611
'  Shimron  ']).  The  patronymic  Shimronite  ('j'nSK' ;  o-a/uapai'ft
IB],  0-afipa.ju.i  [Bab],  <7-a^j3paju.i  [F],  a/ii/3pOjot[e]c  [AL])  occurs  in
Nu.  2024.

SHIMSHAI  ('C'PP',  on  meaning  see  below  ;  CAMCAI
[A],  CAMAIAC  [L]),  a  state  official  (secretary)  who,  with
REHUM  [(/.r. ]  and  others,  sent  a  letter  to  Artaxerxes  to
induce  him  to  stop  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  (Ezra
48:  ffap.affa,  [B],  v.  9:  cra/xee  [B],  17:  ffap.faia  [B],
23:  cra/ci£<ra  [B]).  In  i  Esd.  2 17  he  is  called  SEMEL-
LIUS,  RV  SAMELLIUS  (o-a/tteXXios  [B],  cre/u. ,  or  fftft. ,  or
ffafj..  [A],  pa/jLf\ios  [L]  ;  cp  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  2i,  cre/ifXtos).

[A  right  explanation  of  the  name  would  be  one  of  the  results
of  a  thorough  critical  examination  of  Ezra-Nehemiah.  E.  Meyer
(Ent.  34)  claims  it  as  Syriac.  At  any  rate,  it  looks  as  if  it  were
derived  from  &£&,  '  the  sun  '  (cp  §  76).  But  there  are  still  two
possibilities,  (i)  't^DE'  may  be  a  Hebraised  form  of  an  Iranian
V3K'C' — an  abbreviation  of  such  a  Persian  name  as  <7i<ri/xa<tT)s  or
o-io-o^ii'T)?  (see  Rawl.,  Be.-Rys.,  and  cp  Marti,  Bibl.-aram.
Gloss.).  (2)  The  forms  in  i  Esd.  suggest  as  the  original  either
'Sac1  or  '701 — i-e-i  '^J*VDB"  or  'VNCni'.  This  view  is  preferable.
It  may  naturally  be  combined  with  the  theory  (see  REHU.M)
that  the  geographical  and  personal  names  in  Ezra-Neh.  have
been  systematically  altered  ;  but  independently  of  this  theory
Marquardt  (/•»»</.  62)  decides  in  favour  of  -^CC'-  Rehum  has
probably  a  similar  origin.— T.  K.  c.]


SHINAB  (1N3L'';  Sam.  -JWCT ;  CCNNAAR).  king  of
ADMAH  [?.&.],  Gen.  142.  He  is  mentioned  with  SHEM-
EBER  ("CNDr  ;  Sam.  -ONCE';  ffVfj.oj3op[AD}-'.] ;  ffv/j.op[L]),
king  of  ZEBOIM  [q.v.~\.  The  tokens  of  corruptness
are  so  evident  that  many  moderns  decline  the  attempt
to  explain  these  names.  If,  however,  we  feel  sure  that
there  is  a  historical  substratum  to  the  story,  we  may  be
inclined  to  equate  Shinab  with  Sanibu,  the  name  of  an
Ammonite  king  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (so
Frd.  Del.  Par.  294;  cp  KAT(*  141;  A7?22i),  or
with  the  Ass.  Sin-sar-usur  (cp  SHENAZZAR),  and  Shem-
eber  with  the  Ass.  Sumu-abi  (so  Sayce,  Exp.  T  8  463  ;
cp  SHEM,  NAMES  WITH).  The  reading  of  the  Sam.
suggests  that  an  edifying  comment  ('name  has  perished')
has  taken  the  place  of  the  true  name  ;  similarly  the
Midrash  (Ber.  Rab.  42)  explains  Shinab  as  pec  awir,
'one  who  draws  money  (wherever  he  can),'  and  Shemeber
as  -ia«  DC-,  '  one  who  makes  to  himself  pinions  (to  fly
in  search  of  treasure).''  If,  however,  the  narrative  in
Gen.  14  only  owes  its  appearance  of  historicity  to  an
editor  who  had  before  him  a  corrupt  text,  and  if  by

1  Bairs  suggestions  ('  Shinab '  [rather  -\t<}er]  =  Ar.  sunnar,
Aram,  siinerd,  'cat';  'Shemeber'  [rather  i2NCe'l  =  13N  CP,
'  name  lost,'  a  marginal  gloss)  lack  probability.

4476


SHINAR

applying  the  right  key  we  are  able  to  restore  the  original
sufficiently  to  understand  it  aright,  it  becomes  probable
that  only  one  king  was  mentioned  on  either  side  of  the
contest,  viz.  the  king  of  Geshur  (or  Ashhur)  and  the
king  of  Sodom  (?),  and  that  just  as  '  Jerahmeel  '  occurs
apparently  no  less  than  six  times  (five  times  in  variants)
in  v.  i,  so  '  Ishmael'  occurs  five  or  six  times  (owing  to
variants)  in  v.  2.  Among  the  variants  referred  to  are
ixxy  (Shinab)  and  •ONSB'  (Shemeber).  See  further
SOUOM  AND  GOMORRAH.  T.  K.  c.


SHINAB  ('TWB'),  according  to  the  prevalent  view  a
name  of  Babylon  (cp  GEOGRAPHY,  §  130).  It  is  men
tioned  eight  times  in  all:  Gen.  lOio  Ha  14^9  Josh.  7  21
Is.  11  ii  Zech.  5  ii  Dan.  l2f.  In  Am.  Tab.  25  49  we  find
the  king  of  Sanhar  mentioned  as  an  ally  of  the  king  of
Hatti,  and  in  the  Egyptian  inscriptions  a  king  of  Sangara
often  appears  (cp  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  279).  Ed.  Meyer
(sEgyptiaca,  63  f.)  argues  that  both  these  forms  are
equivalent  to  Kardunias,  the  Kassite  name  for  Baby
lonia  ;  1  this,  however,  is  not  more  than  plausible  (cp
Flinders  Petrie,  Syria  and  Egypt,  180).  The  older
views  explaining  Shinar  as  '  the  land  of  two  cities  '
(sani-'iri,  KAT(l]  34),  or  as  =  samer  in  the  phrase
Sumer  and  Accad  =  S.  Babylonia,  are  untenable.2
Probably  the  identification  of  Shinar  with  Babylonia,
though  an  early  theory,  is  erroneous,  and  except  in
Josh.  7  zi  Dan.  12,  we  should  everywhere  read  Geshur.3
Ni.MRon  ['/.».]  was  a  N.  Arabian,  not  a  Babylonian,
hero  ;  and  originally  the  great  Tower  (Gen.  11  1-9)  was
probably  placed  not  in  Babylonia  but  in  Jerahmeel.4

In  Josh.  72i,  however,  a  different  emendation  is  necessary.
The  goodly  mantle  (see  MANTLE,  §  2)  in  the  spoil  of  Jericho,
coveted  by  Achan,  came  neither  from  'Shinar'  nor  from  'Geshur.'
"IJHK"  (EV  Shinar)  is  most  probably  a  corruption  of  P"]t?',  '  a  coat
of  mail'  (see,  however,  MANTLE,  §  2  [5]);  this  word  probably
stood  in  the  margin  as  a  correction  of  the  erroneous  pjj1'?  (EV
'  wedge  '),  for  which  it  has  been  elsewhere  (see  GOLD,§  2)  proposed
to  read  JVC'.  On  the  other  passage  see  Crit.  Bib.

In  Josh.,  I.e.,  <PB  gives  i^iAiji/  TroiKi'Arjr  for  -\yxy  '-|.S',  disregard
ing  ,13113  (<BAFL  KaArji')  ;  Vg.  pallium  coccineitnityalde  bonuni).
Generally  <E5  gives  <rev(i>)a.ap  ;  but  in  Zech.  5  ii  /Sa/SvAwv,  unless
*?33  here  comes  from  ^KOnV  i  CP  Is-  H  Ir  where  in  like  manner
|3a/3i>AfaWas  may=  ^33  =  *?NCnT  (cp  PATHROS).  T.  K.  C.


SHION  (pN"),  a  city  of  Issachar,  Josh.  19  19
[B],  ceiAN  [A],  CHCO  [L];  Sean  (OS®  154  18)  in
Jerome's  time  was  a  village  near  Tabor,  which  may  be
identified  with  the  'AinSha'ln,  4  m.  NW.  from  Tabor,
near  which  is  a  ruin  called  Khirbet  Shain.  There  is
also  a  Xeby  Shdin,  NW.  from  Nazareth.  The  name
may  be  akin  to  Shunem,  which  occurs  in  v.  18.

The  current  AV  rendering  Shihon  differs  from  that  of  the
edition  of  1611,  which,  like  RV,  has  Shion.

SHIP. The Hebrew  term iTJS,  dniyyah, and the
Greek  trXoiov  are  used somewhat  loosely  in  OT  and
T  • v,+  K  NT in references to navigation, and

1.  lagnt  Doats  Eyin  most  cases  renders  by  the  equally
vague,  and  often  obviously  too  preten
tious  term,  '  ship.  '  Sometimes  there  seems  to  be  no
good  reason  for  the  choice  of  this  term,  as  the  Hebrew
adds  a  qualifying  word  to  indicate  what  is  really  meant.
In  Job  9  26  for  instance,  we  find  the  phrase  (elsewhere
[see  OSPRAY]  indicated  as  corrupt)  n3N  ni'px,  Uniyyoth
'ebeh,  '  ships  of  reed  '  (RVn>£-),  but  in  EV  'swift  ships'
(II  '  as  the  eagle  that  swoopeth  on  the  prey');  with  this
Dillmann  and  most  critics  [but  cp  Crit.  Bib.]  com-

1  See  Rogers,  Hist,  of  Bab.  and  Ass.  1  411.

2  Against  the  latter  see  Sayce,  PSBA,  June, 1896,  P-.I73,
who  argues  that  if  Hammurabi  =  '  Amraphel,  king  of  Shinar'
(Gen.  14  1), and if  Hammurabi reigned in N. Babylonia, it
follows that Sumer  (  =  S. Babylonia)  cannot be the biblical
Shinar. So,  too,  Pat.  Pal.  67.

3  'Missur'  is  a  less  probable  emendation,  though  it  would
suit  in  Gen.  11  2,  if  ^33  in  v.  9  was  originally  j;'?3  =  nj;!j  =  'll!iD'
('  Bela'  probably  comes  from  'Jerahmeel.')

4  mpSi  v-  2,  was  doubtless  originally  ^NCnTH  (so  also  13  n).
Cp  PARADISE,  §  6.

4477


SHIP

pare  Is.  18  2  where  the  expression  NDJ-'Va,  k£le  gome ',  is
given  in  AV  as  '  vessels  of  bulrushes '  (see  RUSHES),
but  where  the  natural  meaning  is  '  vessels  [better,  boats]
of  papyrus'  (RV).  In  both  cases  light  boats  or  skiffs
are  meant,  such  as  those  mentioned  by  Lucan  (P/iars.
436),  Pliny  (//A7 13  ii )  and  other  ancient  writers.  These
were  used  on  the  Nile  (Eg.  name,  baris ;  Copt,  bari),
carried  only  one  or  two  persons  (Plin.  HN  7  57),  and
were  so  light  that  where  navigation  was  difficult  or
dangerous  they  could  be  carried  forward  on  the  shoulders
(Plut.  De  Is.  et  Osir.  18).

In  their  oldest  and  most  primitive  form  these  vessels  were  mere
rafts,  and  such  rafts  are  not  unknown  in  modern  times  (see  the
description  in  the  Memoires  of  the  Due  de  Rovigo  in  Che.  Proph.
Is.  2  304).  Speaking  of  the  smaller  boats  of  this  kind,  Erman
(A  tic.  Eg.  479)  says,  '  these  boats  had  no  deck,  they  were  in  fact
little  rafts  formed  of  bundles  of  reeds  bound  together.  They  were
lather  broader  in  the  middle  than  at  the  ends,  the  hinder  part
was  generally  raised  up  high  whilst  the  front  part  lay  flat  on
the  water.'  They  were  propelled  by  poles  or  paddles,  not  with
oars.  Larger  boats  of  the  same  kind  were  used  for  carrying
light  freights  ;  with  these  is  perhaps  to  be  compared  the  Assyrian
kelek  or  raft  made  of  a  framework  of  wood  supported  by  inflated
skins,  though  these  seem  to  have  been  capable  of  carrying  con
siderable  loads  (see  Masp.  Daivn  of  Civ.  615^  ;  Place,  Ntnive,
pi.  43  ;  cp  Layard,  Nineveh,  1  13  2s  ;  Peters,  Nippur,  2340).
We  seem  to  have  references  to  some  conveyance  of  the  latter
kind  in  OT.  At  least,  as  the  text  of  i  K.  £9  stands,  the  timber
for  Solomon's  temple  was  brought  from  Lebanon  to  Joppa  by
sea  in 'floats'  (iK.Sg,  riTQT  I  2Ch.  2i6,  rrnOSI ;  ©  in  both
cases  (Txefiiai).  In  i  K.  RV  has  'rafts.'  A  similar  statement  is
made  with  reference  to  Zerubbabel's  temple  (i  Esd.  5  55,  <r\e&ias  ;
EV  '  floats  ').!  Such  primitive  modes  of  navigation  are  alluded
to  in  Wisd.  14  $f.  A  certain  floating  bridge  or  landing-stage  at
Alexandria  went  by  the  name  of  Schedia  (3  Mace.  4  ii).

The  papyrus  boats  of  later  times,  however,  were  of
more  elaborate  construction.  Light  boats  have  often

TT  -  ,  been  constructed  with  some  kind  of
2.  Use  01  wood.  framework_a  keel  and  ribs— as  well

as  of  papyrus  or  other  reeds,  like  the  bark  canoes  of
Australia  and  more  especially  of  the  American  continent.
Boats  of  this  kind  may  have  carried  a  sail.  As  in  the
case  of  the  Madras  surf-boats  the  wood  was  no  doubt
fastened  by  thongs.

'  Vessels  thus  stitched  together,  and  with  an  inserted  frame
work,  have  from  a  very  early  time  been  constructed  in  the  Eastern
seas  far  exceeding  in  size  anything  that  would  be  called  a  canoe,
and  in  some  cases  attaining  to  200  tons  burthen '  (£S(a)
21 804/0.

They  were  not  so  primitive  in  construction  as  the
Indian  canoes  made  of  a  hollowed  tree-trunk  (Herod.
898  ;  cp  the  ancient  boats  of  the  Swiss  lake  dwellings),
but  would  seem  to  rank  between  these  and  the  wooden
boats  made  in  pieces  (see  below).2  The  round  kit/as  or
coracles  of  the  Assyrians  made  of  plaited  willow  ( Herod.
1192;  see  Masp.  Dawn  of  Civ.  615)  were  apparently
used  for  short  distances  —  as  ferry-boats  for  crossing
rivers  ;  they  were  thus  an  improvement  on  the  simple
inflated  skin  (cp  ASSYRIA,  §  10^).

Larger  boats  were  constructed  entirely  of  wood
fastened  by  pegs  or  tree-nails.  To  craft  of  this  kind
perhaps  the  phrase  D'E'-'pN,  Snt-sdyit,  'row-boat'  (EV
'  galley  with  oars  '),  of  Is.  3821,  used  in  connection  with
streams  and  rivers,  may  be  supposed  to  refer.  Such
boats  were  also  used  on  the  Nile  (Herod.  2 96  ;  cp  the
boats  in  use  among  the  Polynesian  islands3 — the  modern
nuggur}.  They  were  often  of  considerable  size,  even
under  the  Old  Empire.  They  had  oars  for  rowing  (not
for  paddling,  as  in  the  papyrus  boats)  fixed  into  row
locks,  or  through  the  sides  of  the  boat,  and  fastened  by
a  rope  to  prevent  loss  ;  oars  were  used  also  for  steering
—one  for  small  boats,  several  on  either  side  at  the  stern
for  larger  craft.

1  [These  statements  are  open  to  criticism,  both  on  the  ground
of  their  inherent  improbability  and  because  there  are  indications
that  the  original  form  of  the  text  (already  corrupt  in  the  re
dactor's  time),  was  very  different  from  that  in  MT,  whilst  the
statement  in  i  Esd.  is  an  invention  suggested  by  the  manipulated
form  of  the  narrative  of  Solomon's  temple. — T.  K.  c.]

2  They  would  seem  to  have  been  heavier  than  the  boats  of
the Esquimaux, constructed of skins and whale-bone; see
Lubbock,  Prehistoric  Times  (8),  483  f.

3  On Polynesian navigation cp A. De Quatrefages, The
Human  Sptcits<V)(lSS)i  p.  191.^.

4478


SHIP

At  a  later  date  boats  of  this  build  carried,  in  addition

to  oars,  '  a  rectangular  square  sail  which  \vas  probably

_ , made  of  papyrus  matting' (Ennan). For

.'.. ., the  mast  two  pieces  of  wood  fastened  to-
witli  sails

' gather  at  the  top  were  employed  ;  it  was

held  in  its  place  by  large  ropes  or  shrouds  fastened  at
the  bows  and  stern,  other  ropes  being  attached  to  other
parts  of  the  boat  to  give  additional  strength.  '  The
yard-arm  rested  on  the  point  of  the  mast'  (see  Erman,
481).  These  were  long  Hat  boats.  Having  little  depth,
a  cabin l  fitted  on  the  deck  suffices  both  for  the  ship
master's  accommodation  and  for  a  hold  ;  in  some  of
the  rowing-boats  nearly  the  whole  length  of  the  deck  is
taken  up  by  the  cabin  so  that  a  sail  can  hardly  have
been  used.  A  cargo  would,  of  course,  have  to  be  stowed
on  deck,  and  boats  carrying  a  large  freight  seem  always
to  have  been  towed.

A  great  advance  is  made  under  the  Middle  Empire.  The
double  mast  gives  place  to  a  stout  single  one,  the  steering-oars
to  a  large  rudder ;  the  sail  now  has  two  yards,  the  upper  one
being  fastened  to  the  mast  by  ropes,  not,  as  before,  fixed  to  the  top
of  it.  In  the  New  Empire  the  vessels  increased  in  size  and  com-
plexity.and  were  elaborately  adorned  (cpEzek.27).  In  the  sailing-
boat  of  Queen  Ha'tshepsu  (see  fig.  i)  the  mast  and  sail  have
assumed  huge  proportions,  and  the  yards  are  constructed  of
two  pieces  of  wood.  Here  we  get  a  craft  to  which  we  may
strictly  apply  the  term  'ship.'  Something  of  the  kind  may  per
haps  be  meant  by  the  "VW  %  si  'addir,  EV  'gallant  ship, 'of  Is.
33  21,  which  is  contrasted  with  the  diit-Sayit  in  the  same  passage.


FIG.  i. — Sailing  boat  of  Queen  Ha'tshepsu  (Chnemtamun). After  Erman.


In  11.  23  'tackling'  (D'73n,  haballiii),  'mast'  (pH,  toren),  and
'  sail '  (D3,  ties),  are  referred  to.  Nor  must  we  overlook  the  fine
poetic  similitude  of  Ezekiel  (chap.  27)  in  which  Tyre  is  compared
to  a  ship.  The  oars  are  said  to  have  been  made  of  oak,  the
deck  of  ivory  inlaid  in  cedarwood.  The  sail  was  of  fine  linen
with  embroidered  work  to  serve  as  ensign  ;  the  cabin  of  blue
and  purple  stuffs.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  many-coloured
sails  of  the  ancients  may  have  served  as  distinguishing  signs.
Flags,  as  Cornill  (on  Ezek.  277)  seems  to  have  conclusively
shown,  were  not  known  in  antiquity. '•*

In  a  famous  passage  of  II.  Is.  we  find  the  phrase  'even

.. f,, ,  j  the  Chaldeans,  in  the  ships  of  their  re-

4.  Cnaldaean ... ,,,  „,,,  ., '  .

shins joicmg (Is.  43i4,RV).s Fhat  the  ships

of  Uru  on  the  Persian Gulf (see UR
OF  THE  CHALDEF.S)  appear  prominently  in  very  early

1  The  hut  or  cabin  seems  to  have  been  quite  an  ancient
feature.  Dr.  Budge  in  A  History  of  Egypt  (1  73/.  [1.02])
gives  illustrations  of  ships  drawn  from  predynastic  vases  in
the  British  Museum,  which  he  describes  as  follows :  'Each
boat  contains  two  small  huts,  which  are  placed  amidships,  and
attached  to  one  of  these  is  a  sort  of  mast,  on  the  top  of  which  is
an  emblem  of  some  kind  ;  in  the  front  of  the  boat  is  placed  what
appears  to  be  a  branch  or  boui;h  of  a  tree,  and  in  some  examples
a  rope  for  tying  up  is  represented  under  the  front  of  the  boat,
and  steering  poles  are  represented  at  the  stern.'

IJ  Egyptian  ships  seem  to  have  received  names  at  quite  an
early  date.  See  L.  15.  Paton,  The  Early  History  of  Syria
ami  Palestine,  Tif.  Standards  are  found,  according  to  Dr.
Budge  (A  History  of  Egypt,  1  78),  on  the  boats  represented
upon  predynastic  vases.  The  object  of  the  bough  or  mat  in
these  boats  (see  above,  n.  i)  'seems  to  have  been  to  supply
to  all  beholders  information  concerning  the  tribe  and  family  of
the  occupant  of  the  boat.  The  short  mast  which  was  attached
to  the  aft  cabin  was  probably  used  for  displaying  a  flag  or
symbol  which  either  referred  to  the  country  or  city  of  the
master  of  the  boat,  or  declared  his  rank.'

3  [So  Kittel,  '  the  text  seems  incurably  corrupt.'  Dillmann,
it  is  true,  accepts  the  text,  and  only  stumbles  at  the  1  before

4479


SHIP

inscriptions,  and  that  there  is  evidence  of  commercial
intercourse  between  Babylonia  and  India  at  least  as
early  as  the  seventh  century  B.C.  (OPHIR,  §  2),  is  un
deniable.  The  Babylonian  Deluge-story,  moreover,
gives  an  elaborate  account  of  an  elippu  or  ship — i.e. ,  the
'ark.'  And  even  the  Assyrians,  who  were  an  inland
people,  were  by  no  means  limited  to  the  round  kufas  or
coracles,  or  to  the  kelek  or  raft.

A  iifas  and  kcleks  are  not  the  only  vessels  represented  on  the
Assyrian  monuments  and  referred  to  in  the  inscriptions.  Layard's
Monuments  of  Nineveh  (pi.  71)  gives  illustrations  of  a  number
of  vessels,  evidently  war-ships,  having  two  banks  of  oars,  and
shields  along  the  bulwarks.  '  Five  have  sheer  prows,  and  sharp
beaks  for  ramming,  and  these  have  also  a  mast,  a  single  yard,
fore  and  back-stays,  braces,  and  halliards.'  A  text  (K.  4378)
published  by  Dehtzsch  (Ass.  Lesestacke,^}  86-90)  enumerates
the  different  sorts  of  vessels.  Masts,  sails,  yards,  rudder,  rigging,
bulwarks,  prow,  stern,  deck,  hold,  and  keel  are  all  mentioned  ;
and  among  the  different  kinds  of  vessels  the  '  Assyrian  ship '  is
specially  designated,  along  with  those  of  the  Babylonian  cities
of  Ur  and  Nippur.

The  Assyrians,  however,  had  no  great  skill  in  ship
building.  We  are  told  that  in  696  or  695  B.C.  Senna
cherib  had  ships  built  at  Til  Barsip  for  his  expedition
against  Merodach-baladan.  But  the  carpenters  were
Haiti — i.e. ,  from  the  land  of  the  West — and  the  sailors
\vere  Tyrians,  Sidonians,  and  lonians  (Javnai).

The  Egyptian  ships  mentioned  above  (§  3,  end)  re
sembled  in  shape  the  war-ships  of  a  later  time  rather
than  the  merchant  vessels,  for  whilst

"  5.  Merchant-  th<;  wa'-shipfs ^\

ships  in  OT. 7

were, like these, long

(fj.a.Kpai  ;  navis  longa],  the  merchant -
ships  (irna  ni'jN,  dniyyoth  softer ;  Prov.
31 14,  oneraria]  became  round  and  deep
(crTpoyyi'\ai).  The  increase  in  depth
allowed  of  a  hold  (cp  the  [rare  and  late]
term  nrso,  sephinah,  in  Jon.  1 5,  from
*N/i2D.  '  to  cover,'  and  the  expression
"on  *n3T,  yarkHthe  hasstphinah,  '  sides
of  the  ship  ').  We  hear  in  the  OT  of  a
special  class  of  merchant-ship — the  so-
called  Tarsis  ships  (i^'cnn  n'vjx,  dniyyoth
tarsis,  i  K.  2248).  They  seem  to  have


been  ships  of  large  build,  and  the  expression  has  often
been  compared  to  our  East-  or  West-Indiamen.  They
were  no  doubt  provided  with  oars  as  well  as  with  a  sail
or  sails.

Elsewhere  (see  TARSHISH)  the  phrase,  or  rather  the  probable
earlier  reading  of  the  phrase,  has  been  explained  as  meaning
_' galleys  with  oars."  Torr  (zf.),  assuming  with  most  that  tars:s
is  the  correct  reading,  makes  the  following  suggestion.  '  Among
the  Greeks  the  oars  of  a  ship  were  collectively  termed  tarsos,
and  among  the  Hebrews  ships  of  a  certain  type  were  known  as
ships  of  tarsis  ;  and  Tarsos  and  TarsiS  were  the  Greek  and
Hebrew  names  for  Tarsus  in  Cilicia.  The  coincidence  suggests
that  this  city  was  pre-eminent  in  furthering  the  use  of  oars  upon
the  Mediterranean.  But  of  this  there  are  no  records.'

In  spite  of  their  surroundings,  however,  the  Israelites
(see  PALESTINE,  PHCENICIA,  GALILEE  [SEA  OF],  RED
6.  Navigation  SEA,. NILE,  etc.)  seem  to  have  taken
°., little  interest  in  navigation.1 Not  until
,. °  the  Maccabrean  times  was  the  impor

tance  of  harbours  realised,  and  the
value  of  ships  to  some  extent  appreciated,  whether  for
the  purposes  of  trade  or  for  war. 2  Simon  the  Maccabee
converted  Joppa  into  a  Jewish  port  (i  Mace.  14s),  and
Herod  established  another  harbour  at  Caesarea  (Jos.  Bf
i.  21  5  Ant.  xvii.  5  i  xv.  96) — a  harbour  famous  on
account  of  the  part  it  plays  in  the  story  of  Paul's
journeys  (Acts 930  1822  272).  Israel's  knowledge  of

C'lw'3.  For  the  present  state  of  the  question  see  '  Isa.'  SBOT
(Heb.),  ad  loc.,  and  Crit.  Bill.}

1  Their  lack  of  interest  and  ignorance  in  this  respect  is  some
what  surprising.  Cp,  however,  what  we  learn  of  certain  mari
time  tribes  among  the  P^squimaux,  viz.,  that  they  are  'ignorant,
even  traditionally,  of  the  existence  of  a  boat.'— Ross,  Baffin's
Bay,  170  (quoted  by  Lubbock,  Prehistoric  7V»/«,l6.'  483).

-  In  AV  of  i  Mace.  1172  Mace.  129  the  term  NAVY  is  used.

4480


SHIP

ships,  such  as  it  was,  must  after  the  settlement  have
been  derived  from  the  Phoenicians  and  Philistines  in
whose  hands  were  the  harbours  along  the  coast.  It  is
true  that  some  of  the  tribes  seem  to  figure  in  the  early
legends  as  seafaring  (cp  Ps.  10723-30);  but,  apart  from
the  fact  that  these  stories  are  legendary,  the  text  does  not
seem  to  have  been  transmitted  to  us  in  its  original  form
(cp  Gen.  49 13  Dt.  33 19  Judg.  5 17,  and  see  ASHER,  DAN,
ZEBULUN).  The  description  of  the  ARK  (q.v. )  also  shows
a  slight  knowledge  of  such  matters  (see  Now.  HA  1 248).
It  has  been  pointed  out,  too,  that  when  David  had  an
opportunity  of  seizing  Philistine  harbours  it  did  not
occur  to  him  to  take  it.  Solomon's  connection  with
the  sea — he  is  said  to  have  had  a  '  NAVY  of  Tarshish  ' —
seems  to  have  been  due  to  Hiram  ;  we  know  that  his
ships  were  manned  by  Hiram's  men  (i  K.  926  f. ).  On
the  difficulties  of  these  passages  see  SOLOMON,  §§  3^4.
Jehoshaphat  is  said  to  have  built  '  Tarsis-ships  '  ;  but  his
naval  experience  was  a  disastrous  one  (i  K.  2248  2  Ch.
2036/.;  see  EZION-GEBER).  The  war-ships  of  which  we
hear  in  the  Apocrypha  (i  Mace.  826  15s  ;  cp  Dan.  11  30)
were  no  doubt  similar  to  those  in  use  amongst  the
Greeks  and  Romans.  See  Smith's  Diet,  under  'navis.'
In  the  NT  we  hear  of  vessels  on  the  sea  of  Galilee
(Mt.  42i /.  824  1424  Mk.  437).  The  Greek  term  com-


7.  Boats  in  NT.


monly  employed  is  irXolov,1  which  AV


'translates  'ship.'  RV  renders  'boat,'
but,  as  has  been  pointed  out  elsewhere  ( Kitto,  Bibl.
Cycl.  under  'ship'),  passages  in  Josephus  which  refer
to  navigation  on  the  lake  (BJm.  10  i  ;  I'it.  33)  suggest
that  the  barks  on  this  piece  of  water  were  something


FIG.  2. — A  merchant-ship  of  186  A.D. After  Torr
(Ancient  Ships).

more  than  boats  (they  carried  an  anchor,  and  are  called
ffKa<f>ri  by  Josephus).  In  the  time  of  Jesus  some  of
these  were  owned  by  his  disciples  (Mt.  42i  Jn.  21  3  Lk.
r>3),  and  the  same  writer  points  out  that,  having  regard
to  the  evidence  in  Josephus,  it  is  a  mistake  to  '  represent
the  Galilcean  fishermen  as  of  the  poorest  class.'

The  most  important  references,  however,  to  ships  and
navigation  in  the  NT  are  found  in  the  story  of  Paul's
vovage  to  Rome.2  This  narrative
( Acts  27 /)  maybe  best  illustrated  by
studying  two  representations  of  ancient
merchant-ships  that  have  come  down  to  us,  in  which  all
(or  most  of)  the  parts  mentioned  are  depicted.  A
merchant-ship  of  186  A.D.,3  for  instance,  is  represented

1  There  is  mention  also  of  a.  nXoidpiov  or  of  TiAotapia,  especi
ally  in  Jn.

-  As  a  tent-maker  Paul  may  also  have  been  a  sail-maker,  and
may  have  travelled  in  this  capacity.

3  Figs.  2  and  3  have  been  chosen  for  their  illustrative  value.

4481


SHIP

on  a  coin  of  the  emperor  Commodus  (see  fig.  2  ;  cp
Smith,  The  Voyage  and  Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul,W  202).
Here  we  see  the  two  steering-oars  (cp  Acts  27  40,  ras
^euKT-rjpias  rCiv  TnjSaXiuv)  at  the  stern  (i;  irpufj.va),  which
supplied  the  place  of  the  rudder  of  later  times  ;  in  this
case  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  upper  parts  of  the  oars  are
protected  from  the  waves  by  a  covering  —  'a  prolongation
of  the  upper  waling-pieces,  or  something  of  the  sort'
(Torr)  ;  and  that  the  sails  have  bands  of  rope  sewn
across  to  strengthen  them.  Such  a  ship  would  rely
for  travelling  on  the  large  square  sail  which  is  figured
in  about  the  centre  (cp  Acts  27  17,  r6  aKevos).  The  small
sail  at  the  bow  was  subsidiary  ;  the  name  of  this  foresail1
was  artemon  (apTtfju*>v,  Acts  27  40),  not  dolon  (8u\wv),  as
has  sometimes  been  thought.

The  object  at  the  stern,  which  Smith  takes  to  be  a  mast,
might  be  taken  to  suggest  that  there  was  also  a  sail  at  the
stern,  as  Pliny  (Protein,  in  lib.  xix.;  see  Smith,  p.  192)  asserts
that  there  sometimes  was  ;  but  the  use  of  such  a  sail  would  seem
to  have  been  quite  exceptional,  as  it  does  not  appear  to  be  re
presented  in  the  pictures  that  have  come  dcwn  to  us.  In  fig.  2
the  object  does  not  resemble  a  mast  (as  in  Smith's  reproduction)
so  much  as  an  oar.  In  any  case  it  may  be  only  a  spare  mast  (or
oar),  or  may  even  be  an  addition  on  the  part  of  the  original
artist.

These  merchant-ships  were  often  of  considerable  size.
The  Alexandrian  ship  (ir\olov  'AXe^avSpivbv  ;  Acts  27  6)
in  which  Paul  is  said  to  have  started  on  his  voyage  to
Rome  carried,  according  to  the  Alexandrian  MS,  276
persons  (the  Vatican  MS,  however,  has  76)  in  addition
to  its  cargo  (v.  37)  ;  and  when  this  vessel  was  wrecked
another  merchant-ship  took  on  board  all  these  passengers
in  addition  to  its  own  freight.

In  Acts  27  17  we  are  told  that  when  the  ship  was  in
danger  of  shipwreck  '  they  used  helps,  undergirding  the

ship'


9.  Undergirders.

VVVTfS TO TT\OLOV).  I  llCSC helps,

which  are  called  elsewhere  hypozomata  (viro^difj-ara),
were  cables  for  undergirding  and  strengthening  the  hull,
especially  in  bad  weather.  As  to  the  method  in  which
they  were  attached,  however,  there  is  some  question.

According  to  Torr  they  were  '  fastened  round  the  ship  hori
zontally  ;  the  two  ends  of  each  cable  being  joined  together,  so
as  to  make  it  a  complete  girdle  extending  from  stem  to  stern
along  the  starboard  side  and  back  from  stern  to  stem  along  the
port  side.'  Smith,  however,  contends  that  the  hypozomata  were
bound  'round  the  middle  of  the  ship  at  right  angles  to  the  length,
and  not  parallel  to  it  (he  is  followed  by  Ramsay,  p.  329).'  He
claims  that  liockh  (who  held  the  alternative  view  ;2  p.  134  [see
§  12])  has  misquoted  the  passage  on  which  he  relies  as  evidence
(Vitruvius,  De  A  rchitectura,  x.  15  1).  Bockh  gave  as  the  crucial
words  'quemadmodum  navis  a  puppi  ad  prorani  continetur."
Smith  ((•*)  p.  213)  gives  as  the  correct  text  'q.  mains  navis,  etc.,"
which  he  maintains  supports  his  view  ('the  word  "  malus  "  is
omitted  in  the  edition  of  Schneider,  but  is  retained  in  the
later  carefully  edited  edition  of  Poleni,  Utini,  1829  ').  Torr's
quotation  (41,  n.  100),  however,  agrees  with  that  of  Bockh  ;  he
adds,  '  this  shows  that  the  girding  cables  went  from  the  stem  of
a  ship  to  the  stern.'  In  Teubner's  text  (1899  ;  ed.  V.  Rose)  the
words  are  '  ita  religati  quemadmodum  navi  a  puppi  ad  proram  '  ;
but  in  the  notes  '  navis  '  is  given  as  the  common  reading.  The
whole  passage,  moreover,  seems  to  be  obscure.  On  the
strength  of  a  passage  from  Isidore  (Orig.  1!>4,  '  tormentuni,
funis  in  navibus  longis  qui  a  prora  ad  puppim  evtenditur  quo
magis  constringantur  ;  tormentum  autem  a  tortu  dicta  '),  Smith
admits  that  '  it  does  appear  that  ropes  were  occasionally  ap
plied  in  a  longitudinal  as  well  as  in  a  transverse  direction,  to
prevent  ships  from  straining  '  (p.  213).  In  the  passage  on  which
this  admission  is  based,  however,  the  reference  may  be  to  a
rope  such  as  that  which  we  see  stretched  amidship  over  posts
from  stem  to  stern  of  the  Egyptian  ships  on  the  relief  from
Deir-el-Bahri  —  a  rope  which  was  designed  perhaps  more  for
strengthening  the  heavily-laden  mast  than  for  holding  together
the  hull,  round  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  ends  of  the  rope
are  fastened  at  right  angles  to  the  length  (st;e  fig.  i).  If,  as
Smith  affirms  (p.  214),  —  speaking  as  one  who  had  had  practical
experience  in  seamanship  —  undergirding  lengthways  is  '  a  mode
which  must  have  been  as  impracticable  as  it  would  have  been


As  to  the  date  of  ACTS  (q.v.)r\o  suggestion  of  course  is  here
offered.

1  A  writer  in  Schenkel  (BL)  speaks  of  the  artetnon,  or  top-


4482


SHIP

unavailing  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening  the  ship,'  the  other
view  seems  preferable  until  further  evidence  is  forthcoming.

Another  interesting  representation  of  a  large  merchant-
ship  is  that  of  about  200  A.U.  on  a  relief  found  at  I'orto
Th near  tne  mouth  of  the  Tiber  (see  fig. 3).
_' , This  picture  illustrates  many  features  in  the
.. . ancient  merchant-ships. The  hull  of  a  ship
was commonly painted, sometimes for a
special  purpose — as  in  war,  to  make  the  vessel  as  little
conspicuous  as  possible  ;  but  in  addition  to  this  it  was
often decorated, especially  at  the  stern. We  see  an
example  of  this  decoration  in  the Porto  relief,  a  group
of  figures  being  depicted  at  the  stern. The  ornament
on the stern-post  was often a  swan or goose head
(xyviffKos). It  figures at a  very  early  period ; it is
represented  for  instance  on  the  Asiatic  ship  of  the  naval
battle  of  Rameses III. as  represented  on  a  bas-relief
at  Medinet Habu  (see  Warre- Cornish,  Diet, of  Gk.


SHIPHTAN

were  often  woven  upon  the  sail  ;  we  seem  to  have  an
example  in  this  picture.  At  the  bow  is  a  smaller
mast  to  carry  the  artemon.  But  a  third  sail  is  to  be
noted  on  this  ship.  This  is  above  the  large  square
sail.  Being  triangular  in  shape  and  having  its  base
along  the  main -yard  and  its  apex  attached  to  the
top  of  the  mast,  it  requires  no  topsail-yard.  Similar
triangular  topsails  are  represented  on  some  of  the  coins
of  the  Emperor  Commodus.  Lastly,  we  notice  that  a
small  boat  is  being  towed  astern  (cp  Acts  27  16,  r\  ffKaffrrj)  ;
this  would  be  used  for  various  purposes,  but  it  was  of
special  importance  as  a  life-boat  in  case  of  shipwreck
(Acts  27  16  30  32).  It  could  even  be  hoisted  on  board.1
From  Acts '27  29  it  appears  that  sometimes  several

, , . anchors  were  carried. At  first  stones  were
1 Anchors  P ,  •

used  for  this  purpose  ;  later,  the  anchors

resemble  very  much  those  of  modern
times,  they  were  provided  with  arms,  stocks,  and
crowns,  but  had  no  flukes  at  the  extremities  of
the  arms.2  Ships  also  carried  a  plumb-line  for
sounding  (cp  Acts  27  28,  /3o\is) ;  but  the  want
of  a  compass  made  navigation  often  very
dangerous — the  stars,  by  which  the  course  of
a  vessel  was  directed,  not  always  being  visible
(cp  Acts  272o).3

An  ancient  ship  could  sail,  according  to  Smith,  at
an  angle  of  about  seven  points  with  the  wind.  '  We
have  no  information,'  he  says,  '  as  to  the  exact  angle
with  the  wind  which  an  ancient  ship  could  sail.  It
must,  however,  have  been  less  than  eight  points,
but  more  than  six,  the  usual  allowance  for  a  modern
merchant-ship,  in  moderate  weather.  I  have,  there
fore,  in  my  calculations  taken  seven  as  the  mean  be
tween  these  extremes,  and  I  cannot  suppose  it  would
be  much  greater  or  less  '  (p.  215).

Before  putting  out  to  sea  it  was  usual  to  make
supplication  to  the  protecting  deities  fora  prosperous
voyage  (Wisd.  14  i).4  Cp,  further,  TKADK.

Schlc'izer,  I'ers.  eincr  allg.  Geschichte  d.  Handels
u.  d.  Schtffart  in  den  alt.  Zeitcn,  1706  ;  Le  Roy,
La  Marine  dcs  Anciens  Fcitples,

12.  BibliO-  i777;]^eirg\\^\if,,Gcsc/t.-d.Sc/iiJjr:,rts-
jrrat)hv  kvnde,  1792  ',  A.  Jal,  Archiologie
Narale,  Paris,  1840;  BGckh,  L'r-
kunden  fiber-  das  Seetvcsen  des  Attischen  Staates;
Smith,  I'oyage  and  Shipwreck  p/St.  Paul,  Lond.,
1848,  I4)  i'88o ;  Kreusing,  Die  Xautik  der  Allen,
1886;  T.  Vars,  L'Art  Nautiqut,  1887;  £B&>,  art.
'Ship  ;  Cecil  Torr,  Ancient  Ships,  1895.


FIG.  3. — A  merchant  ship  of  about  200  A.D. After  Torr  {Ancient


SHIPHI  ('1?£C'),  ancestor  of  ZIZA  (,/.?•.):
i  Ch.437t  (cAcp&A  [B],  ce(}>ei  [A],  ccocbei
[L])-


and  Rom.  Antiqq.  under  'navis').  On  the  Porto-
relief  waling-pieces,  or  wooden  belts  (fu&Tripfs,  not  to
be  confused  with  the  inro^/j.ara)  are  seen  to  encircle
the  ship  horizontally.  At  the  stern  is  the  deck-house
or  awning  reserved  for  the  use  of  the  commander
(Acts  27  ii,  Kv^epv-ffT^},  who  might  also  be  the  owner  of
the  ship  (ibid.,  vai>K\ripos).  The  stem-post  usually
terminated  in  a  carved  ornament  or  figure-head  ;  but  in
place  of  this  there  was  sometimes  a  painting  on  the
bow,  as  in  the  example  before  us.  Besides  this,  and
distinct  from  it,  there  were  statues  of  the  patron  deities
(cp  CASTOR);  here  perhaps  to  be  observed  at  the
stern.  In  this  ship  there  are  galleries  projecting  at  the
bow  and  the  stern  ;  the  latter  contains  the  deck-house
(mentioned  above),  in  that  at  the  bow  were  probably
stowed  the  anchors  and  other  instruments  (ffrpoipfia
Kal  7re,iia"yurye£s,  windlasses,  etc.  ?).  At  the  stern  are
the  steering  oars,  here  again  protected  by  the  upper
waling-pieces.  The  large  sail  in  the  centre  has  brailing-
ropes  (/cdXot)  and  rings,  and  the  mast  is  kept  in
position  by  a  number  of  other  ropes.  The  rope  by
which  the  lower  corner  of  the  sail  was  attached  to  the
side  of  the  ship — the  sheet — was  called  pesveli  or  TTOVS  ;
in  the  case  of  a  large  sail,  such  as  this,  when  two  ropes
would  be  required,  TTOI/S  would  denote  the  rope  which
drew  it  aft,  whilst  wpdirovs  (propes]  designated  the  rope
which  drew  it  forward,  or  the  tack.  Various  designs

4483


SHIPHMITE  ("PEL'':  o  TOY  ce<J>N[€]i  [BA],  CA-
4><\MI  [L]V  a  gentilic  attached  to  ZABDI,  3,  who  was
'over  the  increase  of  David's  vineyards'  (i  Ch.  2727),
and,  like  his  companions,  presumably  belonged  to  S.
Palestine.  See  SHEPHAM.

SHIPHRAH  (rnatr,  §51  ;  cen4>60P&[BAFL^the
name  of  one  of  the  Hebrew  midwives  ;  Ex.  1 15.  This
name  may  be  regarded  (C'he. )  as  one  of  the  minor  sup
ports  of  the  theory  that  the  sojourn  of  the  Israelites  was
not  in  Misraim  (Egypt),  but  in  Misrim  (in  part  of  the
Negeb).  Cp  MOSES,  §  4.

SHIPHTAN  (ftpSC*;  c<\BA6A  [B],  C&BA9AN  [A],
C&cp&T&N  [F],  (c)A(}>d>e&  [L]),  an  Ephramite,  father

1  The  above  description  is  based  upon  Torr's  standard  work
(see  §  12).

-  See  the  coin  of  Antoninus  Pius  (given  in  Smith,  210).

3  Cp  A.  De  Quatrefages,  of.  cit.  p. 193  : '  The  Polynesians
knew  perfectly  well  how  to  direct  their  course  at  sea  by  the
stars,  and  the  route  from  one  point  to  another  once  observed
was  inscribed,  if  we  may  use  the  expression,  in  a  song  which
would  never  be  forgotten.'

4  Cp  the  description in Grote, Hist, of  Greece: 'Silence
having  been  enjoined  and  obtained  by  sound  of  trumpet,  both
the  crews  in  every  ship  and  the  spectators  on  shore  followed  the
voice  of  the  herald  in  praying  to  the  gods  for  success,  and  in
singing  the  p»an. On  every ship were seen bowls  of  wine
prepared  and  the  epibatz  made  libations  with  goblets  of  silver
and  gold.'

4484


SHIRT

of Kenmel  ; Nu.  8424. For  a  theory  of  the  origin  of
the  name  cp  SHAPHAT,  and  KEMUEL.

SHIRT  (Judg.  14 12),  AV™ff-,  AV  SHEET.

SHISHA  (Nt?;'L>:,  i  K.43t),  in i Ch.  18  16, SHAV-

SHA.

SHISHAK  (p^"£;,  cp  Vg.  Sesac,  i  K.  14 25,  more
correctly  pt'lEJ' — i.e. ,  Shoshak  [Kt.]),  the  king  of  Egypt
to  whom  Jeroboam  fled  (i  K.I  140)  and  who  plundered
Jerusalem  and  the  temple  in  the  fifth  year  of  king
Rehoboam,  i  K.  1425  (2  Ch.  122  5  7  g).1

Egyptologists  have  always  recognised  in  this  name
the  first  king  of  the  twenty-second,  Bubastide,  dynasty,

- e^i T Shoshenk  I. His  personal  name  Sa-sa-n
1.  Sosenk  I.  ,  r  .  , ,  .,

(sometimes  nu,  sometimes  assimilated )-k-

is  undoubtedly  of  Libyan  etymology,  like  several  other
names  of  that  royal  family.  The  vowels  of  the  name
are  rendered  Su-si-in-ku  (i.e.,  Shoshenk)  by  the
Assyrians,3  and  the  biblical  orthography  confirms  this
pronunciation.  Josephus  (Ant.  vii.  63  viii.  102)  has  the
form  Zowro/cos  (in  another  recension  2i<ra>/ros)  after  (5.
Manetho  transliterates  — etruryX'5  (var.  Zecrwyxacns),
and  according  to  Wilcken  (quoted  Beitr.  zur  Assvr.
1  351)  a  Theban  ostracon  has  the  name  Ze<ro7xcrt. 4  This
vocalisation  Shesh6nk  is  later  but  not  necessarily  wrong,
as  the  Libyan  languages  (like  modern  French,  for
example)  have  little  or  no  accent.  The  original  pro
nunciation  may  thus  have  been  Shdshdnk,  exactly  as
the  name  is  spelt  in  Egyptian.  The  assimilation  of '  n  is
sometimes  met  with  already  in  hieroglyphics  (cp  above).
The  reading  of  ©,  Sowa/c(e)t/x,  seems  to  have  arisen
from  an  attempt  to  put  in  again  this  assimilated  ».5

On  the  origin  of  this  founder  of  a  new  dynasty  from
a  family  of  Libyan  officers,  see  EGYPT,  §  63. 6  The
connection  by  marriage  with  the  high  priests  of  Memphis
seems  to  mark  the  first  step  towards  high  influence  for
these  'commanders  of  the  Mashauasha.'  The  exact
date  of  Shoshenk  I.'s  accession  to  the  throne  would  be
of  the  highest  importance  for  biblical  chronology,
but  cannot  be  determined  exactly  with  our  present
material.  The  end  of  the  twenty-second  dynasty
seems  to  fall  somewhat  after  800  B.  c.  Manetho  gives
the  sum  of  the  dynasty  as  120  (the  single  items  amount
to  116),  which  would  bring  us  to  about  920;  but  the
Manethonian  dates  conflict  with  monumental  dates
which  give  at  least  220  years.7  We  have,  evidently,  a
great  many  co-regencies  for  which  we  may  allow  some
fifty  years,  so  that  the  beginning  of  Shoshenk's  reign
would  be  about  950.

More  cannot  be  said  ;  but,  fortunately,  the  Tyrian  chronology
in  Menander8  seems  to  show  that  we  can  place  the  first  year  of
dynasty  twenty-two  after  950  B.C.  (On  the  campaign  against
Jerusalem,  cp  below,  §  3,  and  CHRONOLOGY,  §  32).  Twenty-
one  years  are  monumentally  attested  for  Shoshenk  on  an  inscrip
tion  in  the  quarries  of  Silsileh,  announcing  that  the  king  ordered

1  See  PHARAOH,  §  2  [5],  for  an  explanation  of  the  absence  of
the  title  Pharaoh  in  the  case  of  Shishak  ;  that  he  is  only  called
'  king  of  Egypt,'  indicates  a  very  early  source.


( TTT ?TT "*


A/WW\

A


3  In  Asur-bani-pal's  records  the  name  is  used  of  a  descendant
of  the  22nd  dynasty,  reigning  in  Busiris  (Bu-si-ri)  as  a  simple
nomarch.

4  Pseudo-Callisthenes  and  others  (see  Wiedemann  on  Herod.
2  102)  have  preserved  the  name  as  Sesonchosis. They  confound
the  king  with  the fabulous  Sesostris. We  can  thus  see  that
Sheshonk-Sesonchosis  must  later  have  enjoyed  the  reputation  of
being  a  great  warrior.

_  5  The  variant  sa-sa-&(e)-H  occurs,  but  too  rarely  to  be  con
sidered  legitimate  (see  Lieblein,  Diet,  de  noins).  Wiedemann,
Gesch.  x£^.  548,  quotes  Shcsakus  from  Abulfarag,  Asochirus  (as
also  some  late  MSS.  of  Josephus  have)  from  Method,  in  Phot.
300  b.

6  The  unfortunate  theory  that  the  family  was  Assyrian  (Rirch,
Lauth, Brugsch)  and that in Takelfit we  have  to recognise
Tiglath (Assyrian tukultu~),  in Ne-ma-ra-te  (probably  Asur-
bani-pal's  Laniintu  furnishes  the  correct  pronunciation)  Nimrod,
etc.,  is  now  generally  abandoned.

7  See  M VAC**  31,  fora  summary  of  the  chronological  question.

8  SeeWi.  JCATft)  120.

4485


SHISHAK

stone  to  be  quarried  for  great  constructions  in  the  temple  of
Amon  at  Thebes.  These  seem  to  be  the  constructions  on  the
SE.  side  of  the  second  pylon  ;  their  completion  would  point
to  a  somewhat  longer  reign.  Manetho,  however,  in  Julius
Africanus,  gives  only  twenty-one  years  to  the  king.

Sculptures  on  the  S.  wall  of  the  great  temple  at
Karnak  present  the  list  of  Palestinian  cities  conquered
by  this  king,1  a  monument  of  great  historical  import
ance,  for  a  specimen  of  which  see  EGYPT,  §  64.  So  far,
133  ovals  with  names  are  known,2  of  which,  however,
many  are  destroyed.  Each  oval  is  surrounded  by  a
line  indicating  a  fortified  wall  ;  a  bound  captive  above
indicates  that  this  strong  city  was  conquered  by  Pharaoh.
The  figures  are  certainly  not  portraits,  but  symbolical.
The  names  have  been  distributed  very  awkwardly
by  the  ignorant  sculptor ;  e.g. ,  one  name  has  been
mechanically  divided  into  three  names,  so  that  now
(107)  'the  fields  (108)  of  Arad  (109)  the  Great'  reads
as  if  three  separate  cities  were  intended.  The  render
ing  of  the  names,  which  is  good  for  the  consonants,  but
very  imperfect  for  the  vowels,  suggests  sources  in  so-
called  Phoenician  letters  in  an  Aramaic  or  half-Aramaic
language  (As.  u.  Eur.  II. c.}.  A  geographical  arrange
ment  of  the  list  (which  properly  begins  only  with  the
2  List  of  IIth  °Va1^  cannot  be  established  ;  the  most
cities  important  cities  come  first,  Israelitish  and
Judagan  names  being  freely  mixed.  Many
writers  have  been  surprised  at  the  mention  of  X.  Israel
ite  cities,  because  from  i  K.  11 48  we  should  have  ex
pected  Shoshenk  to  have  been  a  friend  and  helper  of
Jeroboam.3  C.  Niebuhr  (Chronologic  der  Gesch.  Isr. ,
vii. )  thinks  that  the  Pharaoh  conquered  the  Israelitish
cities  for  his  vassal  (cp  Wi.  GI  1 160) ;  cp,  however,
Stade's  correct  observation  in  GI  1 354.  The  truth  is  (see
Masp.  Hist.  2774,  and  cp  As.  u.  Eur.  166)  that  it  is  not
necessary  to  assume  that  any  of  these  northern  cities
were  attacked  by  the  Egyptians.  Their  enumeration
merely  means  that  the  northern  kingdom  was  tributary;
it  is  only  the  second  half  of  the  list  which  contains  details
pointing  to  the  actual  conquest,4  and  these  seem  to  belong
to  Judah.  The  tribute,  which  the  Pharaoh  claimed
everywhere,  was  promptly  given  by  Jeroboam  who  owed
his  throne  to  Egypt  ;  in  Judah  it  had  to  be  exacted  by
force.  The  Philistine  cities  were  omitted  in  the  list.
As  usual,  no  full  record  of  the  conquests  was  given,  but
only  a  specimen  which,  in  this  case,  comprised  David's
and  Solomon's  kingdom.  The  Philistines  were  certainly
not  exempt  from  the  tribute,  and  it  would  be  strange  if
the  expedition  had  not  comprised  Phoenicia,  at  least.5

The  date  of  Shoshenk's  expedition  is  unknown.
Maspero's  conclusion  (Hist.  '2.713)  that  it  must  have
been  not  more  than  two  or  three  years  before  the
opening  of  the  quarry  in  Silsileh,  is  very  precarious.
It  would  be  more  natural  to  assume  that  the  king
undertook  the  expedition  not  long  after  his  accession,

1  Published  Rosellini,  Man.  Star.  148  ; Champollion,  Monu
ments,  284; Notices, ^113; a  revision  by  Maspero,  Rec.  de
Travaux,  7  100. A  considerable  literature  has  been  called  into
existence  by  this  list. See Blau  in  ZDMG  15  233  ;  Brugsch,
Geogr.  Inschr.  256;  Masp.  AZ,  1880,  44  (and  in  the  Victoria
Institute,  vol.  xxvii.) ;  Brugsch,  Gesch.  Aeg.  661  :  WMM  As.
u.  Eur.  166,  etc. It  may  be  mentioned  that  another  copy,  un
fortunately hopelessly defaced, has recently been found in
another  locality  (Hibeh  in  Upper  Egypt);  cp  .. Innalcs du  service
des  antiqnites,  2  154.

2  Two more rows  have recently  been excavated. A new
edition  of  the  whole  monument  by  the  present  writer  will  soon
appear  in  MVAG,  to  which  the  reader  must  be  referred.

3  According  to  <J5  of  i  K.  12  24,  which  is  modelled  on  i  K.  11
(see  HADAD),  Shishak  was  Jeroboam's  father-in-law.

4  Such  as  the  '  surrounding '  (*?pn>  Aramaic  word)  of,  or  the
road  to,  a  city.

5  Name  29,  Yu-d-h-itia-rn-k  was  explained  by  Champollion
as '  roi de Juda '  and this error which seemed to  furnish a
portrait  of  Rehoboam  has  become  as  popular  as  most  flagrant
errors. The  present  writer  has  (FSB A  10  81)  proposed  ~]SerrT,
'hand  (i.e.,  sign,  monument?)  of  the  king,' as  name  of  a  city.
The  article  would,  however,  be  uncommon,  and  this  makes  the
explanation  somewhat  doubtful. The  interpretation  of  Brugsch
(Geogr.  Inschr.  ii.  6  2)  and Maspero  (Hist.(~)  2,  11.), Jehud  in
Dan,  does  not  agree  with  the  orthography.

4486


SHITRAI

after  the  manner  of  so  many  kings.  A  reference  to
'  expeditions  in  the  countries  of  the  Syrians'  (K-i-nu),
which  seems  to  mean  Shoshenk's  campaign,  is  discussed
in  OLZ-izSo;  a  determination  of  the  year  in  which  a
certain  official  was  governor  of  Thebes  (or  vizir)  would
furnish  the  date  of  the  expedition.

The  other  constructions  of  the  king  of  which  traces  have  been
found  in  Thebes,  Memphis,  Pithom,  Tcl(l)  el-  Yehudeh,1
Bubastua  (Naville,  Itiibastis,  46),  Hibeh  (see  above)  do  not
siiem  to  have  been  very  considerable.

Shishak's  wife  had  the  name  Ka-r'-ma,  frequent  in  dynasty
22.  At  any  rate,  i  K.  11  19  need  not  be  referred  to,  since
Hadad's  exile  in  Misraim  seems  rather  to  point  to  an  old  mis
interpretation  of  Musri,  S.  of  Palestine.  See  HADAD,  3  ;
JEROBOAM,  i ;  SOLOMON.  \V.  M.  M.

The  study  of  the  historical  episodes  with  which  the  name  of
Shishak  is  connected  has  passed  into  a  new  phase  owing  to
Winckler's  discovery  of  the  N.  Arabian  land  of
3.  Shisnak  =  Musri  in  a  number  of  passages  in  the  OT  (see
Cushi  ?  Winckler,  in  KA  T(*)  i^6/.,  and  for  a  fuller,
though  still  incomplete,  list  of  OT  references,
MIZRAIM,  §  2/>).  Already  in  1898  (Ml' Alt,  1898,  i,  pp.  \.\/.t
note,  (3)  cp  Gl'i  269  f.  [1900])  this  scholar  pointed  out  the
possibility  of  the  view  that  Jeroboam  fled  not  to  Egypt  but  to
Musri,  and  in  1899  (JQR,  July,  see  especially  558-560,  and  cp
JEROBOAM,  1)  Cheyne  discussed  at  length  and  in  their  connec
tion  the  references  to  QH5H3  in  the  accounts  of  Solomon  and
Jeroboam.  In  1902  (A".  J  7'(3)  243,  cp  GI  1  160)  Winckler  re
affirmed  the  view  of  C.  Niebuhr  that  Shishak  conquered  N.
Israel  for  Jeroboam,  adding  that  even  if  Jeroboam  took  refuge
in  Musri,  not  in  Egypt,  it  was  natural  for  a  Pharaoh  to
favour  the  plans  of  Jeroboam  on  the  principle  divide  ct  imf>era.
He  remarks,  however,  that  Egyptian  supremacy  in  Palestine
did  not  last  long  ;  the  mutual  enmity  of  Israel  and  Judah  drove
them  into  the  arms  of  their  stronger  neighbours,  Tyre  and
Damascus.  He  still  holds  that  'Shishak 'in  i  1C.  1140  is  an
interpolation  (so  also  Che.  JQR,  I.e.).  Unfortunately  there
are  four  not  altogether  insignificant  objections  to  this  view.

1.  There  is  much  evidence  in  the  OT  for  the  view  that  N.
Arabian  potentates  were  constantly  interfering  in  the  affairs  of
Palestine  in  the  regal  period,  whilst  most  probably there  is  no
evidence  (cp  SOLOMON,  g  5  ff.)  that  Egypt  even  occasionally
interfered,  until  we  come  to  the  time  of  Neco  and  Apries,  and
even  in  the  case  of  these  kings  there  is  room  for  doubt  whether
the  Hebrew  editor  has  not  fallen  into  misunderstandings.

2.  If 'king  of  Q'lsD*  means  'king  of  Misrim'  in  i  K.  1140,
the  presumption  is  that  it  has  the  same  meaning  in  i  K.  1425  '.
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  invasion  of  Jutlah  there  referred
to  has  some  connection  with  the  plot  which  Jeroboam  hatched
in  Misrim  during  his  sojourn  there.

3.  The  fortresses built by Rehoboam, according  to  2  Ch.
11  5-10, were most probably intended  to  guard  against  a  N.
Arabian  invasion  (see  RKHOIIOAM).

4.  From  a  text-critical  point  of  view  it  is  difficult to  doubt
that  pgr»j?(MT)  and  n'pflB'  (® <rou<raicei/x)  are  corruptions  of
en3  and  C'C'IS  respectively. They  belong  to  well-ascertained
types  of  textual  corruption  (cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Is.  6620  Zech.  14  15
where  o'D  comes  from  013,  and  see  SHESHACH,  SHASHAK). In
2  Ch.  1^3  ('the Luhim, the  Sukkiim,  and  the  Cushites ')  the
second  of  the  three  ethnics  is  no  ethnic  at  all  (but  cp  SL'KKIIM)  ;
D'^13  w-is  written  the  first  time  C"B>D  (cp  Am.  9  7). C'311?  should
be  C'T^b — '•''•i  probably  0"lj;Sj  (the  people  of  the  southern  Gilead
[Jer.  822  and  often]. We  may,  therefore,  hold  that,  whether  or
no  Shoshenk I.  really  invaded Palestine, the  event  which  is
recorded in i K.  1425 an(l 2  Ch.  1229-12 is a N. Arabian
invasion, such as is  referred to in  2  Ch.  14  9. Shishak  and
ffov^aKfifi.  both  represent  '^13  'Cushi,'  a  name  such as  might
appropriately  be  given  to  a  king  of  MUrim. It  is  just  possible
that  the  redactor  had  heard  of  an  Egyptian  invasion  by  Shoshenk
(cp  PHARAOH,  §  2  [5]);  but  no  stress  can  safely  be  laid  upon
this-  W.  M.  M.  §  I/ ; T.  K.  C. §  3.

SHITRAI  (nipl?  Kt.,  »B-1B>  Kr.  ;  A.CARTAIC  [B],
CATp&i  [AL],  Pesh.  follows  Kr.),  a  Sharonite,  superin
tendent  of  Solomon's  herds  in  Sharon  ;  iCh.  2729.  Kr.
'Shirtai'  is  probably  right  ;  the  name  (like  SHAPH AT,
which  follows)  comes  from  713-1*,  '  Zarephathite.'

T.  K.  c.

SHITTAH-TREE  (nt3K> ;  nyloc  [Sym.  ACTION
5yAON,  Theod.  AKANOA],  Is.  41i9t),  RV  'acacia-tree,'
and  Shittim  wood,  R  V  '  acacia  wood '  (D*pp>  ^V,  5yAA
ACHTTTA.  Ex.  2~><;iG  and  often,  Dt.  Ids).  Originally
Unfah;  borrowed  from  Ar.  sant ;  Egypt,  fnat  (perhaps
sond't]  '  may  very  possibly  be  also  a  loan  -  word '
(Erman,  7.DMG,  1892,  p.  120)  Mentioned  in  Is.,
I.e. ,  between  the  cedar  and  the  myrtle  in  a  list  of  choice
trees  (see  Jerome's  comment),  and  used,  according  to  Dt.

1  Enumerated  by  Wiedemann,  GA  550.
4487


SHOA

(but  interpolation  is  probable)  in  the  construction  of
the  ark,  to  which  P  in  Ex.  adds  staves,  boards,  bars,
table,  pillars,  altars  in  the  tabernacle.  It  is  perhaps
too  much  to  say  with  Tristram  that  the  Acacia  seydl
must  be  meant.  It  is  true  '  the  timber  [of  that  tree]  is
very  hard  and  close-grained,  and  admirably  adapted  for
fine  cabinet  work '  (NHD  39).  But  Tristram's  remark
that  this  is  '  the  species  of  Acacia  found '  in  the  Arabian
it  is  not  borne  out  by  Doughty  who  writes  thus
'  (Ar.  Des.'29i):

'  The  eyes  of  the  Aarab  distinguish  four  kinds  of  the  desert
thorns  ;  ttlh  (the  gum-acacia),  sdminara,  stllima,  and  sii'ila  ;
the  leaves  of  them  all  are  like  [i.e.,  small  and  pinnate),  but  the
growth  is  diverse.  The  desert  smiths  cut  /^///-timber  for  their
wood  work,  it  is  heavy  and  tough  ;  the  other  kinds  are  too
brittle  to  serve  them.'  Elsewhere  (-'678)  he  states  that  the  tflh-
timber  is  used  for  shipbuilding  on  the  Arabian  Ked  Sea  coast.
It  must  be  difficult  to  those  who  are  not  'Aarab  '  to  distinguish
the  /<///*  (tulli)  from  the  scyal,  and  both  from  the  sant.

Several  species  of  acacia,  including  the  seyal  and  the
sant,  are  found,  says  Tristram,  in  the  Holy  Land
to-day  ;  probably  all  bore  the  same  Heb.  name  Sit/ah
— i.e.,  the  'prickly'  or  'thorny  tree'  (Theod.  faavOa).

The  sant  (Acacia  vera,  Mimosa  Nilotica)  grows  both
in  Lower  and  in  Upper  Egypt,  as  Hasselquist  long  ago
stated  (Travels,  250).  Robinson  found  it  in  Palestine
in  the  western  part  of  the  Wady  es-Sant,  where  perhaps
formerly  it  was  more  abundant,  since  it  has  given
its  name  to  the  Wady.  The  seydl  too  is  abundant
not  only  in  Arabia  (though  less  so,  doubtless,  than
formerly),  but  also  near  En-gedi,  where  these  trees  form
a  characteristic  feature  of  the  landscape.

'  They  are  trees  of  middle  height,  gnarled,  with  conspicuous
branches,  which  form  a  head  like  a  parasol,  covered  with  light,
elegant,  and  beautifully  green  leaves.  The  gum-arabic  exudes
from  them  in  the  autumn,  at  the  base  of  the  trunk,  between  the
crevices  of  the  bark,  and  coagulates  in  'tears'  as  large  as  a
hazel-nut,  of  a  pale  yellow  colour,  and  almost  transparent'
(Lortet,  La  Syrie  d'aujoitrifhui,  in).

The  golden-headed  tufts  of  blossom  are  much  admired
(Tristram,  Land  of  Israel,  489).  The  seyal  is  •  less
dependent  on  moisture  than  the  palm,  though  certainly
its  finest  specimens  are  found  near  springs'  (E.  H.
Palmer,  Sinai,  39).  All  these  trees  have  painful  thorns  ;
'  happy  I  was,  in  those  often  adventures  of  night  travel
ling  in  Arabia,  never  to  have  hurt  an  eye'  (Doughty,
Ar.  Des.  2495).  The  species  to  which  they  belong
includes  more  than  400  varieties,  found  in  the  dry,  hot
regions  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Australia  (Delitzsch,  in
Riehm,  //irZ?l66).  See  also  ABEL-SHITTIM  ;  BF.TH-
SHITTAH  ;  ELAII,  VALLEY  OF  ;  MULBERRY-TREES.

T.  K.  c.

SHITTIM  (DWJ1),  Xu.  25 1,  etc.  See  ABEL-
SHITTIM  ;  ELAH,  VALLEY  OF,  col.  1253.

SHIZA  (NT'p' ;  possibly  a  battered  clan-name  ;  but
cp  NTJJ',  the  name  of  a  Palmvrene  family  [Mordtmann,
A'eiie  Beitrage  stir  Kitnde  Palmyras,  Munich,  1875,
no.  55]),  father  of  AuiNA  [</.r.].  i  Ch.  11  42  (cAIZA  [B],

cezA[N],  cexA[A],  CIZAI  [L]).

SHOA  (lttC> ;  coye  [BQ],  coyA  [A]  ;  Aq.  rtpav-
vov  ;  Vulg.  tyrannos ;  Pesh.  reads  lud],  the  name  of
a  people,  mentioned  beside  Koa,  whose  seats  were  not
far  from  Babylonia  (Ezek.  2823).  Delitzsch  identifies  it
with  Sutu,  which  occurs  often  in  the  cuneiform  inscrip
tions  beside  Kutu  (see  KOA).  A  shorter  and  more
original  form  is  Su,  whence  the  Hebrew  form  Shoa*.
The  country  of  the  Su  or  Sutu  lay  on  the  Tigris,  and
extended  as  far  as  the  southern  declivities  of  the  Medo-
Elamite  mountains  (Del.  Par.  235).  On  the  dangers
to  which  Babylonia  was  exposed  from  the  incursions  of
the  Sutu,  see  Sargon's  Khors.  inscription,  1 135 /  (A'ff
273).  Ezekiel's  list  of  names,  however,  has  to  be
criticised  before  we  can  venture  on  identifications.  How
can  '  all  the  Assyrians '  be  said  to  accompany  the  Sutu
and  the  Kutu?  PEKOD  (y.v.)  gives  the  key.  The
three  names  are — Rehoboth,  Ishmael  [5,11?],  and  Jerah-
meel ;  and  the  '  b'ne  Asshur '  are  the  people  of  Ashhur
(almost  =  Jerahmeel).  See  Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  c.

4488


SHOBAB

SHOBAB  Pill1',  cooB&B,  as  if  '  backsliding,1  but  see
below),  i.  One  of  the  sons  of  DAVID  [§  i  a,  n.  2,  §
ii,  n.]  (2  S.5i4:  ffupadav  [A],  ie<r<7e/3ac  [L]  ;  iCh.  85:
<rw£a;'  [13];  144:  iffofioa/j.  [B],  <rw/3r?/3  [L]).  SHARAR
in  28.2833^  should  perhaps  be  Shobab  ;  cp  HARAR-
ITE,  3.

2.  A  descendant  of  Caleb  and  Azubah  (iCh.  2i8:
<a<roi//3  [B],  <rou/3a/3  [L]).

The  names  of  David's  sons  evidently  spring  from  ethnics.
te<rcre/3ai/  and  icro^oa/x  point  to  ^v^B"  —  ''•<?•,  Sxi'DB",  '  Ishmael'
(cp  some  of  (S's  readings  under  ISHBAAL,  JASHOBEAM).  This
explanation  suits  both  i  and  2.  Cp  Crit.  Bih.  en  Q'321C'>  Jer-
506.  The  theories  suggested  under  AZUBAH  refer,  on  the  whole,
to  AIT.  T.  K  C

SHOBACH  CSpiB*),  captain  of  the  army  of  Hadad-
ezer  who  was  defeated  and  slain  by  David  at  Helam
(28.1016-18:  co>BAK[BA],  [<ra/3.  Au.  18],  cABee  [L]).
His  name  appears  in  i  Ch.  19i6-i8  as  SHOPHACH  (-B'I»
<ru}(pap,  (ra<t>a.O  [B],  ecr<a<pap  [X*],  -a%  [Nc-a?],  ffU(pax,
crw/3ax  [A],  ffufiaK  [L]).

If  Haclad-ezer  was  really  king  of  Musur,  and  not  of  Zoba  (see
ZOBA),  '  Helam  '  (nV  n,  CN^'n)  w'"  ^e  a  corruption  of  Jerahme'el
7NCnY),  and  '  Shobach  '  ("pits')  connected  with  n3U>\  ISHBAH.
Cp  SHOBEK.  'T-  K  C-

SHOBAI  ('3E>  ;  ABAOY,  c^Bei  [B],  ccoBAi,  C^BAI
[A  andN  in  Neh.],  cooBiki  [I-]).  A  family  of  NKTHINIM
[/?.v.~\  in  the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  EZRA  ii.  ,  §  9),
Ezra242  Neh.  ?45  =  iEsd.528;  AV  SAMI,  RV  SABI
(o-a/3et  [A],  (TWjScu  [L],  B  om.  ,  unless  rw/3eis  represents
this  name).  If  the  Nethinim  are  Ethanite  families  (see
SOLOMON'S  SERVANTS),  -n^  will  come  from  ^y  (as
often  from  ^KDB").  It  was  an  Ishmaelite—  i.e.  Jerah-
meelite  —  family.  Cp.  SHOBI.  T.  K.  c.


SHOBAL  pl'lC?,  probably  related  to  Ishmael,  cp
Ashbel,  Ishbaal  ;  hardly  'young  lion,'  as  WRS  Journ.
Phil.  99o  [see  Gray,  HPN  109],  co)B<\A  [BADEL]),  b.
Seir,  a  Horite  (Gen.  86202329  [cra>/3ap  E]  i  Ch.  13840  ;
COyB&A  [L  in  Ch.]).  Another  genealogical  scheme
(cp  GENEALOGIES  i.  ,  §  5)  represents  him  as  son  of
Hur  (which,  as  it  happens,  may  be  shortened  from
Ashhur[ite]  or  from  Jerahmeelfite]),  and  of  Calebite
origin  (i  Ch.  250,  <rw/9a[/>]  [BL]),  and  since  the  name
'Caleb'  may  also  plausibly  be  traced  to  'Jerahmeel,'
and  Judah  was  represented  by  legend  (see  JLTDAH,  §  3)
as  partly  Jerahmeelite,  it  is  natural  to  find  Shobal
appearing  also  as  a  son  of  Judah  (i  Ch.  4i,  ffov/3a\
[BA]).  The  name  Shobal  is  also  perhaps  to  be
identified  with  SHUBAEL  [q.v.'].  Turning  to  i  Ch.  252
(<7w/3a[L]),  we  find  that  whilst  one  of  Shobal's  sons
(Haroeh)  appears  at  first  sight  to  bear  a  personal  name,
all  the  rest  bear  gentilic  names.  The  presumption  is
that  Haroeh  also  is  gentilic,  and  when  we  see  the  name
under  the  form  Reaiah  (4i)  we  cannot  doubt  that  it
is  a  shortened  form  of  'Jerahmeel.'  This  Haroeh,  or
(better)  Reaiah,  is  said  to  be  the  'father*  of  Kirjath-
jearim,  and  there  is  now  plausible  historical  evidence
for  the  view  that  Kirjath-jearim  is  a  corruption  of
Kirjath-jerahmeel  (that  is  to  say,  the  place  was  origin
ally  a  Jerahmeelite  settlement).  To  this  place  four
families  are  assigned  (253).  Their  names,  however,
have  come  down  to  us  in  a  corrupt  form.  They  appear
to  be  partly  parallel  to  the  three  '  families  '  of  Kirjath-
sepher  (i.e.,  Kirjath-sarephathlm),  given,  according
to  the  most  probable  reading,  in  255.  'Ithrites'  may
correspond  to  'Tirathites'  (where  an  old  tribal  name
Jether  [cp  ITHRITES]  may  be  suspected);  '  Shumath-
ites'  to  '  Shimeathites  '  (cp  Simeon);  '  Puthites  '  may
come  from  '  Perathites'  (Perath  or  Ephrath  was  an  im
portant  name  in  the  Negeb)  ;  '  Mishraites'  (like  '  Zorath-
ites'  ?)  reminds  us  of  the  '  Misrites,'  a  race  akin  to  the
Jerahmeelites  (see  Crit.  Bib.  ).1  The  MANAHETHITES
[q.  v.  ]  and  Zorites  or  Zorathites  (see  ZORAH)  are  reckoned
(if  the  text  is  correct)  partly  to  Shobal  and  partly  to

1  So  partly  Winckler  (Cf  2  186,  n. 3). That '  Puthites  '  =  a
clan  called  '  Peleth  '  is  improbable. See  PELETHITES.

4489


SHOES

Salma(/.^. ,  Bethlehem).  ©  found  w.  52  j:  unintelligible,
and  copied  slavishly,  but  Pesh.  ceases  at  v.  52  with  an
obscure  enumeration  of  the  sons  of  Shobal  in  Kirjath-
jearim,  thus  omitting  the  sons  of  Salma  [v.  54]  and  the
notice  of  the  Kenites  [v.  55t>].  The  latter  notice  is  enig
matical.  We  are  perhaps  meant  to  trace  a  connection
between  the  Kenites  and  '  Salma'  (see  SALMAH,  2).  It
may  be  added  that  Hammath  (so  RV,  following  MT)
is  very  possibly  miswritten  for  fcys,  Maachath  (but  cp
HEMATH).  T.  K.  c.

SHOBEK  (pliB>;  ccoBHK  [BKA],  ccoBeip  [L]),
signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  EZRA  i. ,  §  7);  Neh.
10  24  [25].  Cp  SHOBACH.

SHOBI  COb',  see  on  SHOBAI),  son  of  Nahash,  of
Rabbath-ammon,  who  brought  supplies  to  David  at
Mahanaim  (28.1727:  oyecBei  [BA],  cecbeei  L^]  ;
Pesh.  reads  '  Abishai '  [which  is  a  corruption  of
'  Ishmael '],  cp  ZERUIAH).  The  combination  of  this
enigmatical  member  of  the  Ammonite  royal  family
with  a  Machir,  whose  real  existence  is  certainly  not
proved  by  the  reference  in  2  S.  94/. ,  and  an  old
Gileadite  who  bears  the  difficult  name  Barzillai,  and
whose  son  bears  the  equally  doubtful  name  Chimham,
and  both  of  whom  are  introduced  again  in  a  narrative
of  stronglyromantic  appearance,  suggests  critical  caution.
It  is  too  slight  a  remedy  to  omit  '  son  of  Nahash  '  as  an
incorrect  gloss  (We.  TBS  201  n. ).  The  verse  is  largely
made  up  of  corrupt  variants  and  glosses,  and  the  genuine
kernel  probably  is,  '  And  it  came  to  pass  .  .  .  that
Jerahmeel,  son  of  Jonathan,  the  Gilgalite,'  where
'  Jerahme'el '  corresponds  to  '  Shobi '  [Ishmael  ;  see
below],  Machir  to  '[son  of]  Ammiel,'  'Jonathan'  to
'Nahash,'  and  'Gilgalite'  to  'Gileadite.'  The  words
'  Rabbath  of  the  b'ne  Ammon '  are  a  corruption  of
'  Rehoboth-jerahmeel.'  See,  further,  MEPHIBOSHETH,
NAHASH,  ROGELIM.  But  cp  AMMON,  §  4  (end),
and  HPSm.,  ad  loc.,  for  attempts  to  explain  MT.

S.  A.  Cook  (AJSL  16  164./T  [1900]  proposes  to  read  ny\  for
'atfl,  and  to  omit  p  as  a  later  insertion  consequent  on  the  corrupt
reading  ('and  Nahash,  etc.,  brought').  It  is  better  from  our
present  point  of  view  to  read  'jJOt?  NT!  !  NIT1  easily  fell  out
before  Sjojy,  which  form,  being  intermediate  between  »2e>  and
l?J<yCE''>  may  once  have  taken  the  place  of  >ac'-

T.  K.  C.

SHOCHO  (RV  Soco),  2Ch.28i8;  SHOCHOH  (RV
Socoh)  i  8.17 1,  and  SHOCO  (RV  Soco)  sCh.ll/.
See  SOCOH.

SHOES.  Under  this  heading  it  will  be  convenient
to  take  note  of  all  coverings  for  the  feet  whether  sandals,

i T^*^«J j.- shoes,  or  boots,  so  far  as  they  were
1.  Introduction.  ,

known  among  the  early  Hebrews.

This  treatment  is  in  fact  necessary  on  account  of  the  ill-defined
use  of  the  various  terms  to  denote  coverings  of  this  nature.  The
term  '  sandal '  is  usually  applied  to  a  foot-covering  consisting
simply  of  a  sole  bound  on  with  thongs,  but  it  was  also  tied  on,
and  so  the  word  is  roughly  used  by  ©  to  denote  the  >ui'at(7y:,  see
§  3),  the  ordinary  Hebrew  term.  The  Gk.  viroSrj/na  (lit.,  'that
which  is  bound  under  [the  foot]')  originally  denoted  a  sandal ;
but  it  came  to  be  applied  to  the  Roman  calceus  (a  shoe  covering
the  whole  foot),  and  is  used  by  Josephus  (1JJ  vi.  1  8)  of  the  caligj.
(the. thick  shoe,  studded  with  nails,  worn  by  Roman  soldiers).^

Coverings  for  the  feet  have  not  always  formed  a
regular  part  of  the  clothing  of  the  Oriental.  Primarily,
of  course,  everything  depended  upon  the  climate  and
the  nature  of  the  country.  Upon  the  Assyrian  monu
ments  the  warriors  are  not  unfrequently  barefooted,  and
many  of  the  royal  statues  are  totally  devoid  of  any
covering  for  the  foot.  In  Egypt  sandals  were  not  in
use  before  the  fifth  dynasty,  their  introduction  was
gradual,  and  their  popularity  a  work  of  time  ;  '  they
were,  when  off  the  feet,  sometimes  carried  by  an
attendant,  showing  that  they  were  not  always  worn '
(Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.l^b  n. ).

1  Examples  of  such  extensions  of  usage  could  be  easily  multi
plied  (e.g;,  Talm.  xpiQ,  boot;  'DplCi  breeches).  A  shoe  corre
sponding  with  the  caliga  is  evidently  referred  to  in  S/iaM.  600,
In  Syr.,  nald  and  its  denominative  are  used  of  horse-shoes.

4490


SHOES

Examples  of  the  ordinary  sandals  abound  (for  Egypt,
see op. cit. 2, figs. 443  f. ), and are represented
upon the oldest monuments depict


ing inhabitants of Sardinia (WMM
.-Is.  u.  Eur.  374),  Cilicia  (ib.  340 /. ),


2.  Illustrations

from  the

monuments.  w,.sl,.ni  Asi;l  NImor  (^  364/)i  etc.
They  vary  from  a  mere  sole  bound  with  a  thong,  to
elegant  and  elaborate  shoes  of  the  richest  ornamenta
tion,  and  are  variously  made  of  such  materials  as  palm-
leaves,  and  papyrus  stalks  (Egypt),  linen  (Phoenicia),
and  leather  (Assyria,  etc).1

In  Assyria  the  simplest  and  most  common  variety
consists  of  a  sole  with  back  and  sides  bound  to  the  foot
by  two  bands  over  the  instep  (see  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art
in  Chald. ,  etc. ,  1;6),  at  times  a  third  band  crosses  the
toes,  and  is,  again,  sometimes  connected  with  the  straps
over  the  instep.-  In  a  painting  on  stucco  from  Nimrud
(op.  fit. ,  2,  pi.  xiv. ),  the  sandals  are  coloured  black,  the
straps  yellow.  A  more  serviceable  and  not  uncommon
variety  is  seen  to  advantage  in  the  foot-gear  of  Asur-bani-
pal's  followers  (op.  cit.,  1145,  2,  opp.  p.  138).  Over  a
kind  of  tight-fitting  bandage  enveloping  the  leg  is  a  boot
reaching  mid-way  up  the  back  of  the  calf,  the  uppers
being  connected  by  straps.  Similar  straps  are  interlaced
from  the  top  of  the  boot  (top-lacings  ?)  and  appear  to  be
held  up  by  a  garter  worn  just  below  the  knee.3  A  third
important  variety  is  seen  in  the  turned-up  boot,  a  charac
teristic  feature  of  the  Hittites  (cp  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art  in
Judira,  2,  fig.  282,  and  passim],  a  good  example  of
which  is  seen  in  the  representation  of  one  of  Asur-nasir-
pal's  vassals  at  Nimrud  (Art  in  Ass.  2,  fig.  64).  Finally,
from  the  Egyptian  monuments,  we  perceive  that  the
Bedouins  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  customarily  went  bare
footed  (as  is  common  at  the  present  day,  see  Doughty,
Ar.  Des.  1224)  ;  on  the  occasion  of  long  journeys,  how
ever,  they  appear  to  have  worn  a  sandal  of  black  leather,
the  females,  on  the  other  hand,  being  depicted  with  a
sort  of  boot,  reaching  to  the  ankle,  of  red  leather  with  a
white  border.

From  a  consideration  of  these  circumstances  and  our
knowledge  of  the  statues  of  the  earliest  Hebrews,  we  may
suspect  that  they,  too,  at  first,  were  unaccustomed  to
wear  shoes  save  in  travelling  (cp  Ex.  12  n  Dt.  29s  Josh.
9=,  13), 4  although  the  fact  that,  in  later  times,  to  go  bare
footed  (i.e. ,  to  revert  to  the  older  practice)  was  looked
upon  as  a  deprivation  and  as  a  manifestation  of  griet
(Is.  202-4  E/.ek.  24  17  23,  cp  2  S.  15  30)  shows  that  the
custom  of  wearing  shoes  soon  became  firmly  established.

Shoes  or  sandals  are  frequently  mentioned.

The  ordinary  term  is uii'al,  *?y_)  (v/to  confine,


3.  Heb.  and


shut  in).5  EV  '  shoe,'  but  RV  '  sandals  '  in  Cant.


Gk.  terms.  ~  i  [2],  kB  i;ro8>j/xaTa  frequently,  and  crar6aAia
in  josh.  85  Is. '202.  Both  occur  in  the  NT,
viro&rifj.aTa,  Mt.  3n  10  10  Mk.  1  7  etc.  (EV  'shoes'),  and  trav-
SaAia,  Mk.  69  Acts  12 8  (EV  'sandals').  Vg.  has  both  calcea-
menta.  and  sandalia.  In  the  Mishna  the  term  for  a  shoemaker
is  I^IJD  li'S'T  I  the  word  '  sandal '  had  become  naturalised.  The
strap  by  which  the  sandal  is  bound  under  the  foot  is  called  in
biblical  Hebrew  serok,  TjilB'  (<r$<upu>Trjp  ;  and  !;oias,  with  which

cp  Mk.  1  7  etc.)  or  /////,  Bin  (frTapriov),  '  thread  '  (see,  for  both,
Gen.  14  23).  Once,  according  to  most  moderns  (e.?.,  Ges.-Buhl,
Siegfr.-Stade,  Di.-Kittel's  Js.,  Duhm,  Kautzsch),  who  follow

1  Leather  shoes  are  referred  to  in  Ezek.  16  10  (s'nn  ~S>"N1>  ®
vaKidov  ;  see  BADGKKS'  SKINS  [5]).

-  One  is  reminded  of  the  Roman  solcee  where  the  thong  passes
between  the  great  and  the  second  toe  and  is  fastened  to  another,
the  ligula.

3  Especially  curious  are  the  swathes  and  bandages  covering
the  foot  of  Marduk-nudin-ahe  (op.  cit.,  2,  fig.  43). At  the  present
day  the  shepherds  of  Palestine  wear  rough  simple  shoes  (cp
Conder,  Tentwork,  2  281)  with  leather  gaiters  covering  the  calf
of  the  leg,  on  account  of  the  rocks  and  thorns  among  which  they
climb. The  miselwth  (ninsO,  iS.  176, 'greaves')  of  Goliath
may  have  been  similar  ;  see  GREAVES.

4  Josh.  9  5  affords  the  interesting  phrase
'shoes,  worn  out,  and  patched.'

5  ntin'al, ^:D,Dt.  33  25  AV. RVmg.  'shoes '(so©)  is  properly
'bars '  (RV,  Dr.,  Steuernagel,  etc.),  cp  jiian'ftl, 7lJ/'?~,  Neh.  3  3,
Cant.  5  5.

4491


SHOES

Kimhi,  there  is  mention  of  the  military  '  boot.'  This  is  in  Is.
'•'  5  (4)  where  RV»'iI.  offers  the  reading,  '  for  every  boot  of  the
booted  warrior,"  etc.  This  view  of  the  meaning  is  supported
by  a  reference  to  Ass.,1  Syr.,  and  Eth.  parallels.  It  is  unknown,
however,  to  the  old  exegetical  tradition,  which,  so  far  as  it  pre-
supposes  ]1ND  (or  some  word  like  it),  supports  the  rendering
'tumult1  (as  if  p«r) ;  see  Vg.,  Pesh.,  Sym.,  also  Rashi,  Ibn
Ezra,  AV  ('battle'),  one  pait  of  which  probably  supports  the
rendering  'armour,'  the  other  'tumult.'  [©'s  iratrav  o-roArjy
eiri(Tvvriyfi.fvrivS6\>a  possibly  represents  ycna  pDn  jDrrVs.  Vg.,
Pesh.,  Sym.,  also  Rashi,  and  Ibn  Ezra  explain  pxc1,  'tumult.']
AV  ('  battle ')  favours  the  latter  view ;  RV  the  former.2  Our
right  course  is  perhaps  to  compare  parallel  descriptions  of  the
abolition  of  war  elsewhere  (e.g.,  Ps.  409  [10]).  So  at  any  rate
Cheyne,  who  rejects  pxD  altogether,  and,  finding  other  improb
abilities  in  the  text  of  Is.  9  4  [5],  proposes  a  possible  reconstruction
(SBOT,  '  Isa.,'  I.e.).

There  are many  references  to  the  shoe  in  the OT

which  have  a  close  relation  to  important  Hebrew  customs,

„  ,  but  the  Hebrew  and  even  the  Greek  text

sometimes  requires  close  preliminary  in-
customs—


references
to  the  shoe.


vestigation. (a)  We  notice  first  the  com
mand  to  Moses  to  draw  off  his  shoes3  when


on  holy  ground  (Ex.  85,  cp  12 n  Josh.
5 15).  This  supplies  a  trace  of  a  primitive  taboo,  to  which
those  who  assisted  at  religious  festivals,  especially  in  the
sacred  dance  or  procession  (cp  DANCE,  §§  2-6),  were
subject.4  Tunics  and  the  like  were  washed  to  avoid
this  taboo.  In  Egypt,  too,  we  find  that  the  priests
frequently  took  off  their  sandals  when  officiating  in  the
temple.  On  the  other  hand,  a  worshipper  such  as  Asur-
nasir-pal  offers  a  libation  still  wearing  them  (Perrot-
Chipiez,  Art  in  Chald.,  etc.,  2  fig.  113).  The  Talmud
says  (  Ytbamoth,  6  b]  that  no  one  was  allowed  to  approach
the  temple  with  staff,  shoes,  purse,  or  dirt  on  the  feet.5

(6)  Next,  we  have  to  deal  with  an  obscure  reference
in  Ps.  608  [10]  1089  [10].  We  know  from  Ruth  4 7  (see
below)  that  drawing  off  the  shoe  meant  giving  up  a  legal
right.  May  we  assume  from  Ps.  I.e. ,  that  casting  a
shoe  on  a  piece  of  land  was  the  sign  of  taking  possession
of  it  ?  Rosenmiiller  (see  Delitzsch's  commentary)  quotes
an  Abyssinian  custom  of  this  sort ;  Delitzsch  and  Haethgen
follow  him.  Others  (see  RVm£-)  think  that  Edom  is  here
represented  as  a  slave  to  whom  the  shoe  is  cast,  that  he
may  carry  it.6  But  this  is  forced  ;  and  the  reference  to
Moab  as  a  '  washpot '  being  at  least  equally  strange,  it
may  be  necessary  to  suppose  corruption  of  the  text  (see
Che.  Psalms^}.  The  idiom  which  the  psalmist  would
have  used,  had  he  wished  to  describe  the  humiliation
of  a  conquered  country,  would  have  been  '  upon  Edom
will  I  place  my  feet,'  or  the  like  (cp  Josh.  1024).  Wilkin
son  (2326)  gives  a  picture  of  a  captive  in  the  lining  of
an  Egyptian  sandal,  depicting  the  humiliating  condition
considered  suited  to  the  enemies  of  the  country.

(c)  In  the  MT  of  Am.  26  and  86  a  '  pair  of  sandals,'
which,  made  in  a  few  minutes,  would  be  dear  at  a  penny,
would  seem  to  be  proverbial  for  something  of  small
value.7  But  the  parallel  clause  has  '  for  money' ;  D'!?JfJ
may  not  be  the  correct  reading.

It  is  true  that  it  is  supported  by  i  S.  12  3  ©  and  Ecclus.  46  19^
<ES  Lat.,  which  agree  in  representing  Samuel  as  too  honourable
to  accept  even  uTrofi^ara  (sandals)  as  a  bribe.  But  no  doubt

1  On  Ass.  senu,  'shoe '(the  ideogram  means 'road-leather '),
see  Del.  Ass.  IfH'B,  s.v.,  and  Haupt  on  '  Isa.'  I.e.,  in  SBOT,
'Isa.' (Heb.),  88.  i

2  Hitzig  supports  the  rendering  '  armour '  by  the  Syr.  M-» "
'weapon.'

3  The  verb  used  is  Vr3,  elsewhere  rhy  in  Ruth  4  -j/.,  and  f^n
in  Dt.  25g  Is.  202.

4  See  WRS  Kel.  Sew.®  453:  We.  Heid.V*  no.

5  Analogies  from  Crete  and  Rhodes  are  cited  by  Frazer,  Paus.
5  202. Conversely,  on  the  occasion  of  ceremonial  sacrifices  the
worshippers  or  initiated  members  are  shod  in  slippers  made  of
the  skin  of  the  victim. W.  R.  Smith  (Kel.  Sent.W  438)  cites
such  a  case  from  a  late  Syrian  rite,  and  Greek  and  Roman
analogies  are  quoted  by  Frazer,  I.e. It  is  somewhat  remarkable
that  the  Levitical  law  is  silent  on  the  matter  of  the  priest's  shoes,
and  interesting  also  is  the  silence  of  the  Roman rubrics.

6  So  Hupf.,  Riehm. Cp  Mt.  3n. In  Egyptian  paintings
servants  are  represented  performing  this  menial  duty.

7  So  Us'  (lorum  so/etf),  in  the  Arabic  poets  (G.  Jacob,  Alt-
arab.  Parallelen,  17)  ;  cp  also  Goldziher,  ZA  7  296^  (1892).

4492


SHOES

D'Sl'3  (which  these  versions  prtaippose,  and  which  the  Heb.  text
of  Ecclus.  actually  has)  is  a  corruption  of  Cl ?ty  (Mic.  7  3),  which
must  have  been  the  original  reading  in  i  S.  124  [Che.].1

(d]  We  have  already  alluded  to Ruth  4  7  f.  (see  b).
'A  man  pulled  off  (r^e;)  his  shoe,'  we  read,  'and  gave
it  to  his  neighbour '  to  indicate  transference  of  rights.
Hoffmann  (ZATW3<)8)  explains  that  the  shoe,  being
part  of  the  seller's  attire,  was  passed  on  to  the  buyer  as
an attestation of  his right. Cp RUTH, and for an
Arabian  parallel,  references  in  TRADE,  §  82 e  2  (5).

(e)  Similarly,  in  the  ceremony  for  freeing  the  husband's
brother  from  the  duty  of  the  levirate  marriage  (Dt.  209)
his  shoe  was  removed  in  token  of  renunciation.2 So  in
a  Bedouin  divorce  the  husband  says  ; '  she  was  my  slipper
and  I  cast  her  off'  (WRS  Kins.  269). The  renuncia
tion  of  the  brother  was  considered  contemptible  ;  hence
the  woman  spat  in  his  face,  or,  as  the  Rabbis  explain,
in  his  presence. So,  too,  the  shoe  was  not  removed  by
the  brother  himself,  but  by  the  woman,  in  token  that  he
was  abandoning  a  privilege  as  well  as  a  duty. Note
the  phrase  in Dt.  25  10,  '  the  house  of  the  unsandalled
one'  (^jtfri  f'sn  rra). Cp  FAMILY,  KINSHIP.

(/)  Sandals  were  put  on  the  feet  of  the  prodigal  son
on  his  restoration  to  favour  (Lk.  1522).  It  would  seem,
then,  that  in  the  time  of  Jesus,  sandals  were  not  worn
by  the  lowest  class.  The  sandals  of  the  rich  could  no
doubt  be  sumptuous,  like  those  of  the  ladies  of  Egypt
(Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.  2336).  Cp  Cant.  7i,  Judith  104  16g.

[Having  considered  a  very  obscure  and  familiar  passage

of  a psalm  (608  [10])  and a not perfectly  satisfactory

5  Difficult  NT  phrase '"  a  Pr°Phecy  ( Is'  9 5  [4]),  we  now

references aPProach  a  still  more  sacred passage
which  is  repeated  under  slightly  different
forms  in  all  the  four  gospels. These  are  the  four  versions
of  the  Baptist's  words  : —

Mt.  3  ii,  He  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than  I,
whose  shoes  I  am  not  sufficient  (RVm^-)  to  bear.

Mk.  ly,  There  cometh  after  me  he  that  is  mightier
than  I,  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  sufficient
(RVmB-)  to  stoop  down  and  unloose.

Lk.  3i6,  There  cometh  he  that  is  mightier  than  I,  the
latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  sufficient  (RVm£-)  to
unloose.

Jn.  1 27,  He  that  cometh  after  me — the  latchet  of  whose 1
shoe  I  am  not  worthy  to  unloose.

The  difficulty  is  twofold. What  does '  bearing  the
shoes'  (TO.  VTrodrifj.aTa  ^aardffai)  mean?  and  how  came j
the  other  traditional  form  of  words  into  existence,  which
substitutes '  unloosing the latchet ' for '  bearing the
shoes ' ?

(i)  H.  Weiss  (1876)  explains  the  phrase  in  Mt.,  'carrying  the
sandals  after  him ' ;  so,  too,  Holtzmann,  who  describes  it  as  a
constant  duty  of  the  slave,  thus  contrasting  with  the  occasional
duty  of  unloosing  the  master  s  sandals  on  his  return  home.
There  seems,  however,  to  be  no  more  evidence  that  those  who
chose  (not  as  mourners)  to  walk  barefoot  had  their  sandals
carried  after  them  than  for  the  carrying  of  a  washpot  behind  a
king  when  lie  travelled  (see  above).  (2)  The  change  from  /3a<r-
Tcurat  to  AGam  is  ascribed  by  Nestle  (/'////.  Sacra,  ii)  and
Chajes  (Marleusstudien,  5)10  the  freedom  of  a  translator.  Ber-
tholet  (Meyer,.yt'.r«  flutters f>rachc,  120)  prefers  to  look  for  some
Semitic  word  which,  through  being  misunderstood,  could  be
rendered  in  two  different  ways.  He  thinks  that  Mk.  and  Lk.
give  the  right  rendering  of  pyo  hpVD^fi  which  Mt.,  not  in
excusably,  misunderstands.  Unfortunately,  as  Nestle  (I.e.)
remarks,  Spu'Q^  cannot  mean  '  to  unloose."

We  must  look  more  deeply  into  the  text  of  the  Baptist's
sermon  as  given  in  Mt.  It  is  largely  composed  of
phrases  which  occur  or  might  occur  in  the  OT,  and
w.  ii  12  are  parallelistic.  The  latter  consideration  is  of
special  importance.  '  He  that  cometh  after  me  is
mightier  than  I '  is  not  suitably  followed  by  the  words

1  Halevy  restores  DlW  in  Ecclus.  but  not  in  Sam.  This
further  step,  however,  is  clearly  necessary  (Che).  Cowley
and  Neubauer  (cp  Levi,  L ' Eccles,  1  120)  render '3  in  Ecclus.  'a
secret  gift.'  Thisjtiowever,  presupposes  MT  of  i  S.  12  4,  which,
as  Thenius  (KGH  'Sam.'!2')  rightly  saw,  is  incorrect.  The
argument  of  Lohr  (fCGH  '  Sam.'  (Sl)  seems  indecisive.

'  [For  a  similar  Ar.  usage  see  Goldziher,  Abhandl.  2.  Arab.
Phil.  147  (1896).]

4493


SHOSHANNIM

given  in  EV — '  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear1 ;
the  second  expression  ought  to  expand  and  amplify  the
first.  The  '  mighty  one  '  that  '  cometh  '  is  neither  God
(Is.  53 1/.)  nor  the  Messiah;  he  is  a  warrior,  and  we
do  not  expect  the  prophetic  narrator  to  condescend  to
mention  his  sandals.  Not  his  sandals  but  his  weapons
must  be  referred  to,  and  the  speaker  may  be  expected
to  say  that  he  is  not  mighty  enough  himself  to  wear,  or
to  bear,  the  warrior's  armour  ;  inro8-f]fj.ara  must  have
displaced  a  word  meaning  armour,  and  iKav6s  must
mean,  not  #£  toy  ('  worthy '),  but  'strong  enough.'  A
probable  remedy  at  once  suggests  itself.  The  passage
may  have  been  written  in  Hebrew,  and  O'Vw,  '  shoes,'
have  been  misread  for  trSs,1  'weapons.'  Read  -I^N
vSa  rmjwp  'flJBjJ ,  '  whose  weapons  I  am  too  puny  to  bear. '
The  passage  is  now  surely  worthier  of  the  second  Elijah,
who  did  in  fact  both  carry  and  wield  the  sword  of  the
Mighty  One. — T.  K.  c.]  i.  A.— s.  A.  C. — r.  K.  C.

SHOHAM  (Dnb>,  §  71  ;  IC[C]OAM  [BA],  ,ec-
C&M  [L]),  a  Levite,  b.  Merari  (iCh.  2427)t.  The
name  is  of  interest,  having  possibly  come  by  trans
position  of  letters  from  HE'D.  '  Moses.'  Cp  MOSES,  §  2.

T.  K.  c.

SHOMER.  i.  pr±:;  CCOMHR  [B],  pr  ^c  [A];
C€MMHp  [L];  the  name  appears  as  "1?X",  SHEMER
[g.v.~\  in  i  Ch.  734),  father  of  JEHOZABAD,  i  (2  K.  1222).
In  2  Ch.  24 26  the  form  is  n"TCe>,  SHIMKITH  (<ro/x<uw#
[B]  ;  crafj.apid  [A]  ;  cra/upa/uwtf  [L]).

2.  (npie'i  1DK> ;  <ra.ij.rip,  cre^t^p  [B],  ffu/j.rip  [AL]),  a
name  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHER  \_q.v. ,  §  4,  ii.],  i  Ch.
732.  In  v.  34  SHAMER,  RV  SHEMER  [g.v. ,  2]  (-er).

SHOPHACH  (^31^  i  Ch.  19i6-i8,  in  2  S.  10  16-18
SHOBACH.

SHOPHAN. See  ATROTH-SHOPHAN.

SHOSHANNIM;  SHOSHANNIM-EDUTH ;  SHU-
SHAN-EDUTH,  UPON  (D»3BteH?tf;  D»3L';l'4>K
JTny ;  Dill?  |L"-1K;'~;>1,') ;  phrases  found  in  the  respective
headings  of  Pss.  45  69  80  and  60  in  AV  ;  RV  for
'  upon '  gives  '  set  to '  and  in  mg.  renders  '  lilies, '
'lilies,  a  testimony,'  and  'the  lily  of  testimony.'  As
in  the  case  of  other  enigmatical  elements  of  psalm-
headings,  Shoshannim  and  Shoshannim  (or  Shushan)
Eduth  are  often  taken  to  be  the  catchwords  of  a  song,
to  the  air  of  which  the  psalm  which  followed  was  to  be
sung  (so  already  Ibn  Ezra).2  The  'testimony'  (i.e.,
the  law?)  might  be  compared  to  lilies.  Others  (e.g. ,
Thrupp)  think  of  a  musical  instrument  in  the  shape  of
a  lily,  or  (Rashi,  strangely)  with  six  strings,  while
others  (Griitz  ;  Haupt  in  'Pss.'  SBOT,  Eng. ,  p.  183)
render  the  phrase  'with  Susian  instruments,'  comparing
al  'aldmoth  =  '  with  Elamite  instruments'  (?)  in  the
headings  of  two  psalms  close  to  Ps.  45.  That  the
Susians  are  called  Susanchites  (?)  in  Ezra  4g,  may  not
be  decisive  against  this  view.  But  why  should  Susian
instruments  be  mentioned  as  well  as  Elamite?  A
similar  hypothesis  with  regard  to  Gittith  is  rejected  else
where  (GITTITH)  as  untenable,  and  our  experience  both
with  Gittith  and  with  other  strange  words  in  psalm-
headings  leads  us  to  suspect  textual  error,  v  and  n  were
easily  confounded  in  pronunciation,  and  letters  were
often  transposed  by  the  Scribes,  fc-ir,  G'jC'C'  may  be
regarded  as  corruptions  of  je^s,  C'Jtrs,  '  Cushan,'
'  Cushanites '  (cp  SHEMINITH).  EDUTH  must  also  be
a  corruption.  Possibly  rmy  has  sprung  out  of  pwvVjPi
'upon  (?)  Jeduthun.'  On  Teduthun,  see  PSALMS,  §  26
[10}

1  3  became  j,  and  y,  as  in  other  cases,  intruded.

2  In  Ps.  80,  however,  the  words  '  on  Shoshannim '  are  marked
off  from  what  follows  by  the  accent  Athnah.

4494


SHOULDER

&  g  ves,  inrfp  TUIV  aAAoiw#7j(TOjueVu)i'(C'3:f'C'),  or,  in  Ps.  60,  TOCS
a\Aoi<o#r)crofi€Vois  en  (iiy,  Rom.  en),  in  Ps.  SO  adds  fnaprvpiov.
Aq.  eiri  roiy  Kpivois,  e-rrl  xpiviav,  yjrep  rii/  Kpiviav  fnap7vpia<;  ',
Symm.  iiircp  riav  ai'8iav,  inrtp  r.  a.  ^laprvpia ;  Theodot.  iurep
Twi'  Kpivwv ;  Jer.  />r0  /z;V  </«;'  (?«"')  coininotabuntur.  Cp  Ba.
//'r,  1882,  p.  631.  T.  K.  C.

SHOULDER.  The  words  are  (i)  V\"\\,  sfrod  ;  (2)
P)rD,  Mtheph;  (3)  DD£',  -&»&•»*  (cp  SHKCHF.M).  The
sacrificial  'shoulder'  of  Nu.  18 18  AV  becomes  in  RV
'  thigh  '  (plD').  Cp  SACRIFICE.

SHOVEL. The  words  are  : —

1.  y,  yd'  ( s/ny, to  sweep  together),  only  in  plur.
D'jT, utensils  for  cleaning  the  altar  (see  ALTAR,  §  9  ;
COOKING,  §  4),  Ex.273  883  Nu. 414  [all  P],  also  r  K.
74045  2  K.  25 14  2  Ch.  4  it  16  Jer.  52i8f.

2.  in',  ydthed, usually  'pin,' especially 'tent  pin'
(see  TENT); in Dt.  23 13  RVme-  for 'paddle'  of  EV  ;
plainly, from the context, an implement suitable  for
digging  with.

3.  nrP,  rdhath,  Is.  3024t. See  AGRICULTURE,  §  9.
SHRINE, i. The  rendering  suggested  by  RVm£-  in
Am.  5 26  for  |-1'3. See  CHIUN.

2.  et'SwXia [NV*, eiSuAa, AVa]  in i  Mace.  1 47 (in
plur.) is rendered  in  RV 'shrines  for idols,' in AV
'chapels  for  idols'; cp 2  Mace.  11 3 (AV 'chapels,'
RV  'sacred  places'); i  Mace.  1083  (idols'  temple),  Bel
10  ('  temple'). See  TEMPLE,  §  i.

3.  i/aos  (Acts  19  24). See  DIANA,  §  2.

SHRUBS  (D'rrl"),  Gen.  21 15. See  BUSH,  2.

SHUA  (MS?),  aCanaanite  (or  Kenizzite?),  Gen.  38
212  (AV  SHUAH  [iii.]),  whence  BATH-SHUA  (q.v.},  a
Canaanite  (or  Kenizzite?)  woman,  i  Ch.  23  ;  see
JUDAII,  §  2.

SHUA  (XtMt?),  a  name  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHER
(q.-\,  §  4  ii.  and  note — perh.  =SHUAL?  cp  <SBA),  i  Ch.
733t  (COOAA  [BA],  COY&IL])-

SHUAH  (niw*  ;  cu>Ye)'  son  °^  Abraham  by  Keturah
(Gen.  25  2  iCh._l3a:  ccoe  [B],  cpye  [L]).  Very
possibly  the  original  text  had  £'.13,  '  Cush'  (cp  Jokshan,
in  the  same  passage,  from  Cushan,  and  see  HUSHAM).
Upon  the  common  theory,  hosvever,  Shuah  is  identified
with  the  Suhu  of  the  Assyrians  (temp.  Asur-nasir-pal,
about  860  n.c. ),  the  name  of  a  land  situated  on
the  right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  between  the  mouths
of  the  Belih  and  Habor  (Del.  Par.  297 /. ,  Schr.  KGF
142  f. },  perhaps  represented  by  the  <ra.vr)  of  Ptol.  v.  19s
(Di.  on  Gen.  I.e.}.  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Dillmann,  and
Cheyne  (Job  and  Sol.  15)  connect  with  the  ethnic
SHUHITE  ('me',  o  <ravx£a]ftM'i  <rawx[e](njj,  ai>x)  applied
to  Job's  friend  BILDAD,  in  Job2n  (and  else
where).  But  when  the  old  story  of  Job,  which
came  down  in  a  very  fragmentary  form  to  post-
exilic  times  (see  JOB,  BOOK  OF,  §  4)  was  recast,  so
as  to  form  a  setting  for  a  theoretic  treatment  of  the
problem  of  the  suffering  righteous,  it  is  not  likely  that
the  Hebrew  artist  or  poet  brought  one  of  the  wise  men
(Job's  friends)  from  a  country  which  had  no  reputation
for  'wisdom.'  Besides,  '  Bildad '  reminds  us  forcibly
of  Bedad  (?=  Birdadda),  an  Edomite  name  (Gen.
36  35  ;  see  BEDAD).  Now  it  so  happens  that  in  i  K.  431
[5  n],  we  hear  of  certain  wise  men,  not  Israelites,  who
were  famous  in  Hebrew  legend  (see  HEMAN).  The  exact
reading  of  their  names  is  uncertain.  Possibly  '  Darda'  in
'  Calcol  and  Darda'  (jrmi  ^3^3)  is  a  corruption  of  -nSa.
If  so,  Bildad's  description  ought  to  be  '  the  Jerah-
meelite'  (son  of  Mahol  =  son  of  JERAHMEEL).  But
'  Cush  '  and  '  Jerahmeel '  are  practically  equivalent.
'  Shuhi '  may  easily  have  come  by  transposition  from
Hushi=rCushi  (cp  SHUHAM).  Otherwise  we  might
perhaps  venture  to  read  'the  Zarhite '  ('rnn).  Cp
EI.IHU.  T.  K.  c.

SHUAH  (Jin-Its')  i  Ch.  4  H,  AV,  RV  SHUHAH.

4495


SHULAMMITE, THE


SHUAH  (WB'),  Gen.  88212,  RV  SHUA  (i.).

SHUAL.  i.  fyfig}  H«  ;  [THN  or  T-  |-HN]
[BL,  missing  in  A]),  '  Land  of  Shual  '  is  the  name  of  the
district  in,  or  near,  which  OPHKAH  lay  (i  S.  13i7t).
Its  resemblance  to  HAZAR-SHUAL  [y.v.J  and  to  SHAA-
LLM  [<f.  i'.  ]  is  remarkable.  Cp  ASHER,  §  4  note,  also

JQR  11  1  10.  2.  (tyicr  ;  coyAA  [B],  COY<\A  [A],  -N
[L]),  a  name  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHKR  (q.  v.  ,  §  4,  ii.),
i  Ch.  7  36t-

It  should  be  noted  that  SHUAL  and  SHILSHAH  (y.v.)  occur  in
the  same  group  of  names,  just  as  in  i  8.^4  SHALISHAH  (?.&.)
occurs  close  to  SHAALIM  [g.v.].  Cp  also  'jiKt?',  SAUL.


SHUBAEL  Pg?tiP  I  °n  origin  of  name,  see  below  ;
COyBAHA  [BA],  -i  HA  [L]).  A  Levitical  name  given  to
a  descendant  of  Amram  b.  Kohath  b.  Levi  (i  Ch.  24  20,
iuj3.  [B])  ;  also  under  the  form  SHKUUKL  to  the  chief  of
the  sons  of  Gershom  b.  Moses  (i  Ch.  23x6,  VKUST).
'  ruler  over  the  treasuries'  (i  Ch.  2624,  *?ior,  iwjX  [B],
owj3tj;X  [L]).  Tg.  Chron.  identifies  Shebuel  with
JONATHAN  \_q.v.~\  b.  Gershon  b.  Moses  (Judg.  1830).
SHEBUEL  also  appears  as  a  son  of  Heman,  i  Ch.  264
(<roi'/3aT7\  [L]);  but  v.  20  returns  to  the  original  subael  (cp
23  16).

In  the  period  of  the  Chronicler  Shubael  may  perhaps  have
been  derived  from  ^'Z*,  '  to  return,'  and  ^K,  'God'  (cp  NAMES,
SS  31,  79,  ii-).  But  the  name  is  probably  very  old,  and  may  be
identified  with  SHOISAI.  [q.i>.  ],  a  name  borne  by  a  family  origin
ally  Calebite,  which  afterwards  became  merged  in  Judah  (for
parallels,  see  .GERSHOM,  HE.MAN,  KORAII).  The  further  possi
bility  must  be  admitted  that  7KlDr,  Shi-muel  (Samuel)  is  only
a  modification  of  7X13E',  Shcbuel,  and  therefore  of  Shobal
(cp  Jastrow,  JBL  19  102  [1900]).  In  i  S.  1  i  Samuel's
origin  is  traced  to  Jeroham  —  i.e.,  Jerahmeel.  In  i  Ch.  264
Shebuel  is  followed  by  Jerimoth  (  =  Jerahmeel  ?),  and  in  23  23  the
name  of  this  son  of  MUSH  I  [q.v.]  again  occurs.  T.  K.  C.

SHUHAH  (Jin-IE5),  brother  of  Chelub  (i  Ch.  4n  ;
AV  SHUAH,  COY&[L],  -f»«  [Vg.])  ;  <5BA  and  Pesh.  omit
his  name  and  give  after  Chelub  'father  of  Achsah,'  a
reading  which  Benzinger  (KHC)  favours.  But  Shuhah
may  be  identical  with  Hushah  (HC'-in),  v.  4  —  i.e.,
Cushah.


SHUHAM  (Dn-1C  ;  c&M[e]i  [BF],  cAMeiAn  [A],
C&M6  [L]),  and  the  family  of  the  Shuhamites('pn-1tJ'n,
AHMOC  o  CA/v\[e]i  [BAF],  A.  o  c^/v\e  [L],  A.  o
CAAAGlAHl  [A  in  v.  46])  exhaust  the  list  of  '  the  sons  of
Dan  after  their  families'  in  Nu.  2642^  =  Gen.  46  23,
HUSHIM  —  i.e.  ,  Cushim  (Che.);  cp  MICAH,  2,  on  a
theory  of  Danites  in  the  Negeb.  See  also  DAN,  §  9.

SHUHITE  (TVIt?),  Job  2  n. See  SHUAH.


SHULAMMITE,  THE  (JVSTIB'PI),  i.e.,  the  woman
ofShulem,1  the  designation  of  the  bride  in  Cant.  613
[7 1].  The  true  form,  however,  is  probably  rc&msn,  '  the
Shunammite,'  which  should  possibly  be  restored  for
Til  *DJ?  in  612,  and  for  cnuy  in  7?  (see  CANTICLES,
§  16 ;  JQR,  Oct.  1899,  p.  133).  Perhaps  Shulem
was  an  alternative  form  for  '  Shunem '  ;  cp  Bethel  —
mod.  Beitin,  Jezreel  =  mod.  Zer'in,  and  see  Kampff-
meyer,  ZZ>/-'F1532,  also  the  statement  of  Eus.  and
Jer.  (SHUNEM).  Whether  the  poet  is  speaking  directly
of  the  historical  Shunammite  damsel  who  was  David's
'companion,'  or  simply  means  to  compliment  any
and  every  Jewish  woman  at  whose  wedding  festivities
Canticles  may  be  used,  is  disputed.  The  latter  view
(Budde's)  seems  the  more  probable  (see  CANTICLES,
§  6).  The  Shunammite  was  the  type  of  a  fair  woman
(i  K.  1  3  ;  cp  Cant.  18  5  9).  Budde  does  not,  how
ever,  completely  explain  why  this  type  was  selected.
Possibly  (though  this  is  no  part  of  Budde's  theory)  a
tradition  known  to  the  poet  stated  that  Solomon

1  Apart  from  the  article,  the  name  irO^lC'  might  be  a  proper
name.  Cp  'Salome'  and  nC'Sc'.  an  Aramaic  proper  name
(Ges.l1^)  ;  cp  Cook,  Aramaic  Glossary,  113).

4496


SHUMATHITE

actually  took  the  Shulammite  for  his  wife.  In  this
case,  we  may  venture  to  suppose  that  for  '  Naamah
the  Ammonitess'  (rnsjn,  i  K.  142131)  we  should  read
•  Naamah  the  Shunammite '  (jv23C:n).  '  Abishag '  ( i  K.
1315  2  17  21  f. ),  like  Abital,  is  no  real  name.  See
SOLOMON,  §  2,  near  end,  and  article  in  JQR,  referred
to  above.

(ES's  readings  are  aoiijiiafeiTi?  [B],  crovAa/LUTts  [NA,  and  most
cursives].  Vg.,  It.,  two  Onomastica  (OS  198 66  20441),  Procop.,
Theodoret,  favour  <rouAa/xtns ;  Philo  of  Carpasia,  strangely,
oSoAAa/u.iTi«.  The  older  and  more  original  (0  reading  is  that  ot
B  (Riedel,  Die  AusU-gitng  des  Hohenlicdes,  1899,  pp.  io5/).
Aq.  f v  cipr)i'euou(rf) ;  Sym.  TT\V  e(TKv\evfifi^v.

T.  K.  C.

SHUMATHITE  (*nO«:;),  i  Ch.2  53- See  SHOBAL.

SHUNAMMITE  (JVtM-ll?,  i  K.  1  3  I5  2  17  2  K.
4  12  25;  JV?33l';,  iK.  2ai/  2  K.  4  36).  Agentilic
(fem.),  applied  to  Abishag  and  to  the  hostess  of  Elisha,
both  women  of  SHUNEM  [</.£'.].

*P  in  Kings  invariably  has  <ru>fiai'[e]iTis,  crw^.at'i-n)?,  o-ovjuartTis,
or  crovjuai'iTTjs.  Cp  SHULAM.MITE,  and,  for  Eus.  and  Jer.  see

SHUNE.M.

SHUNEM  (D;W,  in  Josh.  coyN&N  [B],  -M  [A],
cyNHM  [L]);  in  i  S.  COOMAN  [BL],  T^NAMAN  [A];

in 2 K. COYAAAN [B], CU>M<\N [Bam«-  L], CI60NAM

[A*vid-],  CICOMAM  [A?];  on  Eus.  and  Jer.  see  below),  i.  A
place  in  Issachar,  grouped  with  Jezreel  and  Chesulloth
(Josh.  19  18),  and  mentioned  in  the  Egyptian  lists  among
the  places  in  Palestine  which  submitted  to  Thotmes  III.
and  Shoshenk  (RPW  646  ;  As.  u.  Eur.  170).  Shunem
must  be  the  mod.  S&lem,  which  is  a  small  village,
with  beautiful  fruit-  and  flower-gardens,  well  situated  on
the  SW.  slope  of  the  Neb!  Dahi  (Little  Hermon),  and
looking  over  the  whole  plain  as  far  as  Carniel.  Two
natives  of  Shunem  are  specially  mentioned — viz. ,
Abishag,  David's  'companion'  (i  K.  1  3  2i72i/i),
and  the  'great  woman'  who  entertained  Elisha  (2  K.
48^!);  many  add,  as  a  third,  the  'Shulammite'  of
Canticles.  We  also  learn  from  i  S.  28  4  that  the
'  Philistines,'  in  the  time  of  Saul,  pitched  their  tents
in  Shunem,  over  against  the  Israelites  on  Gilboa  (i  S.
28  4).  (On  Elisha's  miracle  at  Shunem  and  its  NT
parallel,  see  NAIX.)

2.  If  we  may  hold  that  the  scene  of  Saul's  last  struggle
with  the  Philistines,  and  also  that  of  Elisha's  prophetic
ministry,  have  been  mistaken  by  the  editor  or  editors
who  brought  the  texts  of  i  S.  28  and  2  K.  4  into  their
present  form,  there  was  a  second  Shunem  in  the  Negeb.
This  is,  of  course,  not  a  mere  isolated  theory,  but  a
part  of  a  general  theory  that  much  of  the  OT  has  been
recast,  on  the  basis  of  a  partly  corrupt  text,  and  under
the  influence  of  wrong  theories  of  the  geography  and
(partly)  the  history  of  ancient  Israel.  On  this  matter,
so  far  as  it  concerns  Shunem,  see  SAUL,  §§4^^;  PRO
PHECY,  §  5/.  '  Shunem  '  is  probably  the  place  called
'  Beth-shan '  in  i  S.  31  10 — that  is  to  say,  perhaps  the
Bor-ashan  of  i  S.  30  30  (see  ASHAN),  and  '  Mt.  Carmel'
to  which  the  '  great  woman '  rode,  and  where  Elisha
dwelt,  was  Mt.  Jerahmeel.  If  so,  it  becomes  very  pos
sible  that  Abishag  '  the  Shunammite  '  was  a  native  of  the
Shunem  in  the  Negeb  ;  indeed,  David's  close  connection
with  the  Negeb  makes  this  in  itself  highly  probable.

It  is  remarkable  that  Eus.  (OS  294  56,  s.7>.  trovfaiJ.)  and  Jer.
(<?.S"152i7,  s.v.  Suncitt),  who  say  that  the  Issacharite  locality
was  in  their  time  called  Sulem,  do  not  identify  it  with  the
Shunem  of  Elisha's  hostess.  This  they  refer  to  separately  as
<T<ova.fi,  Sr>nant  (OS  IS:*  36  15:S  is),  and  identify  with  the  <ravi.ii.  or
Saniin  of  their  own  day,  'a  village  within  the  border  of  Sebaste
in  the  region  of  Acrabattene.'  T.  K.  C.

SHUNI  CO-lty  ;  C&YNIC,  COYNI  [A],  c<\yNeic  [£>],
COYN6I  [B],  COYNI  [F],  CAYN6IC,  CCOYNI  [L]),  one
of  the  sons  of  Gad  (Gen.  46  16  Nu.  26  15),  a  corruption
either  of  Sharonite  (GAD,  §  13)  or  of  Shunammite  (Gad
having  been  originally  settled  in  the  land  of  SIHON  [from
Cushan],  or  of  the  Negeb,  where  there  appears  to  have

4497


SHUR

been  a  Shunem).1 The  patronymic is  Sbunite, Nu.
26  15  ('wrr,  <rovi>[e]i  [BAF],  crwwei  [L]). T.  K.  c.

SHUPHAM,  RV  Shephupham  fa.  7-.),  whence  the
gentilic  Shuphamite  ('CB-1L"),  Num.  2639.  Cp
SHUPPIM,  also  SHAPHAM  and  SHEPHAM,  originally
names  belonging  to  the  Negeb,  whence  Benjamin  also
may  be  held  to  have  come  (Che. ).

SHUPPIM  (DSEK;,  §  75).  i.  A  son  of  Benjamin  :2
I  Ch.  7  12  ist  (ffairtpfiv,  /ma/u.<f>€tv  [B],  aafidfj.,  aeffxpti^.
[A],  0a.<t>a,v,  ffa.<pLv  [L]).  The  preferable  form  is  prob
ably  SHUPHAM  (?.v.).

2.  According  to  i  Ch.  26  16  MT,  the  westward  lot
fell  'to  Shuppim  and  Hosah '  (see  HOSAH)  when  the
courses  of  the  doorkeepers  were  arranged  in  David's
time  (et's  dfiirepov  [B,  as  though  D'3C']>  eis  5.  rols
ripodvpois  [L,  as  if  it  read  Q'sn],  rf  crefadfj.  [A]).
The  name  is  probably  a  mere  error  arising  from
the  repetition  of  the  last  two  syllables  of  the  preceding
verse  (e'BDNrt,  '  the  stores  ').

SHUR  pit?  ;  COYP  :  hut  in  J  S.15?  accoyp  [B],
coyA  [L] ;  i  S.  278  [peA&M]  yoyp  TereixicMCNiON
[B], — COYP  •  •  •  TCT.  [A],  reccoyp  LL1 ;  Gen.  2518
COyHA  [A]),  generally  supposed  to  be  a  locality  on
the  NE.  border  of  Egypt  ( i  S.  157278  Gen.  16 7  20 1
25  18);  adjoining  it  was  the  'wilderness  of  Shur '  (Ex.
1522).  If,  however,  we  examine  these  passages  and  their
contents  historically,  we  soon  see  that  Egypt  is  not  at
all  likely  to  be  referred  to  ;  the  scene  of  all  the  narra
tives  in  question  is  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (see  NKGEH).
D'lsD  should  therefore  be  vocalised  Misrim  (=the  N.
Arabian  Musri)  not  Mizraim  (see  MIZKAIM,  §  2!'),  and
the  Shur  or  Asshiir  (correction  or  gloss  in  Gen.  25 18
and  i  S.  157  <5p'j  is  a  region  south  of  Palestine  and
adjoining  Misrim  or  Musri.

The  passages  are— ( i )  Gen.  16?  ;  Hagaris  found  '  by
the  fountain  in  the  way  to  Shur  '  (i.e.,  between  Kadesh
and  Bered  [on  the  phrase  in  16  14  see  Crit.  /»'//;.]).  (z)
20 1  ;  Abraham  dwelt  '  between  Kadesh  and  Shur  '  (see
GERAR).  (3)  25 18  ;  the  Ishmaelitcs  dwelt  '  from
Havilah  [  =  Jerahmeel]  as  far  as  Shur  that  is  in  front  of
Misrim,  [to  the  entrance  of  Asshur].'  (4)  Ex.  1522  ;
after  leaving  the  yam  sftph  [RED  SEA],  the  Israelites
'went  out  into  the  desert  of  Shur,'  after  which  they
came  to  Marah  and  Elim  [together  =  Jerahmeel  ;  cp
REPHIUIM].  (5)  i  S.  15?  ;  the  Amakkite  country
'  from  Havilah  [rather  Jerahmeel]  to  the  entrance  of
Shur  that  is  in  front  of  Misrim.'  (6)  278;  the
Amalekites  whom  Saul  defeated,  and  the  other  peoples
named,  inhabited  '  the  land  which  is  from  Jerahmeel
(oSl'D  comes  from  VND/WC,  and  corresponds  to  nV'inO  in
the  U  ,  Gen.  25i8)  to  the  entrance  of  Shur.'  To  these
may  be  added  two  phraseologically  similar  passages,
though  the  name  given  is  not  Shur,  but  in  one  case
Asshur  and  in  the  other  Shihor,  viz.,  (7)  Gen.  214;
Hiddekel  (i.e.,  the  wady  Jerahmeel)  which  'goes  in
front  of  Asshur'  ;  and  (8)  Josh.  183;  the  territory  of
the  Geshurites,  etc.,  '  from  Shihor  (=Ashhnr)  which  is
in  front  of  Mi.srim  as  far  as  the  border  of  Ekron  (rather
'Jerahmeel')  northward.'  See  PARADISE,  §5  ;  SHIHOR.

Thus,  to  the  equivalent  forms  Asshur,  Ashhur,  and
Gfishur,  we  may  now  add  a  fourth  'Shur.'  The  view
based  upon  <5BA  of  i  S.  27  8,  held  formerly  by  Well-
hausen  (  TBS  97)  and  still  assented  to  by  H.  P.  Smith
(Sam.  133),  that  Shur  originally  meant  the  wall  (or
line  of  fortresses)  which  extended  from  Pelusium  through
Migdol  to  Hero,  and  protected  Egypt  against  the
Arabians  (cp  Brugsch,  Gesch.Aeg.  119,  195;  Die  Bill.
Sieben  Jahre,  8q),  must  apparently  be  abandoned.  [No
such  line  of  fortifications  is  known.  W.  M.  Muller

1  All  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Gad  in  Gen.  4fi  16  (from  Ziphion
or  Zephon  =  Zaphon.  to  Areli=Jerahme'eli)  can,  according  to
the  present  writer's  theory,  be  explained  as  Nepeb  names.

2  Or  rather,  son  of  Bela  b.  BENJAMIN  (?.?;.  g  91.),  iCh.S.r.EV
Shephuphan. CpJQR  11  ioS/,  §  8.

4498


SHUSHAN

(cp  Aden,  102,  134)  thought  of  a  comparison  of  Shur
with  the  great  Egyptian  frontier-city  and  fortress,  Ja-
ru  (pronounce  about  Zor?),  S.  of  Pelusium,  part  of
which  that  city  held  in  earlier  time.  Phonetic  diffi
culties  would  of  course  still  remain.]  Cp  Winckler,
Musri,  2  (MTG,  1898,  4)  p.  6/  T.  K.  c.

SHUSHAN  (JL"-1)^,  coYC<\[fM])r  always  (except  in
Esth.  815*  where  JJI'lj;'  "VI?  H,  cp  <5's  constant  TJ  TroXis)
with  the  addition  of  '  the  palace,'  or  rather  [RVme-]  '  the
castle'  (!TV3n  ;  see  BDB,  io8a),  in  the  time  of  Daniel's
Belshazzar,  capital  of  the  province  of  ELAM  (q.v.  and
cp  PERSIA,  §  12)  ;  in  that  of  Xehemiah's  Artaxerxes
and  of  Esther's  Ahasuerus,  the  residence  of  the  kings  of
Persia  (Dan.  82  Neh.  1  i  Esth.  1  2  5  815,  twice).  The

....  identification  with  Susa,  which  in  the  Ass.
1.  Ancient

Susa, inscriptions is repeatedly referred to as

Susan  (  =  the  Susin  or  Susun  of  the
Susian  inscriptions),  is  obviously  agreeable  to  the  in
tention  of,  at  any  rate,  the  last  redactor  of  Dan.  ,  Neh.  ,
and  Esth.  ;  whether  the  reading  '  Shushan  '  was  that  of
the  original  narratives,  remains  to  be  considered.
Where  the  ancient  Susa  was  situated,  and  what  it  was
like  in  the  glorious  period  which  begins  with  its  second
foundation  by  Darius  Hystaspis,  we  now  know  more
fully  than  was  once  possible,  owing  to  the  explorations
of  Loftus  and  M.  Dieulafoy,  though  ancient  tradition
had  told  of  the  magnificent  walls  and  of  the  hoards  of
gold  found  in  the  treasury  by  the  victorious  Alexander.
Of  the  first  Susa  with  its  palace  (Rogers,  Hist.  Bab.
Ass.  1420)  and  its  zikkurrat  (see  BABYLONIA,  §  16)  of
alabaster,  which  was  destroyed  by  Asur-bani-pal  (K'B
2205),  we  have  no  mention,  primary  or  secondary,  in
the  GT,  though  the  SUSANCHITKS  in  Ezra  4g,  whom
'the  great  and  noble  Osnappar  (?)  brought  over'  (to
Samaria)  are  generally  thought,  incorrectly  perhaps
but  with  no  slight  plausibility,  to  have  come  from  the
district  of  Shushan.  The  situation  of  Susa,  indeed,  was
so  suitable  for  a  large  city  that  a  revival  of  its  ancient
prosperity  might  have  been  with  some  confidence  pre
dicted.

'  It  is  at  a  distance  of  15  m.  in  a  SW.  direction  from
Dizful  that  the  prodigious  mounds  of  Shush,  or  Susa,

»!fn<J  ^  aS'™s|  <heKsk>'-  /hey  are
situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river
Shaur  (originally  Shapur),  which  rises  at  no  great  dis
tance  to  the  north  and  flows  in  a  deep,  narrow  bed
below  the  Tomb  of  Daniel,  and  between  the  larger
rivers  Ab-i-Diz  (Eulnsus),  6J  m.  distant  on  the  E.,
and  the  Kerkhah  (Choaspes),  i|  m.  distant  on  the
W.  The  Choaspes  divided  the  populous  quarter  of
the  ancient  city  from  the  citadel  and  palace.  The
entire  circumference  of  the  mounds  is  from  6  to  7  m.
They  consist  of  three  levels  :  the  lowest  conceals  the
remains  of  the  ancient  city  ;  the  second,  which  is  a
rectangular  platform  2^  m.  round  and  72  ft.  high,  was
the  fortified  enceinte  that  contained  the  palace  ;  the
uppermost,  120  ft.  in  height,  uoo  yds.  round  the  base,
and  850  yds.  round  the  summit,  was  the  citadel,  and  is
still  known  as  Kaleh-i-Shush.  '  1  So  strong  was  this
citadel  (the  fitij.v6vi.ov  of  Strabo  xv.  3  2  ;  cp  Herod.  654)
that  it  successfully  withstood  Molon  in  his  war  with
Antiochus  the  Great  (Polyb.  5  48).  The  original
palace,  however,  was  destined  to  a  somewhat  short
existence  ;  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  in  the  time  of
Artaxerxes  Longimanus.  Artaxerxes  Mnemon  restored
it.  According  to  Xenophon  (Cyrop.  viii.  6  22)  Susa  was
the  winter  residence  of  the  Persian  kings,  the  rest  of
the  year  being  spent  by  them  at  Babylon  and  Ecbatana.
Susa  was  still  a  flourishing  city  under  the  Sassanians.  It
was  razed  to  the  ground  after  a  revolt,  but  rebuilt  by
Shapur  II.  ,  under  the  title  Iranshahr  Shapur.  The  forti
fications  were  dismantled  at  the  Moslem  conquest,  but  the

1  Curzon,  Persia,  2309. A  little  below  the  great  mound  is
the  alleged  Tomb  of  Daniel.

4499


2.  Situation.


SHUSHAN

site  was  still  inhabited  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  a  seat
of  the  sugar  manufacture  of  Khuzistan.

If  M.  Dieulafoy  may  be  followed,  the  excavations
which  he  brought  to  so  successful  a  close  at  Susa  are  of
high  importance  for  the  study  of  the  book  of  Esther.
Among  other  matters,  he  refers  to  the  bithdn  (EV
'  palace  ')  mentioned  twice,  once  as  the  place  in  the  court
of  the  garden  of  which  a  feast  was  made  by  the  king
for  all  the  people  of  'Shushan  the  castle'  (Esth.  Is),
and  again  in  connection  with  the  'banquet  of  wine*
at  which  occurred  the  crisis  in  the  fortunes  of  the
•wicked  Hainan'  (?7/.).  The  word  (jrva)  occurs  no
where  else,  and  all  that  scholars  can  say  is  that  it  is  a
new  formation  from  n'3-  M.  Dieulafoy,  however,  thinks
that  when  for  two  years  one  has  interrogated  the  soul
of  the  Memnonium,  it  is  impossible  not  to  recognise  in
the  '  Bithan  '  of  the  OT  the  Susian  apadana. J

'  Alone  of  all  the  palace  buildings,  the  tabernacle  consecrated
to  the  divinised  king  could  and  ought  to  rise  in  the  midst  of  a
paradise  [irapaSeio-os]  ;  alone,  it  was  sufficiently  isolated  from
the  apartments  reserved  for  the  sovereign  to  make  it  possible
conveniently  to  introduce  a  considerable  number  of  persons.
Like  the  tit/tan,  the  apadana  was  surrounded  by  groves  imme
diately  adjoining  the  house  of  the  women  ;  like  the  tit/tan,  it
was  preceded  by  an  immense  vestibule,  capable  of  holding  the
guests  of  Ahasuerus  ;  like  the  bithiin,  it  was  a  hypostyle,  and
paved  with  coloured  marbles.  Lastly,  like  the  tit/ian,  it  played
a  special  part  in  the  life  of  the  kings  of  Persia  and  the  ceremonial
of  the  Achaemenian  court.'  'The  apadana,  or  throne-room,
resembled  a  Greek  temple  ;  the  king  occupied  the  place  of  the
divine  statue.  The  throne-room  of  Susa  covers  more  than  a
hectare  (2^  acres)  ;  the  porticoes,  the  staircases,  the  enclosures
open  out  on  a  terrace  eighteen  times  more  considerable  in  area,
and  divided  in  two  parts  by  a  pylon.  On  this  side  a  colossal
staircase  led  from  the  place  cTarmes  outside  to  the  level  of  a
vast  parade;  on  the  other,  radiant  with  its  crown  of  enamels,
buried  in  the  foliage  of  a  hanging  garden,  was  the  apadana,
past  which  marched  the  ambassadors  of  all  the  states  of  Greece.'  a

That  this  is  satisfactory  we  cannot  bring  ourselves  to
admit.  We  will  not  insist  on  the  unsn  (appadno)  of
Dan.  ll4s(EV'his  palace'),  for,  in  spite  of  the  tendency  of
scholars  to  identify  this  word  with  the  Old  Pers.  apadana,
we  feel  the  strong  probability  that  this  word  is  corrupt
(see  PALACE,  §  i  [9]).  But  is  it  likely  that  the  narrator
in  Esther  should  have  known  the  Persian  architecture
so  accurately  when  (see  ESTHER,  §  i)  the  book  is  in
other  respects  so  full  of  patent  improbabilities  ?  A  little
experience  of  the  ways  of  the  scribes  shows  a  better  way
out  of  the  difficulty  of  the  jjv;j.  That  it  is  a  parallel
formation  to  rra,  is  a  purely  arbitrary  theory.  Much
more  probably  [n-3  is  a  corruption  of  'jaa.  It  was  an
orchard  (naa)  of  pistachio  nut-trees  that  was  meant  (cp
the  '  garden  of  nuts  '  [TUN  nfs]  in  Cant.  6n).

The  improbabilities  of the  story  of Esther would
op  , become  less  striking,  if  we  could  recon-


writer's  theory.


struct the original story, which the


editor  (according  to  a  theory  for  which
there  seem  to  be  analogies  elsewhere  in  the  OT)  has
converted  as  well  as  he  could  into  a  story  of  the  Jews
under  Persian  rule,  whereas  originally  the  story  had
reference  to  the  period  when  the  Jews  were  (it  may  be
held)  in  captivity  under  the  N.  Arabian  Jerahmeelites.
The  present  writer  sees  reason  to  think  that  the  books
of  Daniel  and  even  Nehemiah  (besides  Judith  and
Tobit)  have  passed  through  a  similar  process.  Into
the  details  of  this  we  cannot  enter  here  (see  Crit.  Bib. ).

We  may,  however,  point  out  (i)  that  'Shushan  habbirah '
(not  a  very  probable  phrase3),  in  all  the  places  where  it  occurs,
may  very  possibly  have  come  from  '  Cushan-harabbah  '  ;  (2)
that  nyicn  C^'ya  may  be  an  editor's  recast  of  [Sxcrrrl  cS'i/3.
where  'm%  may  be  a  correction  of  the  corrupt  word  c  ?T  I  (3)
that  <VlX  ^31N  in  the  same  verse  may  represent  two  corrupt
forms  of  ^.vortV  (i-f-,  the  river  of  Jerahmeel,  Ezekiel's  '  Chebar'
or  rather  'Barachel  '  =  Jerahmeel).  The  parallelism  between
Daniel  on  the  banks  of  Ulai  (?)  and  Ezekiel  by  the  '  river

1  M.  Dieulafoy  has  constructed  an  imaginatively  restored
model  of  the  palace  of  Artaxerxes  Mnemon,  which  stands  in  the
Louvre.

-  '  Le  Hvre  d'Esther  et  le  palais  d'Assuerus,'  REJ,  April- June
1888,  pp.  275-277.

3  G.  Jahn  (Das  B.  Esther,  1901,  p.  2)  thinks  that  © read

Tj?n  for  nva.-r-

4500


SHUSHANCHITBS

Chebar  (?)  '  has  already  been  noticed  by  commentators. Parallels
for  the  corruptions  here  assumed  will  be  found  in  Crit.  Bib.

The  result  of  accepting  the  theory  referred  to  would  be
that  we  get  in  each  case  two  documents  instead  of  one  —  •
first  the  original  narrative,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  traced,
which  had  to  do  with  X.  Arabia,  and  next,  the  edited
and  recast  narrative,  which  shows  the  acquaintance,
slight  indeed,  but  genuine,  of  a  much  later  Jew  with
Persian  geography  and  history.  If,  then,  we  are
tempted  to  criticise  severely  the  historical  errors  in
these  books  (Dan.,  Ezra-Xeh.  ,  Esth.  ),  which  have
absorbed  so  much  time  with  so  little  result,  let  us
remember  that,  according  to  this  theory,  the  editor  had
to  make  the  best  that  he  could  of  partly  corrupt
material,  and  that  he  is  not  to  be  judged  by  the  standard
of  an  original  narrator.

Cp  Delitzsch,  Par.  326,  and  Calwer  Bib.-Lex.(?)  8757:;
I.oftus,  Chaldiea  and  Snsiana,  343^  (1857);  Mme.  Jane
Dieulafoy,  La  Perse  la  Chaldcc  et  la  Susiane  ;  Relation  de
voyage  (1887);  M.  Dieulafoy,  L'Acropole  de  la  Suse  (1890);
Billerbeck,  Susa  (1893)  ;  Nuldeke,  Gesc/i.  eier  Perser  aus  Tabari
(1879),  p.  58.  See  also  ULAI.  -p.  14.  c.


SHUSHANCHITES

SUSANCHITES.


l'T),  Ezra  49  RV. AV


SHUSHAN-EDUTH (JYni?
See  SHOSHANNIM.


Ps. 70 title.


SHUTHELAH  (rTPJT'lEJ'),  an  Ephraimite  clan-name,
Xu.  26  35/  (<S39/,  coyTAAA  [B],  6oocoyCA\A  [A  v.
39j.  6oyc-  [A  v.  40]  aov6a\a  [FL]),  ethnic  Shuthal-
hite,  RV  Shuthelahite  (TPntrrt,  v.  35,  o  coy-
T&AA6I  [B],  -a.\AAi  [FL],  Goyc-  [A]).  The  name  (see
SHELAH)  probably  came  from  the  Xegeb.  It  should
perhaps  be  inserted  in  Gen.  46  2o/;  with  ©  (aoirraXaa^
[AD]  -0.  [L])  ;  see,  however,  EPHRAIM,  §  12,  n.  i.

It  occurs  twice  in  the  much-edited  genealogy  of  EPHRAIM
[f.v.,  §  12],  i  Ch.  720-27;  in  v.zof.  (o-wflaAa  [A  v.  20],  -0.
[B  it.],  -eA.e  [Ba.b.mg.,  Om.  B*  A  v.  21],  a-ovOa^ala.^]  [L]),  and,
again,  in  the  corrupt  form  TELAH  in  v.  25  (n^fl,  0aAe  [A],  -ees


SHUTTLE  (riN),  Job  76. See  WEAVING.

SIA  (Ntf'D  [Xeh.])  or  SIAHA  (NHL"?  LEzra]),  the
family  name  of  a  company  of  (post-exilic)  Xethinim.

Ezra  244  (trtorjA.  [B],  a<raa  [Avid.],  iwcriov  [L])  =  Neh.747
(ao-ovta  [B],  tatrouta  [#},  <rioua  [A],  lajcriou  [L])  =  i  Esd.52a
SUD,  RV  SUA  (o-oua  [H],  a-ova-a  [A]  iwcria  [L]).

The  longer  form  of  the  name  has  probably  arisen
from  a  combination  of  two  readings  xyo  and  rtyo  ',  cp
NEPHUSHESIM,  Xeh.  752.

SIBBECHAI,  RVSibbecaiCOap,  cABpHXHCor  Co-
BAKXIC  []<»•  :  cp©L  2  S.  21  i?,  i  Ch.  20  4]),  a  Hushath-
ite  (or  man  of  Hushah,  a  place  apparently  near
Ephrath  —  i.  e.  ,  Bethlehem  =  Beth-jerahmeel  [Che.  ]  J)
renowned  in  popular  tradition  through  his  combat
with  a  giant  in  the  Philistine  war  (see  SAPH)  ;
2  s.  21  18  (oeBox.A  .  [B],  ceBoxAei  [A],  coBeKxi[L]),
I  Ch.  -204.  Critics  (\\'ellh.  ,  Dr.,  Klost.  ,  Budde)
agree  in  restoring  his  name  in  place  of  the  corrupt
MEBUNNAI  (e/c  TUV  MIUV  [BA]  :  vapfvi  [L])  in  2  S.
2827  :  this  is  supported  by  several  MSS  of  ©  (including
<5L  aa.pei>i),  and  by  the  parallel  passage  (i  Ch.  204;
ffofioxai  [B],  0-0/3/3.  [A],  <ropa.KX.i-  [L]),  also  by  i  Ch.ll29
(<roj3[j8]oxai  [BA],  ffofioxe  [N],  cropoicxd  [L]).  But  we
decline  to  follow  Chronicles—  i  Ch.27n  (cro/So^ai  [BA];
ffcLxtKi  [L])  —  when  it  makes  Sibbechai  commander  of
the  eighth  part  of  David's  army.

SIBBOLETH  (1^30),  Judg.  126. See  SHIBBOLETH.


SIBMAH  (nDnc?  ;  AV  SHIBMAH  in  Xu.  32  38),
or  (masc.  form)  SEBAM  (D3E',  only  Xu.  32  3  ;  AV
SHEBAM  ;  Sam.  n£3E>  ;  usu.  ceB<\M&  ;  in  Xu.  32  3,
eceBeMA  [Bab],  ceMABA  [F]),  a  place  beyond  the


1  Ephrath  in  the  Negeb  is  probably  intended.  See  RACHEI
SEPULCHRE,  and  note  that  in  iCh. 27n  Sibbecai  is  connect
with  the  Zerahites.


144


4501


SICYON

Jordan  with  extensive  vineyards  ;  Reubenite,  according
to  Xu.  8238  (cpv.  39  and  Josh.  1819);  Moabite,  accord
ing  to  Is.  168/.  (cABAMA  [Q  in  v.  9]),  jer.  48  3a
(tOCepHMA  [BNc-a],  (oc  epHMOC  [N*],  ACepHMA[A],

CA.B<\M<\  [Q]),  a  passage  in  a  prophecy  written,  at
any  rate,  long  after  the  fall  of  Israel.  Jerome  (on  Is.
168)  states  that  it  was  hardly  500  paces  from  Heshbon.
Conder  identifies  it  with  the  important  site  Sumia,  with
tombs  and  ruined  vineyard  towers,  2^  m.  W.  of  Heshbon
(PEFQ>  1882,  p.  9).  As  Derenbourg  has  suggested,
Sibmah  may  be  referred  to  in  MI  /.  13.

The  passage  runs,  '  And  I  settled  therein  (i.e.,  in  the  conquered
city  of  ATAROTH,  y.v.)  men  of  pc1.'  In  the  Jerus.  Targ.  nt?
is  given  for  035?  and  neat?-  So  also  Schlottmann  (ZDMG,  24
259).  Cp  ZERETH-SHAHAR.  T  K  c

SIBRAIM  (D'nnp;  ceBpAM  [B],  C€<J>.  [A],  -PA,M
[Q].  C&B«\peiM  [QniK']'  Pesh-  reads  '  Sepharvaim '),  a
city  on  the  ideal  northern  border  of  Canaan  (Ezek.
47 16),  described  in  MT  as  lying  between  the  territory
of  Damascus  and  that  of  Hamath.  According  to
Cornill  (see  (@)  this  definition  belongs  strictly  to  another
city  HELAM  (q.v.},  the  name  of  which  should  be  in
serted  after  Sibraim.  It  is  more  important,  however,
to  notice  that  the  original  text,  which  has  been  redacted
by  an  uncomprehending  editor  (cp  TAMAR),  probably
referred  (as  also  Xu.  34  \/.}  to  the  Jerahmeelite  Xegeb.
The  four  names  in  the  MT  of  Ezek.  47  i6a  will  in  this
case  represent  Maacath,  Rehoboth,  Zarephath,  Cusham
(see  MAACAH,  REHOBOTH,  ZAREPHATH).  Xor  could
we  hesitate  to  explain  Helam  (c'rn)  as  =  Jerahmeel.  If
i  on  the  other  hand  we  suppose  the  MT  to  give  the
original  text,  the  difficult  question  arises,  where  is
Sibraim  to  be  placed  ?  In  accordance  with  his
view  of  the  ideal  frontier  as  a  whole,  van  Kasteren
identifies  Sibraim  with  Khirbet  es-Sanbarlyeh,  4i  m.
SSE.  of  Kh.  Serada  (see  ZEDAD),  near  the  bridge  of
the  Xahr  HasbanI,  on  the  road  to  Banias  (Rev.  bib.,
1895,  P-  31)-  The  form  Sanbarlyeh,  however,  would
rather  (as  van  Kasteren  himself  remarks)  point  to  a
Hebrew  form  Sabbarim  or  Sibbarim.  Xor  is  Furrer's
identification,  which  arises  out  of  an  opposite  view  of
the  situation  of  the  frontier,  less  free  from  difficulty  (see
below).  Sibraim  was  at  any  rate  a  place  of  importance,
if  we  may  accept  Halevy's  view  ('/.A  l4,oif. }  that  both
Sibraim  and  Sepharvaim  are  identical  with  the  Sabarain
which  was  destroyed  in  727  by  Shalmaneser  IV.  ac
cording  to  the  Babylonian  Chronicle  discovered  by
Pinches  (see  SEPHARVAIM,  and  note  the  reading  of
Pesh.  given  above).  The  objections  are  (i)  the
representation  of  D  by  s  (which,  however,  is  not  an
insuperable  difficulty),  and  (2)  the  possibility  of  reading
Samarain.  See  SAMARIA,  SHALMANESER.

[The  conjecture  of  Furrer  that  Sibraim  is  the  mod.  Shau~
vieriya  (ZDPl'Sig)  on  the  E.  side  of  the  lake  of  Emesa,  rests
mainly  on  the  doubtful  reading  o-a^iapei/x  in  some  copies  (t.i?.,  68,
87)  of  the  LXX.— \v.  K.  s.]  T.  K^c.

SICCUTH  (n-13p),  Am.  526.  See  CHIUN  AND
SICCUTH,  SALMAH.

See  also  Muss-Arnolt,  Expos.  2,  6th  ser.  [1900],  414-428.
SICHEM  (Q3C:),  Gen.  126  AV,  RVSHECHEM  (g.v.).
SICKLE  (C;p-in,  ^|»). See  AGRICULTURE,  §  7.

SICYON  (ciKY^N1  [NV],  i  Mace.  15 23).  Sicyon
appears  in  the  list  of  cities  and  countries  to  which
1  Lucius,  consul  of  the  Romans'  (i.e.,  probably  Lucius
Calpurnius  Piso,  consul  in  139  B.C.)  wrote  in  favour  of
the  Jews.  We  may  infer  that  Jewish  settlers  and
traders  formed  a  considerable  element  in  the  population
of  the  places  named.  Reference  is  made  in  the
authorities  to  the  extent  of  the  Jewish  Dispersion
about  this  date  (cp  Orac.  Sibyll.  8271,  irciffa  de  yala
veOev  ir\ripris  KO.I  Traffa  0d\a<r<ra — i.e. ,  about  140  B.C.

1  The  change  from  the  early  form  SeKixui/  or  SeiKviav  to  the
form  SiKvwi'  is  dated  by  the  coins  to  the  time  of  Alexander  the
Great  (Leake,  Num.  Hell.  95).

4502


SIDDIM,  VALE  OF

See  also  the  quotation  to  the  same  effect  from  Strabo
in  Jos.  Ant.\\\.l*  and  cp  /'</.  Z// vii.  83).  Philo
Judieus  testifies  to  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  Jewish
race  over  the  far  East  and  Asia  Minor,  and  after
enumerating  Thessaly,  Bceotia,  Macedonia,  Actolia,
and  Attica  as  regions  in  which  Jews  were  plenteously
scattered  he  adds  Argos  and  Corinth,  and  '  the  most
and  the  test  parts  of  the  Peloponnese1  (/-eg.  ad  Caium,
36,  Mang.  2587,  T&  TrXetoro  Kal  Aptara  llf\oTrovvr)(rov.
Cp  Philo,  In  Flaccum,  7,  Mang.  2524).

Sicyon  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  cities  of  Greece,
advantageously  placed  alxsut  2  m.  from  the  sea  on  a
terrace  over-looking  a  fertile  plain  on  the  S.  shore  of
the  Corinthian  Gulf,  about  18  m.  W.  of  Corinth.
Though  she  could  not  rival  Corinth,  Sicyon  next  to  that
city  was  renowned  for  skill  and  industry  in  all  kinds  of
manufacture  (Strabo,  382).

At  an  early  date  Sicyon  became  &  flourishing  home  of  plastic
art  (see  Gardner,  Hatuilwok  of  Greek  Sculpture,  1  igoyC).  The
ancient  wealth  and  importance  of  the  town  is  attested  by  the
large  number  of  its  coins  still  extant,  dating  from  about  the
middle  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.  (usual  type,  a  Chim;era  and
flying  wood-p';^eon  ;  see  Head,  Hist.  Numm.  345  /,).  The
destruction  of  Corinth  by  the  Romans  in  146  u.c.  would  tend  to
revive  the  commercial  importance  of  Sicyon,  more  especially  as
Sicyon  received  an  accession  of  territory  thereby  (cp  Pans.  ii.'22).
Nevertheless  the  town  gradually  sank  into  decay,  even  before
the  restoration  of  Corinth,  and  was  burdened  with  debt  (Cic.
jT/.  ad  Ait.  i.  19  9  i.  204  ii.  1 10)  ;  in  the  second  century  A.  D.  it
was  in  a  miserably  decayed  condition  (Paus.  ii.  7  i).

\V.  J.  \V.

SIDDIM,  VALE  OF  (D^bPI  p$? ;  Vg.  vaUis
silvestris ;  for  ©  see  below),  the  scene  of  the  battle
between  the  king  of  Sodom  and  Chedorlaomer  (and
their  respective  allies),  Gen.  143810.  It  is  said,  as  the
text  stands,  to  have  been  '  full  (a  conjectural  paraphrase,
see  AV)  of  slime-pits,'  or  rather  of  'pits  of  bitumen"
(icn  I  see  BITUMEN),  which  proved  fatal  to  two  of  the
kings  (see  SODOM).

In  143  the  'vale  of  Siddim"  has  the  gloss,  'that  is,  n^Srt  D'
(EV  'the  salt  sea').  The  notion  is  supposed  to  be  implied" that
the  'salt  sea'  at  a  later  time  extended  itself  over  the  vale  of
Siddim  where  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  stood.  <&AW;.L  gives  the
strange  rendering  em.  rrfv  <ba.pa.yya.  TY^V  aAvioji/ '  avri)  (ecrr'tr)  fj
0d\ao-<ra  TO»'  aAu>i/  (r<.  3  ;  ^  icoiAa?  17  aAvK>j,  7T.  8  10).  Theod.,
however,  gave  (according  to  Jerome  ;  see  Field's  /A-.r.,  n.)  riav
aAo-uH/  —  i.e.,  C"VJ'N^,  '(the  vale  of)  the  Asherahs";  and  <B  may
once  have  had  the  same  reading.  This,  however,  can  hardly  be
correct,  nor  is  it  satisfactory  to  keep  the  letters  of  MT,  pointing
D""]L''_n,  'the  demons,'  with  Renan  (I fist.  1  116),  Wellhausen
(/JGW  103),  and  Winckler  (GI  2  33  iog).l

If  the  view  of  Gen.  14  set  forth  elsewhere  (SonoM)  is
correct,  the  notion  that  the  vale  of  Siddim  has  any
connection  with  Sodom  and  contained  pits  of  bitumen
must  be  abandoned.  The  '  vale  of  hassiddim  '  has  most
probably  arisen  by  corruption  from  Maacath-cusham —
i.e. ,  Maacah  of  Cusham.  See  SODOM,  §  6  (c).

T.  K.  c. .

SIDE  (ciAH  [ANV]),  i  Mace.  15 23.  A  rich  and
flourishing  seaport  of  Pamphylia,  lying  between  the
rivers  Eurymedon  (W. )  and  Melas  ( E. ').  It  was  founded
by  the  Cymaeans  (Strabo,  667)  and  possessed  a  temple
of  Athena  apparently  of  some  celebrity.2  Attaleia  and
Side  were  the  two  outlets  for  the  products  of  Pamphylia.
Side  had  close  commercial  relations  with  Aradus3  in
Phoenicia  (cp  Livy  35  48,  where  the  contingents  of
Aradus  and  Side  form  the  left  wing  of  the  fleet  of  Antio-
chus  the  Great,  as  those  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  the  right —
anas  gmtes  t/ullce  unquam  nee  arte  nee  virtute  navali
crquassent ;  see  also  id.  37a3/).  According  to  a
tradition  current  at  Side  itself  the  town  was  of  Hellenic

1  The  'Valley  of  Spirits,"  thinks  Winckler,  is  a  fictitious
name  derived  from  Babylonian  mythology  ((7/2  108).

-  Hence,  on  the  interesting  series  of  coins  of  Side,  Pallas
frequently  appears.  The  coin-type  or  symbol  of  the  town,
playing  upon  its  name,  is  the  fruit  of  the  pomegranate,  which
the  Greeks  called  o-t'Sij  (see  Hill,  Handbook  of  Greek  and
Roman  Coins,  176).

8  The  name  of  Aradus  occurs  immediately  after  that  of  Side  in
the  enumeration  in  i  Mace.  15  23.

4503


SIDON,  SIDONIANS

origin,  but  the  Asiatic  elements  gradually  asserted
themselves,  until,  by  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,
Greek  was  no  longer  spoken  there,  but  a  peculiar  idiom
which  differed  also  from  that  of  the  neighbouring
aborigines  (  Arrian,  Anab.  1  26).  This  curious  statement
is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  a  series  of  the  coins  of  Side
has  the  legend  ~i5rjTiKov  supplanted  by  inscriptions  in
characters  resembling  the  Aramaic  which  have  never
been  deciphered  with  certainty  (see  Waddington,  in
Rev.  Num.,  1861,  13).

After  the  defeat  of  Antiochus  by  the  Romans,  Side
retained  practical  autonomy,  and  became  one  of  the
chief  places  of  mintage  on  this  coast.  Its  importance
is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  Attic  tetradrachms  of
Side  were  allowed  to  circulate  in  Asia  assimilated  in
value  or  tariffed  with  the  cistophori  which  under  ordinary
circumstances  were  the  only  legal  tender  (Momms.  Hist.
A/an.  Rom.  1  99).  This  coinage  lasted  a  long  time  and
is  of  astonishing  abundance,  perhaps  owing  to  the  fact
that  Side  was  the  great  mart  in  which  the  Cilician
pirates  disposed  of  their  booty  (Strabo,  664).  It  is,
therefore,  not  surprising  to  find  Side  enumerated  in
i  Mace.  1623  as  containing  a  strong  Jewish  element.
Antiochus  VII.  (138-128  B.C.  )  owed  his  by-name  Sidetes
to  the  fact  that  he  had  been  brought  up  at  Side.

Side  continued  to  be  a  town  of  importance  under  the
Empire,  to  which  fact  its  coins  testify  in  various  self-
laudatory  epithets  —  Xa^iTrpordr^s,  'splendid,'  eifSo^ov,
'honourable,'  or  irlffTys  <pi\rfs  crv^nd-xov  'Pw/uaiwp.
Aspendus  on  the  Eurymedon  was  her  rival  (Pol.  573),
and  later  also  Perga.  Both  Side  and  Perga  claim  trie-
title  irpdir-q  IIa/z0i>\i'aj.  In  fact,  the  ecclesiastical  lists
always  separate  Pamphylia  into  Pamphylia  Prima  under
Side,  and  Pamphylia  Secunda  under  Perga,  although
the  civil  organisation  recognised  but  a  single  province
(Rams.  Hist.  Geog.  of  A.M.  393).

The  remains  of  Side  (now  Eski  Adalia)  on  a  low  peninsula
are  now  deserted.  Its  two  ports  are  silted  up;  its  theatre  is
one  of  the  largest  and  best  preserved  in  Asia  Minor  (for  de
scription  and  views,  see  Beaufort,  Karamania,  ii,of.).

W.  J.  W.

SIDON,  SIDONIANS.  (JTtfr?;  D»3[tfl[»]y;  ciAwisi,
c[e]iA6GNlOl.  4>OlNiKec).  For  the  early  history,  see
PHOENICIA  Ancient  writers  already
explained  fish-town  from  sud  (nn),
4  to  hunt,'  and  in  Phoenician  also  'to  fish"  (see  Justin
183).  If  we  accept  this,  'Sidonians'  originally  meant
the  fishing  population  on  the  coast  ;  but  perhaps  we
should  rather  derive  the  name  from  some  tribal  god
Sid  (I;,-),  after  whom  both  town  and  people  were
named.1  \Ye  do  not  indeed  find  any  trace  of  a
worship  of  Sid  ;  but  the  gods  Sid-melkart  and  Sid-tat
are  both  met  with  (cp  PHOENICIA,  §  12).

Sidonlm,  Sidonians,  both  (a)  in  Phoenician  and
Assyrian  inscriptions  and  (b)  often  in  OT,  means  the
_.  -  Phoenicians  generally.

'Sd  ' (a) Hiram H> calls hirnself ™&k

ians.  sfclsnfmfafft'fo),  'king  of  the  Sidonians1
upon  a  votive  inscription,  and  Tyrian  coins  of  the  time
of  Antiochus  IV.  tear  the  legend  I'sor  em  sidonim
(C3l!i  DN  is'?)  '  of  Tyre,  the  metropolis  of  the  Sidonians.'
So  too  in  Assyrian  inscriptions  Elulreus  king  of  Tyre
and  suzerain  of  most  of  the  Phoenician  coast  is  called
Lule,  king  of  Sidon.  Of  course,  we  also  find  the
narrower  use  of  the  term  both  on  Phoenician  coins  and
in  Assyrian  inscriptions.

(fi)  In  Gen.  49  13^  'Sidon'  is,  not  the  town  —  which
lies  too  far  N.  —  but  the  Phoenician  coastland,  and
in  Judg.  18?  the  phrase  '  the  manner  of  the  Sidonians'
refers  to  the  unwarlike  Phoenician  traders.  Ittobaal
(see  ETHBAAL,  but  also  SOLOMON,  §  3  b]  is  called  '  king
of  the  Sidonians'  in  i  K.  1631.  and  Solomon  (i  K.
56  [20])  admits  the  superiority  of  the  '  Sidonians  '  to  the

1  Winckler  also  questions  the  explanation  'fish-town.'  He
supposes  '  Sidon  '  to  be  a  Semitised  form  of  a  pre-Phocnician
name  (AOh'\  427).

4504


1.  Etymology.

*


SIEGE

Jews  in  the  hewing  of  timber.  In  both  cases  the  Phoe
nicians  are  meant.  '  Sidonians  '  as  the  name  of  a  people
must  once  have  been  as  common  as  the  ethnic  names
Moabite,  Edomite,  Ammonite,  and  the  rest.1  Quite
rightly,  then,  in  Gen.  10 15,  Canaan  (=  Syria,  as  in
Amarna  Tablets)  is  said  to  have  two  sons,  Sidon  (the
Phoenicians)  and  Heth  (the  Hittites).  Of  these  Sidon
is  the  firstborn,  because,  as  we  now  know,  the  Hittites
did  not  penetrate  into  central  Syria  till  the  fourteenth
century.  'Afterwards,'  so  the  writer  continues  (v.  i8i>),
'  the  tribes  of  the  Canaanites  spread  themselves  abroad' ;
v.  -if>l>  is  admitted  to  be  an  interpolation  (see  e.g. ,  Dill-
mann).  The  same  use  of  '  Sidonians '  is  common  in
Greek  literature.

The  Phoenicians  are  in  Homer  very  often  called  ~5.iS6vi.oi  (//.
6290;  Od.  15  n8  =  46i8),  and  their  land  ~2.<&ovLi\  (//.  0  291  ;  Od.
18205).  True,  <I>oiViK6s  is  also  found  (//.  '!'&  74S./.  ',  Od.  18272,
14288^7C  15415^).  Both  names  occur  together  likewise  in  the
celebrated  verses  concerning  Menelaus'  wanderings  (Od.  48syC).
The  name  of  the  town  Sidon  is  found  in  Od.  16  425.  From
the  fact  that  Sidon,  not  Tyre,  is  mentioned  we  must  not  draw
political  conclusions  as  some  have  done  ;  through  the  influence
of  the  ethnic  name  '  Sidonian '  the  name  of  Sidon  was  familiar
to  the  Greeks  at  an  earlier  time  than  that  of  Tyre,  although  the
latter  was  then  much  the  more  important.

Roman  poets,  too,  frequently  use  '  Sidonius '  (as  a
synonym  for  'Poenus')  in  the  sense  of  'Phoenician'
(cp  Ovid.  Fast.  8108,  etc.).  E.  M.

A  king  of  Sidon  has  dealings  with  Zedekiah  ( Jer.  27  3),

and  Jewish  prophets  mention  Sidon  by  the  side  of  Tyre

_, ,  both  in  the  Babylonian  and  in  the  Persian

hihliral Period (Jer-47"-» E»*.278 Joel  3  [4]  4).

Unfortunately  the  OT  references  to  Zidon,

rences. as wdl ns to Tyr^ often occur in

passages  where  corruption  may  with  probability  be
suspected  (so  Cheyne ;  for  instances  see  MIZRAIM,
TlRAS,  ZAREPHATH).2  Whether  the  destruction  of
Sidon  by  Artaxerxes  Ochus  (351  B.C.)  is  really  referred
to  in  Is.  23 1-14  (Duhm),  24 10  (Cheyne),  is  also  at  any
rate  doubtful.  The  comparative  revival  of  Sidon  in
later  times  is  attested  by  Lk.  617  Acts27s.

A  bishop  of  Sidon  ('a  city  of  note,'  Eus.  OS)  attended  the
Council  of  Nicaea  (325  A.D.). Again  and  again  Sidon  is  men
tioned  in  the  annals  of  the  Crusades. Several
4.  Later times  destroyed,  it  was  for  three  centuries  quite
History,  etc. insignificant  till  at  the  beginning  of  the  seven
teenth  century  it  began  to  recover  under  the
Druse  Emir  Fakhr  ed-Din. The  present  town  of  Saida  contains
about  15,000  inhabitants. The  northern  harbour  still  survives;
but  the  large  southern  harbour  was  filled  up  by  Fakhr  ed-DIn,
to  make  it  inaccessible  to  the  Turks.3  E.  M.,  §1/1

SIEGE. The  proper  term  for  '  besiege '  is  the  kal  of

sfir  (-;-i)  Dt.20i2  2S.lli  i  K.l.r.27  1C.  17  20  i  2K.C,y4/~.  173
18g  24  n  Is.  20  3  Jer.  214  322,  usually  followed  by  Sy  or  SN.
The  corresponding  substantive  is  nnisr'r(^'^),  Xah.  3  14,  and  the
phrase  D3  32"  or  C3  rrn  is  used  to  express  the  passive  '  to  be

T  : -  T  T  : TT

besieged."  S3  N13  is  used  in  the  same  sense  when  applied  to  a
city  Dt.SOig  2  K.  24io252  Jer.  52  5.  The  Greek  equivalents
are  TroAtopiceiV  (en-i),  Tref>iKa6i£e<.i>  (eiri,  ev),  7rep<Ka#7J<r#ai  iwi,
eiriKaQr\cr8a.i:  ewi,  crvy/cAeicti/,  ^apaxovv  e-rri,  or  StaKaOifeiv  eni,
or  Kadi^eiv  itri.  The  Assyrian  word  is  lamA  (eseru  used  of
persons).

The  earliest pictorial  representations  of  sieges  and

assaults of  fortified  towns come  to  us  from ancient

Egypt. Thus the  tomb  of  Beni-Hasan

1.  Egypt ; portrays  a  fortress  of  the  Middle  Empire

Amarna ancj  presents  a  vivid  example  of  a  siege.

Tablets  ; Like the Assyrians of a later time, the

early  Israel. Egyptians  '  advanced  under  cover  of  the  arrows

of  the  bowmen; and  either  instantly  applied

the  scaling  ladder  to  the  ramparts  or  undertook  the  routine  of  a

regular  siege,  in  which  case  having  advanced  to  the  walls,  they

posted  themselves under  cover of testudos, and shook  and

1  For  other  OT  evidence  see  Dt.Sg  Judg.  83  (  =  Josh.  13  4-6),
106  12  i  K.  11  5  33  Is.  23  2,  etc.

2  -p;j  and  -]•)>$  would  easily  arise  out  of  an  indistinctly  written

lisa-

3  [From  a  series of  newly-found Phoenician inscriptions  it
appears  that  Sidon  consisted  of  at  least  two  divisions,  one  of
which was  called Q'  px, '  Sidon-super-mare '  (C. C.  Torrey,
JAOS,  23  (1902)  1567?: Cp  the  Eshmunazar  inscription,  /.  16
D'  fix  ps  (CIS  1  n.  3),  and  the  Ass.  form  Asdud-immu  (see
ASHDOD).]

45°S


SIEGE

dislodged  the  stones  of  the  parapet.'  This  they  accomplished
by  means  of  what  might  be  called  a  hand  battering-ram,  con-
sisting  of  a  long  lance  or  pole  with  a  strong  metal  point.  In
case  the  fortress  resisted  all  attacks  by  scaling  ladders  and
assaults  by  the  hand-ram  the  testudo  or  pent-house  would  be
employed,  which  concealed  as  well  as  protected  the  sappers  who
undermined  the  walls.  This  testudo  was  a  rude  framework
covered  with  hides  large  enough  to  contain  several  men  (Wilk.
Anc.  Egf.\2^2ff.  and  woodcut;  Rosellini,  Alonumenti  civili
del  I 'Eg it  to,  1 1 8).

The  Tell -el -Amarna  despatches  (1450-1400  B.C.)
yield  us  but  little  information.  The  Egyptian  governor
Rib-Addi,  in  repeated  letters  to  the  King  of  Egypt,
compares  himself  to  a  '  bird  sitting  in  a  snare'  (?cage,
basket),1  when  besieged  in  Gebal  by  the  hostile  forces
commanded  by  Abd-Asirta.  We  are  reminded  of
Sennacherib's  phrase  in  the  Taylor-cylinder  in  which  he
boasts  that  he  had  shut  in  Hezekiah  'like  a  bird  in  a
cage'  (col.  820).  Rib-Addi  addresses  repeated  pathetic
appeals  to  the  Egyptian  sovereign  to  send  him  sabi  (or
amiluti)  masarta(-ti),  'garrison  troops'  (cp  Heb.  -vise),
and  says  (in  another  letter)  that  he  remains  helpless
and  inactive  in  his  town  and  dare  not  pass  outside  the
city  gates  (64,  //.  2of. )  ;  but  we  have  no  details  re
specting  siege  operations.

When  we  come  to  the  latter  part  of  the  thirteenth
century  B.C.  (igth  dyn. ),  however,  the  reign  of  Rameses
II.  affords  us  interesting  glimpses  into  the  methods  of
siege  and  assault.  The  scenes  are  depicted  in  Lepsius'
Denknuiler,  3 166.  \Ve  have  a  representation  of  the
storming  of  Dapuru  (?),  a  fortress  of  the  Heta.

'  This  fortress,  as  we  see,  deviates  somewhat  from  the  ordinary
style  of  building.  Below,  a  battlemented  wall  surrounds  an
immense  lower  building  which  supports  four  towers,  the  largest
of  which  has  windows  and  balconies.  Above  the  towers  is  seen
the  standard  of  the  town,  a  great  shield  pierced  through  with
arrows.  .  .  In  order  to  protect  themselves  from  the  shower  of
stones  and  arrows  that  the  besieged  pour  down  from  above,  the
Egyptian  soldiers  advance  under  cover  of  pent-houses.  Then
ensues  the  actual  storming  of  the  castle  by  means  of  scaling-
ladders.  .  .  Some  of  the  besieged  let  themselves  down  over  the
wall,  more  than  one  being  killed  in  this  attempt  to  escape'
(Erman,  Life  in  Anc.  Egypt,  533).  See  fig.  4  in  EGYPT.

In  the  earliest  periods  of  Israel's  history  we  do  not
read  of  regular  siege  operations.  No  attempts  were
made  to  capture  cities  save  by  assault,  since  the  early
nomad  Hebrews  did  not  possess  engines  of  war  or  other
appliances  requisite  for  the  regular  reduction  of  a
fortress.  In  capturing  a  city- fortress  by  direct  assault,
as  in  the  case  of  Jerusalem  which  was  stormed  by
David's  warriors  (2  S.  56-8,  a  very  obscure  passage),2
there  must  have  been  enormous  loss  of  life.  Some
skilful  stratagem  was  sometimes  resorted  to  by  the
besiegers,  as  a  pretended  retirement  followed  by  an
ambuscade  (Josh.  84/1 )  or  a  night-attack  (Judg.  7 19  f.  )•
It  is  doubtful  how  far  the  Assyrians  resorted  to  the
slow  methods  of  siege  in  reducing  the  fortress-cities  to
.  .  subjection  in  the  earliest  period,  viz.,  in
2.  Assyria.  the  reign  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  Even  in
the  records  of  Asur-nasir-abal  and  Shalmaneser  II.  we
have  no  account  of  such  operations,  though  the  monu
ments  portray  them  occasionally.  Thus  in  describing
the  capture  of  Madara  in  the  annals  of  Asur-nasir-abal
(col.  2,  //.  gS/,  A'fflSg)  we  are  only  told;  'The  city
was  very  strong  (danan  dannis}.  Four  walls  (dvrdni)
encircled  it.  I  stormed  the  town  ;  they  feared  my
fearful  weapons.'  In  an  earlier  passage  (col.  254)  no
details  are  furnished  of  siege-operations  (in  the  capture
of  Amalu),  and  many  other  similar  instances  might
be  given.  It  is  certainly  probable  that  in  a  large
number  of  cases  regular  siege  operations  were  not
carried  on.  These  involved  a  considerable  expenditure
of  time  as  well  as  of  means  and  material.  Engines  of
war,  like  chariots,  were  difficult  objects  of  transport  in
a  mountainous  country.  We  have  already  had  occasion
to  notice  the  passages  in  the  annalistic  inscriptions

1  See  Winckler,  KB  v.  55  45-48,  e03s,  etc.,  62  T.-$ff.,  04  34.^,
84  8-10,  etc.  Kima  issun  sa  ina  libbi  (tuhari  kilubi.  V\  ith  this,
expression  cp  Jer.  5  27.

»  [See  Crit.  Bit.}

4506


SIEGE


SIEGE


which record that chariots  were  left behind for this
reason  (CHARIOT,  §  4).

When  we  come  to  the  records  of  Sargon  II.  (721-705)
we  have  in  his  great  triumphal  palace-wall  inscription
a  vivid  account  of  his  campaign  against  Merodach-
haladan.  This  document  (A'Z?268 ff.},  as  well  as  the
annals  (where  the  defence  of  Dur-Athara  is  recounted,
//.  248/1 ),  describes  the  precautions  taken  by  the  besieged.
Merodach - baladan  flees  from  Babylon,  his  capital,
takes  refuge  in  the  fortress  of  Dur-Yakin,  strengthens
its  walls,  summons  the  neighbouring  tribes  to  his
assistance,  and  posts  them  before  the  great  wall.  He
then  dug  out  a  trench  of  immense  size,  200  cubits
broad  and  18  cubits  deep,  and  filled  it  by  cutting  a


description  of  the  operations  against  Urdamani,  says
that  he  blockaded  him  and  deprived  him  of  food  and
water  (A7?2i68),  and  in  another  passage  (cyl.  col.  8109)
refers  to  the  warriors  posted  on  the  walls  of  the  cities.
These  are,  however,  very  slight  details  and  bear
reference  to  defence  rather  than  attack.

What  these  verbal  descriptions  omit  is  supplied  to  us  in
fair  abundance  by  the  monumental  representations.  The
accompanying  figure  of  the  siege  of  a  city  by  Asur-nasir-
abal  (fig.  i)  furnishes  the  details  which  we  require  and
enables  us  to  realise  the  enormous  slaughter  which  the
storming  of  a  fortress  entailed.  Another  figure  (fig.  2)
portrays  the  siege  of  a  town  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.
Archers  are  depicted  shooting  at  the  walls  from  behind


FIG.  i. — Siege-Operations  by  Assyrians.


channel  to  the  Euphrates  (Triumph.  Insc.  //.  127  f.}.
Having  thus  flooded  a  large  area  around  the  city  with
water,  he  broke  the  bridges.  What  follows  is  certainly
somewhat  obscure.  Merodach-baladan  is  described  as
pitching  his  royal  tent  in  the  midst  of  this  defensive
lake  'like  a  tusmi  bird.'  In  flamboyant  style  Sargon
says  that  he  (Sargon)  transported  his  warriors  over  the
flood  '  like  eagles.'  We  may  suppose  that  some  rafts
were  constructed  (see  Winckler's  remarks  in  the  Introduc
tion  to  his  Keilschrifttexte,  34).  The  battle  must  have
been  fierce  and  murderous  and  the  waters  were  stained
with  the  blood  of  Merodach-baladan's  warriors  (/.  130).
We  read  of  no  prolonged  attempt  to  reduce  Dur-Yakin


FIG.  2. — Sharp-shooters  behind  Shelters.

by  regular  approaches.  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  the
fortress  Dur-Athara,  into  which  on  another  occasion
Merodach  retreated,  defending  it  by  means  of  a  deep
fosse,  filled  from  the  river  Surappi  (//.  248  f. ),  the
siege  operations  were  of  brief  duration,  for  we  are  told
that  the  town  was  reduced  before  sunset  (/.  252).

In  the  Taylor -cylinder  of  Sennacherib  (col.  821/1
KD'2f)^}  we  read  that  the  Assyrian  general  erected
against  Jerusalem  ramparts  (halsani,  probably  'towers')
which  effectually  shut  in  the  defenders  of  the  city.
Cp  Rassam  cyl.,  col.  252.  Asur-bani-pal,  in  his

4507


wicker  screens,  while  the  battering-ram  is  wielded  below,
and  we  behold  the  ghastly  spectacle  of  captives  impaled  ad
terrorem  before  the  walls.  To  this  horrible  practice  the
inscriptions  bear  witness.  Thus  Asur-bani-pal  (Rassam-
cyl.  col.  2s/. )  in  the  account  of  his  Egyptian  campaign
describes  how  his  generals  attacked  the  hostile  cities  of
the  Delta,  hung  the  corpses  of  the  rebels  on  stakes  and,
after  having  flayed  them,  placed  their  skins  on  the  city
walls.

The  monumental  reliefs  show  that  the  usual  course
in  storming  a  fortress  was  for  the  heavy -armed  to
advance  first  and  with  shield  in  hand  to  mount  the  tall
ladders  which  were  placed  against  the  city-walls  and
reached  almost  to  the  summit  of  the  latter.  The
archers  meanwhile  from  behind  the  protective  screens
made  of  wicker-  or  wood-work  discharged  arrows  against
the  defenders  on  the  walls  and  especially  against  the
towers  where  the  enemy  were  concentrated.  Doubtless
fire  was  employed,  and  missiles  covered  with  tow  and
resin  or  pitch  would  be  hurled  against  anything  com
bustible.  Thus  in  the  early  Israelite  episode  (narrated
in  Judg.  946-49)  we  read  that  Abimelech  and  his  followers
cut  down  branches  and  set  fire  to  the  hold  of  the  temple
of  El-Berith  into  which  the  occupants  of  the  tower  of
Shechem  had  betaken  themselves.1

The  historical  books  of  the  OT  and  occasional
passages  in  the  prophets  enable  us  to  supply  a  few  details
of  the  ancient  siege-operations  carried  on  in  the  wars  of
pre-exilian  Israel.  Thus  2  S.  11  furnishes  some  account
of  the  siege  of  Rabbath  Ammon,  and  it  can  be  readily
inferred  that  it  lasted  a  considerable  time.  On  the
other  hand  there  is  no  reference  to  any  entrenchments,
engines  of  war,  or  other  siege  operations  or  appliances.
The  Hittite  URIAH  (q.v. }  was  simply  slain  by  a  sortie
executed  by  the  Ammonites  against  Joab's  beleaguering
force.  Yet  it  can  hardly  be  asserted  that  Israel  by  that
time  was  not  conversant  with  any  other  methods  of
warfare  than  night-attacks,  surprises,  feigned  retreats  or
ambuscades.  For  in  2  S.  20 15,  where  the  siege  of  Abel-
l>eth  -  maacah  is  described,  a  mound  or  embankment
(soltldh)  is  thrown  up  against  the  city.  This  embank
ment  stood  in  the  intervening  space  between  the  principal
wall  and  a  smaller  outer- wall  (tel).  And  we  are

1  [On  the  obscure  word  rl'ns  see  HOLD  ;  and  on  the  narrative,
SHECHEM,  ZALMON.]

4508


SIEGE

apparently  to  understand  that  under  the  protection  of
this  embankment,  occupied  probably  by  archers  or
engines  ot  war,  some  of  the  Israelite  troops  were  oc
cupied  in  undermining  (so  Ewald)  or  battering  down
the  walls. 1  The  passage  shows  that  the  Hebrews  under
Joab's  energetic  military  guidance  were  beginning  to
make  some  progress  in  siege  operations,  not  improbably
under  Phoenician  influence.  See  FORTRESS,  §  2,  and
cp  2  S.  5  n.

When  we  turn  to  another  important  passage,  in
i  K.  '20,  descriptive  of  the  siege  of  Samaria  by  Benhadad
(  =  Hadadezer,  the  Dad'idri  of  Shalmaneser's  inscr.  read
by  Winckler  Bir'idri)2  we  find  several  elements  that  are
obscure  [see  Crit.  Bib.~\.  The  account,  moreover,  is
from  two  distinct  sources  (see  Kittel).  In  v.  12  a  word
seems  to  have  dropped  out  between  ID'BH  and  the
following  TJfrrVp.  <§  read  otVoSo/u^craTe  x°-Paica  '  build
a  rampart '  or  perhaps  '  palisaded  camp. '  The  former
seems  here  to  be  the  meaning  of  x<x/3d£,  which  is  also
employed  in  a  collective  sense  by  Polybius  (in  the  sense
of  '  entrenched  camp  ' ).  The  omitted  word,  correspond
ing  to  this  Greek  word  for  '  rampart,'  was  in  the  original
Hebrew  text  used  by  the  (5  niso  (cp  Dt.  20 19  Heb.
and  ©)  'siege-works'  or  'lines  of  circumvallation.'
There  is  an  alternative  view,  that  the  word  to  be  supplied
here  is  y\s  '  battering-rams '  ;  but  this  has  no  basis  of
support  in  the  <5,  and  is  only  plausibly  sustained  by  the
use  of  the  phrase  hy  c'iff  in  Ezek.  4  2  in  connection  with
the  word  D"i3.  Over  these  lines  of  entrenchment,  within
which  Benhadad  and  his  Syrian  troops  thought  them
selves  secure,  Ahab  made  a  desperate  sally  with  7000
men  and  utterly  routed  the  enemy.

The  importance  of  the  military  embankment  (nV?fa)  for
siege  operations  may  be  clearly  discerned  in  the  monu-


FIG.  3. — Wheeled  Turret  with  Ram.

mental  reliefs.  The  n"?j?b  was  constructed  of  earth  and
stones  and  might  even  reach  almost  to  the  level  of  the
confronting  fortress-wall.  Sometimes  a  path  paved
with  bricks  or  tiles  was  formed  on  this  rampart  and
upon  this  lofty  six-wheeled  movable  turrets,  carrying
bowmen  on  the  summit,  and  provided  with  a  powerful

1  Heb. nDirn  ^Sn1?  CJVntrp. Ewald regards Ciyne'D as
denom.  verb  from  nnff  'hole,'  and  is  followed  by  Bottcher  and
Thenius.  (J5,  however,  render,  tvoawrav(Litvw6avv),  which  leads
Wellhausen  and Klostermann  to  restore  C'3B;np  (cp  Prov.  24s
Jon.  14),  'were  meditating  to  overthrow,  etc. '—a weak  meaning.

2  [To  reference  in  BENHADAD,  §  i,  acid  now  KA  7"(3)  1  250.]

4509


SIEGE

battering-ram,  were  driven  down  the  paved  slope  against
the  hostile  wall  or  tower.  Some  of  these  movable  rams
(fig.  3),  mounted  on  wheeled  conveyances,  were  of  much
smaller  size.  These  possessed  a  powerful  head  or  spur,
shaped  like  a  ram's  head,  and  the  body  of  the  convey
ance  was  framed  of  thick  planks  which  afforded  pro
tection  to  the  warriors  inside  against  the  arrows  and
stones  discharged  by  the  defenders  of  the  besieged  city.
The  more  simple  and  primitive  contrivances,  consisting
of  long  beams  or  poles  with  metal  heads  (such  as  the
ancient  Egyptians  used,  see  above),  which  were  driven
by  hand  only  against  the  lower  portions  of  the  walls,
were  employed  even  as  late  as  in  the  days  of  Shal-
maneser  II.  (middle  of  gih  cent.  B.C.),  and  even  in
the  days  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  if  we  can  trust  the  details  of
Ezekiel's  portrayal  of  his  operations  against  Tyre,  26  9
(see  below).  The  larger  movable  towers  with  powerful
rams  may  be  found  depicted  on  the  monuments  of  Asur-
nasir-abal.  Billerbeck  thinks  that  they  must  have  been
employed  at  a  much  earlier  period  to  reduce  the
enormous  walls  of  strongholds  that  were  erected  in
Babylonia  as  far  back  as  3000  B.C.1

As  we  approach  the  close  of  the  regal  period  in
Hebrew  history  the  methods  adopted  by  the  Assyrians
3  Later  nre  Became  familiar  to  Israel.  Thus  the
PYilip  T«rapl  word  for  battering-ram,  kdr,  is  several

CA111O XDldCl. ,  -  i  j  i_ T-> i • i /  j ni r -i\

times  employed  by  Ezekiel  (42,  21  27  [22]).
We  cannot,  however,  lay  stress  on  the  details  of  2  Ch.
26is  in  which  it  is  recorded  that  King  Uzziah  placed
catapults  or  ballistce  (rrbiirn,  see  ENGINE)  for  discharg
ing  stones  and  darts  on  the  towers  of  Jerusalem.
Probably  the  passage  reflects  the  tradition  ;is  to  defen
sive  apparatus  in  a  besieged  town  of  the  early  Greek
period  (300  B.C.).  Certainly  catapults  were  employed
by  the  Assyrians  for  discharging  stones  and  darts  at  the
defenders  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  and  it  is  possible  that
Israel  was  familiar  before  750  B.  c.  with  these  military
engines  ;  but  we  have  no  mention  of  them  in  pre-exilian
literature.  Injer.  66  reference  is  made  to  one  of  the
characteristic  accompaniments  of  a  siege,  viz. ,  the
destruction  of  trees.  Fruit-trees  are  here  not  specifically
mentioned,  but  all  the  trees  whose  wood  served  for
palisades  or  hurdles,  as  shelters  for  the  archers  or  as
timber  for  the  pent-houses.  That  the  Hebrews,  like
the  Assyrians,  employed  the  services  of  slingers  (see
SLING)  in  sieges  is  clearly  shown  by  2  K.  825.

In  Ezek.  42  we  have  an  enumeration  of  the  various
forms  of  siege-work  to  be  depicted  on  the  tile  in  which
the  central  figure  represents  Jerusalem  itself.  Around
it  are  placed  the  rampart  (dayek)  and  the  embankment
(solfldh).  Encampments  are  to  be  made  and  battering-
rams  erectea  on  every  side.  It  is  quite  evident  that
these  clear  and  definite  features  have  been  derived  from
the  prophet's  acquaintance  with  the  military  operations
of  Nebuchadrezzar's  armies.  A  fresh  and  vivid  detail
should  be  noted  in  Ezek.  268  in  the  prophecy  against
TYKK  (r/.-r.).  Nebuchadrezzar  will  besiege  Tyre.  The
embankments  will  be  cast  up  and  the  testudo  reared
against  her.  Kraetzschmar,  however,  doubts  the  render
ing  of  sinndh  by  testnJo,  and  prefers  to  regard  it  as
meaning  the  high  shield  carried  by  the  Babylonian
soldiery,  under  whose  protection  they  undermined  the
walls.  In  favour  of  this  view  he  cites  IJelitzsch,  Beitriige
sur  Assyr.  8175.  In?'.  9  the  doubtful  words  i^g  <np
probably  refer  to  the  battering-ram,  and  we  should
render  with  Cornill,  '  And  his  battering-ram  he  places
against  thy  walls  and  thy  towers  he  demolishes  \\ith  his
lances. '

The  Books  of  Maccabees  throw  some  light  on  the

1  See  '  Fortress-construction  in  the  Ancient  East,'  by  Colonel
Billerbeck  in  Dcr  alte  Orient,  fa  no.  4  (Leipsic,  1900).  The
present  writer  much  regrets  that  this  careful  study  came  into
his  hands  too  late  for  him  to  utilise  in  the  article  FORTRESS.
Billerbeck  gives  a  ground-plan  (16)  of  the  ancient  fortress  of
King  C'.udea (about  3000  B.C.) inscribed  on  a  sttneslab  preserved
in  the  Louvre.

4510


4 Details  in

Maccabees

and  Josephus.


SIEGE

siege  operations  of  the  second  century  B.C.  In  the
sie«e  of  Mt.  /ion  described  in  i  Maco.
we  read  of  stations  to  shoot  from
ft?,  probably  embankments,
and  engines  of  war  for  the  dis
charge  of  fire-brands  (irvpo^oXa)  and  stones  (\i0op6\a),
as  well  as  ffKopiridia.  which  seem  to  have  been  a  smaller
kind  of  ffKopirlos  or  great  cross-bow  (called  also  yacrrpa-
<(>^T^  'stomach-bow').1  Lastly  we  have  slings  (see
SUNG).  Engines  were  also  constructed  by  the  besieged  to
repel  these  attacks.  In  the  days  of  Simon  the  Maccabee
strongholds  were  erected  in  Judrea  '  fortified  with  high
towers,  great  walls,  gates,  and  bars'  and  well  pro-
visioned.  In  i  Mace.  1843  we  read  that  Simon
besieged  Gaza  and  invested  it  with  intrenched  camps
and  brought  a  particular  engine  called  eX^TroXts  (or
'city  taker')  to  bear  against  the  city,  and  battered  one
of  the  towers  and  captured-it.  '  The  occupants  of  the
eX^TroXis  then  leaped  into  the  city  and  there  was  a  great
commotion  in  the  city  and  the  inhabitants  rent  their
clothes  and  went  on  the  walls  with  their  wives  and
children  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice  beseeching
Simon."

This  fX^TroXis  was  invented  by  Demetrius  Poliorcetes
in  the  siege  of  Salamis  in  Cyprus  in  306  B.C.  It  was  a
tower  120  feet  high  and  measured  60  feet  laterally.  It
was  carried  on  four  wheels,  each  12  feet  in  diameter,
was  divided  iifto  nine  stories,  and  was  manned  by
200  soldiers,  who  moved  it  by  pushing  the  parallel
beams  at  the  base  (Warre-Cornish).  An  even  larger
machine  was  employed  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes  in  the
following  year,  pyramidal  in  shape  and  with  iron  plates
on  the  three  sides.

The  use  of  slings  in  sieges  to  which  2  K.  825  i  Mace.
651  bear  witness  was  also  characteristic  of  the  Roman
period  of  domination.  When  Sabinus  the  Roman  pro
curator  was  besieged  by  the  Jews,  the  attackers  used
slingers  as  well  as  archers  (Jos.  Ant.  xvii.  102)  and  they
were  also  employed  by  Pompey  with  considerable  effect
when  he  besieged  Aristobulus  in  Jerusalem  (Jos.  BJ
i.  7 9).  This  siege  was  memorable  for  the  enormous
labour  involved  in  filling  up  not  only  the  ditch  in  front
of  the  N.  side  of  the  temple,  but  the  deep  valley  as  well.
Josephus  in  his  De  B^llo  Judaico  furnishes  abundant
material  for  detailed  description — -though  not  in
frequently  exaggerated2— of  a  Roman  siege.  Especially
interesting  are  the  vivid  particulars,  derived  from
personal  experience,  of  Vespasian's  operations  against
the  naturally  strong  fortress  of  Jotapata  (Z?/iii.  1  $f. ).
Hurdles  were  formed  of  the  wood  cut  down  from  the
mountains  for  the  protection  of  the  soldiers  in  the  con
struction  of  the  embankment.  Meanwhile  the  Jews
hurled  darts  and  stones  at  the  troops  so  engaged.
Vespasian,  on  the  other  hand,  set  up  160  engines  which
discharged  javelins,  stones  a  talent  in  weight,  arrows,
and  fiery  missiles,  and  thus  made  the  walls  untenable  by
the  defenders,  when  they  came  within  range.  Sallies,
however,  were  made  from  the  walls,  the  hurdles  dragged
away,  and  the  workers  at  the  embankment  killed.  The
attempt  made  by  Josephus  to  raise  the  height  of  the
city  walls  was  carried  out,  in  spite  of  the  volleys  of
missiles,  by  the  ingenious  expedient  of  covering  fixed
piles  with  raw  hides  from  newly  killed  animals,  which
owing  to  their  moisture  were  proof  against  fire.  Another
device,  to  neutralise  the  shock  of  the  battering  ram,3

1  See  Warre-Cornish,  Concise  Diet,  of  Greek  and  Roman
Antiqq.,  '  Tormentum,'  636  b.

3  This  battering-ram  (Bf'm.  7  19,  §§  214^)  was  far  more  formid
able  than  the  rams  employed  by  the  Assyrians  described  above,
and  propelled  by  different  means.  It  was  a  vast  beam  of  wood
like  a  vessel's  mast,  with  a  thick  piece  of  iron  at  the  head  and
swung  in  the  air  by  ropes  passing  over  its  centre  and  suspended
like  a  balance  in  a  pair  of  scales  from  a  second  beam  supported
by  other  beams  passing  on  both  sides  of  the  second  like  a  cross.
This  battering-ram  was  then  pulled  by  a  great  number  of  men
with  united  force.  In  order  to  protect  them  it  was  cased  with
hurdles  all  over  the  upper  part,  secured  with  skins.

45"


SIEVE

consisted  in  letting  dowVi  sacks  of  chaff  to  meet  the
impact  (§  20).  As  an  effective  mode  of  defence  scald
ing  oil  was  poured  upon  the  Roman  soldiers  and
penetrated  within  their  armour.

We  have  no  space  to  describe  further  the  varied  ex
pedients  in  offence  and  defence  in  this  memorable  siege,
nor  to  recount  other  phases  of  warfare  that  present
themselves  either  in  the  investment  of  Gamala  or  in  the
operations  carried  on  by  Titus  around  Jerusalem.  These,
like  the  account  of  the  siege  of  Alesia  in  Ccesar,  de  Bell.
Gall.  768-89,  belong  to  classical  rather  than  biblical
archaeology.

The  ethics  of  ancient  warfare  are  almost  universally
conspicuous  by  their  absence. The  religious  sanction  of
5 No  ethics  J'frfm  (see  BAN)  was  Siven  to  wholesale
for  sieges slauKhter  which the  Hebrews  like  other
Semites  ruthlessly  inflicted  on  the  captured
inhabitants  (Joshua,  passim,  i  S.  1633  2  S.  82  ;  cp  2  K.
812  15 16  Hos.  14 1  [13 16]  Am.  1 13. Also  see  Stone  of
Mesha,  /.  17). Even  the  deuteronomic  legislation  made
it  incumbent  (Dt.  20 13)  that  every  male  inhabitant  of  a
town that resisted  should be put to the  sword, but
women,  children,  and  cattle  should  be  carried  away  as
captives. Assyrian  monuments  depict  the  terrible  clos
ing  scenes  of  the  tragedy  of  a  captured  town. Mothers
and  maidens  on  the  walls  are  portrayed  with  dishevelled
hair  and  outstretched  hands  praying  for  mercy. But
mercy  was scant. Asur-nasir-abal, after  storming  a
mountain  stronghold,  boasts  that  he  cut  off  the  heads
of  260  warriors  and  built  them  up  into  a  pyramid  (col.
164). In the  capture  of Hulai 3000 prisoners  were
burnt  (/.  1 08). The  strong  fortress  of  Tela  with  three
encircling  walls  received  a  fearful  punishment. Many
prisoners  were  burnt. Others  were  deprived  of  hand,
arm,  nose,  ears,  or  eyes. The  Assyrian  boasts  that  he
erected  a  column  of  writhing  agony  (/.  118). Boys  and
girls  were  burnt  in  the  flames  (col.  2i). That  all  the
survivors became  slaves was  the  natural  outcome  of
universal custom. Walls were razed to their  foun
dations,  the city  totally  demolished,  while cattle and
valuables were carried off  as spoil. The fruit-trees
around  the  city  were  utterly  destroyed  by  the  invader.
Thus  Tiglath-pileser III. in describing  his  operations
against  Chinzer  (Rawl.  Nimrud-insc.  II.,  67,  24)  says,
(isu)  kiri  (isu)  musukkani  sa  dih  cliirisu  akisma  isten "  ul
ezib  ; 'The  plantations  of  palm  which  abutted  on  his
rampart  I cut  down,  not  a  single one did I leave.'
Though Elisha  recommended  a  like  course  in  the  war
against Moab (2 K.  819), the growing humanitarian
spirit  gradually  broke  into  the  old  ruthless  tradition  of
herein. The  fruit-trees around the  city  were to be
spared  (Dt.  20 ig/). Yet  the  old  spirit  of  warfare  still
remained  in  full  force  (uv.  13-17),  especially  in  reference
to  Canaanite  towns. But  this  was  after  all  a  trait  of
the  dead  past. Greater  mercy  was  to  be  shown  in  wars
with  more  distant  peoples  (vv.  11-15). And  this  growing
spirit  of  humanity  is  reflected  in  the  conduct  of  Simon
the  Maccabee  towards  the  inhabitants  of  Gaza  (Gazara),
an  episode  already  narrated  (§  4). In  response  to  their
entreaties  he  becomes  reconciled.

The  duration of  a siege  varied  with the resisting

power  of  the  walls  and  its  defenders  as  well  as  the  strict-

6 Duration  ness  °^  the mvestment- Other factors

of  a  sie^e co-0Perated,  such  as  the  provisions  stored

°  ' in  the  city  and  the  water-supply. Disease

also  might  accelerate  the  end. The  siege  of  Samaria

lasted  more  than  two  years. The  siege  of  the  island

of Tyre by  Shalmaneser IV. and Sargon II. lasted

probably  five  years, and by  Nebuchadrezzar thirteen

years  (unsuccessfully). Of  the  great  straits  to  which  a

prolonged  siege  reduced  the  inhabitants  we  have  a  vivid

portraiture  in  2  K.  625  Ezek.  4 ion  5  ion  Jer.  19g  Lam.

2  20  Dt.  2853- Cp  the  language  of  Lk.  21 23 /.

o.  c.  w.

SIEVE  (n-n3,  Am.99t;  nSJ,  Is.3028t)  and  SIFT
k-  2231. See  AGRICULTURE,  §  10.
45"


SIGN,  SIGNS

SIGN,  SIGNS.  i.  D3,  nfs,  and  2.  JTIX,  'otA.
See  ENSIGNS,  §  la  c.  For  'signs'  in  phrase  D'nS-'  niriNi
<7T)ju.eia  (cat  rtpara,  see  WONDERS  ;  also  GOSPELS,  §  137^!

3.  JVS, siyyfin', Ezek.  39  15  Jer.  31  21 2  K.  23  17. See  col.
2978  (e).

4.  DNB'S,  ntas'eth,  Jer.  6  i,  RV  'signal.'

5.  irapdoT)M-os.  Acts  28  n. See  CASTOR  AND  POLLUX.

6.  <rrjju.eio»'. See  above,  2.

For  'the  twelve  signs'  (ni"??c,  2  K.  285  EVn>K-,  and  nwDi

{ob  38  32  AV»>t,'.,  RV'i'K-  '  signs  of  the  Zodiac  '),  see  M  AZZALOTH,
IAZZAKOTH,  STARS,  §  3</.


SIGNET  (DJTin. hotham;
'izkil'  ;  SaKTi/Aios). See  RING.

SIHON  (flTD,  jilTD;  CHCON  [BAF],  CIOON  [L]),  a
king  of  the  Amorites,  in  the  time  of  the  early  Israelites.
There  are  serious  problems  arising  out  of  the  accounts
of  Sihon.  Our  object  must  be,  first,  to  give  a  sketch
of  the  traditions  in  their  present  form,  and  to  state  the
position  of  previous  critics  as  to  their  historical  value,
and  next,  to  point  out  the  great  simplification  of  the
whole  question  produced  by  the  application  of  a  keener
criticism  to  the  text  of  the  narratives.

Sihon  is  represented  in  the  traditional  text  as  a  king
of  the  Amorites  beyond  the  Jordan,  whose  dominion

TVi t was  b°uncled  by  the  Jabbok  on  the  N.,
1.  me  tra- by  the  Arnon on  the s  _  and by  the

ditional  text.  jordan  on  the  w  _  and  extended  east
wards  to  the  desert  (Judg.  1122).  According  to  Josh.
123  1827,  however,  it  also  included  the  ARABAH  \_q.v.]
between  the  Jabbok  and  the  sea  of  Galilee  (called
Chinnereth  or  Chinneroth),  and  in  Josh.  13  21  the  five
kings  of  the  Midianites  killed  by  the  Israelites  (Nu.  31  8)
are  called  '  princes  of  Sihon  '  (creiuv  B],  a-rjup  [A]).
When  Israel  asked  leave  of  this  Amorite  king  to  pass
through  his  land,  in  order  to  reach  the  Jordan  and
invade  Canaan,  he  refused  it,  and  took  the  field  against
them,  but  was  defeated  and  slain  at  Jahaz  (Nu.  21  21-24  ;
01.226-36;  Judg.  11  19-22).  The  Israelites  took  Heshbon,
Sihon's  capital,  and  with  it  all  the  territory  between  the
Jabbok  and  the  Arnon.  OG  [g.i1.  J  and  his  kingdom  they
also  conquered,  and  so,  as  it  would  appear  unintention
ally,  they  became  the  masters  of  the  whole  of  the  trans-
Tordanic  region  called,  in  the  wider  sense,  Gilead  (see
GILEAD,  §  3).  The  northern  part  —  the  former  kingdom
of  Og  —  was  given  to  half  Manasseh,  the  southern  to
Gad  and  Reuben.  From  Nu.  2127-30  Josh.  1825  Dt.
236  it  is  inferred  that  Sihon  'had  crossed  the  Jordan,
and  driving  Moab  southwards  over  Arnon  and  Ammon
eastwards  to  the  sources  of  the  Jabbok,  had  founded  a
kingdom  for  himself.'  l  The  extraordinary  negotiations
described  in  Judg.  1114-27  are  based  upon  the  asserted
fact  that  the  territory  between  the  Jabbok  and  the  Arnon
originally  and  properly  belonged  to  Ammon.  The
Ammonites  sought  in  vain  to  conquer  their  ancient
territory  from  the  Israelites,  and  in  i  K.  4  19  we  find
one  of  Solomon's  prefects  ruling  over  '  the  land  of
Gilead,  the  country  of  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites  and
Og  the  king  of  Bashan.  '

The  circumstance  that  neither  J  nor  P  mentions  the  fight  with
Sihon  has  suggested  to  Meyer  (ZA  TW  5  36^)  and  Stade  (GVI
1  117)  that  the  tight  with  Sihon  can  have  formed  no  part  of  the
original  tradition,  and  arose  out  of  a  misunderstanding  of  the
old  song  in  Nu.  21  27-30.  Their  objections  are  noticed  and
replied  to  by  Kittel  (Hist.  2  228-231)  and  by  G.  A.  Smith  (ffG
561),  but  not  altogether  conclusively.

The redactors and  editors of  the already  corrupt

Hebrew  texts  have  ventured  to  alter  the  historical  and

f1  T 11 geographical  details  in  accordance  with

^  \A  if f tne'r  own  inaccurate  ideas  ; but  they

led  text.  use  their  liberty  so  conscientiously  that

it  is  almost  always  possible  in  a  greater  or  less  degree

to  discern  the  true  text  underlying  the  false. Og  the  king

of  the  Amorites  was  really  Agag  king  of  the  Arammites  or

Jerahmeelites  (=Amalekites),  and  the  region  occupied

by his branch of  the Jerahmeelite race was called

Cushan  —  i.e.,  the  N. Arabian Gush, which adjoined

1  G.  A.  Smith,  ffG  $S7/-

45*3


SILAS,  SILVANUS

Missur  or  Musri.  This  '  Cushan  '  (jtyir)  was  miswritten
Sihon.  Whether  the  capital  of  the  land  was  called
'Heshbon'  (pasTi)  or  'Heshmon'  (porn)  may  be
doubtful.  There  are  traces  of  a  clan  called  ac'n  or  the
like  (cp  Hashabiah,  Hashubah)  as  well  as  of  one  called
Drn  (cp  Heshmon,  Husham).  That  the  five  kings  of
the  Midianites  should  be  called  '  princes  of  Sihon  '  (Josh.
13zi)  need  not  surprise  us.  Their  names  are  based  on
the  three  ethnic  names  Jerahmeel,  Zarephath,  and
'Arab  ;  it  is  not  more  wonderful  that  such  personages
should  be  connected  with  Cushan  than  that  Balak,  a
son  of  Zippor  (i.e. ,  a  Zarephathite),  should  be  introduced
to  us  as  king  of  Missur  ('  Moab,'  in  Nu.  224,  etc.,  as
often,  is  miswritten  for  '  Missur'),  and  that  these  kings
should  be  called  '  Midianites '  harmonises  with  the  fact
that  Balak  king  of  Missur  ( '  Moab  ')  is  closely  connected
with  the  elders  of  Midian.1  The  reconstruction,
whether  partial  or  complete,  of  all  the  other  Sihon
passages  would  occupy  too  much  space  here  (see  C'rit.
Bib. ).  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  view  of  E.  Meyer,
Stade,  Bacon,  and  the  Oxf.  Hex.  that  Nu.  21 26  is  an
editorial  insertion  arising  out  of  a  misunderstanding  of
the  song  which  follows  seems  fully  justified.  The  song
itself,  in  a  revised  form  which  probably  approaches  the
true  text  somewhat  more  nearly  than  earlier  revisions,
appears  to  run  thus  : —

27/1  Let  the  castle  of  Heshbon  be  built,
Let  the  city  of  Cushan  be  established  !

28  For  a  fire  burned  Heshbon,
A  flame  the  city  of  Cushan,

It  devoured  the  cities  of  Missur,
It  consumed  the  citadels  thereof.

29  Wo  to  tbee  !  [O  people  of]  Missur,
Thou  art  undone,  O  people  of  Cusham!
He  has  given  up  his  sons  as  fugitives,
(Yea),  Jerahmeel  his  daughters  into  captivity.

30  Cushan  as  far  as  Rimmon  has  perished,
Missur  as  far  as  Naphtoah  is  desolate. a

The  criticism  of  Judg.  11  12 Jf.  given  elsewhere  (JEI'HTHAH,  §§
3,  5)  may  be  here  reaffirmed,  so  far  as  it  asserts  that  the  narrative
has  been  editorially  recast,  and  in  particular  that  the  account  of
Jephthah's  message  to  the  king  of  Ammon  (?)  must  originally
have  referred  to  the  compact  between  Laban  and  Jacob  or
Israel  (Gen.  8144-54).  But  the  theory  that  p'ej?  has  often
arisen  out  of  pVojf  or  ^NOm'j  taken  in  connection  with  the
view  of  the  earlier  tradition  respecting  Moses  suggested  elsewhere
(see  MOSES,  §  18),  suggests  a  better  key  to  the  problem.  The
Og-story  itself  (see  OG)  did  not  originally  have  Hauran  for  its
scene  ;  this  naturally  suggests  a  more  radical  treatment  of  the
Sihon-narrative.  On  the  statement  in  i  K.  4  19  (MT  and  (P),
which  Kuenen  wrongly  supposed  to  confirm  the  tradition  of  an
Amorite  king  Sihon,  see  Crit.  Bib.  Solomon's  twelve  prefects
(as  the  original  text  must  have  stated)  were  most  probably
placed  over  the  Israelite  territory  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  ;
see  SOLOMON,  §  6,  n.  i.

See  Kuenen,  Th.  Ti.  18516^  [1885],  E.  Meyer,  ZATW
5  36-52  [1885].  T.  K.  C.

SIHOR  OirVt?),  Josh.  133  AV,  RV  SHIHOR  (q.v.).
Cp  also  EGYPT,  RIVER  OF,  and  NILE.

SILAS,  SILVANUS. Silvanus  (in  this  form  of  the

name) is mentioned only four times in NT. In

NT  A  ^ Thess.  1  l 2  Thess.  1 1 he appears as

'  joint author, along with Paul and

Timothy, of the respective epistles  ; according to

2  Cor.  1 19  he  preached the Gospel in Corinth along

with the  same two; according to i  Peter  (5 12)  that

Epistle  was  written  '  through  '  (did)  Silvanus.

Silas  (in  this  form  of  the  name)  is  met  with  only  in

1  Either  the  large  ethnic  term  '  Midian '  covers  the  smaller
one  of  'Jerahmeel'  (or  'Zarephath'),  or  more  probably  [HO  is
written  in  error  for  1SI2  (Missur)  ;  cp  Joel  3  [4]  4,  flTsl  IS,  where
pTX  maY  come  from  iijjg,  a  correction  of  is,  and  the  poem  in


side  by  side ;  pia  apparently  comes  from  pTXi  and  this  from
TSD  (the  original  reading  out  of  which  3N1D  sprang).

2  See  Crit.  Bib.  The  last  line  seems  to  baffle  Prof.  Sievers
(Metrische  Studien,  2411).  But  Pesh.'s  reading  1310  (see
MEDEBA)  might  have  suggested  the  remedy.  Cp  1310  flllO

(Ps.65i3  [12]),  i.e.,  lisa  rroD-iN.
45  T4


SILAS,  SILVANUS

Acts  15  22-185.  At  the  council  of  Jerusalem  he  is
chosen  along  with  Judas  Barsabas  to  accompany  Paul
and  Barnabas  in  name  of  the  primitive  church  to
Antioch  and  there  deliver  the  letter  embodying  the
apostolic  decree  which  at  the  same  time  is  to  be  com
municated  by  word  of  mouth  also  (102227).  After
some  time  so  spent  they  return  to  Jerusalem  (1532/1).
In  connection  with  their  appearance  in  Antioch  they  are
called  'prophets'  (trpo(prJTai.)  ;  when  chosen  at  Jerusalem
they  are  referred  to  as  '  chief  men  among  the  brethren '
(dvdpes  i)yoi'ifjL€voi  ev  rocs  ddf\<t>o2s)  ;  103222.

After  the  separation  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  in  con
sequence  of  the  difference  about  John  Mark  before  the
second  missionary  journey,  Paul  makes  choice  of  Silas
to  take  the  place  of  Barnabas  as  his  companion  (1540).
The  next  mention  of  Silas  is  in  connection  with  the
incidents  at  Philippi  when  he  and  Paul  wereapprehended,
beaten  at  the  instance  of  the  Roman  authority,  and
cast  into  prison.  It  is  described  how  as  they  prayed
aloud  at  midnight  they  were  miraculously  delivered  and
how  they  baptised  the  gaoler  and  his  family.  When
orders  came  to  let  the  prisoners  go,  Paul  claimed
for  himself  and  his  companion  their  privileges  as
Roman  citizens,  thus  compelling  the  magistrates  to
come  in  person  and  beg  them  to  leave  the  city  (16 19-40).

In  connection  with  the  sojourn  in  Thessalonica  it  is
recorded  of  Silas  that  he  took  part  in  the  successful
missionary  work  there  ;  and  after  a  tumult  was  escorted
out  of  the  town  by  the  Christians  there  on  his  night
journey  with  Paul  towards  Beroea  (l?4-iort).  In  Beroea
with  Paul  he  was  again  successful  in  the  synagogue.
Along  with  Timothy  (of  whom  there  has  been  no  men
tion  by  name  since  16s)  Silas  remained  in  Beroea  whilst
Paul,  in  consequence  of  a  tumult,  was  brought  by  the
Christians  to  Athens  (17io^-i5«).  These  bring  back  a
message  from  Paul  begging  Silas  and  Timothy  to  join
him  as  soon  as  possible,  he  awaiting  their  arrival  there
(17 i$fi  16).  But  it  is  not  until  after  he  has  gone  on
to  Corinth  that  they  actually  come  up  with  him  (18s).

The  question  whether  by  the  two  forms  of  the  name

the same person is denoted is one which must be

_ ... determined  mainly  by  the  contents  of  the

.',  ...  passages  in  which  they  respectively  occur  ;
the  mere  suggestion  of  a  person  having
two  names  does  not  in  itself  create  any  difficulty  (§  7).

(a)  It  is  in  agreement  with  2  Cor.  1 19  that,  as  we  read
in  Acts  18  5,  Silas  and  Timothy  rejoin  Paul  in  Corinth.

(/>)  According  to  i  Thess.  3  if.  5,  Paul,  before  the
composition  of  i  Thess. ,  sent  Timothy  from  Athens  to
Thessalonica.  According  to  this  we  shall  have  to
assume  at  all  events  a  hiatus  in  Acts.  If,  as  we  read
in  Acts  18  5,  Timothy  first  rejoined  Paul  not  at  Athens,
but  at  Corinth,  then  if  he  was  to  be  sent  by  Paul  from
Athens  to  Thessalonica  he  must  first  have  again  made
the  journey  to  Athens  from  Corinth  along  with  the
apostle.

Of  any  such  break  in  Paul's  sojourn  in  Corinth,  however,  we
find  no  trace  in  Acts  18  i-iSa.  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  to
assign  the  journey  to  Athens  to  a  later  date  ;  for,  according  to
Acts  IS  18^-22  Paul's  route  from  Corinth  leads  him  directly  by
way  of  Ephesus  to  Syria.  The  third  missionary  journey  is  not
to  be  thought  of  in  this  connection  ;  for  in  it  the  apostle  came
to  Macedonia  first,  proceeding  afterwards  to  Hellas  (Acts '20  if.  ;
whether  to  Athens  or  no  is  not  at  all  said),  whilst  according  to
i  Thess.  '2  18  3  4  he  had  not  been  in  Thessalonica  again  before
the  letter  was  composed.

Unless  we  are  prepared  to  assume  that  a  journey  of
Paul  from  Corinth  to  Athens  has  been  omitted,  the
only  alternative  is  to  seek  for  the  lacuna  in  what  we  are
told  concerning  Timothy  (and  Silvanus),  and  suppose
somewhat  as  follows.  While  Paul  was  still  in  Athens
(Acts  1716-34),  not  afterwards  when  he  was  in  Corinth,
he  was  joined  from  Beroea  by  Timothy,  whom  he  then
sent  (from  Athens)  to  Thessalonica.  As  for  Silvanus,
it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  even  a  lacuna,  if  we
conjecture  that  his  meeting  with  Paul  did  not  occur  at
Athens  but  only  after  Corinth  had  been  reached.  But
if  in  Acts  the  arrival  of  Timothy  at  Athens  is  left  un-

4515


SILAS,  SILVANUS

mentioned  and  the  journeys  of  Timothy  and  Silvanus
are  always  represented  as  having  been  made  together,
there  is  also  the  other  possibility  that  Silvanus  joined
Paul  along  with  Timothy  while  the  apostle  was  still  in
Athens.  Only,  in  that  case,  when  Timothy  set  out  from
Athens  for  Thessalonica  Silvanus  must  have  been  sent
off  somewhere  else,  as  we  find  Paul  saying  that  the
journey  of  Timothy  to  Thessalonica  had  for  its  con
sequence  that  he  himself  was  left  in  Athens  alone.  The
plural  in  i  Thess.  3 1/  'we  thought  it  good  to  be  left
behind  at  Athens  alone  and  sent  Timothy '  seems  to
|  allow  the  supposition  that  Paul  remained  in  Athens
along  with  Silvanus;  but  the  singular  in  3  5  'I  ...  sent'
shows  that  this  is  excluded.

It  is  to  be  emphasised  that  the  introduction  of  a  coming  of
Timothy  (and  Silvanus)  to  Paul  in  Athens  is  quite  contrary
to  the  view  of  Acts  ;  for  according  to  17  16  Paul  awaits  both  in
Athens,  yet  in  point  of  fact  (IS  5)  they  do  not  reach  him  till
he  is  in  Corinth  and  this  last  circumstance  is  stated  in  such
a  form  as  makes  the  meeting  there  entirely  the  result  of  the
apostle's  injunction  recorded  in  17  15.  If,  however,  the  student
is  prepared  to  accept  the  assumption  of  the  one  lacuna  or  the
other  in  Acts  as  above,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  identifica
tion  of  Silas  with  Silvanus.

Weizsacker  (Ap.  Zeitalter,  (2>  256,  ET1 292/1)  never
theless  doubts  the  identification.  He  thinks  that

3 Two tlle comPan'on °f  ^aul was  Silvanus but
, that the  composer  of  Acts  substituted  for
distinct ,  • o-,  , f  ,

^  him  Silas,  a  member  of  the  primitive  church,

with  a  view  to  expressing  by  this  means
also  the  connection  of  Paul  with  Jerusalem.  It  is
correct  to  say  that  this  tendency  really  is  at  work  in
Acts  (see  ACTS,  §  4 ;  CORNKLIUS,  §  5  ;  COUNCIL,
§§  6,  10).  In  point  of  fact  one  can  very  easily  find
cause  for  bringing  it  into  requisition  in  the  case  of  Silas
when  regard  is  had  to  the  parallel  case  of  Barnabas.

Silas  is  Paul's  companion  on  the  second  missionary  journey
as  Barnabas  was  on  the  first.  Now  we  find  Barnabas  figuring
in  Acts  11  19-26  as  the  emissary  of  the  primitive  church  who  is
charged  by  it  with  the  task  of  inspecting  the  first  Gentile
Christian  church  at  Antioch  and  who  fetched  Paul  from  Tarsus
to  Antioch.  Not  only  is  this  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the
known  independence  of  Paul ;  it  is  also  excluded  by  the  order
of  the  provinces,  Syria  and  Cilicia,  to  which,  according  to  Gal.
l2i,  Paul  betook  himself  after  his  first  visit  to  Jerusalem.  As,
then,  in  Acts,  for  the  first  period  of  his  activity  Paul  is  placed
under  the  guiding  hand  of  Barnabas,  so  also  is  it  possible  to
conceive  that  under  the  influence  of  the  same  tendency  he  has
assigned  to  him  a  companion  from  Jerusalem  for  the  second
missionary  journey,  a  companion  who  shall  be  the  guarantee  that
in  the  missionary  activity  of  the  apostle  the  connection  with
Jerusalem  shall  not  be  lost.  The  same  composer  in  fact  in
21  20-26  goes  so  far  as  to  affirm  that  Paul,  on  the  last  occasion
of  his  coming  back  to  Jerusalem,  took  upon  himself  a  Nazirite
vow  and  fulfilled  it  in  order  to  prove  with  all  publicity  the
completeness  of  his  adherence  to  the  Mosaic  law.  As  against
this  see  ACTS  (§  7,  n  end).  In  particular,  in  164  a  main
business  of  the  second  missionary  journey  is  represented  as
having  been  that  of  communicating  and  inculcating  the  decree
which  we  are  told  had  been  arrived  at  in  the  Council  of  Jerusalem.
(As  against  the  historicity  of  this  decree,  see  COUNCIL,  §  n.)
For  such  a  purpose  Silas  must  have  seemed  a  singularly  suitable
companion  for  Paul,  as  along  with  Judas  Barsabas  he  had  been
the  messenger  solemly  charged  by  the  primitive  church  to  carry
the  decree  to  Antioch.

All  this,  however,  supplies  no  compelling  reason  for
assuming  a  substitution  of  the  Jerusalem  Silas  for  a
companion  of  Paul  not  belonging  to  Jerusalem  who
was  named  Silvanus.  Precisely  by  the  instance  of
Barnabas  ought  we  to  be  put  on  our  guard  against  too
far-reaching  critical  operations.  That  Barnabas  was  a
prominent  missionary  companion  of  Paul  is  assured  by
Gal.  2 1  9,  and  that  he  was  a  Jew — a  Jew  in  fact  who
notwithstanding  all  his  daily  intercourse  with  Paul  had
nevertheless  not  as  yet  succeeded  in  freeing  himself
from  the  yoke  of  the  law — is  shown  by  Gal.  2 13.  This
being  so,  Paul  can  very  well  be  supposed  to  have
selected  also  a  second  Jew— Silas,  to  wit — for  a  travelling
companion.  Had  Silas  really  been  the  bearer  of  the
decree  of  the  council,  Paul  assuredly  would  not  have
done  so  ;  it  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  no
such  decree  was  ever  made  and,  least  of  all,  carried  to
Antioch.  It  is  possible  to  recognise  the  tendency  of
Acts,  spoken  of  above,  to  represent  Paul  as  in  con-


SILAS,  SILVANUS

uection  with  Jerusalem  by  means  of  his  companion
Silas,  and  yet,  to  decline  to  be  shut  up  to  the  supposition
that  this  tendency  brought  about  the  substitution  of  this
Silas  in  the  place  of  another  companion  of  the  apostle  ;
it  is  enough  to  discern  the  error  and  the  tendency  of
Acts  simply  in  its  representation  of  the  Silas  who
actually  did  accompany  Paul  as  a  prominent  person
in  the  primitive  church  and,  in  particular,  as  guarantor
of  the  apostolic  decree.

That  the  companion  of  Paul  was  a  Jew  is  presupposed  not
only  by  the  composer  of  Acts  as  a  whole,  inasmuch  as  he
represents  Silas  in  1"  10  (2-4)  as  coming  forward  in  synagogues
and  also  (10  3)  represents  circumcision  as  being  necessary  in  a
companion  of  Paul  (in  the  case  of  Timothy),  but  also  by  the
author  of  the  '  we  '-source  (see  ACTS,  §1,9  end),  who  includes
Silas  among  the  number  of  those  who  (according  to  16  16)  go  to
the  synagogue  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  the  Jewish  place  of
prayer,  and  (1013)  teach  there.  In  1620  Paul  and  Silas
are  even  called  Jews  expressly — though  only  in  the  mouths  of
their  accusers,  it  is  true,  on  which  account  the  passage  must
be  set  on  one  side  as  possibly  meaning  to  suggest  that  the
accusers  were  in  error  (cp  1637).

Amongst  the  views  of  critics  we  find  not  only  the  dis
tinction  between  Silas  and  Silvanus  just  spoken  of;

4  Silas tnere  is  also  the  attempt  to  identify  the

C5i '  „_  individual  to  whom  both  names  are  as-

Silvanus  same • , •  ,

0_T , - signed  with  other  persons  as  well, \\ith

dS -Lill-KG i  I .  . i_  . ,  ,,-,, . .  .

Luke,  to  begin  with.  This  hypothesis
was  put  forward  by  Van  Vloten  (see  below,  §  10)  in  the
interests  of  his  proposed  answer  to  the  question  as  to
the  authorship  of  the  '  we  '-source  in  Acts.

There  is  much  that  speaks  for  the  view  that  this  author  was
Silas  ;  other  considerations  speak  for  Luke  ;  yet  neither  theory
is  in  itself  alone  quite  satisfactory  (see  ACTS,  §  9).  Van  Vloten
accordingly  sought  to  combine  the  advantages  of  both  by
identifying  the  two  persons.  In  particular  he  found  difficulty
in  the  supposition  that  in  1G  10  the  author  of  the  '  we  '-source
should  have  joined  Paul  as  a  travelling  companion  without  the
fact  being  mentioned.  The  supposition  is  necessary  as  long  as
one  chooses  to  see  in  this  author  some  one  not  named  in  Acts —
Luke,  for  example ;  it  can  be  dispensed  with  (he  thinks)  as
soon  as  we  see  in  him  one  who  has  already  been  spoken  of  as  a
member  of  the  travelling  company — Silas,  for  example.  Van
Vloten  sought  to  establish  the  possibility  of  his  identification
with  Luke  by  the  consideration  that  the  words  from  which
Silvanus  and  Lucanus  (the  original  form  underlying  the  abbrevi
ation  Lucas  ;  see  LUKE,  §  6)  are  derived,  have  the  same  meaning
(silva  =  lucus=  wood);  also  by  the  argument  that  in  2  Cor.,  i  and
2  Thess. ,  and  i  Pet.  only  the  name  Silvanus  is  met  with,  but
conversely  in  Col.  (4  14),  Philem.  (24),  2  Tim.  (4n)  only  that  of
Luke.

To  all  this  the  answer  must  be  that  identity  of  etymo
logical  meaning  in  the  case  of  two  proper  names  by  no
means  establishes  any  title  to  identify  the  persons  who
bear  them.  Moreover,  it  is  not  objectionable  but  be
fitting  the  seemly  modesty  of  the  author  if  his  joining
the  company  of  travellers  is  indicated  not  by  the  mention
of  his  name  but  simply  by  the  transition  from  the  third
to  the  first  person,  whether  he  is  really  himself  the  eye
witness  or  falsely  makes  himself  appear  as  such  (see
ACTS,  §  i).  The  transition  to  the  first  person,  too,  is
not  made  any  more  explicable  if  the  person  so  indicated
has  already  been  named.  Since  he  is  not  the  only  one
who  has  been  so  named  we  do  not  learn  from  the
1  we '  who  he  is.  Moreover,  Van  Vloten  has  not  at  all
succeeded  in  disposing  of  the  difficulties  by  which  the
hypothesis  that  Silas  wrote  the  '  we  '-source  is  beset  (see
ACTS,  §  9),  or  even  in  lessening  them  ;  the  identification
with  Luke  contributes  absolutely  nothing  at  all  towards
their  removal.

The  identification  of  Silas -Silvanus  with  Titus  has
been  attempted  in  quite  other  interests,  (a)  It  has  long

5  Silas been  regarded  as  a  conspicuous  instance
Silvanus  same  °f  silence  due  to  -tendency' that in

as  Titus  ?  name  of  Titus,  who,  accord

ing  to  Gal.  2s,  was  the  subject  of  so
violent  a  contention  at  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  is  men
tioned  neither  in  this  connection  nor  yet  anywhere  else
(see  COUNCIL,  §  7).  This  difficulty  would  disappear  if
Titus  was  identical  with  Silas.  Titus,  however,  was
a  Gentile  Christian,  we  learn  (Gal.  23);  whilst  Silas,
according  to  Acts  1522,  was  a  member  of  the  church  of
Jerusalem.

45T7


SILAS,  SILVANUS

In  order  to  identify  the  two  in  spite  of  this  consideration
Marcker  and  Seufert  (see  below,  §  io)  rind  themselves  reduced
to  the  violent  expedient  of  interpreting  Acts  1622  in  the  follow
ing  sense  :  '  it  seemed  good  to  the  apostles  and  the  elders,  with
the  whole  church,  to  choose  men  out  of  their  company  and  send
to  Antioch  with  Paul  and  Barnabas,  Judas  Barsabbas  and  Silas,
chief  men,  in  company  <if(ev)ihe  brethren.'  On  this  interpre
tation  Judas  and  Silas  are  distinguished  from  the  brethren
chosen  from  out  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  and  therefore  Silas
may  possibly  be  a  Gentile  Christian.  On  the  other  hand,  even
apart  from  the  violence  done  to  the  language  of  the  text,  this
supposition  is,  in  its  substance  also,  in  the  highest  degree  im
probable  ;  for  it  would  be  impossible  to  have  chosen  as  exponent
of  the  apostolic  decree  any  more  unsuitable  person  than  Paul's
uncircumcised  comrade.  No  less  astonishing  is  the  other
supposition,  that  of  Graf,  which  seeks  to  reach  the  same  result
by  the  opposite  route  ;  the  supposition,  namely,  that  Titus-Silas
was  from  the  first  a  member  of  the  church  of  Jerusalem  and  was
chosen  from  its  midst.  In  other  words,  we  are  asked  to  suppose
that  an  uncircumcised  person  had  been  for  years  a  member  of
the  church  in  Jerusalem.  Apart  from  the  inherent  difficulties,
neither  form  of  the  hypothesis  serves  in  any  adequate  degree  the
purpose  for  which  it  is  introduced  ;  for  though  it  is  true  that
on  this  hypothesis  Acts  does  not  leave  out  the  name  of  Titus-
Silas  altogether  in  connection  with  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  it
omits  the  principal  thing—  viz.,  that  the  demand  for  his  circum
cision  was  frustrated  by  Paul.

(£)  A  peculiar  position  is  taken  up  by  Seufert.  He
does  not  write  in  the  apologetic  interest  ;  rather  does  he
ascribe  to  the  composer  of  Acts  a  tendency  similar  to
that  supposed  by  Weizsacker  (§  3  above),  that,  namely,
of  putting  forward  Titus,  by  the  selection  of  his  Jewish-
sounding  name  Silas  (see  below,  §  jb),  as  a  man  stand
ing  in  close  connection  with  the  Jerusalem  Christians,
and  so  bridging  over  the  gulf  between  these  and  Paul.
It  will  be  time  to  consider  this  theory  when  the  identity
of  Titus  and  Silas  has  been  established  ;  but,  as  has
been  shown,  what  is  proved  is  their  distinctness.

The  acme  of  complexity  is  reached  by  the  hypothesis
of  Zimmer  (see  below,  §  io).  According  to  him,  Silas

6 One  S'la l'le Jevv'sn Christian of Jerusalem is

'  mentioned only in Acts  1,022  27  32  /;

_j  • •  r  i •  i  • i  • i  • i

2finct  fr°™  hm'  I™'  identical  w»th
Silvanus  and  Titus,  ,s  the  Silas  named
in  Acts  1040-185.

(a)  The  Silas  who,  according  to  Acts  15  40,  is  chosen  by  Paul,
then  in  Antioch,  to  be  his  travelling  companion,  cannot  be  the
same  person  as  the  Silas  who,  according  to  15  33,  returned  from
Antioch  to  Jerusalem.  —  But  why  not?  Paul  might  base
summoned  him  back  from  Jerusalem  ;  or,  without  the  circum
stance  being  expressly  mentioned,  Silas  could,  after  the  interval
named  in  15357^,  have  again  returned  to  Antioch.  1

(/')  The  Roman  citizenship  which,  according  to  Acts  16  37,
Silas  possessed,  does  not  disprove  that  he  belonged  to  Jerusalem  ;
for  either  he  or  his  parents  can  have  acquired  it  somewhere  in
the  Diaspora  in  the  same  manner  as,  for  example,  the  'libertini'
of  Acts  69  possessed  it  (see  Schiir.  GJ  I  '(-)  2  537^,  ET  ii.  2276^).
Besides,  this  citizenship  of  Silas  is  itself  exceedingly  doubtful
(.see  below,  §  8  a).

(c)  Zimmer  argues  that  in  2  Cor.  8  23  the  same  thing  is  said  of
Titus  as  is  said  of  Silvanus  in  1  19,  and  therefore  the  two  are
identical.  But  the  statements  are  by  no  means  completely  co
incident.  Titus  could  rightly  be  called  '  fellow-worker  '(<nn'epyos)
of  Paul  in  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  even  if  he  had  not  been
the  companion  of  the  apostle  in  the  founding  of  that  church,
simply  in  view  of  the  fact  that  after  their  alienation  from  Paul
he  had  won  them  back  to  him  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  expression
employed  with  reference  to  Silvanus  ('  preach  the  gospel  ')  relates
to  the  founding  of  the  church.

1  We  have  no  need,  therefore,  in  order  to  maintain  the  identity
of  the  Silas  of  1533  with  him  of  1040,  to  fall  back  upon  the
interpretation  —  in  point  of  fact  a  very  unskilful  one  —  offered  by
v.  34«,  '  But  it  seemed  good  to  Silas  that  they  should  remain  '
(e'6of€i/  5e  TUJ  Si'Aqt  f7n.ju.eiKu  O.VTOUS).  It  presupposes  that  the
<XTreAv#T)o-ai'  dirb  rail'  a.Sf\<j><av  of  v.  33  does  not  mean  '  they  took
leave  of  the  brethren  and  set  out  on  their  journey  '  —  a  meaning
which  nevertheless  is  assured  by  28  25,  and  in  our  present  passage
is  made  specially  necessary  on  account  of  the  addition  'unto  those
that  had  sent  them  forth'  (rrpbs  TOVS  a7ro<rTei'Aai/Tas  at'Totis)  —  but,
'it  was  said  to  them  by  the  brethren  that  it  was  not  desired  to
detain  them  longer  in  Antioch.'  Had  the  composer  of  Acts  held
this  to  have  been  what  actually  happened,  he  would  not  in  any
case  have  regarded  it  as  a  thing  worth  recording.  Matters  are
not  made  any  better  by  the  reading  '  it  seemed  good  to  Silas
to  remain  there  '  (avrov)  with  the  further  addition  '  but  Judas
alone  proceeded  '  (^xoi/os  6c  'Iov6a;  enopevBr)).  They  become  still
worse  if  this  last  clause,  which  D  and  Vg.  are  almost  alone  in
giving,  be  omitted  (so,  for  example,  RVnip-)  ;  for  in  that  case
a.irt\vdri<Tav  must  necessarily  mean,  '  they  on  their  side  took
leave,'  and  why  Silas  should  then  suddenly  have  changed  his
mind  is  left  wholly  unexplained.


with  Titus,
another  not?


SILAS,  SILVANUS

(it)  The  apologetic  aim—  followed  by  Zimmer  as  well  as  by
Marcker  and  Graf  —  of  freeing  Acts  from  the  charge  of  silence
with  a  purpose,  is  even  less  successfully  realised  in  the  case  of
Zimmer  than  it  is  in  that  of  the  other  two,  since  the  Silas  who,
according  to  Zimmer,  is  identical  with  Titus  is  not  mentioned  at
all  in  connection  with  the  Council  of  Jerusalem.

(e)  The  difficulty  (only  arising  in  connection  with  Zimtner's
hypothesis)  that  in  Acts  two  separate  persons  of  the  name  of
Silas  should  he  mentioned  in  such  close  proximity  (153240)
without  any  indication  of  their  being  distinct  individuals  is  hardly
less  than  that  which  presses  upon  all  forms  of  an  identification
of  Titus  with  Silas-Silvanus  —  this,  namely,  that  Paul  should  have
designated  one  and  the  same  fellow-worker  now  as  Silvanus  now
as  Titus,  and  should  have  interchanged  the  two  names  even  within
the  limits  of  so  short  a  passage  as  2  Cor.  1  19-2  13.

As  for  the  forms  of  the  names,  the  identity  of  Silas

and  Silvanus  admits  of  being  shown  in  a  variety  of  ways.

7 Th«  namfiH (rt)  Silas may  be  an  abbreviation of

I* X  11U llclJJICD* ,-..t  TM •  c \ i  •

Silvanus.  I  his  sort  of  abbreviation
used  for  pet  names  (hypocoristica)  is,  properly  speaking,
native  to  Greek  soil  ;  but  that  in  NT  times  it  was  also
applied  to  Latin  names  is  shown  by  the  instance  of  Luke
(see  LUKE,  §  6).  Strictly  speaking,  the  form  we  should
have  expected  would  be  Silvas  ;  but  the  form  Silas  is
also  possible,  since  abbreviation  followed  no  hard  and
fast  rules.

It  can  be  shown  that  Mei/e'trraf  (not  Meye'o-rpas)  is  equivalent
to  Mei/eVrpnTO?  (Polyb.  iv.  16g  xx.  10s  xxii.  12[14]i3)  and  >AP'
Xi'crras  to  '  'Apxicrrparos  (Kick,  Gricch.  I'crsonennainen,^}  73).
For  Lucas  too  no  hesitation  is  felt  in  assuming  Lucianus  (not
to  mention  other  forms  which  have  been  suggested)  as  the  un
abbreviated  name.  Jos.  />y  vii.  8i_/C  5,  §§  252,  275-279,  306^,
ought  not  to  be  cited  as  against  this,  for  the  Si'Aova?  i  there
named  is,  according  to  Schiirer  ((///  "(2*  1541,  ET  i.  2259)  and
Korcellini  (Onom.  Latinitatis,  3  (1883)  n6a),  L.  Flavins  Silva
Nonius  Hassus,  so  that  the  name  does  not  come  into  considera
tion  here  at  all.  Still  less  ought  appeal  to  be  made  to  the  fact
that  in  MSS  of  the  NT  the  word  is  accentuated  St'Aas,  although
if  an  abbreviation  from  Silvanus  it  really  ought  to  be  2iAa?  ;2
for  the  accentuation  of  MSS  is  in  no  sense  authoritative.  The
circumstance,  too,  that  the  name  Silas,  according  to  Zahn  (Einl.
i.  d.  NT  1  22  _/[),  does  not  occur  at  all  elsewhere  on  Latin  soil,
and  has  been  met  with  on  Greek  soil  only  at  Thespire  (CfG
Septentrion.  1,  no.  1772,  /.  12  3)  is  far  from  being  decisive,  in
deed,  against  abbreviation  from  Silvanus,  yet  at  least  points
to  another  alternative,  viz.  that

(d)  Silas  may  also  be  a  Semitic  name.4  Silvanus  in
this  case  will  be  the  Roman  form  nearest  possible  in
sound  to  his  own  name,  a  Roman  form  assumed  by  this
Jew  for  intercourse  with  the  non-Jewish  world  (see
NAMES,  §  86).

As  regards  etymology,  the  derivation  from  V7&,  '  three,'  is
inadmissible.  The  £'  7'j  (SHELESH)  named  in  i  Ch.  7  35  becomes
SeAAjjs  in  ©A.  Should  one  choose  to  conjecture  B'Sjy  (wilh
scgol)  as  the  Hebrew  form  —  as  is  perhaps  done  by  Hoole
(Classical  Element  in  the  NT,  1888,  p.  f>if.)—  the  Greek,  after
the  analogy  of  1./3  in  i  Ch.  2  30,  which  appears  in  the  LXX  as
2aAa«  [HA]  or  SaAeS  [LI,  would  in  no  case  be  2iAa«.  Thus
also  the  con  lecture  that  Silas  is  identical  with  the  Tertiusof  Rom.
10  22  (so  Franz  Burman,  Exercitt.  Acad.  2,  Rotterdam,  1688,
p.  161)  is  seen  to  lie  quite  baseless.

Jerome  (on  Gal.  1  i  ;  ed.  Vallarsi,  vii.  1  374)  and  OS  (ed.  Lag.
71  16  7225  199  70)  derive  Silas  and  Silvanus  alike  from  nSt?
{tnissus  :  <?.919S6i  has  SiAas  fxeo-iVrjs).  So  also  Zimmer,  who
cites  the  PPS?  (SHELAH,  2)  of  Gen.  1024  1113-15  i  Ch  11824.
This  last,  however,  appears  as  2aAa  in  <P  (or  2aAa?  [L  once
in  Gen.  1024]),  in  Jos.  Ant.  i.  64/.,  §§  146,  150,  as  2aAas,  2aAr;s
or  SeAa?.  For  this  reason  we  must  also  reject  the  conjecture  of
Seufert  (above,  §  5/>)  that  the  choice  of  the  Hebrew  name  which
the  composer  of  Acts  gives  to  Silvanus  was  determined  by  the
attribute  of  its  bearer  as  being  an  apostle  or  one  'sent.'

In all probability the  root of  Silas is SMB>. The

1  To be accentuated so, according  to  Winer,  I8>  §§ 6sa, 5
n.  73,  because  ov  stands  for  a  consonant  and  other  MSS  write
2iA£as.

2  Thus,  if  for  no  other  reason,  because  in  the  longer  form  the
accent  lies  upon  the  second  not  upon  the  first  syllable. That  all
hypocoristica  should  have  the  circumflex  on  the  last  syllable  is
in  accordance  indeed  with  the  principles  laid  down  by  Herodian
(ed.  Lentz,  1  so-^o)  but  not  with the examples he  gives: cp


•*  With  Greeks  it  might  be  an  abbreviation  of  SiAafds  which
occurs  —  f.g-.,  so  early  as  in  Xen.  Anab.  vi.  2  [4]  13.

4  In  Josephus  the  following  Jews  bear  the  name  of  Silas:  —
(«)  a  tyrant  of  Lysias  (Ant.  xiv.  3  2  §  40)  ;  (/>)  a  friend  of  Agrippa
I.  (--viii.  67,  §204;  xix.  63,  §  299;  7  i.§§  3i7-325  ;  83,  §353);  (c)
a  commandant  of  Tiberias  (K/V.  17,  §  89_/I  ;  53,8272;  BJ  \\.  21  6,
8  6iV)  :  (<{)  a  commandant  from  Babylon  (BJ  ii.  192,  §  520,  iii.
2  I/,  §§  ii,  19).

4519


SILAS,  SILVANUS

Palmyrene  inscriptions  nos.  17,  18,  and  95  in  de  Vogue
i  (Syrie  Centrale,  inscript.  S<!mit.,  1868,  pp.  21,  65)
show  —  and  indeed  in  the  case  of  no.  17  with  the  Greek
j  parallel  text  rov  SmXa1  —  the  form  «'?<KC'  which  is
equivalent  in  meaning  to  the  Heb.  ^MS;,  '  he  who  has
been  asked  for';  cp  Nold.  ,  ZDMG,  1870,  p.  g6f.  As
the  aleph  in  the  middle  was  hardly  audible,  the  form
Sila  easily  arose  out  of  this.  So  in  CIG  3  4511  =  Le  Bas
et  Waddington  (see  n.  i)  23,  no.  2567,  p.  586,  explic.
P-  589  /•  :  ~a./j.<riyf  papas  6  Kai  SetXas  in  Emesa  in
Coelesyria,  78-79  A.D.  ;  &•<&  several  times  in  Talmud
(cp  Noldeke,  I.e.  ,  and  Zahn,  123)  ;  also  ^v  in  eastern
Aramaic  in  the  fifth  century  A.D.  (CIS  '2,  no.  101,
according  to  Zahn).  On  this  etymology  ZtXas  will  be
the  correct  accentuation.

The  form  T<2  2<riAf<x  in  Acts  1634  D  (d  :  Silea:)  is  noticeable,
as  also  the  (only  graphically  different)  rep  SiAcua  of  Acts  174  D,
whilst  elsewhere  D  invariably  has  SiAaV  or  SetAa?.  The  2iA-
j3ai>o«  found  in  2  Cor.,  i  and  2  Thess.  (I)d  lie  FG),  and  in  i  Pet.
(B)  is  only  another  writing  for  SiAouoros.

We  come  now  to  the  question  of  the  credibility  of  the
data  regarding  Silas-Silvanus.

">  Asreg d Ac* '  has  re


8.  Credibility  ,,  K

of  Acts  marked  already  (§  2  /  )  that  the  share  of
1  and  2  Thess  Silas-Silvanus  in  Paul's  second  mission-
ind  1  Pet  '  ary  Journey  's  not  °Pen  to  an>'  question,
on  Silas  '  especially  when  confirmed  as  it  is  by
2  Cor.  1  19  (on  the  genuineness  of  which
epistle  see  GALATIANS,  §§  6-9),  but  that  Acts  needs
between  17  15  and  18s  some  supplementing,  and  so  far
as  its  entire  presentation  of  the  '  apostolic  decree  '  is
concerned  is  completely  unhistorical.  The  same  holds
good  of  the  miraculous  deliverance  of  Paul  and  Silas
from  prison  at  Philippi,  as  soon  as  i  Thess.  is  accepted
as  genuine,  for  in  i  Thess.  22  Paul  alludes  to  the  evil
treatment  he  had  received  at  Philippi  and  yet  attributes
it  not  to  any  outward  miracle  but  to  his  own  inward
disposition  that  he  nevertheless  found  fresh  courage  for
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  Thessalonica  (cp  ACTS,
§  2).  The  fact  also  that  the  Roman  citizenship
is  here  so  unexpectedly  attributed  to  Silas  rouses  the
suspicion  that  the  author  may  have  expressed  himself
carelessly  and  included  Silas  in  his  statement,  although
in  fact  all  that  he  really  knew  of  was  the  citizenship  of
Paul  (see  above,  §  6£).

(&)  Whilst  the  genuineness  of  i  Thess.,  and  so  also
the  designation  of  Silvanus  as  joint  author  (1  1),  is  open
to  no  well-grounded  objection,  that  of  2  Thess.  must  be
given  up,  especially  on  account  of  2  1-12.  It  will  not
avail  to  plead  for  the  genuineness  of  the  rest  after  this
has  been  set  aside  ;  rather  must  we  regard  those  portions
of  2  Thess.  which  coincide  with  i  Thess.  ,  including  that
in  which  Silvanus  is  named,  as  being  imitations  by
which  it  was  sought  to  give  the  epistle  the  appearance
of  being  a  genuine  writing  of  Paul  (cp  Schmiedel  in  HC
zum  NT2*  ;  Holtzmann,  ZNTW,  1901,  pp.  97-108).
(c)  Since  after  the  sojourn  of  Paul  at  Corinth  in  the
course  of  his  second  missionary  journey  (Acts  IS  5  2  Cor.
1  19),  Silvanus  is  not  again  mentioned  as  having  been  in
the  company  of  the  apostle,  it  is  in  itself  possible  that
when  i  Pet.  was  written  Silvanus  was  in  the  company  of
Peter  —  the  epistle  being  assumed  to  be  genuine  and  to
have  been  written  after  that  date.  Of  those  who  do  not
regard  i  Pet.  as  genuine,  many  find  in  the  affirmation
of  5  12  that  Peter  is  writing  'through  Silvanus'  (5td
ZtXoi'di'oO)  and  particularly  in  the  words  wj  \oyi^ofw.i
(AV  'as  I  suppose')  which  RV,  certainly  correctly,
takes  as  referring  to  '  faithful  '  (iriffrov,  '  by  Silvanus,
our  faithful  brother,  as  I  account  him,  I  have  written
unto  you  briefly'),  a  veiled  reference  to  the  fact  that
Silvanus  had  written  the  epistle  after  Peter's  death.  If,
however,  the  epistle  dates  from  1  12  A.  D.  (see  CHRISTIAN,
§  8)  this  theory  is  excluded  by  consideration  of  what
would  have  been  Silvanus's  age  at  that  time.  Thus  we

1  The  Greek  text  also  in  CIG  3,  no.  4484,  and  in  Le  Bas  et
Waddington,  I  'vyage  archeolagitjue  en  Greet  ft  en  Asie  Afineare,
'-  3,  1870,  no.  2601  (p.  594  ;  explications,  p.  600).

4520


SILENCE

shall  have  to  suppose  that  the  mention  of  Silvanus,  as
also  that  of  Mark  (5 13),  who  also  can  hardly  have
been  still  alive  at  so  late  a  date  as  112  A.D. ,  subserves
a  definite  purpose.  Both  had  been  members  of  the
primitive  church  (for  Mark,  cp  Actsl2i2)  and  at  the
same  time  companions  of  Paul  ;  thus,  on  the  one  hand,
they  become  fitted  to  figure  as  comrades  of  Peter,  and,
on  the  other,  the  naming  of  them  creates  the  impression
that  Peter  had  a  thoroughly  good  understanding  with
Paul  the  founder  of  many  of  the  churches  included  in
the  address  of  the  epistle  ( Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,
Asia,  and  Bithynia).  The  remaining  contents  of  the
epistle  show  little  of  that  tendency  to  bring  about  a
reconciliation  between  Paulinism  and  Jewish  Christianity
which  the  Tubingen  school  attributed  to  it  ;  but  the
closing  verses  which  have  been  under  our  consideration
must  doubtless  be  taken  in  this  sense  (cp  PETER,
EPISTLES  OF,  §  6,  end).

In  doing  so  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  we  are  to
understand  by  '  through  '  (oia)  that  Silvanus  is  indicated  as  the
individual  who,  like  Tertius  in  Rom.  1(3  22,  wrote  the  epistle  at
the  apostle's  dictation  (so  the  subscription  to  Rom.  in  cod.  133  :
'it  was  written  through  Tertius,'  eypa</»)  8ia  Tepnou),  or
whether,  as  the  analogy  of  the  other  spurious  subscriptions  of
Pauline  letters  would  warrant,  we  are  intended  to  look  upon  him
as  the  bearer  of  the  letter  ;  all  that  is  excluded  is  the  attribution
to  him  of  any  sort  of  independent  share  in  the  composition  of
the  epistle.

In  the  lists  of  the 'seventy'  (Lk.  10  i) Silas  and Silvanus

figure  as  distinct  individuals,  the  former  as  bishop  of  Corinth,

the  latter  as  bishop  of  Thessalonica. Accord  -

9.  Later  Views,  ing  to  the  IlepioSoi  Bapca|3a.  John  Mark  was

baptized  by  Barnabas,  Paul,  and  Silas  in
Ii:onium(Lipsius,  Apokr.  Ap.  -gesch.  i.  203,  ii.l  gf.  2  277  280  285).
Many  interpreters  maintain  Silas  to  be  the  '  brother '  referred  to
in  2  Cor.  8  i8_/C  This  brother,  however,  must  rather  have  been  a
Macedonian,  as  he  was  chosen  by  the  Macedonians  to  represent
them  in  conveying  the  collection  to  Jerusalem.  Against  the
theory  that  Silas  was  the  author  of  the  '  we  '-source  of  Acts  see
ACTS,  §  9.  Against  the  view  put  forward  in  1825  by  Bohmeand
Mynster  that  Silas  was  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
the  same  considerations  hold  good  as  have  been  urged  against
the  authorship  of  Barnabas  in  so  far  as  they  both  belonged  to
Jerusalem  (see  BARNARAS,  §  5).

Van  Vloten,  'Lucas  u.  Silas'  in  ZWT,  1867,  pp.  223_/? ;  1871,
pp.  431-434  ;  against  him,  Cropp,  ibid.  1868,  pp.  353-355  ;

Marcker, Stellung  der Pastoralltriefi; im

10.  Literature. Lebcn des Paulus, Gymnasialprogramm,

Meiningen,  1861,  pp.  10-12  ; Titus  Sik>an us,

ibid.  1864  ;  Graf  in  Heidenheim's  I'ierteijahrsschrift  fitr
tnglisch-theologische  Forschung,  1,  1865,  pp.  373-394  ;  Seufert,
ZH'T,  1885,  pp.  359-371  ;  Zimmer,  Ztschr.f.  kirchl.  IVissensch.
u.  kirchl.  Lefren,  1881,  pp.  169-174;  JPT,  1881,  pp.  721-723;
against  him  Jiilicher  JPT,  1882,  pp.  538-552;  Adolf  Johannes
(catholic),  Comm.  zu.  i  Thess.,  1898,  pp.  147-153.

P.  W.S.

SILENCE  (nD-il;  &AHC;  infernum),  a  title  of
SHEOL  (q. v. } ,  Ps.Vl  1711517.

The  existence  of  such  a  word  is,  however,  most  improbable,
and  there  is  no  Ass.  parallel.  <0's  afirjs  may  =  njD7X.  See
SHADOW  OF  DEATH.

SILK  occurs  in  AV  as  the  rendering  of  three  different
words.

1.  e!y,  ses,  is  rendered  '  silk  '  in  AV  text  of  Pr.  31  22,  and  mg.
of  Gen.  41  42  Exod.  25  4. On  this  see  LINEN  (7).

2.  "tto, mdsi  (rpi'xaTTos),1 Ezek.  16io isf. Amidst
the variety of  ancient renderings there is a general
agreement  that  some  cloth  of  fine  texture  is  intended  ;
Jewish  tradition  favours  'silk'  (Ges. Thes.},  a  meaning
with  which  the  rendering  in  (5  is  not  inconsistent  ; and
Movers  (Phon.  ii.  8264)  contends  that  silk  was,  at  least
as  far  back  as  Ezekiel's  time,  conveyed  from  China  into
W. Asia by the land route through Mesopotamia,
though  it  was  probably  almost  unknown  in  Europe  till
after Alexander's conquests, and did not come into
general  use  before  the  period  of  the  Roman  Empire.2
Cp  TRADE,  §  62. In  any  case  the  reference  in  Ezek.
16 10  is to  a  long  outer vail of  fine  material which
covered  the  entire  person  (Smend,  ad  loc.\

1  I.e.,  '  woven  of  hair  ' ;  Aq.  has  i/n)Aa(/>r)TOS  and  ai/Oi^os,  Sym.
iwfvSvua and TroAvjuiTOS  ; Th. merely transliterates. Vg.
subtilia and polymitus, Pesh. hello, ('vail'), and  tekletha
('blue').

2  Cp  £3(9)  22  56.

4521


SILOAM,  SHILOAH

3.  ffipiKw,  i.e.,  crripiKov,  the  familiar  Greek  name  for
silk  (from  2r;/) :  see  Strabo,  516,  701),  occurs  in  Rev.
18i2f,  in  the  enumeration  of  wares  which  formed  the
merchandise  of  the  apocalyptic  Babylon.

The  references  in  classical  writers  show  that,  under  the  early
empire,  silk  was  of  great  costliness,  and  its  use  a  sign  of  extreme
luxury.

The  larva  of  the  silk-worm  moth,  Bombyjc  inori,  so  called  from
its  feeding  on  mulberry  leaves,  produces  far  the  greatest  bulk  of
the  silk  in  use.  Inferior  silks  are,  however,  produced  by  several
species  of  the  same  genus,  and  Tussar  silks  are  spun  from  the
cocoons  of  Anthenea  feniyi,  which  feeds  on  oaks,  in  China;
and  of  A.  mylitta  in  India,  and  from  other  species  mostly  be
longing  to  the  family  Saturniid;e.  The  silk  is  the  hardened
extract  of  certain  silk  glands  which  open  just  below  the  mouth
of  the  caterpillar,  and  is  excreted  to  make  the  cocoon  within
which  the  insect  passes  its  pupal  stage.

Cp  Hitzig,  ZDMGSziijff'.  K.  M. — A.  E.  S.

SILLA  (X^D  ;  ceA<\  [Eus.  OS  296,  99]  ;  si; LA  [Jer.,
Vg. ]),  a  place-name  in  the  account  of  the  murder  of
Joash  (2  K.  1220  [21]).  'At  the  house  of  Millo  [or,  at
Beth-millo]  which  goeth  down  to  Silla,'  as  AV  gives,  is
clearly  wrong  (iv  OIK^  /xaaXw  TOV  yaa\\a  [B,  iv  y.  Bab],
.  .  .  fj.a\\uv  T<£>  Iv  TTJ  Ka.Tapa.ffei.  aXXuv  [L],  .  .  .  ^uaaXw
rbv  Karafj-evovTa.  yaaXad  [A,  sic  ut  vid.]),  had  neheth
las' la  [Pesh.]).

The  key  to  the  problem  is  supplied  by  the  theory  that  the
people  with  whom  the  Israelites  had  most  constant  relations
were  the  Jerahmeelites,  and  that  Solomon  most  probably  obtained
his  timber  for  building,  not  from  the  Lebanon,  but  from  the
mountain- country  of  the  Negeb.  The  mysterious  word
KI^Q  (Millo)  is  most  probably  a  corruption  of  ^MCrlT  (Jerahmeel),
and  so  too  is  N^D  1~rn  (see  MILLO).  It  was  at  Beth-jerahmecl
that  Joash  was  slain,  and  since  the  context  requires  a  place  in
Jerusalem,  the  most  plausible  view  is  that  '  Beth  -Jerahmeel '
means  the  'house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,'  for  Solomon's
Lebanon,  or  perhaps  Gebalon,  appears  to  have  been  in  the
Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (see  SOLOMON,  §  3  /')•  The  same  building
is  probably  specified  in  the  true  text  of  2  Ch.  2425  (see  Crit.
Bio,).  Cp,  however,  Winckler,  KA  7  (3)  260,  n.  2,  and  the  com
mentaries  of  Benzinger  and  Kittel  (less  satisfactory  conjectures).

T.  K.  C.

SILOAM, SILOAH, SHELAH, SHILOAH. The

four  places  in  which  Shiloah  or  Siloam  are  mentioned  are  :  (i)
Is.  86(r6:rnl  T>;  TbvSujpTo02etAa)<i^[BN],  T.  v.  T.  £iA.  [AOr],

The  waters  of  Shiloah,  EV);  (2)  Neh.  3 15  (n_"yn  nrro;

KO\vfj.f}riOpa.  T<av  Ka&faav  IB],  om.  K<aSi<ai>  «*,  hab.  K<»AIUI>
l^c.amg.,  j^  adds  Qe  TOV  iuAujaju,  rij?  /cprjn)?  TOV  itAiua  ( L]  ;  The

pool  of  Siloah  AV,  of  Shelah  RV)  ;  (3)  Lk.  13  4  (6  wi>pyo<;  ii-  nl>
SiAwdju.;  The  tower  in  Siloam);  (^)  J  11.117  ancl  ("l)l  '"  ^est
MSS)  ii  (T^V  Ko\vn^epav  TOV  SiAwaja,  The  pool  of  Siloam
'  which  is  by  interpretation,  Sent ' :  the  better  reading  seems  to
be  TOV  3..).

Possibly  also  there  is  an  allusion  to  Siloam  in  the
'fountain'  and  'pool'  of  Neh.  2 14.  For  topography
and  description  see  JERUSALEM,  §  3  and  diagram  ;  also
§§  n,  18  f. ,  and  map  facing  col.  2420  ;  also  CONDUITS,
§  5,  where  a  translation  of  the  famous  Siloam  inscription
is  given.  Josephus  (BJ  v.  4i  §  140)  speaks  of  the  waters
of  the  fountain  (^7777;  ZiAojas)  as  sweet  and  abundant,
and  (DJ  v.  9,  §  410)  reports  himself  in  his  speech  to  his
compatriots  as  having  pointed  out  that  Siloam  and  the
other  springs  which  were  formerly  almost  dried  up  when
under  the  control  of  the  Jews,  had,  since  the  advent  of
Titus,  run  more  plentifully  than  they  did  before.
Jerome  (Comment,  in  Exa.  86)  also  mentions  the
irregular  flow  of  Siloam  —  a  feature  which  has  been
noticed  by  most  subsequent  pilgrims  and  travellers,  and
is  explained  by  the  geological  formation  of  the  district.
In  NT  times  certainly,  and  probably  earlier,  a  healing
virtue  was  attributed  to  the  waters  of  Siloam.  On  the
mystical  meaning  of  Jn.  9n  see  GOSPELS,  §  56,  col.
1803,  but  cp  SHILOH,  and,  on  the  miracle,  cp  JOHN,
§  35,  col.  2539.

In Is.  86 the waters of Shiloah 'that go softly'
(at  least  if  the  text  is  sound  ;  see,  however,  Crit.  Bib.
[Che.  ])  represent  either  the  power  of  the  house  of  David,
which  certainly  was  insignificant,  or  the  might  of  Yahwe
which  seemed  but  was  not  really  slight  ; they  are  con
trasted  with  the  '  waters  of  the  River,  strong  and  many '
(v.  7),  which  symbolise  the  vast  physical  power  of  Assyria.
In  Jn.  97 the  aTrecrTaXyu^os  has  been taken  by  most
1  A/nWi  einisit  1  cp  emissary  ?
4522


SILVANUS


SIMEON


interpreters  from  Theophylact  onwards  to  refer  to
Christ  the  true  Siloam  (cp  629  38/.  7  28  826  17321).
Whether  this  is  at  all  probable  may  be  doubted  ;  other
interpretations  however  (see  Holtzmann,  ad  loc.)  are  no
better.  Liicke  has  pointed  out  the  possibility  that  the
clause  is  merely  a  marginal  gloss.  Such  explanations
abound  in  the  Onomastica,


SILVANUS

SILAS.


, 2 Cor.  1 19, etc. See


SILVER  (5)D|,  kiseph;  Aram.  NSD3  ;  Syr.  kespd ;
Ass.  kaspu ;  root-meaning  perhaps  'paleness,'  see
WRS/.  Phil.  14 125).

The  word  is  sometimes  used,  in  its  proper  sense,  of

silver ore, e.g. , Ezek.  222022 (figuratively), etc., but

__, also  often  of  silver  as  a  measure  of  weight

-  '  and  value,  e.g. , '  silver  30  shekels  '  (  Kx.

'* 2132), '400  silver  shekels' (Gen.  23 15).

and,  with the  omission  of 'shekel' or  'shekels,' 'a

thousand of silver' (Gen.  20i6), 'twenty of silver'

(3?28). Hence more often still 'silver' (kt'sfj>h}  =

'  money,'  cp  dpyvpiov  and  the  French  argent,  but  not

necessarily  coined  money, e.g..  Gen.  31  15  422527 Ut.

2320  [19]. In Gen.  4225  35 the plural form (as if

'  monies  ')  is  found.

On  silver  mining,  alluded  to  in  Job  28 1,  and  on  the
methods  of  refining  the  crude  ore  alluded  to  in  (Is.  1  25)
Ezek.222022  Zech.  139  Mai.  83  Prov.  1/3  27zi  (we
must  not  add  Ps.  126 '  [7]),  see  MKTALS.  The  separ
ated  silver  was  called  kheph  sAruph  (fjris  p|pr,  I's.
12 7  [6]);  k.  mezukkdk  (pjsip  'a,  iCh.  294  Ps.  127  [6]) ;
k.  nibMr  (~in:n  '3,  Prov.  1620).  The  crucible  is  called
masreph  (^psc,  Prov.  17 3  272i).2  In  Jer.  lOg  we  read
of  '  silver  beaten  out  into  plates  '  ;  where  it  came  from
we  shall  have  to  ask  presently.  Hebrew  traditions
told  of  great  abundance  of  silver  in  early  times.  These
traditions,  which  are  supported  by  the  use  of  kiseph
(silver)  for  '  money,'  are  doubtless  correct.  Abram
and  Kphron  '  the  Hittite '  have  certainly  no  lack  of
silver,  according  to  Gen.  23,  and,  though  this  passage
comes  from  the  much  disparaged  priestly  writer,  he
probably  does  but  repeat  the  statements  of  earlier
writers.

According  to  a  view  which,  even  if  new,  may  nevertheless  do
justice  to  old  and  forgotten  truth,  the  scene  of  the  transaction
described  was  not  at  Hebron  but  at  some  place  of  hallowed
associations  in  the  Negeb— probably  Rehoboth,8  which  would
justly  be  represented  as  Kirjath-'arab,*  'city  of  Arabia.'  In
this  connection  we  may  refer  to  Joseph's  silver  divining  cup
(Gen.  44  2).  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  original  scene  of  the
fascinating  story  of  Joseph  was  not  in  Egypt  but  in  the  Negeb.
But  even  if  this  was  not  the  case,  we  are  assured  on  the  best
authority  that  silver  in  Egypt  had  at  first  a  higher  value  than
gold  (see  EGYPT,  §  38).  The  true  Hittites,  too  (whose  capital
was  Kadesh  on  the  Orontes),  had  abundance  of  silver  in  the
time  of  Rameses  II.  ;  the  treaty  between  them  and  this  powerful
Egyptian  king  was  on  a  silver  tablet.

In  Solomon's  time,  it  would  appear  as  if  the  larger
introduction  of  gold  depreciated  the  value  of  silver.
We  are  told  (i  K.  102i)that  none  of  the  king's  'vessels'
were  of  silver,  which  '  was  nothing  accounted  of  in

1  ©,  as  we  now  have  it,  gives  in  Ps.  I.e.  &OKI/J.I.OV  Tfj  yfj. In
Prov.  27  21  £OKI'/U.  corresponds  to  rp^O,  '  crucible.' Did  the  text
of  &  in  Ps.  at  one  time  run,  apyvpiov  irtnvptafievov  fv  Soxi.fj.iia
( =  £oKificiw) without  TJJ yjj? Deissmann  (Ncue  Bibelftvdien,
90)  thinks  that the  only  tolerable  r.cnse  of  SOKUUOV  TJJ  yfj  is
'genuine  silver  for  the  land.' At  any  rate  both  the  MX  and  (5
of  Ps.  12  7  [6]  attest  the  activity  of  scribes  working  upon  a  cor
rupt  text. Cp  n.  2.

2  Nestle  (Exp.  T  8  287)  would  give the  same  sense  to  '^V,
which in Prov.  27  22= '  pestle.' This affects  the criticism  of
'"Spa- May  we  read  -Sy3,  '  in  the  crucible  '  ? There  seems  to
be  a  better  solution.

3  '  Hittite  '  itself,  when  used  of  any  person  in  the  S.  of  Pales
tine,  is  a  mutilated  form  of  '  Rehobothite.' See  REHOBOTH.

*  For  instances  of  numerals  which  are  corruptions  of  ethnic
names,  see  MOSES,  8  n,  PROPHET,  §  7,  Crit.  Bib.  on  Gen.  15  13.
'  City  of  Four  '  (Kirjath-arba)  is  as  improbable  as  '  daughter  of
Seven  '  (see  SOLOMON,  §  2).

4523


the  days  of  Solomon,'  and  (v.  27)  that  he  'made  silver
to  be  in  Jerusalem  as  stones. '

From  what  sources  was  this  plentiful  supply  of  silver

derived? It  is  geologically  impossible  that  either  gold

„  or  silver  should  exist  in  the  mountains  of

' Syria  and Palestine. \Ye  may  suppose

that  most  of  the  silver  of  the  '  Hittites'  came  from  the

mines of Bulgar  Dagh in Lycaonia. According to

Prof.  Sayce  : —

'The  Hittite  inscription  found  near  the  old  mines  of  these
mountains  by  Mr.  Davis,  proves  that  they  once  occupied  the
locality.  It  is  even  possible  that  their  settlement  for  a  time  in
Lydia  was  also  connected  with  their  passion  for  "the  bright
metal."  At  all  events,  the  Gumush  Dagh,  or  "  Silver  Mountains,"
lie  to  the  S.  of  the  Pass  of  Karabel,  and  traces  of  old  workings
can  still  be  detected  in  them.'1

As  to  the  treasures  of  Solomon,  we  are  told  in  i  K.
1022  (cp  SOLOMON,  §  4,  end)  that  the  'navy  of  Tarshish'
brought  silver  as  well  as  gold.  Upon  this  Prof.  W.  M.
Miiller  remarks  (OLZ  8269)  that  this  points  to  great
ignorance  of  the  Red  Sea  coasts.  There  was,  however,
according  to  the  Arabic  notices,  no  lack  of  silver  in
the  mountains  of  Yemen,  and  it  was  hence,  as  Oskar
Fraas  thinks  (HIVB^  10070),  that  Solomon  derived  the
precious  metals.  And  what  is  to  be  said  of  Tartessus  ?
If  the  current  opinion  is  correct,  though  Solomon's  ships
did  not  get  out  so  far  as  Spain,  the  later  supply  of  silver
to  Palestine  was  largely  derived  from  the  rich  territory
by  the  Guadalquivir.  We  fear  the  opinion  needs  to  be
accepted  with  reserve.  Tartessus  was,  no  doubt,  in  a
rich  district.  The  story  is,  that  since  the  Phoenicians
found  that  they  could  not  carry  all  their  silver  away,
they  made  '  silver  anchors '  in  place  of  those  that  they
had  brought  (Aristot.  De  Mirab.  148  ;  cp  Diod.  635).

Unfortunately,  there  is  considerable  danger  that,  except  in  late
passages  like  2  Ch.  !1  21 2  Jon.  1  3,  '  Tarshish  '  is  a  corruption  of
'Asshur';  and  there  is  one  extremely  late  passage  (Jer.  lOg)
where  the  same  restoration  ('  silver  .  .  .  brought  from  Asshur  ')
should  apparently  be  made.  Perhaps  the  most  important
passage  is  Ezek.  '_'7  12  where,  according  to  MX,  silver,  together
with  iron,  tin,  and  lead,  is  represented  to  have  been  brought  to
Tyre  from  Tarshish.  A  close  investigation  of  the  passage  in  its
context  suggests  that  Missur  (not  Tyre)  provides  the  market,  and
N.  Arabian  peoples  provide  the  merchandise  disposed  of  (see
Crit.  Bib.).  Xhe  Asshurite  merchants,  it  would  seem,  were  the
middlemen  between  the  miners  in  some  perhaps  distant  part  o.
Arabia,  and  the  rich  and  powerful  people  of  Missur.  Another
evidence  of  the  abundance  of  silver  in  N.  Arabia  is  supplied  by
2  S.  8  10-12  (in  the  light  of  criticism),  where  the  spoil  taken  by
David  from  ZOUAH  [y.i'.},  or  rather  Missur  and  other  N.  Arabian
regions  bordering  on  Palestine  (such  as  'Aram' — i.e.,  Jerahmeel),
is  said  to  have  consisted  in  vessels  of  silver,  of  gold,  and  of  brass.
It  is  noteworthy,  too,  that  the  poem  of  Job,  which  most  probably
arose  either  in  N.  Arabia  or  under  strong  N.  Arabian  influences
(the  names  point  decidedly  to  this,  see  JOB  [BOOK],  §§  4,  9),
shows  great  interest  in  gold  and  silver  mines.  On  two  out  or
the  three  references  in  Job  (22  25  286),  see  GOLD,  §  i,  col.  1750.

T.  K.  C.

SILVER,  PIECE  OF  Upr-ypiA),  Mt-  26 15.  See
STATKK,  ad  Jin.

SIMALCUE  (ciNMAAKOYH  [AJ),  i  Mace.  11 39  AV.
RV  IMALCUE.


SIMEON


Where  settled?  (§  i).
Gen.  34  4!>  (§  2).
Deut.  33  (§  3).
Judg.  1  (§  4).
i  Ch.  4  (§  5).


Extra-biblical?  (§6).
Conclusion  (§  7).
Name  (§  8).

Genealogical  lists  (§  9).
Geographical  lists  (§  10).


Simeon  (JWDS?  ; CY/vxeoON [BAL]  ;  see  below,  §  8}

was  the  brother3  of  Levi  and  Dinah  (Gen.  8425,  J  ; cp

Wh 49s). What  genealogical  scheme  underlay

itl j  , this  representation  we  do  not  know.4 In

set ea  . tng  scjieme  followed  by  the  final  redactors

Simeon  had  five  full  brothers  ;  how  many  sisters  (Gen.

37 35, J  ; 467, D) we  are nowhere  told. Moreover,

1  The  Hittites  (1888),  95.

2  We  do  not  add  i  K.  22  47  (see  JEHOSHAPHAT,  col.  2352).

3  On  crtN  m  Gen.  49  see  §  8,  i.

•*  It  is  natural  to  suppose  a  genealogy  that  made  Simeon,
Levi,  and  Dinah  the  only  children  of  their  mother.  We  cannot
assume  this  with  confidence  however.  Simeon  and  Reuben
form  a  pair  in  Gen.  48  5  (P),  and  Simeon  is  styled  brother  of
Judah  in  Judg.  1  3  (J).

4524


SIMEON


SIMEON


Simeon  the  brother  of  Dinah  figures  as  a  tribe  in  the
district  of  Shechem,  whereas  the  Simeon  whose  cities
are  enumerated  in  the  well-known  lists  (§  10)  is  there
connected  with  the  S.  country  and  associated  with
Judah  rather  than  Israel.1  It  has  been  customary  to
identify  these  two  Simeons.  It  is  not  impossible,  how
ever,  to  hold  that  there  were  more  Simeons  than  one
(see  below,  §  6).  If,  however,  we  identify  them,  are  we
to  regard  the  two  representations  as  variant  theories,
belonging  to  a  time  when  the  real  life  of  the  tribe  had
been  forgotten  ?  Or  may  we  suppose  that  they  both
contain  reminiscences  of  history,  that  in  fact  Simeon
lived,  let  us  say,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Shechem  and
then  removed  to  the  S.  ?  There  would  be  more  chance
of  giving  confident  answers  to  these  questions,  if  we
knew  whether  the  framers  of  our  sources  had  actual
knowledge  of  a  Simeon  tribe  or  Simeon  families  ;  if,  for
example,  we  could  point  with  confidence  to  sanctuaries
which  at  least  had  been  distinctively  Simeonite,  where
therefore  there  might  have  been  preserved  a  tradition  of
Simeon's  having  come  S.  from  the  highlands  of  central
Palestine.  It  is,  no  doubt,  natural  to  suppose  that
Beersheba  was  such  a  sanctuary.  It  may  very  well
have  been  ;  it  was  certainly  famous,  and,  in  particular,
was  at  least  at  times  in  touch  with  northern  Israel.
The  difficulty  is  to  prove  that  it,  or  any  other  definite
spot,  was  Simeonite.  Simeon  is  never  mentioned  as  a
component  part  of  the  southern  kingdom.2

Still, although we  may  not be  able  to point with

confidence to any contemporary statement about

_  Simeon  in  the  literature  accessible  to

us,  the  editors  whose  work  has  reached

us  may  have  had  such  evidence  lying  before  them.3

i.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  end  of  J's  story
of  the  Shechem  exploit  ascribed  to  the  tribe  has  been
lost.  That  may  have  told  of  Simeon's  removal  towards
the  south.  From  the  fact  that  the  redactor  suppressed
the  passage  we  may  plausibly  conjecture  that  what  it
narrated  was  more  or  less  of  the  nature  of  a  catastrophe
discreditable  to  'Israel.'  It  may  therefore  have  been
historical,  and  may  have  come  from  a  time  when
Simeon  was  still  really  a  tribe.  How  a  later  writer
would  have  told  (and  did  tell)  the  story  we  can  perhaps
see  from  Gen.  35s  :  After  the  incident  which  forms  the
subject  of  chap.  34  the  Israelites  moved  off  leisurely,
their  god  having  interfered  in  their  behalf  so  that  there
fell  on  the  natives  of  the  land  an  awe  such  as  fell  on
the  Greeks  when  Apollo  brought  the  seemingly
vanquished  Hector  back  to  the  fight  strong  as  ever
(//.  15 279 _^).  So,  a  later  writer  thought,  must  it  ever
fare  with  Israel.  The  older  story,  however,  told  not  of
'  Israel,'  but  of  Simeon  and  Levi.4  All  that  a  later
editor  was  willing  to  retain  of  it  was  the  remonstrance
of  Jacob  :  you  have  brought  a  disaster  (cn~Qi')  on
us,  in  making  us  abominable  to  all  the  natives  of  the
land  ;  as  we  are  but  a  small  company  they  will  band  them
selves  against  us  and  defeat  us,  and  we  shall  be  destroyed.

ii.  What  the  sequel  of  the  older  narrative  was  can
probably  be  inferred  from  Gen.  495-7.  Even  there  we
are  not  told  explicitly  what  happened  ;  but  there  was
a.  power  to  fulfil  itself  in  the  father's  curse  (cp  BLESSING
AND  CURSING)  :  I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob,  And
scatter  them  in  Israel.  What  meaning  the  writer  would
put  into  these  words  is  uncertain.  Steuernagel  thinks
that  Jacob  is  here  a  tribe  name  and  that  the  verse
means  that  Simeon  was  dispersed  in  the  highlands  of

1  Cheyne, however,  suggests that  the Shechem  -  story  also
dealt  originally  not  with  central  Palestine,  but  with  a  district
on  the  N.  Arabian  border,  in  or  near  the  Negeb  (cp  MOSES,  §
18) ;  SHECHEM,  2.

2  On  Simeon's  never  being  assigned  to  either  kingdom  cp
Graf,  Stamm  Simeon,  19  ;  also,  on  theories  connecting  him  with
the  northern  kingdom,  ib.  33. For  the  Chronicler's  notice  see
below,  §  5,  iv.

3  On  i  Ch.  4  38-41  see  below,  §  5.

4  There  seems,  however,  to  have  been  an  independent  story
which  did  speak  of  '  Israel.' See  Gen.  Wnf.  [E]  (cp  Gunkel
in  /M"(2)  ad  lac.),  and  the  legend  in  Jubilees  342-8  (cp  Charles
ad  lac.  and  the  literature  cited  by  him).

4525


central  Palestine  (Einwanderung,  104),  some,  however,
perhaps  wandering  southwards  (ib.  15).  As  treating
of  the  early  fortunes  of  Shechem,  the  story  of  Gen.  34
is  dealt  with  elsewhere  (see  EPHRAIM,  §  6,  DINAH).
Dinah  was  perhaps  supposed  to  have  disappeared  com
pletely  (see  DINAH,  §  6)  ;  what  the  real  history  of  Levi
was  is  a  difficult  question  (see  LEVI,  LEVITES,  GENE
ALOGIES,  §  7).  It  is  with  Simeon  that  we  are  here  con
cerned.  That  it  was  not  always  counted  as  a  tribe
appears  to  follow  from  its  absence  from  Dt.  33  (blessing
of  Moses).1

It  has  been  questioned,  however,  whether  the  omission
of  Simeon  in  Dt.  33  is  original.

Not  only  does  ©AL  apply  v.  db  to  Simeon  (xoti  (ru/ueo>i'  [(5B

om. <r.]  eiTTta  TroAus  ei/  apifyioi), to  whom  the words, however

they are to  be  taken  (REUHKN,  §  4),  are  quite

3.  Dt.  33. as  applicable  as  to  Reuben. It  has  been  thought

also(Graetz,  Gesch.  ii.  1  4867^,  Heilprin,  Hist.  Poet.

Heb.\iiT,f.\ cp Halevy,  /. As., 1897(1,  pp. 329-31)  that 70.

perhaps  belonged  to  Simeon  (there  might  be  a  play  on  the  name

in '  Hear '). If these proposals  were  combined the Simeon

saying  2  would  read  :

Let  Simeon  be  a  small  company.
Hear,  Yahwe,  his  voice,
And  bring  him  in  unto  his  people.

The  case  for  such  a  text,  however,  is  not  strong  (see  Driver,
ad  loc.).'A

If  the  passage  really  mentioned  Simeon  in  some  such
way  it  would  seem  to  imply  that  Simeon  had  somehow
come  to  be  severed  from  '  his  people. '  That  would  be
an  interesting  variant  of  the  view  of  Simeon  represented
in  the  'Jacob  Blessing'  (Gen.  49),  where  Simeon  is  not
detached  from  his  people  but  dispersed  among  them.

Moreover  if  Simeon  is  really  mentioned  in  the
Esarhaddon  tablet  to  be  discussed  later  (§6,  iii. ),  a
position  of  detachment  for  Simeon  at  a  comparatively
late  period  would  be  established  by  contemporary
extra-biblical  evidence.  Gen.  49  (and  34)  is,  however,
by  no  means  the  only  biblical  reference  to  movements
on  the  part  of  Simeon.

Of  special  interest  are  the  references  in  Judg.  1 ,  as
giving  a  theory,  doubtless  widely  held,  as  to  Simeon's
j  ,  arrival  on  the  scene.  There,  as  we  have  seen
ag  (col.  4524,  n.  4),  Simeon's  brother  is  Judah
(vv.  317).  Israel,  having  agreed  to  a  division  of  the
land  among  the  tribes,  inquires  of  Yahwe  who  is  to
begin  the  attack.  The  answer  being  'Judah,'  Judah
asks  Simeon  to  join  in  the  expedition,  promising  to
return  the  favour  later.  Simeon  consents,  and  the
two  peoples  advance  against  the  Canaanites,  defeating
them  signally  at  Bezek,  if  the  text  is  sound  (see  BKZKK).
WThether  the  tradition  made  Simeon  and  Judah  then
settle  in  the  central  highlands  is  not  clear.4  The
meagreness  of  the  account  of  Judah's  campaign  suggests
that  the  old  story  of  Judah's  advent  was  lost  or
suppressed  :  we  hear  of  Caleb's  appropriation  of
Hebron,  Othniel's  of  Debir,  the  Kenites'  of  the  district
of  Arad  (Judg.  1 16  ;  on  the  text  see  the  comm. ),  and
Simeon's  of  Zephath-Hormah  ;  5  but  nowhere  are  we  told
where  or  how  Judah  settled.6  It  is  difficult  to  think  that
this  is  accidental  :  the  redactor  would  have  told  of
Judah's  southward  progress  if  he  could.  Perhaps  one
reason  why  he  could  not  was  that,  as  Graf  suggested
(Stamm  Simeon,  15),  the  district  which  ultimately  bore
the  name  of  Judah  was  entered  from  the  S.  If  Judah  is
primarily  the  name  of  the  southern  kingdom,  which
consisted  of  Kenites,  Calebites,  Jerahmeelites,  Simeon-
ites,  and  other  southern  elements,  the  settlement  stories
would  naturally  deal  with  the  fortunes  of  its  component

1  On  its  omission  in  Judg.  5  see  below,  note  4.

2  This  theory  thus  suggests  that  the  Judah  saying  is  :  7*  ii.

3  On the various proposals see  further, Graf, Der  Segen
Moses,  24-26  (1857).

4  If  so,  are  we  to  suppose  that  old  tradition  did  not  always
distinguish  between  Judah  and  '  Levi '  ?  (Gen.  34). Only  in  this
connection  can  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  Simeon  in  Judg.
4  or  Judg.  5  have  any  significance.

B  To  infer  from  the  Hormah  exploit  being  elsewhere  (Nu.213
see  HORMAH)  given  to  '  Israel,'  that  some  assigned  to  Simeon  in
early  times  a  position  of  great  importance  would  be  precarious.

6  Gen.  38  is  somewhat  different.

4526


SIMEON

parts.1  Even,  however,  if  the  other  Judah  elements
entered  from  the  S. ,  Simeon  might  first  have  lost  a
footing  temporarily  gained  in  Central  Palestine.  That
might  account  for  the  Shimeon  at  Semuniyeh  (right
across  Esdraclon  from  Ibzik)  of  Josh.  11 1  l'2zo  if  that
is  the  true  reading  (see  SHIMRUN,  and  below,  §  6,  ii. ).
On  the  other  hand  the  story  of  the  partnership  of
'  Judah '  and  Simeon  may  not  rest  on  prehistoric
relations  so  early  as  the  settlement.  It  may  reflect  a
later  time.

It  has  been  thought,  for  example  (Wi.  Gf  '2  201  n.),  that
underneath  what  now  appears  in  i  Ch.  424  as  a  mere  list  of  names
it  is  possible  to  detect  a  statement  relating  to  a  migration  of
Simeon  southwards.  According  to  this  theory  Simeonites  were
settled  ill  the  southern  part  of  the  territory  out  of  which  Saul
carved  an  extensive  Henjamite  state  (above,  col.  2583,  n.  i),
and  rather  than  yield  to  him  they  moved  south.  That  would
be  a  likely  thing  to  happen,  especially  if  the  Simeonites  were
not  firmly  settled.  Of  course  such  a  movement  would  agree
passably  with  the  suggestion  of  Gen.  49  and  the  story  in  Gen.
34.  Nor  is  there  anything  impossible  about  an  origin  such  as
Winckler  proposes  for  the  genealogical  list.  Still,  the  sug
gestion  in  question  is  perhaps  hardly  convincing  enough  (see
below,  §9,  i.)  to  form  the  basis  of  a  definite  theory  of  the  history
of  Simeon.

To  the  same  period  was  assigned  by  Dozy  a  move
ment,  or  movements,  on  the  part  of  Simeon  of  which
_.  the  Chronicler's  account  is  still  in  the  form
of  a  narrative,  although  it  contains  a  good
many  names.  The  passage  (iCh.  438-43)  contains
several  statements,  the  relation  of  which  to  one  another
is  not  clear,  the  text  being  more  or  less  doubtful.2

(a)  According  to  438-40  certain  Simeonites  pushed  down  to
the  district  of  Gedor  or  Gerar  in  search  of  pasture  for  their
sheep.

(/>)  According  to  v.  41  these  men  went  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah
and  smote3  .  .  .  and  the  Meunim  who  were  'there'  and
banned  them  and  dwelt  in  their  place.

(<-)  According  to  -'.  .\-z_f.  some  of  '  them  '  (500  with  4  leaders)
went  to  Mt.  Seir  and  smote  those  who  were  left  of  the  fugitive
Amalekites  and  settled  there.

i.  According  to  Ben/inger  these  three  statements  are
divergent  accounts  of  the  same  thing  (KHC,  i?/-),  all
of  them  being  later  insertions  into  the  Chronicler's  work.
A  question  more  important  than  the  date  of  their
insertion  is  whence  they  were  drawn.  We  must  allow
for  the  possibility  that  they  come  from  a  good  source.
Of  coarse  that  need  not  imply  the  correctness  of  the
reference  to  Hezekiah.4  There  is  nothing  in  itself
improbable  in  the  Hezekiah  date.  The  Meunim  seem  to
be  mentioned  under  Uzziah,  also  Arabs  in  Gur  (  =  Gerar?
and  Syi  for  Sjn?  :  Winckler,  A'.4T(S>  143,  n.  i  :  2  Ch.
267  ;  cp  MEUNIM,  b}.  A  little  later,  under  Manasseh,
according  to  one  interpretation  of  a  passage  in  a  cunei
form  tablet,  we  find  Simeon  as  a  whole  reckoned  as
belonging  to  Musri,  not  Judah  (below,  §  6,  iii. ).

ii.  Dozy  (De  hraeliten  te  Mekka  [1864],  56  [Germ.
Trans.  50]),  however,  thinks  that  v.  31^  shows  that  the
events  belong  to  the  time  of  Saul,  and  in  an  extremely
ingenious  manner  works  out  the  following  theory  : —

When  Saul's  expedition  was  sent  with  orders  to  extirpate  the
Amalekites,  the  king  was  spared  and  brought  back  (i  S.  103  9).
In  Yethrib-.Medina  it  was  told  that  when  the  disobedient  army
returned  to  Palestine  they  were  exiled  for  their  disobedience
and  returned  to  the  Amalekite  land6  (60 f.  [53 f.}).  The  force
sent  would  likely  be  Simeonite  (the  most  southern  tribe,  63  [56]).
Afterwards,  when  David  punished  the  Amalekites  for  their  attack
on  Ziklag,  400  escaped  (i  S.  ^0  17),  to  be  destroyed  later  by  500
Simeonites  who  settled  in  Seir  (i  Ch.442_/C  :  p.  s6_/T  [50]).  In
Hezekiah's  time  an  interest  was  felt  in  these  Simeonite  exiles

1  In  this  connection  we  may  note  the  absence  of  all  mention
of  Judah  from  the  Shechem  story  in  Gen.  84  39. See  above,
col.  4526,  n.  4.

2  For  Cheyne's  view  of  the  text  see  MEUNIM,  a.

3  On  the  text  compare  Winckler,  Ml'G,  1898,  pp.  487?!

*  Dozy  argues  that  it  is  only  the  writing  down  that  is  ascribed
to  Hezekiah's  time  (Israel,  te  Mekka,  56  [49]).  Bertheau  thinks
the  reference  is  intended  to  include  the  expedition.  It  is
difficult  to  see  how  the  person  who  inserted  the  notice  could
apply  it  to  any  other  than  the  time  of  Hezekiah.

»  The  Gedor  of  v.  39  is  thus  \\\e.jidar  or  sanctuary  at  Mekka
(89  [80]),  'the  valley'  (of  v.  39)  is  E.  of  Mekka  (92-94  [83/]),
which  received  its  name  from  the  great  fight  ('"I2T  H3O  =  Macoraba :
81  [72/J>.

4527


SIMEON

(56  [49],  72  [64])  and  Is.  21ny?i  is  an  invitation  to  them  to  come
back  (67-73  [60-65]).  I"  tlme  they  came  to  be  called  Ishmael
(103-1 10  [93-99])  ;  cp  below,  §  8  iii.

Dozy's  reason  for  assigning  the  Simeonite  movement
to  the  time  of  Saul  does  not  seem  cogent  :  v.  316  ( '  these
were  their  cities  unto  the  reign  of  David ' )  is  not  the
Chronicler's  ;  it  is  a  maiginal  gloss  which  has  intruded
so  as  to  sever  '  and  their  villages  '  (v.  32)  from  the  words
to  which  the  parallel  Josh.  19  shows  that  they  belong
(so  Be.  ad  loc.).  Nor  can  Dozy's  other  combinations
be  accepted  (for  a  sober  criticism  see  Grafs  review,
ZD.UG  19  330-351  [1865]).

iii.  N.  I.  Weinstein  (Zur  Genesis  der  Agada,  291-156
[1901]),  however,  adopts  most  of  Dozy's  combinations,
and  adds  others  of  his  own.

He  tries  to  show  that  the  Minim  of  Talmudic  literature  are
the  Meunim  of  the  OT,  and  they  in  their  turn  Dozy's  wander
ing  Simeonites,  whose  name  he  supposes  later  writers  to  have
avoided  on  account  of  a  reproach  under  which  they  lay,  substi
tuting  Meunim  or  Minim.  Much  of  this  seems  open  to  the
same  kind  of  criticism  as  Dozy's  discussion.

iv.  On  the  other  hand,  there  seems  no  definite  reason
to  urge  in  support  of  the  view  that  the  Chronicler's
statements  are  a  late  invention  (We.  Prol.^  212  ;  ET
213).  Why  should  he  invent  such  a  story?  Else
where  the  Chronicler  seems  to  treat  Simeon  as  belong
ing  to  northern  Israel  [but  cp  Crit.  Bib.  16,  on  Is.
97-104]  (2  Ch.  15g  :  Ephraim,  Manasseh,  Simeon;  346:
Manasseh,  Ephraim,  Simeon,  Naphtali).  It  would  be
a  strong  point  in  favour  of  an  early  source  for  the  state
ments  in  i  Ch.  439-43  if  it  could  be  proved  that  Simeon
was  still  a  current  name  in  S.  Palestine  in  the  seventh
century  B.C.  (see  §  6,  iii.).

At  this  point,  accordingly,  we  may  conveniently  turn
_ .  to extra-biblical sources in search of

MXH1 references.

i. We  may  begin  with  the  attempt  to
references?  find  such  inyTh^mes  III/S  list  ofFII9

places  of  Upper  Rtnu.

No.  35  is  §a-m-'-n-'  and  no.  18  Sa-m-'-n-'-w  (var.  Sa-m-'-'-w),
which  looks  like  the  plural  of  no.  35.  We  may  grant  the
similarity  of  the  names  to  Simeon  (cp  the  spelling  of  Sa-ra-ha-na);
but  we  cannot  infer  much.  We  cannot  locate  them.  According
to  W.  M.  Miiller,  they,  at  least,  were  not  in  the  S..  as  the  list  (he
believes)  does  not  include  names  in  the  S.  of  Judah.  Cp  also
col.  3546,  number  35,  and  notes  2  and  3.  The  conjecture,  there
fore,  that  Simeon  (with  Levi)  was  an  early  settler  in  Palestine
(Hommel,  AUT  268  ;  Sayce,  Early  Heb.  Trad.  392)  remains  a
hypothesis.

ii.  Nor  are  we  much  better  off  a  century  or  more
later  in  the  Amarna  correspondence.

There  is  a  letter  (KB  5,  no.  2203)  from  Samu-Addu,  prince  of
a  place  called  Sa-am-hu-na,  which  is  phonetically  =  Simeon,  and
is  definitely  indicated  as  the  name  of  a  town  (alii)  ;  but  we
cannot  tell  where  it  lay.  Steuernagel  inclines  to  identify  it
with  the  SymoOn  (^.v^oiav)  of  ©B  in  Josh.  11  i  (0AFL  ^.o^ep<ai;
MT  pip:?,  SHIMRON,  §  i)  mentioned  with  Achshaph,  and
Symoon  (so  Buhl,  Pal.  215)  with  Semuniye2  (see  below,
iii.,  a  [i]).  There  is  nothing  to  make  the  identity  of  Samhuna
with  one  of  the  places  mentioned  in  the  Karnak  list  improbable
(so  also  Meyer,  Glossen,  73).  If  the  identity  be  held  probable,
it  would  appear  to  stand  in  the  way  of  connecting  Simeon  in
any  very  definite  manner  with  the  Habiri  as  Steuernagel
proposes  to  connect  the  Leah  tribes  generally.

iii.  Unfortunately,  none  of  the  later  Egyptian  lists
contains  a  name  resembling  Simeon.  It  might  be
surmised  that  the  old  towns,  or  at  least  their  names,
had  died  out.  Sayce  conjectures  that  Simeon  preceded
Judah  in  the  occupation  of  S.  Palestine,  and  had  dis
appeared  by  the  time  of  David  (Early  Heb.  Trad.
392).  There  is  a  passage,  however,  in  one  of  the
fragments  relating  to  the  successful  Egyptian  expedition
of  Esarhaddon,  which  must  be  taken  account  of.

1  Dozy  (70  [63]),  Gratz  (Gesch.  ii.  1 485:  a  theory  later  abandoned)
follow  Aq.  Sym.  Theod.  in  inserting  fugitives  (Tli  =  £cuyoi'TaO
as  subject  to  'call.' On  a  supposed reference to  Simeon  in
Mic.  1  15  (Movers, Unterstich.  lib.  d. Chron.  136;  Hitzig,  ad
loc.)  see  Graf,  Stamtn  Simeon,  32  ;  on  a  supposed  connection  of
Massa  of  Prov.  30i  31  i  (Hitzig,  Spriiche  Sal.  310/1  and  others)
with  Simeon,  see  ib.  34,  and  on  other  supposed  references  see
Weinstein  (as  in  §  5  iii.).

2  Petrie,  also,  places  Samhuna  in  Galilee  (Hist.  Egypt,  2  317).

4528


SIMEON

'  From  (country]  Mu-sur,'  says  Esarhaddpn,  '  I  marshalled  my
camp  (karasu  ad-ki-c),  to  Me-luh-ha  I  directed  my  march,  30
kiisbii-kakkar  from  (f'tyl  Ap-ku  which  is  in  (or  'by')  (/>a-ti)
(country}  Sa-me-n[a]  to  (fty)  Ra-pi-hi  to  (a-na  i-te)  1  the  Wacly
of  Musur.'

If  this  is  really  the  text  of  the  tablet — it  is  the  read
ing  of  Budge,  Peiser,  Craig,  and  (doubtfully)  Rogers  -
— it  is  important  ;  the  district  (mat]  in  which  Ap-ku  lies
is  not,  as  has  been  supposed,  Samaria,  but  Sa-me-n[a],
a  name  which  might  be  an  Assyrian  representation  of
Simeon.3  According  to  this,  there  was  probably  in  the
first  half  of  the  seventh  century  B.  c.  a  district  known  to
the  Assyrians  as  j[j,']Djr,  apparently  somewhere  in  Pales
tine.  The  next  question  is,  Where  ?

a.  The  district  contained,  or  had  on  its  border  (patf),  a  town
called  Apku,  which  lay  30  kasbu-kakkar  from  Rapihi — Raphia
=  er-Refah. What  the  length  of  a  kasbu-kakkar  was  is  un
certain  4  (11^  kilom.  [  =  7  Eng.  m.]?  or  5^  kilom.  [  =  34  m.]). The
average  day's  march  in  this  inscription  is  2  kasbu-kakkar.

(1)  If  the  day's  march  was  about  7  m.,  30  kasbu-kakkar  from
Rapihi  would  give  the  site  of  Apku  as  somewhere  about  100  m.
from  er-Refah —  that  is  to  say,  about  as  far  as,  e.g.,  between
Dothan and Jenln. It might then be a question whether
Sa-me-n[a] is not perhaps a clerical error for Sa-me-ri-na.
'  Aphek  in  Sharon  '  (cp  APHEK,  end)  seems  too  far  S. Fik,  E.
of  the  Sea  of  Galilee, with  which  Schrader  identified  Apku
(KA  Tft)  204)  is  some  135  m.  from  er-Refah  ; kal'at es'-Sema'
SE. of Tyre, with which ,->anda  (.1/1 'G, 1902,  p. 58 \'2j.\])
connects  the  district  of  Samen[a],  identifying  Apku  with  '  Aphck j
in  Asher1  of  Josh.  1930,  is  over  140  in.  ;  Semuniye  (above,  ii.),
somewhat  over  no  m.

(2)  If the day's march  was  about 14  m., 30  kasbu-kakkar
from  Rapihi  would  make  Apku  some  200  m.  from  er-Refah —
that  is  to  say  farther  than  BeVut. Afku  (in  B.I  on  map  facing
col.  3736  ;  cp  APHEK,  i)  seems  to  be  about  215  m.  from  er-Refah.

b.  The  attempt  to  do  justice  to  the  Apku  part  of  Esarhaddon's
statement,  however,  raises  a  difficulty  in  what  precedes.

(i)  Esarhaddon  seems  to  say  that  when  he  directed  his  march
to  Me-luh-ha  he  was  in  Musur  and  there  marshalled  his  camp,
starting  from  Apku.  Now,  Mu-sur  is  nowhere  used  of  N.
Palestine.  It  has  been  argued  with  great  force,  however,  by
Winckler  (and  by  no  Assyriologist  disproved5)  that  Musri  is


1  Hommel,  literally,  'to  the  borders  of'  (A-ufstitze,  295).

2  In  3  R.  35  no.  4  obv., /.  n,  the  name  is  read  [1870]  Sa-me-ru.
G. Smith  (TSBA  8457  ['874])  does not  quote  the  name,  but
(Assyr.  Discov.  312  [1875])  renders  it  Samaria  ;  similarly  in  W.
Bosca wen's  text  (TSBA  4  93  [i875]),and  Strassro.^///t.  Verzeich,
p.  533,  no.  4238  :  Sa-me-[ri-na],  the  reading  followed  by  Schrader,
(KA  rPl  [1882])  and  Delitzsch  (Par.  286). Meanwhile  Budge,
however, Hist, of  Esarhaddon  [iSSoJ, 118, reads Sa-me-na
(without  query). This is rejected (emended?) explicitly  by
Tiele  (BAG  350,  n.  i  [1888]),  and  silently  by  Winckler  (Unters.
z.  altar.  Gfsc/i.  98  :  translit.  text  [1889]). Later,  however,  the
original  was  examined  by  Peiser  and  J.  A.  Craig  and  declared
to read  Sa-me-na  (MVGii\.\%  [1898])  which is likewise the
reading  (shown  shaded)  of  Rogers('  Two  Esarhaddon  Texts, "in
Haverford  College  Studies,  no.  2, 1889). The  present  writer
examined  the  tablet,  and  is  convinced  that  the  reading  Samerina
is  quite  impossible  (so  also  Budge,  and  C.  A. Thompson,  in
conversation). There  are several  possibilities ; but Samena
seems  most  likely. See  also  §  6  iii,  a.  (i).

3  On  Ass.  <>«  =  Heb.  dn  (for  an)  see  Delitzsch  on  'Samaria'
{Ass. Lesestucke,^ i93/')- For disappearance of  'ayin at
the  beginning  of  a  syllable,  cp  ibfl  from  i/itll=if>'al  (Sj'311).

4  Cp  Del.  far.  177-179,  and  C.  II.  \V.  Johns  as  in  n.  i,  col.
4530,  and  the  literature  cited  there  and  in  Muss-Arn.  Diet.  414.

"  Since  the  above  was  written,  E.  A.  W.  Budge  has  given
his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  view  of  Winckler  (Hist,  of  Egyf>t,  6
pp.  ix-xxx).  It  can  hardly  be  claimed,  however,  that  they  settle
the  question,  (i)  The  fragment  (83,  1-18,  83_6)  cited  by  Winckler
as  apparently  mentioning  Musri  and  Mif.sri]  side  by  side  must,
indeed,  be  left  out  of  the  argument.  It  is  broken  off  so  close  to
the  upright  wedge  of  '  is '  that  it  is  illegitimate  to  argue  as  if
the  character  were  complete,  and  therefore  is.  It  might  quite
well  be  hth  (KA  713>  145,  n.  3).  Budge  and  King  go  further,
and  say  that  they  can  see  clearly  a  trace  of  the  head  of  a  second
upright  wedge  (the  present  writer,  after  examination  of  the
tablet,  is  inclined  to  think  that  they  may  be  right).  The  reading
would  then  probably  be  Mi-lu[h-h.al  as  Winckler  suggests
(JKAT&I  145,  n.  3:  mi  for  tire  would  be  unusual  [Wi.] !
the  reflf.  in  the  index  to  Bezold's  Catalogue  yield  no  parallel ;
still,  in  Khors.  103,  Oppert  and  Menant  [Joitrn.  as.  6  ser.  i,
begin.,  1863]  give  »ri,  though  Botta,  Man.,  pi.  iqo.  /.  9,  gives
the  usual  ta[e],  and  Winckler's  edition  follows).  Winckler's
theory,  however,  by  no  means  falls  with  the  surrender  "f  this
reading.  He  never  treated  the  tablet  as  the  main  justification
of  his  theory  (see  Musri,  etc.,  i).  (2)  Budge's  other  arguments,
however,  seem  open  to  criticism  as  inconclusive.  In  particular,
the  translation  of  ana  kef>uti  eli mat  Musri  (Kl.  In.  34)  by  '  to
the  wardenship  of  the  Marches  of  Egypt,"  although  following
time-honoured  precedent,  has  never  been  justified.  The  pho
netic  value  of  NI.GAB  when  it  means  gate-guardian,  as  in

4529


SIMEON

sometimes  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  the  neighbourhood
of  Ihe  Negeb  of  Judah.

Winckler,  accordingly,  conjectures  that  the  Same[na]
in  question  was  in  Musri,  used  in  the  sense  just  indi
cated,  Apku  being  the  Apheka  of  Josh.  15  53,  where  it
is  assigned  to  Judah.  The  Joshua  context  suggests  the
neighbourhood  of  Hebron  ;  at  all  events,  somewhere  in
the  hill  country  of  Judah.  This  theory  would  give  us
the  most  interesting  and  remarkable  datum  that,  about
a  generation  and  a  half  after  the  fall  of  Samaria,  the
name  Sim[eo]n  was  at  least  known  as  a  geographical
term  denoting  a  district  not  far  from  Hebron,  and  the
further  datum  that  the  Assyrians  counted  it  to  Musri.
This  would  have  some  bearing  on  the  theory  which
finds  Simeon  referred  to  in  Dt.  33  (see  above,  §  3)  and
explain  the  prayer  for  its  return  to  Judah.  Many
interesting  problems  would  thus  assume  a  new  aspect  ;
but  the  point  most  important  for  our  present  object
would  be  the  establishment  of  such  a  contemporary
geographical  use  of  the  name  Simeon  as  would  virtually
prove  a  real  knowledge  of  a  Simeonite  people  in  S.
Palestine,  which  would  give  us  a  valuable  starting-point
for  dealing  with  the  Hebrew  Simeon  legends.

There  is,  however,  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  identify
ing  Esarhaddon's  Apku  with  the  Judahite  Aphek  of
Josh.  1553-
Hebron  is  barely  some  60  m.  from  Raphia,  which  could  equal
30  kasbu-kakkar  only  if  the  kasbu-kakkar  were  some  2  m.  If
that  is  not  tenable,  the  Hebron  Apku  theory  could  be  maintained
only  by  supposing  that  '  30 '  (since  there  is  no  doubt  about  the
reading)  is  a  mistake  of  the  Assyrian  scribe  or  of  the  source  from
which  he  compiled.1  Placing  Apku  in  S.  Palestine  is,  there
fore,  not  beyond  criticism.

(2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  difficulty  of  a  N.  Palestine
site  for  Apku  hardly  seems  to  be  quite  as  great  as
Winckler  suggests.

It  is  no  doubt  natural  to  suppose  that  Esarhaddon  was  him
self  in  Musur  when  he  set  out  for  Meluhha  ;  but  ad-ki-e  is  not
quite  unambiguous.-  Esarhaddon  might  then,  from  a  N.
Palestine  Apku  have  ordered  his  army  out  of  Musri  and  have
marched  himself  to  join  it.  Sa-me-na  might  in  that  case  be
connected,  perhaps,  with  one  of  the  places  in  Thotmes  III.'s  list
mentioned  above  (§  6,  i.)  (so  Sanda,  [2  58  74],  n.  ;  cp  above,  \.f.).

There  remains,  however,  against  the  N.  Palestine
theory,  the  difficulty  emphasised  by  Winckler  :

How  came  Esarhaddon's  army  to  be  in  Musri  so  as  to  be
called  forth  by  Esarhaddon,  unless  that  were,  as  Winckler
suggests,  simply  the  stage  on  the  expedition  reached  at  the
point  in  the  narrative  ?  And,  if  so,  how  was  Esarhaddon  not
with  the  army?

We  must  thus,  apparently, be  content  to  leave  the

problem  open  for  the  present. Simeon  may  be  mentioned

,, .  in  contemporary  documents  belonging

.  uonc  usion.  tQ  thg  sixtecrun  century,  the  fifteenth,

or  the  seventh  ;  but  we  cannot  be  sure.  The  hope  of
securing  a  fixed  starting-point  for  the  story  of  Simeon
in  strictly  contemporary  evidence  is  for  the  present  not
fulfilled.  Any  day,  however,  new  material  may  enable
us  to  decide  the  question.  Meanwhile,  we  must  be
content  with  possibilities.

When  the  character  of  the  development  which  resulted
eventually  in  the  formation  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  is
fully  considered,  and  the  suggestions  of  affinity  with

'Descent  of  Istar '  fassitu,  is  pitu  or  muXelis  (5  R.  136  187);
when  its  phonetic  value  is  kepu  (as  a  comparison  of  Rost,  Plate
23  16  ki  .  .  .  ti  with  Plate  376,  NI.GAB-u-ti,  shows  that  it  is  in
the  Esarhaddon  passage  [cp  what  is  said  by  C.  H.  W.  Johns  on
the  phonetic  value  of  NI.GAB  in  his  careful  discussion  of  the
kefii  office  in  Assyrian  Deeds  and  Documents,  284-88,  which
the  present  writer  did  not  see  till  after  this  note  was  written]),
it  means  governor.  Schrader  admitted  twenty-four  years  ago
that  'governor  over  Egypt'  was  impossible  (fCGJ'~ 265)  ;  only,
he  gave  up  'governor'  instead  of  giving  up  'Egypt.'  On  kefu
see  also  Johns,  Doomsday  Kk.  9.

1  Or  by  regarding  kasbu-kakkar  as  not  a  technical  measure
but  a  general  term  :  '  long  journey '  (cp  C.  H.  W.  Johns,  Assyr.
Deeds  and  Documents,  2  208).

2  The  contexts  in  which  it  oftenest  occurs  give  it  the  meaning
of  'muster, marshal! forces where one is' (e.g., in Taylor
Cylinder,  5  23  :  assemble  your  army  {fu-uh-hir  um-man-ka],
muster  your  camp  [di-ka-a  karasa-ka])  ;  but  it  need  not  imply
presence  ; cp  4  R.  48  12, 13*1 : '  Bel will call  forth  (i-da-kas-
sum-ina)  a.  foreign  foe  against  him  '  (Del.  Ass.  Htt'K).

453°


SIMEON

Ishinaelite,  Edomite,  Kenite,  etc.  are  allowed  for,  it  is
natural  to  conjecture  that  Simeon  stands  for  one  of  the
unsettled  elements  of  the  southern  population  fused
more  or  less  permanently  into  a  state  by  David,
especially  when  it  is  noted  (cp  Sayce,  Early  Hebrew
History,  392)  how  many  (5  out  of  n)  of  the  towns
( i  S.  3027-31)  to  which  he  is  said  to  have  'sent  gifts'
appear  in  the  list  of  Simeonite  towns,  for  there  does
not  seem  to  be  between  the  lists  any  literary  connection
(below,  §  10).  According  to  Land  (De  Gids,  Oct.
1871,  p.  21 )  Simeon  was  very  possibly  an  Ishinaelite
group  that  attached  itself  to  Israel.1  If  we  think  that
Beersheba  was  markedly  Simeonite,  interesting  problems
arise  connected  with  such  names  as  Abraham,  Isaac,
(cp  Stade,  Gl Yl  155),  Samuel's  sons,  David,  Amos.

i. In  all  the  statements  we  have  referred  to,  the  name
has  borne  practically  the  same  form. It appears to
consist  of  the  radical  sm'  with  the  nominal


8.  Name.


termination  on=an.a What  view  of  the


name  was  taken  in  early  times  we  cannot  say.  It  is
not  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  story  of  Leah's  grati
tude  for  the  hearing  of  her  supplications  (Gen.  2^33)
was  a  very  early  explanation.  It  is  exactly  parallel  to
the  explanation  of  the  cognate  name  Ishmael  (Gen.
18ii:  J).

The  name  Simeon  has  been  connected  by  Hitzig  (GVI  47),
W.  R.  Smith  (JPhil.,  1880,  p.  80),  Stade  (Gl'I  \  152),  Kerber
(Die  rel.-g^ck.  Btdcut.  d.  Heb.  Eigtnn.  71)  with  the  Arabic
si»t\  said  to  mean  the  offspring  of  the  hyauna  and  the  female
wolf  (Hommel,  Saugethiere,  304),  and  Hall  (SBOT,  ad  loc.
and  114)  proposes  to  read  Gen.  49  5  :  Simeon  and  Levi  are  ohlin
(for  akim  :  '  brothers '  3),  in  the  sense  of  'howling  creatures,'
perhaps  '  hyaenas."  Unfortunately,  o/iiiii  occurs  only  in  Is.  13  21
and  its  meaning  is  not  known  (Che.  SHOT,  'jackals';  but
Duhm,  Marti,  probably  'wild  owls'  ;  cp  Staerk,  Studien,  '2  18
[1899]).  Smith  supports  his  explanation  by  citing  the  Arabic
tribal  names  Sim',  '  a  subdivision  of  the  defenders  (the  Medin-
ites),'4  and  Sam'an,  'a  subdivision  of  Tamim,"  and  compares
such  names  as  Zabyan  (saby,  gazelle),  Wa'lan  (ii'a'l,  ibex),
Labwfm  (lahua,  lioness),  with  which  he  classes  such  Hebrew
names  as  Zibeon  (ny^Si  hyaena),  Kphron  (jnsi1,  -\sy,  gifr,  calf
of  wild  cow).

If  Simeon  is  really  mentioned  by  Esarhaddon's  scribe
as  Sa-me-n[a]  (§  6  iii. ),  it  would  seem  that  the  name  was
at  that  time,  at  least,  sometimes  pronounced  Sam'an.
On  the  other  hand,  there  was,  as  we  have  seen,  a  place-
name  pronounced  Samhuna  in  the  fourteenth  century
B.  c.  (above,  §  6  ii. ),  and  there  is  a  contract  tablet  dated
in  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  Artaxerxes  I.  which  mentions
a  man  named  Sa-ma-ah-u-na  (Hilprecht,  no.  45,  /.  2),
brother  of  la-hu-u-na-ta-nu  (=Jehonathan).B  Later,
as  a  personal  name,  Simeon  became  common  (see
SIMEON  ii.,  1-6,  andSi.Mox,i-i3  ;  SIMON  PKTEK,§  \a,b\
cp,  for  Palmyrene  inscriptions,  Lidzbarski,  Ephemeris,
vol.  i. ,  index  (under  fiysc1).

ii.  The  name  appears  in  regular  gentilic  form  as
Sim'oni,  SIMEONITE  ('jyaw :  cp  Reuben,  ReubenI).

<B,  however,  everywhere  represents  the  gentilic  by  the  noun
form  (trvfitiav  :  in  Nu.  '25  14  '31'CB'n  becomes  in  (S15  riav  cr.  [AFL
om.  Toil']).  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  the <ru/J.eiav  of  <5»NAQr
in  Zech.  12  13  implies  that  Shimei,  'j;"r  was  known  as  an  alterna
tive  form  of  the  gentilic«  (cp  WRS,  JPhil.  Oo6  [1880]),  just
as  in  Arabic  there  is  the  similar  pair  ending  in  -'I  and  -'am
respectively  (WRS,  80).

1  Cp  Dozy's  view,  above,  §  5  ii.  (small  type,  end),  and  below
§  8  iii.
a  Cp  Noldeke,  ZDMG  15  806  [1861].

3  Gemini,  according  to  Zimmern  (ZA 7i62f.)  and  Stucken
(.IfTG,  1902,  p.  189).

4  He  does  not  allude  to  Dozy's  daring  hypothesis  referred  to
above  (§5).

5  The  gentilic  (amelu)  Sa-ma-u-nu-ai  occurs  along  with  (amtlu)
Pu-ku-du-ai  in  a  letter  to  'the  king'(K.  1248). What '(city)
Sa-am-'-u-na  (so,  according  to  the  text  in  Del.  Lesestticke,(^
not  [as  in  KB1  io6l  Sa-am-u-na),  son  of  Marduk-apil-iddina  '  in
Sennacherib's  Taylor Prism inscription  (5  a/.)  can mean it
would  be  hard  to  say. Sa(T)-nta-'-gv-nu  was  the  name  of  one
of  the  sons  of  Bel-ikasa  (ruler  of  the  half-Aramaean  tribe  of  the
Gambulai)  executed  by  ASur-bani-pal. Samuna  in  Sa-mu-na-
aplu-iddina  (Johns, Doomsday Bk.  viii.  1  6  =  K.  8179) and in
Sa-mu-nu-ia-tu-ni  (Ass.  Deeds  nnd  Doc.  160  R.  n  =  K.  279)  is
doubtless  Kshmun  (Doomsday  Bk.  16).

6  The  Shemaiah  also  of  I  Ch.  437  appears  in  ®B  as  tru^tiav.

4531


SIMEON

iii.  Names  containing  the  three  radicals  yav  are  so
common,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  S.  Palestine,
that  they  would  be  enough  in  themselves  to  suggest  the
theory  of  dispersion  underlying  Gen.  49.  In  that  theory
there  may  be  more  than  popular  fancy.  We  cannot
here  profitably  discuss  W.  R.  Smith's  view  that  'the
dispersion  of  the  tribe  Simeon  is  most  easily  under
stood  on  the  principles  of  exogamy  and  female  kinship  '
(jl'hil.  996  [1880]).  A  historical  connection  of  some
kind,  however,  between  at  least  some  of  the  various
cognate  names  seems  extremely  probable.

We  find  Shimei  as  Simeonite  (i  Ch.  427),  Leyite  (Ex.  617),
Reubenite  (i  Ch.  64)—  all  Leah  tribes  —  Henjamite1  (2  S.  10  n
etc.  ;  cp  i  K.  4  is),  and  in  the  family  of  David  (2  S.  21  21  Kt.)
as  the  name  of  the  only  brother  mentioned  in  old  sources  (Hu.
on  i  S.  169  in  KHC);  besides  which  we  find  cognate  names  like
Kshtemoa,  and  Ishmael,2  pronounced  now  in  Egypt,  Isma'in3
(cp  Bethel,  Betin  ;  Reubel,  Reuben).4

Not  only  are  the  names  Simeon  and  Ishmael  cognate.
There  seem  to  be  also  in  the  genealogy  of  Ishmael  points
of  contact  with  that  of  Simeon  (see  MlBSAM,  MISIIMA),
to  which  we  now  pass.

i.  As  in  the  case  of  Reuben,  P's  genealogy  of
p  Simeon  occurs  in  Ex.  615  as  well  as  in

logical  li^ts.  foJ0^  passages" The  list  is M

Gen.  4(5  10  =  Ex.  615 Nu.  26  12  i  Ch.  424


inxt

J'3't


pa't
J'3't

rrni


3'Tt

nnit


The  Gen.  =  Ex.  list  seems  to  con  tain  three  names  each  appearing
twice  :  _^ma'  =  SiNgf,  pa'  =  p3',  and  inN  =  inS-  ^'u-i  changing
one  sibilant,  gives  mi  for  ini,  and  drops  its  double  (inx).  I  Ch.
4  further  shows  3—)'  for  J'3".

Winckler  thinks  that  we  have  here  a  case  the  converse  of  what
is  suggested  elsewhere  with  regard  to  ISSACIIAK  (§  7):  the
Chronicler's  list  is,  he  thinks  (C/2zoi,  n.  i),  the  corruption  of  a
sentence  telling  that  the  b'nc  Shiin'On  went  southwards  when
Saul  contested  with  the  Zarhites.5  On  this  suggestion  see
above  (§  4,  end).

If  the  list  be  taken  for  a  real  '  genealogy  '  it  is  difficult
to  choose  between  the  variants  (see  the  special  articles).

Bertheau  decides  in  favour  of  Jakin  as  against  Jarib,  but  only
for  the  (weak)  reason  that  it  occurs  thrice.  He  thinks  that  the
best  known  Simeonite  clan  was  Shaul  (Shaul's  mother  is  known
as  a  Canaanite  and  he  alone  has  [three]  sons,  of  whom  Misma"
in  turn  has  three).  It  would  seem  that  some  popular  story  was
current  about  this  Shaul  and  his  Canaanite  mother.  According
to  Jubilees  34  20  her  name  was  Adibaa,  and  according  to  44  13
she  was  a  woman  of  Zephath,  which,  according  to  Judg.  1  17,  was
the  city  captured  by  Simeon  and  called  Hormah.  In  Gen.
Rat.  80  she  is  said  to  have  been  Dinah  (cp  Charles,  Jubilees,  206).

ii.  In  the  Chronicler's  special  genealogy  (i.  4  25  _/".),  which
appears  in  MT  thus  —

Shaul
I

I


Shallum  8


Mibsam


Mishma

I


Hammuel


Zaccur


Shimei


1  Note  also  Jamin  and  Saul  as  Simeonite  names  (i  Ch.  424).

2  Cp Graf, Der  Stamm Simeon, 23, Ewald,  GGA, 1864,
p.  1274,  and  above,  §§  5  ii.  7.

3  Indeed  the  note  on  the  name  in  Gen.  16  n  (J)  is  .tin1  yDP
"]'3V  SN.  with  'jy  as  in  the  case  of  REUBEN  (§  7  i.).

4  How  cautious  it  is  necessary  to  be  in  reasoning  from  simi
larity  of  names  appears  from  the  remarkable  fact  that  Saul  as
well  as  Shimei  is  a  Simeonite  name, and  that  Samuel, who
'  discovered '  Saul,  is  brought  into  relation  with  Beersheba,  the
most  famous  of  the  towns  claimed for Simeon. Shemuel b.
Amrnihud  is  the  name  of  the  Simeonite  representative  in  the
partition  of  W.  Palestine  (Nu.  34  20).

5  'nut?  rnt  3"v  inx  pa*  Vx  in  pycr  '33% This  might  be

made  more  plausible  perhaps  by  reading 1C3,  instead of  tho

strange  113,  for  icj  of  Sxiaj  \  t>ut  tne  clause  Vint?  nil  3"V  in*
is  not  convincing.

6  Cp  P's  Simeonite  census  prince  Shelumiel  b.  Zurishaddai
(Nu.  1  6  2  12  7  36  10  19),  from  whom  Judith  is  said  to  be  descended
(Judith  8  i). Salu  (K^D-  but  ®n  <raAjuu>r,  ®Hi-  <raAu>/i)  was  the
father  of  the  Simeonite  Zimri  who  was  slain  with  the  Midianite
woman,  Nu.  25  14  (see  §  10,  a,  end). The  other  nimes  assigned
to Simeon are Shaphat b. Hori, the '  spy ' (Nu.  13  5), and
Shephatiah  b.  Maacah,  the  ruler  (i  Ch.  27  16).

4532


see  above,  §  5  ii.  )


SIMEON

the  names,  apart  from  the  Ishmaelite  Mibsam  and  Mishma'  and
the  Judahite  Ham(m)uel,  need  not  be  old  (cp  Gray,  HPN  236)  :
indeed  ®u  omits  Hammuel  and  Zaccur,  and  Shimei  might  be  a
duplicate  of  Mishma'.  Moreover,  they  all  appear  in  (£5BA  as
descendants  in  progressive  -generations  of  Shaul.

iii.  Still  more  suspicious  looking  is  the  peculiar  list  in  w.  34-
37.  (On  the  number,  thirteen,1  of  the  names,  some  of  which  are
supplied  with  genealogies,  see  below,  §  10,  i.).

It  maybe  noted,  however,  in  connection  with  Simeon's
being  a  brother  of  Levi,  that  the  names  brought  into
prominence  in  the  list  —  Shaul,  Shimei,  Ziza2  (traced
back  five  generations3)  —  are  known  otherwise  as
Levitical  names  (cp  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  7[v.]).

a.  The  theory  of  the  statistical  writers  evidently  was
that Simeon was gradually merged in Judah  : the

.  0 _  Simeonites first settled amongst the

graphicaUists.  -;.udahitfes  <J°sh;
time of David

marginal  gloss  to  the  whole  list
were  lost  in  Judah.  It  would  appear  that  there  was
a  time  when  the  Judah  list  in  Josh.  1621-32  lacked
exactly  those  cities  which  in  Josh.  19  are  assigned  to
Simeon,  for  when  they  are  omitted  the  total,  twenty-
nine  (instead  of  thirty-six),  is  correct.  The  fact  remains,
however,  that  all  the  Simeonite  cities  are  somewhere
or  other  assigned  to  Judah.  It  has  been  noted  that
whereas  we  hear  of  the  Negeb  of  Judah  (i  S.  27  10),  of
Caleb  (30  14),  of  the  Kenite  (27  10),  of  the  Kerethi
(30i4),  of  Jerahmeel  (27  10),  we  nowhere  hear  of  the
Negeb  of  Simeon  (Graf,  Stamm  Sim.,  14).  Whilst
naturally  no  attempt  is  made  to  sketch  a  boundary  line,
it  is  clear  that  Simeon  was  supposed  by  the  writer  of
Josh.  19  1-9  to  be  found  in  the  SW.  of  Judah.

The  slighting  of  Simeon-1  in  the  partition  of  W.  Palestine  has
been  connected  (\Veinstein,  Gen.  dcr  Agada,  Iqg)  with  the  story
of  Zimri  in  Nu.  25  14  ;  so  also  (Gen.  rab.  99  ;  Xum.  rat.  26  ;
Rashi,  arid  others)  the  fact  that  Simeon  is  the  only  tribe  that
falls  in  the  second  census  (Nu.  "2ii  14)  enormously  (from  59,300  to
22,200)  below  its  size  in  the  first  (Xu.  1  22yC).s  It  is  difficult,
however,  to  extract  any  more  history  out  of  the  first  story  than
out  of  the  second.

b.  The  list  of  Simeonite  cities  appears  in  four  forms,
which  are  here  shown  side  by  side.

(i) SIMEON-. (2)  (3) JUDAH. (4)


Josh.  I'J  2-6

i  Ch.  428-31

Josh.  1026-32

Neh.  11  26-29

7

32

42  .

i.

i.

i.

i.

Beersheba

Beersheba —

Shema

Jeshua

sheba

Moladah

Moladah

Moladah

Moladah

Hazar-gaddah

Heshmon

Bethpalet

Bethphelet

Hazar-shual

Hazar-shual

Hazar-shual

Hazar-shual

—  Beersheba

Beersheba

[Bizjothjah  =

'  its  villages  ']

Balah

Bilhah

Baalah

lim

Azem

Ezem

Azem

Eltolad

Tolad

Eltolad

Bethuel

Bethuel

Chesil

Hormah

Hormah

Hormah

Ziklag

Ziklag

Ziklag

Ziklag

Beth-marcaboth

Beth-marcabot

i  Madmannah

Mekonah

Hazar-susah

Hazar-susim

Sansannah

Beth-lebaoth

Beth-birei

Lebaoth

'its  villages'

Sharuhen

Shaaraim

Shilhim

ii.

ii.

Etam

Ain  Rimmon

Ain  Rimmon

Ain  and  Rim-

En-rimmon

mou

ii.

Ether

—Ether

Tochen

Ashan

Ashan

Ashan

The  names  have  been  given  in  the  forms  under  which
they  are  discussed  in  the  separate  articles,  where  account

1  In  the  Chronicler's  expanded  version  of  the  Hexateuch  list
(i  Ch.  424-26)  it  is  necessary  to  include  Simeon  himself  to  make
up  the  full  thirteen.

2  In  the  form  Zizah  ;  see  ZINA.

3  Ending  in  <E|n  with  Simeon  himself  (a\<u.t<av  for  Shemaiah).

4  On  the  varying  ethical  judgment  on  the  conduct  of  Simeon
in  Gen.  34  see  Gunkel  ad  loc.  and  Charles'  BK.  OF  JUBILEES,
on  302-6.

5  In  the  case  of  the other  four  —  Reuben  (3000), Ephraim
(8000),  Naphtali  (8000),  Gad  (1000)  —  the  fall  is  slight.


145


4533


SIMON

is  taken  of  the  variants  in  (S.  It  will  suffice  here  to
note  that  in  list  (i)  <SI!  inserts  Oa\xa  after  Rimmon;
in  list  (3)  ©BA  omits  Heshmon  and  <S5A  identifies
ASHAN  (v.  42)  with  ASHNAH  (v.  43).  In  list  (4)  ©L
follows  MT  ;  but  ©»NA  omits  all  except  Jeshua  and
Beersheba.

1.  The  main  list  (i. )  appears  to  consist  of  thirteen
towns  agreeing  with  the  thirteen  (101.434-37)  names
(some  with  genealogies  attached)  of  their  inhabitants
who  afterwards  migrated  to  Gerar  (i  Ch.  439).

ii.  The  main  list  of  towns  is  followed  by  a  supple
mentary  list  (ii. )  of  four  (Ain  Kimmon  being  a  single
place,  and  Tochen  preserved  only  in  i  Ch.  432),  agreeing
with  the  four  '  captains  '  who  migrated  to  Mt.  Seir.

iii.  Of  the  list  of  nine  Judahite  or  Simeonite  towns
assigned  to  the  priests  (i  Ch.  657-59  [42-44]  =  Josh.  21 13-
16)  only  ASHAN  (q.v.  ;  in  Joshua  miswritten  AIN)  is  ever
called  Simeonite.  H.  W.  H.

SIMEON  (fiypE> ;  cy/we^N  [BAL] ;  see  SIMEON
i. ,  §  8,  i. ,  end),  i.  EV  accurately  SHIMEON,  in  the
list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (EZRA  i.,  §  5,  end),
Ezra  103i  (©BNA  Ze/ueaw).

2.  Grandfather  of  MATTATHIAS (i  Mace.  2 1); see
MACCABEES  i. ,  §  2.

3.  A  devout  man  of  Jerusalem,  mentioned  in  Lk. 's
Gospel of the Infancy (Lk.  222-39). He was gifted
with  the 'holy  spirit" — i.e. , the spirit  of  prophecy — •
and  had  learned  by  revelation  that  he  should  not  die
without  having  seen  the  Messiah. Having  been  super-
naturally  guided  to  the  temple  courts,  he  saw  the  child
Jesus  brought  in  by  his  parents,  according  to  custom,
on  the  completion  of  the  period  of  the  mother's  puri
fication. He  then  burst  into  an  inspired  song  (w.  29-
32),  known  to  us  as  the  A'utic  Dimittis  (cp  HYMNS,  §  3).
He  could  now  depart,  like  a  relieved  sentinel,  and  could
transmit  to  others  the  happy  tidings  of  the  dawn  of  the
Messianic  day  (see  GOSPELS,  §  39). For  Mary  he  added
a  special  word  of  prophecy, pointing  to the different
results  of  the  preaching  of  the  Cross  of  Jesus, which
would  lead  some  to  a  new  life,  and  others  to  anguish
at  his  crucifixion  (w.  34^ ). See  further,  J. Lightfoot
on  Lk.  225.

It  is  possible  to  regard  Simeon  as  a  poetic  personification  of
that  inner  circle  of  Jewish  believers  which  formed  the  true
SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD  (q.v.).  Long  had  it  waited  for  the  ful
filment  of  the  prophecies  of  salvation,  and  now  (i.e.,  when  this
'  Gospel  of  the  Infancy  '  was  written)  its  members  were  passing
one  by  one  into  the  company  of  believers  in  Jesus.  Nor  need
we  be  startled  to  find  an  imperfect  parallel  to  the  story  of  Simeon
in  one  of  the  legends  which  cluster  round  the  birth  of  the  Buddha
(see  Carpenter,  The  Synoptic  Gospels^),  155).

4.  RV,  SYMEON  (Lk.  830). See  GENEALOGIES  OF
JESUS,  §  3.

5.  RV,  SYMEON,  '  that  was  called  Niger'  (cy/V\ea)N
6 KaXovftevos Nfyep [Ti.  WH]), is mentioned along
with Barnabas, Lucius, Manaen, and Saul, among
the prophets and teachers in the primitive church
at  Antioch  (Acts  13  if). See  MINISTRY,  §  37. Niger
was  probably  his  Gentile  name, whether  chosen  with
any  reference  to his complexion we  cannot  tell  ; the
name was not uncommon (see Diet. Gr. and  Rom.
Biogr.  and  My t hoi.}.

The  list  of  the  first  preachers  of  the  Gospel  given  by
Epiphanius  (Epiph.  Opera,  1  337,  ed.  Dindorf)  closes  with  the
names  Dappo/Sap,  /cal  'An-eAA.-rji>,  'Vovfyov,  Ni'yepa  KOUTOUS  Aotjrov?
T<av  ej35ofi7]KOi'Ta  Svo.

6.  RV, SYMEON  (Acts  15 14). See SIMON PETER,

§  i.

SIMON  (c  I  MOON  ;  =' snub-nosed '?  a  Greek  name
[see  SIMON  PETER,  §  la]  of  frequent  occurrence  among
post-exilic  Jews  [p^D] ;  cp  JASON  ;  see  SIMON  PETER,

§  i*.

The  persons  who  bear  the  name  in  <P  or  XT  are  : —
i. Simon Chosameus (CIMCON \OCAMe.OC [B]

.  .  .  XOCOMA.IOC  [A]),  i  Esd.  9 32  =  Ezra  10 31,  SHIMEON

[b.  Harim].

4534


SIMON

2.  Son  of  Mattathias  surnamed  THASSI  (T  Mace.  2s  ;
Bcurffu  [A],  0acr(T|»  [KVJ ;  thasi  [V]  ; ^fiD'X  [Syr.]  ;
Jos.  Ant.  xii.  61,  0am). See  MACCABEES,  §§  i,  5.

3.  Son  of  Onias,  'the  great  priest,'  whose  praise  is
set  forth  in  Ecclus.  50. It  is  doubtful  whether  Simon
I.  ('  the  Just ')  or  Simon  II.  is  alluded  to  ;  cp  ECCLESI-
ASTICL-S,  §  7  ;  CANON,  §  36  ;  ONIAS,  §$  4-7.

4.  A  Benjamite,  who,  wishing  to  avenge  himself  upon
Onias,  informed  Apollonius  of  the  existence  of  huge  sums
of  money  in  the  temple  treasury  (2  Mace.  3-4). The  ac
count  of  the  attempt  of  HELIODORUS  \_q.v.}  to  seize  the
treasure  is  well  known. See  Ai'OLLONius,  MENELAUS,
ONIAS,  §  6. He  is  called  the  irpoardr^  rov  Itpov  (84)
or  temple  overseer,  and  it  was  perhaps  his  duty  to  look
after  the  daily  supplies  of  the  temple. Cp  TEMPLE,  §  36.

5.  Named  in  Mt.  1855  Mk.  63,  together  with  James,
Joses,  or  Joseph,  and  Judas,  as  one  of  the  'brethren'
of  Jesus. He  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  NT  ;
but  it  is  not  impossible that  he  is identical  with the
Simeon,  son  of  Clopas  the  brother  of  Joseph,  mentioned
by  Hegesippus  as '  cousin  german  '  (dve^ibs)  of  Jesus,
who  succeeded  James  in  the  bishopric  of  Jerusalem  and
suffered  martyrdom  in  the  reign  of  Trajan. See  CLOPAS.

6.  Surnamed  theCANAN^AN,  AVCANAANiTE  (6  Kav-
arcuoj : Mt.  104  Mk.  3i8),  or  the  ZEALOT  (6  Z^Xwr^s,
Lk.  615  Acts  113)  ; named  as  an  apostle  in  all  the  four
canonical  lists  (APOSTLE,  §  i ). There  is  no  doubt  about
the  superiority  of  the  reading  Kavavaios  to  that  of  TR,
Kavavirrj^, though  the  latter  has  the  support  of  X ; but
although  the  writer  of  the  Third  Gospel  and  Acts  took  it  as
representing,  and  has  translated  it, 'Zealot'  (see  ZEAL
OTS),  many  modern  critics  (cp  JUDAS,  9,  §  2)  are  inclined
to  take  the  word  as  a  Greek  modification  of  ';x:p  or
'Kji?,  meaning,  '  a  man  of  Canan,  or  Cana"  (there  were
several  Canas). Simon  does  not  reappear  in  the  NT
history. In  ecclesiastical  tradition  he  is  usually  men
tioned  in  conjunction  with  Judas  of  James  ;  and  indeed
in  some  western  authorities  in  Mt.  10.)  the  epithet  Zelotes
is given  to  Judas  not  to  Simon,  Judas  Zelotes  taking
the  place  of  Thadd;t>us. '  The  addition  of  Zelotes  is
probably  due  to  a  punctuation  of  Lk. 's  text  which  might
not  seem  unnatural  if  no  connection  of  sense  were  recog
nised  between  Kavavcuos  and  fT/XorrrJs  '  (\VH). Simon
the Zealot is frequently identified with the Simon
(Simeon)  of  Clopas  mentioned  by  Hegesippus  (ap.  Eus.
HE  832)  as  a  descendant  of  David  who  was  alive  in
Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Trajan  and  suffered  martyrdom
under  the  consular  Atticus  ; but this identification is
not  made  by  Hegesippus  or  Eusebius  themselves,  and
appears  to  be  first  met  with  in  the  Chronicon  Paschale,
Pseudo-Hippolytus,  and  Pseudo-Dorotheus,  all  of  which
call  him  Simon  Judas.

Later  ecclesiastical  tradition  varies  as  to  the  field  of  Simon's
apostolic  labours.  One  set  of  legends  places  his  activity  in
Babylon  or  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea.  But,  as  Lipsius
points  out  (Apokr.-At>.-gescli.'&-i4'3.Jf.\  these  representations
have  probably  arisen  from  a  confusion  with  Simon  Peter  who
writes  from  '  Babylon  '  and  addresses  the  Christians  in  '  Pontus.'
Another  set  of  legends,  especially  met  with  in  late  Greek  writers,
represents  him  as  preaching  in  Egypt,  Libya,  Mauretania,  and
Britain  ;  but  the  same  districts  are  also  assigned  by  some  tradi
tions  to  Simon  Peter.  In  the  Western  church  the  festival  of
Saints  Simon  and  Judas  is  observed  on  Oct.  28.  The  Breviary
lesson  for  the  day  has  it  that  '  Simon  Chananaeus  qui  et  Zelotes,
et  Thadd;eus  qui  et  Judas  Jacobi  appellatur  in  Evangelic,  unius
ex  catholicis  Epistolis  scriptor'  evangelised  Egypt  (Simon)  and
Mesopotamia  (Jnde)  respectively,  and  afterwards  went  together
into  Persia  and  ended  a  successful  ministry  there  in  a  glorious
martyrdom.

7.  Of  CYRENE  \jj.v.~\  (Zf/iow  Kvpnvaios  [Ti.  WH]),
perhaps  a  Hellenistic  Jew,  who  came  from  the  country
and  was  compelled  to  carry  the  cross  for  the  crucifixion
(Mt.  2/32 Mk.  15zi Lk.  2826). Afterwards he was
reckoned  among  the  seventy 'others'  (apostles), Lk.
10 1,  and  he  was  said  to  have  died  on  the  cross  birep
Xpiffrov — i.e. ,  for  the  sake  of  Christ. The  Basilidian  and
perhaps  also  other  Gnostics  believed  that  he  died  in  place
of  Jesus  ;  cp  R.  A.  Lipsius,  Apokr.  Apostelgesch.  1 195 /.

4535


SIMON  MAGUS

204  8427.  According  to  Mk.  he  was  the  father  of
ALEXANDER  and  RCFUS  \qq.v. ].  W.  H.  Ryder  (JDL
17io6/,  1898)  thinks  that  Simon's  eldest'  son  was
Alexander,  his  second  Rums,  his  third  Tertius,  and  his
fourth  Quartus— all  Christians  living  in  or  near  Rome
when  Mark  wrote.  Living  among  Gentiles,  Simon
gave  his  sons  Greek  and  La' in  names.  This  Rufus  has
been  conjectured  by  many  to  be  the  same  as  the  Rufus  of
Rom.  1613.  E.  P.  Gould,  St.  Mark,  2897  (1896),  re
marks  '  It  is  the  height  of  foolish  conjecture  to  identify
this  Rufus,  the  son  of  Simon  of  Cyrene,  with  the  one  in
Rom.  1613  :  St.  Mark  will  only  indicate  that  the  names
Alexander  and  Rufus  were  known  to  the  early  church. '
Deep  indeed  is  our  ignorance  on  such  points.

vv.  c.  v.  M.  (No.  7.)

8.  '  The  leper  '  of  Bethany,  in  whose  house  the  woman
anointed  Jesus  with  the  contents  of  the  alabaster  cruse
(Mt.  266  Mk.  143  ;  cp  MARY, §  25). An  incredible
apocryphal  story  makes  him  the  husband  of  Mary  the
sister  of  Martha ;  cp  LAZARUS. [The  designation  '  leper'
has  greatly  exercised  the  critics. It  is  worth  recalling,
however,  that  the  mother  of  JEROBOAM  [q.v.  i]  is  called
in  MT  nyns.  'a  leper'  (i  K.  1126),  and  that  Naaman  in
the  extant  recast  of  an  older  story  ( 2  K.  5 1 )  is  represented
as  jni-p,  '  a  leper.' In  both  cases  the  original  tradition
stated  that  a  Misrite  was  referred  to. It  is  possible  that
the  Simon  referred  to  was  said  to  have  come  (like  '  that
Egyptian  '  in  Acts  2138)  from  Egypt  to  Jerusalem,  and
that  the  original  narrative  (in  Hebrew)  called  him  nssn.
Cp  also 'Simon  of  Cyrene.' Chajes  (Markus-studien
[1899], P- 75)  supposes  an original Hebrew  reading
1'uvn,  '  the  humble  ' — i.e. ,  '  pious '  (as  often  in  Talmud).

'  One  who  had  been  a  leper '  is  at  any  rate  a  miserable
explanation. — T.  K.  c.]

9.  The  Pharisee,  in  whose  house  the  penitent  woman
anointed  Jesus'  hands  and  feet  ( Lk.  7  40). Cp  GOSPELS,
§  10,  and  MARY,  §  25,  col.  2970. Against  the  identi
fication  of  this  anointing  with  that  of  Mary  of  Bethany,
just  before  the  Passion,  see  Plummer  (209). The  theory
is  at  any  rate  ancient,  for,  as  Plummer  remarks,  Origen
on  Mt.  266  contends  against  it. It  is  also  supported  by
Keim  (Jesu  von  Nasara,  8222),  Holtzmann  (HC®,  273,
<3>346),  and  Scholten  (Het  Paulinisch  Evangelic,  254).
The  last-named  scholar  is  of  opinion  that  '  the  influence
of  Paulinism  on  the  changed  representation  of  Luke  is
unmistakeable,'  and  that  '  leper'  in  Mt.  and  Mk.  was  a
symbolic phrase for Pharisee. Without committing
ourselves  to  this,  we  may  reasonably  hold  that  here,  as
often  in  collections  of  traditions,  a  germ-idea  received
conflicting  developments.

10.  A  tanner  of  Joppa  with  whom  Peter  lodged  (Acts
943). The reference to his trade is  significant  ; the
narrator  suggests  that Peter  was losing his old pre
judices. It  is  said  that  a  wife  could  claim  a  divorce
from a husband who became a tanner (Mishna,
KUthfiboth  7io). Cp  HANDICKAFT,  §  5  ;  JOPPA  (end).

1 1.  The  father  of  Judas  Iscariot,  Jn.  671  182  26.

12.  For  Simon  Magus, see below (special  article).
On the 'Great  Apophasis ' see  GOSPELS,  §  91 (and
references ).

13.  For  Simon  Peter,  see  below  (special  article).

w.  c.  v.  M.  (No.  7. )

SIMON MAGUS.

CONTENTS

Introductory  :  Acts 8 9-24  (§  i).  Anti-Pauline  and  Anti-Gnostic
Extra-canonical  data  (§  2/.).  polemic  (§§  9-11).

Simon  =  Paul  (§§  4-7).  Historical  Simon-figures  (§  12).

Four distinct  Simon-figures Conclusion on Acts 80-24

(§8).  (»i3/:).

Literature  (§  15).

Simon  Magus  is  mentioned  in  the  NT  only  in  Acts

89-24.  (a)  In  Acts  85-8  we  read  that Philip  the

1 In  Acts KvanSel'st  preached  the  Christ  in  the  city

of  Samaria,  and  wrought  many  miracles

of  healing. Next (w.  9-13), we  are  told  that  Simon

4536


SIMON  MAGUS

had  previously  to  this  bewitched  the  people  by  his
magical  arts,  giving  out  that  he  was  some  great  one,
and  being  declared  by  them  to  be  that  power  of  God
which  is  called  Great.  After  that  men  and  women  had
received  baptism  at  the  hands  of  Philip,  Simon  also  did
so,  and  continued  with  Philip,  full  of  amazement  at  his
miracles.  Meanwhile  (vv.  14-17),  at  the  instance  of  the
apostles  in  Jerusalem,  Peter  and  John  had  come  to
Samaria,  and  through  laying  on  of  hands  had  obtained
the  Holy  Ghost  for  those  who  had  been  baptised.  Upon
this,  Simon  (vv.  18-24)  offered  them  money  and  desired
the  same  power,  but  after  a  severe  rebuke  from  Peter,
finally  besought  the  two  apostles  to  pray  for  him,  that
the  punishment  they  had  threatened  might  be  averted.

(l>)  This  narrative  contains  much  that  is  strange.
That,  instead  of  the  city  of  Samaria  (as  in  vv.  5  8/. )
the  country  of  Samaria  should  be  named  in  v.  14,  may
be  set  down  to  a  pardonable  want  of  exactness.  The
designation  of  Simon  as  '  that  power  of  God  which  is
called  Great '  and  his  designation  of  himself  as  '  some
great  one '  l  are  not  intrinsically  incompatible  with  his
sorcery  ;  but  it  is  very  surprising  that  the  sorcery  is
referred  to  twice  (vv.  911)  and  that  its  second  mention
is  preceded  by  the  same  word  (irpoafixoi>,  '  gave  heed  ')
as  had  already  been  employed  in  v.  10.

This  appears  to  indicate  that  the  two  explanations  of  his
popularity  come  from  two  different  sources.  By  the  reference
to  his  sorcery,  he  would,  in  that  case,  be  characterised  as  a  mere
yorjs  of  the  sort  that  was  very  abundant  in  those  days  ;  '  that
power  of  God  which  is  called  Great '  would  signify  something
much  more  exalted.  Now,  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  that  an
editor  would  have  introduced  v.  n  if  he  had  already  found  zv.
9./T  lying  before  him  in  his  text.  It  is  more  probable  that  v.  10
was  interpolated,  and  that  in  the  process  '  took  heed  '  (Trpoaet-
Xov)  was  borrowed  from  v.  1 1.  The  close  of  v.  9  (Simon's  giving
out  that  he  was  some  great  one)  can  in  that  case  have  belonged
to  the  original  text,  for  it  is  far  from  conveying  necessarily  any
thing  nearly_so  high  as  'the  power  of  God  which  is  called
Great '  ;  but  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  '  bewitching,  and  bringing
the  nation  of  Samaria  into  a  maze  '  (fnayeviav  KOL  efio'Tai/oui'  TO
(Bros  rrjs  Sajuapeta?)  also  should  come  from  the  author  of  v.  n.
Perhaps  the  original  text  had  vv.  g  loa  (down  to  '  great,'  /neyaAov);
the  redactor  beginning  with  '  saying,'  Ae'yorres  (v.  loi),  added
the  designation  of  Simon  as  the  power  of  God  that  is  called
Great,  and  then  thought  it  necessary  to  return  in  v.  n  to  the
idea  of  sorcery  (from  which  attention  had  meanwhile  been
called  away),  and  in  doing  so  borrowed  '  took  heed  '  (-n-povelxov)
from  v.  ioa  and  e£e<rrajcli/<u  from  v.  9  (ef  undviuv).  This  re
newed  mention  of  Simon's  sorcery,  however,  was  not  indispens
able  ;  v.  12  could  quite  as  well  have  followed  directly  on  v.  10.
It  would  have  been  equally  superfluous  if  it  had  been  inserted
by  the  redactor  in  v.  9  faayevuv  to  2a/napei'as),  had  v.  n
belonged  to  the  original  text  (in  which  case  the  whole  of  v.  10,
on  account  of  the  Trpocrfl\ov,  would  have  to  be  attributed  to  the
redactor).  If  there  is  reluctance  to  assign  to  any  redactor  the
doubled  mention  of  the  sorcery,  there  remains  only  the  alternative
that  a  copyist  who  acted  as  independently  and  arbitrarily  as  the
copyist  of  D  (or  a  preliminary  stage  of  D;  see  ACTS,  §  17  z")
substituted  at  his  own  instance  the  other  reference  to  the  magical
practices  for  that  which  he  found  before  him  ;  that  then,  upon
comparison  of  this  transcription  with  an  unaltered  copy,  the
new  form  of  the  idea  was  written  upon  the  margin,  and  then  was
taken  by  the  next  copyist  for  an  integral  portion  of  the  text  left
put  by  his  predecessor  by  an  oversight,  and  was  accordingly
introduced  into  it  at  what  seemed  to  be  an  appropriate  place.

(<:)  The  idea  that  only  apostles  (by  laying  on  of
hands)  can  procure  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  quite
unhistorical  (see  MINISTRY,  §346').  From  this,  it
would  not  at  once  follow,  however,  that  it  is  a  later
insertion  ;  for  the  whole  passage  may  be  equally  un
historical.

At  the  same  time  it  is,  in  fact,  apparent,  that  vv.  14-18(1  intro
duce  a  representation  which  in  the  actual  connection  is  surpris-
ln.?_-  _  According  to  v.  13,  Simon  has  been  only  astonished  at
Philip's  miracles  :  as  for  the  bestowal  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he
wishes  to  be  able  to  do  the  same.  In  a  sorcerer  would  it  not
have  been  more  natural  to  desire  to  possess  the  miraculous
power  of  Philip  (cp  SIMON  PETER,  §33'0?  Among  the
scholars,  therefore,  who  separate  sources  in  Acts  (see  ACTS,  §  n),
we  find  Van  Manen,  Feine,  Clemen,  Jiingst  supposing  that  in
the  source  Simon  did  seek  to  purchase  Philip's  miraculous  power
with  money.  On  this  supposition  it  is  simplest  to  regard  the
last  word  of  v.  13  (ef  lo-raro,  '  he  was  amazed  ')  and  w.  14-18/1


j  Perhaps  originally  it  ran  merely  as  in  5  36  elvai  nva  eavrov
— '  that  he  was  somebody' — and  '  great '  (ficyav)  may  have  been
merely  an  explanatory  gloss  to  '  somebody  '  (riva)  ;  cp  the  neuter
tivain,  '  to  be  somewhat,'  Gal.  2663.

4537


SIMON  MAGUS

(down  to  Tfvev^a)  as  interpolated.  In  this  case,  in  the  immedi
ately  following  context,  we  must  regard,  at  least,  v.  i,,,  the
them  (aurois)  instead  of  'him  '  (air™)  in  v.  18,  '  Peter'  in  v
20  and  the  plurals  Sei/^re  and  tJprJKaTe  in  v.  24  as  adjustments
caused  by  the  interpolation.

(d)  However  plausible  this  separation  may  seem  to
be,  it  by  no  means  completely  solves  the  riddle  of  our
passage.  The  problem  still  remains  quite  dark,  how  it
was  that  the  editor  could  ever  have  come  to  interpolate,
at  one  and  the  same  time,  into  a  source  which  consist
ently  represented  Simon  as  a  sorcerer  (v.  9  or  n),  and  as
wishing  to  possess  still  greater  magical  powers,  two
such  foreign  elements  as  the  designation  of  Simon  as
the  power  of  God  that  is  called  Great  and  the  com
munication  of  the  Holy  Ghost  through  the  apostles  (w.
10  14-17).  The  two  have  not  the  slightest  connection  with
each  other.  It  might  perhaps  be  suggested  that  the  desig
nation  had  been  borrowed  by  the  editor  from  a  second
source,  and  that  the  reference  to  the  Holy  Ghost  was
his  own  contribution  ;  but  this  would  not  •  furnish  us
with  any  intelligible  motive  for  his  proceeding.  Yet  it
seems  highly  necessary  that  we  should  discover  such  a
motive  ;  for  a  second  surprising  point  which  is  not
cleared  up  by  separation  of  sources,  and  hardly  can
be,  is  the  question  how  it  could  come  to  pass  that  a
man  to  whom  the  whole  people  of  Samaria  gave  heed,
and  showed  high  honour,  should  have  been  so  easily
converted  to  Christianity,  and  that  as  a  sorcerer,  he
should  so  little  resemble  the  Bar-jesus  of  136-iz  who  quite
naturally  opposed  the  Christian  missionaries  so  strenu
ously.  Moreover,  it  is  surprising  that  the  story  lias
no  close  ;  we  are  not  told  what  in  the  end  became  of
Simon.  Here,  once  more,  can  it  be  seen  how  useless
it  is  to  carry  out  separation  of  sources  merely  on  the
ground  of  indications  of  broken  connections,  while  not
concerning  oneself  at  all  about  the  deeper  questions  re
lating  to  the  composition  of  a  piece,  and  about  '  tendency '
criticism.  The  solution  of  the  problem  can  be  led  up
to  only  by  widely  extended  investigations.

Simon, to begin  with, plays a great part in the
writings  of  the  Fathers.

(a)  Justin  (about  152  A.D.)  cites  him  as  an  instance

to  prove that, even  after  the  ascension of  Jesus, the

2 In  the demons  causecl  men  to  come  forward  who

Church- ^ave  tnemselves  out  to  be  deities,  and  were

Fathers actua^v  worshipped 'as  such. Such  was  a

certain Samaritan named Simon, of the

village of  Gitta,1  who performed  feats of magic by

demonic  arts  in Rome  during  the reign  of Claudius,

was  held  to  be  a  god,  and  was  honoured  by  Senate  and

people  with  a  statue  in  the  middle  of  the  Tiber,  between

the two bridges, bearing the inscription in Latin  :

'  Simoni  deo  sancto,'  and  almost  all  the  Samaritans,  as

well  as  a  few  people  elsewhere,  worshipped  him  as  '  the

first  god  ' (TOV  irpCirov  Oeov],  '  the  god  above  all rule

and  authority  and  power'  (6ebv  inrepavw  TrdaTjs  apxrjf

leal e^ovffias nal 5vvd[j.ews), and declared a certain

Helena,  who  had  formerly  lived  in  a  house  ot  evil  fame,

and  afterwards  travelled  about  with  him,  to  be  the  first

1  'An-b  Kiafifi';  Aeyoju.eV»j?  TiTTtav.  Thus  Gitton  would  be  a
possible  form  of  the  name.  YirTiav,  however,  is  certainly  gen.
pi.,  since  Gitta  is  met  with  elsewhere  also  as  the  name  of  a
town  :  in  Josephus  (Terra  or  Terra,  gen.  rYrnjs  or  Tirrwv  '.  see,
e.f.,  Ant.  vi.  13  10,  §§  319-321)  for  the  Philistian  Gath,  in  Pliny
(//TVv.  19[17]7s)  for  a  place  on  Carmel  (Getta),  and  in  the
Philosophumena((t-i)v:e.  have  6  rirnji/os  (not  rirrwcos).  For
further  details  see  Lipsius,  Petrussage,  33,  n.  In  all  the  editions
of  Justin  known  to  the  present  writer,  indeed,  the  word  is  ac
centuated  TiTTtav,  and  so  also  in  Eus.  HE  ii.  183  and  Epiphanius,
Htpr.  21  i.  In  that  case  the  nominative  would  be  Ftrrai  ;  this,
however,  in  view  of  the  gen.  rirrr;?  is  quite  unlikely.  If  both  geni
tive  forms  are  to  be  explicable,  the  nominatives  must  coincide.
Cp  rofioppa?  (2  Pet.  2e)  alongside  of  Top-opptav  (Mt.  10  15),
Auo-rpai/(Actsl462i  16  i)alongsideof  Avorpois  (148  Iti  2  2Tim.
3  u),  ©vareipav(Rev.  1  n  :  so  in  Lachmann,  and  as  an  alternative
reading  in  WH)  alongside  of  Qvare ipoi?  (2  18  24),  and  ©uareipaii'
(Acts  10  14),  AvSSas  (Acts  9  38)  alongside  of  the  accus.  \vSSa.
(9  32  35).  Similar  variations  are  found  in  i  Mace,  in  the  cases  of
ASiSa,  Baifio-oupa,  Ta^apa.  The  word  form  '  ex  vico  Gethonum  '
(Clem.  Recogn.  2  7)  rests  upon  a  misunderstanding.

4538


SIMON  MAGUS

thought  that  had  proceeded  from  him  (wpuTij  tvvoia. :
see  Apol.  1.26  56  2 15,  Dial.  120).

(b]  The  base  of  the  pillar  referred  to  was  dug  up  on
the  island  in  the  Tiber,  at  the  place  indicated  by  Justin,
in  1574  ;  the  inscription  runs  :  '  Semoni  Sanco  deo  fidio
sacrum.  Sex.  Pompeius  .  .  .  donum  dedit.'  Thus,
the  pillar  was  dedicated  to  the  Sabine  god  Semo  Sancus
(cp  Ovid  Fast.  6213-218),  and  not  by  Senate  and  people,
but  by  the  piety  of  a  private  individual.

As  Justin  has  gone  so  far  astray  here,  Lipsius  (/>/.  6318;
Apokr.  Ap.-gesck.  ii.  1  34^)  ventures  to  trace  back  also  the
alleged  worship  of  Simon  and  Helena  by  'almost  all  the
Samaritans '  to  misunderstanding  of  certain  sacred  pillars  or
massebahs  (see  MASSKHAH),  to  wit  those  of  Hercules-Melkart,
the  '  king  of  the  city '  of  Tyre  and  the  Tyrian  moon-goddess
Selene-Astarte,  whose  impure  worship  is  alluded  to  in  the
reference  to  the  house  of  evil  fame  (according  to  Iren.  Ifter.
i.  16  [23]  2  and  according  to  the  quotation  of  Justin,  Apol.  \.  263
in  Eus.  HE  ii.  184,  it  was  in  Tyre).  In  the  pseudo-Clementine
Recognitions  Helena  is  actually  called  Luna,  that  is  to  say,  Selene
(2eArj>>T)),  and  according  to  the  Ho milies  (-23)  she  was  among  the
companions  of  John  the  Baptist  (of  whom  Simon  was  the  first)  the
only  woman  —  thus  only  '  half  man'  (ij^uwv  ai»6po?),  to  indicate
that  these  30  companions  really  represent  the  number  of  days  in
a  lunar  month,  which  are  not  30  complete  days  but  only  294.

(<.•)  What  we  read  about  the  '  first  god'  (Trpwros  0e6j)
and  his  '  first  thought '  (irpdjT-rj  ZWOLO.}  is  taken  from  the
Gnostic  system  which  is  attributed  to  Simon.  We  may
suppose  Justin  to  have  given  full  information  as  to  this
in  the  work  cited  by  himself  in  Apol.\.  268,  but  now  lost,
entitled  ffuvTayfjia.  Kara  TraffHiv  aipecrecoc,  which  was
used  by  later  heresiologists  from  Irenreus  (Hcer.  1  16  [23])
and  the  author  of  the  Philosophumena  (67-20)  down
wards.  I  larnack  (I.ehrb.  d.  Z?(7(-'  1 206-208)  finds  in  Simon
a  new  '  universal  religion  of  the  supreme  God,'  Lipsius
nothing  more  than  the  ordinary  Gnosis  which  had
become  widely  diffused  in  Syria  from  about  the  time
of  Trajan,  and  is  known  to  us  mainly  through  the
Ophites,  with  this  difference  alone  that  here  Simon
takes  the  place  of  Jesus  as  the  Redeemer.  According
to  Kreyenbiihl  (Evang.  d.  Wahrheit,  1,  1900,  pp.
174-264)  Simon  was  not  a  founder  of  a  religion,  but  the
first  genuine  philosopher  of  religion,  to  whom  belongs
the  undying  merit  of  having  been  the  first  to  formulate
and  scientifically  to  elaborate  the  fundamental  principle
of  all  Christian  philosophy,  namely,  an  '  anthropo
logical  pantheism '  or  an  '  absolute  and  universal
theanthropologism  '  (240).

In  the  'Great  Announcement '  (airo^a^i?  jieyaAr;),  attributed
to  Simon,  which  is  first  mentioned  in  the  Philosophumena  and
copiously  extracted  from,  Kreyenbiihl  discerns,  not,  like  all  other
critics,  the  work  of  a  later  Simonian,  but  a  genuine  production
of  Simon  himself.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  not  necessary
to  discuss  this  question  or  to  set  forth  the  Simonian  system,  for
which  the  reader  may  consult  Lipsius  (BL  [>  3i6_/C)and  Hilgenfeld
(Ketzi-rgesc/t.,  1884,  pp.  163-186).

(d)  Suffice  it  to  observe  here  that  all  the  church
fathers  from  Irenceus  onwards  make  Simon  the  prime
author  of  all  heresies,  and  inform  us  that  he  was
regarded  not  merely  as  a  leader  of  a  sect,  but  also  as  a
manifestation  of  the  supreme  Deity,  as  Messiah,  also
by  the  name  of  'the  Standing  One'  (6  e<rru>s),  or,
more  precisely,  according  to  the  '  Great  Announcement '
(Philos.  6913)  as  6  ecrroiy,  crrcis,  (TTT/cro/Ltevoj — i.e.,  the
permanently  Abiding.  Cp  further,  §  \\e,f.

(a] This interpretation of the expression 'the

Standing One ' is confirmed also by the pseudo-

3.  Pseudo-Clem. Clementine tf™,7i« (222  : & drj

Homm.  and 9Tt^9t '  ™  n.tima'ing that  he

Eecogg.:  (a)  on  *ha11  ah va>'s  stand  >  and  *eco*nt-
+v,«  r>~~~t.;~  tions  (2.j  :  negat  posse  se  ahquando
the  Gnostic  ,.  ,  .

Simon  dissolvi, asserens carnem suam ita

divinitatis  suns  virtute  compactam  ut

possit  in  neternum  durare  '). According  to  Recogn.  1  72,

Simon  further  designated  himself  as  '  virtutem  summam

excels!  Dei  qui  sit  supra  conditorem  mundi. ' Cp  §  14  d.

(b}  We  thus  find  in  Simon's  case  also  application  of  the

Gnostic  distinction  between  the  supreme  Deity  and  his

subordinate,  the  creator  of  the  world  or  demiurge. The

supreme  Deity  is  incomprehensible  and  unknown  to  all

(Recogn.  2 37 f.}.

4539


SIMON  MAGUS

He  sent  forth  the  creative  Deity  to  make  the  world  ;  having
done  so,  the  latter  declared  himself  to  be  God,  and  demanded
observance  of  the  Mosaic  law.  To  Simon,  also,  is  attributed
the  doctrine  that  the  souls  of  men  proceed  from  the  supreme
God  (who  at  the  same  time  is  called  The  Good),  but  that  they
have  been  let  down  into  captivity  within  the  world.  The  body
is  their  prison  ('2  57 /.).  This  enables  us  to  understand  what  is
meant  when  we  are  told  that  Simon  deniud  the  resurrection  of
the  dead  (//<?;//.  2  22).  It  can  be  explained  from  2  Tim.  2  18,
according  to  which  the  false  teachers,  who  are  simply  Gnostics,
declared  that  the  resurrection  was  past  already,  By  the  resur
rection  they  understood  the  soul's  arrival  at  knowledge  of  its
heavenly  origin,  and  its  superiority  to  the  body  which  is  its
prison.  Therefore,  in  their  view,  for  all  Gnostics  the  resur
rection  has  already  come  about,  and  they  consistently  denied
any  future  resurrection  of  the  body.

(c )  These  data  may  be  sufficient  to  show  that  it  is  a
form  of  Gnosticism  that  the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies
and  Recognitions  are  combating  in  the  person  of  Simon.
If  they  contained  nothing  more  they  would  accordingly
be  seen  to  have  arisen,  at  the  earliest,  sometime  in  the
second  century.

Other  indications  which  do  not  need  to  be  discussed  here  lead
us  to  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  (so  Lipsius,  ii.  1  37,  n.  2  ;
Harnack,  Lehrb.  d.  DlW,  1  266 :  beginning  or  middle  of  third
century,  according  to  1J,'Z,  1902,  p.  570,  even  as  late  as  the  4th
cent.,  before  Eus.  [HE  iii.  38  5] — this  after  Chapman  [below,  §  1 5)
had  disputed  their  employment  by  Origen),  and  to  infer  a  Catholic
redaction  of  both  writings  (so  Harnack,  I.e.),  or  at  least  of  the
Recognitions  (so  Lipsius,  I.e.).  The  story  as  to  the  members  of
Clement's  family  who  became  separated  as  non-Christians,  and
after  their  conversion  find  one  another  and  recognise  (whence
the  name  '  Recognitiones,'  aptryi-uipiovuioi)  one  another,  both  in  a
bodily  and  in  a  higher  sense,  has  a  purely  edificatory  purpose.
Apart  from  the  final  redaction  (see  above)  the  proper  standpoint
of  the  authors — a  Gnostical  Jewish  Christianity— does  not  point
back  to  the  oldest  times,  and  can  hardly  have  exercised  much
influence.  Thus,  from  what  has  been  said  up  to  this  point,  it
might  well  appear  that  these  writings  '  contribute  nothing
towards  a  knowledge  of  the  origin  of  the  Catholic  church  and
doctrine.'  This  is,  in  fact,  the  opinion  of  Harnack  {Lehrb.  d.
J)ogm.-Gesch.(-1,  1268),  and  in  his  view,  indeed,  'it  may  be  re
garded  as  certain.'

The pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  and  Recognitions,

however, contain yet another element of the very

A. I h\  n  greatest  importance. In  them  Simon

„. _T> 1 displays  features which are unques-

bimon-raul. tionably derived from Paul, and

plainly  show  him to be  a  caricature  of  that apostle

drawn  by  an  unfriendly  hand, (a)  The  principal  passage

is  Horn.  17  19.

Here  Peter  says  to  Simon:  '  If,  then,  our  Jesus,  manifesting  him
self  in  a  vision,  made  himself  known  to  thee  also,  and  conversed
with  thee,  in  doing  so  it  was  as  one  who  is  wroth  with  an
adversary,  and  therefore  speaks  by  visions  and  dreams  [Nu.
126-8],  or,  it  may  be,  even  by  revelations  which  [yet]  were
external.  But  can  any  one  be  qualified  for  the  teaching  office
through  a  vision?  And  if  thou  wilt  say,  '  It  is  possible,'  then
(I  ask)  '  Why  did  our  teacher  for  a  whole  year  continually
converse  with  those  who  were  awake?  And,  further,  how  are
we  to  believe  thy  word  that  he  even  appeared  to  thee?  How
can  he  have  appeared  to  thee,  when  thy  manner  of  thinking
is  wholly  contrary  to  his  doctrine?  But  if  thou  hast  for  even
so  much  as  a  single  hour  been  made  blessed  and  instructed  for
the  apostleship  by  a  manifestation  of  him,  then  pray  declare  his
doctrine,  set  forth  his  words,  love  his  apostles,  and  strive  not
against  me  who  companied  with  him.  For  indeed  thou  hast
come  forward  as  adversary  against  me  who  am  a  firm  rock,  the
foundation  of  the  church  [Mt.  lijis].  If  thou  wert  not  an
adversary  (acTiKet>ei<os)  thou  wouldest  not  slander  me  and
revile  my  preaching,  in  orderthat  I,  when  I  utter  that  which  I  have
heard  from  the  Lord  face  to  face,  may  find  no  credence,  plainly
as  if  I  were  a  condemned  and  reprobate  person  [read  Kai  e/noO
a&oKifiov  OVTO?  ;  cp  i  Cor.  9  27].  But  if  thou  sayest  that  I  am
condemned  (ei  KaTeyixaa-^eifov  /ne  Ae'-yeis),  in  doing  so  thou
inveighest  against  God  who  revealed  Christ  to  me,  and
inveighest  against  him  who  on  account  of  this  revelation  did
call  me  blessed  [Mt.  16  17],'  and  so  forth.

What  Gnostic  ever  personally  withstood  Peter  ?
According  to  the  incontrovertible  statement  of  Hege-
sippus  (ap.  Eus.  HE  iii.  32 7/. ),  Gnosticism  arose  from
the  times  of  Trajan  after  that  the  sacred  choir  of  the
apostles  had  deceased.  For  what  Gnostic  had  it  ever
been  possible  to  be,  like  Peter,  a  personal  disciple  of
lesus  during  his  lifetime  upon  earth?  What  Gnostic
ever  gave  himself  out  to  be  an  apostle  ?  What  Gnostic
ever  claimed  to  have  been  qualified  for  the  apostolate
by  a  definite  vision  which  he  described  ?  And  who
ever  except  Paul  (Gal.  2n)  spoke  of  Peter  as  'con
demned'  (KaTeyvwcr/dvos)?  Thus,  it  was  at  Antioch

454°


SIMON  MAGUS

that  '  Simon '  assailed  Peter  and  spoke  evil  of  his
preaching,  and  it  was  his  vision  on  the  way  to  Damascus
(for  Paul,  according  to  i  Cor.  9 1  Gal.  1 1  12,  the  basis  of
his  claim  to  the  apostolate)  that  is  here  intended  to
be  reduced  ad  absurdum  by  a  dialectic  that  really  has
much  to  say  for  itself.  Already  in  chaps.  14  and  16  it  is
urged  that  such  a  vision  could  have  been  produced  by
an  evil  demon,  just  as  well  as  by  Jesus.

(i>)  Nor  is  this  all.  The  words  of  Peter  in  his
Epistle  to  James  prefixed  to  the  Homilies  (chap.  2)
relate  also  to  the  same  incident  in  Antioch  :  '  Some  of
the  Gentiles  have  rejected  my  doctrine  which  is  in
accordance  with  the  law  [of  Moses],  while  imputing  to
me  a  certain  lawless  and  nonsensical  doctrine  (&vofj.6v
nva  KO.I  (f>\vapwdri  SL8a<TKa\iav)  of  the  hostile  man.
And  indeed  while  I  was  in  my  journeyings  some  took
in  hand  by  manifold  interpretations  to  wrest  my  words
unto  the  dissolution  of  the  law,  as  if  1  myself  also  were
of  such  a  mind  but  did  not  openly  proclaim  it'  (cp  the
charge  of  hypocrisy,  Gal.  2i2/. ).  Nay,  more,  in  Horn.
20i9  =  AVa;jf.  106i,  it  is  related  that  P'austus,  father  of
Clement,  to  whom  Simon  has  by  witchcraft  given  his  own
outward  semblance,  is  in  Antioch  constrained  by  order
of  Simon  publicly  to  proclaim  his  repentance  in  the
following  words  : — •

'  I,  Simon,  declare  this  to  you,  confessing  that  I  have  unjustly
slandered  Peter.  For  he  is  no  false  teacher,  no  murderer,  no
sorcerer,  nor  any  other  of  those  wicked  things  which  I  in  my
wrath  formerly  accused  him  of.  I,  myself,  who  have  been
the  author  of  your  hatred  against  him,  beg  of  you  to  cease  from
your  hatred  of  him  ;  for  he  is  a  true  apostle  of  the  true  prophet
sent  by  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  .  .  .  And  now  I  will
tell  you  why  it  is  that  I  have  made  this  confession.  Last  night
angels  of  God  severely  scourged  me,  the  godless  one,  as  being
an  enemy  (e^tfpos)  to  the  herald  of  the  truth.  I  beseech  you,
therefore,  if  ever  I  again  should  come  forward  and  venture  to
speak  against  Peter,  do  not  listen  to  me.  For  I  confess  to  you  :
I  am  a  magician,  I  am  a  false  teacher,  I  am  a  sorcerer.  Per
haps  it  is  possible  by  repentance  to  wipe  out  my  past  sins.'
If  the  father  of  Clement  did  not  occur  in  an  older  form  of  the
book,  we  may  conjecture  that  this  confession  was  originally
there  put  directly  into  the  mouth  of  Simon.  What  is  said  about
his  chastisement  is  a  malicious  allusion  to  the  declaration  of
Paul  in  2  Cor.  12  7,  as  to  the  cause  of  his  malady,  that  an  angel
of  Satan  (ayyeAos  Sarai/a)  had  been  sent  to  buffet  him.  It  is
important  to  observe  that  in  Recog.  we  have  the  sing.  :  '  an
ange!,'  not  the  pi.  'angels'  as  in  Horn.

(c)  If  we  have  here  a  well-ascertained  case  in  which
an  utterance  of  Paul  regarding  himself  is  spitefully
twisted  to  his  discredit,  soon  also  we  find  more  of  the
same  kind  elsewhere.

In  the  course  of  his  vindication  of  himself  Paul  had,  with
great  reserve,  declared  that  he  had  once  been  carried  up  into
the  third  heaven  (2  Cor.  12  i_/i).  This  is  made  ridiculous  in
Rec.  2  65  :  si  putas  facilem  menti  tuae  accessum  esse  super  ccelos
et  considerare  te  posse  quae  illic  sunt  atque  immensae  illius  lucis
scientiam  capere,  puto  ei  qui  ilia  potest  comprehendere  facilius
esse  ut  sensum  suum  qui  illuc  novit  ascendere  in  alicujus
nostrum,  qui  adsistimus,  cor  et  pectus  injiciat  et  dicat  quas  in
eo  cogitationes  gerat.l  The  doctrine  of  Paul  that  to  eat  meat
offered  to  idols  is  not  forbidden  (see  more  fully  under  COUNCIL,
§  n,  col.  924_/C)  is  distorted  into  the  story  that  Simon  in  the
market-place  entertained  the  people  of  Tyre  with  the  flesh  of  a
sacrificial  ox  and  with  much  wine,  thus  bringing  them  under  the
power  of  the  evil  demons  (Horn.  7  3  ;  cp  4  4).  This  distortion
is  all  the  more  worthy  of  attention,  because  the  author,  in
connection  with  it,  gives  admonitions  in  the  very  words  of  Paul
'  to  abstain  from  (or  not  to  be  partakers  of)  the  table  of  devils '
(TpaTT-e'^Vjs  Sai^oixav  aTre'^ecrSai,  or  jixr)  ijLfTa^afj.ftdi/fitr,  748;  cp

1  Cor.  10  2o_/?). In  view  of  the  miracles  which Paul  himself
claims  in  2  Cor.  12  12  Rom.  15  19,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that
he  came  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  magician. In  the  enumeration  of
the  magical  powers  of  which  '  Simon  '  makes  his  boast  in  Recog.

2  9,  the  '  when  bound  I  can  loose  myself  .  .  .  when  confined  in
prison  I  can  make  the  barriers  open  of  their  own  accord '  ('  vinctus
memetipsum  solvam  ...  in  carcere  colligatus  claustra  sponte
patefieri  faciam  ')  specially  recalls  Paul's  liberation  from  prison
at  Philippi  (Acts  1  (5  23-26). Even  if  this  liberation  is  unhistorical
(ACTS,  §  2),  it  found  belief  after  it  had  been  related,  and  it  can
have  been  related  a  considerable  time  before  the  date  at  which
Acts  was  written. Once  more,  let  us  take  another  word  that  is
used,  not  indeed  by  Paul  himself,  but  with  reference  to  him  by

1  '  If  you  think  that  there  is  easy  access  for  your  mind  above
the  heavens,  and  that  you  are  able  to  conceive  the  things  that
are  there,  and  to  apprehend  knowledge  of  that  immense  light,  I
think  that  for  him  who  can  comprehend  these  things  it  were
easier  to  throw  his  sense  which  knows  how  to  ascend  thither
into  the  heart  and  breast  of  some  one  of  us  who  stand  by,  and
to  tell  what  thoughts  he  is  cherishing  in  his  breast.'

4541


SIMON  MAGUS

a  follower.  In  Acts  9  15  he  is  called  a  chosen  vessel  of  the
Lord  ;  in  Recog,  3  49,  Simon  is  called  a  vas  electionis  of  the
devil.1

(d)  In  this  violent  polemic  it  is  not  surprising  to  find
thrown  back  at  Simon — i.e. ,  Paul — the  charges  which
Paul  had  himself  levelled  at  his  opponents.

In  2  Cor.  11  13  Paul  calls  the  Judaising  emissaries  at  Corinth
'false  apostles'  (\jjfv&air6<TTO\oi) ;  in  Hom.  1621  Peter  says  that
Jesus  foretold  false  apostles  (i/fevfiaTrdoroAot),  false  prophets,  the
forming  of  sects  and  lists  for  supremacy,  all  which  seem  to  him
to  have  taken  their  beginning  with  Simon  the  blasphemer  of
God.  In  2  Cor.  11 14  Paul  proceeds  :  '  And  no  marvel ;  for
even  Satan  fashioneth  himself  into  an  angel  of  light '  ;  in  Recog.
2  18,  Simon  is  called  the  '  malignus  transformans  se  in  splen-
dorem  lucis.'  According  to  Hom.  233  wickedness  (Kaicia.)  sent
forth  its  comrade  in  arms,  Simon,  like  a  serpent  (cos  ofyiv ;  cp
2  Cor.  11  3),  according  to  Hom.  11  35,  as  one  who  preaches  under
a  pretence  of  truth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  sows  false
doctrines  (TrAai/j;),  and  it  was  with  reference  to  him  that  Jesus
(Mt.  7  15)  foretold  the  coming  of  ravening  wolves  in  sheep's
clothing.  Here,  also,  may  be  recalled  a  saying  which  does  not
come  from  Paul  himself,  but  from  the  author  of  Acts.  This
writer  puts  into  Paul's  mouth  (2029)  the  prophecy  that  after
his  departure  grievous  wolves  shall  make  their  appearance  in
Ephesus,  not  sparing  the  flock.  It  is  very  probable  that  refer
ence  is  intended  here  to  the  Jewish-Christian  school  of  thought,
which  was  prevalent  in  Ephesus  under  John  in  the  last  third
of  the  first  century.  Paul  himself  had  already  in  i  Cor  169
spoken  of  the  '  many  adversaries '  (curticctyievot  rroAAoc)  in
Ephesus.  This  expression,  also,  is  taken  up  and  turned  against
himself  in  the  passage  already  cited  under  a,  above.

(e)  More  especially  wre  find  recurring  in  the  pseudo-
Clementine  Homilies  and  Recognitions  three  designations
which  are  already  referred  to  in  the  epistles  of  Paul  as
having  been  made  use  of  against  him.

When  in  2  Cor.  68  Paul  says  of  himself,  'as  deceivers  and
[yet]  true  '  (ios  irAapot  Kai  aArjSeis),  the  censure  implied  in  the
word  n-Aai/os  is  just  as  little  purely  imaginary  as  is  that  contained
11169  :  <o«  ayvoovfj.ei'oi,  w?  7rai6evd/ixei'oi  (' unknown, '  'chastened'),
etc.,  or  that  repudiated  in  45  ('we  preach  not  ourselves'),  or
that  hinted  at  in  3  i  ('  are  we  beginning  again  to  commend  our
selves?'),  cp  5  12.  All  these  charges  had  actually  been  made,
otherwise  Paul  would  not  have  needed  to  repel  them  (§  9  </).
The  word  most  fitted  to  stick  as  a  term  of  reproach  was  '  the
deceiver '  (6  TrAai'o;),  and  in  point  of  fact  it  does  reappear  in
Hom.  2  17,  which  represents  Jesus  as  having  foretold  that  '  first
must  come  a  false  gospel  by  the  instrumentality  of  a  certain
deceiver '  [the  gospel  of  freedom  from  the  law]  (irpwrov  \jiev&es
<5ei  e\6eli>  evayyf\LOv  VTTO  TT\OLVOV  TIVOS).  Cp  the  TrAa'ir;  in  the
quotation  (11  35)  cited  under  d,  as  also  the  miracles  which  Simon
works  ('2  33),  '  to  astonish  and  deceive '  (?rpbs  Karon-A^f iv  KOI
arraTT)!'),  or  ("4),  the  expression  'deceived  before  by  Simon'
(IITTO  TOW  .  .  .  ~S,ifj.tavo<;  n-poan-aTijtfeVTes),  or  the  deceptiones  of
Simon  {Recog.  865),  his  '  slanders  '  (6io/3oAat  :  Hoin.  3  59).

Notice  further  that,  according  to  Gal.  1 10,  it  was  made  a
reproach  against  Paul  that  he  sought  by  his  doctrine  to  please
men  ;  this  comes  up  again  in  the  words  of  Peter  in  Hom.  IS  10 :
'  Since  ye  have  thus  spoken  to  please  the  multitudes  who  are
present '  (en-eiSr/  opecncoi'Ttus  TOIS  •na.povaiv  6\Aoi«  oii-rws  £<£)??).

Above  all,  however,  it  is  of  the  constant  designation
of  Simon  as  '  enemy  '  (o  exftpos  dvOpunros,  or  simply  as
o  fx@pfa>  inimicus,  see,  e.g. ,  above,  b]  in  both  writings,
that  we  are  able  to  infer  from  Gal.  4 16  with  a  high
degree  of  probability  that  it  had  already  been  applied
by  his  Galatian  adversaries  to  Paul.  It  is  difficult  to
see  how  Paul  could  have  felt  any  occasion  to  ask  the
Galatians  whether  he  had  been  the  enemy  of  the
Galatians  by  his  preaching  of  the  true  gospel,  that  is  of
the  gospel  freed  from  the  law  (this  is  what  is  intended
by  aXriBevuv  iifuv  :  4 16)  if  he  had  not  been  spoken  of
to  the  Galatians  as  being  their  'enemy.'  Here  should
be  added  Mt.  1828  (see  below,  §  6  c).

(_/")  This  '  homo  quiclam  inimicus '  according  to
Recog.  l?o/.  raises  a  tumult  against  James  the  episco-

1  This  very  drastic  kind  of  polemic  is  exemplified  in  the  NT
also.  The  Gnostics  who  are  controverted  in  the  Epistle  of
JUDE  (q.v.,  §  2),  in  common  with  all  Gnostics,  divided  mankind
into  the  two  categories  of  '  psychic  '  and  '  pneumatic  ' ;  they  held
themselves  to  be  pneumatic.  This  the  author  turns  round  the
other  way  in  v.  19  :  'these  are  they  who  make  a  division  [/.«.•.,
between  psychic  and  pneumatic  ;  not,  as  in  A V,  '  who  separate
themselves,'  or,  as  in  RV,  '  who  make  separations'],  sensual,  not
having  the  spirit.'  There  is  a  still  closer  parallel  to  this  sub
stitution  of  the  devil  for  God  in  Rev.  224.  It  is  hardly  to  be
supposed  that  the  followers  of  Jezebel  made  it  their  boast
that  they  '  know  the  deep  things  of  Satan  ' ;  we  may  be  perfectly
certain  that  their  boast  was  that  they  knew  the  deep  things  of  God.
All  the  more  sharply  sarcastic  is  the  form  of  the  phrase  :  '  Know
.  .  .  the  deep  things  of  Satan,  as  they  say.'  But  it  is  Paul  who
is  the  author  of  the  claim  to  possess  the  spirit  that  searcheth  all
things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God  (i  Cor.  2  10-12).  Cp  §  6  b.

4542


SIMON  MAGUS

poruin  princeps  at  Jerusalem,  snatches  a  firebrand  from  '
the  altar  and  with  this  l>egins  a  general  Jewish  massacre
of  Christians  ;  he  throws  James  down  headlong  from
the  top  of  the  steps,  so  that  he  lies  as  one  dead.  After
three  days  the  Christians  who  have  rled  to  Jericho  learn
that  the  hostile  man  has  received  from  Caiaphas  the
high  priest  the  commission  to  persecute  all  Christians,
and  armed  with  written  missives  ( '  epistolae ')  from  him  is
about  to  go  to  Damascus  in  order  to  begin  the  persecu
tion  there,  believing  that  Peterhas  betaken  himself  thither1
(cp  Acts  8  3  9  if.  "224  /  269-12  Gal.  1  13  i  Cor.  159).

(g)  Even  the  style  of  Paul  is  plainly  imitated  in  a
mocking  way.  In  the  recantation  (Horn.  20  19)  of
Simon  mentioned  above  (6)  we  have  his  Seonai  V,UM>V  ',
('I  beseech  you':  Gal.  4 12),  aiV6s  ^70}  ('I  myself:
2  Cor.  10 1 ),  elStvai  i>/aas  0Au»  ('I  would  have  you
know'  :  i  Cor.  US),  Trapa/caXui  otV  ('I  beseech  there
fore' :  Rom.  12 1  iCor.  4i6;  cp  Eph.  4  i  i  Tim.  2i);
elsewhere  rl  ydp,  ri  ovv,  etc.

So  also  with  the  apocryphal  Acts  of  Peter  and  Acts

of Peter  and Paul (as  to  which  see  SIMON PETER,

5 AuocrvDhal  §§  32-34)- Whilst  in  the  apocryphal

At  correspondence of Paul with the

Corinthians  which  belongs  to  the  Acta

Pauli (see SIMON PETER, §  39  e, n.) the doctrine

attributed  to  Simon  is  Gnostic, in  the  Apocrypha  just

mentioned  Simon  appears  less  as  a  gnostic  than  as  a

wonder-worker  ;  but  that  by  him  the  apostle  Paul  was

originally  meant  is  manifest  here  also.

(a)  The question of Paul to Simon  : '  Why didst
thou  deliver  up  circumcised  men  and  compel  them  to  be
condemned  and  put  to  death  ? ' ( dta.  rl  crv  TTfpLTfT/j,rj-

diroKTavdrjvai  ;  see  SIMON  PETER,  §  34  e)  is  decisive.
There  is  no  Gnostic  who  could  have  had  either  such
power  or  such  inclination.  The  words  can  refer  only
to  what  Paul  did  according  to  Gal.  1  13  i  Cor.  15  9
ActsSsQi/".  '224  f.  269-12.  In  this  way  what  follows
gains  in  cogency,  the  original  reference  to  Paul  being
not  so  absolutely  palpable  without  this  key.

(b)  In  the  (pre-Catholic)  Acta  Petr.i  Simon  is  spoken
of as '  inimicus,' 'condemned' (§4<7,  e,  and SIMON
PETER,  §33^),  and  even  the  Greek  word  TrXctvos  (§4?)
has  found  its  way  into  the  Latin  text  ;  according  to  the
Act  us  Petn.  cum  Simone  (4  12,  in  Acta  Apocr.  i.  p.  49,  1.
13  and  p.  60,  1.  4)  not  only  is  Paul  called  ('  magus  '  or)
'  planus,'  but  Simon  also is  described as  '  planus (et
deceptor).' In  the  (Catholic)  Acta  Pctri  et  Pauli (43)
Nero  makes  it  clear  that  Simon  persecutes Peter  and
Paul  out  of  envy,  and  is  a  'manifest  enemy'  (-TrpoSr/Xos
^X#pjs)  of  both  and  of  their  Master.

(c)  In the  disputation on circumcision touched on
above  (a  ;  cp  SIMON  PETER,  §§  34  e,  39  c},  Simon  warns
the Emperor  against  believing  Peter  and  Paul,  as  they
are  circumcised  and  therefore  worthless  persons. Paul
makes  answer  : before  we  knew  the  truth  we  had  the
circumcision  of  the  flesh  ; since  then, only  the  circum
cision of  the  heart. Peter  adds : if circumcision is
something  bad,  why  art  thou  circumcised,  Simon? It
will  be  manifest  at  once  that  only  the  words  of  Peter,
not  those  of  Paul,  are  any  effective  reply  to  the  reproach
of  Simon. If  with  Lipsius  (II.  1  360)  we  remove  those
of  Paul  as  being  a  later  addition  (cp  SIMON PETER,
§  35  e),  then  the  pure  antithesis  between  Simon  as  the
opponent  and Peter  as  the defender of  circumcision
comes  to  light. This,  however,  is  directly  contrary  to
the  whole  representation  of Peter  elsewhere  in these
Acts  ;  for  here  he  figures  as  the  one  who  is  doing  away
with  the  law  (SIMON  PETER,  §§  34  a,  39  r). In  so  far,
however,  as  Peter  defends  circumcision  the  effect  is  to
take away  'his complete agreement with Paul (the
accentuation  of  which  is  nevertheless  one  of  the  main
objects  of  the  book; see  SIMON  PETER,  §  35  d), for

1  He  is  not  here  expressly  called  Simon.  Should  this  be
intentional,  this  passage  would  then  have  to  be  relegated  to  §  6
as  being  direct  polemic  against  Paul.

4543


SIMON  MAGUS

here  it  is  only  the  circumcision  of  the  heart  that  Paul
stands  up  for.  Thus  in  our  present  passage  it  is  not
at  all  the  Catholic  Peter,  but  the  original  genuinely
Jewish-Christian  Peter  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  and
this  is  our  evidence  that  his  opponent  was  not  origin
ally  a  Gnostic,  but  simply  an  opponent  of  the  Judaising
of  Christianity,  in  other  words,  no  other  than  Paul.

(</)  To  Paul  also  applies  the  further  accusation  in
the  same  passage,  that  'Simon'  found  it  necessary  to
give  himself  out  falsely  to  be  a  Jew  and  to  put  on  the
semblance  of  strict  observance  of  the  law  in  order  to
deceive  the  people  whom  otherwise  he  would  not  have
been  able  to  win  over  to  his  erroneous  doctrine  (see
SIMON  PETER,  §  34<?)-  This  clearly  points  back  to
i  Cor. 920  :  '  to  them  that  are  under  the  law  (I  became)
as  under  the  law,  not  being  myself  under  the  law,  that
I  might  gain  them  that  are  under  the  law.'  We
recognise  also,  however,  the  charge  which,  according  to
Gal.  5  ii  1 10,  was  made  against  Paul  by  his  Judaistic
opponents,  that  outside  of  Galatia  he  still  continued  to
preach  circumcision,  for  everywhere  he  shapes  his
doctrine  so  as  to  please  men  (see  GALATIANS,  §  13,
middle).

(e)  With  this  accords  (even  if  not  conclusive  as
evidence)  the  favour  which  Simon  finds  with  Nero.
After  Nero  ha^  proved  himself  the  most  dreadful  enemy
which  Christianity  had,  it  must  have  suggested  itself
very  readily  to  the  adversaries  of  Paul  to  lay  it  to  Paul's
discredit  that  he  had  so  expressly  enjoined  obedience  to
Nero  (Rom.  181-7)  and  that  Paul's  captivity  had  been
so  mild  (Acts  2830/1 ).  As  a  result  of  his  submissive-
ness  such  a  partiality  of  the  emperor  as  we  find  him  ex
pressing  for  Simon  in  the  Catholic  and  also  in  the  fire-
Catholic  Acta  (SiMON  PETER,  §33 h]  seemed  natural.
Cp  below,  §  1 2  b.

(/)  Lipsius  (ii.  Is63/  )  has  even  conjectured  that  the
story  of  the  seeming  beheading  of  Simon  (§  34  c )  has  at
its  root  malicious  misrepresentation  of  the  beheading  of
Paul.

In  order  that  Paul  might  not  have  the  glory  of  martyrdom
his  traducers  had  it  that  he  had  not  been  beheaded,  but  by  a
trick  had  brought  it  about  that  a  ram  was  decapitated  in  his  stead.
To  this  was  then  added  the  further  touch  that  he  presented  him
self  to  the  emperor  as  one  who  had  risen  from  the  dead,  in  order
thereby  to  secure  acknowledgment  of  his  divinity,  and  of  the
truth  of  the  promise  he  had  previously  made,  of  a  return  from
death  after  three  days.  This  promise  is  met  with  also  in  quite
another  form  in  the  Philosophumena,  620,  where  Simon  suffers
himself  to  be  buried  by  his  disciples,  and  proposes  to  rise  again
after  three  days,  but  does  not  revive  (see  SIMON  PETER,  g  32  a,
n.  i).  Evidently  the  theme  has  gone  through  several  variations.
In  accord  with  it  is  what  we  read  in  the  Catholic  Acta.  tHat  Nero
causes  the  body  of  Simon,  who  has  fallen  down  from  the  clouds,
to  be  watched  for  three  days  so  as  to  know  whether  he  will  rise
or  not  (see  SIMON  PETER,  §  34^).  With  Simon's  promise
Lipsius  confronts  the  statement  of  the  Acts  of  Paul  (=  '  Martyrium
Pauli,'  4,  6  =  Pseudo-I,inus,  'Passio  Pauli, '8,  18,  in  Actu  A/>ost.
Apocr.  1  112-11632  42)  that  it  was  Paul  who  foretold  to  Nero
his  return  after  his  beheading  and  who  also  fulfilled  this  pre
diction.

(g]  Lastly,  mention  must  be  made  of  the  attempt  of
Simon  to  fly  to  heaven  (see  SIMON  PETER,  §  33  [/],
§  34  [f])-  The  supposition  lies  close  at  hand  that
here  too  we  have  a  malicious  perversion  of  the  saying
of  Paul  that  he  had  been  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven
(2  Cor.  122)  and  that  precisely  the  story  of  his  fall  and
of  his  death  was  connected  with  this  because  the  appeal
to  this  rapture  into  heaven  was  regarded  as  a  flagitious
piece  of  self-glorification,  and,  should  the  conjecture  of
Lipsius  just  mentioned  prove  correct,  the  beheading  of
Paul  was  not  regarded  as  being  the  true  end  of  his  life.

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed  that  Simon's  flying  is
reported  in  two  forms.  Alongside  of  the  statement,  just  recorded
above,  that  his  desire  was  to  reach  heaven  by  it,  we  find  another
much  simpler  one  that  his  intention  was  simply,  by  a  brief  flight,
to  give  proof  of  his  magical  powers,  and  thereby  secure  public
attention  (SiMON  PETER,  §§  330:,  34  c).  For  this  we  have  an
authenticated  parallel.  Suetonius  (Nero,  12)  relates  that  a  flying
professor  who  had  undertaken  to  play  the  part  of  Icarus  in  a  re
presentation  of  mythological  scenes  organised  by  Nero,  in  the
circus  on  the  Campus  Martins  (that  is  to  say,  exactly  on  the
scene  of  the  alleged  attempt  of  Simon),  at  his  first  attempt  fell
to  the  ground  close  beside  Nero,  who  was  bespattered  with  his

4544


SIMON  MAGUS

blood.  If  it  was  this  or  some  similar  occurrence  that  suggested
the  ascription  to  Simon  of  the  attempt  at  flight,  the  statement
that  Simon's  intention  was  to  fly  to  heaven  is  a  further  develop
ment.  The  possibility  remains  that  the  story  was  manufactured
with  2  Cor.  12  2  in  view  ;  yet  we  cannot  be  confident  of  this.  In
the  pseudo-Clementine  tfotnititl  we  find  merely  that  Simon  flies
occasionally  (2  32),  and  in  the  Recognitions  (~2g)  this  takes  the
special  form  that  Simon  promises  :  '  si  me  de  monte  excelso
prajcipitem,  tanquam  subvectus  ad  terras  illzesus  deferar.'
What  seems  to  lie  at  the  basis  of  this  is  the  promise  of  Satan
to  Jesus  in  the  temptation  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  (Mt.
4syT  =  Lk.  4p-n).  The  evidential  value  of  the  arguments  ad
duced  at  the  beginning  of  this  section,  however,  is  not  impaired
by  the  ambiguous  character  of  the  indications  last  adduced.

How  small  is  the  right  of  any  one  to  set  aside  any

such polemic  against Paul as  being  from the outset

. ,  impossible  is shown  by  the fact that

6. na  OgOUS jn  earjv  Christian  literature  the same

,  — . thing  is  found  also  without  intervention
against  raui.  of {he magk of siinori| and even

occasionally  with  express  mention  of  the  name  of  Paul.

(a)  Epiphanius  (Haer.  30  16,  end)  tells  us  that  in
F.bionitic  Acts  of  the  Apostles  was  found,  regarding  the
apostle  Paul,  the  statement  that  he  was  the  son  of  a
Greek  mother  and  a  Greek  father  belonging  to  Tarsus,
that  he  had  spent  some  time  in  Jerusalem  and  there
desired  the  daughter  of  the  high  priest  in  marriage,  on
which  account  he  became  a  proselyte  and  accepted
circumcision  ;  but,  having  after  all  failed  in  his  suit,  in
his  wrath  he  wrote  against  circumcision,  the  Sabbath,
and  the  law.

(/')  In  Rev.  2 14  20  it  is  said  of  the  followers  of  Balaam
and  Jezebel  that  they  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols  and
commit  fornication.  The  two  classes  of  persons  are
thus  identical  in  spite  of  their  different  names.  Nor
are  the  Nicolaitans  [cp  NlCOLAJTANS]  distinct  from
them,  for  we  read  (2 15)  :  '  so  also  hast  thou  them  that
hold  the  teaching  of  the  Nicolaitans  in  like  manner'
(orrws  ^x€'s  Kai  ffb  (not :  <rv  KO.I)  Kpa.TovvTa.'s  rr/f  dida-xty

TUV ^\  lKO\a.lTLt>V  OjUOCWS).

That  is  to  say,  In  that  thou  (the  church  of  Pergamos)  hast  the
Balaamites,  thou  hast  also  [in  the  same  persons]  those  that  hold
the  teaching  of  the  Nicolaitans  in  like  manner  as  the  Church  of
Ephesus  has  (26).  Now  the  Nicolaitans  at  Ephesus  are  in  22
said  to  be  apostles  who  have  been  found  to  be  false  ;  and  of  the
adherents  of  Jezebel  we  are  told  in  '2  24  that  they  profess  to  have
known  the  depths  of  Satan.  All  these  accusations  fit  Paul ;  the
last  of  them  must  be  understood  in  the  manner  indicated  above
(§  nc,  n.).  To  eat  meat  offered  to  idols  and  to  commit  fornica
tion  had  been  indeed  sanctioned  by  Paul  if  we  take  '  fornication '
in  the  sense  that  has  been  indicated  under  COUNCIL,  §  n,  col.
925.  As  he  had  already  called  his  opponents  false  apostles
(2  Cor.  11  13)  it  is  not  surprising  if  we  rind  them  hurling  back
this  reproach  at  himself  and  his  followers  (cp  §  4<f).  The  later
the  date  to  which  the  epistles  in  Rev.  If.  are  assigned  (see  JOHN,
SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  n)  the  more  easily  possible  does  it  become
that  in  them  it  is  no  longer  Paul  himself,  but  a  later  school  that
is  being  controverted,  a  school  which  made  perhaps  a  more
thoroughgoing  use  in  practice  of  this  doctrine  of  freedom  from
the  law  than  he  himself  made,  or  which  even  abused  that
principle  ;  but  neither  is  it  possible  to  show  from  the  text  itself
that  it  cannot  by  any  means  have  been  directed  even  against
Paul.  On  13  11-17,  see  §  T  b.

(f)  Even  in  the  First  gospel,  in  all  probability,  it  is
Paul  who  is  alluded  to  alike  as  the  'enemy'  (e%^p6s
avGpiairos),  of  Mt.  1828,  and  as  the  'least'  (e\cix"rros)
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  see  GOSPELS,  §§  1 12  c,  128  c.
Cp  above,  §  4  e,  end.

(</)  As  for  the  canonical  book  of  Acts,  the  polemic
against  Paul  which  underlies  89-24  and  2422-26,  and
which  is  artificially  turned  aside  by  the  composer,  will
come  under  our  consideration  later  (§§  13/1,  12  b  ;
cp  also  BARJESUS).  Kreyenbiihl  (214-216 ;  §  15  below),
it  may  be  added,  sees  also  in  Acts  148-20  and  19n-i9
a  similar  proceeding  on  the  composer's  part.

In  Lystra  Paul  was  only  stoned  ;  the  divine  worship  which  he
is  represented  as  having  received,  rests  only  on  the  detraction
of  his  Judaising  adversaries,  who  thereby,  as  elsewhere  in
the  person  of  Simon,  wished  to  represent  him  as  a  man
who  owed  his  success  with  the  Gentiles — these,  according  to
Kreyenbiihl,  are  figured  in  the  lame  man  blind  from  his  birth —
to  magical  arts.  The  magical  efficacy  assigned  to  the  handker
chiefs  and  aprons  touched  by  him  (19  12)  is  held  in  like  manner
t<j  be  an  invention  due  to  a  similarly  hostile  intention.  In  the
Nicolaus,  also,  of  Clement  of  Alexandria  (Straw,  iii.  4  2^,  p.
522,  ed.  Potter),  who,  when  he  had  been  rebuked  by  the  apostles
for  jealousy,  offered  his  beautiful  wife  to  any  one  who  chose  to

4545


SIMON  MAGUS

marry  her,  Kreyenbiihl  also  (igof.)  finds  Paul  who  gave  up  the
'chaste  virgin,'  the  primitive  church,  to  the  Gentiles,  and  thus
to  fornication.  Such  conjectures  hardly  rise  to  the  level  of
probability,  even  although  the  difficulties  suggested  by  stories
of  this  kind  when  literally  taken  remain  worthy  of  attention.

(e)  Similarly  it  is  necessary  to  receive  with  caution
the  view  of  Preuschen  (Z.NTW,  1901,  pp.  169  [186]-
201),  that  the  form  of  Paul  underlies  the  delineation  of
the  Antichrist  in  the  Christian  Apocalypse  of  Elias,1
although  the  coincidences,  especially  also  with  the
Acta  Pauli,  are  some  of  them  really  striking.

Preuschen  himself  says  that  a  searching  investigation  as  to
the  history  of  the  origin  of  this  Apocalypse  is  still  needed.  Ac
cording  to  Schiirer  (TLZ,  1899,  pp.  4-8),  it  is  later  than  Clement
of  Alexandria.  If  this  be  so,  the  features  of  the  picture  of  Paul
cannot  have  been  transferred  to  the  Antichrist  for  the  first  time
when  Paul's  high  place  had  become  undisputed  ;  that  must  have
occurred  much  earlier,  when  the  hatred  against  Paul  was  still
alive  and  did  not  shrink  even  from  such  a  distortion  of  his
picture  as  this.  In  the  transference  of  these  features  to  the
Apocalypse  of  Elias  now  before  us,  misunderstandings,  however,
can  easily  have  crept  in.  This  admonishes  to  great  caution.
Moreover,  Preuschen 's  work  is  not  yet  completed.

At  the  same  time,  however,  Preuschen's  view  regard-

„.  ing  the  Apocalypse  of  Elias  leads  to  the

Antichrist  in  question  whetlier  perhaps  the  figure  of


Apocalypses.


Simon  may  not  also  underlie  the  picture


of  the  Antichrist  in  apocalyptic  writings.

(u)  Preuschen  (I.e.  173-176)  answers  this  question  in
the  affirmative  so  far  as  SibylL.  863-74  2165-170  are  con
cerned.  That  in  863  the  expression  '  afterwards  shall
Beliar  come  forth  from  the  Sebastenes '  ( en  de  ~f(laffT'r]v&v
7;£ei  BeXtap  /nfToiriffdev),  ^f^affTrjvoi  has  never  as  yet
been  satisfactorily  explained  is  true.

2e/3acrros  is  the  Greek  rendering  of  Augustus,  a  name  of
honour  which  Octavian  first  received  in  27  n.c.  Should  ZefSatr-
rrji'oi,  however,  mean,  not  people  of  Augustus,  but  people  of
Samaria,  neither  is  this  designation  possible  at  an  earlier  date
than  27  B.C.,  for  it  was  not  till  then  that  Samaria  received  the
name  Sebaste.  In  order  to  be  able  to  maintain  the  very  tempt
ing  interpretation  which  refers  the  widow  ruling  the  world  in
3  75-80  to  Cleopatra,  and  the  triumvirate  clearly  indicated  in
3  51  f.  to  Antony,  Octavian,  and  Lepidus,  and  thus  fixes  the
date  of  the  whole  piece  3  36-92  as  falling  somewhere  between  40
and  30  B.C.,  scholars  have  found  it  necessary  to  take  the  ex
pression  SejSno-TrjTOi  as  proleptically  possible  even  before  the
official  bestowal  of  his  name  of  honour  upon  Augustus,  or  to
regard  the  verse  in  which  it  occurs  as  an  interpolation.  Preuschen
understands  the  world-ruling  woman  (v.  75)  of  Rome  (that  in  r.
77  she  is  called  a  widow,  and  that  in  ztv.  47  52  Rome  is  designated
by  its  own  proper  name  he  does  not  take  into  consideration)  and
then  interprets  the  Beliar  who  is  to  arise  from  among  the
Samaritans  as  referring  to  Simon  the  Magician.  It  is  correct  to
say  that  the  rather  vague  delineation  here  and  in  '-'1(5-170
presents  no  obstacle  to  stand  in  the  way  of  this  identification  ;
but  the  identification  is  not  yet  thereby  established.

In  fact,  it  appears  even  to  be  directly  excluded  if  t>.  69  is
correctly  interpreted  :  Beliar  is  to  seduce  many  men,  namely
'as  well  faithful  and  elect  Hebrews  as  also  lawless  ones,  and
other  men  who  never  at  all  heard  of  God  '  (Trtoroiis  T'  e/<A«TOi»s
8'  'HfSpaiow;  ayo,u.ovs  re  /cal  aAAovs  ape'pas  o'invet  oinrod'  ciAios
OeoO  eia-fjKOucrai').  Jiilicher,  who  was  the  first  to  interpret  Beliar
as  referring  to  Simon  Magus  (TL/.,  1896,  379),  finds  mankind
here  divided  into  three  classes  :  (i)  Christians  (TTKTTOUS  eKAeKroi's),
(2)  Jews  ('EjSpat'ovt  aro^ious),  and  (3)  Gentiles  (aAAoi/s  avepas,
etc.).  In  that  case,  however,  the  third  re  ought  to  have  come
after  'E/Spouovs,  not  after  ar'6/u.pvs.  Grammatically  possible
would  be  another  threefold  division  :  (i)  TTKTTOUS,  (2)  fxAexTOvs
'E/3pai'ous.  (3)  avoit-ov;  KO.I  diAAous  are'pas,  etc.  Only,  in  that  case
the  TTIO-TOI  would  certainly  not  mean  Christians  ;  otherwise  the
'E(3paioi  would  not  be  called  CKAEKTOI.  If  the  passage  is  due  to
a  Christian,  as  Jiilicher  supposes,  then  the  only  right  construc
tion  is  that  which  takes  ai/o/oious  as  a  predicate  of  'E/Spot'ous,
as  above.  Moreover,  in  the  third  class  just  supposed  the  KO.L
would  have  a  disturbing  effect.  If  the  re  after  dvo^ovs  could
mean  '  and,'  then  it  would  be  permissible  to  render  Kai  by  '  also  ' :
'and  also  other  godless  men.'  There,  however,  after  dvofiavs  must
mean  'as  also'  since  that  after  TTICTTOUS  means  'as  well '  ;  con
sequently  Kat  can  only  mean  'and.'  The  only  unexceptionable
translation  is  accordingly  the  following  :  'As  well  faithful  and
elect  Hebrews  as  also  lawless  ones,  and  other  men,'  etc.  As
these  '  other  men  '  are  the  Gentiles,  only  Jews  can  be  meant  by
the  'lawless  ones.'  If  on  this  rendering  one  were  to  seek  for
Christians  also,  they  must  be  indicated  by  the  'faithful  and
elect  Hebrews,'  in  other  words  must  be  exclusively  Jewish

1  German  translation  from  the  Coptic  by  SteindorfT  in  TU
173,  1899;  as  Apocalypse  of  Sophonias  already  published  by
Stern  in  Z.f.  cigypt,  Sfraclie,  1886,  pp.  115-135,  and  in  French
by  Bouriant,  Metnoires  de  la  mission  arehiologimte  ""  Ca'ire,
i.  '2  260-279  ('885)  ;  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Jewish  Apoca
lypse  of  Elias  cited  by  the  Church  Fathers  ;  see  Schiirer,  GJV&)
2  673-076,  ET  ii.  3  129-132.

4546


SIMON  MAGUS

Christians,  which  will  hardly  he  supposed  by  any  one.  Rather
does  the  author  divide  the  Jews  into  the  two  classes  of  the
'faithful  and  elect'  and  the  'lawless,'  placing  the  Gentiles
alongside  of  them.  In  that  case,  however,  the  passage  is  not
the  work  of  a  Christian,  and  therefore  it  does  not  relate  to  Simon
Magus  ;  for  it  was  only  among  Christians  and  not  at  all  among
Jews  that  Simon  Magus  passed  for  a  person  so  objectionable
and  at  the  same  time  so  important  that  he  could  be  identified
with  the  devil.

Nor  yet  even  among  Christians  was  any  such  estimate  put
upon  him  at  so  early  a  date  as  in  the  apostolic  age  ;  he  acquired
it  by  the  enhanced  importance  which  came  to  be  attached  to
him  through  the  romance  of  which  he  was  the  hero.  Thus  if
Simon  should  be  meant  we  should  have  to  reject  as  too  early
the  dating  of  Preuschen,  who  understands  by  the  three  men
who  destroy  Rome  (?'.  5iyC)  Galba,  Otho,  and  Vitellius  (68  and
69  A.D.)  and  by  the  fire  from  heaven  (r>.  53./C)  the  eruption  of
Vesuvius  in  79  A.U.  Moreover  the  second  dating  cancels  the
first ;  for  that  Galba,  Otho,  and  Vitellius  had  destroyed  Rome
could  no  longer  be  believed  after  69  A.D.  Geflcken  (TU'2'Ai
p.  15),  who  agrees  with  Jiilicher  as  regards  Simon  Magus,
judiciously  leaves  the  date  undetermined.  Yet  it  is  altogether
wrong  to  take  it'.  36-92  or  even  only  w.  46-92  as  a  unity.  In
the  passage  before  us  the  destruction  of  the  world  by  fire  is
predicted  as  something  new  no  less  than  three  times  (53-61,
71-74,  84-87);  and  moreover  the  destruction  of  Rome  by  the
three  men  just  referred  to  follows  upon  the  reign  of  the  Messiah
over  all  the  earth  (46-52),  whilst  of  course  it  must  have  preceded
it,  and  the  reign  of  the  widow  over  the  world  follows  upon  the
destruction  of  the  world  together  with  Beliar  and  his  followers
by  fire  (71-77),  and  also  upon  the  destruction  of  Rome  by  the
three  men  already  related  in  z-.  *>i_f.,  which  would  be  equally
inappropriate  whether  the  widow  be  taken  as  meaning  the
widow  Cleopatra  or  Rome.  Thus  only  vv.  63-74  come  into
account  as  a  unity  for  our  present  discussion.

(&)  Simon  the  Magician  has  been  detected  in  the
•other  beast'  of  Rev.  1811-17  (which  in  1613  19 20  20 10
is  called  the  'false  prophet')  in  recent  years  by  Spitta
(Offenb.  d.  /a//.,  1889,  pp.  380-385)  and"  Erbes  ( 'O/cnb.
Joh.,  1891,  pp.  25-27).  This  identification  may  in  some
measure  suit  the  wonderful  works  which  are  attributed
to  this  beast  in  13  13-15*2.  Rut  it  no  way  suits  the  regard
for  the  worship  of  the  Emperor  in  w.  12  15^,  and  the
exclusion  of  those  who  have  not  the  mark  of  the  beast
on  hand  or  forehead  from  the  buying  and  selling,  unless
we  choose  to  suppose  that  the  figure  of  Simon  furnished
merely  the  outlines  for  this  second  beast  which  were
filled  in  by  the  author  with  essentially  new  features.

Still  less  have  Volkmar  (Comin.  s.  Offcnb.  Joh.,  1862,  pp.  197-
213),  Blom  (77;.  7',  1884,  pp.  175-181)  and  Kappeler  (Theol.
Ztschr.  ans  tier  Sckweia,  1893,  pp.  40-62,  65-69)  succeeded,
without  resort  to  the  greatest  lengths  of  allegorical  interpretation,
in  finding  the  apostle  Paul  in  the  second  beast ;  on  any  literal
exegesis,  not  even  the  miracles  which  cause  no  difficulty  when
referred  to  Simon  can,  by  any  possibility,  be  assigned  to  Paul.

(c}  In  so  far,  however,  as,  after  the  example  of
Gunkel  (Schopf.  it.  Chaos,  1895)  and  Bousset  (Anti
christ,  1895),  the  line  taken  is  that  of  seeking  in  the
leading  apocalyptic  forms  merely  renewals  of  older
figures,  whether  of  mythological  or  of  literary  origin,
which  assumed  once  for  all  a  normative  character  that
underwent  only  slight  modifications  when  applied  to
new  circumstances  and  conditions,  it  may  certainly
be  worth  while  to  inquire  whether  Paul,  or  Simon,  or
the  features  in  the  figure  of  Simon  which  have  been  de
rived  from  Paul,  have  contributed  elements  to  the  shaping
of  these  renewed  apocalyptic  figures.  Preuschen's  aim
is  nothing  less  than  to  show  that  it  was  by  the  introduc
tion  of  the  form  of  Paul  that  the  figure  of  Antichrist,
originally  thought  of  as  a  ruler,  assumed  the  character
of  a  false  teacher,  so  that  both  types  of  Antichrist
thenceforward  existed  alongside  of  each  other.

After the survey  just made  of  the  appearances  of

Simon  in  the  literature  of  early  Christianity,  our  next

8 Four  forms  task  must  ^  to  ascertain  wnat  results,

of  Simon  dis-  £  an'V; ^"^  cl*imed' (a\  In <he

tinguished. first  Place'  u  has  become  evident  that
we have to do with three distinct

magnitudes  which  meet  us,  now  here  now  there,  under
the  form  of  Simon.  To  these  must  be  added  as  a
fourth  a  Jewish  magician  of  Cyprus,  Simon,  a  guard  of
the  procurator  Felix,  who  employed  him  to  draw  away
Drusilla  from  her  husband,  Azizus  king  of  Emesa,  and
procure  her  in  marriage  for  himself  (Jos.  Ant.  xx.  7  2,  §
I4i/ ).  To  him  we  shall  return  afterwards  (§  \zbce}.

4547


SIMON  MAGUS

Meanwhile,  the  three  figures  that  have  come  before  us
in  the  literature  we  have  hitherto  been  surveying  are  :
(i)the  Samaritan  magician  as  Acts,  on  the  first  im
pression,  seems  to  present  him  ;  (2)  the  Gnostic,  founder
of  the  Gnostic  sect  of  the  Simonians  ;  (3)  the  distorted
image  of  the  apostle  Paul.

(t>)  It  is  indispensably  necessary  that  \ve  should
distinguish  these  three  forms  as  sharply  as  possible,  and
especially  necessary  in  cases  where  they  may  have  come
to  be  mixed  up  in  one  and  the  same  writing.  In  this
sense,  we  have  already  treated  separately  the  Gnostic
and  the  perverted  image  of  Paul  as  they  are  found  in
the  pseudo- Clementine  Homilies  and  Recognitions
(§  3/-  )•  In  tl'ese  writings  Simon  appears  as  a  magician
also  ;  but  if  thereby  the  magician  who,  according  to
Acts,  made  his  appearance  in  the  very  first  years  of
Christianity,  is  to  be  understood,  then  the  Gnostic
system  ascribed  to  him  does  not  at  all  fit,  for  it  is  of
much  later  date.

Now,  magicians  have  existed  in  all  ages,  and  thus  it  were
easily  conceivable  that  the  author  of  the  Gnostic  system  in
question, "in  the  second  century,  was  really  also  at  the  same  time
a  magician.  As  against  this  suggestion,  however,  two  considera
tions  must  be  borne  in  mind  ;  not  only  that  Gnosis  and  magical
arts  are  united  in  the  fancy  of  the  Church  fathers  (who  attributed
to  their  adversaries,  without  discrimination,  all  kinds  of  evil
things)  more  easily  than  they  are  in  reality,  but  also  that,  on
this  view,  we  lose  all  connection  with  the  Samaritan  Simon  of
the  earliest  Christian  times,  a  connection  which  is  nevertheless
presupposed  in  so  far  as  Simon  is  opposed  by  Peter.  If,  in  view
of  this,  we  decline  to  give  up  the  connection,  we  must  neverthe
less  recognise  that  in  the  pseudo-Clementines  all  the  three  forms
of  Simon  are  mixed  up  with  one  another  so  as  to  form  a  com
pletely  impossible  figure.  The  case  is  similar  in  the  apocryphal
Acts  ;  only,  there  the  Gnostic  features  in  the  person  of  Simon
are  not  very  prominent.  On  Acts  8  9-24  see  $  14.

(c)  If,  then,  we  desire  to  get  at  the  truth  of  the
matter,  it  is  an  exceedingly  perilous  thing  to  be  too
readily  prepared  to  find  a  harmonious  picture,  instead
of  various  features  derived  from  distinct  sources.  Thus,
the  argument  is  very  widely  current  that,  inasmuch  as  in
the  Simon  of  the  pseuflo-Clementine  Homilies  and
Recognitions  a  Gnostic  tendency  is  being  controverted,
he  cannot,  at  the  same  time,  have  any  Pauline  features;
in  fact,  the  myth  has  even  come  into  being  that  Lipsius
too,  in  conceding  the  Anti-Gnostic  character  of  these
writings,  has  also  given  up  their  Anti-Pauline  character.
Similarly,  it  is  often  supposed  that  nothing  more  is  re
quired  than  the  postulate  of  the  actual  existence  of  a
Samaritan  magician  of  the  name  of  Simon,  in  order  to
make  it  possible  to  set  aside  all  supposed  reference  to
Paul  in  the  narrative  of  Acts  8  :  or,  where  a  little  more
caution  is  exercised,  it  is  supposed  that  the  same  result
can  be  reached  by  the  observation  that  the  figure  of
Simon  there  exhibits  Gnostic  characteristics.

If once we are prepared to keep these different

o TV, A + characteristics  strictly  separate,  and  at
y.  iiiG  Ami- .i_  •  , •

the same time to recognise their

presence  together  (should  they  happen
to  be  present  together)  in  one  and  the
uua,u  uiic same  writing,  the  next  question  for  us
n  1- nos  1C.  comes  to  t)e  whether  the  Anti-Pauline
polemic  is  older  than  the  Anti-Gnostic.

(a)  One  might  suppose  that  the  answer  could  not  be
doubtful,  seeing  that  Paul  himself  was  before  Gnosticism.
The  consequences,  however,  which  have  been  deduced
by  the  Tubingen  school  from  this  view  of  the  case  cause
many  to  shrink  from  accepting  this  result,  however
obvious.

These  critics  are  utterly  averse  to  making  the  admission  that
any  such  intense  hatred  could  really  ever  have  been  directed
against  Paul,  as  would  follow  from  the  malignant  and  perverse
representation  of  him  implied  in  the  Homilies,  and  Kecognitions,
and  in  the  apocryphal  Acts,  should  it  be  the  fact  that  the
passages  in  question  date  from  the  earliest  Christian  times.
The  ideal  of  Acts,  that  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  (as
also  the  apostles)  were  of  one  heart  and  soul  (432)  dominates
the  current  conception  of  that  period  much  too  strongly  to  make
it  possible  for  many  to  recognise  as  historical  any  conflict  of  so
profound  and  far-reaching  a  character  as  that  revealed  in  these
writings.

(/>)  Only,  what  is  it  that  is  done  in  order  to  avoid  the
4548


Pauline

ic
than  the


SIMON  MAGUS

unwelcome  admission  of  its  historical  character  ?  Any
attempt  to  explain  away  the  hatred  which  these  writings
breathe  against  the  Simon  with  whom  they  deal,
promises  little  success.  Thus,  of  necessity,  one  is
driven  to  the  assertion  that  the  Anti-Gnostic  interest  is
in  these  authors  the  original  one  and  the  Anti-Pauline
features  are  merely  later  introductions,  much  in  the
same  way  as  an  artist,  in  order  to  give  greater  life  to
his  picture,  will  introduce  into  it  here  and  there  a  few
additional  touches,  but  without  altering  the  nature  of
the  work  as  a  whole.

(c)  This  assumption,  however,  of  the  posteriority  of
the  Anti-Pauline  polemic  in  these  writings  is  completely
untenable. How should  the writers have come to
make  precisely  Paul  their  target? If  there  had  been  a
conflict  between  him  and  another  school  of primitive
Christianity  from  which  these  writers  were  not  perhaps
far  removed,  the  conflict  was  nevertheless  buried  at  the
death  of  Paul.

It  is  coming  to  be  more  and  more  generally  recognised  that
the  real  Paulinism  hardly  survived  the  lifetime  of  its  author  (so
Harnack  himself,  Lehrb.  d.  DG\^-)  46,  n.  i,  52_/  78^,  116,  etc.).
Whilst  the  most  general  of  all  its  results  —  the  admission  of  the
Gentiles  to  Christianity  without  observance  of  the  law  —  was
accepted  in  its  own  interests  by  the  Church  now  beginning  to  be
Catholic,  every  other  special  interest  which  Paul  had  promoted,
and  even  his  services  in  connection  with  the  carrying  out  of  the
universalism  which  now  was  taken  as  a  thing  of  course,  passed
into  oblivion.  Already  the  book  of  Acts  represents  Peter  as  the
real  originator  of  this,  and  Paul  as  but  his  follower  in  it  (ACTS,
§  4).  Simultaneously,  however,  this  book  and  the  whole  of  that
literature  and  period  gave  to  Paul  more  and  more  a  place  of
honour  beside  Peter  (see  MINISTRY,  §  36),  and  his  writings
during  the  second  century  gained  more  and  more  of  a  canonical
position.

Thus,  partly  forgotten  so  far  as  his  conflict  with  the
attitude  of  the  original  apostles  is  concerned,  and  partly
highly  honoured  as  an  apostle  of  bygone  days  :  how
should  Paul  ever  come  to  be  in  the  second,  or,  so  far  as
the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  and  Recognitions  are
concerned,  even  in  the  third  or  fourth  century,  the
object  of  so  fanatical  a  hatred?  It  is  a  psychological
impossibility.  Add  to  this  that  the  writers,  by  the
introduction  of  Pauline  features,  would  have  been  making
unrecognisable  the  picture  of  that  which  they  wished  to
combat  (§  10  a).

(d)  Harnack  has  felt  this,  and  drawn  the  consequence
which  is  the  only  possible  one  : '  perhaps  the  Pauline
features  of  the  [pseudo-Clementine]  magician  altogether
are an appearance merely' (Lehrb. d. Dogm.-gesch.
1C-)  269). In  the  light  of  our  preceding  investigations,
the  boldness  of  this  proposition  will  be  apparent.

How  could  such  a  judgment  be  possible,  or  that  of  Headlam
'  '


(f'f/iSf.,  i9oi_/I,  pp.  53^0  :  'With  the  possible  exception  of
one  passage,  there  is  not  the  slightest  sign  of  anti-Paulinism,
and  nowhere  is  there  any  opposition  to  St.  Paul''?  Is  it,
perchance,  due  to  the  fact  that  Headlam  has  his  eye  only  on
the  real  Paulinism  and  finds  that  the  polemic  of  the  pseudo-
Clementines  and  apocryphal  Acts  does  not  touch  that,  and  then
omits  to  ask  whether  the  authors  perhaps  precisely  by  their
malicious  distortion  of  the  image  of  Paul  deliberately  wished  to
harm  him  more  than  would  have  been  possible  by  means  of  any
honourable  polemic?

(e)  The  examples  of  polemic  against  Paul  without
the  mask  of  Simon,  already  adduced  in  §  6,  must  have
shown  how  deep  the  antipathy  to  Paul  w^ent,  and  how
widespread  it  was  even  where  we  have  not  to  do  with
writings  which  clothe  themselves  in  the  form  of  a
romance.  The  epistles  of  Paul  himself,  however,  con
tain  still  more  traces  of  this.

In  §§4i?  5</,  we  have  already  touched  on  what  admits  of
being  inferred  from  Gal.  5  1  1  (still  preaching  circumcision),
1  10  (seek  to  please  men),  4  16  (exOpos),  2  Cor.  6  8  (nAovos).
Paul's  self-commendation  in  2  Cor.  3  i  5nyC,  his  preaching  of
himself  (4s),  and  his  claim  to  have  been  taken  up  into  the  third
heaven  and  into  Paradise  (12  2-4),  needed  only  to  be  exaggerated
a  little  and  the  charge  of  self-deification  was  ready.  To  these
have  to  be  added,  further,  the  charges  which  Paul  would  not  be
found  repudiating  so  emphatically  if  they  had  never  been  made
against  him  :  such  as  that  he  walks  in  carnal  wisdom  (2  Cor.  1  12),
writes  other  things  than  appear  (1  13),  says  Yea  and  Nay  in
the  same  breath  (1  17),  corrupts  the  word  of  God  (-17),  seeks
to  be  lord  of  the  faith  (1  24),  uses  his  power  for  the  destruction
of  the  churches  (108  13  10),  when  present  is  weak  but  comes
forward  in  his  letters  with  the  greatest  claims  (10  qf.  i).

4549


SIMON  MAGUS

From  his  refusal  of  financial  support  for  himself,  the  inference
was  drawn  that  plainly  he  was  conscious  of  not  being  a  real
apostle,  otherwise  he  would  have  made  use  of  the  privilege  of
those  who  were  (i  Cor.  <J  15  2  Cor.  11  10).  To  this  it  was  added,
further,  that  he  applied  to  his  own  uses  the  collections  which  he
caused  to  be  made  for  the  poor  in  Jerusalem  (2  Cor.  12  16-18  7  2,
end).  Finally,  'chastened  '  (naiSfvofievoi)  in  2  Cor.  69  can  only
be  understood  as  meaning  that  his  malady  had  been  interpreted
as  a  divine  punishment  for  his  opposition  to  the  Christianity  of
the  original  apostles.

(/)  All  these  charges  and  reproaches,  however,  proceed,
in  the  last  resort  at  least,  from  the  Judaizers  who  came
to  Corinth  or  to  Galatia  and  sought  to  turn  against
Paul  the  churches  which  he  had  founded  —  in  other
words,  from  the  representatives  of  that  school  which
speaks  in  the  pseudo-Clementine  writings  and  apocryphal
Acts  or  at  least  in  their  sources.  If  one  desires  not  to
be  unjust  to  them,  one  will  even  have  to  concede  that
Paul  had  provoked  them  to  the  utmost  by  his  persistent
advocacy  of  his  own  views,  by  his  unsparing  attack  even
upon  Peter  at  Antioch  (Gal.  2  11-21),  by  his  blunt  judg
ment  upon  things  which  they  regarded  as  sacred,  by
the  anathema  he  pronounced  upon  their  gospel  (Gal.
18_/". ),  by  his  biting  sarcasm  (Gal.  612),  and  by  his
sweeping  condemnation  of  everything  about  them
(2  Cor.  11  13-15).  We  are  only  too  readily  inclined  to
take  sides  with  Paul  and  to  find  in  his  case  certain
things  to  be  perfectly  correct,  which  in  his  adversaries
we  would  either  condemn  without  qualification,  or  even
declare  to  be  historically  impossible.  Whether,  for
example,  Paul  says  that  his  opponents  are  servants
of  Satan  (11 15),  or  whether  the  pseudo-Clementine
Recognitions  say  that  Paul  is  a  chosen  instrument  of
Satan  (849)  comes  to  very  much  the  same  thing  ;  and,
viewed  from  their  standpoint,  Paul  must  really  have
seemed  to  them  quite  as  much  the  enemy  of  the  truth
as  they  to  him — for  after  all  he  was  doing  away  with
the  law  concerning  which  they  could  quite  honestly
feel  convinced  that  it  had  been  laid  down  by  God  as
of  perpetual  obligation  (see  COUNCIL,  §  3,  begin.).
Instead  of  denying  the  manifestly-patent  fact  that  the
opposing  schools,  within  the  borders  of  primitive
Christianity,  carried  on  their  controversies  with  the
utmost  violence,  we  ought  rather  to  be  unfeignedly
glad  that  the  Christian  religion  possessed  within  itself
sufficient  vitality  to  enable  it  to  survive  so  severe  a
crisis.

(g)  There  is  accordingly  but  one  presupposition
only,  by  means  of  which  it  will  be  really  possible  to
hold  the  an ti- Pauline  features  in  the  pseudo-Clementines
to  be  more  recent  than  the  anti-Gnostic,  namely  the
assumption  that  the  principal  Pauline  epistles  are
more  recent  than  the  Gnosticism,  which  the  pseudo-
Clementines  combat.  So  Loman  (Th.T,  1883,
pp.  25-47),  Meyboom  (ib.  1891,  1-46),  and  Steck
(Galaterbrief,  325-335  [1888]).  It  makes  little  differ
ence  here,  whether  on  this  view  the  two  things  are
also  regarded  as  contemporaneous.  Marcion  passes
for  the  chief  representative  of  the  gnosis  which  is
controverted.  We  note  further  that  Meyboom  finds
the  polemic  in  the  Homilies  the  fresher,  and  derived
more  from  direct  observation  of  the  two  views  he  opposes,
Marcionitism  and  the  Antinomism  set  forth  by  the
'  canonical  Paul '  ;  that  of  the  Recognitions  he  finds
more  colourless  and  confused.  Against  the

denial  of  the  genuineness  of  the  principal  Pauline
epistles  altogether,  see  GALATIANS,  §§  1-9.

If  then  it  is  impossible  to  deny  the  existence  of  the
Anti-Pauline  polemic  or  to  maintain  that  it  is  later  than
the  Anti-Gnostic,  the  next  question


10.  Anti- Pauline


comes to  be  as  to  how  it  came  to


and  Anti-Gnostic  be  connectedi and even combined

polemic  how wkh the Anti. Gnostic in such a

connected. manner  as  we  see,  especially  in  the

Homilies  and  Recognitions.  (a) Harnack,  in  so  far

as  he  does  not  explain  the  Anti-Pauline  element  as  only

seeming  (above,  §  9  if),  says  upon  this  point  (loc.  cit.)

that  the pseudo-Clementines '  before  aught  else  con-

4550


SIMON  MAGUS


SIMON  MAGUS


troverted  Simon  Magus  and  his  followers  .  .  . ,  but
also  the  apostle  Paul,  and  seem  to  have  transferred
Simonian  features  to  Paul,  and  Pauline  features  to
Simon.'  The  question  still  remains,  however,  Why
they  did  so?  If  they  depicted  Simon  or  Paul  otherwise
than  each  of  them  in  reality  was,  they  only  obscured  the
picture  of  each,  whilst  in  the  polemic  that  was  being
waged,  it  must  nevertheless  have  always  been  a  matter
of  primary  importance  to  depict  the  adversary  in  such
a  way  that  every  one  could  clearly  recognise  him.  The
literary  skill  of  the  authors  must  accordingly,  on  the
assumption  of  Harnack  here  presupposed,  that  they
wrote  their  works  as  we  now  have  them  without  making
use  of  any  sources,  be  ranked  very  low  ;  in  reality,
however,  it  is  admittedly  very  considerable.  By  the
judgment  we  have  quoted,  accordingly,  Harnack  has
merely  raised  another  problem,  not  solved  the  one  in
hand.

(t>)  Harnack  proceeds  (loc.  cit.},  'Yet  it  remains  also
possible  that  the  Pauline  features,  borne  by  the  magician,
came  first  into  existence  in  the  process  of  redaction,  in
so  far  as  in  the  course  of  this  the  whole  polemic  against
Paul  was  deleted,  but  certain  portions  of  it  were  woven
into  the  polemic  against  Simon.'  The  assumption
underlying  these  words  is  of  the  utmost  importance.
\Ve  see  Harnack  here  reckoning,  as  he  had  not  yet
done  in  the  preceding  sentence,  with  literary  antecedents
of  the  pseudo-Clementine  writings.

This  is  in  point  of  fact  indispensable,  if  only  for  the  reason  that
we  find  the  Homilies  for  considerable  stretches  dealing  with  the
same  matters  as  the  Recognitions,  and  then  again  diverging
widely  from  them  and  also  changing  the  order  of  the  occurrences
which  both  relate  in  common.  Further,  in  Recog.  3  T$f-  it  is
said  that  Clement,  at  the  instance  of  Peter,  wrote  down  and
sent  to  James  in  ten  books  (the  so-called  Kypvytiara  of  Peter)
the  discourses  held  by  Peter  in  his  disputation  with  Simon  in
Caesarea,  and  in  the  same  place  is  given  a  list  of  the  contents  of
this  writing  which  shows  that  it  dealt  with  things  which  occur
also  in  the  pseudo-Clementines  of  to-day.  To  this  must  be
added  the  family  romance,  and  other  matter  which  again  points
to  a  separate  origin  (above,  §  3  c).

And  yet  it  is  precisely  this  question  as  to  possible
sources  of  this  literature  that  we  may  not  propound
if  Harnack's  dictum  is  to  hold  good  that  these  writings
cannot  be  called  into  requisition  in  any  investigation
regarding  primitive  Christianity,  because  they  did  not
come  into  existence  at  all  until  the  third  or  fourth  century.
Granted  that  their  present  form  is  not  older  than  the
third  or  fourth  century,  nevertheless  their  sources
certainly  are  older,  and  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  the
historian  to  look  into  them.  Harnack  withdraws  him
self  from  the  task,  although  he  has  himself  recognised
its  existence  in  the  sentence  we  have  quoted.  Finally,
immediately  afterwards  he  goes  on  to  say  as  quoted
above  (§  gd\,  '  the  Pauline  features  of  the  magician  are
perhaps  only  apparent.'  The  student  who  finds  him
self  disinclined  to  follow  this  path  out  of  the  difficulty
which  Harnack  himself  treads  so  hesitatingly,  has  no
longer  to  face  the  question  whether  one  is  to  '  believe '
in  a  primeval  Simon-romance  (so  Harnack  ;  see  SIMON'
PKTKR,  §  31  //),  but  whether  one  is  prepared  in  dis
charge  of  the  duty  of  a  historian  to  probe  the  matter  to
the  bottom.

(f )  That  Harnack's  hint  of  the  result  to  which  this
would  lead  (above,  b,  begin.)  is  a  happy  one  cannot
be  said.  How  are  we  to  conceive  to  ourselves  even
so  much  as  the  initial  juxtaposition  of  an  anti-Simonian
and  an  and-  Pauline  polemic,  which  Harnack  even
presupposes  at  a  certain  stage  of  his  hypothesis
where  he  does  not  yet  take  account  of  a  fusion  of
different  sources  ?  But  why  afterwards  was  the  anti-
Pauline  polemic  deleted  ?  How  crime  it  about  that  never
theless  certain  portions  of  the  polemic  against  Paul  got
themselves  woven  into  that  against  Simon  ?  From  mere
confusion  ?  No  doubt  some  transference  of  traits  that
suit  Paul  to  Simon  has  occurred  ;  but  this  can  be
explained  with  any  psychological  probability  only  by
supposing  that  the  hatred  against  Paul  in  those  circles,
within  which  these  writings  took  their  rise,  still  con-

4551


tinued  to  be  active,  and  that  what  this  hatred  had  found
to  be  worthy  of  detestation  in  Paul,  was  involuntarily
imputed,  without  any  basis  of  fact,  to  other  persons  also
simply  from  the  need  it  felt  to  give  itself  air.  This  is
only  a  proof  of  the  original  strength  and  bitterness  of
the  hostility  in  question  against  the  apostle.  In  him
his  enemies  saw  the  embodiment  of  all  that  was  detest
able,  nay  devilish.  If  now,  in  course  of  time,  there
arose  other  teachers  whose  position  resembled  his,  yet
was  not  identical  with  it,  the  inclination  was  only  too
natural,  in  those  who  disapproved,  to  fix  their  attention
only  on  the  points  of  agreement,  and  to  carry  over,
without  alteration,  to  the  newcomers  the  sentence  of
condemnation  that  had  long  ago  been  pronounced  upon
Paul,  and  all  the  words  of  censure  in  which  it  had
been  conveyed — 'enemy,'  '  false  teacher,'  '  devil's  tool,'
'magician,'  '  deifier  of  self,'  and  the  like.  Without
the  existence  of  a  deeply-rooted  hatred  against  Paul
that  continued  to  be  active  down  to  a  later  time,  all
this  would  not  have  been  possible ;  but  as  soon  as  its
existence  is  recognised,  the  mingling  of  the  attributes
of  distinct  persons  is  no  longer  unintelligible.  In  like
manner  also  in  that  case  one  is  in  a  position  to  under
stand  that  people  of  this  fanatical  sort,  when  un
questionably  new  characteristics  emerged,  did  not  allow
themselves  to  be  led  by  this  to  recognise  that  a  new
thing  had  appeared,  that  was  not  to  be  identified  with
the  old,  but  simply  regarded  the  new  characteristics  in
question  as  a  fresh  development  of  the  long  familiar
and  detestable  characteristics  of  the  original  adversary.
(d)  One  new  characteristic  of  the  kind  just  referred
to,  undoubtedly,  was  the  divine  worship  implied  in  the
erection  of  a  statue  in  Rome  (above,  §  2  a).  Even  the
most  fertile  imagination  could  hardly  have  constructed
this  out  of  the  image  of  Paul.

Lipsius,  therefore  (ii.  l4o_/),  is  probably  right  when  he
supposes  this  assertion  about  Simon  to  owe  its  origin  to  the
stupid  misunderstanding  of  Justin,  and  to  have  found  its  way
into  the  Recognitions  only  after  Justin's  statement  had  become
current.  Here  it  is  even  put  in  the  mouth  of  Simon  as  a
prophecy  :  'adorabor  ut  dens,  publice  divinis  donabor  honuribus,
ita  ut  simulacrum  mihi  statuentes  tanquam  deum  colant  et
adorent'  (2  9 ;  cp  863  where  Rome  is  expressly  named  as  the
place).  It  is,  however,  as  great  a  misunderstanding  of  the
meaning  of  Lipsius  as  that  already  (§  8c)  noted  when  Erbes
(Z.f.  Kirchcngesch.  22,  1901,  i3_f.)  reports  it  in  the  following
terms:  'that  the  Clementine  story  of  Peter's  conflicts  with
Simon  in  Rome  can  only  have  arisen  on  the  foundation  of
the  statement  of  Justin.'  Lipsius  does  not  say  this  of  these
conflicts  in  general,  but  expressly  only  of  '  the  Gnostic  figure  of
Simon.'  From  the  view  which  Krbes  adopts,  he  draws  the  con
clusion  that  '  we  have  no  need  at  all  to  go  into  the  question
as  to  the  sources  and  the  strata  of  that  [pseudo-Clementine]
literature,  and  are  now  already  in  a  position  to  affirm  that  the
legend  which  brings  Peter  in  conjunction  with  Simon  Magus  to
Rome,  cannot  have  arisen  until  after  147  A.D.  [i.e.,  after  Justin].'

What  Lipsius  holds,  and  at  the  same  time  what  we
too,  it  would  seem,  ought  to  hold,  is  the  exact  opposite
of  this.  If,  through  an  error  of  Justin  with  reference
to  a  certain  Gnostic,  a  statement  arose  which  subse
quently  came  to  be  incorporated  in  the  pseudo-
Clementines,  we  have  all  the  more  pressing  occasion
for  inquiring  what  was  the  form  which  these  writings
exhibited,  and  what  the  picture  of  Simon  which  they
presented,  before  the  introduction  of  such  Gnostic
features.

(c)  Lipsius,  it  is  true,  since  1876  (JPT  6^6/.,
Apokr.  Ap.-gesch.  ii.  1 38  f.  363)  has  abandoned  his
earlier  attempt  to  reconstruct,  as  a  single  writing,  a
purely  Anti-Pauline,  pre-Gnostic  source  which  should
embrace  the  whole  of  the  existing  Anti- Pauline  material
that  we  now  find  dispersed  in  the  pseudo-Clementines
and  the  apocryphal  Acta  —  not,  however,  because  it
had  been  shown  to  be  wrong,  but  simply  because  it
could  not  be  proved  to  be  right.  All  the  more
decidedly,  however,  does  he  maintain  that  this  whole
Anti- Pauline  polemic  existed  in  an  oral  form  before  the
introduction  of  the  Gnostic  features.  This  is  in  fact
the  least  that  we  must  suppose,  unless  all  the  facts
which  we  have  pointed  out  regarding  the  polemic

4552


SIMON  MAGUS


SIMON  MAGUS


oneness  of
anti-Pauline

elements  in
Ps. -Clem,  and


against  Paul  are  to  be  simply  denied.  Xor  should  a
renewed  attempt  to  find  in  the  Clementines  a  written
source  of  this  kind  be  simply  banned  as  impossible.
Attention  must,  however,  be  called  also  to  the  fact  that
the  position  held  by  Lipsius  has  only  in  appearance
been  made  worse  by  the  new  turn  he  has  given  to  it,
and  in  reality  has  been  improved.

It  can  appear  to  be  more  questionable  if  it  is  unable  to  find
support  on  any  written  source  capable  of  being  separated  out  from
tlie  writings  before  us,  and  if  the  possibility  has  to  be  reckoned
with  that  the  Anti-Pauline  legend  existed  for  long  only  in  an
oral  form,  and  was  reduced  to  writing  only  after  the  Gnostic
features  had  been  combined  with  it.  Nor  is  this  really  difficult
to  suppose.  The  mixture  of  features,  and  the  difficulty  felt  in
keeping  them  clearly  separate,  become  easily  intelligible  on  the
assumption  that  the  writing  was  done  at  a  late  date  ;  but  the
certainty  of  the  existence  of  a  mass  of  matter  that  was  originally
purely  Anti- Pauline  is  not  destroyed  by  the  absence  of  any  book
in  which  this  had  been  committed  to  writing.  The  hatred
against  Paul  which  still  finds  expression  through  the  present
forms  of  the  writing  which  have  been  so  much  worked  over,  was
strong  enough  to  secure  that  every  one,  even  without  their
being  committed  to  writing,  should  know  perfectly  well  what
was  the  nature  of  the  charges  brought  against  Paul.

The  positive  advantage  offered  by  the  new  form  of
the  hypothesis  of  Lipsius  is  a  chronological  one.  On
the  supposition  of  a  written  source,  difficulties  can  be
raised  by  the  question  as  to  whether  it  is  really  older
than  the  period  of  Gnosticism  (from  about  100  A.n. ),
from  which  the  non- Pauline  features  of  the  legend  are
derived.  In  presence  of  a  legend  that  existed  orally
only,  this  difficulty  disappears ;  for  such  a  legend
naturally  must  have  existed  since  the  days  of  Paul,  in
whose  own  letters  we  have  already  been  able  to  point
out  so  many  of  the  features  which  it  presents  (§  9^).

If  originally  it  \vas  Paul  who  was  attacked  under  the
guise  of  Simon  alike  in  the  Pseudo-Clementine  Homilies
_ .  and  Recognitions  and  in  the  Apocryphal

11.  Original  Acts  (abov^>  §  4  y)?  the  question  in
evitably  arises  whether  this  happened
in  the  two  groups  of  writings  indepen
dently,  or  whether  both  groups  have  a.

.  . , common  origin.

Apocr.  Acts. ^  The  first  view  is  favoured  by  the

circumstance  that  the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  and
Recognitions  deal  exclusively  with  encounters  in  Palestine
and  Syria,  the  Apocryphal  Acts  only  with  encounters  in
Rome.  In  many  instances  scholars  have  contented
themselves  with  establishing  this  fact  and  then  holding
the  question  as  at  once  settled.

(b)  The  idea,  however,  which  underlies  this  whole
polemic  against  '  Simon  '  is  most  distinctly  against  this,
the  idea,  namely,  that  Peter  has  to  follow  Simon  into
every  place  where  the  latter  has  spread  his  erroneous
teaching.

That  this  is  Peter's  task  is  everywhere  taken  for  granted  as  a.
thing  of  course.  Take,  for  example,  Hani.  14  12,  where  we  find
Peter  saying  that  Simon  is  in  Antioch  (with  Annubion);  '  when,
then,  we  get  there  and  come  upon  them,  the  disputation  can
take  place ' ;  out  of  a  large  number  of  other  passages  we  may
point  also  to  '1 17  where  Peter  speaks  of  himself  as  having  come  in
upon  Simon  'as  light  upon  darkness,  as  knowledge  upon  ignor
ance,  as  healing  upon  disease'  (eTreASwi'  ws  CTKOTOJ  rJMas,  MS  ayvoiq
•yvuxris,  ws  i-otrw  tatris).  According  to  46  none  but  Peter  can
cope  with  Simon,  and  his  companions  complain  that  he  has  sent
them  on  this  occasion  before  him.  In  Recog.  865  Peter  says:
'  Since  Simon  has  gone  forth  to  preoccupy  the  ears  of  the
Gentiles  who  are  called  to  salvation,  it  is  necessary  that  I  also
follow  upon  his  track  so  that  whatever  disputation  he  raises
may  be  corrected  by  us'  (Quia  Simon  egressus  est  aures  gentilium
qni  ad  salutem  vocati  sunt  praevenire,  necesse  est  et  me  vestigia
ejus  insequi,  ut  si  quid  forte  ab  illo  disputatum  fuerit,  corrigatur
a  nobis),  and  in  368  we  read  that  'Simon  has  set  out,  wishing
to  anticipate  our  journey ;  him  we  should  have  followed  step  by
step,  that  wheresoever  he  tries  to  subvert  any  there  he  might
forthwith  be  confuted  by  us'  (Simon  praecedere  yolens  iter
nostrum  profectus  est,  quern  oportuerat  e  vestigio  insequi,  ut
sicubi  aliquos  subvertere  tentaret,  continue  confutarettir  a  nobis).

In  view  of  such  passages  as  these  it  is  not  conceivable
that  the  plan  of  the  Homilies  and  Recognitions  became
limited  to  conflicts  between  '  Simon '  and  Peter  in  the
East,  as  soon  as  it  was  known  to  the  author  that  Simon
had  come  also  to  Rome.  But  this  was  in  point  of  fact
actually  known  to  the  author,  unless  one  is  prepared  to
deny  that  the  apostle  Paul  is  meant  by  '  Simon.'  Even

4553


if  it  is  a  Gnostic  Simon  that  is  controverted  in  the
Homilies  and  Recognitions,  it  was  Paul  who  supplied
the  basis  for  this  Gnostic  figure  (above,  §  gf. )  ;  and  it
is  only  with  the  original  oneness  of  the  anti- Pauline
elements  in  the  Homilies  and  Recognitions  on  the  one
hand  and  in  the  Apocryphal  Acts  on  the  other  that  \ve
have  here  to  do.

(c)  Nor  yet  are  direct  indications  wholly  wanting  in
the  Homilies  and  Recognitions  that  the  conflicts  must
be  continued  in  Rome  also.

Thus  in  Kec.  863  f.  we  read  of  Simon's  going  from  Ca:sarea  to
Rome  saying  that  '  there  he  would  please  the  people  so  much
that  he  should  be  reckoned  a  god  and  receive  divine  honours'
(dicens  se  Romam  petere  ;  ibi  enim  in  tantum  placiturum  ut  deus
putetur  et  divinis  donetur  honoribus);  see  above,  §  2  a.  With
this  it  agrees  that  Peter  makes  the  request  of  Clement  who  is
brought  to  him  by  ISarnabas:  'travel  with  us,  participating  in
the  words  of  truth  which  I  am  going  to  speak  from  city  to  city,
as  far  as  Rome  itself  (awo&tvaov  r)f*ii'  /ueTaAap./3di'wi>  r<ur  rtjs
aArjfleias  Adyta!/,  &v  Kara.  TrcAty  TroieicrScu  fxeAAw  fJ-f^pi  'Pw/xJJS
ain-rjs  :  Hom.\-Lt>=Recog.\I'$\  iter  age  nobiscum  et  audi  ser-
monem  veritatis  quern  habituri  sumus  per  loca  singula,  usquequo
ad  ipsnm  nobis  perveniendum  sit  urbem  Romam  ;  cp  1  74  :  usque-
quo  deo  favente  perveniatur  ad  ipsam  quo  iter  nostrum  diri-
gendum  credimus  urbem  Romam).  So  also  in  the  Kpistle  of
Clement  to  James  prefixed  to  the  Homilies  (eh.  1)  Peter  is  spoken
of  as  being  he  '  who  as  being  fittest  of  all  was  commanded  to
enlighten  the  darker  part  of  the  world,  namely  the  West,  and
was  enabled  to  set  it  right '  (6  TTJS  Sva^euii  TO  <7<coTei>'OTfpoi'  TOV
KOCT/XOU  /ue'pos  ws  irai'Tiav  ixayuJTepo?  (ftiariffai  KtAeutrtfeis  Kai  icar-
opftio-ai.  Svvr)6fif),  and  as  having  died  in  Rome.

The  value  of  these  passages  as  evidence  becomes
greater  in  proportion  to  the  fulness  of  their  agreement
with  the  fundamental  idea  set  forth  above,  under  b.
AH  the  more  significant,  therefore,  is  the  simple  ignor
ing  of  them  by  Harnack  and  Clemen  who  do  not  accept
this  idea,  and  all  the  bolder  the  view  of  Chase  (Hastings,
DB  8775*)  that  they  '  are  so  incidental  in  character  that
they  may  well  be  the  interpolation  of  a  later  editor,  the
writer,  for  example,  who  composed  the  Epistle  of  Clement
to  James,  prefixed  to  the  Homilies.'

(it)  Of  equal  importance  is  the  fact  that  the  Apo
cryphal  Acts  which  deal  only  with  conflicts  in  Rome
contain  references  back  to  earlier  conflicts  of  Simon
with  Peter  (and  Paul)  in  the  East.

For  the  pre-Catholic  Acts,  17,  23,  see  SIMON  PETKR,  §  33  c,  ci,
and  for  the  Catholic  Acts  see  chap.  17,  where  Simon  says  of
Peter  and  i'aul  :  '  They  have  turned  aside  all  Judaea  from  be
lieving  in  me'  (fiteVrpeii/ai/  o\rjv  rrjv  'lov&aiav  TOV  ny  iricrTeveiv
f/.oi),  to  which  Peter  makes  answer,  '  Thou  hast  been  able  to  im
pose  upon  all,  but  upon  me  never  ;  and  those  also  who  have  been
deceived,  God  has  through  me  recalled  from  their  error '  (na<ri
SC  eTriOecreius  r\ovvr]0^.  efj.oi  S'  ovSfTrore '  Kal  O.VTOVS  &f  roi/s
efaTraTryfeVras  oY  ejnov  6  fob?  eK  TTJS  ioia<s  TrAanjs  areKaAeVaro).
Simon  again  holds  precisely  similar  language  in  chap.  28  where
he  mentions  all  Palestine  and  Caesarea  as  well  as  Judaea  (ac
cording  to  the  Recognitions  it  was  in  Caesarea  that  the  last
great  disputation  between  Simon  and  Peter  occurred).  With
this  it  agrees  that  in  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  (ch.  o),  in  exact
parallelism  with  the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  and  Recvg-
nitions,  Peter  receives  from  Christ  in  a  vision  the  following
instruction:  'quern  tu  ejecisti  de  Juda;a  approbatum  magum
Simonem,  iterum  praeoccupavit  vos  Roma;  .  .  .  crastina  die
proficiscere,'  whereupon  Peter  says  to  his  Christian  brethren
'necesse  est  me  ascendere  Romas  [for  Romam]  ad  expugnandum
hostem  et  inimicum  domini  et  fratrum  nostrum  '  [for  '  nostrorum ']
(cp  SIMON  PETER,  §§  34  c,  33  l>).

Thus  the  pseudo -Clementines  and  the  Apocryphal
Acts  alike  make  it  plain  that  both  of  them  have  the
underlying  idea  of  a  controverting  of  Simon  by  Peter
in  the  East  as  well  as  in  Rome,  even  although  only  the
one  half  is  developed  in  the  one  group  of  writings  and
the  other  half  in  the  other.

(e]  The  attempt  has  been  made  to  meet  this  by  point
ing  out  that  church  fathers  mention  the  presence  of
Simon  in  Rome  while  at  the  same  time  not  speaking  of
controversies  between  him  and  Peter.  This  is  indeed
true  of  Justin,  who  knows  nothing  of  any  presence  of
Peter  in  Rome  at  all  (above,  §  2  ;  SIMON  PKTEK,  §  30^),
as  also  of  Irenseus  (Ii6[23];  about  185  A.u.)  and
Tertullian  (Apol.  13  ;  cp  De  anima,  34,  57  :  about
200  A.D.  )  who  elsewhere  do  speak  of  the  appearance
of  Peter  in  Rome  (see  SIMON  PETER,  §§  25  b,  26  a,  and,
conversely,  the  mention  of  Peter  and  Paul  without
Simon,  §  41  c).  Only,  this  argument  from  silence

4554


SIMON  MAGUS

cannot  prove  that  Simon  really  did  make  an  appear
ance  in  Rome  without  any  conflict  with  Peter.

In  the  writings  of  the  church  fathers  the  first  mention  of
this  conflict  occurs  in  the  I'hiloscifhuinena,  about  235  A.D.
(see  SIMON  PETER,  §  39  </).  Amongst  the  sources  of  this  work,
however,  must  unquestionably  be  reckoned  the  avvra.yp.0.  irpbs
arracras  ras  aipe'creis  of  Hippolytus,  written  about  200  A.D.,
even  if  Hippolytus  may  not  be  held  to  have  been  the  author  of
the  Pkilosofkumtna  itself;  and  Lipsius  has  made  it  probable
(JPT,  1876,  p.  607)  that  this  avv-ray^a.  of  Hippolytus,  now  no
longer  extant,  already  contained  the  conflict  between  Peter  and
Simon.  If  this  be  so,  it  can  no  longer  be  asserted  that  the
tradition  of  the  conflict  is  later  than  the  opposite  tradition  01
Tertullian  and  Irenzeus.  Moreover,  it  cannot  be  maintained
that  these  two  authors  had  any  urgent  occasion,  in  the  particular
connections  in  which  they  were  writing,  to  mention  this  conflict
if  they  had  known  it.

(/)  In  the  case  of  Justin  such  an  occasion  un
deniably  did  exist ;  and,  moreover,  Justin  as  being
the  earlier  (about  152  A.D.)  is  also  the  most  important
witness.  He,  however,  as  already  pointed  out,  knows
nothing  of  Peter's  presence  in  Rome.  Thus  what  he
says  about  Simon  admits  of  explanation  without  any
difficulty,  even  if  a  tradition  was  already  in  existence
before  his  time  to  the  effect  that  Simon  had  been
controverted  by  Peter  in  Rome.  One  part  of  this
tradition — that  about  Simon's  presence  in  Rome — he
found  himself  able  to  accept  (in  fact  he  held  it  to  be
confirmed  by  the  statue,  which  he  brought  into  con
nection  with  Simon  ;  see  above,  §  za),  the  other — that
about  Peter's  presence  in  Rome — he  was  unable  to
accept.  Why  he  could  not,  is  a  matter  of  indifference  ;
what  is  certain  is  that  one  who,  as  Justin  does,  regards
all  the  twelve  original  apostles  as  having  engaged  in
missions  to  the  Gentiles,  and  is  completely  silent  about
Paul  (MINISTRY,  §  3&a)  would  have  had  no  difficulty
in  accepting  the  presence  of  Peter  in  Rome,  if  he  was
in  possession  of  credible  information  to  this  effect.  One
must  reflect  that  the  circles  from  which  the  traditions
relating  to  the  controverting  of  '  Simon '  by  Peter
emanated  enjoyed  small  repute  in  the  church,  and
certainly  no  mistake  will  have  been  committed  if  we
suppose  that  it  was  Justin's  knowledge  of  the  Roman
tradition,  which  he  acquired  on  the  spot,  that  pre
vented  him  from  believing  in  the  presence  of  Peter
there  (cp  SIMON  Pi-:TER,  §  40  d}.

(g]  As  soon  as  the  later  hypothesis  of  Lipsius,  which
as  we  have  seen  (above,  §  loe)  has  most  to  recommend
it,  is  adopted — viz.,  that  the  entire  anti-Pauline  polemic
existed,  in  the  first  instance,  in  oral  tradition — we  are
all  the  less  in  a  position  to  doubt  that  from  the  beginning
it  formed  a  unity  ;  and  sayings  of  church-fathers  about
a  presence  of  Simon  in  Rome  without  any  conflict  with
Peter  cannot,  on  the  other  hand,  be  regarded  as  proving
anything,  if  only  because  they  are  all  of  them  much
later,  since  the  oral  tradition  just  referred  to  must  have
come  into  existence  during  and  shortly  after  the  lifetime
of  Paul.

[h]  Nor  can  the  fact  that  in  the  Homilies  and
K-jccgnitions  only  the  eastern  conflicts  are  dealt  with,
and  in  the  Apocryphal  Acts  only  the  Roman  be  held  as
having  force  against  this  conclusion,  even  if  we  are  not
able  to  explain  it.

At  the  same  time,  we  may  certainly  conjecture  that  the  resi
dence  and  the  geographical  horizon  of  the  various  authors  had
a  determining  influence  on  the  selection  of  the  places  which  they
made  the  scenes  of  their  romance.  Otherwise,  the  Homilies  and
Recognitions  would  certainly  not  have  confined  themselves  to
Palestine  and  Syria,  but  would  have  included  Asia  Minor  and
even  Macedonia  and  Greece  as  well,  where  also  Paul  had  exer
cised  his  missionary  activities.  Moreover,  neither  the  Homilies
and  Recognitions,  nor  yet  the  Apocryphal  Acts  (though  this
does  not  hold  true  of  them  in  the  same  degree)  exhibit
unity  of  conception  in  their  present  form.  We  cannot  tell
whether  older  forms  of  them  would  not  give  us  a  clearer  insight
into  the  original  oneness  of  this  whole  body  of  literature.

Having  now  examined  the  Simon-romance  in  all  its

ramifications,  our  next  ciuestion  must
12.  What  Simon  ^  .  what  e]emem  of  historical  truth

°?8> (if  any)  is  there  attaching  to  Simon  ?
historical? » {a}y>0f  the four sinion.figures

distinguished  above  (§8),  the  caricature  of  Paul  in  the

4555


SIMON  MAGUS

Homilies  and  Recognitions  and  in  the  Apocryphal  Acts
was  interpreted  as  having  its  basis  in  the  historical  Paul
and  no  other  historical  person  whatsoever  by  the
Tubingen  school,  followed  by  Xoldeke  (in  Lipsius,
Ergdnsungsheft,  32 /. )  and  Liidemann  (below,  §  15),  as
also  at  an  earlier  date  by  Lipsius.

On  this  interpretation  the  explanation  of  the  name  Simon  is
that  Paul,  whose  real  name  of  course  could  not  be  mentioned,
was  the  opponent  of  Simon  Peter  and  thus  was  the  false  Simon  ;
he  was  called  a  Samaritan,  it  was  held,  because  he  was  a  Jew,
and  yet  also  no  Jew  since  he  rejected  the  law  of  Moses.  On  all
other  features  .see  above,  §§  4-7,  9-11.

(b]  Krenkel  (below,  §  15),  to  explain  the  caricature
of  Paul,  calls  in  the  Cyprian  magician  Simon,  \vho
stood  high  in  favour  with  Felix  because  of  his  services
in  helping  him  to  win  Drusilla  (above,  §  8 a).

As  Paul  also  was  well  treated  by  Felix  when  in  prison  at
Cssarea  (Acts  24  22-26),  it  was  a  comparatively  easy  thing  for
Jewish-Christian  slander  to  assert  that  he  really  was  identical
with  the  Cyprian  Simon,  and  that,  using  this  name,  in  order  the
more  easily  to  gain  followers  he  gave  himself  out  to  be  the  apostle
Simon  Peter.  This  last  conjecture  is  altogether  improbable  ;
but  the  first  also  goes  somewhat  far.  although  it  seems  to  have
some  support  in  Paul's  preaching  before  Felix  and  Drusilla  '  of
righteousness  and  temperance  and  the  judgment  to  come '  (Acts
24  25  ;  see  BAKJKSUS,  §  4</).  Cp  above,  §  5  e.

(f)  Kreyenbiihl  (205-214  ;  see  below,  §  15)  goes  still
further.

The  accusation  against  Paul  of  having  brought  Drusilla  to
Felix,  he  attributes  not  to  the  Jewish  Christians,  but  to  the
Jews  who  accused  him  before  Felix.  According  to  Kreyenbiihl,
a  Cyprian  Simon  never  existed  ;  what  Josephus  relates  regarding
him  is  simply  this  slander  which  was  current  against  Paul,  having
been  brought  against  him  under  the  name  of  Simon  which  was
given  to  him.  liut  the  question  arises  :  How  came  non-Christian
Jews  to  give  to  Paul  the  name  of  Simon?  Kreyenbiihl's  ex
planation  of  how  it  was  that  at  the  same  time  they  designated
him  as  a  Cyprian  by  birlh,  is  that  Barjesus  or  Klymas  (Acts
186-12)  was  originally  the  apostle  Paul  (see  BAKJESUS,  §  46).
Both  names  are,  according  to  Kreyenbiihl,  nicknames  which
were  given  him  by  Jews  (not  Christian  Jews),  because  he  was
received  in  a  friendly  way  in  Cyprus  by  Sergius  Paulus,  and
there  fully  declared  his  apostasy  from  Judaism  by  changing  his
name.  Elymas  means  'magician,'  literally  'man  of  Elam'
(BAKJESUS,  §  if),  the  classical  land  of  magic;  Barjesus  means
'  follower  of  Jesus.'  Such  hypotheses  are  exceedingly  pre

carious.  The  historicity  of  the  Cyprian  Simon,  attested  as  it  is
by  Josephus,  must  not  be  questioned  ;  but  it  is  not  to  the  Paul
of  the  Simon-romance,  as  Krenkel  thinks  (above,  b),  but  only
to  the  Paul  who  is  presented  under  the  name  of  Barjesus  that
features  have  been  transferred  from  him  (I>A1<JESUS,  §  4,  l>,  c).
Should  it  so  happen  that  his  name  was  not  Simon,  but  Atomus
("ATO^OS),  as  Niese  reads  with  the  Milan  codex  and  the  epitome
of  Josephus,  then  one  would  be  tempted  to  bring  this  into
combination  with  the  Erot/xas,  which  is  D's  reading  for  Elymas
in  Acts  138  (so  Harris,  Exf>.  1902  a,  pp.  189-195  ;  cp  BAKJESUS,

§!,£*).

(d]  Lipsius, in his  latest treatment  of  the  subject
(Apokr,  Ap.-Gesch.  ii.  1 49-56),  has  recognised  a  Samaritan
76775  named  Simon  as  historical. By  doing  so,  he  holds,
we  make  it  easier  to  understand  the  liestowal  of  the  name
of  Simon  upon  Paul,  and  Justin's  statement  that  Gitta
was  the  birthplace  of  Simon,  as  well  as  the  fact  that
Simon  passes  not  only  for  the  father  of  all  heresies,  but
also  as  the  revelation  of  the  supreme  God,  and  thus  as  a
kind  of  Messiah  (above,  §  2.  d}. If  Paul  was  the  only
basis  for  the  figure  of  Simon,  then  only  the  first  of  these
two  predicates,  not  the  second  also,  would  have  been
attached  to  it. Lipsius  adds,  as  a  possibility,  that  this
Samaritan Simon  may  be identical with the  Cyprian
Simon  of  Josephus.

(e)  Harnack,  in  his  turn,  also  maintains  the  historicity
of  the  Samaritan  Simon  ; not,  however,  as  explaining
the  caricature  of  Paul  (above,  §  4f. ),  but  because  the
Gnostic  sect  of  the  Simonians  must  have  had  a  founder.
Lipsius  (51  /. )  adduces  this  reason  for  believing  in  the
historicity  of  Simon  only  with  the  reservation  that  it  is
not  necessary  to  bring  the  Simonians  into  direct  historical
connection  with  Simon  ;  they  seem  to  have  marked  him
out  as  the  representative  of  their  ideas  only  by  an  after
thought. Kreyenbiihl  (199-201),  in  like  manner,  postu
lates  a  founder  for  the  Simonian  sect,  but  places  him  at
the  beginning  of  the  second  century,  since  the  Gnostic
contents  of  his  'A7r60acrts  M^dXfj,  which  he  accepts  as
genuine  (above,  §  zc),  do  not  fit  in  with  the  first  century,
and Justin himself  says that Simon  was  a pupil  of

4556


SIMON  MAGUS

Menander,  and  pupils  of  Menander  '  are  alive  even
now '  (vvv  ;  Apol.  i.  264),  that  is  to  say,  about  152  A.u.
Justin,  it  is  true,  says  in  the  same  chapter,  and  often,
that  Simon  came  to  Rome  under  the  emperor  Claudius
or,  it  may  be  (as  Kreyenbuhl  thinks),  under  (Claudius)
Nero  (see  SIMON  PETER,  §37</);  but  Kreyenbuhl
supposes  him  to  draw  this  from  another  source  without
regard  to  chronology.  In  truth,  the  Simon  of  Acts
shows  very  little  if  any  of  the  attributes  of  a  Gnostic
leader  of  a  sect,  and  we  must  be  on  our  guard  against
holding  him  for  such,  on  the  ground,  merely,  that
tradition  names  no  other.  If  \ve  assume  a  Gnostic
Simon  of  Gitta  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  century,
then  we  do  not  need,  as  Kreyenbuhl  at  the  same
time  does,  to  deny  the  historicity  of  the  Samaritan
magician  named  Simon  in  the  first  century — a  historicity
which  the  reasons  adduced  by  Lipsius  make  very  prob
able.  If,  further,  we  hesitate  about  identifying  the
Samaritan  with  the  Cyprian  Simon — an  identification
which  has  nothing  in  its  favour  except  that  the  name
and  the  quality  of  magician  is  the  same  in  both  cases —
we  find  ourselves  in  the  end  accepting  three  persons
named  Simon.  The  point,  however,  is  difficult  to  decide.

(/)  It  is  certain,  however,  from  all  our  premises,  that
not  only  Peter,  but  also  the  Samaritan  Simon  of  the
apostolic  age,  never  appeared  in  Rome.  It  is  told  of
Simon  merely  because  by  his  figure  Paul  is  intended.
The  only  writer  who  represents  Simon  as  appearing  in
Rome  without  Peter — Justin — in  view  of  his  fiction
about  the  statue  of  Simon  is  not  entitled  to  credence,
especially  as  his  statement  also,  and  not  merely  that  of
a  simultaneous  appearance  of  Simon  always  with  Peter,
is  quite  easily  intelligible  if  it  be  taken  as  resting  on  the
romance  of  Simon  =  Paul  (§  i\e,  f).  Whether  a
Gnostic  of  the  second  century  named  Simon  appeared
in  Rome  remains  an  open  question  ;  but  it  is  not  of
decisive  importance  for  our  present  investigation.

The  acceptance  of  a  Samaritan Simon in the  first

century  does  not, however,  by  any  means,  ipso  facto,

. , o  carry  with  it  the  acknowledgement  of

1  . c _!£24: the credibility of Acts  89-24. The

imon  —  au .  features  enumerated  in  a  preceding
section  (§  I  c,  d},  which  are  by  no  means  appropriate
to  a  magician,  find  a  satisfactory  explanation  only  when
it  is  recognised  that  the  apostle  Paul  underlies  this  figure
also.  (</)  Only  Paul,  not  a  magician,  could  have  had
the  wish  to  be  able  to  impart  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  thereby  attain  equality  of  rank  with  the  original
apostles  ;  and  Simon's  so  rapid  conversion  to  Christianity
can  apply  'only  to  Paul,  the  narrative  already  pre
supposing  him  to  be  a  Christian  and  interesting  itself
solely  in  his  desire  to  be  able  to  impart  the  gift  of  the
Spirit.  In  the  same  direction  point  also  the  words  of
Peter  (821) :  '  thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  (sX-^pos)  in
the  matter';  for  K\rjpo^  (RV  'portion,'  RVmK-  'lot')
is  in  1 17  (cp  1  25)  used  of  the  apostolate,  the  attainment
of  which  by  a  magician  is  barred  from  the  outset.

(i)  Equality  of  rank  with  the  original  apostles  was
refused  to  Paul  also  by  their  party  ( i  Cor.  9  2  :  '  if  to
others  I  am  not  an  apostle, '  etc. ),  for  which  reason  the
apostle  himself  claims  it  with  the  emphasis  which  we
see  (9ili  2  Cor.  1 1  Gal.  1 1  Rom.  1 1-6).  Now,  it  is
not  difficult  to  discern  in  Peter's  other  expressions  also
in  Acts 821-23,  traces  of  the  polemic  which  was  being
carried  on  against  Paul.

'  Thy  heart  is  not  right  before  God '  (r>.  21)  has  a  close
similarity  to  the  expression  used  in  13 10  in  addressing  Bar-
jesus  (i.e.,  Paul)  :  '  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right
ways  of  the  Lord  ?  '  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  phraseology
recalls  also  Gal.  2  14  :  '  they  walked  not  uprightly  (OVK  6p0o-
TroSova-iv)  according  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel.'  So  Paul
expresses  himself  in  Antioch  against  Peter  and  his  fellows.
Thus  we  perceive  that  Acts  8  9-24  is  the  counterpart  to  the
setting  down  of  Peter  by  Paul  at  Antioch,  and  we  are  able  to
understand  823.  For  this  verse  does  not  mean,  as  in  AV  RV,
'thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity.'
'  In  the  bond  '  might  be  intelligible,  but  '  in  the  gall '  not.  Thus
ei«  XoArji/  .  .  .  opoj  <re  OVTO.  is  the  same  familiar  Hebraism  as  we
find  in  Mt.  19s:  'I  see  that  thou  art  bitter  gall  and  an  iniquitous

4557


SIMON  MAGUS

bond.'  Paul  must  have  seemed  like  'bitter  gall'  on  account  of
his  opposition  to  Peter  in  Antioch,  and  an  '  iniquitous  restraint'
in  so  far  as  he  endeavoured  to  prevent  Peter  from  again
withdrawing  from  table  -fellowship  with  the  Gentile  Christians.
Lastly,  Simon's  repentance  (8  24)  has  its  parallels  (i.e.,  according
to  §  9,  its  foundation)  in  the  Homilies  and  Recognitions  (above,


(c)  But,  did  Paul  really  offer  the  original  apostles
money  in  order  to  obtain  from  them  a  recognition  of  his
equality  with  them?  Certainly  not.  But  it  was  merely
the  finishing  touch  to  the  discovery  of  the  Simon
romance  when  Volkmar  (  Tub.  Theol.  Jahrbb.  1856,  -pp.
279-286)  perceived  that  Paul,  according  to  Jewish-
Christian  scandal,  was  held  to  have  done  so  when  he
carried  the  great  collection  to  Jerusalem  on  the  occa
sion  of  his  last  journey  thither  (i  Cor.  161-4  2  Cor.  S/.
Rom.  1525-28).

On  this  presupposition, let  us  now  ask  what  judg

ment  we  ought  to  form  as  to  the  literary  activity  of  the

14  Tendency author  of  Acts- («)  If  the  Samaritan

f  A  t  S  Simon  was  not  a  historical  person,  the

['  author  of  Acts  invented  him  in  order  to
say  that  not  Paul  but  a  Samaritan  magician  was  the
Simon  with  regard  to  whom  Jewish-Christian  stories
told  that  he  had  wished  to  purchase  equality  with  the
apostles  with  money,  and  had  been  repulsed  by  Peter.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  Samaritan  Simon  really  did
exist,  then  also  the  author  of  Acts  can  nevertheless  have
made  use  of  him  simply  as  a  means  for  attaining  the
same  purpose.  In  this  event,  the  representation  that
the  affair  had  happened  before  Paul's  conversion,  must
be  regarded  as-  specially  effective.

(6)  In  order  not  to  be  compelled  to  attribute  this  to
the  author  of  Acts,  Lipsius  in  his  latest  treatment
(Apokr.  Ap.-Gesch.  ii.  Isi/".  )  assumed  not  only  that  the
Samaritan  Simon  had  actually  existed,  but  also  that  he
had  an  encounter  with  Peter.

At  the  same  time,  inasmuch  as  what  is  said  in  Acts  8  14-17  as
to  the  prerogative  of  Peter  and  John  in  regard  to  the  imparting
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  quite  unhistorical  (MINISTRY,  §  34  c),
Lipsius  can  uphold  his  view  only  on  the  assumption  that  the
encounter  between  Peter  and  Simon  had  another  occasion.
When  this  hypothesis  is  entertained,  however,  not  only  has  a
region  of  pure  conjecture  to  be  entered  upon,  but  the  tendency
of  the  author  of  Acts  remains  just  as  it  was  before  —  a  tendency
to  say  something  unhistorical  about  Simon  in  order  to  blunt  the
point  of  the  Judaistic  allegation  that  it  applied  to  Paul.

(c)  Lipsius  further  propounds  it  as  a  possibility  that
this substitution for Paul of the Samaritan Simon
already  lay  before  the  author  in  one  of  the  sources  of
Acts. This  source,  accordingly,  it  was  which  followed
the  tendency  to  divert  from  Paul  the  charge  of  bribery  ;
the author of  Acts, however, failed to perceive this
tendency, but relates the story as referring to the
Samaritan  Simon  in  all  good  faith  in  its  trustworthiness.

(d)  By  way  of  support  of  some  such  expedient,  it  had
already been  urged  before  Lipsius  that  the magician
does  not  wear Pauline features  ; or  at least  not ex
clusively  Pauline  features,  but  also  Gnostic  ones,

In  this  connection,  however,  89  cannot  be  urged  :  'giving  out
that  himself  was  some  great  one  '  ;  for  by  this  expression  he  is
more  nearly  brought  on  a  level  with  Theudas  (5  36).  Even  the
fact  of  his  being  called  '  the  power  of  God  that  is  called  Great  '
(8  10)  admits  of  being  carried  back  to  Paul.  Paul,  indeed,  not
only  calls  his  gospel  a  power  of  God  (Rom.  1  16  i  Cor.  1  1824),
but  also  claims  himself  to  possess  the  power  of  God  (2  Cor.
4767  12g  184  i  Cor.  5  4).  Vet  it  remains  possible  that  the
expression  in  Acts  8  10  is  a  Gnostic  one,  especially  in  view  of
the  word  KaAoiijixe'n).  We  have  no  more  reason  for  omitting
this  with  HLP  sah  than  we  have  for  deleting  TOU  0eou,  after
Blass  (St.  Kr.  1896,  p.  462),  on  the  sole  ground  of  the  Latin
translation  of  Perpignan  (Acrs,  col.  50.  n.  2).  On  the  other
hand,  neither  also  is  there  any  occasion  for  taking  jueyaATj  as  the
Aramaic  participle  Pael  (xSja  or  '^D=Ctlle  revealer  '  ;  so
Klostermann,  Probleme  im  Aposteltext,  1883,  pp.  15-21).  In
the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  (2  22)  we  read  in  the  descrip
tion  of  the  Gnostic  predicates  of  Simon  :  '  he  wishes  to  be
accounted  a  certain  supreme  power,  higher  even  than  the  god
who  created  the  world  '  (tfe'Aei  vo\Li(f<iOa.\.  ai/ajTarr)  TI?  flrai  8ura/u.t?
ical  ail-row  TOU  rov  Ko&fiov  KTiVai-ros  OeoG  [avwrcpa  is  perhaps  to
be  supplied]  ;  Recog.  '2  ^  :  excelsam  virtutem  qua;  supra  creatorem
deum  sit  ;  cp  §  3<z,  and  SIMON  PETER,  §  331).

(e)  Yet,  even  if  the  author  of  Acts  has  already  taken
up  a  Gnostic  feature  into  his  presentation  of  Simon,  the

4558


SIMON  MAGUS


SIMON  PETER


fact  remains  that  he  was  aware  of,  and  wished  to
obviate,  the  reproach  that  Paul  had  wished  to  purchase
for  himself  equality  with  the  original  apostles  by  means
of  his  great  collection.  Otherwise,  he  would  not  have
passed  the  collection  over  in  such  complete  silence  in
chap.  21,  where  we  should  have  expected  its  delivery  to
be  recorded,  whilst  yet  he  has  preserved  in  204  from
the  'we-source'  (according  to  a  highly  probable  con
jecture)  the  list  of  those  who  brought  it  ((JALATIA,
§  22.}.  Not  till  24 17  has  been  reached  does  the  author
allude  to  it  at  all,  but  here  in  such  a  manner  that  it
becomes  something  quite  different — viz. ,  '  alms  for  my
nation,'  not  for  the  Christians  in  Palestine  only.  For
the  main  purpose  of  the  book — the  representation  of  the
harmony  subsisting  between  Paul  and  the  original
apostles  (ACTS,  §  3,  end) — the  mention  of  the  collection
would  have  been  serviceable  in  the  highest  degree.
This  may  be  the  reason  why  a  collection  brought  by
Paul  to  the  Christians  in  Jerusalem  is  actually  mentioned,
though  at  a  time  at  which  it  is  historically  impossible
(1129  f.  1225;  cp  COUNCIL,  §in).  All  these  circum
stances  speak  for  tendency  too  clearly  to  allow  us  to
shut  our  eyes  to  the  presence  of  the  same  thing  in  89-24.

(f)  The  decision which must  be  pronounced, that
tendency is at work here, is not weakened, but
strengthened, by separating out a source which was
not (as  with Lipsius  ; above,  c) already  a tendency-
document,  but  rather  as  absolutely  historical  as  possible
(above,  §  i,  b-d] ; for  the  user  of  this  source  has  all  the
more  assuredly,  in  that  case,  purposely  introduced by
his interpolations the tendency which the present
narrative  as  a  whole  exhibits.

(g)  What  we  are  able  to  absolve  him  from,  then,  is
certainly  in  no  case  (whether  he  used  sources  or  not)
the  deliberate  intention  of  representing  the  great  collec
tion  in  another  light  than  that  which  agreed  with  actual


facts,  in  order  to  take  away  all  foundation  from  evil
rumours  about  Paul  which  were  based  on  the  facts  ;  the
most  that  one  can  do  is  to  absolve  him  from  the  charge
of  having  deliberately  invented  statements  of  fact,  if  we
assume  that  he  actually  knew  of  the  existence  of  the
Samaritan  Simon  which  we  must  recognise  as  a  fact,
and  in  good  faith  believed  that  it  must  have  been  this
Simon  who  made  the  attempt  to  bribe,  and  that  Peter
must  have  withstood  him.  This  view  admits  of  being
understood  as  a  result  of  his  general  assumption  that
the  party  of  the  original  apostles  cannot  possibly  have
stood  in  a  relation  of  such  hostility  to  Paul  (cp  the
similar  judgment  expressed  under  BAKJKSUS,  §  4<r).
It  still,  however,  remains  impossible  to  deny  that  the
author  has  been  led  by  tendency  to  be  silent  as  to  the
real  history  of  the  collection,  just  as  he  has  been  led  to
be  silent  about  the  dispute  between  Peter  and  Paul  at
Antioch,  and  about  Titus  (see  COUNCIL,  §§  3  end,  7
end),  or  that  he  relates  matters  for  which  he  had  no
historical  warrant.

Haur,  Tiib.  Ztschr.f.  Theol.,  1831,  ri,  114-136;  Simson,  Z.f.

hist.  Theol.  1841,  c,  15-79  '. Hilgenfelcl,  ZWT, 1868, 357-396  ;

Ketzergesch.,  1884, 163-186,  453-461 ;  Lipsius,

15.  Literature.  Quellen d. rSm.  Petrussage, 1872,  13-46 ;

Simon  Magus'  in BL, •>, 1875, 301-321;


gcsch.C^,  204-209,  264-270;  Dieterlen,  L'apotre  Paul  et  Simon
le  magicien,  Nancy,  1878;  Krenkel,  Josephus  u.  Lucas,  1894,
178-190;  Kreyenhiihl,  Kvang.  d.  H'ahrheit,  1,  1900,  174-284.

On  the  pseuclo- Clementine  writings  see  Schliemann,  Die
Cli-mentinen,  1844 ;  Hilgenfeld,  Die  clement.  Kecogn.  u.
HotniKen,  1848  ;  Uhlhorn,  Die  Homil,  u.  Recogn.  des  Clemens
Rom.,  1854;  Langen,  Die  Clemensromane,  1890;  Hort,  Notes
Introductory  to  the  Study  of  the  Clt'in.  Recog.,  1902  ;  Bigs;,  in
Stud.  Bib.  "1,  1890,  157-193  ;  Headlam,  JThSt,  1901  f.,  41-58  ;
Chapman,  ibid.  436-441  ;  and  (in  agreement  with  him)  Harnack,
TLZ,  1902,  570.  p.  w.  S.


I.  IN  PAUL  AND  ACTS.

Parallels  (§  2/).
In  Acts  alone  (S  4).

II.  IN  SYNOPTISTS.
Synoptists  as  Sources  (§  5).
Walking  on  water  (§  6).

Other  unhistorical  narratives  (§  7).


SIMON  PETEE
CONTENTS

NAME  (§  i)
PALESTINIAN PERIOD  (§§  2-23)

Transfiguration,  Stater  (§  8yC).  III. IN  FOURTH  GOSPEL.

Other  doubtful  elements  (§  10).  Less  strongly  divergent  points  (§

Minor  notices  with  historical  kernel  (§  n).  Denial  (§  19).

Call  (§  20).

Foot  washing  (§  21).

Peter  and  beloved  disciple


Jairus'  daughter  (§  12).

Call,  draught  of  fishes  (§  I3/.).


I.  IN  NT  AND  CHURCH  FATHERS  (
Earliest  and  later  witnesses  (§
Ascensio  Jesaia;,  i  Clem.  (§  ?j  f.).
Martyrdom  unlocated  (§  29).
Silence  on  sojourn  and  martyrdom  (§  30).
Provisional  conclusions  (§  31).


Denial,  confession  (§  15/1).
Designation  as  Satan  (§  17).

LATER  PERIOD  (\
MISSIONARY  FIELDS
SOJOURN  IN  ROME  (§

25-31).  II.  IN  APOCRYPHAL  ACTS  (§§  32-39).

;/).  Literary  (§  32).

).  Pre-Catholic  Acta  Petri  (§§  33,  36).

Catholic  Acta  Petri  et  Pauli  (§§  34/).

Arrival  in  Rome,  day  of  death  (§  37  f.).

Conclusions  from  Apocr.  Acts  (§  39).


Character  of  Peter  (§  23).


22).


i  24-48)
(§24)
25-41)


III.  IN  PSEUDO-CLEM.  HOM.  AND  RECOG.

(§  4°/)-
Inference from pseudp -Clementine

Homilies  and  Recognitions  (§  40).
No  counter  testimony  (§  41).


Babylonia  as  field  of  activi'y  (§  42  f.).
Babylon  of  i  Pet.  5  13  =  Rome?  (§  42).
Babylonia  and adjoining countries  as
Peter's  mission-field  (§  43).


death  (§  45).

Simon,  or  Symeon  (cyMeoiN  ;  so  <5  for  jil?DU' ;  see
SIMEON,  §  8),  was  the  original  and  proper  name  of  the

1 N  me intimate  disciple  of  Jesus  who  was  destined
' to be for ever known throughout all
Christendom  by  the  surname  of  Peter.

(a)  The  name  Simon  is  a  classical  one  which  occurs  (for
example)  in  Aristophanes,  Lysias,  and  Demosthenes.  Ever
since  the  Jews  began  the  practice  of  assuming  Greek  or  Greek-
sounding  names,  alongside  of  their  proper  Hebrew  ones,  to  be
employed  in  intercourse  with  the  outside  world  (cp  BARNABAS,
8  i,  end,  and  NAMES,  $  86),  Simon  was  regarded  as  an  appropri
ate  equivalent  for  Symeon,  all  the  more  because  in  the  selection
of  such  equivalents  similarity  of  sound  was  considered  an  im
portant  element.  (/>)  The  form  Simon  CS.ifi.tav)  is  that  almost
invariably  met  with  in  the  OT  Apocrypha  (3  Ezra  [i  Esd.]  932
Ecclus.  .10  i  ;  also  in  i,  2  and  4  Maco.).  Only  once  is  the  well-
known  Maccabaean  leader  called  'S.vfi.eiav  (i  Mace.  265);  so  too

4559


Place  of  death  :  Conclusion  (§  447^).  Importance  for  Roman  Church  (§  46).

Where  did  Peter  die?  (g  44).  Later  Traditions^  47).

Conclusion  as  to  Peter's  later  life  and ll'ritings  attributed  to  Peter  (§  48).

Bibliography  (§  49).


only  once  his  great  grandfather (2  i),  and  the  son  of  the  patriarch
Jacob  thrice  (4  Mace.  '2  19  Judith  615  92).  For  the  last-named
Josephus  invariably  writes  Symeon  (or  Semeon :  Sv/if  wi-,
var.  2eM.eaji>),  for  all  other  persons  he  has  Simon  (Si'/uan-),
except  in  two  cases  {Ant.  xii.  61,  §  265 — for  the  ancestor  of
the  Maccabees — and  in  BJ  iv.  89,  §  159,  where  in  each  case
2u;u.eu>c  is  found).  Soon  after  the  apostolic  age  it  even  came
about  that  the  Greek  form  was  taken  to  underlie  the  Hebrew
and  pD'D  was  written  instead  of  pyiT;?  (cp  NAMES,  §  86,
end).  (c)  In  the  NT  Simon  (2t',ua>")  is  the  current  form.

Symeon  (2u/ue<->i'),  in  fact  (if  we  leave  out  of  account  the
patriarch,  mentioned  in  Rev.  7  7,  the  ancestor  of  Jesus  in
Lk.33o,  the  acred  prophet  of  Lk.  22534,  and  the  prophet
and  teacher  of  Antioch  in  Syria  who  bore  the  surname  of  Niger,
Acts  13  i)  occurs  but  twice  ;  and  in  both  instances  —in  2  Pet.  1 1
as  well  as  in  Acts  15  14 — is  used  with  the  obvious  intention  of
giving  special  solemnity  to  the  designation  of  the  apostle.  In
Acts  15  this  is  all  the  more  unmistakable  because  Peter  is  the

4560


SIMON  PETER

name  used  throughout  the  rest  of  the  book,  except  in  presence
of  Cornelius  or  in  the  mouth  of  his  messengers,  when  the  style
always  is  '  Simon  whose  surname  is  Peter'  (10s  18  32  11  15).  it
hardly  needs  to  be  said  that  we  cannot  assume  the  author  of
Acts  to  be  here  following  a  literally  exact  report  ;  we  see  rather
how  as  a  literary  artist  he  is  taking  account  of  the  situation  he
is  describing.  Similarly  it  is  plainly  with  conscious  intention
that  in  the  third  Gospel  he  uses  the  name  Simon  (43863-10)
down  to  the  point  at  which  in  connection  with  the  choice  of  the
apostles  (0  14)  he  mentions  the  giving  of  the  name  Peter.  Only
in  58  does  he  let  fall  the  double  designation  '  Simon  Peter  '  ;  we
may  perhaps  hazard  the  conjecture  that  the  addition  of  '  Peter '
is  due  merely  to  the  carelessness  of  a  copyist  (it  is  wanting  in  D,
in  2  MSS  [13  and  69]  of  the  Ferrar  group  and  in  the  old  Lat.
codd.  a,  b,  e).  Throughout  the  whoTe  of  the  rest  of  the  gospel
'Simon'  recurs  only  in  the  mouth  of  Jesus  (2231)  and  of  the
disciples  (24  34).  In  the  only  other  passage  where  Jesus
addresses  the  apostle  (2^34)  we  find  'Peter'  (Herpe).  This,
however,  is  probably  introduced  for  the  sake  of  the  contrast  ;
Jesus  in  effect  says  that  Peter  will  be  so  far  from  showing  him
self  a  rock  that  he  will  actually  deny  his  master.  In  the  two
passages  in  Acts  where  Peter  is  addressed  (10  13  11?:  in  the
vision  at  Joppa)  we  also  find  'Peter'  (IleVpt).  It  would  be
difficult  to  suggest  any  special  reason  for  this  here  ;  the  author
will  simply  be  following  his  prevailing  custom.

(if)  In  Mk.  also  we  find  the  same  principles  operative  in
determining  the  employment  of  the  name  Simon.  Down  to  the
choice  of  the  apostles  (3  16)  we  invariably  find  '  Simon  '  (1  16  2gyC
36),  but  after  that  only  once,  in  the  single  instance  in  which  the
apostle  is  addressed  by  Jesus  (1437).  Mt.  departs  from  this
only  in  so  far  as  he  adds  the  surname  Peter  to  the  name  of  Simon
not  only  when  he  records  the  choosing  of  the  apostles  (10  2)  but
also  at  the  point  where  he  first  has  occasion  to  name  its  bearer
at  all  (4  i«),  and  thus  as  early  as  8  14  he  is  able  to  use  the  simple
designation  'Peter.'  In  the  places  where  the  apostle  is  addressed
by  Jesus  Mt.  also  never  uses  '  Peter,'  but  always  '  Simon  '  (17  25),
or  with  special  solemnity,  '  Simon  son  of  Jonas'  (16  i;).1

(f)  Similarly,  it  is  in  accord  with  the  solemnity  of  the  moment
at  which  Peter  confesses  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  that  we  find  Mt.
using  here  (10  16),  though  nowhere  else,  the  combination  '  Simon
Peter.'  In  Mk.  it  does  not  occur  at  all,  in  Lk.  only  in  5s  (see
above,  c) ',  in  2  Pet.  1  i  it  is  found  in  B.  the  Ferrar  MSS  13
and  69,  and  other  cursives,  but  Symeon  Peter  (2v/ietoi/  rierpo?)
is  certainly  to  be  preferred,  as  the  form  Symeon  is  rare  and
thus  cannot  easily  have  been  introduced  into  the  text  by  copyist's
error  merely.

(/)  On  the  other  hand  this  combination  '  Simon  Peter,'  which
as  we  have  seen  is  so  rare  elsewhere,  is  the  usual  designation  in
the  Fourth  Gospel.  'Peter'  alone  is  comparatively  infrequent
and  occurs  only  where  '  Simon  Peter  '  has  immediately  preceded
(1  44  18837  18  ii  i6-i826_/  20  jf.  21  -j  a  17  20 f.),  in  other  words
only  in  order  to  avoid  a  quite  excessive  stiffness  ;  yet  even  in
such  cases  there  are  several  instances  in  which  the  more  formal
'  Simon  Peter  '  immediately  recurs  (13  9  206  21  7 1>).  Jn.  agrees
with  Mt.  in  using  '  Simon  [son]  of  John  '  (1  42  21  15-17)  in  the  two
instances  where  he  represents  the  apostle  as  directly  addressed
by  Jesus,  with  Mk.  and  Lk.  in  using  '  Simon'  without  addition
when  the  bearer  of  the  name  is  first  mentioned  (141).

(.ef)  The  Aramaic  name  Kephil  (XS'| ;  in  AT  only  in  pi.  CTB3
(B  TTtrpai,  Jer.  4  29  Job  30  fi)  is  used  only  by  Paul,  who  employs
its  Gracised  form  KT)f/>af  (EV  Cephas).  Or  rather,  outside  of
the  Pauline  writings  it  occurs  but  once  ;  namely  in  Jn.  1 42  where
Jesus  gives  it  as  a  surname  to  Simon,  with  the  addition,  however,
'  which  is  by  interpretation  Peter.'  Since  the  name  Simon  serves
perfectly  well  as  a  Greek  equivalent  for  Symeon  we  can  all  the
more  readily  believe  that  Peter  (and  Cephas)  was  not  a  name
assumed  by  the  bearer  himself,  that  it  was  bestowed  upon  him
by  Jesus.  Moreover,  Peter  was  not  at  all  a  current  name  at
that  time.  In  Josephus  it  occurs  once  (Anf.  xviii.  63,  §  156)
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  Epitome  which  in  many
instances  has  alone  preserved  the  true  text ;  all  the  MSS,  how
ever,  read  Protus  (Ilpwros)  which  also  was  a  proper  name.
According  to  Pape-Benseler  {WSrterb.  d.  griech.  Eigennatncii),
apart  from  Christian  circles  Peter  would  seem  to  have  been  first
brought  into  currency  through  Roman  influence.

(ft)  From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  evident  that
with  NTT  writers  the  honorific  name  of  the  apostle  was
the  only  one  in  general  currency,  and  that  they  used
his  proper  name  Simon  (or  Symeon)  only  when  there
were  literary  reasons  for  doing  so.  This  holds  good
also  for  the  author  (not  hitherto  referred  to)  of  i  Pet.
who  calls  himself  ( 1 1 )  II  expos.  From  the  epistles  of  Paul
we  can  gather  that  the  Aramaic  form  of  this  honorific
name  was  known  even  in  Galatia  (Gal.  1 18  2g  n  14)  and
in  Corinth  (i  Cor.  1 12  822  9s  15  5).  And  in  fact  this  is
not  to  be  accounted  for  by  some  such  reason  as  a  mere
personal  habit  of  Paul's  to  call  him  so  ;  rather  must  we
infer  from  i  Cor.  1 12  that  Peter's  own  followers  had
brought  his  name  in  its  Aramaic  form  to  Corinth  ;  for
we  may  be  sure  that  Paul  when  he  attributes  the  words

1  On  the  form  of  the  name  of  Simon's  father  see  JOHX,  SON
OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  i,  middle.


2.  Pauline
notices.


SIMON  PETER

'  I  [am]  of  Cephas  '  to  the  Petrine  party  at  Corinth  is
rendering  their  language  with  literal  fidelity.  Yet  from
Paul's  twice  saying  'Peter'  (Gal.  2?/)  we  must  not
conclude  that  the  verses  in  which  the  name  occurs  are
from  another  hand  ;  for  along  with  the  Aramaic  name
we  may  be  sure  that  the  Galatians,  precisely  because  it
was  an  honorific  name,  not  a  proper  name  in  the  stricter
sense  of  the  word,  would  be  apprised,  whether  by  Paul
or  by  some  other,  of  its  meaning  also.

A. PALESTINIAN PERIOD.
I.  ACCORDING  TO  PAUL  ANP  ACTS.

It  the  question  is  asked  whither  we  ought  to  turn  for
our  most  secure  data  for  the  life  of  Peter,  the  answer
must  be :  neither  to  Uie  Gospels  nor
to  Acts  where  there  is  so  much  that  is
open  to  critical  deduction,  but  to  the
epistles  of  Paul.

As  to  the  genuineness  of  these  see  GALATIANS,  jj§  1-9;  and
on  i  Cor.  15  i-n,  in  particular,  see  RESURRECTION-NARRATIVES,
§§  \of.  As  regards  Gal.  211-13  it  n'aV  'je  added  that  Volter,
although  holding  Galatians  to  be  entirely  spurious,  sees  in  these
three  verses  a  real  historical  record  which  was  known  to  the
author  of  Acts  and  by  him  so  made  use  of  for  10i-lli8  as  to
make  it  appear  that  not  Paul,  but  precisely  Peter,  was  the  first
to  make  a  stand  for  table-fellowship  between  Jewish  and  Gentile
Christians  (Kompos.  d.paulin.  Hauptbriefe,  1890,  pp.  149-154).

The  following  are  the  facts  we  learn  from  these
epistles.

(a)  Peter  was  the  first  to  witness  an  appearance  of
the  risen  Jesus  (i  Cor.  15 5).  As  to  the  fundamental
importance  of  this  event",  see  RESURRECTION,  §  37.

(<£)  Paul,  three  years  after  his  conversion,  found
Peter  in  Jerusalem  along  with  James  the  brother  of
Jesus  in  a  prominent  position  (Gal.  1 18 f. ) ;  fourteen  years
later  he  again  found  him  along  with  James  the  brother
of  Jesus  and  John  the  son  of  Zebedee  occupying  the
position  of  leaders  of  the  church  who  had  received  from
their  supporters  the  honorific  title  of  '  the  pillars  '  (ol
crrOXot  ;  Gal.  2i-io  ;  see  COUNCIL,  §  6).

(c)  On the occasion  just mentioned, that of the
'  council  of  Jerusalem,'  Peter  with  James  and  John  was,
at  the  outset,  by  no  means  on  Paul's  side,  and  in the
course  of  the  discussions  which  took  place  suffered  him
self  to  be  brought to  concede Paul's  contention that
heathen ought  to  be  admitted  to Christian  privileges
without  circumcision,  not  on  grounds  of  principle  but
only  in  view  of  the  established  fact  of  Paul's  missionary
success,  a  fact  in  which  he  was  constrained  to  recognise
the  hand  of  God  (Gal.  27-9  ;  COUNCIL,  §§  4,  8).

(d)  The  fellowship  (KOIVUVICL)  with  Paul  and  Barnabas
which,  along  with  James  and  John,  he  then  ratified  by
joining  hands  (Gal.  2g)  was  a  restricted one. It  was
based  upon the  arrangement that  the mission to  the
Gentiles  should  be  undertaken  by  Paul  and  Barnabas
whilst  the  original  apostles  restricted  themselves  to  the
Jewish  field — a  restriction  which  they  took  in  a  strictly
ethnographical  sense, their  purpose  being  to  proclaim
the  gospel  thenceforward  to  circumcised  persons  only,
not also to Gentiles living in the  midst  of  a  Jewish
population,  and  thus  to  be  in  a  position  in  which  they
could  go  on  observing  the  law  of  Moses  which  forbade
defilement by intercourse with the uncircumcised
(COUNCIL,  §  9).

(e)  Peter  took  up  a  somewhat  less  rigid  attitude  when
after  a  certain  interval  he  came  to  Antioch  and  partici
pated  in  the  common  meals  of  the  mixed  community  of
Jewish and  Gentile Christians there. All the more
harmful  was  the  effect  when  after  the  arrival  of  some
followers  (or,  it  may  be,  direct  emissaries)  of  James  he
withdrew  from  this  participation,  and  by  his  example,
at  least, if not by  express utterances, led the other
Jewish  Christians,  and  even  Barnabas,  to  take  the  same
step (Gal.  2n-2i). The charge of hypocrisy  which
Paul  brought  against  him  on  this  account  must  in  all
probability  be  regarded  as  unjust  and  be  modified  to
one  of  inconsistency. The  freedom  in  relation  to  the
Mosaic  law  which  he  asserted  by  his  behaviour  on  his  first

4562


SIMON  PETER

coming  to  Antioch  will  have  been  the  result  merely  of  a
genial  temper  called  forth  by  the  pleasant  conditions  of
that  particular  community,  not  the  result  of  any  firmly
established  conviction.  Peter  was  not  so  strictly  legal
as  James,  but  essentially  he  was  still  unemancipated
from  the  fetters  of  the  law  (see  COUNCIL,  §  3).

(/)  That  Peter  suffered  himself  to  be  convinced  by
Paul's  argumentation  (Gal.  2 14-21)  must  not  be  supposed  ;
for  the  incident  in  Antioch  was  followed  by  the  syste
matic  invasion  of  the  Pauline  communities  by  Jewish
emissaries,  with  which  we  are  made  acquainted  in
Galatians  and  Corinthians.  Had  Peter  recognised  that
Paul  had  right  on  his  side  he  needed  only  to  assert  his
authority  and  to  call  to  mind  the  arrangement  indicated
in  Gal.  2 9  and  all  attempts  to  undermine  the  influence  of
Paul  in  the  communities  he  had  founded  and  to  win
them  back  to  Judaism  would  have  ceased.  The  leaders
of  the  primitive  church,  and  among  these  Peter  so  long
as  he  was  in  Palestine,  must  be  held  responsible  for  a
share  in  this  action  against  Paul  by  the  withholding  of
their  veto  at  least,  if  not  even  by  overt  action — such  as,
for  example,  perhaps  the  issue  of  recommendatory
letters  (2  Cor.  3 1).  See  COUNCIL,  §  3.

(g)  It  will  be  convenient  to  take  up  at  this  point  also
the  last  notices  of  Peter  that  are  found  in  Paul,  even
though  these  should  possibly  lie  outside  the  period  of
Peter's  activity  in  Palestine.  In  Corinth  there  was,
according  to  i  Cor.  112822,  a  Cephas-party.  That
Peter  himself  was  ever  in  Corinth  is  utterly  improbable.

No  one  earlier  than  Dionysius  of  Corinth  (about  170  A.D.  ;  a/>.
Eus.  HE  ii.  25  8  ;  see  below,  §  25  a)  knows  anything  of  Peter's
ever  having  been  at  Corinth.  Cp,  as  against  this  assumption,
only  such  a  passage  as  i  Cor.  4  15.  But,  further,  if  Peter  had
followed  Paul  in  Corinth,  Paul  who  names  him  with  respect  in
i  Cor.  9  5  165,  and  in  847^  refrains  from  naming  him  also  out
of  respect  ('  when  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  another,  I  am
of  Apollos;  are  ye  not  men?')  would  not  have  expressed  him
self  so  sharply  as  he  does  in  3  10-15  with  regard  to  all  those  who
had  come  after  him  there.

Nevertheless  the  rise  of  a  Cephas-party  in  Corinth  is
readily  explicable.  Real  disciples  of  Peter  came  to
Corinth  and  the  followers  whom  they  gained  in  the
community  there  took  up  from  them  their  watchword  :
'  I  am  of  Cephas.'  Now,  there  was  also  at  Corinth,  as
we  know,  besides  this  party  the  Christ-party  which  was
strictly  Judaistic  (see  CORINTHIANS,  §  16).  Inasmuch
as  the  Cephas-party  remained  apart  from  it,  we  see
here  also  another  evidence  that  within  Jewish  Christen
dom  Peter  represented  the  milder  school.  In  2  Cor.
it  is  only  of  the  Christ-party  that  we  continue  to  hear
(10  7),  no  longer  of  that  of  Cephas.

(h)  Kinally,  we  learn  incidentally  that  in  his  mission
ary  journeys,  which  in  accordance  with  Gal.  2  9  we  are
to  think  of  as  being  made  in  regions  having  a  Jewish
population,  Peter  was  accompanied  by  his  wife,  and  for
her  as  well  as  for  himself  asked  and  received  sustenance
from  the  communities  in  which  he  laboured  ( i  Cor.

94/4

In  the  accounts  in  Acts  relating  to  these  same  events

there  is  practically  no  agreement  with  what we  learn

„ p 11  ia  from Paul except on  the  quite  general


in  Acts.


statement  that Peter  at  the  time  of  the


council  held  along  with  James  a  prominent
position  in  the  church  at  Jerusalem.  All  else  is  absent,
or  otherwise  reported.

(a)  As  regards  the  silence  of  Acts,  no  one  svill  find  it
surprising  that  no  express  mention  is  made  of  the  out
standing  importance  of  Peter  at  Paul's  first  visit  to
Jerusalem  ;  the  thing  is  presupposed  (but  cp  c).  It  is
all  the  more  remarkable,  however,  that  the  book  has  not
a  word  to  say  about  the  dispute  of  the  two  apostles  at
Antioch,  about  the  Cephas-party  in  Corinth,  or  about
the  Judaistic  invasion  of  the  Pauline  communities  and
the  part  taken  by  the  original  apostles  in  this  ;  and
that  in  fact  it  substitutes  for  the  first-mentioned  dispute
another  which  arose  between  Paul  and  one  of  those
engaged  in  the  conflict,  only  in  this  case  not  Peter
but  Barnabas,  and  on  a  question  which,  dogmatically

4563


SIMON  PETER

considered,  was  wholly  indifferent — viz.,  as  to  whether
John  Mark  should  or  should  not  be  taken  as  a  companion
on  the  second  missionary  journey  (Acts  1536-40).  Such
a  notice  is  very  well  adapted,  it  is  obvious,  to  counter
act  any  representation  of  the  real  state  of  the  case  that
might  have  been  derived  from  (let  us  say)  the  Epistle  to
the  Galatians  or  from  ora!  tradition,  by  its  substitution
of  another  which  deprives  the  affair  of  any  considerable
importance.  Furthermore,  of  any  missionary  journey  of
Peter  one  learns  nothing  more  than  the  little  that  is  said
in  Acts  9  32  43;  for,  in  spite  of  825^  ('  they  .  .  .  preached
the  gospel  to  many  villages  of  the  Samaritans'),  814-25
is  to  be  taken  less  as  a  missionary  journey  than  as  a
tour  of  inspection  (see  below,  §  4^).  In  12 17  we  are
told  merely  that  after  his  deliverance  from  prison  Peter
went  from  Jerusalem  to  another  place.  Whither  he
went  or  what  he  did  there  we  are  not  informed.  In
15  7  we  find  him  again  in  Jerusalem  as  if  this  were  a
matter  of  course.  The  author  of  the  book  has  not
deemed  it  necessary  in  speaking  of  a  person  of  Peter's
importance  to  give  any  connected  account  of  his  activity.

(*)  The  account  of  the  council  in  Jerusalem  in  Acts  is
in  glaring  contradiction  with  what  we  read  in  Paul.

In  place  of  the  arrangement  with  Peter,  James,  and  John
for  a  division  of  the  missionary  field  we  have  a  decree  of  the
primitive  Church  which  is  directly  excluded  by  Gal.  26  as  well
as  by  i  Cor.  8  10i4-lli  (712-14)  and  finds  its  only  historical
foundation  in  a  custom  of  the  second  century,  not  at  all  of  the
first  (see  COUNCIL,  §  \of.).  In  particular,  Peter  comes  forward
at  the  very  beginning  of  the  discussions  with  a  discourse  the
dogmatic  portion  of  which  (ISg/'-n)  would  be  appropriate  only
in  the  mouth  of  Paul  ;  had  Peter  actually  spoken  it  he  would
have  deserved  in  the  fullest  degree  the  reproach  of  hypocrisy  for
his  reversion  to  the  Mosaic  law  at  Antioch.  The  event,  how
ever,  on  which  Peter  relies  in  the  narrative  part  of  his  discourse
(15  7-9*1),  had  it  been  really  historical,  would  have  made  the
council  an  impossibility  from  the  first  ;  for  if  a  Gentile  in  the
full  sense  of  the  word,  as  Cornelius  is  represented  to  have  been
in  1028  11$,  had  been  received  by  Peler  into  the  Christian  com
munity,  and  if  the  primitive  church,  by  reason  of  the  divine
command  followed  by  Peter  in  doing  so,  had  given  its  approval
(115-18),  the  question  would  already  have  been  settled  and
could  not  again  be  raised,  or  if  it  had  been  raised  must  have
been  answered  by  a  simple  reference  to  this  fact  without  recourse
being  needed  to  any  council  (see  CORNELIUS,  §  z/.,  5).

(c)  Finally,  even  what  has  been  spoken  of  under  (a)  as  not  open
to  antecedent  objection — the  absence  of  mention  of  Peter  on
the  occasion  of  the  first  visit  to  Jerusalem — rests  upon  false
information;  for  in  Acts  826-30  Paul  is  represented  not,  as  in
Gal.  1  \%f.  22,  as  having  visited  Peter  and  James  only,  but  as
having  conversed  in  full  publicity  with  the  entire  Christian
community  of  Jerusalem.

Thus,  in  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  control  Acts  by
the  Epistles  of  Paul,  Acts  is  seen  to  have  little  claim
to  our  confidence  in  anything  it  has  to  say  about  Peter.
We  can  hardly  expect  to  be  able  to  repose  more  confi
dence  in  it  in  those  portions  where  it  is  our  sole
informant.

The  opinion  is  widely  held  that  the  trustworthiness  of

Acts  as  regards  Peter  has  been  strengthened  when  it  has

_  . , , been  pointed  out  that  the  first  half  of

'At  ActS  haS  an °lder S°Urce behind  iL

That  we  have  to  reckon  with  one  or

more  sources  becomes  particularly  plain  in  the  discourses
of  Peter  (see  ACTS,  §  14),  in  the  pentecost  narrative
(SPIRITUAL  GIFTS,  §  10),  and  in  that  relating  to
primitive  communism  (COMMUNITY  OF  GOODS,  §§  1-4).
It  can  only  be  regarded,  however,  as  indicative  of  the
extreme  recklessness  with  which  many  theologians  deal
with  such  questions  if  we  find  them  taking  for  granted
that,  once  the  existence  of  a  source  has  been  made  out,
the  trustworthiness  of  its  contents  has  also  been  forth
with  established.  If  Acts  was  composed  about  100-130
A.  D.  its  sources  may  easily  have  been  late  enough  to  be
legendary  in  character,  and  even  should  man}'  parts —
the  discourses,  let  us  say — be  found  worthy  of  credence,
this  would  not  necessarily  by  any  means  apply,  there
fore,  to  all  the  other  contents  as  well.  The  temptation
to  idealise  the  primitive  Church  was  only  too  easy,  and,
moreover  the  general  drift  or  tendency  of  the  final  com
poser  has  also  to  be  taken  into  account  as  a  very  im
portant  factor  (see  ACTS,  §§  3-6).

4564


SIMON  PETER

(a)  As  for  the conversion of Cornelius, it is  only
necessary  to  recall  what  has  been  said  already  (above,
§  3<$)  that,  regarded  as  a  Gentile  conversion,  it is  an
impossibility  unless  we  are  to  take  it  as  having  happened
at  a  date  subsequent  to  the  Council of  Jerusalem — a
supposition, however, which is also impossible (see
CORNELIUS,  §  2).

The  only  possible  way  of  saving  some  historical  kernel  for  the
story  would  be  by  regarding  Cornelius  as  a  Jewish  proselyte
who  had  already  been  circumcised.  No  such  thing,  however,
is  anywhere  said  in  Acts  (not  even  in  10  2  22  25)  and  the  idea  is
diametrically  opposed  to  the  representation  as  a  whole  (see
CORNELIUS,  §  3).  The  narrative  is  a  conspicuous  illustration  of
the  extent  to  which  the  author  could  be  led  away  from  historical
truth  by  his  tendency  or  rooted  inclination  to  regard  Peter,  not
Paul,  as  the  originator  of  every  progressive  movement  in
Christianity,  and  particularly  of  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles.
Thus  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  for  us  to  dwell  upon  the  special
difficulties  that  attach  to  the  closely  corresponding  visions  of
Cornelius  and  Peter  (9  3-16)  as  integral  parts  of  the  far-reaching
parallelism  between  Peter  and  Paul  which  is  to  be  observed  in
Acts  (see  ACTS,  §  4,  end).

(b)  That  Peter  and  John  should  have  visited  Samaria
after  Philip's  missionary  labours  there  (814-25)  is  very
conceivable. The  main  thing  reported  in  this  connec
tion,  however — namely, that  it was  by  means  of the
laying-on  of  hands  of  the  two  original  apostles  that  the
Samaritans  who  had  already  been  baptised  received  the
Holy  Ghost- — cannot  be  regarded  as  historical  (ACTS,  §  10,
end  ; MINISTRY,  §  346-). The  statement  rests  upon  a
strongly  hierarchical  idea  which,  moreover,  in  virtue  of
the  parallelism  just  alluded  to,  is  extended  to  Paul  also
(196),  and  marks  out  this  journey  of  Peter  and  John
as  one of episcopal inspection. On  the unhistorical
character  of  818-24  see  SIMON  MAGUS,  §§  i,  13  f.

(f)  The  miracles  of  Peter — the  healing  of  the  man
lame  from  his  birth  (3i-n),  of  /Eneas  in  Lydda  who
had  been  lame  for  eight  years  (932-35),  the  raising  of
Tabitha  at  Joppa  (9  36-42),  and  the  many  works  of  healing
performed  by  the  apostles  which  led  to  the  belief  that
they  could  be  effected  even  by  Peter's  shadow  (012  15  f.)
— are  all  primarily  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  the
parallelism  with  Paul.  Since  the  author  of  Acts  had
at  his  command  a  larger  supply  of  materials  relating  to
Paul  than  of  materials  relating  to  Peter,  with  the  result
that  he  left  out  much  in  order  to  avoid  making  Paul
appear  greater  than  Peter  (see  ACTS,  §  4,  end),  it  is
natural  to  conjecture  that  he  would  be  eager  to  lay  hold
of  any  item  regarding  Peter  which  came  to  his  hand
without  subjecting  it  to  any  too  severe  a  scrutiny.

The  case  of  /Eneas  moreover  plainly  shows  how  little  the
author  of  Acts  felt  it  necessary  to  form  to  himself  any  concrete
image  of  what  he  was  relating.  The  course  of  events  cannot  in
reality  be  conceived  as  occurring  in  the  manner  described  :  Peter
came,  looked  upon  the  sick  man,  and  without  further  preliminary
said,  'Jesus  Christ  heals  thee  ;  arise'  and  so  forth.  In  this
form,  devoid  of  any  indication  of  a  previous  conversation  with
the  sufferer  or  any  enquiry  as  to  his  spiritual  condition,  the  story
cannot  possibly  have  come  from  the  mouth  of  an  eye-witness ;
it  comes  to  us  in  the  form  of  the  most  meagre  extract,  where  the
interest  is  merely  in  the  bare  fact  of  the  miracle  without  any
regard  to  attendant  circumstances  or  to  any  psychological
features.  If,  however,  the  story  as  we  now  have  it  does  not
come  from  an  eye-witness  its  historicity  also  becomes  question
able  even  if  it  be  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  name  /Eneas  is
wholly  imaginary.  The  healing  of  the  lame  man  in  the  temple
is  accomplished  with  almost  equal  abruptness.  In  the  case  of
the  raising  of  Tabitha  it  is  worth  observing  how  widely  it  differs
from  its  counterpart,  the  raising  of  Eutychus  ('207-12).  Eutychus
cornes  to  life  again  not  long  after  his  accident  and  Paul  expressly
says:  'his  life  is  in  him.'  Hut  here  Peter  must  first  be
summoned  from  Lydda  to  Joppa.  As  regards  the  wholesale
miracles  of  healing  in  5  12  i$f.,  finally,  apart  from  their  astonish
ing  range  it  has  to  be  observed  that  the  text  in  this  place  is  wholly
devoid  of  connection  (see  ACTS,  §  n).  Cp  further,./^  below.

(</)  The  sudden  death  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira
(5i-n)  comes  under  a  different  category  in  so  far  as  it
is  capable  of  being  explained,  if  one  so  choose,  without
postulating  any  miracle.  The  naturalistic  explanation,
however,  will  make  it  all  the  more  probable  that  in  the
course  of  transmission  or  at  the  time  when  it  was  fixed
in  writing  the  occurrence  acquired  a  more  dramatic
character  than  originally  and  actually  it  possessed.  It
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  composer  of  Acts  regards
it  as  a  miracle  ;  but  the  credibility  of  his  narrative  is

146  4565


SIMON  PETER

just  at  this  point  rendered  questionable  by  the  circum
stance  that  within  the  compass  of  a  few  verses  he  sets
forth  two  wholly  irreconcilable  views  on  the  subject  c,f
community  of  goods  in  the  primitive  church  (see  COM
MUNITY  OF  GOODS,  §  3/  ).

(e)  With  respect  to  the  three  imprisonments  of  Peter
(in  43  5i8  along  with  the  other  apostles,  in  123-5  with
out  them)  and  his  two  miraculous  deliverances  (619
126-iy),  the  conjecture  has  long  been  current  that  all
the  accounts  relate  to  but  one  occurrence  which  gradual!)
came  to  be  told  in  different  ways.

By  separation  of  sources  also  it  has  in  some  quarters  been
deemed  possible  to  show  that  in  the  source  of  chaps.  4  and  5
there  was  no  word  of  an  imprisonment  of  the  apostles  (so,  for
example,  Bern.  Weiss).  InigyC  the  lame  man  who  has  been
healed  stands  by  the  side  of  the  apostles  before  the  synedriurn.
This  is  conceivable  only  if  he  had  been  cited  as  a  witness  before
that  court  or  had  been  arrested  along  with  the  apostles.  Neither
of  these  things  however  is  said  ;  in  fact,  both  are  excluded,  for
in  i'.  14  the  members  of  the  court  take  knowledge  of  his  presence
as  something  new.  What  is  apparently  suggested  is  much  rather
that  the  members  of  the  court,  immediately  after  the  healing  had
been  wrought,  betook  themselves  to  the  apostles  in  the  temple
and  that  their  dealings  with  them  took  place  here.  To  escape
this  Spitta  finds  himself  compelled  to  regard  the  mention  of  the
man  who  has  been  healed,  in  4  10  (end)  and  in  4  14,  as  an
addition  to  his  source  made  by  the  composer  himself— certainly
not  an  easy  assumption.  In  628  we  should  surely  have  expected
to  read  that  the  high  priest  had  taken  the  accused  to  account  not
only  for  their  preaching  of  Jesus  but  also  for  their  escape  from
prison,  if  the  source  from  which  628  is  taken  had  also  contained
5i8f.

In  chap.  12  on  the  other  hand  the  picture  is  very
vivid  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  believe  that,  for
example,  the  name  Rhoda  is  a  mere  invention.  In
this  case  in  point  of  fact  there  is  no  need  to  deny  the
imprisonment  and  the  liberation,  or  even  that  the
liberation  appeared  very  wonderful  alike  to  Peter  and
to  all  the  other  persons  mentioned  ;  and  yet  it  admits
of  a  very  intelligible  explanation  if  with  Hausrath  we
suppose  that  the  angel  who  brought  Peter  forth  from
the  prison  will  have  been  the  death-angel  of  Herod
Agrippa  (NTliche  /.eitgcsck.W,  235*  /•)•  with  tlle
death  of  a  ruler  the  prison  doors  often  opened  for  those
whom  he  perchance  had  locked  up  more  out  of  caprice
than  in  any  supposed  interests  of  justice.

(/)  There  is  yet  another  consideration  which  tells
against  the  historicity  of  the  two  imprisonments  of  the
apostles  and  the  miracles  wrought  by  them  in  Jerusalem.
If  they  had  come  forward  at  so  early  a  date  into  publicity
so  marked  as  to  call  for  the  intervention  of  the  synedrium,
that  body  would  hardly  have  rested  satisfied  with  merely
enjoining  them  not  to  preach  Christ  (4 1821)  or  with
scourging  them  (540).

The  danger  which  Jesus  by  his  recent  ministry  had  brought
upon  the  ancestral  religion  was  still  fresh  in  men's  memories.
On  the  re-emergence  of  the  same  danger  the  synedrium  would
assuredly  have  interposed  with  the  utmost  vigour  and  the  per
secution  of  the  Christians  first  mentioned  in  Acts  as  occurring
after  the  death  of  Stephen  (8  i  3)  would  certainly  have  broken
out  much  sooner  and  threatened  the  well-being  and  even  the
existence  of  the  church  just  in  proportion  to  its  immaturity
and  want  of  consolidation.  In  all  probability  the  Christians
found  themselves  constrained  to  remain  entirely  in  concealment
for  a  considerable  time.  That  the  original  apostles  whose  homes
were  in  Galilee  should  have  removed  to  Jerusalem  at  so  early  a
date  as  is  represented  in  Acts  is,  moreover,  quite  unlikely  (see
MINISTRY,  §  21  d).  It  was  only  what  was  quite  natural  if  the
spontaneous  impulse  to  present  the  primitive  church  in  the
most  favourable  light  led  to  the  view  that  the  original  apostles,
and  above  all  Peter,  had  faced  the  civil  power  undismayed  and
plainly  declared  that  they  were  determined  to  disregard  the
prohibition  to  preach  Jesus,  and  that  they  must  obey  God  rather
than  man  (4  \gf.  629).  It  was  forgotten  that  such  conduct
would  certainly  have  led  to  their  destruction.  As  to  the  un-
trustworthiness  of  &36f.  see,  further,  THEUDAS,  §§  1-3.

(g]  The  portion  of  Acts  relating  to  Peter  which  seems
to  possess  the  largest  claim  to  be  regarded  as  trustworthy
is  that  which  records  his  speeches  (with  exception  of
157-n,  on  which  see  above,  §  3^).  It  must  not,  how
ever,  for  a  moment  be  imagined  that  they  are  verbally
or  even  throughout  in  substance  accurate.  What  we
read  in  1 16-22,  and  the  coincidences  of  the  other  addresses
of  Peter  with  those  of  Paul,  show  in  the  clearest  possible
way  that  they  all  are  compositions  of  the  author  of  Acts

4566


SIMON  PETER


SIMON  PETER


as  sources
for  life.


(see  ACTS,  §  14).  Observe,  moreover,  that  a  main  I
point  in  their  contents,  the  proof  of  the  resurrection  of  I
Jesus  drawn  from  Ps.  16 10  (Acts  227),  is  possible  only
when  <5  mot  MT)  is  followed,  and  would  thus  have  been
impossible  in  the  mouth  of  Peter  (see  RESURRF.CTION-
NARRATIVES,  §  36^).  If  these  discourses  assigned  to
Peter  agree,  in  their  Christology  especially,  with  what
seems  to  us  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  oldest  pre- Pauline
view,  this  does  not  admit  of  explanation  as  due  simply
to  the  employment  of  a  source  of  this  character.  The
most  important  factor  is  rather  that  the  author  of  Acts
must  himself  personally  have  been  attached  to  such  a
view.  As  he  puts  it  into  the  mouth  of  Paul  also,  it  be
comes  possible  indeed,  but  by  no  means  provable,  that  :
he  drew  it  from  an  old  and  trustworthy  source  when  he
was  making  the  speeches  of  Peter.

(/i)  Thus it appears that  on the  whole  Acts adds
extraordinarily  little  of  a  trustworthy  character  to  what
we  already  know  about  Peter  from  the  Pauline  Epistles.
Relatively  speaking  the  most assured of  its  additions
would seem to be  the  fact of  his imprisonment and
liberation  about  the  time  of  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa
(44  A.  u.),  but  without  the  supernatural  features  in  the
narrative. The  other  remaining  facts  which  are  not
open  to  question,  as  for  example  his  stay  for  a  time  at
Joppa  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  tanner  (943  106),  are
of  but  trifling  importance. As  regards  Ananias  and ;
Sapphira,  .'Eneas, Tabitha,  Cornelius, it may  perhaps j
be  safe  to  suppose  that Peter  had  relations  with  these ;
persons  of  such  sort  as  supplied  some  basis  for  what
we  read  about  them  in  Acts  ;  but  what  these  relations |
precisely  were  remains  obscure. Nor  are  we  any  better '
off  when  we  are  told  that  he  often  came  forward  as
speaker  for all the  original apostles, for we cannot
regard  as  trustworthy  records  the  reports  of  the  speeches
attributed  to  him  in  Acts.

II.  ACCORDING  TO  THE  SYNOFTISTS.

Turning  now  to  the  earlier  period  of  the  life  of  Peter
there  arises —

(a)  First,  the  question  of  the  credibility  of  what  we
read  in  the  synoptists  in  regard  to  this.  That  the  books

_ _, ... were  not  written  without  definite  '  ten-
6.  Synoptists ,
__• _^_ dencies may  be  taken  as  proved  (see

GOSPELS,  §g  108-114).  Moreover,
such  tendencies  could  come  into  play
with  peculiar  readiness  where  the  judgment  as  to  Peter
was  involved.  To  a  lewish  Christian  he  must  have
seemed  the  leading  figure  of  all  Christendom,  whereas
to  a  Paulinist  he  must  just  as  inevitably  have  seemed
the  opponent  of  the  true  apostle,  an  unreasonable
obstructionist,  a  narrow-minded  resister  of  the  real  will
of  God  which  required  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles.  Now
where  tendencies  inlluence  the  production  of  gospels  their
natural  effect  is  that  judgments  which  the  author  per
sonally  holds  about  a  given  person  or  thing  arc  put  into
the  mouth  of  Jesus  himself  in  the  naive  persuasion  that
he  could  not  have  held  any  other  view  than  that  which
the  writer  held  to  be  true  at  the  time  of  writing.  If  the
student  is  unwilling  to  go  so  far  as  to  suppose  that  whole
narratives  have  been  freely  invented  with  no  other  basis
than  a  desire  to  exalt  or  to  depreciate  Peter,  it  still
remains  easy  to  believe  that  an  author  whose  disposition
towards  Peter  was  friendly  would  be  ready  to  omit  or
tone  down  incidents  which  told  against  that  apostle,
whilst  another  whose  inclination  was  less  favourable
would  suppress  or  weaken  things  which  told  the  other  '
way.

(6)  In  its  search  for  such  tendencies,  however,
criticism  has  often  gone  very  far  astray.  To  begin
with,  because  the  representatives  of  tendency-criticism
have  for  the  most  part  entirely  dispensed  with  any
inquiry  as  to  sources  of  the  synoptics,  or  any  attempt
to  distinguish  earlier  from  later  portions  in  them.  From
the  standpoint  of  pure  tendency -criticism  it  is  very
tempting  to  suppose  that  the  most  honorific  passage  in

4567


Mt.  about  Peter  (1617-19)  was  omitted  by  Lk.  and  Mk.
because  they  both  were — Mk.  in  a  less  degree  than  Lk.,
it  is  true  —  Paulinists.  In  reality,  however,  such  a
supposition  must  be  rejected — not  only  for  Mk.  inas
much  as  Mk.  was  not  acquainted  with  the  gospel  of
Mt.,  but  also  for  Lk.  inasmuch  as  the  section  in  Mt.
is  exceedingly  probably  a  quite  late  interpolation  (see
GOSPELS,  §§  136,  151  ;  MINISTRY,  §  4/. ).

(c)  Nor  is  this  all  ;  the  gospels  frequently  present  us
with  the  opposite  of  what  we  should  have  expected  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  tendency-critics.

It  is  tempting  to  suppose  that  it  was  out  of  reverence  for
Peter  that  Mt.  (17  +/.)  suppressed  what  Mk.  (9e)and  Lk.  (1)33)
report,  that  Peter  at  the  transfiguration  knew  not  (Mk.)  what
to  say  or  (Lk.)  what  he  was  saying  ;  but  where  the  same  touch
recurs  in  Mk.  (1440)  we  find  that  it  is  suppressed  not  only  by
Mt.  but  also  by  Lk.  Tempting,  again,  is  it  to  suppose

that  it  is  a  result  of  tendency  that  Lk.  (8  51-53)  says,  not  of  the
multitude  in  the  house  of  Jairus,  as  Mk.  (638-40)  and  Mt.
(9  23  f.)  do,  but  of  Peter  with  James  and  John  and  the  damsel's
parents  that  they  laughed  Jesus  to  scorn  when  he  said  the
damsel  was  not  dead  but  sleeping  (cp  below,  §  12  a).  Yet
where,  according  to  Mk.  (833)  and  Mt.  (1023),  Jesus  calls  Peter
Satan  it  is  Lk.  ('.'22)  who  omits  the  whole  passage.  Once

more,  it  is  tempting  to  suppose  that  a  leading  place  among  the
disciples  is  being  given  to  Peter  when  according  to  Mt.  1*24
the  collectors  of  the  temple  tax  approach  him  with  their  enquiry
why  his  master  does  not  pay  it,  or  when  according  to  Mt.
(1821)  he  addresses  a  question  to  Jesus  whilst  according  to  Lk.
(1™4)—  the  incident  does  not  appear  at  all  in  Mk. — Jesus  gives
the  answer  unasked.  But,  on  the  other  side,  we  find  Lk.  (l-4i)
assigning  to  Peter  an  interpolated  question  which  is  wholly
wanting  in  Mt.  (2444^);  a  saying  which  Mk.  (5  31)  assigns  to
the  disciples  in  general— the  passage  does  not  occur  at  all  in
Mt. —  is  by  Lk.  (845)  assigned  to  Peter  alone  ('Master,  the
multitudes  press  thee  and  crush  thee');  and  where  Mt.  (1015)
does  the  same,  attributing  to  Peter  and  not,  as  Mk.  ("17),  to
the  disciples  the  request  for  an  explanation  of  a  parable — Lk.
omits  the  incident — the  answer  is  recorded  in  terms  not  highly
complimentary  to  the  speaker :  '  Are  ye  also  even  yet  without
understanding?'  What,  in  fine,  are  we  to  say  to  such

facts  as  these  — that  only  Lk.  ('22  31  f.)  has  the  saying,  the
latter  half  of  which  is  exhibited  along  with  Mt.  16i8.X  in
letters  of  gold  in  the  basilica  of  St.  Peter  in  Rome,  and  that  it
is  only  Mt.  (1428-31)  who  reports  Peter's  little  faith  when  he
endeavoured  to  walk  on  the  water?  Baur's  only  resource  here
(AV/V.  Unffrsnch.  iiber  die  kanon.  Evnngg.,  1847,  p.  471)  was  to
regard  the  event  as  involving  a  great  personal  distinction  con
ferred  upon  Peter  by  Jesus,  for  which  reason  it  was  omitted  by
Lk.  As  against  this  we  have  only  to  call  to  mind  how  high  is
the  position  accorded  to  Peter  by  the  last-named  writer  in  Acts
(see  ACTS,  §  4).

(d]  From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  seen  that  it
will  not  be  safe  to  look  for  tendency  in  any  remaining
differences that may be detected in the  accounts of
Peter  given  by  the  synoptists.

In  Mt.  (lOa)  Peter  is  designated  in  the  list  of  the  names  of
the  twelve  as  '  first '  (Trpan-os),  in  Mk.  (3  16)  and  in  Lk.  (*5  14)  this
numeration  is  absent.  In  the  story  of  the  transfiguration  it  is
only  Lk.  (II 32)  who  records  that  Peter  and  John  and  James
were  heavy  with  sleep.  According  to  Mt.  20  ijf.  Jesus  sends
forward  '  the  disciples '  to  make  the  passover  preparations  ;  in
Mk.  (14  13)  he  sends  two  only,  in  Lk.  (22s)  these  are  said  to
have  been  Peter  and  John.  In  Gethsemane  according  to  Mk.
1433  and  Mt.  2(i  37  Jesus  takes  Peter,  James,  and  John  to  keep
watch  along  with  him,  in  Lk.  (2240)  this  feature  is  absent.  The
question  as  to  the  date  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is  in  Mk.
(183)  attributed  to  Peter,  James,  John,  and  Andrew,  in  Mt.
(24  3)  to  the  disciples  generally,  in  Lk.  (21  5-7)  to  '  some  '  (rive's).
Cp,  further,  §  7  c.

(c)  The  trustworthiness  of  every  statement  in  the
synoptists  about  Peter,  even  when  not  open  to  any
special  objection,  by  no  means  necessarily  follows.
Whether,  for  example,  it  was  Peter  or  another  who
propounded  the  question  recorded  in  Mt.  1821  or  gave
the  answer  now  to  be  read  in  Lk.  845  is  for  the  writers
of  the  gospel  narrative  a  matter  of  so  little  importance
that  variations  of  statement  could  very  easily  arise  out
of  mere  inattention.  Before  coming  to  a  judgment,
therefore,  regarding  the  share  of  Peter  in  any  given
occurrence,  it  will  be  necessary  previously  to  scrutinise
the  credibility  of  the  occurrence  itself,  and  over  and
above  this  to  remember  that  even  when  this  has  been
satisfactorily  established,  Peter's  share  in  it  does  not  at
once  follow,  unless,  indeed,  his  part  in  it  be  the  very
essence  of  the  occurrence.  In  particular,  we  must  be
specially  on  our  guard  against  the  view — widely  spread
though  it  be — that  the  second  gospel  presents  in  written

4568


SIMON  PETER

form  oral  communications  received  by  the  evangelist  from
Peter  (on  this  hypothesis  see  GOSPELS,  §  148).

We  begin  with  those  accounts  in  the  synoptists  which
may  at  the  outset  be  set  aside  as  unhistorical.

(a)  With regard to  the story, found  only  in Mt.
(1428-31),  that  Peter  went  to  meet  Jesus  on  the  Sea  of

_  ...  Galilee, but through failure  of  faith

th tg  OQ  began  t0  S'nk  and  had  l°  te  rescued
w a ' by  Jesus,  we  find  even  so  conservative

a  writer  as  Bern.  Weiss  (Leben  Jesu^,  2209)  declaring
that  critical  investigation  imperatively  demands  that  it
be  given  up  as  a  statement  of  prosaic  matter  of
fact,  whilst  Beyschlag  (Leben  Jestt,  1306)  expresses
the  opinion  that  the  desire  of  Peter  that  Jesus
should  bid  him  come  to  him  on  the  water  is,  literally
taken,  simply  childish,  and  that  the  miraculous
power  of  Jesus  was  not  bestowed  upon  him  in  order
that  he  might  be  able  to  respond  to  every  childish
caprice.  Both  theologians  are  at  one  with  the  entire
critical  school  in  regarding  the  narrative  as  having
originally  been  an  allegorical-poetical  setting  forth  of
an  idea,  and  that  it  came  to  be  regarded  as  literal  fact
only  by  a  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  the  evangelist
or  of  the  writer  whom  he  followed.

At  the  same  time,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  it  was  Peter's
denial  of  his  master  that  was  originally  intended  to  be  figured  in
the  story.  In  that  denial  it  was  not  his  faith  but  his  fidelity
that  failed  the  apostle.  Had  it  been  his  faith,  the  underlying

Eresupposition  of  the  story  would  be  that  if  only  Peter  had
•ankly  confessed  himself  the  disciple  of  Jesus  he  would  have
come  off  wholly  unharmed.  As  matters  actually  stood,  however,
the  worst  consequences  were  really  to  be  apprehended  as  results
of  such  a  confession,  though  nevertheless  it  was  his  duty  to
make  it.

(/>)  We  may  be  sure  that  the  story  of  Jesus'  walking
upon  the  water  was  originally  a  parable  intended  to
exhibit  in  a  graphic  way  the  thought  that  if  his
disciples  have  faith  they  will  be  able  to  walk  with
safety  on  the  troubled  sea  (of  life)  (see  GOSPELS,
§  142  a).  The  addition  relative  to  Peter  then  brings  in
an  illustration  based  on  the  opposite  thesis  ;  he  who
has  no  faith  necessarily  goes  down  unless  he  calls  upon
the  Lord  and  receives  help  from  him.  This  view  itself,
however,  in  which  Jesus  appears  as  the  Lord  of  succour,
shows  by  its  very  nature  that  it  cannot  have  come  from
Jesus  himself.  He  would  not  have  designated  himself,
but,  as  in  his  genuine  parables,  a  person  by  whom  God
is  meant,  as  Him  from  whom  help  comes.  Thus  the
later  origin  of  the  narrative,  already  rendered  probable
by  its  absence  from  Mk. ,  is  confirmed  from  another
point  of  view.  If  this  be  so,  we  may  perhaps  go  on  to
suppose  that  the  reason  why  Peter  came  to  be  selected
as  hero  of  the  story  was  because  he  was  regarded  as
head  of  the  church,  and  what  is  related  of  him  was  in
tended  to  be  taken  as  applying  to  the  entire  church  (so
Pfleiderer,  Urchristenthum,  517,  (-'1.582).

There  are  other  narratives  also  which  require  no
detailed  proof  of  their  unhistorical
character.

(a)  The  statement  in  Lk.  24 12  that
Peter  visited  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus  and
found  it  empty  is  doubtful  even  text-critically,  and
when  its  substance  is  considered  cannot  be  accepted
(see  RESURRECTION -NARRATIVES,  §§  zc  and  21;
GOSPELS,  §  138  <?,/).

(b)  Along  with  the  historicity  of  the  statements  as  to
the  women  at  the  empty  sepulchre  must  also  be  given
up  the  historical  character  of  the  notice,  found  only  in
Mk.  (167), that they  received  from  the  angel the  in
junction  to  tell  the  disciples  and  Peter  that  they  should
see  the  risen  Jesus  in  Galilee. See  GOSPELS,  §  138  a,  e,  f,
RESURRECTION-NARRATIVES,  §  21,  and,  as  regards  an
allusion  in  Mk.  167  to  a  fact  indirectly  referred  to  in
this,  ib.  §  9  b.

(c)  As  the  withering  of  the  fig-tree  cannot  be  regarded
as  historical  (see  GOSPELS, §§ 137^/3,  141,  142*7),  the
statement  in  Mk.  (11 21)  that  Peter  called  attention  to
the  fact on the  following day also disappears. In

4569


7.  Other  un
historical
narratives.


SIMON  PETER

Mt.  21 20  all  the  disciples  together  are  already  aware  of

it, for the tree at the word of  Jesus withers  away

'  immediately '  ;  the  incident  is  not  found  at  all  in  Lk.

It  is  difficult  to  form  a  definite  judgment  as  to  the

„,  story  of  the  transfiguration  of  Jesus in

figuration' Alk-  92-IO  =  Mt-  r<  1-9  =  Lk.  928-36.

°  '  (a)  The  form  in  which  Jesus  is  here

seen  is,  on  the  one  hand,  that  of  Moses  when  he  came
down  from  the  mountain  of  the  law,  according  to  Ex.
3429-35,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  which  the  exalted
Christ  was  conceived  of,  according  to  2  Cor.  87-46,
where  Paul  cites  precisely  the  passage  just  mentioned
regarding  Moses,  and  that  of  the  angel  at  the  empty
tomb,  according  to  Mt.  283  (cp  Lk.  244  Mk.  16s).
Looked  at  on  this  side,  the  scene  is  accordingly  designed
to  represent  by  anticipation  the  coming  heavenly  glory
of  Jesus,  and  at  the  same  time,  by  the  presence  of
Moses  and  Elijah,  to  exhibit  it  as  a  fulfilment  of  the
OT.  Viewed  in  this  aspect,  it  can  make  no  claim  to
historicity.

This  would  be  difficult  even  were  one  inclined  to  concede  that
the  '  metamorphosis '  of  Jesus  did  not  happen  as  a  physical  reality
but  was  seen  only  by  the  three  disciples  in  a  vision  ;  difficult
still  even  were  there  a  disposition  to  reduce  the  number  to  one,
say  Peter,  on  the  assumption  that  James  and  John  were  named
in  error  partly  because  in  other  places  also  they  are  mentioned
along  with  Peter  on  special  occasions  as  being  the  disciples  who
were  on  terms  of  special  intimacy  with  the  master  (see  below,
§§  nc,  12),  partly  because,  according  to  Ex.249,  three  inti
mate  associates,  Aaron,  Nadab,  and  Abihu  (along  with  seventy
of  the  elders  of  Israel)  are  also  represented  as  having  gone  up
with  Moses  to  the  mountain  of  the  law.  Even  so,  the  question
would  still  remain  as  to  how  it  was  that  in  the  midst  of  the
earthly  life  of  Jesus  Peter  was  visited  by  the  thought  which
at  once  assumed  for  him  the  form  of  a  vision.  (On  the
psychological  antecedents  of  a  vision  cp  RESURRECTION-
NARRATIVES,  §  34  a.)

(!>}  The  transfiguration  scene,  however,  has  yet
another  main  purpose.  It  contains  the  divine  declara
tion  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  in  the  words  'This
is  my  beloved  son. '  This  voice  coincides  almost
exactly  with  that  heard-  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus  (Mk.
1  ii  =  Mt.  817  =  Lk.  822).  If,  however,  Jesus  had
already,  even  at  that  early  date,  been  divinely  pro
claimed  to  be  the  Messiah,  this  second  fact  would
necessarily  rob  the  other  of  its  value.

To  avoid  this  the  following  supposition  has  been  made  :  just
as  the  divine  voice  at  the  baptism,  according  to  the  most  modest,
and  therefore  most  trustworthy  of  the  accounts  (that  of  Mk.),
was  heard  only  by  Jesus,  the  whole  occurrence  admitting  of
being  resolved  into  an  inner  revelation  communicated  to  him
without  external  physical  accompaniments,  so  also  in  the  vision  in
which  Jesus  was  transfigured  only  Peter  (or  Peter  along  with
James  and  John)  heard  that  heavenly  voice.  So,  for  example,
Reville  (Jesus  tie  Nazareth,  2204-206  [1897]),  who  therefore
inclines  to  place  the  occurrence  at  a  date  shortly  before  the  confes
sion  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  (Mk.  8  27-29  and  ||s).  Bacon
(Amer.Journ.  ofTheol.,  1902,  pp.  236-265)  goes  a  step  further.
He  also  supposes  that  it  is  a  vision  of  Peter  that  is  described,  not,
however,  a  vision  which  he  had  actually  had,  but  one  which  is
attributed  to  him  through  a  transformation  of  the  account  relating
to  his. confession  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  (Mk.S  27-31).  The
transfiguration  scene  breaks  the  connection  between  Mk.  9  i  and
9  u,  and  comes  from  a  source  in  which  were  contained  this
and  other  modifications  of  gospel  narratives  that  were  taken  by
the  evangelist  to  be  accounts  of  new  facts.

(c}  At  the  same  time,  there  is  no  indication  in  the
text  that  the  divine  voice  was  directed  to  Peter  alone  (or
Peter  and  James  and  John) ;  it  is  indicated  with  at  least
eb_ual  clearness  that  it  is  heard  by  Jesus.  If,  then,  we
have  reason  for  believing  that  in  the  first  period  of  his
public  life  Jesus  did  not  yet  account  himself  to  be  the
Messiah,  but  only  a  prophet  and  a  reformer,  this  will
incline  us  to  recognise  in  the  divine  voice  at  the  Trans
figuration  a  reminiscence  of  the  fact  that  he  only
received  his  divine  authorisation  to  come  forward  as
the  Messiah  at  a  particular  point  in  the  course  of  his
ministry.  The  similar  saying  at  his  baptism  will  rest  in
that  case  upon  an  anticipation  on  the  part  of  the
narrators,  to  whom  it  was  inconceivable  that  the
designation  by  God  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  should
have  been  postponed  to  any  later  date.  On  this
assumption  also,  it  becomes  reasonable  to  assign  the
incident  that  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  transfiguration-story

4570


SIMON  PETER

to  a  time  shortly  anterior  to  the  confession  of  Peter  ;  for
so  long  as  Jesus  was  not  himself  certain  by  dis-ine
revelation  of  the  fact  of  his  Messiahship  he  could  not
accept  the  proclamation  of  it  by  Peter.

(d)  The  occurrence  itself  admits  very  easily  of  being
regarded  as  having  taken  place  in  the  inner  conscious
ness  of  Jesus.  The  participation  of  Peter,  James,  and
John  becomes  in  that  case  much  less  active.  That  they
were  present  need  not  be  denied  ;  but  their  activity
would  then  be  limited  to  this — that,  after  awaking  from
sleep  perhaps,  they  received  a  powerful  impression  of
the  wondrous  majesty  with  which  Jesus  came  to  meet
them  after  he  had  heard  the  heavenly  voice.  The
terms  in  which  this  had  been  expressed  the}'  would  not
in  that  case  hear  directly  for  themselves,  but  would
afterwards  learn  from  the  mouth  of  Jesus.  The
assertion  in  2  Pet.  Ii6-i8  that  Peter  himself  heard  the
voice  upon  the  '  holy '  mountain  does  not  fall  to  be
taken  account  of  in  the  present  connection,  in  view  of
the  pseudonymous  character  of  this  epistle  (see  PETER,
EPISTLES  OF,  §§  9-12).

In the  story  of  the  stater  in  the  fish's  mouth  (only
Mt.  1724-27),  it  has  above  all  to  be  observed  that  the
_, , miracle  is  only  announced,  not  described  as
9.  btater  having  happened. All  the  safer,  therefore,


in  fish's
mouth.


is the supposition that here we are in


presence  of  a  symbolical  saying  of  Jesus.
The  section  contains  two  separate  thoughts,  of  which  the  one
would  be  quite  sufficient  without  the  other,  (i)  Properly  speak
ing,  Jesus  and  his  disciples  do  not  require  to  pay  the  tax,  but  in
order  to  avoid  offence  they  do  so.  The  incident  contains  the
presupposition  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  alike  whether  the  words
attributed  to  Jesus  were  actually  spoken  by  him,  or  whether
they  are  erroneously  put  into  his  mouth  ;  along  with  this  it  con
tains  (2)  also  the  exhortation  to  submit  to  existing  institutions,
and  thus  applies  equally  well  alike  to  the  temple  tax  which  was
exacted  in  the  time  of  Jesus,  and  to  the  Roman  state  tax  which
from  70  A.D.  onwards  was  substituted  for  the  temple  tax  in  the
case  of  Jews  (Jos.  BJ  vii.  l>6,  §  2i3)  and,  particularly  under
Domitian,  was  rigorously  exacted  from  Christians  also  (see
CHRISTIAN,  §  6,  vii.,  end).

It  is  in  connection  with  the  second  of  these  main
ideas  that  Peter  comes  more  directly  into  the  story  ;  he
is  to  fish  for  the  means  of  paying  the  tax.  As  he  is  a
fisherman  by  occupation,  the  meaning  of  this  symbolical
saying  at  once  suggests  itself;  by  the  exercise  of  his
craft  he  will  easily  be  able  to  earn  enough  to  meet  this
call  upon  him.  This  feature  in  the  story  may  point  to
the  authenticity  of  the  saying  as  attributed  to  Jesus  ;  but
it  may  also  quite  well  have  been  invented,  as  every  one
in  later  times  knew  that  Peter  had  been  a  fisherman.
After  the  death  of  Jesus  it  would  have  been  less  easy
to  have  invented  that  other  feature — that  the  produce
of  Peter's  industry  was  to  serve  to  pay  the  tax  both  for
himself  and  for  Jesus  ;  for  it  is  not  easy  to  make  out  any
allegorical  application  to  later  conditions  of  this  earning  of
a  double  tax.  Still,  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  pericope
is  one  of  the  most  obscure  in  the  whole  gospel  history.

Passing  from  these  unquestionably  unhistorical  ele
ments,  we  come  next  to  a  series  of  others  which  cannot
_,. be  rejected  at  once,  but,  at  the  same  time,
Sr  can  just as  little  be  regarded  as  certainly


doubtful
elements.


authentic.


To  this  category belong  :


(a)  all  those  cases  in  which  Peter  is  repre
sented  as  having  said  something  which  in  some  other
gospel  is  attributed  to  the  disciples  at  large  (Mt.  15 15
Lk.  845  Mk.  183;  see  above,  §5<-,</)  or  is  omitted
altogether  although  the  narrative  to  which  it  belongs  is
retained  in  that  gospel  (Mt.  1821  as  against  Lk.  174,
and  Lk.  124t  as  against  Mt.  'li^f.  ;  see  §  5<r).

(t>)  To  this  class  falls  to  be  added  one  instance  of  a
subordinate  action  (the  preparation  for  the  passover)
which  only  Lk.  (228)  assigns  to  Peter  (and  John)  ;  see
§  5  d ;  and  also —

(c)  The  word  which  according  to  all  three  evangelists
(Mk.  1028  Mt.  1927  Lk.  1828)  Peter  is  reported  to  have
uttered:  'we  have  left  all  and  followed  thee. '  If  the
evangelists  are  in  other  places  so  little  at  one  as  to  the
authorship  of  a  given  saying,  agreement  in  this  particular

4571


SIMON  PETER

instance  cannot  here  be  taken  as  proving  the  accuracy
of  the  report,  for  their  agreement  comes  only  from
mutual  borrowing.  In  any  case,  whether  the  word  in
question  was  spoken  by  Peter  or  by  another  the  circum
stance  is  too  unimportant  to  allow  us  precisely  here  to
place  unqualified  confidence  in  the  eldest  of  the  three
who  is  followed  by  the  other  two.  If  Jesus  blamed  a
questioner  this  very  fact  still  added  to  the  importance  of
the  latter  (cp  below,  §  17)  ;  but  such  is  not  the  case
here.  Moreover,  the  question  must  not  be  treated
apart  from  the  answer  of  Jesus  ( '  shall  receive  a  hundred
fold,'  etc. ).  If  Jesus  ever  gave  any  such  promise  to  his
disciples,  we  may  be  certain  at  least  that  it  was  not  in
connection  with  a  question  so  self-seeking  as  this.  If,
however,  the  narrative  is  open  to  suspicion  on  this  most
important  point,  it  is  impossible  to  feel  confidence  on
such  a  relatively  subordinate  matter  as  the  person  of  the
questioner.

Other  notices  there  are  to  which  a  historical  kernel,
or  even  complete  historicity  cannot  l>e  denied  ;  on  the
TVT  one  hand  they  were  important  enough  to

.'.  ...  impress  themselves  on  human  memories

n?  ."l68  -W11  and  on  tne  otner  hand  they  were  not  so
,  .  important  as  to  tempt  to  a  departure  from
historical  accuracy  (cp  the  principle  laid
down  in  GOSPELS,  §  131,  col.  1873,  begin.),  (a)
Thus  there  is  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  Jesus  on  a
Sabbath  day  healed  Peter's  mother-in-law  and  other
sick  persons,  but  on  the  following  day  withdrew  him
self  into  solitude  and  was  sought  out  by  Peter  and  his
comrades  with  the  view  of  bringing  him  back  (Mk.  129-
38  =  Lk.  438-43  ;  Mt.  814-17  has  the  healings  only).

(6)  That  the  name  Cephas  (Peter)  was  bestowed  upon
Simon  by  Jesus  may  in  view  of  what  has  been  said  in
§  ig  be  regarded  as  wholly  credible  even  if  the  date  at
which  it  was  bestowed  remains  uncertain.  According
to  Mk.  (3i6)  it  was  at  the  time  when  the  apostles  were
first  chosen.  A  more  appropriate  occasion  but  not  on
that  account  historically  established  would  be  that  of
the  confession  at  Cassarea  Philippi  with  which  Mt.  (16i8)
connects  it  (see  MINISTRY,  §  4,  end).  If  Mt.  already
when  Peter's  call  is  recorded  (4i8)  and  again  at  the
choosing  of  the  apostles  (102)  says:  'Simon,  who  is
called  Peter,'  he  is,  of  course,  not  to  be  taken  as  intend
ing  to  indicate  the  time  at  which  the  name  was  given,
but  simply  as  wishing  to  apprise  his  readers  that  this
Simon  was  the  man  whom  they  already  knew  as  Peter.
Lk.  (614)  likewise  has  on  the  occasion  of  the  choosing
of  the  apostles  the  words  '  Simon,  whom  he  also  named
Peter.'  By  this,  however,  he  perhaps  does  not  mean
to  convey  that  the  name  was  bestowed  by  Jesus  then,
but  only  that  it  had  been  bestowed  by  him  at  one  time
or  another.

(c}  Equally  natural  is  it  to  recognise  faithful  remi
niscence  in  the  statement  that  in  Gethsemane  Jesus  took
Peter,  James,  and  John  to  watch  with  him,  and  that
nevertheless  they  fell  asleep  (Mk.  1432-42  —  Mt.  2636-46),
even  although  we  cannot  be  certain  that  this  last
happened  three  several  times.  This  last  doubt,  how
ever,  is  no  reason  for  giving  the  preference  to  Lk.
(2240-46)  who  mentions  the  incident  as  having  occurred
but  once,  and  that  in  the  case  of  all  the  disciples,  for
as  he  unquestionably  was  acquainted  with  Mk.  the
simplification  here  must  be  explained  as  due  merely  to
absence  of  interest  in  the  details  of  the  story.

In  the  case  of  the  raising  of  Jairus'  daughter  also —

(a)  No  difficulty  will  be  felt  in  recognising  true  remi
niscence  in  the  statement  that  Jesus  suffered  no  one  but
,  Peter,  James,  and  John  to  go  with  him

d htUS to  the  h°USe  °r  (besides  the  PS""61115  of
ugn r. the  girl)  to  enter  the  room  where  she  lay

(Mk.  5 37-40).

If  Mt.  (1123-25)  has  nothing  about  this,  his  silence  is  to  b«
connected  with  the  fact  that  here  in  other  particulars  also  he  is
notably  much  briefer  than  either  Mk.  or  Lk.,  just  as  he  i*  in
three  other  miracle  narratives  :  that  of  the  Gadarene  and  the
herd  of  swine  which  immediately  precedes  (Mk.  5  1-20=  Mt.  828-

4572


13.  Call.


SIMON  PETER

34  =  Lk.  826-39),  tnat  of  the  healing  of  the  man  sick  of  ihe  palsy
(Mk.2  i-i2  =  Mt.9i-8  =  Lk.D  17-26),  and  that  of  the  lunatic  boy
(Mk.  9  14-29  =  Mt.  17  14-20),  where  Lk.  also  (9  37-43)  is  so  short  ;
there  is  also  the  story  of  the  imprisonment  and  death  of  John
the  Baptist  (Mk.  6  i7-29  =  Mt.  14  3-12)  which  Lk.  has  not  at  all.
Lk.'s  divergence  (8  51-53)  is  presumably  not  so  seriously  intended
as  it  has  been  represented  above  (§  =,c)  in  verbal  strictness  to  be
—  namely,  that  it  was  the  parents  and  the  three  disciples  who
laughed  Jesus  to  scorn.  Perhaps  when  he  wrote  the  words
(v.  52),  'and  all  were  weeping  and  bewailing  her,'  Lk.  was
thinking  not  of  the  live  persons  named  immediately  before,  but,
like  Mk.,  of  the  multitude  assembled  within  the  house,  and  has
only  failed  to  bring  this  to  clear  expression.  In  any  case  he  has
retained  the  separation  of  the  three  disciples  from  the  rest.

(l>)  As  the  occurrence  is  the  only  accredited  one  in
the  Gospel  history  which  must  have  presented  itself  to
those  who  witnessed  it  as  a  case  of  raising  of  the  dead
it  is  very  conceivable  that  the  presence  of  only  three
disciples  should  have  impressed  itself  upon  the  memory.
Whilst  the  raising  of  the  widow's  son  at  Xain  (Lk.  7n-
17)  and  of  Lazarus  (Jn.  11  1-44;  cp  JOHN,  SON  OF
ZiiBEUEE,  §§  20(7,  35^,  371?)  cannot  be  regarded  as
historical,  no  more  exception  need  be  taken  to  the
raising  of  the  daughter  of  Jairus  than  to  the  resuscita
tion  of  Eutychus  (Acts  267-12),  if  only  one  take  as
literally  the  words  of  Jesus,  '  the  child  is  not  dead  but
sleepeth,'  as  one  does  those  of  Paul,  '  his  life  is  in  him.'
According  to  Mk.  Jesus  spoke  these  words  before  he  had  seen
the  girl,  and  it  is  very  easily  conceivable  that  information  received
from  the  father  may  have  enabled  him  to  form  this  judgment  ;
but  it  is  also  possible  that  this  element  in  the  story  arises  from
unconscious  modification  of  the  real  fact  and  that  it  is  Lk.  who
is  in  the  right  here  when  he  represents  Jesus  as  uttering  the
words  in  presence  of  the  girl,  even  if  this  representation  does  not
rest  upon  the  direct  testimony  of  an  eye-witness  but  upon  altera
tion  of  the  text  of  Mk.

The  account  of  Peter's  call  in  Mk.  1  16-20  =  Mt.  4  18-22
is  an  excellent  example  of  shortening  and  condensation
of  a  fuller  narrative  by  tradition.  It  is  un
thinkable  that  in  this  scene  no  words  but
these  of  Jesus  should  have  been  spoken  :  '  Come  ye
after  me  and  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men.  '
Peter  and  his  comrades  Andrew,  James,  and  John  must
assuredly  have  had  previous  opportunity  of  making  the
acquaintance  of  Jesus  and  must  on  their  side  have
had  some  conversation  with  him.  Xo  eye-witness  could
possibly  give  so  colourless  an  account  as  that  in  Mk.
and  Mt.  The  later  narrators,  however,  had  no  longer
any  interest  in  dramatic  details  or  in  the  psychological
processes  which  resulted  in  the  decision  of  the  four
fishermen.  The  central  action,  the  call  given  by  Jesus,
alone  engaged  their  attention,  and  for  the  purpose  of
edification  which  they  had  in  view  when  they  circulated
it,  and  as  an  example  for  the  converts  whom  they  wished
to  incite  by  it,  the  narrative  may  have  seemed
beautiful  and  precious  just  in  proportion  to  the  sudden
ness  with  which  the  call  of  Jesus  came  to  Peter  and  his
comrades,  and  the  absolute  promptitude  of  their  obedi
ence.  Apart  from  this,  however,  Mk.  and  Mt.  unques
tionably  present  the  most  trustworthy  account  of  the
undoubtedly  historical  call  of  Peter.

The  story  of  Peter's  draught  (Lk.  5i-n)  falls  to  be
adduced  here  as  a  parallel  although  in  so  far  as  we  are
advancing  from  the  less  credible  to  the
more  credible  order  of  narratives  its
proper  place  in  the  discussion  would
have  been  much  earlier.  It  constitutes  one  of  the  few
examples  we  have  in  the  Synoptists  of  a  consciously-
framed  allegory  being  put  forward  in  the  form  of  a
seemingly  historical  narrative  in  order  to  set  forth  a
particular  idea  ;  this  idea  is  in  point  of  fact  quite  clear.
(a)  First  of  all  it  is  certain  that  the  scene  is
intended  as  a  substitute  for  what  we  read  in  Mk.  and
Mt.  about  the  call  of  Peter  and  his  comrades  ;  for  Lk.
nowhere  narrates  this  last,  and  on  the  other  hand  intro
duces  its  main  point  at  the  end  of  the  passage  before  us
(v.  10)  :  '  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men.'
(b]  At  its  beginning  Lk.  places  the  scene  in  which  Jesus
teaches  the  multitude  standing  on  the  shore  from  a  boat
(53).  Now,  in  Mk.  (4i/.  )  and  Mt.  (181-3)  this  is  the
scene  in  which  certain  parables  are  delivered  ;  but  Lk.

4573


14

'


SIMON  PETER

avoids  giving  it  in  the  parallel  passage  dealing  with
these  parables  (84).  Thus  we  have  in  Lk.  ;>  an  artificial
composition  from  various  elements  and  it  becomes
necessary  to  inquire  into  its  purpose.  (c)  Now

the  function  of  a  fisher  of  men  is  exercised  by  means  of
teaching  ;  if  then  we  find  Jesus  engaged  in  teaching  at
the  beginning  of  our  pericope  this  indicates  to  us  how
the  draught  of  fishes  that  immediately  follows  ought  to
be  taken  ;  namely,  not  as  relating  to  takes  of  literal
fish  but  in  the  deeper  sense  as  relating  to  the  capture  of
human  souls.  Thus  the  idea  is  precisely  the  same  as
that  in  the  parable  of  the  net  in  Mt.  1847,  only  without
its  reference  to  the  subsequent  separation  of  the  good  fish
from  the  bad.  (d)  The  narrative  before  us,  how

ever,  admits  of  still  more  definite  interpretation  in  detail.
Simon  with  his  comrades  has  toiled  in  vain  the  whole
night  through  ;  now,  on  receiving  a  special  command
from  Jesus,  he  makes  an  unexpected  haul.  This  has
already  been  rightly  interpreted  by  the  Tubingen  school
as  referring  to  the  difference  between  the  practically
fruitless  mission  to  the  Jews  and  the  highly  successful
mission  to  the  Gentiles.  In  the  latter,  Peter  received
a  special  Divine  command  and  this  was  necessary  in
order  to  overcome  his  original  aversion  to  such  an
undertaking  (Acts  109-22).  (e)  The  launching

forth  into  the  deep  also  will  admit  of  being  in
terpreted  as  referring  to  missions  to  heathen  lands
as  compared  with  the  less  venturesome  putting  out
a  little  from  the  shore,  although  it  is  not  said  that
the  fruitlessness  of  the  night's  toil  is  caused  by  the
proximity  to  the  shore.  (/)  The  sin  of  which

Peter  becomes  suddenly  conscious  (v.  8)  is  thus  by  no
means  sinfulness  in  general — reference  to  this  were  but
little  called  for  by  the  circumstances — but  definitely  the
sin  of  failure  hitherto  to  recognise  and  practice  the  duty
of  evangelising  the  Gentiles  as  befitting  and  in  accord
ance  with  the  will  of  God.  (g]  We  are  now
able  to  perceive  the  significance  also  of  the  place  where
Lk.  has  brought  in  the  calling  of  Peter.

He  introduces  it  at  a  later  point  than  Mk.  and  Mt.  In
particular  it  is  preceded  in  Lk.  by  the  rejection  of  Jesus  at
Nazareth  (4 16-30),  which  on  a  small  scale  foreshadows  the
rejection  of  Jesus  by  the  entire  Jewish  people  (see  GOSPELS,
§  109^).  It  is  appropriate  that  it  should  be  followed  by  the
command  of  Jesus  enjoining  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles,  and  is
in  harmony  with  the  principle  carried  through  by  the  same
author  in  Acts  (see  ACTS,  §  4,  middle),  according  to  which  Paul
preaches  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles  in  each  city  only  after  it  has
been  rejected  by  the  Jews.  In  the  gospel,  by  placing  the  calling
of  Peter  at  a  somewhat  later  period,  the  author  has  brought
about  the  awkwardness  that  Peter  has  to  be  brought  into  close
relations  with  Jesus  even  before  his  call,  at  the  healing  of  his
mother-in-law  (4  y&f.) — even  although  his  name  is  suppressed  in
4  42,  the  parallel  to  Mk.  1  36 — whilst  the  occasion  of  the  draught
of  fishes,  in  itself  considered,  appears  to  be  the  first  meeting  of
Peter  with  Jesus.

In  this  we  may  perhaps  find  a  hint  that  Lk.  saw
the  significance  of  this  pericope  as  referring  to  the  mission
to  the  Gentiles  (or  perhaps  even  invented  it  ?  see  below,  *')
and  in  accordance  with  this  gave  it  the  place  it  now
occupies.  (h)  The  naming  of  James  and  John

as  those  who,  according  to  v.  iof. ,  follow  Jesus  along
with  Peter »is  still  more  noteworthy.  Why  is  it  that
precisely  Andrew,  the  brother  of  Peter,  is  absent —
Andrew  whom  nevertheless  Mk.  (1 16)  and  Mt.  (4i8)
mention  in  immediate  juxtaposition  with  him  ?  It  can
hardly  be  by  accident  merely  that  by  this  omission  the
names  left  are  the  names  of  the  three  who  according  to
Gal.  2  9  were  the  'pillars'  of  the  primitive  church  and
who  at  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  though  at  first  averse,
in  the  end  gave  their  sanction  to  the  mission  to  the
Gentiles  ;  it  can  hardly  be  mere  accident,  even  although
there  the  James  intended  is  no  longer  the  son  of  Zebedee
but  James  the  brother  of  Jesus.  (z)  Further,  be

it  noticed  at  how  late  a  point  they  are  introduced.

The  narrative  so  runs  that  almost  down  to  its  close  Peter  alone
figures  in  it  along  with  Jesus.  Helpers  such  as  are  necessary
where  many  nets  are  in  use  he  certainly  has,  according  to  iru.
4-6  and  v.  9  (on  v.  7  see  below,  k)  ;  but  it  is  not  thought  worth
while  to  give  their  names,  and  they  must  therefore  be  regarded
as  subordinate  persons  like  the  hired  servants  in  Mk.  1  20.  After

4574


SIMON  PETER


SIMON  PETER


all  have  been  grouped  together  in  v.  g  by  the  phrase  '  all  who
were  with  him '  (vraiTas  TOUS  aiiv  auraJ)  the  addition  '  as  also
James  and  John '  (6|uouos  6«  <cai  'idic<aftov  KO.L  'Iiodynji')  comes  in
strangely ;  but  moreover,  after  they  have  been  named,  Jesus
goes  on  to  address  the  words  '  fear  not,  for  henceforth  thou  shall
catch  men,'  to  Peter  alone,  whilst  yet  according  to  v.  n  James
and  John  appropriate  it  also.

All  this  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  narrative
originally  named  Peter  alone,  and  that  the  reference
to  James  and  John  was  only  introduced  into  it  after
wards.  The  object  of  its  introduction  in  that  case
would  have  been  to  restore  agreement  with  Mk.  and
Mt.  by  the  naming  of  several  apostles  who  had  been
simultaneously  called  and  yet  at  the  same  time  to
restrict  their  number  to  that  of  the  three  'pillars.'  It
will  hardly,  however,  be  safe  to  attribute  any  such
intention  to  an  interpolator  ;  rather  must  it  be  put  to  the
account  of  the  redactor  who  had  the  plan  of  the  whole
book  in  his  mind.  If  this  be  so,  we  shall  have  to
suppose  that  Lk.  did  not  himself  invent  the  story  of
Peter's  draught  of  fishes,  but  that  he  had  met  with  it  in
writing  or  in  oral  tradition  and  that  its  meaning  as
denoting  that  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles  was  the  institu
tion  of  Jesus  himself  was  fully  manifest  to  him.

(£)  Now  at  last  we  are  in  a  position  to  form  a  judg
ment  regarding  the  second  boat  mentioned  in  v.  7  and
its  occupants.

As  they  are  spoken  of  as  '  fellows '  (jueVo^oi)  of  Peter  and  his
subordinates  it  might  appear  at  first  sight  as  if  they  ought  to  be
identified  with  James  and  John  who  are  called  'partners'
(Kou'ioi'oO  of  Simon  in  7'.  10.  The  inappropriateness,  however,
which  has  already  been  pointed  out  in  the  naming  of  James  and
John  in  v.  10  as  additions  to  the  '  all '  (n-di'Ta?)  of  v.  9  would  by
no  means  be  got  over  by  this  identification  ;  for  the  '  fellows '
(ju.eVo\oi)  also  of  v,  7  are  included  in  the  'all'  of  v.  9.  But  as
the  '  fellows'  (^ceVoxot)  of ''.  ^  exercise  an  independent  activity
and  have  a  boat  of  their  own,  their  names,  had  they  really  been
James  and  |ohn,  would  certainly  have  been  mentioned  already
in  v.  7  and  not  held  over  till  v.  10  where  no  independent  activity
is  attributed  to  them.

Thus  we  must  seek  to  ascertain  their  names  from
their  work.  They  are  called  in  to  help  because  Peter
and  his  comrades — in  whose  number  James  and  John
are  thus  included — are  unequal  to  their  task  unaided.
This  applies  to  no  one  but  to  Paul  and  those  with
him.  In  actuality  lie  was  the  originator  of  the
mission  to  the  Gentiles,  and  not  one  who  had  merely
been  called  in  to  assist  ;  but  we  must  reflect  that
here  the  dominating  presupposition  is  that  it  was  by
the  original  apostles  that  this  mission  was  begun,
at  the  direct  command  of  Jesus,  or  of  God.  So
Acts  109-22  15y,  so  Lk.  2447,  so  Mt.  2819;  so,  still,
Justin  (Apol.  i.  393  45s  50i2,  Dud.  42,  begin.).  On
such  a  view  of  the  matter,  Paul  and  his  comrades  can
only  figure  as  helpers  subsequently  called  in.  The  two
boats  by  which  the  fish  that  had  been  caught  were
brought  to  land  thus  signify,  not  the  mission  to  Jews
and  to  Gentiles  respectively,  but  the  mission  of  the
original  apostles  and  that  of  Paul.  That  of  the  former
was  to  the  Jews  at  first  but  afterwards  was  extended  to
the  Gentiles  also,  that  of  Paul  was  to  the  Gentiles  only.
Jesus  from  the  beginning  makes  use  of  Simon's  boat  ;
but  this  eventually  proves  insufficient.  (/)  Whether

the  touch  in  v.  6  that  the  nets  threatened  to  break  be
simply  a  graphic  decoration  of  the  situation,  or  whether
it  too  have  an  allegorical  meaning — namely,  that  through
the  mission  to  the  Gentiles  the  unity  of  the  church  both
before  and  at  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  dispute
between  Paul  and  Peter  at  Antioch  (Gal.  2 11-21)  was
threatened  with  disruption,  as,  for  example,  is  suggested
by  Carpenter  (The  First  Three  Gospels^,  1890,  vi.  5i,
pp.  206-208) — must  remain  undecided,  as  no  such  mean
ing  is  unmistakably  suggested  by  the  words.  So  much
as  this,  however,  is  rightly  emphasised  bv  Carpenter —
that  the  author  of  Jn.  21  found  this  reference  in  our
passage  ;  for  his  remark  in  7'.  n  that  for  all  the  multi
tude  of  fishes  the  net  remained  nevertheless  unbroken  is
clearly  intended  to  be  set  against  that  of  Lk. ,  and
indicates  that  the  unity  of  the  church  had  not  come  to

4575


harm.  Already  in  Mt.  1847  we  find  the  net  employed
as  a  figure  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

Peter's  denial  of  Jesus  is  a  fact  as  certain  as  his  call.
Even  a  thorough-going  Paulinist  would  not  have  in-
D  'al  vented  it  against  him — quite  apart  from
.'  ,.  the  question  whether  in  the  absence  of

any  tradition  he  would  have  found  any
credence  had  he  done  so.  (a)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
possible  to  question  whether  it  happened  exactly  thrice,
or  whether  the  number  three  belongs  to  a  later  develop
ment.  That  the  scene  gained  in  dramatic  character  as
it  was  handed  on  by  one  narrator  to  another  is  shown
by  Lk.  22 60,  according  to  which  the  eye  of  Jesus  fell  on
Peter  after  the  third  denial— a  circumstance  of  which
Mk.  and  Mt.  know  nothing  (as  to  the  cause  which
rendered  this  change  possible  see  below,  §  19^).
Doubtless,  merely  in  order  to  be  able  to  explain  how  the
whole  night  was  passed,  the  interval  between  the  second
denial  and  the  third  is  given  in  Lk.  (22 59)  not  as  'a
little  while'  (so  Mk.  14?o  and  Mt.  2673),  but  as  'about
one  hour.'

(f>)  Still  more  insistent  is  the  question  as  to  whether,
and  if  so  in  what  form,  Jesus  foretold  the  denial  of
Peter.  From  the  outset  we  must  regard  as  later
additions  the  words  of  Jesus,  found  only  in  Lk.  (22si/. ),
which  foretell  not  only  the  temptation  that  is  about  to
come  upon  Peter,  but  also  the  ultimate  stability  of  his
faith,  with  the  added  exhortation  :  '  Do  thou,  when
once  thou  hast  turned  again,  stablish  thy  brethren.'

Their  principal  theme  already  is  that  Peter  is  to  be  the  first  to
believe  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  (see  RESURRECTION-NARRA
TIVES,  §  37),  and  in  presence  of  such  a  prediction  relating  to  a
more  distant  future  the  passing  denial  of  Peter  seems  like  an
insignificant  intermezzo.  It  is  difficult  to  regard  as  probable
such  gentleness  of  judgment  on  the  part  of  Jesus  in  this  so  grave
a  moment,  even  should  one  have  no  difficulty  in  attributing  to
him  such  a  foreknowledge  of  the  future  as  is  presupposed  by  Lk.
Besides,  in  Lk.  the  prophecy  of  the  denial  is  placed  in  the
supper  chamber,  not  as  in  Mk.  and  Mt.  on  the  way  to
Gethsemane.

(c)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  by  no  means  improbable
that,  on  the  last  evening  of  his  life,  in  conversing  about
what  lay  before  him, Jesus should  have  expressed  a
doubt  as  to  the  constancy  of  his  disciples,  that  Peter
should  have  declared  his  own  with  emphasis,  and  that
the  doubt  should  thereupon  have  been  expressed  anew
and  perhaps  in  very  drastic  form. If  Jesus  actually  on
this  occasion  uttered  the  prediction  that  Peter  would  in
an  exceedingly  short  time  deny  him,  we  still  are  not
compelled to suppose that the  prediction  was meant
otherwise  than  conditionally,  to  some  such  effect  as  the
following  : '  should  it so happen that thou  fall into
grievous temptation  to  deny  me thou  wilt not have
constancy  enough to  resist it.' As for  the threefold
repetition  there  is  much  reason  to  apprehend  that  the
prediction of  Jesus as to this was afterwards made
much  more  explicit  than  it  had  been,  in  view  of  what  was
known  or  believed  to  have  actually  happened.

(d)  The  same  holds  good  of  the  specification  of  time  :
before  the  cock  crows  (Mt.  26s4  =  Lk.  2234)  ; and  in  an
intensified  degree  of  that  given  in  Mk.  (Hso):  before
the cock  crows  twice. Indeed, the additional state
ment — found only  in Mk.  (146872)— of  the  fact that
the  cock  actually  was  heard  to  crow  twice,  is  a  clear
sign  of  the  secondary  character  of  our  canonical  Mk.  as
compared  with  Mt.  and  Lk.  (see  GOSPELS,  §  ngc).

Even  the  textual  criticism  of  the  passage  seems  to  show  that
this  datum  is  one  which  crept  only  gradually  into  the  text  of
Mk.  Jn  r-.  63  the  addition  «ai  oAeVrujp  «4>wn)crei>  is  so  weakly
attested  that  it  is  omitted  by  WH  and  does  not  appear  even  on
the  margin  ;  still,  there  is  certainly  a  hiatus  if  in  v.  72  we  read
'  ;ind  straightway  the  second  time  the  cock  crew '  without  any
previous  mention  made  of  the  first  time.

(e)  Lastly,  the  fact  of  the  cock's  having  crowed  at  all
has  been  sometimes  called  in  question  by  reason  of  the
fact  that,  according  to  the  Mishna  (Biibd  Kammd  7  7),  it
was  forbidden  to  keep  fowls  in  Jerusalem.

It  was  expressly  permitted,  however,  we  read,  to  purchase
them  to  be  killed,  or  to  receive  them  as  presents  for  the  same  pur
pose  (//'.  lOg),  and  it  is  testified  that  on  one  occasion  a  cock  was
stoned  in  Jerusalem  because  it  had  killed  a  human  being  (a  child)

4576


SIMON  PETER


SIMON  PETER


('Eduyyoth,  6  i  ;  see  all  the  passages  given  in  Brandt,  Evang.
Gesc/i.,  1893,  32y.).  Thus,  the  fact  of  the  cock  crowing  cannot
be  shown  to  be  unhistorical ;  yet  neither  can  it  be  shown  with
certainty  to  be  historical.  Cockcrowing  (dAe<cTopo$o)i'ui)i  is,
according  to  Mk.  1835,  the  third  of  the  four  night-watches  into
which  the  night  was  divided  by  the  Romans  (see  DAY,  §  4).
This  division  into  four  is  current  in  the  NT  (Mk.  l>48  =  Mt.  1425
Acts  1- 4),  although  the  Israelites  originally  divided  the  night
into  only  three  watches  (Judg.  7  19,  cp  Lam.  2  19  Ex.  14  24
I  S.  11  n,  and,  in  all  probability,  also  Lk.  12  38).  As  the  second
Roman  night-watch  which  ended  at  midnight  is  called  '  mid
night  '  (fxeuofVKTioi'),  we  must  suppose  that  the  cockcrowing
from  which  the  third  took  its  name  originally  denoted  the  time
at  which  it  came  to  an  end,  that  is,  about  3  A.M.  The  saying
of  Jesus  could  thus  very  easily  have  run  in  this  form:  'before
cockcrowing'  [i.e.,  before  three  o'clock  to-morrow  morning]
thou  shall  have  denied  me,'  without  any  intention  to  predict  that
directly  after  the  denial  a  cock  should  literally  crow  ;  and  with
equal  ease  might  the  view  have  arisen  through  a  misunderstand
ing,  that  Jesus  had  actually  foretold  this  detail,  and  that  the
prediction  had  been  fulfilled.

Amongst  the  most  certainly  assured  facts  of  the  life

of  Peter  must  be  ranked  that  of  the  confession  he  made

at  Csesarea  Philippi  (Mk.  827-30=^11.

16.  Confession  16 =Lk.  9  /V  (a}  Even  Wrede

3  L  C^ssirea,
p/vT. . (Das  Messiasgeheiinniss  in  den  Evan-

rmlippl.  gelien,  1901,  pp.  115-124,  237-239)
does  not  venture  positively  to  pronounce  it  unhistorical
although  he  also  says  that  one  need  not  shrink  from
such  a  view  if  it  seem  to  be  required.

According  to  Wrede,  Mk.  believed  that  Jesus  had  kept  his
Messiahship  a  secret  from  the  people  throughout  the  whole  of
his  life,  but  had  communicated  it  to  his  disciples,  though  without
producing  understanding  on  their  part.  Not  till  after  the
resurrection  of  Jesus,  according  to  Mk.,  did  any  real  recogni
tion  of  what  Jesus  was  begin.  Wrede  believes  that  this  view  of
Mk.  is  historically  false,  but  nevertheless  considers  that  it
dominates  the  whole  of  his  gospel,  and  further,  that  Mk.  is  not
conscious  of  the  frequency  with  which  it  is  traversed  by  his
repeated  statements,  according  to  which  the  Messiahship  of
Jesus  all  the  same  did  not  remain  a  secret.  It  must  be  urged,
however,  that  the  confession  of  Peter  is  little  in  harmony  with
either  the  secrecy  observed  about  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  or
the  failure  of  the  disciples  to  understand  it.

(3)  Wrede  endeavours,  therefore,  at  least  to  lessen
the  importance  of  the  confession  as  much  as  possible  in
Mk.'s  connection,  pointing  out  that  it  is  only  in  Mt. ,
which  was  written  later  than  Mk. ,  that  Jesus  put  a  high
value  upon  the  confession.  It  is  the  fact  that  in  Mt.
16i8y.  only  the  designation  of  Peter  as  a  rock  can  be
regarded  as  historical,  and  this,  too,  without  our  being
able  to  be  certain  that  it  was  given  to  him  just  then  (see
§  ii  b;  MINISTRY,  §§  4,  5  a,  l>).  It  has  further  to  be
observed  that  by  the  form  in  which  the  question  of  Jesus
is  put  in  Mt.  the  scene  is  made  unintelligible.

Whilst,  according  to  Mk.  (and  Lk.),  Jesus  asks  '  Who  do  the
people  say  that  I  (/«.«')  am?'  he  is  represented  in  Mt.  as  having
asked  '  Who  do  the  people  say  that  the  son  of  man  is?'  Mt.
himself  allows  us  to  see  that  this  is  not  the  right  form  ;  for  in  the
form  of  the  second  question  of  Jesus  he  coincides  with  Mk.  and
Lk.  :  '  but  ye,  who  do  ye  say  that  I  (/u.e)  am  ? '  In  so  far  as  '  son
of  man'  is  a  designation  of  the  Messiah,  according  to  the  form
of  the  first  question  in  Mt.,  the  answer — viz.,  'Thou  art  the
Christ,'  would  already  have  been  given  by  Jesus  in  the  question.
Yet  this  form  of  the  question  presumably  is  due  not
to  unhistoricity  on  Mt. 's  part,  but  to  intention.  Already
in  Mt.  1023  ]24o  1841,  and  especially  in  1433  ( '  °f  a
truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God  '),  all  which  passages  are
wanting  in  Mk.  and  Lk. ,  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  has
"been  proclaimed.  At  this  stage,  therefore,  the  appro
priate  question  in  1613  is  no  longer,  Whom  do  the  people
say  that  I  am?  but  only,  Whom,  more  exactly,  do  the
people  say  that  he  who  is  already  known  as  the  Son  of
Man  is?  Accordingly,  in  Mt. ,  the  answer  of  Peter
does  not  run  simply  as  in  Mk.  ('  Thou  art  the  Christ,'
<n>  el  6  Xpiffros  ;  similarly  in  Lk.  '  the  Christ  of  God,'
•rbv  Xpicrroi'  rov  GeoO),  but  there  is  added,  as  the  most
important  of  all,  the  addition  :  '  the  son  of  the  living
God '  (6  vibs  rov  Qeov  rov  fuWos).  This  last  title
plainly  must  be  regarded  as  expressing  more  than  '  the
Christ '  (6  XpwrTos)  or  than  '  Son  of  Man,'  and  therefore
denotes  Jesus  not  as,  let  us  say,  in  an  ethical  sense  a
Son  of  God  after  the  manner  of  the  OT,  that  is,  as
one  who  subordinates  his  will  to  the  will  of  God  as  a
son  does  in  presence  of  his  father,  but  in  a  metaphysical
sense  as  a  being  proceeding  in  a  supernatural  way  from

4S77


God,  a  meaning  which  is  not  necessarily  connected
with  either  'Messiah'  or  'Son  of  Man.'  Thus  we
have  here  a  dogmatic  development.

(c)  Granted, however, that Mt. in the points  just
mentioned  goes  beyond  the  original  record,  it  does  not
necessarily  follow  that  he  has  also  altered  the  situation
in  an  unhistorical  sense  by  the  words  assigned  to  Jesus
in  1617  which  are  not  met  with  in  Mk.  or  Lk. : '  rlesh
and blood hath not revealed it unto thee but my
Father,'  etc.

Even  should  Wrede  be  correct  in  saying  that  Mk.  attaches  to
the  confession  of  Peter  just  as  little  importance  as  to  the  words  of
the  demoniacs  who,  on  his  representation,  more  than  once  (1  240  7)
applied  to  Jesus  the  same  predicate  as  Peter  applies  here,  and
that  on  this  account  Jesus  does  not  praise  Peter,  but,  just  as  in
the  case  of  the  demoniacs,  merely  bids  him  be  silent,  this  way  of
looking  at  the  matter  would  simply  be  in  each  instance  only  a
consequence  of  the  view  attributed  by  Wrede  to  Mk.  that  the
Messiahship  of  Jesus  had  to  be  kept  secret.

As  a  historical  fact,  however,  apart  from  the  repre
sentation  of  Mk. ,  the  occurrence  could  in  no  case  have
elicited  such  a  judgment  on  the  part  of  Jesus.  For
even  in  the  representation  of  Mk.  Jesus  assuredly  does
not  act  upon  the  plan  of  concealing  his  Messiahship  ;
he  studiously  seeks  to  elicit  an  expression  of  it  from  the
disciples.  It  is  presupposed  in  this  that  they  have  not
as  yet  recognised  him  as  Messiah.  It  is  thus  a  moment
of  the  greatest  possible  importance  when  the  words
'  Thou  art  the  Messiah '  are  for  the  first  time  spoken  by
them.

(d)  The  injunction  to  tell  no  man  is  also,  even  without
the  theory  of  Mk.  spoken  of  above,  very  readily  intelligible
in the  mouth  of  the  historical  Jesus, inasmuch  as  he
cannot  have  been  without  apprehensions  lest  the  people
should  misunderstand  his  Mcssiahship,  and  perhaps  set
their  hopes  on  him  as  one  who  was  to  free  them  from
the  yoke  of  Rome. Nevertheless, the  scene  retains  its
importance  as  marking  a  turning-point  in  the  conscious
ness  of  the  disciples,  and  can  therefore  quite  appropri
ately  be  spoken  of  as  a  divine  revelation  accorded  to
Peter. In  view  of  the  importance  it  thus  possessed,  it  is
also  easy  to  believe  that  it  should  have  engraved  itself
upon  the  memory  of  the  disciples  and  taken a  secure
place  in  tradition — unless  one  were  to  regard  it  as  pure
fiction. Against this, however, as Wrede also has
perceived, there are various considerations, amongst
them  this,  that  it  is  assigned  to  a  definite  locality  in  the
journey  to  Ca;sarea  Philippi,  which  seems  to  point  to
definite  recollection. On  the  point  that  Mt.  11  27  gives
no  ground  for  doubting  the actuality  of  Peter's  con
fession,  see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  25  £.

Immediately  on  Peter's  confession  follows  in  all  the
synoptists  the  first  prediction  by  Jesus  of  his  passion,

death,  and  resurrection  (Mk.  831  f.  —
17.  Designation  Mt  ^  =  Lk_  ^ . ^ in 'Mk

as  batan.  (S32/.)  and  Mt.  (1622/. )  it  is  added
that  Peter  had  reproved  his  master,  but  was  in  turn
rebuked  and  addressed  as  Satan.  Here  it  must  be
again  remarked  that  not  only  the  predictions  of  Jesus
regarding  his  resurrection,  but  also  the  detailed  predic
tions  of  his  passion  and  death  are  open  to  grave  doubt,
and  least  probable  of  all  is  it  that  precisely  at  the
moment  when  Peter  had  uttered  his  confession  for  the
first  time — a  moment  which  must  have  been  one  of  the
most  joyful  in  all  his  life — Jesus  should  have  expressed
himself  as  he  did  (see  GOSPELS,  §  145  e,f).  This  is
not  equivalent  to  saying  that  Jesus  on  no  occasion  in
the  later  period  of  his  public  life  ever  had  or  expressed
the  thought  that  suffering  and  death  might  be  in  store
for  him.  On  some  such  occasion  may  very  well  have
happened  the  scene  between  Peter  and  his  master
which  now  stands  immediately  after  the  great  confession.
The  expression  '  Satan  '  by  its  very  strength  is  its  own
guarantee  that  none  of  the  later  narrators  could  have
invented  it  ;  in  fact,  the  entire  scene  is  wanting  in  the
evangelist  to  whom  tendency-criticism  would  have  found
least  difficulty  in  assigning  it  (see  above,  §  5  b,  c).

4578


SIMON  PETER
III.  ACCORDING  TO  THE  FOURTH  GOSPEL.
If  we  turn  now  to  the  utterances  of  the  Fourth  Gospel


18.  Less


regarding  Peter,  we  shall  find  that  sonic  of


strone-lv tnein  rest  uPon  those  of  the  synoptists  and
•[.  have  merely  received  a  Johannine  colouring  ;


divergent
points.


but  that others, where they  contain new


matter,  cannot  lay  claim  to  historicity.

(a)  The nearest  approach to  the synoptic  account
(Mk.  1426-31  and  ,!)  is  made  by  the  Johannine  in  describ
ing  the  prediction  of  Peter's  denial  (Jn.  1833-38) ;  yet  even
here  we  already  see  clearly  the  Johannine  colouring.

It  is  not  as  in  Mk.  and  Alt.  the  adjoining  reference  to  the
dreaded  scattering  of  the  disciples  that  gives  Peter  the  occasion
for  making  his  promise  never  to  leave  Jesus  ;  it  is  a  specifically
Johannine  thought  which  in  a  quite  similar  manner  has  already
been  brought  forward  in  7  33_/?  821,  and  which,  moreover,  as  we
so  often  find  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  lends  itself  to  misunder
standing  as  possessing  at  once  an  obvious  external  meaning
a:id  a  hidden  spiritual  sense:  'Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come. '
Peter,  like  all  the  interlocutors  of  Jesus  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,
takes  it  in  the  surface-meaning:  Lord,  whither  goest  thou?
.  .  .  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  thee  even  now?'  As  regards
the  time  at  which  this  was  said,  Jn.  agrees  with  Lk.  against
Mk.  and  Mt.  (see  above,  §  15^).

(b)  In  the  account  of  the  arrest  of  Jesus  a  legendary
development  is  apparent  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  so  far
as  here  (18 10)  the  name  of  Malchus  the  servant  of  the
high  priest  is  given  ; it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  synoptists.
Equally  legendary  perhaps,  but  perhaps  also  deliberately
followed,  is  the  other  development  according  to  which
Peter  is  named  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  as  the  follower  who
wielded  the  sword  whilst  the  synoptists  merely  say  : '  A
certain  one  of  them  that  stood  by  '  (Mk.  1447),  or  words
to  the  same  effect.

To  this,  moreover,  it  has  to  be  added  that  it  is  only  in  the
synoptists  that  any  motive  can  be  found  for  the  stroke  ;  it  is  at
the  moment  when  Jesus  is  being  seized  (so  Mk.  and  Mt.)  or
about  to  be  seized  (so  Lk.)  in  consequence  of  the  treachery  of
Judas.  In  Jn.,  on  the  other  hand,  the  entire  cohort  of  500  (or
1000)  men  has  fallen  to  the  ground  ;  Jesus  voluntarily  surrenders
himself  and  all  that  he  asks  of  his  captors  is  that  his  disciples  may
be  allowed  to  escape  unharmed  (184-9).  Lastly,  the  word  with
which  JCMIS  rebukes  the  sword-stroke  receives  a  Johannine  form.
In  Mk.  it  is  not  reported  at  all  ;  Lk.  ('2251)  has  it  quite  briefly  :
'Suffer  ye  thus  far.'  Thus  what  lies  at  the  basis  of  Jn.  is  Mt.
2652-54  ;  but  in  Jn.  18  n  this  is  compressed  into  the  question  :
'  The  cup  which  the  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  '
By  this  question  is  set  aside  from  the  outset  by  the  Johannine
Christ  a  thought  which  the  Jesus  of  the  synoptists  earnestly
cherishes  for  a  time  —  that  involved  in  the  prayer  that  '  this  cup  '
might  pass  from  him — exactly  as  in  1^27,  where  the  words  are
to  be  taken  as  a  question  :  'What  shall  I  say?  (Shall  I  say:)
Father  save  me  from  this  hour?'  (cp  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEK,
§  26  a).

Jn.  has  left  on  one  side  the  statement  of  Lk.  (22si)
that  Jesus  healed  the  ear  of  the  servant  of  the  high
priest.  Perhaps  the  miracle  seemed  to  him  purposeless
in  such  a  situation,  or  hardly  worthy  of  the  dignity  of
the  Logos.

(c)  That  the  parallel  to  the  confession  of  Peter  (Mk.
827-30  and j's) is  to  be  found in Jn.  666-71 is  almost
universally  conceded. It  is  indeed  the  only  scene  in
which, as  in the  synoptists, in  answer to  a  question
expressly  addressed  to  all  the  twelve  disciples,  Peter  as
their  spokesman  makes  a  confession  to  Jesus  ;  moreover,
it  follows soon  after  the  miracle  of  the  feeding  of  the
multitude  (in Mk.  and  Mt.  after  the  second  miracle).
This  makes  the  variations  all  the  more  remarkable.

The  place  is  not  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Csesarea  Philippi
but  (according  to  059)  at  Capernaum.  Peter  does  not  designate
Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  nor  can  he  ;  for  this  has  already  been
done  by  Andrew  (141),  and  indeed  still  higher  predicates  have
been  already  employed  by  the  Baptist  (I  1529-34),  by  Nathanael
(1  49),  and  by  Jesus  himself  (:i  13  16  426,  etc.).  The  contents  of
Peter's  confession  have  thus  lost,  still  more  completely  than  in
Mt.  (see  §  166),  that  character  of  novelty  which  gives  it  its  his
torical  importance.  The  expression  'the  holy  one  of  God'
(o  oiyios  rov  <e>eov)  also,  employed  by  Peter,  is  new  only  in  the
Fourth  Gospel,  but  carries  neither  in  the  literal  meaning  of  the
wotds  nor  by  virtue  of  the  application  made  of  it  in  Mk.  1  24  =
Lk.  4  34,  by  the  demoniac  in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum  (cp
'the  holy  one,'  o  oiyios,  Rev.  3  7  ijn.  2  20 ;  'Aaron, 'the  holy
one  of  the  Lord,'  '\apuiv  rov  aytov  Kvptov,  Ps.  10(>  16  ;  '  the  holy
and  just,'  6  oiyios  <tac  cU'»catos,  Acts  3  14),  a  predicate  transcending
those  previously  made  use  of  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Further-
mote,  the  words  of  Peter  are  entirely  in  the  Johannine  didactic
style  :  '  words  of  eternal  life  '  (cp  3  34-36  6  63  12  49^)  ;  '  we  have

4579


SIMON  PETER

believed  and  know'  (cp  11  27  173  i  Jn.  4  16).  Finally,  we  note
the  absence  of  any  word  of  recognition  on  the  part  of  Jesus  such
as  we  find  in  at  least  Mt.  16  17.

(</)  According  to  Jn.  1  44,  Hethsaida  is  the  city  of  Peter
(and  Andrew)  ;  according  to  Mk.  121  29  =  Lk.  431  38,  as
also  according  to  Mt.  85  14,  it  is  Capernaum.

In  explanation  of  the  discrepancy  it  is  suggested  that  Peter
(and  Andrew)  originally  belonged  to  Bethsaida ;  or  recourse  is
even  had  to  the  wholly  inadmissible  exegesis  that  according  to  the
change  of  prepositions  in  Jn.  1  44  Philip  was  in  virtue  of  his  then
domicile  '  of  Bethsaida  (an-b  BijttcratSa)  but  by  birth  he  was  '  out
of  Capernaum  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Peter  (e'<c  ni)s  n-oAewj
'A.v&p<sov  «ai  IleVpou).  In  reality  it  is  even  uncertain  whether
the  naming  of  Bethsaida  has  claim  or  only  makes  claim  to  his
torical  accuracy.  Cp  PHILIH,  col.  3700,  n.  2.

In  the  account  of  the  denial  of  Peter  (Jn.  1815-27) —

(a)  The  most  important  differences  as  compared  with
the  synoptists  ( Mk.  14  54  66-72  and  ,  s)  are  that  Peter  gains
19  Denial  access  to  tne  palace  of  the  high  priest
through  the  intervention  of  an  '  other
disciple,'  and  that  his  repentance  is  not  recorded.
Upon  both  these  points  see  §  22,  begin.  Legendary
development  is  seen  in  the  touch  that  he  who  gives
occasion  for  Peter's  third  denial  is  said  to  have  been  one
of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  being  a  kinsman  of
him  whose  ear  Peter  cut  off.  Furthermore,  the  series
of  the  three  denials  of  Peter  is  broken,  not,  however,  as
in  Lk.  (2259)  between  the  second  and  the  third,  and  not
by  the  simple  statement  that  an  interval  of  about  an
hour  had  elapsed,  but  between  the  first  and  the  second,
and  this  by  the  account  of  the  whole  proceedings  in  the
palace  of  Annas  and  of  Jesus's  being  led  away  to  the
palace  of  Caiaphas.

(£)  Spitta  (Zur  Gesch.  n.  Lit.  d.  Urchristenthums,
1158-168,  1893)  conjectures  the  original  order  of  the
verses  to  have  been  :  n/.  19-24  14-18  25^-27.

That  is  to  say :  Jesus  was  brought  from  Gethsemane  to  the
palace  of  Annas ;  here  Caiaphas  (not  Annas)  investigated  the
case,  then  Annas  sent  him  to  Caiaphas ;  thereupon  arrived  first
the  '  other  disciple '  and  thereafter  Peter  in  the  courtyard  of
Caiaphas  (not  Annas)  and  Peter  denied  his  master  three  times
in  unbroken  succession.  When,  shortly  after  the  publication  of
the  work  of  Spitta,  the  Syr.  sin.  became  known,  it  was  found  that
in  the  main  it  followed  the  same  order,  viz.  vt>.  i2_f.  24  14  f.
19-23  16-18  25^-27.  Thus  here  also  the  case  is  heard  before
Caiaphas,  but  in  his  own  palace,  not  in  that  of  Annas  ;  here  also
Peter  comes  into  the  court  of  Caiaphas  not  of  Annas  ;  here  also
there  is  a  threefold  denial  without  intervening  incident  and
v.  25«  ('now  Simon  Peter  was  standing  and  warming  himself)
which  coincides  with  the  close  of  z>.  18  falls  away,  but  the
entrance  of  the  '  other  disciple  '  into  the  court  of  Caiaphas  does
not  immediately  precede,  but  happens  some  considerable  time
before.

(c)  Notwithstanding  this  very  large  measure  of  agree
ment  neither  of  these  two  rearrangements  of  the  verses
can  be  regarded  as  the  original.  If  it  was,  as  Spitta
thinks,  Caiaphas  who  dealt  with  the  case  of  Jesus  in
the  house  of  Annas,  the  expression  in  v.  24  that  it  was
Annas  who  sent  Jesus  to  Caiaphas  is  as  awkward  as  it
could  possibly  be.  Syr.  sin.  has  in  point  of  fact  avoided
this  awkwardness  by  reporting  no  hearing  at  the  house
of  Annas  at  all.  In  this  way,  however,  the  addition  in
Syr.  sin.  of  '  the  chief  priest '  (rbv  apxifpfa)  to  Caiaphas
( Kaia0ac)  in  -'.  24  becomes  all  the  more  impossible  if
this  verse  follows  immediately  upon  f.  13  in  which
Caiaphas  is  named  as  high  priest  of  that  year.  Before
all  others,  however,  this  question  will  obtrude  itself:
In  what  way,  if  it  be  not  the  original,  could  the  present
order  of  the  verses  have  arisen  ?

Spitta's  answer  is  that  the  copyist's  eye  wandered  from  T.  13
to  ?'.  24  and  wrote  therefore  its  continuation  (the  present  ii<.  14-
18)  by  mistake  immediately  after  r'.  13.  When  he  had  reached
v.  1 8,  that  is  to  say  the  middle  of  Peter's  threefold  denial,  he  became
aware  that  he  had  passed  over  the  entire  hearing  of  Jesus,  along
with  his  removal  to  the  palace  of  Caiaphas  (19-24),  and  forthwith
introduced  these  verses  into  his  text  immediately  after  v.  18.
Only  after  he  had  done  this  did  he  proceed  to  finish  the  account
of  Peter's  denial  (25^-27);  but  with  a  view  to  this,  in  order  to
resume  the  thread  that  had  been  dropped,  he  had  first,  in  the
exercise  of  his  own  discretion,  to  repeat  the  close  of  v.  18,  and
that  in  the  somewhat  modified  form  which  we  now  have  in  25*1.
It  is  indeed  hard  to  say  in  what  possible  sense  we  can  call  a
man  who  goes  to  work  thus  a  copyist.  As  if  we  did  not  know
from  a  hundred  examples  how  it  was  that  copyists  proceeded
when  they  happened  to  have  omitted  anything  :  they  placed  it
on  the  margin  and  inserted  merely  a  caret  in  the  text.  The

4580


SIMON  PETER

same  observation  holds  good,  of  course,  if  it  was  the  order  of  Syr.
sin.  and  not  that  of  Spitta  which  the  '  copyist  '  altered  into  that
which  we  now  have.  All  the  more  does  it  require  to  be  borne
in  mind  that  often  the  case  is  plainly  the  other  way  ;  the  author
of  Syr.  sin.  has  allowed  himself  the  most  arbitrary  changes  of
the  text.l

I  has  to  be  added,  however,  that  in  his  case  it  is
possible  to  perceive  a  reason  for  the  changes  found  in
his  text  ;  he  wished  to  make  Peter's  denial  a  unity  and
to  get  rid  of  the  repetition  which  he  deemed  irksome  —
of  v.  18  end  in  v.  25^.  For  the  converse  procedure,  on
the  other  hand,  the  production  of  our  present  text  out
of  that  of  Syr.  sin.  or  that  conjectured  by  Spitta,  no
reason  can  be  imagined  ;  and  thus  Spitta  had  no
choice  but  to  have  recourse  to  his  untenable  hypothesis
of  a  copyist  who  yet  was  no  copyist  nor  yet  a  redactor
either.

(rf)  Although  Syr.  sin.  and  Spitta  have  thought  the
present  order  of  the  text  capable  of  improvement  it
nevertheless  remains  intelligible  enough  even  without
transposition.  The  new  element  in  Jn.  which  neither
Syr.  sin.  nor  Spitta  could  or  would  remove  is  the  fact
that  Jesus  before  being  delivered  over  to  Pilate  was
taken  to  two  separate  places,  to  the  house  of  Annas
and  to  that  of  Caiaphas.

According  to  Mk.  and  Mt.  he  is  brought  only  to  the  '  high
priest'  (Mk.  1453;  Mt.  2057  adds  the  name  of  Caiaphas)  and
from  there  taken  to  Pilate  (Mk.  15  i  =  Mt.  27  iyC).  Mk.  and
Mt.,  however,  record  two  sittings  of  the  synedrium  on  the  case  ;
the  first  during  the  night,  the  second  in  the  morning.  Lk.  knows
only  the  second  of  these  (22  66-23  i);  in  his  narrative  it  is  not
till  morning  that  the  synedrium  meets  ;  in  the  night  Jesus  looks
upon  Peter  after  his  third  denial  and  thus  he  is  still  in  the  court
yard,  not  in  the  court-room,  and  in  accordance  with  this  repre
sentation  is  in  the  course  of  the  night  only  mocked  and  buffeted
(Lk.  2261-65),  which  likewise  is  to  be  pictured  as  taking  place  in
the  courtyard.  On  this  view  it  remains  a  possibility  that  Lk.,
like  Mk.  and  Mt.,  thinks  of  the  morning  meeting  of  the  synedrium
as  being  held  in  the  same  high-priestly  palace  into  which  Jesus
was  brought  from  the  first.  The  words  (Lk.  22  66),  '  they  led  him
away  into  their  council  '  (aTufiyayov  aiiTov  els  TO  o-vveSpiov  aiirlav),
in  that  case  mean  only  that  they  led  him  away  (out  of  the  court
yard)  into  the  chamber  of  the  same  palace  in  which  the  synedrium
meanwhile  had  assembled.  This  interpretation  is  favoured  by
'  their  '  (aiiriav).  Vet  it  is  also  possible  that  Lk.  thinks  of  the
synedrium  as  assembling  in  another  house  —  most  easily  in  the
place  of  their  solemn  meetings.  The  '  led  away  '  (a-nriyayov)  in
22  66  will  then  mean  that  they  led  Jesus  into  another  house  ;  and
the  word  actually  is  so  used  in  Mt.  27  2,  and  still  earlier  in  2657


1  Even  in  the  pericope  before  us,  for  example,  an  instance
occurs  in  v.  i6yC  The  portress  is  here  called  first  '  the  portress  '
(i,  ffvptapos)  simply,  then  afterwards  '  the  maid,  the  portress  '  (17
iraiSi'o-KT)  r;  dvptapos).  This  is  a  noticeable  circumstance  and
finds  its  explanation  only  in  this,  that  when  she  is  mentioned
for  the  second  time,  it  is  said  that  she  charged  Peter  with  being
one  of  the  followers  of  Jesus.  According  to  the  synoptists  this
was  done  by  a  maid  (nai&ia-Ki),  Mk.  1466  and  ||s),  and  in  remi
niscence  of  this  Jn.  subsequently  added  this  expression  to  his
'portress'  (^  Ovptapos).  Syr.  sin.,  however,  has  'porter'  for
'  portress  '  in  v.  16  and  makes  '  the  maid,  the  portress  '  (17  ircuSiVioj
T)  dvpiapos)  in  v.  17  into  the  porter's  maid.  As  other  examples  of
arbitrary  alterations  which  (unless  where  otherwise  stated)  are
quite  peculiar  to  Syr.  sin.  we  may  mention  :  (Mt.  Hi  13)  '  \Vhat
do  men  say  concerning  me  ?  who  then  is  this  son  of  man  ?'  (on
this,  cp  above  §  i6£);  or  (Lk.  166<$),  'and  he  [i.e.,  the  steward]
sat  down  quickly  and  wrote  them  fifty'  and  (167^),  'he  sat
down  immediately  [and}  wrote  them  fourscore  '  ;  or  (Jn.  8  57  —
with  N*sah),  '  thou  art  not  fifty  years  old  and  hath  Abraham
seen  thee?'  or  Lk.  24,  where  as  in  D  the  last  clause,  'because
he  was  of  the  house  and  family  of  David,'  is  introduced  after
T.  5,  and,  moreover,  altered  into  '  because  they  were  both  of  the
house  of  David."  Syr.  sin.  also  knows  how  to  make  important
changes  in  the  text  by  simple  addition.  Examples  are  :  Jn.  663
(it  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth  the  body  :  bitt  ye  say  the  body
profiteth  nothing),  or  12  3  (now  Mary  took  an  alabaster  box  of  a
pound  of  ointment  of  pure  good  spikenard,  of  great  price,  and
poured  it  on  the  head  of  Jesus  while  he  sat  at  meat,  and  she
anointed  his  feet),  or  Lk.  23  37  (addition  :  and  they  placed  also
on  his  head  a  cro^vn  of  thorns).  Of  additions  arbitrarily  made
for  decoration  or  smoothing  we  may  give  such  instances  as
(Lk.  11  29),  '  no  sign  from  heaven  shall  be  given  unto  them,'  or
(Jn.  36,  at  close),  ''because  God  is  a  living  spirit'  [Tert.  and
codd.  of  Itala,  etc.,  have  simply:  quia  deus  sfiiritus  est\  or
(11  39),  '  Martha  said  unto  him,  Lord,  why  are  they  lifting  away
the  stone?  Behold,  he  stinketh  '  ;  or  (11  41),  'then  those  men
who  were  standing,  came  near  and  raised,'  or  (20  16),  '  and  she
understood  him  and  answered  saying  unto  him  :  Rabbuli.
And  she  ran  towards  him  that  she  might  touch  him'  [last
clause  also  in  x^.a,  the  Ferrar  codd.  13,  346,  543,  826,  828,  syr.

ril.


pal.,  syr.  hkl.,  Vg.  MSS  mm,  gat,  armach,  Cyril.
4581


SIMON  PETER

=  Mk.  1453,  as  also  are  'led'  (riyayov)  in  Lk.23  i  and  'led  away'
(d-nriveyKav)  Mk.  15  I.

(e)  In  any  case  Jn.  was  fully  entitled  so  to  understand
it  and  accordingly  to  take  from  Lk.  the  transference  of
Jesus  from  one  house  to  another.

Only  what  he  thinks  of  as  being  the  second  house  to  which  Jesus
was  brought  is  not  the  meeting-place  of  the  synedrium  ;  and  on
his  premises  he  is  right  ;  for  at  the  time  when,  according  to  Lk.
(if  this  be  his  meaning),  the  place  was  being  used,  viz.  in  the
morning,  it  was  accessible,  but  it  was  not  accessible  in  the  night
time,  when,  according  to  Jn.  Jesus  was  being  transferred  (before
cockcrowing ;  see  Jn.  1824  27),  as  it  was  situated  on  the  temple
hill(Schiirer,  GJW)  2  162-164  ;  ET  ii.  1 190-195)  the  gates  of  which
were  shut  at  night.  Thus  there  remains  for  Jn.,  as  the  second
house  to  which  Jesus  could  appropriately  be  brought,  only  the
palace  of  the  high  priest.  The  house,  however,  to  which  Jesus
is  in  the  first  instance  brought  is  also  called  (Mk.  1453  and  ||s)
that  of  the  high  priest.  At  this  point,  therefore,  came  to  the
assistance  of  Jn.  the  statement  in  Lk.32  Acts  46,  according  to
which  Annas  also  was  high  priest  ;  and  that  the  evangelist  was
following  this  is  apparent  (although  he  nowhere  designates  Annas
as  high  priest)  in  the  fact  that  he  calls  Caiaphas  '  high  priest  of
that  year '(11  49  51  1813).  I"  ^a.ct  >l  has  even  been  held  that
Lk.  regards  Annas,  whom,  alike  in  3  2  and  in  Acts  46,  he  places
before  Caiaphas,  as  the  real  high  priest  in  Jesus'  time,  and  thus
that  he  thinks  with  Jn.,  that  Jesus  was  brought  from  Gethsemane
direct  to  the  house  of  Annas.

Be  this  as  it  may,  in  any  case  Jn.  seeks  to  remove
the  discrepancies  of  the  synoptists.  He  follows  Lk. ,
as  he  understands  him,  in  so  far  as  he  represents  Jesus
as  having  been  brought  from  one  house  to  another  ;  but
Mk.  and  Mt.  in  so  far  as  he  represents  some  hearing  of
the  case  to  have  taken  place  during  the  night,  only  with
out  the  nocturnal  meeting  of  the  synedrium  affirmed  in
Mk.  14s3  =  Mt.  2657,  and  then  before  the  high  priest
alone — by  whom  Jn.  understands  Annas.  In  all  prob
ability  therefore  Jn.  thinks  of  the  meeting  of  the  synedrium
as  having  been  in  the  house  of  Caiaphas,  but  without
describing  it.

(/)  These  points  once  clearedup,  we  are  in  a  position  to
understand  the  story  of  Peter's  denial  in  Jn.  In  making
the  denial  begin  directly  after  Jesus  has  been  brought  in
after  his  arrest,  Jn.  is  simply  following  Lk. ,  who  in  fact
knows  of  no  hearing  of  the  case  at  all  by  night  ;  in
representing  the  denial  as  having  been  interrupted  he
also  is  following  Lk.  in  so  far  as  in  this  gospel  (Lk.
22sg)  the  series  of  the  denials  is  broken  by  an  interval  of
something  like  an  hour  ;  in  Jn. ,  however,  the  interruption
is  caused  by  the  account  of  the  first  hearing  which  Jn. ,
departing  from  Lk. ,  takes  from  Mk.  and  Mt.  Thus  it
becomes  perfectly  intelligible,  and  not  to  be  regarded  as
a  copyist's  error,  that  the  statement  about  Peter's
standing  at  the  fire  and  warming  himself  is  repeated
from  18 18  in  18  25^  when  the  story  of  the  denial  is
resumed.  In  precisely  the  same  way  Mk.  146?  repeats
from  v.  54  that  Peter  was  warming  himself,  and  Mt.
266g  from  v.  58  that  he  was  sitting  in  the  courtyard.
That  Peter's  arrival  in  the  courtyard  and  his  denial
should  at  all  costs  be  narrated  without  interruption
cannot  in  reason  be  demanded  ;  it  is  not  so  related  even
in  Mk.  and  Mt. ,  and  if  Jn.  allows  the  interruption  to
come  in  at  a  later  point  than  they  do,  this  is  mainly
due,  as  has  been  shown,  to  the  fact  that  he  is  here  at
first  following  Lk.

The  call  of  Peter  is  described  in  the  Fourth  Gospel
(135-42)  in  a  manner  entirely  different  from
that which  we  find in the  synoptists  (see
above,  §  13).

(a)  It  occurs,  not  by  the  lake  of  Galilee,  but  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Baptist,  who  has  not  yet  been  cast
into  prison  (as  he  has  in  Mk.  1 14  Mt.  4 12  Lk.  3 19 /. ),  but
himself  points  his  disciples  to  Jesus  ;  those  whom  Jesus
wins  to  his  side  do  not  appear  as  fishermen,  but — at
least  the  first  two  (1  35-40)  and  probably  Peter  also — as
disciples  of  the  Baptist.  Peter  is  not  called  first,  but
only  after  his  brother  Andrew  and  an  unnamed  person
by  whom  is  almost  universally  understood  the  beloved
disciple  ;  of  those  who  are  represented  in  the  synoptists
as  then  having  been  called,  John  (even  if  it  be  he  that
is  intended  by  the  companion  of  Andrew)  remains  un
named,  and  his  brother  James  is  left  entirely  unnoticed.

4582


20.  Call.


SIMON  PETER


SIMON  PETER


(6)  It  would  be  perfectly  useless  to  try  to  identify  the
two  accounts.  Harmonistic  efforts  confine  themselves
to  the  assertion  that  Jn.  is  describing  an  earlier
occurrence  than  that  recorded  in  the  synoptists.  That
in  Jn.  is  spoken  of  as  the  'call  to  friendship,'
that  in  the  synoptists  as  the  '  call  to  disciple-
ship.'  Any  such  distinction,  however,  is  quite
arbitrary.  The  'follow  me'  (d.Ko\ov6ei  /JLOI)  which
Jesus  addresses  in  Jn.  143  to  Philip,  holds  good  sub
stantially,  it  does  not  need  to  be  said,  also  for  those
called  before  Philip,  for  it  is  hard  to  see  why  we  are  to
regard  them  as  entering  into  less  intimate  relations  with
Jesus  than  he.  The  same  verb,  however  (a.KO\ovOeii>),
stands  inMk.  1  18  Mt.  4  20  22  Lk.  5n,  where  it  is  the  'call
to  disci  pleship'  that  is  described.  And  even  apart  from
this  it  would  be  quite  contrary  to  history  that  Jn.  should
allow  it  to  appear  as  if  those  disciples  who  had  been
called  only  to  friendship  remained  henceforward  con
tinually  in  the  company  of  Jesus  (as  in  point  of  fact  he
does  in  2  2  12  17  22  822  4  2  8  27  31-38,  etc.),  if  the  actual
truth  had  been  that  they  had  again  parted  from  Jesus
and  thereafter  received  from  him  the  new  call  of  which
the  synoptists  speak.  Similarly  it  would  be  quite  con
trary  to  history  on  the  part  of  the  synoptists  to  represent
the  calling  of  the  four  disciples  as  made  at  first  sight
without  previous  acquaintance  on  their  part  with  the
master,  if  the  truth  really  were  that  three  of  them  had
already  been  called  to  friendship  by  Jesus.

This  unhistorical  distinction  between  the  'call  to  friendship  '
and  the  '  call  to  discipleship  '  is  carried  to  the  farthest  extreme
when  the  '  call  to  apostleship  '  is  added  as  a  third  stage  which  is
seen  for  the  first  time  in  Mk.  3  14-19  and  j|s  in  the  chousing  of  the
twelve.  If  we  find  Jesus  already  saying  to  Peter  and  Andrew
in  Mk.  1  18  '  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men  '  (similarly
Mt.  4  19  Lk.  5  10),  how  are  we  to  describe  this  if  not  as  a  call  to
apostleship  ?  The  choosing  of  the  twelve  is  not  to  be  understood
as  if  the  four  disciples  who  had  already  been  chosen  were  now
chosen  a  second  time,  and  that  to  a  higher  dignity,  but  only  in
the  sense  that  the  other  eight  were  newly  chosen,  the  four  who
had  been  chosen  already  being  now  enumerated  along  with  the
otners  merely  in  order  to  make  up  a  complete  list  of  twelve.

(c)  If  then  the  accounts  of  Jn.  on  the  one  hand  and
the  synoptists  on  the  other  are  mutually  exclusive,  it  is
necessary  to make our choice  between them. The
precise  specification  of  clay  and  hour  in  Jn.  (1  29  33  39  43
2i)  might  seem  here  to  be  conclusive  evidence  that  the
Johannine  account  proceeds  from  an  eyewitness  ; but
this  becomes  plainly  impossible  when  it  is  considered
how  here  the Baptist  and  the  first  disciples  are  repre
sented  as  possessing  a  knowledge  regarding  the  Messiah-
ship,  and  indeed  also  regarding  what  goes  far  beyond
this,  the  divine  nature  of  Jesus,  such  as  in  actual  fact
they  cannot  have  possessed  at  least  at  so  early  a  period,
unless  indeed  we  are  prepared  to  reject  as  completely
unhistorical the whole picture of the synoptists  and
especially  the  novelty  of  Peter's  confession  at  C.-tsarea
Philippi. The  supernatural  knowledge  also  regarding
Peter  and  Nathanael  (Jn.  142477".  )  which  is  attributed
to Jesus is quite inconsistent with the synoptic
representation.

(d)  The unhistorical character of the Johannine
account  has  therefore  to  be  conceded  even  although  we
find  ourselves  unable  to  explain  in  detail  in  every  case
how  it  was  that  Jn.  came  to  his  far-reaching  divergences
from  the  synoptists. So  much  is  clear  —  that  he  takes
no  trouble  whatever  to  bring  himself  into  line  with  them,
but  seeks  to  give  a  representation  that  is  based  purely
on  ideal  considerations. Just  as  Jesus  is  already  in  the
prologue  introduced  as  the  Logos  of  God,  and  just  as
the  Baptist  straightway  proclaims  his  Godhead,  so  also
must  the  disciples  be  brought  to  him  from  the  beginning
through  their  recognition  of  this  truth,  and  arrive  at  this
recognition  through  the  agency  of  the  Baptist,  whereby
the latter  brings to its most effective fulfilment his
function as  forerunner  of  Jesus. '  He  must  increase,
but I must  decrease'  (830); this  is  the  motto  of  the
whole  history  of  the  call  ;  in  this  also  lies  the  reason
why  the  first  disciples  of  Jesus  must previously  have
been  disciples  of  John.

4583


(e)  A  further  object  Jn.  has  in  view  is  the  relegation
of  Peter  to  a  subordinate  place.  Elsewhere  (see  jj  22)
this  happens  only  so  far  as  the  beloved  disciple  is  con
cerned  ;  but  here  we  see  it  also  in  operation  with
reference  to  Andrew  who  elsewhere  comes  forward  but
little  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.

The  cause  of  this  feature  lies  perhaps  in  sympathy  with  the
story  of  the  walk  to  Emmaus,  with  regard  to  which  story  Thoma
(1,'t-ntsis  d.  Jok.-Evang.,  406-408  [1882])  supposes  that  it  served
Jn.  as  model.  Two  disciples  come  to  know  Jesus  as  Messiah  ;
the  one  is  afterwards  mentioned  by  name,  the  other  not  ;  on  their
return  to  Jerusalem  it  is  found  that  Jesus  has  appeared  also
to  Peter.  Thus  the  last-named  takts  the  third  place.

(/)  The  tenth  hour  also  (  Jn.  1  39)  Thoma  thinks  to  be
derived  from  Lk.  (24  29)  ;  '  it  is  towards  evening.'

Such  combinations,  however,  are  from  the  nature  of  the  case
uncertain.  What  is  certain  is  that  Jn.  reckons  the  hours  of  the
day  in  Jewish  fashion  (19  14)  and  thus  means  here  4  P..M.  Others
consider,  in  view  of  i  In.  2  18  ('  it  is  the  last  hour  '),  that  the
author  intends  to  divide  the  whole  development  of  the  world
into  twelve  periods,  which  he  allegorically  calls  hours,  and  that
what  he  means  to  say  is  that  the  entire  development  was  already
Hearing  its  end  when  Jesus  appeared,  whence  the  pressing
necessity  for  accepting  Christianity.  Or  it  is  pointed  out  that
according  to  Philo  (1  347  532-536  2  183-185,  ed.  Mangey)  ten  is
the  number  of  perfection,  with  which  accordingly  Christianity
as  the  age  of  perfection  begins.

Such  a  way  of  interpreting  the  'hour,'  however,  does
not  harmonise  very  well  with  the  specification  of
individual  days  in  1  29  35  43  2  i.  In  this  specification  one
may  have  much  greater  confidence  in  discerning  the  pro
gress  of  the  narrative  from  one  step  in  the  revelation  of
Jesus  to  another.  In  any  case  neither  it  nor  the  speci
fication  of  the  tenth  hour,  even  if  no  quite  satisfactory
explanation  of  the  latter  has  yet  been  found,  can  be
urged  as  evidence  that  the  author  was  an  eyewitness  of
what  he  describes.

As  with  the  call  of  the  disciples,  so  also  in  the  case  of

the  footwashing,  the  Fourth  Evangelist  has  not  supple-

0 _ , mented  a  synoptic  narrative  but  has  sup-


washin
&>


planted


(a)  Jn.'s  silence  as  to  the  institution  of
the  sacrament  of  the  supper  would  otherwise  be  inexplic
able.  Equally  inexplicable,  however,  would  be  the  silence
of  the  synoptists  about  the  rbotwashing  had  this  event
actually  happened.  Even  Lk.  ,  to  whom  appeal  is
made,  in  2224-27  records  only  the  thought  which  under
lies  the  footwashing,  not  the  fact.  One  may  as  well
deny  the  historicity  of  the  synoptists  altogether  if  one  is
determined  to  maintain  that  they  had  heard  nothing  of
so  important  an  action  of  Jesus  which  must  have  im
pressed  itself  so  indelibly  upon  the  recollection  of  those
who  witnessed  it.  On  the  other  hand  the  rise  of  the
narrative  of  the  footwashing  out  of  the  passage  just
cited  from  Lk.  (2224-27)  is  very  readily  intelligible,  and
that  too  even  without  our  supposing  any  deliberate
fiction  on  the  part  of  the  evangelist  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF
ZEBEDEE,  §  35  [/]).  The  transaction  taken  as  a
whole  is  the  highest  activity  of  ministering  love  (13  1  15
34  /.  );  in  so  far  as  it  occurs  at  a  meal,  it  stands  on  a
level  with  a  love-feast  (dydirrj  :  Jude  12)  and  thus  is  a
substitute  for  the  sacramental  supper  which  Jn.  ,  by
reason  of  the  data  on  which  he  was  working,  could  not
report  as  having  been  held  on  the  last  evening  of  the
lifetime  of  Jesus  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  23).

(t>)  The  person  of  Peter  comes  into  consideration  in
connection  with  a  subordinate  point  only.  He  hesitates,
out  of  reverence,  about  suffering  his  feet  to  be  washed
by  Jesus,  but  is  met  with  the  answer  :  '  if  I  wash  thee
not  thou  hast  no  part  with  me'  (138).  Whereupon
Peter  would  have  hands  and  head  washed  also,  but  is
told  :  '  he  that  is  bathed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his
feet  but  is  clean  every  whit  ;  and  ye  are  clean,'  etc.
(13io).  From  i>.  8  it  follows  that  the  footwashing  is
intended  to  be  not  a  manifestation  of  love  merely,  but
also  at  the  same  time  in  some  sort  a  means  of  grace  ;
from  v.  10  it  follows  that  this  means  of  grace  has  been
preceded  by  another  of  a  completer  character  —  by  which,
especially  in  view  of  the  expression  '  he  that  is  bathed  '
(6  XeXof/o&'os),  one  can  only  understand  baptism.  The

4584


SIMON  PETER

meaning  would  then  be  :  He  that  is  baptised  needs  only
a  partial  renewal  of  the  effect  of  baptism.

If  the  effect  of  baptism  is  held  to  be  the  forgiveness  of  sins,
the  footwashing  would  represent  a  means  of  grace  which  likewise
brings  a  forgiveness  though  not  so  comprehensive  as  that  of
baptism  but  only  of  particular  sins  committed  after  baptism.  It
is  quite  impossible  that  by  this  means  of  grace  should  be  meant
the  sacrificial  blood  of  Jesus.  For  neither  does  its  action  set  in
only  after  baptism  nor  does  it  admit  of  being  conceived  of  as
partial  only  ;  and  moreover,  in  the  circle  of  ideas  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  it  plays  no  further  part  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEHEUEE,  §
62  f,  begin.).  But  also  the  thought  of  a  second  repentance
following  upon  that  sealed  in  baptism,  as  suggested  in  Hernias
(I'is,  ii.  2  4,  Mand.  4  3),  is  quite  remote.  The  forgiveness  of  sins
that  constantly  needs  renewal  after  baptism  is  better  seen  in  the
sacrament  of  the  supper,  in  accordance  with  Mt.  26 28:  'unto
remission  of  sins."  With  this  it  agrees  that  the  eucharist  is
repeated,  baptism  not,  and  that  the  footwashing  as  representing
the  agape  is  intended  to  be  a  substitute  for  the  eucharist.

(c)  There  is  nevertheless  the  objection  that  forgiveness
of  sins  does  not  figure  in  the  Johannine  conception  of
the  eucharist  (626-63)  and  just  as  little  in  the  express
interpretation  of the  footwashing, which  according  to
138  is  regarded  rather  as  a  means  of  communion  with
Jesus. This  is  the  effect  of  the  eucharist  in  like  manner
according  to  Jn. ,  and  thus  we  are  led  by  this  considera
tion  also  to  the  conclusion  that  by  the  footwashing  the
eucharist  is  intended. It  cannot  be  denied,  however,  that
here  the  figure  of  cleansing  which  is  involved  in  the  idea
of  washing  has  disappeared,  and  the  picture  thus  loses
its  vividness.

(d)  It  becomes  all  the more  necessary  therefore  to
note  that in  Jn.  15  3 we have in all probability  an
authentic  interpretation  of  the  footwashing. As  in  13 10
so  also  here  we read: 'ye  are  clean,' only  not 'by
baptism,'  or  '  by  the  supper,'  but,  '  because  of  the  word
which  I  have  spoken  unto  you. '

This  declaration  is  very  like  that  made  in  6  63.  After  very
great  weight  has  been  laid  in  (i  53-58  upon  physical  participation
in  the  sacramental  meal,  we  find  it  nevertheless  soon  depreciated
again  in  favour  of  a  purely  spiritual  view  which  thinks  of
fellowship  with  Christ  as  realised  solely  by  means  of  his  word  :
'  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing  ;  the  words  that  I  have  spoken  unto
you  are  spirit  and  are  life.'  Just  so  in  15  3  also  the  mere  recep
tion  of  the  words  of  Jesus  is  given  as  the  means  of  purification  :n
place  of  any  sacramental  act  whatsoever.  And  this  reception  of
the  word,  according  to  the  connection  of  Jn.  13,  consists  specially
in  fulfilment  of  the  command  of  love.  On  this  view,  13 10
would  mean  :  he  who  has  been  baptised  is  in  need  of  no  further
sacramental  acts  ;  all  that  is  needed  is  that  he  should  follow  the
commandment  of  love.  At  the  same  time  this  does  not  perfectly
suit  either  the  words  or  the  thought.  If  it  is  to  fit  the  words
these  ought  to  run  somewhat  thus  :  '  he  that  is  bathed  needed
not  save  to  wash  the  feet  of  others  '  ;  and  as  for  the  thought —
that  which  depreciates  the  value  of  sacramental  acts — one  misses
the  extension  of  it  which  one  would  expect  to  baptism  also.

(e)  The  view  indicated  by  15s  is  thus  better  suited  by
the  reading  of  N  c,  several  Vg.  MSS  Orig.  and  Tert.
according  to  which  '  except  the  feet '  (fl  /ctrj  TOVS  TroSas)
is  wanting. In  this  case  'he  that  is  bathed'  (6  \f\ov-
fdvos)  will  no  longer  refer  to  baptism  but  to  footwashing  ;
he  who  has  received  the  footwashing,  that  is  to  say  who
has  taken  to  himself  the  command  of  love, needs no
sacramental  act  or  any  other  external  institution  but  is
quite  clean.

Yet  this  view  of  the  passage  also  is  not  wholly  just  to  the  tenor
of  the  words.  For  this  one  would  expect  some  such  text  as  '  he
whose  feet  are  washed  needs  not  to  wash  hands  or  head.'  And
further,  even  if  one  finds  it  possible  to  understand  how  the
longer  reading  could  have  arisen  out  of  the  shorter  as  soon  as
'  he  that  is  bathed  '  (6  AeAovne'i/os)  had  come  to  be  taken  as
referring  to  baptism  and  the  footwashing  to  the  supper,  at  the
same  time  the  converse  also  is  conceivable  —  that  on  account  of
the  words  '(he)  is  clean  every  whit '  it  seemed  inappropriate  that
the  washing  of  the  feet  should  still  be  required,  and  it  was
thought  necessary  to  restore  the  meaning  that  washing  of  a
wholly  clean  person  is  no  longer  at  all  needful,  by  deletion  of  the
words  '  except  the  feet '  (et  fir)  TOUS  TrdSas).

At  all  events,  whatever  may  be  the  proper  interpreta
tion  of  the  footwashing,  it  is  plain  that  in  it  Peter  plays
no  better  part  than  other  persons  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,
as  for  example  Thomas  (14s),  or  Philip  (148),  or  Judas
the  Cananaean  (1422),  or  Nicodemus  (84),  into  whose
mouth  an  unintelligent  saying  is  put  which  is  afterwards
set  right  by  Jesus  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  25 c).

The  same  thing  has  already  been  remarked  in  con-

4585


SIMON  PETER

nection  with  the  prediction  of  Peter's  denial  (1836-38),

22.  Peter  and  whfe Pet,er is, c°rrecled  f°r  a  mis;
. understanding  by  Jesus  ;  we  have  found
the  beloved ,  •  •

,. . .  him also shown in an unfavourable

aiscip  .  light  in  so  far  as  the  sword-stroke  is
attributed  to  him  (18io),  and  neither  his  repentance
after  his  denial,  nor  any  acknowledgement  of  Jesus  after
his  confession,  is  recorded  (1827  670).

(a)  It  is  to  the  beloved  disciple,  however,  in  particular,
that  Peter  is  subordinated  ;  to  him  he  owes  his  intro
duction  into  the  high  priest's  palace  (18 16),  and  only
after  him  (and  Andrew)  does  he  receive  his  call  to  the
discipleship  (\^f. ),  and,  further,  Peter  must  avail  him
self  of  his  aid  (1824)  in  order  to  learn  who  the  betrayer
is.  If,  following  the  figure  of  speech  which  we  see  in
Rev.  12 1-6  13-17,  it  is  the  Christian  church  that  is  to  be
understood  by  the  mother  of  Jesus  as  she  stands  at  the
foot  of  the  cross  (Jn.  19 25) — a  view  which  is  rendered
more  difficult,  it  is  true,  than  it  would  otherwise  be  by
the  presence  of  other  women  at  the  crucifixion — we
should  here  find  evidence  of  a  very  great  depreciation
of  Peter,  in  the  fact  that  she  is  committed  to  the  charge,
not  of  Peter,  but  of  the  beloved  disciple.  So  also  the
conferring  upon  all  the  apostles  of  the  power  to  remit
sins  or  to  retain  them  (2623),  if  we  are  to  suppose  it  to
have  been  already  known  to  the  Fourth  Evangelist  that
this  power  according  to  Mt.  1 6 19  had  been  conferred
upon  Peter  alone  (on  the  age  of  this  passage  see
GOSPELS,  §§  136,  151).

(b}  It  is  to  the  account  of  their  visit  to  the  sepulchre,
however  (20 2-10),  that  we  must  specially  turn,  for
elucidation  of  the  mutual  relations  of  Peter  and  the
beloved  disciple.  On  the  unhistorical  character  of  this
incident  see  GOSPELS,  §  138,  a,  e,  f.  Being,  as  it  is,
unhistorical,  we  may  all  the  more  safely  assume  that
here  it  is  intended  to  give  expression  to  an  idea.  This
idea  would  be  perfectly  transparent  if  the  precedence  of
the  one  apostle  over  the  other  had  been  recognised
without  qualification.  In  point  of  fact  a  certain
measure  of  precedence  is  assigned  to  each  in  turn.
Or  rather  to  Peter  in  one  respect,  namely  that  he  is
the  first  to  enter  the  sepulchre,  but  to  the  beloved
disciple  in  the  twofold  respect  that  he  is  the  first  to
arrive  at  the  sepulchre,  and  the  first  to  believe  in  the
resurrection.

Let  us  begin  with  what  is  clearest.  When  it  is  said  of  the
beloved  disciple  that  he  believed  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus(20s),
it  is  included  in  this  that  Peter  has  not  as  yet  come  to  do  so.
Now,  in  view  of  i  Cor.  165  (and  Lk.  2434)  it  is  quite  impossible
to  assert  that  any  one  arrived  earlier  than  Peter  at  the  con
viction  that  Jesus  was  arisen — unless  it  had  been  at  the  empty
sepulchre  ;  but  the  account  of  this  is,  as  has  been  shown,  un
historical.  If,  nevertheless,  a  deeper  truth  is  to  be  sought  in  it,
the  solution  must  be  found  in  the  conception  of  faith.  Not  in
the  holding  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  to  be  a  fact,  but  only  in  a
right  apprehension  of  the  nature  of  the  resurrection  and  of  the
risen  one,  can  any  one  have  taken  precedence  of  Peter,  a
precedence  represented  as  a  precedence  in  time,  because  the
truth  has  been  clothed  in  the  form  of  a  narrative  of  a  visit  to  the
grave.

And  if  it  is  to  the  beloved  disciple — that  is  to  say,
the  ostensible  author  or  guarantor  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEREUEK,  §  41 1/) — that
this  precedence  is  assigned,  we  also  know  wherein  it
consists  ;  namely,  in  the  spiritual  view  of  the  resur
rection,  according  to  which  the  risen  one  is  identical
with  the  holy  spirit  (see  RESURRECTION-NAKKATIVES,
§§  i6c,  agfi).  Oniy  by  way  of  antithesis  to  this  is  it
possible  to  gain  a  good  sense  for  the  statement  that
Peter  was  the  first  to  enter  the  grave,  and  the  first
to  observe  all  the  clothes  and  their  orderly  arrange
ment.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  to  him
(see  i  Cor.  15s  Lk.  2434)  that  he  was  the  first  to
ascertain  the  outward  tokens  of  the  resurrection  ;  herein
he  takes  a  relative  precedence.

What  has  just  been  said  still  leaves  unexplained  the  state
ment  that  the  beloved  disciple  was  the  first  to  reach  the
sepulchre.  And  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  what  precedence
over  Peter  is  intended  to  be  expressed  by  this ;  for  when  it  is
stated  that  he  was  the  first  who  in  the  deeper  sense  '  believed,'

4586


SIMON  PETER

all  ha;  been  said  which  could  secure  him  a  precedence  over
Peter  in  the  matter  itself.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  in  the
question  as  to  who  arrived  first  at  the  sepulchre,  it  is  only  a
precedence  in  point  of  time  that  is  thought  of — not,  however,  as
if  the  beloved  disciple  actually  had  taken  precedence  of  Peter  in
any  matter  of  importance,  but  only  in  so  far  as  he  was  at  first
held  in  higher  estimation  in  the  church  than  Peter.  The  most
significant  thing  in  the  narrative  is  certainly  this,  that  the
beloved  disciple  in  the  beginning  has  precedence  over  Peter,  but
that  afterwards  Peter  takes  this  pracedence  from  him,  and  only
in  the  end  does  the  beloved  disciple  receive  a  higher  valuation.

Now,  it  assuredly  was  not  throughout  the  whole
church  that  Peter  in  the  first  period  was  held  in  less
esteem  than  the  beloved  disciple,  that  is  to  say,  than
the  John  of  Asia  Minor.  We  must  reflect,  however,
that  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  it  is  not  the  entire  church,
hut  only  the  following  of  the  John  of  Asia  Minor  that
is  speaking.  For  the  latter  it  really  is  true  that  the
beloved  disciple  was  looked  on  as  the  first  witness  of
Christ,  the  risen  one  ;  but  if  it  is  added  that  Peter  took
his  precedence  from  him,  this  can  only  mean  that  the
estimate,  according  to  which  Peter  was  held  to  be  the
most  eminent  of  all  the  apostles,  had  gradually  found
acceptance  even  in  those  circles  which  in  the  first  period
had  given  the  first  place  to  John.  The  purpose
of  the  passage  before  us,  then,  is  to  restrict  this  high
estimate  of  Peter,  and  to  restore  to  John  the  place  of  pre
eminence.

(c)  The  last  mention  in  the  series  of  passages  which
seek  to  settle  the  relation  between  Peter  and  the  beloved
disciple,  is  found  in  chap.  21.  Here,  however,  the
tendency  is  in  the  other  direction.

Along  with  other  circumstances  this  also  supplies  a.  reason
why  we  should  attribute  this  chapter  to  a  different  authorship
from  that  of  Jn.  l-'-'O  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  40;
RESURKKCTION-NARKATIVES,  §§  yi,  gc,  2gc).  The  history  of
the  external  evidence  shows  that  for  several  decades  after  its
appearance  the  Fourth  Gospel  found  no  recognition  (JOHN,  §§
42-49).  In  chap.  21,  ini.  24  f.  clearly  reveal  the  purpose  to
remove  the  mistrust  with  which  it  was  regarded.  This  being
so,  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  deserves  to  be  scrutinised,  with
the  view  of  finding  whether  it  also  subserves  the  same  tendency.
In  point  of  fact  this  is  actually  seen  to  be  the  case,  as  soon  as
we  suppose  its  depreciation  of  Peter  to  have  been  one  of  the
causes  that  militated  against  the  general  recognition  of  the
Gospel.

Therefore  we  find  Peter  now  rehabilitated  to  a  con
siderable  extent.  It  is  still  the  beloved  disciple,  it  is  true,
who  first  recognises  the  risen  one  in  the  figure  standing  in
the  morning  on  the  shore  (21 7);  but  once  he  has
learned  who  it  is,  Peter  is  the  first  to  hasten  towards
him.  Further,  it  is  Peter  who  first  goes  a-fishing  and
who  draws  the  net  with  its  great  take  unbroken  to  the
shore  (21$  n).  Since  this  net  signifies  missions  in
general,  and  particularly  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles,
and  its  remaining  unbroken  symbolises  the  continued
unity  of  the  church  (see  above,  §  14^,  d,  c,  1],  it  is
hereby  recognised  that  Peter  was  the  originator  and
the  most  important  actor  in  the  missionary  activity  of
the  church,  including  the  mission  to  the  Gentiles,  and
the  guardian  of  the  unity  of  the  church.  The  leading
position  in  the  church  is  still  more  clearly  assigned  to
him  in  the  words  '  feed  my  lambs '  .  .  .  '  tend  my
sheep'  (2115-17),  which  are  a  further  development  of
Lk.  2232,  '  stablish  thy  brethren.'  Finally,  martyrdom
is  predicted  for  him,  and  this  as  an  honour  (21i8/l).
For  the  beloved  disciple  there  is  left  a  much  more
modest  part  than  he  has  in  chaps.  1-20  ;  he  too,  not
only  Peter,  may  follow  Jesus,  if  in  another  manner  than
by  death  ;  a  longer  life  is  allotted  to  him  than  to  Peter,
and  he  has  the  advantage  of  bearing  written  testimony
to  the  life  of  Jesus  (2120-24).

Let  us  now  seek  to  gather  together  the  results  of  the
foregoing  discussions  of  details,  and  attempt  to  form

some estimate of the character of
23.  Character  peter

of  Peter.  ^  It  jg  evident in  the  first  p]acei

that  we  must  refuse  to  avail  ourselves  of  very  much  of
the  material  that  is  usually  employed  for  this  purpose.

What  value  are  we  to  attach  to  such  inferences  as  that  which
deduces  from  his  proposal  at  the  transfiguration  to  build  taber
nacles  for  Jesus,  Moses,  and  Elijah,  or  from  the  precipitancy

4587


SIMON  PETER

with  which  in  Jn.  21  7  he  throws  himself  into  the  water  the
'  impulsiveness  '  of  Peter  ;  or  from  his  noticing  the  withering  of
the  fig  tree  (Mk.  11  21)  his  powers  of  observation  ;  or  I  rum  his
confession  in  Lk.  58,  '  I  am  a  sinful  man  '  his  humility  ;  or  from
his  hesitation  about  eating  unclean  animals  (Acts  10  14)  his  little
preparedness  to  follow  a  divine  leading  ;  or  from  his  action
connected  with  the  draught  of  fishes  in  Lk.  5  5  the  opposite  ;
or  from  his  sinking  in  the  attempt  to  walk  on  the  water  his
little  faith  ;  or  from  the  opposite  wishes  he  expressed  at  the
footwashing  (Jn.  185-9)  his  rapid  changes  of  mood  ;  or  from  his
conduct  at  the  sepulchre  his  '  practical  and  impetuous  'character,
or  more  particularly  from  his  being  second  in  the  race,  yet  first
to  enter  the  sepulchre,  his  greater  age  as  compared  with  the
beloved  disciple,  and  his  greater  boldness — if  the  incidents
never  really  happened  ?  What  validity  is  there  in  the  inference
of  the  liveliness  of  his  interest  from  the  frequency  of  his  ques
tions,  of  his  self-seeking  nature  from  his  question  as  to  the
future  reward  for  having  followed  Jesus,  of  his  recklessness
from  his  use  of  the  sword  in  Gethsemene,  if  there  can  be  no
certainty  whether  it  was  Peter  at  all  who  said  or  did  the  things
in  question?  Or  what  ground  is  there  for  discerning  the
rapidity  of  his  decisions  and  the  sanguineness  of  his  tempera
ment  from  his  following  Jesus  without  previous  acquaintance,
if  this  inference  rests  not  upon  actual  fact,  but  merely  upon  the
excessively  abbreviated  manner  in  which  the  matter  has  been
handed  down  to  us?  It  is  not  at  all  impossible  that  many  of
these  characteristics  really  did  belong  to  Peter  ;  but  it  is  not
permissible  to  deduce  them  from  the  NT  data  just  referred  to.

(£)  Even  when  we  restrict  ourselves  to  those  accounts
which  may  with  confidence  be  accepted,  caution  is  still
necessary  lest  we  should  take  more  out  of  them  than  we
are  entitled  to  do.

The  emphatic  remonstrance  made  by  Peter  against  the  idea
of  Jesus'  passion  is  simply  an  evidence  of  a  praiseworthy  love
and  solicitude,  such  as  assuredly  every  devoted  disciple  has  in
his  heart ;  the  reproachful  '  Satan,  thou  mindest  not  the  things
of  God,  but  the  things  of  men'  (Mk.  833)  is  spoken  from  quite
another  point  of  view,  to  appreciation  of  which  Peter  could  not
be  expected  to  have  at  that  time  attained.  As  regards  the
contrast  between  his  promise  not  to  be  offended  by  what  was  to
befall  Jesus  and  his  denial  so  soon  afterwards,  it  will  be  best  for
us  to  say,  Let  him  who  is  confident  that  in  a  like  position  he
would  show  himself  stronger  than  Peter  cast  the  first  stone.
Let  us  refrain,  too,  from  drawing  any  inference  as  to  character
from  his  sleep  in  Gethsemane.  Nor  can  we  venture  to  deduce
from  his  confession  at  Caesarea  Philippi  an  inclination  to  sudden
inspirations,  rapid  apprehension,  and  bold  expression  of  new
thoughts ;  for  we  do  not  know  how  far  the  confession  was
prepared  for  by  previous  hints  of  Jesus  (see  JOHN,  SON  OF
ZEBEDEE,  §  25  />).  or  whether  it  could  not  have  been  uttered  by
the  other  disciples  also.

(c)  We  can  best  arrive  at  the  kernel  of  Peter's
personality  by  contemplating  the  greatest  fact  of  his
whole  life, — his  faith  in  Jesus  which,  in  the  extra
ordinary  circumstances  in-which  he  found  himself,  led  by
psychological  laws  to  his  vision  of  the  risen  Jesus.  As  to
this  see,  more  especially,  RESURRECTION-NARRATIVES,
§  37.  In  this  one  fact  is  concentrated  the  whole
result  of  his  conviction  of  the  imperishable  value  of
that  which  Jesus  had  been  to  him,  of  the  gratitude
and  reverence  which  he  owed  him,  and  of  the  un
conditional  trust  which  he  had  learned  to  repose  in
him  and  in  his  heavenly  father.  It  is  true  that  the
triumphant  struggle  of  his  faith  against  the  over
powering  impression  left  by  the  death  of  Jesus  was
helped  by  something  that  cannot  be  reckoned  to  the
character  of  Peter  —  by  the  vision  he  had,  by  his
illusion  ;  and  his  denial  had  a  share  in  the  production
of  this  vision.  The  value  of  his  faith,  however,  is  not
lessened  by  this  ;  for  had  it  not  possessed  this  super-
eminent  strength,  the  vision  could  not  by  the  laws  of
psychology  have  arisen.

(ii)  The  stage  preliminary  to  Peter's  resurrection-
faith  was  the  confession  at  Caesarea  Philippi.  If  his
obedience  to  Jesus'  call  at  first  bears  witness  merely  to
the  depth  of  the  impression  which  the  words  and
person  of  Jesus  had  made  upon  him,  and  thus  shows
his  soul  to  have  had  the  religious  hunger  and  the
religious  receptivity  which  found  their  satisfaction  in
Jesus,  the  confession  carries  us  still  further.  It  shows
that  under  the  influence  of  Jesus  Peter  was  capable  of
purifying,  elevating,  and  spiritualising  those  national
and  political  ideas  which  as  a  Jew  he,  as  matter  of
course,  had  entertained  regarding  the  Messiah,  to  such
an  extent  that  he  was  able  to  discern  in  Jesus  the  true
Messiah.  That  he  also,  in  other  ways,  showed  himself

4588


SIMON  PETER


SIMON  PETER


steadfast  and  trustworthy,  is  shown  by  the  surname
Cephas  which  Jesus  gave  him  ;  and  the  leading  place
among  the  apostles  which  he  received  even  during  the
lifetime  of  Jesus,  and  maintained  in  a  still  greater
degree  after  his  death,  is  evidence  enough  that  in  more
than  one  direction  he  must  have  been  a  very  remarkable
personality.  This  does  not  preclude  us  from  observing
that  his  pre-eminence  was  also  associated  with  much
weakness.  It  is,  nevertheless,  certain  that  he  did  and
suffered  far  more  than  we  now  know.

(t?)  Both  sides,  the  favourable  and  the  unfavourable,
are  seen  also  in  his  relation  to  Paul  and  the  mission  to
the  Gentiles.  His  original  line  of  conduct  during  his
visit  to  Antioch  proves  that  he  was  no  such  bigoted
upholder  of  the  Mosaic  law  as  were  James  the  brother
of  Jesus  and  the  Judaists  who  made  their  way  into  the
churches  founded  by  Paul  in  Galatia  (see  GALATIANS,
§  13).  It  must  therefore  be  noted  to  his  credit  that  he
had  grasped  the  true  inwardness  of  the  religion  of  Jesus
better  than  they.

Even  if,  as  regards  outward  conduct,  Jesus  must,  generally
speaking  and  apart  from  questions  of  Pharisaic  strictness,  be
regarded  as  an  observer  of  the  law  of  the  fathers — for  otherwise
the  Judaising  zealots  for  the  law  could  not  have  claimed  to  be
called  his  disciples  at  all — in  his  fundamental  principles  he  was
far  beyond  the  position  which  would  have  made  salvation  in
any  way  dependent  on  conformity  with  that  law.  The  poverty
of  spirit,  the  purity  of  heart,  the  love  to  God  and  one's  neighbour
which  he  required  are  all  of  them  things  for  which  no  observance
of  any  particular  precepts  is  necessary,  and  moreover  he  asserted
with  an  emphasis  that  increased  the  non-obligatory  character  of
many  ceremonial  commands  (see  GOSPELS,  §  I45£").  When
accordingly  Paul  preached  the  admission  of  Gentiles  within  the
pale  of  Christianity  and  the  ending  of  the  Mosaic  law,  he  showed
a  better  understanding  of  the  inner  meaning  of  Jesus  than  the
apostles  who  actually  ate  and  drank  with  him.

(/)  In  some  measure  this  understanding  had  reached
Peter  also.  But,  unfortunately,  not  in  sufficient
measure.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  he  was  outstripped
by  Paul,  and  the  later  development  of  the  church
depended  only  upon  Paul  not  upon  Peter.  Indeed,
instead  of  following  Paul,  if  perhaps  with  slower  steps,
on  the  new  path  of  freedom  from  the  law,  Peter  allowed
himself  to  be  held  back  by  the  power  of  ancient  custom
of  which  James  was  the  embodiment,  and  to  be  forced
into  the  ranks  of  those  who  were  opposed  to  Paul.  In
this  connection  are  seen  the  most  serious  limitations  of
his  spiritual  activities,  the  absence  of  consistency  in
dealing  with  the  new  situation,  and  want  of  energy  in
opening  up  the  new  path.  If  it  had  depended  on  Peter,
he  would  have  preserved  Christianity  as  a  Jewish  sect
and  condemned  it  to  a  maimed  life.  The  elasticity  of
soul  which  was  required  for  drawing  and  pursuing  the
consequences  resulting  from  the  entrance  of  Christianity
into  the  Gentile  world  was  certainly  not  easy  of  attain
ment  to  one  in  Peter's  situation  ;  but  for  a  true  leader
it  was  nevertheless  indispensable.  The  conflict

with  Paul  into  which  Peter  was  brought  by  his  con
servative  attitude  also  unfortunately  brought  with  it  the
result  that,  quite  apart  from  the  judgment  we  are  called
upon  to  pronounce  as  to  his  intellectual  endowments,  a
deep  shadow  falls  upon  the  character  of  Peter — deeper
than  upon  that  of  Paul.  Of  Paul  we  know  only  that  in
his  manner  of  expressing  himself  as  against  his  Judaistic
opponents  he  exercised  little  restraint  upon  himself
(2  Cor.  11 13-15  Gal.  5 12,  etc);  Peter,  on  the  other  hand,
can  hardly  be  cleared  of  the  charge  of — even  by  actions,
or  at  the  very  least  by  failures  to  act — having  worked
against  the  activity  of  Paul  (see  above,  §  2  [/]).

B. LIFE  OUTSIDE  PALESTINE  ; AND  DEATH

In the preceding sections the  NT data regarding
Peter  have  been  practically  exhausted,  yet  a  very  impor-
•,,. .  tant  part  of  his  life  still  remains  to  be

g  ,  , *  discussed — that  relating  to  his  activities
outside  the  limits  of  Palestine,  and  to
his  death. Our  information under  these  heads must
thus  be  drawn  almost  entirely  from  the  Church  fathers
and  from  legendary  works  of  very  doubtful  trustworthi-

4589


24


ness.  The  examination  becomes  much  more  compli
cated  and  the  results  much  more  hypothetical  than
those  we  have  hitherto  had  in  hand.

Let  us  first  take  a  survey  of  the  countries  in  which
outside  of  Palestine  he  is  represented  as  having  laboured. 1

(a)  Origen  is  the  first  who  tells  us  that  '  Peter  seems
(2oi.Kfi>)  to  have  preached  to  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion
in  Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia, Cappadocia, and  Asia
[i.e.  the  western  coast  of  Asia  Minor]'  (Comm.  in  Gen.
torn.  3,  ed. de  la  Rue,  2  24  A  ;  ap.  Euseb.  HE  iii.  12).
The  very  form  in  which  this  sentence  is  cast  shows  us
that  the  statement  is  not based on  trustwoithy  inde
pendent information, but is merely deduced from
i  Pet.  1 1.

Nor  is  this  all  ;  the  deduction  is  a  very  mistaken  one,  for  in
1  14  18  21  2gf.,  42  _/T  it  is  clearly  said  that  the  readers  of  the
epistle  are  Gentile  Christians  and  in  1  12  with  equal  clearness
that  it  was  not  the  writer  of  the  epistle  who  had  brought  the
gospel  to  them.  Not  till  we  come  to  2  Pet.  1  16  is  it  asserted
that  they  had  been  preached  to  by  Peter.  On  this  showing  we
should  have  to  suppose  that  he  had  come  to  them  at  some  time
after  the  composition  of  the  first  epistle  ;  for  according  to  2  Pet.
3  i  the  second  epistle  is  addressed  to  the  same  readers  as  the
first.  This,  however,  is  inconsistent  with  the  address,  according
to  which  2  Pet.  is  directed  to  the  whole  of  Christendom  ;  and
Christendom  is  not  here  to  be  restricted,  on  account  of  (as  it
might  at  first  sight  appear)  3  i,  to  the  five  provinces  named  in

1  Pet.  1  i,  which  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  manifest  sense
of  the  words,  but  contrariwise  we  must  believe  the  author  of

2  Pet.  to  have  presupposed  i  Pet.  to  have  been  already  addressed
to  the  whole  of  Christendom. This  presupposition  comes  before
us  in the Muratorian  fragment  where  (<Y.  54-59)  it  is  asserted
that  from  the  number  of  the  churches  to  which  Paul  addressed
his  nine  letters — viz.,  seven— and  from  the  number  of  the  epistles
in the  Apocalypse — also  seven — we  are  to  perceive  that  both
writers  are  addressing  themselves  in  their  letters  to  the  entire
church. There  are  other  reasons  also  for  assigning  2  Pet.  to  the
same  date  as  this  fragment,  say  about  170  or  180  A.D.

(b)  The  other  spheres  of  activity,  in  which  Peter  is
represented  as  having  laboured  along  with  other  apostles
are  equally  questionable. Alongside  of  such  traditions
there  is often  a simpler form in which Peter is not
mentioned. Thus  there  readily  arises  the  suspicion  that
Peter  has  been  given  as  a  companion  to  other  apostles
by  legend  merely.

Peter  is  said  to  have  laboured  with  Philip  in  Assakia
(Phrygia),  with  his  brother  Andrew  and  Matthias  or  Matthew
in  the  country  of  the  Barbarians,  that  is  to  say,  primarily,  by
the  Black  Sea,  so  that  this  legend  coincides  with  a  part  of  that
already  noticed  under  a.  As,  however,  there  is  also  a  country  of
the  barbarians  by  the  Red  Sea,  we  find  Peter  as  the  companion
of  Bartholomew  in  Egypt  as  well  ;  and  finally  what  is  said  of
this  last  apostle  is  transferred  to  Judas  Thadda:us,  so  that
Peter  is  made  to  be  the  companion  of  this  Judas  in  Syria.

(c)  We  are  told  further  that  from  Egypt Peter  also
made  journeys  to  North  Africa  and  to  Britain,  but  in
these  cases  he  was  alone.

(if)  In  Syria  Peter  appears  not  only  with  Judas
Thaddseus,  but  also  without  any  companion,  particularly
in  Antioch.  Indeed,  according  to  Eusebius  in  his
Chronicle,  or  in  his  source  (§  26  e  ;  Lipsius,  ii.  125-27),
that  church  was  founded  by  Peter  in  the  second  year  of
Claudius,  that  is,  in  42  A.D.  This  is  in  absolute  con
tradiction  with  Acts  11 19-26.  Nor  is  there  any  plausible
reason  for  accepting  the  activity  of  Peter  in  Antioch  to
be  found  in  the  consideration  that  he  could  easily  touch
at  Antioch  in  the  course  of  his  journeys  from  Jerusalem
to  Asia  Minor  ;  and  just  as  little  can  we  attach  weight
to  the  circumstance  that  it  was  precisely  in  Antioch
that  SIMON  MAGUS  (q.v.  §  n  6),  whom  it  was  one
of  Peter's  tasks  continually  to  confute,  made  his
appearance.  Thus  it  is  tempting  to  conjecture  that  the
statement  as  to  the  appearance  of  Peter  in  Antioch  rests
upon  Gal.  2 11-21.  If  this  conjecture  is  correct  we  shall
have  here  an  admirable  example  of  the  manner  in
which  in  the  making  of  ecclesiastical  legend  the  hostile
relations. of  two  apostles  are  ignored  or  even  changed
into  a  relation  of  friendly  co-operation  (cp  §  40  b).

We  learn  even  that  Peter  and  Paul  together  in  Antioch
consecrated  Marcianus  as  bishop  of  Syracuse,  and  Pancratius  as
bishop  of  Tauromenium  in  Sicily  (Lipsius,  ii.  1  5  %f-).  But  it

1  For  details  here  and  in  what  follows  we  refer  once  for  all  to
Lipsius,  Apokr.  Apost.-Gesck.  (1883-1890),  and  especially  in  the
first  instance  to  vol.  2i,  and  the  Ergdnzungsheft,  226_/T

459°


SIMON  PETER


SIMON  PETER


is  only  late  authors  who  assign  to  Peter  the  bishopric  of  Antioch
(Cod.  Coislinianus,  No.  120  [ed.  Grosch,  Jena,  1886]  for  two
years,  the  Liber  Pontificalis  [6th  and  yth  cent.]  for  seven  or  ten
years).  Origen  does  not,  even  when  he  designates  Ignatius
(/fain.  6  in  Luc.,  III.  938  b  A,  ed.  de  la  Rue)  '  episcopum
Antiochiae  post  Petrum  secundum,'  for  these  words  are  to  be
understood,  in  accordance  with  the  expressions  of  ancient
authors  cited  below  (§  26  g),  in  such  a  sense  that  Peter  is  not  to
be  reckoned  as  included  :  so  also  Kus.  HE  iii.  30  2.  Euodius,
who  is  represented  as  having  been  appointed  by  Peter  himself
(Const.  Apost.  vii.  4(5),  passes  for  the  first  bishop  of  Antioch.

(e)  It  accords  with  the  dating  of  i  Pet.  (013)  from
Babylon  that  Peter  should  be  represented  as  having
laboured  in  Babylonia  and  Persia.  Whilst  many  accounts
have  it  that  he  subsequently  journeyed  to  Rome,  the
Syrian  historians  assign  to  him  the  lands  of  the  Euphrates
exclusively  as  his  missionary  field  (Lipsius  ii.  16611-613,
ii.  2i4S/  175)-  Cp§  43.

(/)  The  statement  which  has  met  with  widest  accept
ance  is  that  Peter  laboured  in  Rome  and  suffered
martyrdom  there.  As  to  this,  see  §§  25-31,  37-41,  45.

(g)  The  missionary  journeys  of  Peter  through
Macedonia,  Greece,  Sicily,  and  Italy  are  open  to  the
suspicion  that  they  have  been  assumed  merely  in  order
to  make  more  clear  his  migration  from  Asia  Minor  to
Rome  and  that  for  their  details  the  journeys  of  Paul
served  as  a  pattern  (Lipsius  ii.  1  n).

(/«)  The  representation  that  Peter  laboured  also  in
Gaul  and  in  Spain  appears  to  have  arisen  out  of  the
desire  of  the  Roman  church  to  secure  for  itself  the
supremacy  over  these  countries.  Pope  Innocent  I.
(402-417)  expressly  denies  that  in  Italy,  Gaul,  Spain,
Africa  and  Sicily,  or  any  of  the  intermediate  islands,
churches  were  anywhere  founded  by  any  one  except
priests  who  had  been  instituted  by  Peter  or  by  his
successors  ( Epist.  252,  ap.  Lipsius,  11.2217307).

(*')  \Ve  thus  obtain  as  a  preliminary  result  that  apart
from  Rome  only  the  claims  of  Antioch  and  Babylon  or
at  most  also  of  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea  (Pontus)
have  some  measure  of  plausible  support  in  tradition  ;
but  of  these  that  of  Antioch  is  definitely  ruled  out  by
the  data  of  the  XT  ;  for  not  only  is  the  founding  of
the  churcli  there  by  Peter  impossible,  but  also  any
lengthened  stay  there  on  his  part,  inasmuch  as  its
Gentile  Christian  character  was  most  marked  and  more
over  it  had  been  witness  of  his  humiliation  at  the  hands
of  Paul  (Gal.  2 11-21).  As  for  the  claims  of  Babylon,
see  below,  §  y>k,  43.

Let  us  first  inquire  what  are  our  earliest  authorities

for a sojourn of Peter in Rome and his ultimate

„ .  . martyrdom  there, (a)  The  first  whom

._  '  J  ..  ,  we  can  date  with  certainty  is  Dionysius,
Rome:  earliest bishop  of  Corinth  (abou\  I/0  ,(  D  }
witnesses.  From  a  ]etter  of  hjs  atldressed  to  the
Church  of  Rome  in  the  time  of  the  bishopric  of  Soter
there  (about  166-174),  m  which1  he  thanks  the  Romans
for  pecuniary  help  given  to  members  of  the  Corinthian
church,  Eusebius  (HE  ii.  258)  has  preserved  the  follow
ing  passage  :  raura  Kal  vfj.sis  Sia.  rr/s  TOffavr-qs  pon^ecrtas
TT}v  dwo  \\frpov  Kal  Ilai'Xoii  (pvTeiav  yevrjOelffav  'Pco,ua/a;i'
re  Kal  Kopivdiuir  crvveKepdaarf.  Kal  yap  aij.(pu)  Kal  eis  TTJV
•f]fj.eT^pav  \\.6piv0ov  ipvTevtravTes  Tjuds  o^oiais  fdida^av,
buoiws 5£  Kal  €i's TTT}v  'lra\iav o/J-offf  didd^avres  e/j.apTvpr}crav
Kara  TOP  avrbv  Kaipov.  '  So  also  by  this  so  weighty
admonition'2  ye  have  brought  together  that  planting
made  by  Peter  and  Paul  of  the  Romans  and  of  the
Corinthians.  For,  indeed,  these  two  both  planted  us
in  our  Corinth,  and  likewise  taught  us  ;  in  like  manner
also  after  having  taught  together  in  Italy  they  suffered
martyrdom  about  the  same  time. '

The  meaning  of  these  words  is  not  perfectly  clear  [cp  col.
4145] ;  but  so  much  can  be  made  put— that  Dionysius  means  to
designate  the  Roman  and  Corinthian  churches  alike  as  founda
tions  of  Peter  and  Paul.  This  is  involved  in  '  planting  '  (</>urf  i'a)

1  As  Eusebius  in  his  enumeration  (HE  iv.  23 9)  of  the  epistles
of  Dionysius  known  to  him  mentions  only  one  to  the  Romans,
we  must  suppose  this  to  be  the  same  as  that  which  he  had
already  made  use  of  (ii.  25s).

a  By  this  is  doubtless  intended  the  Epistle  of  the  Roman
church  mentioned  in  iv.  23  u,  which  Dionysius  is  answering.

4591


even  if  we  should  prefer  for  ^yTeuVai/Tes  the  reading  of  Syncellus  :
<|>oiT>j<rai'Tes. At  the  same  time,  the  expression  ei«  TTJI'  'I


thus  <t>oirri<7ai>Tfs,  even  if  it  ought  to  be  regarded  as  the  right
reading,  would  not  furnish  the  requisite  completion  to  the  second
member  of  the  sentence.  This  being  so,  the  suggestion  becomes
natural  that  «ts  .  .  .  Kopirtfor  stands  for  ey  .  .  .  KoptVCw,  and
thus  that  <J>uTeuaai>Tes  ought  to  oe  retained— all  the  more  be'cause
it  is  in  keeping  with  <f>uTeia.  'O/j.6<rc  means  properly  '  towards
one  and  the  same  place ' ;  but  as  we  may  not  bring  in
<f><HT>jcrai/Tes,  this  will  not  at  all  suit  the  context.  Here  also  then
we  must  discern  another  instance  of  the  same  confusion  as  that
between  ets  and  iv,  in  other  words  6/xou  must  be  meant.  Thus
Dionysius,  even  if  he  does  not  expressly  say  that  Peter  and
Paul  came  simultaneously  to  Corinth  and  simultaneously  to
Rome,  nevertheless,  as  regards  Rome  at  least,  states  that
they  taught  there  simultaneously  ;  in  fact  '  in  like  manner
also '  (6/oiotios  6«  KaC)  indicates  very  distinctly  that  he  assumes
them  to  have  taught  together  in  Corinth  also.

This  last  assumption  is  quite  irreconcilable  with  Acts
18i-i8202/. ;  and  even  were  we  to  suppose  that
Dionysius  thinks  of  Peter's  visit  to  Corinth  as  having
been  at  a  different  date  from  that  of  Paul,  we  should
still  be  at  hopeless  variance  with  i  Cor.  810-15  4 15  (see
§  2  g).  The  statement  of  Dionysius  accordingly  can
only  rest  on  unwarranted  inference  from  what  Paul  says
regarding  the  Cephas  party  in  Corinth  (i  Cor.  1 12

32I/). _

Thus  it  is  of  no  avail  when  Harnack  (ACL  ii.  [  =  Chronol.]
1  2427^)  seeks  to  defend  Dionysius  by  arguing  that  even  accord
ing  to  Acts  (8  14-17)  the  founding  of  a  church  becomes  '  perfect '
only  after  apostolic  labours,  so  that  Dionysius  does  not  by  the
language  he  uses  exclude  an  activity  of  other  missionaries  in
Rome  before  the  arrival  of  Peter  and  Paul.  In  the  first  place,
Harnack's  exegesis  of  the  passage  in  Acts  is  not  exact.  What
can  be  effected  by  the  apostles  alone  is  the  bestowal  of  the  Holy
Spirit  ;  that  without  this  the  founding  of  a  church  is  not
'  perfect '  is  not  said,  and  does  not  at  all  suit  the  other  case  in
which  the  same  theory  is  found  (19  1-7).  This  last  passage  has
nothing  at  all  to  do  with  the  founding  of  a  church,  but  only
with  the  spiritual  gifts  of  speaking  with  '  tongues '  and  of
prophecy.  But,  further,  Harnack's  defence  of  Dionysius.  even
were  it  valid,  would  apply  only  to  what  he  says  about  Rome,
not  to  what  he  says  about  Corinth  ;  for,  if  Dionysius  has
followed  the  theory  of  Acts  as  this  is  expounded  by  Harnack,
in  the  present  case  at  all  events  Paul  has  complied  with  it,
inasmuch  as  he  brought  about  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at
once  in  his  first  ministry  there,  and  thus  Peter  would  have
found  no  field  there  for  his  function  as  a  founder  of  churches
unless  his  arrival  had  been  synchronous  with  that  of  Paul.

Thus  it  is  impossible  to  absolve  Dionysius  from  the
charge  of  having,  in  the  interests  of  a  theory  as  to  the
co-operation  of  Peter  and  Paul,  grievously  distorted  the
history  of  his  own  church  in  a  point  as  to  which  he  of
all  men  must  be  presumed  to  have  been  accurately
informed.  How  then  are  we  to  repose  confidence  in
such  a  'witness'  when  he  tells  us  about  Rome?
Perhaps  his  whole  knowledge  regarding  Rome  rests
upon  misunderstanding  of  i  Clem,  (below,  §  28),  of
which  he  says  (ap.  Eus.  HE  iv.  23  u)  that  it  is  regularly
read  at  Corinth  in  public  worship.

(/>)  In  Irenoeus  (about  185  A.  u. )  the  most  important
passages  relating  to  our  present  inquiry  are  the
following.  According  to  Hcer.  iii.  1 2  [i]  Matthew  wrote
his  gospel  '  whilst  Peter  and  Paul  were  preaching  the
gospel  at  Rome  and  founding  the  church'  (rov  \\irpov
Kai  TOU  ]lai'\ovfv'Pu/j.riei'ayyf\i£o/Li:ev(ijt>  Kal6e/j.e\i.ovi'T<i)i>
TTJV  €KK\-rjffiaf).  In  iii.  3 1  [2]  he  speaks  of  the  'very
great,  very  ancient,  and  universally  known  church
founded  and  constituted  at  Rome  by  the  two  very
glorious  apostles  Peter  and  Paul '  (maxima  et  antiquissima
et  omnibus  cognita  a  gloriosissimis  duobus  apostolis
Petro  et  Paulo  Romre  fundata  et  constituta  ecclesia).
Here  Irenceus's  interest  is  to  prove  the  apostolical
succession  of  bishops.  As  it  would  be  too  laborious  a
task  to  do  this  for  all  churches  he  contents  himself
with  the  case  of  Rome.

(c)  The  list  of  bishops  of  Rome  which  Irenaeus
proceeds  immediately  afterwards  to  give  (iii.  3z  /. )
comes  down  to  his  own  day  (vvv)  and  ends  with
Eleutherus  (about  174-189).  It  may  be  presumed  that
it  was  not  drawn  up  for  the  first  time  at  the  date  of  his
writing.

4593


SIMON  PETER

It  cannot  indeed  be  maintained  that  Hegesippus — as  his  words
in  Eus.  HE  iv.  22  3  seem  to  say — drew  up,  after  his  arrival  in
Rome,  a  list  of  the  bishops  there  down  to  Anicetus  (about  154-
166)  as  Lightfoot  (Apost.  Fathers,  i.  [  =  Clement  of  Rome]  1  b^f.
I53/;  202_f.  327-333)  would  have  it  (see  MINISTRY,  §  58  c,  n.  and
Harnack,  ACL  ii.  1  180-184);  but  on  the  other  hand  according
to  Harnack  (pp.  cit.  184-193)  and  Erbes  (Z.  f.  Kirchengesch.
222-5  (I9OID  it  is  probable  that  Epiphanius  (Hter.  27  o)  for  his
list  of  the  bishops  of  Rome  made  use  of  the  same  Roman
original  source  as  Irenseus,  and  that  this,  as  in  Epiphanius,
ended  with  Anicetus,  and  thus  perhaps  was  drawn  up  during  his
episcopate,  or  at  any  rate  during  that  of  his  successor,  Soter.
Whatever  its  date,  the  form  in  which  the  list  is  now  found  gives
no  certainty  as  to  what  is  the  most  important  point  in  this  con
nection —  the  question,  namely,  as  to  when  it  was  that  the
reference  to  Peter  and  Paul  was  first  introduced.  Irenajus  begins
his  rendering  of  it  thus  :  '  The  blessed  apostles  [Peter  and  Paul],
then,  after  founding  and  building  up  the  church,  committed  the
office  of  the  episcopate  into  the  hands  of  Linus.  To  him
succeeds  Anencletus,  and  after  him,  in  the  third  place  from  the
apostles,  Clement  is  allotted  the  episcopate  '  (tfejueAiGJo-acTes  ovv

KOi  OlKo5ofX))(7<I>'TCS Ol jtiaKaplOl aTTOOToAoi Tt]V iKK\T)<ria.V At'l'Cj)

TI\V  Tijs  67ricrKOirr)S  Aetroupyi'ai'  ivt\tlf>l(Tav.  StaSe'^eTat  6e  O.VTOV
' \veyK\rfToy'  fieri  TOVTOV  6e  rpiYw  TOTTO)  anb  rioc  aTroerToAui/  TT/V
eTTicncoTrrji'  (cArjpouTai  KArjjurjs).  Thus  we  find  no  mention  either
of  Peter  or  of  Paul  as  bishop  of  Rome.  If  Clement  is  designated
as  third  '  from  the  apostles '  (a»rb  tiav  ano<nd\u>v)  probably  all
that  is  intended  is  to  accentuate  the  unbrokennessof  the  succes
sion,  not  to  imply  that  if  one  chose  to  include  the  two  apostles
in  the  reckoning  he  would  be  not  the  third  but  the  fourth  or
fifth  in  the  series.  Epiphanius,  however,  says  :  '  In  Rome  the
first  were  Peter  and  Paul,  apostles  and  bishops,  thereafter  Linus,
thereafter  Cletus,  thereafter  Clement,"  etc.  (ev  'Pco/ur;  yeyopacri
TTQGOTOI  IleVpos  Ka.1  IlaCAos  aTrdoToAot  KCU  CTTIOXOTTOI.  eira  AiVos,
etra  KArjros,  etra  KArj,u.T)s,  /c.r.A.).  Aftera  short  interruption,  he
resumes :  '  The  series  of  bishops  in  Rome  shows  the  following  suc
cession, — Peter  and  Paul,  Linus  and  Cletus,  Clement, 'etc.  (17  rtav
(V  'Pcufirj  CTricncdirwi'  SiaSoxri  ravrrjv  e\ei  TTJC  O.K.O  \ovBiav  •  Herpes
xal  IlauAos,  AtVos  Kal  KArJTOS,  KA>j;u.7)s,  /c.-r.A.).  If,  however,
Epiphanius  makes  Peter  and  Paul  bishops  of  Rome,1  then
Irenaeus  also,  or  another  shortly  before  him,  can  have  prefixed
their  names  to  the  whole  list  which  at  an  earlier  date  had  begun
simply  with  Linus.  The  list  of  bishops  can  have  been  subjected
to  the  same  supplementing  process  after  Irenaeus's  time  also,
before  it  came  into  the  hands  of  Epiphanius  (died  403),  or  after
that  of  Julius  Africanus  (about  220)  or  of  Hippolytus  (about  234),
the  two  last  mentioned  of  whom  also  made  use  of  it,  according
to  Harnack  (188).  A  list  of  this  kind,  from  the  nature  of  the
case,  was  not  allowed  to  remain  long  unaltered,  but  could  easily
be  '  completed  '  in  the  course  of  transcription  whenever  a  copyist
believed  he  had  found  a  gap  in  it.  Moreover,  neither  Irenasus
nor  Epiphanius,  whose  editions  of  the  list  lie  before  us  as  they
wrote  them,  makes  any  statement  that  he  is  using  an  external
document,  and  feels  himself  under  obligation  to  reproduce  it
scrupulously.  Thus  for  us  no  exact  determination  of  its  date  is
necessary  ;  so  far  as  Peter  and  Paul  are  concerned  it  does  not
with  certainty  take  us  back  to  a  date  before  Irenaeus.

(d)  In Clement of Alexandria Peter's sojourn in
Rome is, as  with Irenteus, mentioned in connection
with  the  writing  of  a  gospel — in  this  case,  however,  Mk.
not  Mt

From  the  Hypotyposes  Eusebius  (HE  vi.  146_/C)  has  preserved
a  piece  of  information  which  Clement  claims  to  have  received
from  the  presbyters  of  the  olden  time  (riav  aveKOL&tv  TrpeovSu-
re'pwi/).  '  After  that  Peter  had  publicly  preached  the  word  in
Rome,  and,  filled  with  the  spirit,  had  set  forth  the  gospel  (TOU
HeVpou  Srifiocria  ev  'Poi/irj  xrjpiifai'TOs  rov  Adyoi/  Kal  irvev^ari.  TO
fva.yyfh.iov  e^enrovros),  Mark  at  the  request  of  many  hearers
set  down  these  discourses  in  writing.'  Similarly  in  the  Adutn-
brationes  on  i  Pet.  (ed.  Potter,  1007)  :  '  Marcus  Petri  sectator
palam  praedicante  Petro  evangelium  Romae,'  etc.  In  the  other
passage  where  Eusebius  transcribes  the  same  matter  from  the
Hypotyposes  of  Clement,  though  somewhat  differently  (HE
ii.  15  if.;  with  regard  to  which  cp  GOSPELS,  §  147,  end),  Rome
is  presupposed,  through  the  connection  with  ii.  14  g^,  to  be
the  place.  As  the  Gospel  of  Mark  is  alleged  to  have  owed  its
origin  to  the  evangelist's  reports  of  the  discourses  of  Peter,  it  is
intelligible  why  Clement  should  not  have  mentioned  Paul  at  the
same  time,  even  although  he  was  convinced  of  the  apostles
having  been  together  in  Rome.

(e)  Pseudo-Cyprian,  De  Rebaptismate,  17  (Cypr.  ed.
Hartel,  890),  read  in  Pauli  Prcedicatio  as  follows  : '  et
post  tarita  tempora  Petrum  et  Paulum  post  conlationem
evangelii  in Hierusalem et mutuam cogitationem et
altercationem  et  rerurn  agendarum  dispositionem [the
reference  is  to  Gal.  2  Acts  15]  postremo  in  urbe  quasi
tune primum  invicem sibi esse  cognitos, et quasdam

1  For  this  very  reason  if  for  no  other  we  see  that  Epiphanius
cannot  have  preserved  the  original  form  of  the  list.  It  also
indicates  but  little  accuracy  when  he  says  at  one  time  'Linus,
then  Cletus  '  (AiVos  f  Ira  KArji-os),  at  another  '  Linus  and  Cletus  '
(AiVos  Kal  KATJTOS),  for  the  latter  form  of  expression  denotes,  as
we  see  in  '  Peter  and  Paul '  (Ile'Tpos  Kal  IlavAos),  contempor
aneous  tenure  of  office.

4593


SIMON  PETEE

alia  hujuscemodi  absurde  ac  turpiter  conficta '  ( '  and
that  after  such  long  time,  Peter  and  Paul,  after  the
collation  of  the  gospel  in  Jerusalem  and  the  mutual
consideration  and  discussion  and  arrangement  of  things
to  be  done,  had  at  last  in  the  city,  in  a  certain  way,
then  for  the  first  time  become  known  to  one  another  ;
and  certain  other  things  of  this  sort,  absurdly  and
basely  feigned  ' ).

In  spite  of  the  title  Pauli  Prcedicatio  this  quotation  is  often
regarded  as  coming  from  the  book  known  by  the  title  of
KrjpvyfAa  IleVpov,  in  the  belief  that  the  title  sometimes  ran  also  :
Preaching  of  Peter  and  Paul.  Were  this  correct,  we  should
have  here  the  oldest  testimony  to  the  Roman  sojourn  of  Peter,
it  being  presupposed  that  the  book  was  used  not  only  by
Clement  of  Alexandria  but  also  as  early  as  in  the  Afology  of
A ristides  (see  Harris,  Apology  of  Aris tides,  in  TSt.  i.  186-99;
Harnack,  ACL  ii.  1472.7?  ;  cp  OLD-CHRISTIAN  LITERATURE,
§§  ii,  36).  But  the  question  of  the  derivation  of  the  quotation
from  it  is  so  uncertain  (it  is  answered  negatively  by  von
Dobschiitz,  for  example,  in  7" £7  xi.  113-15  127-131)  that  we  need
not  pursue  the  matter  further.

(/")  The  apocryphal  Ada  Petri,  which  relates  the
activity  and  death  of  Peter  at  Rome  with  detail,  may
be  mentioned  at  this  point  as  being  possibly  a  witness
of  equal  age,  but  must  not  be  taken  account  of  until
after  it  has  been  carefully  discussed  (see  §§  32-39).
So  also  with  the  Hpd^eis  Ilav\ov  from  which  Origen
(torn,  in  Jn.  20i2,  ed.  de  la  Rue,  4322,  c)  quotes:  'as
was  said  by  the  Saviour,  ' '  I  am  going  to  be  crucified
anew"  '  (ws  virb  rov  <rwr?5pos  eipri^vov  •  &vu9ev  fj.t\\u
aravpovffdai)  (see  §§  33^,  34^,  39  a,  c}.

We  proceed  now  to  the  testimonies  which  come  from
a  somewhat  later  date.

(a)  Tertullian  supplies new data, if  not indeed in
adv.  Marc.  ( 4  5  begin. )  where  he  says  : '  Romani  . . .

.p  quibus  evangelium  et  Petrus  et  Paulus

. "p0n}  sanguine quoque suo signatum reli-

sojourn:  later  querunti-  or  in  Baptism,  4,  where  he
'  ascribes  the  possession  of  the  same
salvation  to  those  '  quos  Joannes  in  Jordane  et  quos
Petrus  in  Tiberi  tinxit,'  etc.,  yet  certainly  in  Prascr.
haeret.  36  :  '  habes  Romani  .  .  .  ubi  Petrus  passioni
dominicce  adasquatur  [by  crucifixion],  ubi  Paulus  Joannis
[the  Baptist's]  exitu  coronatur '  [by  beheading],  and  in
kcorpiace,  15  :  '  orientem  fidem  Romoe  primus  Nero
cruentavit.  Tune  Petrus  ab  altero  cingitur  [Jn.  21 18/.]
cum  cruci  adstringitur  ;  tune  Paulus  civitatis  Romanas
consequitur  nativitatem  cum  illic  martyrii  renascitur
generositate,1  '  Paul  acquires  the  Roman  citizenship  by
right  of  birth  when  he  is  born  again  in  the  nobility  of
martyrdom.'

(b]  Gaius  of  Rome  (under  Zephyrinus, about 198-
217)  says  in  his  writing  against  the  Montanist  Proculus
(ap.  Eus.  HE  ii.  256  f. )  : '  But  I  am  able  to  show  the
"trophies"  of  the  apostles. For  if  you  will  come  to
the  Vatican  or  to  the  Ostean  Way,  you  will  find  the
"  trophies"  of  those  who  founded  this  church'  (t"-yw  5£
TO,  TpoTraLa  r&v  dirocrToXwi'  ^%oj  5ei£cu. eav  yap  6e\r)aris
cnreXOeii'  firl  TQV  ISaTiKavbv  ?}  tirl  T^V  odbv  rr\v  'Qarlav,
evprfffets  TO.  rpoiraia  T&V  ravrriv ISpvaa/ufvuv TTJV tK-
K\riaiav). By  rporraia  we  are  to  understand  here  not
'places of  burial,' as  Eusebius does, but 'places of
death.'

Even  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word  ('  sign  of  victory ')  admits
this  meaning  only ;  for  a  martyr  gained  his  victory  only  at  the
place  of  his  death,  not  at  the  place  of  his  burial.  To  under
stand  the  meaning  '  sign  of  victory  '  we  have  only  to  make  the
further  supposition  that  those  who  honoured  the  martyrs  were
able  to  show,  at  the  place  of  death,  some  object  or  other  that
marked  it  out  for  those  who  visited  the  spot,  and  with  which
was  associated  some  reminiscence,  whether  real  or  supposed,  of
what  happened  at  the  martyr's  death.  Thus  in  the  Vatican  was
shown  a  terebinth,  on  the  road  to  Ostia  a  pine  tree,  beside  which
Peter  and  Paul  respectively  breathed  their  last  (Lipsius  ii.  1  391).

Even  apart,  however,  from  its  lexical  meaning  we  may  learn
that  rpoTrata  cannot  here  mean  graves.  For  the  bones  of  the
two  apostles  were  not  deposited  in  the  places  he  mentions  till
long  after  the  time  of  Gaius ;  those  of  Peter  after  354,  in  the
Church  of  St.  Peter,  which  was  built  at  that  date  ;  those  of
Paul,  according  to  the  list  of  the  depositio  martyrum,  in  the
famous  chronicle  of  the  year  354,  as  early  as  258  A.D.,  by  the
road  to  Ostia  (and  before  354  in  the  basilica  newly  built  there).
In  the  same  year,  however  (258  ;  June  29),  the  relics  of  Peter,

4594


SIMON  PETER

according  to  the  same  list,  were  transferred  in  catacumbas,  that
is  to  say,  into  the  catacombs  of  the  piece  of  ground  beside  the
Appian  Way,  half-an-hour  outside  of  the  Porta  Appia,  in  other
words,  hard  by  the  present  church  of  San  Sebastiano,  which
piece  of  ground  was  originally  the  only  one  that  bore  the  name
'ad  Catacumbas,'  a  name  which  has  never  as  yet  been  quite
satisfactorily  explained.  Here  an  inscription  of  bishop  Damasus
(366-384)  ran  :—

hie  habitasse  priiis  sanctos  cognoscere  debes
nomina  quisque  l  Petri  pariter  Paulique  requiris.
So  far  as  Peter  is  concerned,  this  agrees  with  the  fact  that  his
relics  had  been  removed  to  the  church  of  St.  Peter  before  this
inscription  was  composed  ;  as  regards  Paul  the  statement  of
Damasus  is  not  easily  reconciled  with  that  of  the  list  referred
to  above.  Still,  even  if  the  list  be  correct  it  is  certain  that  the
relics  of  Paul  had  not  yet,  in  the  time  of  Gaius,  their  resting-
place  by  the  road  to  Ostia,  and  that  those  of  Peter  should  have
been  removed  to  the  catacombs  would  be  very  unlikely,  if  already
in  Gaius's  time  they  had  their  resting-place  at  the  place  of  his
death,  namely  the  Vatican.  On  the  whole  question  see  Lipsius
ii.  1391-404;  Erbes,  Z.  f.  Kirchcngcsch.  7  (1885)  1-49,  and,  as
regards  the  special  point,  otherwise  in  '  Todestage  der  Apostel
Paulus  u.  Petrus'  in  TU  xix.  (=Neue  Folge,  iv.),  1  (1899)
67-133.  Ficker  (Z./.  Kirchengesch.  22,  1901,  333-342)  utterly
denies  that  the  inscription  relates  to  the  burial  of  Peter  and
Paul.  His  opinion  is  that  in  the  view  of  Damasus  they  had
during  their  lifetime  resided  at  the  spot  where  the  inscription
was  found  (cp  'habitasse,'  and  'nomina'  not  'corpora').  The
inscription,  he  holds,  was  directed  against  the  refusal  of  the
Eastern  Chirch,  from  325  A.D.  onwards,  to  accept  any  decisions
from  Rome,  and  against  the  argument  urged  in  support  of  this
refusal  that  Peter  and  Paul  came  from  the  East  (the  inscription
in  fact  says,  towards  the  end  :  Roma  suos  polius  meruit
defendere  cives).  Only,  as  the  locality  where  the  inscription  was
found  was  a  place  of  burial,  it  is  very  improbable  that  Damasus
can  have  believed  that  Peter  and  Paul  when  alive  lived  here  at
half-an-hour's  distance  from  the  city.

(c)  In  immediate  continuation  of  the  passage  relating
to  Peter  cited  above  (§  24  a),  Origen  proceeds  :  '  Who
also  in  the  end,  being  in  Rome,  was  crucified  head
downwards,  having  himself  desired  to  suffer  in  this
way'  (6s  KO.I  etrl  r^Xet  ev'Pu/J.ri  yevo/j.fi>os  avtaKoXoiriffOri
Kara  Ke(pa\rj^,  oirrws  aiV6s  d^iwcras  iraQelv}.  The
Acta  Petri  (see  §  33^)  deals  fully  with  the  reasons  why
Peter  chose  this  particular  manner  of  death.  As  regards
Paul,  Origen  goes  on  to  say  that  he  suffered  martyrdom
in  Rome  under  Nero.

((f)  The  Philosophumena  (dating  from  about  235  and
ascribed  to  Hippolytus),  as  well  as  other  later  writings,
mentions  the  polemic  with  Simon,  carried  on  at  Rome
by  Peter  (and  Paul),  with  which  we  are  acquainted
through  the  apocryphal  Acta  Petri  (and  Acta  Petri  et
Pauli).  For  details  see  §  39  d.

(e}  Of  later  writers  we  at  once  mention  Eusebius.  He
brings  together  all  that  has  been  hitherto  mentioned,
and  will  have  it  that  Peter  was  bishop  of  Rome  for
twenty-five  years,  namely  from  42-67  A.D.  He  thus
places  the  Neronian  persecution,  in  which  according
to  him  also  Peter  and  Paul  suffered  martyrdom  (HE
ii.  25s),  three  years  too  late.  It  is  of  a  piece  with  this
that  he  supports  the  theory,  which  he  himself  (HE
v.  1814)  takes  from  the  Anti-Montanist  Apollonius  (about
200  A.D.) — a  theory  which  already  finds  expression  in
the  Prcedicatio  Petri  (above,  §  25  e  ;  ap.  Clem.Al.
Strom,  vi.  643,  p.  762,  ed.  Potter  ;  for  other  supporters
of  it  see  Harnack,  ACL  ii.  1243) — that  the  apostles  had
been  commanded  by  Jesus  not  to  go  abroad  from
Jerusalem  till  twelve  years  after  his  death.  These
twelve  years  Eusebius  reckons  as  from  30  to  42  A.  D.  The
variations  met  with  in  the  different  translations  of  his
Chronicle,  no  longer  extant  in  Greek,  need  not  trouble  us
here.  The  only  point  of  importance  for  our  inquiry  is
that  the  reckoning  of  twenty -five  Roman  years  was
found,  not  invented,  by  Eusebius.  According  to
Harnack  (ACL  ii.  1116-129)  he  used  the  Chronography
of  Julius  Africanus,  which  closed  with  the  reign  of
Elagabalus  (218-222  A.D. ).

(/)  Thus, according  to  Harnack  (201,  70$ f.), the

'tendency  legend,' that  Peter  sojourned  in  Rome  for

twenty-five  years,  arose  and  '  became  official '  between

the  time  of  Irenaeus,  who  as  yet  knew  nothing  whatever

of  Peter's  twenty-five  Roman  years,  and  that  of  Julius

Africanus, that is  to say  in  the  episcopate of  Victor

1  Quisque  here  =  quicunque  =  whosoever.

4595


SIMON  PETER

(about  189-198),  or  in  that  of  Zephyrinus  (about  198-
217).

(g)  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  Peter  becomes  no
longer  the  founder  merely,  or  joint  founder,  but  the
bishop  also  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  that  Paul,
whom  we  still  find  even  in  Irenreus,  etc.  (§  26  a-J],  at
his  side  and  on  a  level  with  him,  is  eliminated.  This
consequence,  however,  was  developed  only  gradually.

The  Roman  bishop  Calixtus  (about  217-222)  claimed,  as
appears  from  Tertullian's  refutation  (/'udic.  21),  the  power  to
remit  or  retain  sins,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  the  successor  of
Peter  who,  according  to  Mt.  lOis/I,  had  been  invested  with
this  power.  So  also  his  successors  affirmed  in  Cyprian's  time :
'  Se  successionem  Petri  tenere  '  or  '  per  successionem  cathedram
Petri  habere';  and  this  is  presupposed  by  Cyprian  himself
(/•:/>ist.  75 17  558  59 14  713).  According  to  the  Epistle  of
Clement  to  James  (2)  that  now  stands  prefixed  to  the  Pseudo-
Clementine  Homilies,  Peter,  in  appointing  Clement  bishop  of
Rome,  hands  over  to  him  his  Ka0f&pa  riav  \6ytav,  and  confers
on  him  the  power  of  binding  and  loosing.  The  author
(Hippolytus?)  of  the  'Little  Labyrinth'  against  the  sect  of
Artemon  (ap.  Ens.  HE  l>  28)  in  §  3  styles  Victor  as  rpitTKat-
Sexa.TO';  ajrb  IleVpou  er  'PCOJU.IJ  (Tricricoiros — thus  no  longer,  as
Irenaeus  phrases  it,  curb  riov  cuTToa-Tob.tav — (i.e.,  from  Peter  and
Paul  ;  see  above,  §  25  c).  Yet  he  continues  to  call  Victor  the
thirteenth  as  Irena;us  had  called  Eleutherus,  Victor's  prede
cessor,  the  twelfth  ;  thus  he  does  not  yet  reckon  Peter  as  the
first  member  of  the  series.  Similarly,  Eusebius  still  counts
Linus  ns  the  first  bishop  of  Rome,  and  in  accordance  with  this,
gives  the  succeeding  bishops  the  same  numeration  as  Irenaeus
does.  While  doing  so  he  nevertheless  adds  (HE  iii.  4s),  ^erd
HeTpoi',  yet  along  with  this  not  only  juera  TTJC  IlauAou  icai  Ile'rpow
fiapTvpiW  (iii.  2),  but  also  /u.era  IlaOAdi/  re  «a!  IleYpoi'  (iii.  21),
aTrb  Ile'rpou  xal  IlaiiAou  (iv.  1)  and,  precisely  as  Irenaeus  has  it,
airb  •nil'  an-ooToAaji'  (iv.  65  and  v.  prooem.  i).  For  more  precise
details  from  Eusebius  see  Kneller,  Z.  f.  kathol.  Theol.  1902,

p. 229./C

(//)  It  is  in  the  Catalogus  Liberianus  (i.e.,  the  list
of  Roman  bishops  brought  down  to  Liberius,  A.  u.
352^),  forming  part  of  the  famous  Chronicle  of  354,
that  Peter  is  first  spoken  of  unreservedly  as  first  bishop
of  Rome  :  '  post  ascensum  ejus  [Jesu]  beatissimus  Petrus
episcopatum  suscepit '  (but  here  from  30-55  A.D.  ).

The  Ascensio  Jesaice  would  seem  to  be  a  still  older
witness  than  any  of  those  we  have  hitherto  discussed,
to  the  fact  of  Peter's  martyrdom  at  Rome.

(a)  Clemen  (Z.WT,  1896,  388-415; 1897,  455'465)

held it  possible  to  distinguish and  isolate  in  33i-(or

32i)-422  an  apocalypse  put  into  writing

27.  Ascensio before  the  death  of  Nero  ^2y  13.lg)|

Jesaiae.  which  related  to  Nero's  persecution  of
the  Christians  ;  and  in  4  3  b,  which  at  that  date  he
knew  only  through  Dillmann's  Latin  translation  from
the  Ethiopic  ('  e  duodecim  in  manus  eius  tradetur'),  he
found  an  allusion  to  the  death  of  Peter  in  that  reign.

Harnack  (ACL  ii.  1714-716)  disputed  this  hypothesis,  in
cluding  that  relating  to  Peter;  Zeller  (Zll'T,  1896,  p.  558-568)
accepted  the  latter,  but  like  Harnack  put  the  date  of  composition
much  later  than  Clemen  had  done,  and  therefore  denied  its
trustworthiness  as  regarded  Peter.  Clemen  at  a  later  date  was
able  to  report  (Theol.  Rundschau,  1901,  p.  75)  that  Vernon
Hartlet  (Apostolic  Age,  1900,  p.  524)  also  had  assigned  Asc.  Jes.
813-421  to  the  last  years  of  Nero,  but  at  the  same  time  took
the  opportunity  to  add,  without  further  discussion,  that  he  him
self  no  longer  regarded  that  dating  as  probable  in  view  of  the
Greek  text  recently  published  by  Grenfell  and  Hunt  (Ainherst
Papyri,  1,  1900,  1-22).  Charles,  who  makes  use  of  this  Greek  text
in  his  edition  of  Asc.  Jes.  (1900),  holds  that  a  hiatus  in  4  •$/>  ought
to  be  filled  by  the  insertion  of  ets  and  the  clause  interpreted  as
referring  to  Peter  :  '  of  the  Twelve  one  will  be  delivered  into
his  hands  '  ([T]iav  SiaStKa  [ets]  rals  xfpo-'"/.a"TO"  MapaSoerjo-eTai).
Harnack  also  gives  his  adhesion  to  this  (SBA  II  ,  1900.  p.  985
f.),  but  adds  that  the  value  of  the  statement  regarding  Peter  will
depend  upon  its  date,  and  this  he  prefers  to  assign  rather  to  the
first  half  of  the  third  century,  than  to  any  time  within  the
second  (ACL  ii.  1574-577)-

(fi)  Charles,  however,  holds  that  Asc.  Jes.  3i3<Mi8,
'  the  testament  of  Hezekiah,'  ought  to  be  dated  between
88  and  100  A.D. ,  not,  as  in  APOCALYPTIC  (above,  col.
230),  between  50  and  80  A.D.  According  to  him  the
question  turns  upon  4  13  (p.  30 /.  )•

Charles  renders  the  Ethiopic  version,  here  the  only  text
available  for  us,  as  follows:  'And  many  believers  and  saints,
having  seen  Him  for  whom  they  were  hoping,  who  was  crucified,
Jesus  the  Lord  Christ  fafter  that  I,  Isaiah,  had  seen  Him  who
was  crucified  and  ascended],  and  those  also  who  were  believers
in  Him — of  these  few  in  those  days  will  be  left  as  His  servants,
while  they  flee  from  desert  to  desert,  awaiting  the  coming  of  the
Beloved.'  Charles  adds  :  '  we  see  that  two  classes  of  the  faithful

4596


SIMON  PETER

are  discriminated  .  .  .  believers  who  had  seen  Christ  personally,
and  believers  who  had  not.  .  .  .  Ol"  the  two  classes  our  text
declares  that  few  will  be  left.'  As,  however,  the  first  class  can
not  well  have  survived  into  the  second  ceiuury,  this  passage
must  have  been  written  before  100  A.D.  On  the  other  hand,  it
has  to  be  remembered  that  this  distinction  of  two  classes  could,
if  really  intended,  hardly  be  called  a  good  one.  The  second
class  is  spoken  of  as  consisting  simply  of  'those  who  were
believers  in  Him '  ;  but  the  first  class  also  consists  of  '  believers
(and  saints).'  Thus  it  would  hardly  seem  to  have  been  the
writer's  intention  to  distinguish  two  classes.

(<•)  In  a  private  communication  Charles  now  prefers
to  read  :  '  and  many  believers  and  saints  who  had  seen
Him  .  .  .  and  who  also  kept  believing  in  Him,'  etc.  By
this  conjectural  substitution  of  ot  for  the  6're  which  the
Ethiopic  translation  presupposes  '  all  reference  to  a  second
class  disappears.'  Charles  continues  to  maintain,  how
ever,  that  the  reference  is  to  Jewish  Christians  who  have
personally  known  Jesus.  But  in  this  case  we  are
compelled  to  ask  :  Is  the  persecution  of  the  last  days
really  to  be  confined  to  these  alone,  and  are  they  alone
to  look  for  the  Messiah,  and  other  Christians  not?
Besides,  the  text  even  as  restored  by  Charles  still  contains
a  very  disturbing  tautology,  '  many  believers  and
saints  .  .  .  who  also  kept  believing  in  Him. '

Bousset  (Antichrist,  1895,  p.  87/1)  regards  our  passage  as
more  largely  interpolated  than  Charles  does.  But  neither  is  his
conjecture  at  all  satisfying.  As  long  as  we  hold  by  Charles'
text,  Zeller's  interpretation  remains  the  most  probable  one,  that
'  seeing  '  means  a  knowledge  of  Christ  possessed  by  all  Christians
and  not  merely  by  those  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  his  earthly
life  (cp  Jn.  147  ijn.  36  3  Jn.  IT).  On  this  interpretation
however  all  necessity  disappears  for  dating  the  passage  before
100  A.D.  There  are  signs  of  a  later  origin,  such  as,  for
example,  the  distinction  of  bishops  from  presbyters  (MINISTRY,
§§  46,  47,  54  /',  c),  which  as  matter  of  fact  is  clear  in  the  irpea-
fSvTepoi.  (cat  Troi/xe'res  of  824  (and  also  829  according  to  the
Ethiopic  version),  or  the  representation  of  the  circumstances  of
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  (815-17),  which,  at  least  in  so  far  as
it  names  Michael  (a'nd  Gabriel),  goes  beyond  that  of  the  gospel
of  Peter  even  (see  RESURRECTION-NARRATIVES,  §  7  <•)•

(</)  Finally,  it  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  any
one  to  ask  whether  or  no  the  most  important  clause  of
all  in  the  passage  before  us  really  belongs  to  the
original  text  (4  3^  :  '  of  the  Twelve  one  will  be  delivered
into  his  hands.'  Charles  (pp.  Ixix-lxxiii)  has  rightly
perceived  that  it  is  not  the  living  Nero  who  is  regarded
as  Antichrist,  but  the  dead  one  :  in  the  form  of  Nero,
we  read  in  424,  Brliar  (=  Satan  ;  2  Cor.  615,  and  cp
BKLIAL)  will  appear  and  will  rule  for  3^  years,
immediately  after  which  will  be  the  end  of  the  world
(45-18).  Of  this  Nero  it  cannot  be  intended  to  say  that
Peter  is  to  fall  into  his  hands  in  the  year  64  A.  IX
Except  in  this  one  clause — if  indeed  it  is  to  be  referred
to  Peter — the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  description  is
purely  apocalyptic  ;  Christians  will  become  godless
(821-31),  Beliar  will  come  in  the  form  of  Nero  (4a)  and
will  persecute  the  plant  which  the  twelve  apostles  of
the  Beloved  have  planted  (Gk.  'will  plant'  :  <pvrev<Tov(nv,
43«  ;  as  to  this  clause,  cp  below,  e)  ;  he  will  work
miracles,  will  cause  himself  to  be  worshipped  as  God,
and  will  be  cast  into  hell  by  the  Lord  (Christ?),  who
will  come  down  from  the  seventh  heaven  (44-14).  If
in  the  middle  of  all  this  it  is  said  of  one  of  the  twelve
that  he  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  this  Beliar  (4  3^),
the  one  intended  must,  if  the  clause  is  to  fit  the  context,
be  one  who  has  survived  the  death  of  Nero.

The  only  notorious  instance  which  the  readers  could  have
found  referred  to  in  these  purely  allusive  words  would  be  that
of  John  with  his  cup  of  poison  and  his  bath  of  boiling  oil  (see
JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEDEE,  §  8/').  Yet  it  is  not  easy  to  see  why
this  atrocity  should  be  referred  precisely  to  Beliar  coming  in  the
form  of  Nero.  This  Beliar  is  a  purely  apocalyptic  form,  whose
deeds  are  with  good  reason  described  in  quite  general  and
indefinite  terms.  As  real  prophecy  a  piediction  of  any  such
detail  would  be  not  only  bold  but  also  out  of  keeping  with  the
apocalyptic  character  of  the  representation  of  the  time  of  the
end  ;  as  vaticinimn  e.r  event-it  it  is  equally  out  of  keeping  ;  and,
besides,  the  martyrdom  of  John  is  not  a  historical  fact  but  first
came  to  be  believed  at  so  late  a  date  after  the  time  _of  the
emperor  under  whom  it  is  alleged  to  have  occurred  (Domitian  is
usually  named)  as  to  make  it  absolutely  impossible  that  at  the
time  of  the  writer  this  emperor  should  be  spoken  of  as  the  last
to  reign  before  the  end  of  the  world  or  that  a  reign  of  no  more
than  3i  years  should  be  assigned  to  him.

Thus it  becomes in  fact  probable  that it is Peter

1!~  4597


SIMON  PETER

rather  than  John  who  is  intended.  In  that  case,  how-
ever,  the  clause  must  be  regarded  as  a  gloss.  It  is  so
regarded,  it  will  be  seen,  not  with  the  object  of  getting
rid  of  a  text  that  is  inconvenient  for  the  view  of  Peter's
life  taken  in  the  present  article,  but  purely  for  reasons
affecting  a  right  understanding  of  Asc.  Jes.  The
deletion  of  the  clause  would  be  necessary  even  if  it
related  not  to  Peter  but  to  some  other  of  the  apostles
who  had  suffered  martyrdom  under  Nero.

(e)  There  are  two  ways  by  which  the  extent  of  the
gloss  can  be  determined.

If  in  the  entire  text  the  Antichrist  is  the  subject,  then  it  consists
only  of  the  above  cited  words  in  4  3^.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
we  should  find  ourselves  constrained  to  understand  the  living
Nero  as  being  the  subject  of  v.  3  (the  subject  according  to  v.  2,
end,  is  'Who  himself  (even)  this  king,'  OCTTIS  avrbs  6  /3a<riAevs
oJ-ros),  then  the  immediately  following  expression,  i>.  3*1  ('  will
persecute  the  plant  which  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Beloved  have
planted  ')  must  also  be  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  interpola
tion  ;  for  it  is  quite  improbable  that  between  two  utterances
regarding  Antichrist  there  should  stand  one  relating  to  the  living
Nero  who  must  nevertheless  be  dead  before  Antichrist  comes
forward  in  Nero's  form.

Why  the  clause  should  have  been  added  by  some
ancient  reader  will  become  very  intelligible  if  only  we
suppose  such  reader  to  have  understood  by  Beliar  the
actual  Nero — as  was  done  at  first  by  Clemen  in  1896/1
It  thus  appears  that  Asc.  Jes.  cannot  be  adduced  as  an
earlier  witness  for  the  belief  of  the  martyrdom  of  Peter
under  Nero  than  the  documents  dealt  with  in  preceding
sections.

Contrariwise  all  the  writings  of  an  older  date  are
profoundly  silent  on  the  subject  of  Peter's  Roman

_,. sojourn. A detailed examination of
28.  1  Clem. i  c,em is  at  this  poim  cal,L.d  fo]%  parlly

on  account  of  its  fundamental  importance,  and  partly
because  it  is  often  taken  in  the  other  sense.

(a)  After  having  pointed  to  the  instances  in  the
OT  in  which  jealousy  and  envy  are  seen  to  have  led
to  the  most  direful  results,  Clement  proceeds  :  V.  i.
'AXV  iVa  rijov  apx.a.iuv  vTrodfiy/uidTwv  travaw-
fj.e0a,  £\6co[j,fv  eirt  TOVS  eyyiara  yfvop.ei'oi'S  dflXr?-
rds '  \d(3tofj.ev  rrjs  yevtas  Tjfj.wi'  TO.  yevveua.  vvoody-
/Kara.  2.  Ata  fi/Xoi'  /ecu  (frOovov  ol  /j-^yiaToi.  Kal
5iKa.iOTa.TOi  ffTvXoi  toiu-%6'nffa-v  KCLI  £a;s  6a.va.Tov  fj6\r](Ta.i>.
3.  Adpiiifj.ev  irpb  6(pOa\fj.^iv  i]p.Civ  TOVS  dyadovs  diroffTb-
\ovs'  4.  IleTpov,  5s  did  ^f/\ov  adiKov  oi>x  %va  ovo£  ovo
d\\d  ir\eiovas  virrjveyKe  Tr6vovs,  /cat  OVTW  /j.apTvpriffas
tiropevOT]  eis  TOV  6(pei\biJ.tvov  T^TTOV  Trjs  do^rjs.  5.  Ata
£/)\ov  Kal  'epiv  Ilai'Xos  virofj.ovrjs  fipaflf'iov  ^dei^ev  6.
eTrrd/cis  defffj-d  <f>op£o-a.'S,  <pvya8ev8ds,  \iOacr6eis,  KTJpvj-
yevvuevos  Zv  re  Trj  dva.TO\rj  /cat  fi>  TTJ  ovaei,  TO  ytv-
vaiov  TI)S  TriffTeus  avTov  /cX^os  £'Xa/3ec'  7.  diKaioffvvrjv
di5d£as  6\ov  TOV  KOff^ov,  /cat  eirl  TO  r^a  TTJS  5i'<crewj
tXOuv  /cat  /j.apTvpr]ffas  tVi  T&V  fiyov/itvwv,  OVTWS  dinj\-
\dyr;  TOV  Koff/J.ov  /cat  eis  TOV  ayiov  TOTTOV  (iropevQ-q,
virofj.oi'fjs  yevjfjt.evo's  /j.^yiffTos  viroypa.fj.n6s.  VI.  i.
To('>Tots  rot's  dvSpdaiv  ocrtws  TroXtrei'cra/afJ'otj  avvyOpoiffBti
TroXi)  7rX?)6>os  ef/cXe/cru;;' ,  oiVtJ'es  TroXXals  ai/ctats  Kal
(laffdvois  did  f??Xos  Trafljcres  i>ir68fiy/J.a  Kd\\urrov
fytvovTO  iv  rjfuv.  2.  Ata  fijXos  5ia>x0etcrat  yvvcUKCS
Aavat'Sej  /cat  A/p/cat,  ai'/ctV/xara  dfivd  /cat  ai^crta
Tra^oOcrat,  e?rt  Tbv  Trjs  iriffTeus  pefiaiov  dp6/j.ov  Karf^v-
TTjcrav  /cat  gXafiov  yitpas  yevvalov  at  dffdevels  T<^  crto^tart.

(5  i)  '  But,  not  to  dwell  on  the  ancient  examples,  let  us  come
to  those  champions  who  lived  nearest  ourselves.  Let  us  take  the
noble  examples  of  our  own  generation.  (2)  By  reason  of
jealousy  and  envy  the  greatest  and  most  righteous  pillars  were
persecuted,  and  contended  even  unto  death.  (3)  Let  us  set  before
our  eyes  the  good  apostles ;  (4)  Peter,  who  by  reason  of  un
righteous  jealousy  endured  not  one  nor  two  but  many  labours,
and  thus  having  borne  his  testimony  went  to  his  due  place  of
glory.  (5)  By  reason  of  jealousy  and  strife  Paul  showed  the
reward  of  patient  endurance.  (6)  After  that  he  had  been  seven
times  in  bonds,  had  been  driven  into  exile,  had  been  stoned,
had  preached  in  the  East  and  in  the  West,  he  won  the  noble
renown  of  his  faith ;  (7)  having  taught  righteousness  to  the
whole  world  and  having  come  to  the  limit  of  the  West  and
having  borne  his  testimony  before  the  rulers,  he  thus  departed
from  the  world  and  went  unto  the  holy  place,  having  become
a  very  great  example  of  patient  endurance.  (61)  Unto  these
men  of  holy  lives  was  gathered  a  vast  multitude  of  elect  ones
who,  suffering  by  reason  of  jealousy  many  indignities  and

4598


SIMON  PETER

tortures,  became  a  most  admirable  example  among  us.  (2)  By
reason  of  jealousy  women  being  persecuted  as  Danakls  and
Dircae,  after  that  they  had  suffered  cruel  and  unholy  insults,
safely  reached  the  goal  in  the  race  of  faith  and  received  a  noble
reward,  feeble  though  they  were  in  body.'

(f>)  The  word  (j.aprvp'/iffa.s  applied  to  Paul  (5  7)  will
be  most  fittingly  interpreted  as  meaning,  not  '  having
suffered  martyrdom'  (his  death  is  indicated  rather  by
the  words  d.wr)\\d.yr]  TOV  KOCT/JLOV)  but  rather  '  having
borne  (oral)  testimony'  or,  at  most,  'having  suffered
tortures.'  In  the  case  of  Peter,  however  (54),  the  first
of  these  two  renderings  does  not  fit  well  :  for  oi'rw
/uapTtip77<rcts  seems  intended  to  convey  '  after  that  lie
had  borne  testimony'  by  the  'labours'  (TTOVOL)  just
mentioned.  These,  however,  extend  over  his  whole
life  as  an  apostle.  That  precisely  his  death  was
occasioned  by  some  such  '  labour '  and  thus  was  a
martyrdom  is  not  expressly  said  and  therefore  might
be  disputed.  Still,  since  Peter  is  here  cited  as  an
instance  of  how  the  greatest  '  pillars '  '  contended  even
unto  death '  we  refrain  from  doing  so.

(c)  In  like  manner  it  will  be  well  to  concede  that
'among  us'  (ev  ijfj.iv)  in  61  does  not  mean  'among  us
Christians' — which  would  be  tolerably  vague — but
'  among  us  Romans.'  The  reference  is  to  the  victims  of
the  Xeronian  persecution  (t>2)  who  were  made  use  of  for
the  presentation  of  mythological  pieces.  Still  when  it  is
said  of  the  Xeronian  martyrs  in  Rome  that  they  were
gathered  together  with  Peter  and  Paul,  we  are  by  no
means  to  draw  it  as  a  necessary  inference  that  Peter
and  Paul  also  died  in  Rome.  To  '  was  gathered '
(irvfTj^pMcrOr]}  in  61  what  we  ought  rather  to  supply
will  be  '  to  thu  due  place  of  glory  '  (eis  TOV  6<pei.\b[j.evoi>
TOTTOV  rrjs  5J£r/j)  or  '  to  the  holy  place'  (eh  TOV  &yiov
TOWOV)  of  04  7.  Thus  the  common  meeting -place
referred  to  is  not  Rome  but  heaven,  and  accordingly  the
present  passage  says  nothing  as  to  the  place  of  death.

(ci)  Xeither  in  5i  does  the  author  give  any  reason  to
suppose  that  he  is  thinking  of  all  as  having  one  and  the
same  place  of  death.  The  oneness  that  unites  those
about  to  be  mentioned  and  separates  them  from  those
who  have  been  mentioned  already  is  characterised  as  a
oneness  of  time  only  :  '  who  lived  nearest  .  .  .  our  own
generation'  (Tovs£yyi<TTa,yevo/j.fvovs  .  .  .  T-qsyevfasijiJ.^).

(^)  As  the  writer  is  at  Rome,  by  the  '  limit  of  the
west'  (rtp.u.0.  rrii  ovfffu?,  5?)  to  which  Paul  came  it
would  seem  as  if  Spain  must  be  meant.  The  fact,
however,  of  a  journey  of  Paul  to  Spain  is,  if  the  present
passage  be  left  out  of  account,  nowhere  asserted  before
the  fourth  century  except  in  the  Muratorian  fragment
(//.  38,  39)  and  in  the  pre-Catholic  Acta  Petri  (see
below,  §  33 a],  and  in  view  of  the  silence  of  the  other
witnesses  is  very  much  exposed  to  the  suspicion  of
being  merely  an  inference  from  Rom.  1624  28,  where
Paul  expresses  the  intention  of  extending  his  journey
from  Rome  to  Spain.  Eusebius  (HE\\.  222)  speaks  of
a  missionary  activity  of  Paul  after  the  captivity  spoken
of  in  Acts  28  30  f.,  but  does  not  say  where,  and  adds
that  thereafter  Paul  came  once  more  to  Rome  and
suffered  martyrdom  there.  In  the  immediately  follow
ing  context  (223-8)  he  refers  the  '  first  hearing'  (irpwrr)
d.Tro\oyia)  of  2  Tim.  4i6  to  the  first  Roman  captivity.
Here  too,  in  view  of  the  silence  of  other  witnesses,
there  arises  inevitably  a  strong  suspicion  that  the  dis
crimination  of  two  captivities  may  have  been  suggested
by  this  passage  merely,  whilst  nevertheless  Trpdirrj
airo\oyia  in  the  nature  of  things  ought  to  mean  merely
a  first  '  appearance '  or  '  hearing '  as  distinct  from  a
second  in  the  course  of  the  same  captivity,  since  the
whole  passage  49-18  is  speaking  of  the  details  of  a
single  captivity.  For  this  inference  not  Eusebius  but
some  one  who  preceded  him  must  be  held  responsible  ;
he  himself  introduces  the  whole  story  with  a  \6yos  txfl
( '  the  story  goes ' ).  If,  however,  Eusebius,  who  elsewhere
puts  forth  so  much  that  is  false  with  the  greatest  assurance,
here  uses  so  cautious  an  expression  as  this,  the  matter,
we  may  rest  assured,  is  questionable  in  the  highest  degree.

4599


SIMON  PETER

Harnack  (A  CL  ii.  1  239/1)  characterises  the  liberation  of  Paul
from  his  first  Roman  captivity  (and  the  journey  to  Spain)  as  an
'assured  fact '  (gesichcrte  Thatsache).  His  reasons  are — apart
from  TO  rippa.  TTJS  6u<7«u>«  here — certain  genuine  fragments  of
Paul  preserved  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles  (2  Tim.  1  15-18  4  9-21
Tit.  3  I2/I),  for  which  one  can  find  no  room  in  the  earlier  life  of
Paul  (P.  very  precarious  hypothesis,  to  say  the  least)  and  also
chronological  considerations  according  to  which  the  tirst  captivity
came  to  an  end  in  59  A.D.  whilst  the  martyrdom  of  Paul  in  the
Neronian  persecution  (July,  64  A.D.)  is  an  'ascertained  fact.'
This  last  fact  has  no  other  '  secure  '  basis  on  which  to  rest  than
Harnack's  interpretation  of  our  present  passage  in  i  Clem,  and
the  'definite  pieces  of  information'  (ACL  ii.  1  710)  referred  to
above  (§  25_/C)  of  which  Harnack  himself  wrote  not  so  very  long
ago  (on  i  Clem.  5  4  :  1876):  '  posteriore  tempore  auctores
martyrii  Petri  vel  itineris  Romani,  quorum  testimonium  nullius
fere  pretii  est,  sunt  Dionysius  Corinthius,  Gajus  Rumanus,  .  .  .
Irena:us,'  etc.  If  these  testimonies  are  of  hardly  any  value  with
reference  to  Peter  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  they  are  entitled  to
much  confidence  in  what  they  say  about  Paul, — so  far  at  least
as  the  persons  of  the  witnesses  are  concerned.  The  reckoning,
however,  which  is  suggested  alternatively  for  adoption  under
CHRONOLOGY,  §§  64-80,  according  to  which  the  Iirst  Roman
captivity  ends  in  59  A.D.,  Harnack  is  able  to  maintain  (238)
only  at  the  cost  of  assuming  that  Tacitus  is  wrong  by  a  year  as
to  the  age  of  the  imperial  prince  Britannicus.  Spitta  (Zur
Gesch.  u.  Lit.  tf.  Urchristcnth.  i.  [1893]  I-I°8  i»-  1  [1900])
postulates  the  liberation  of  Paul  from  his  two-years'  Roman
captivity  in  the  interests  of  a  very  bold  division  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans  into  two  separate  epistles,  the  tirst  of  which  was
written  by  Paul  before,  and  the  second  (12  1-167  16  1-20)  after,
his  first  sojourn  in  Rome.  Conservative  theology  with  almost
complete  unanimity  postulates  this  liberation  in  the  interests  of
the  genuineness  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  In  that  case,  however,
the  journey  into  Spain  is  only  an  embarrassment,  as  the  Epistles
in  question  presuppose  rather  fresh  journeys  of  the  apostle  in
the  East  (i  Tim.  138  14  f.  4  13  Tit.  158  12)  :  but  these  in  turn
are  excluded  by  Acts  20  25  ('  I  know  that  ye  all  ...  shall  see
my  face  no  more '),  a  saying  which  the  author,  even  if  it  had
reached  him  by  tradition  as  a  genuine  utterance  of  Paul,  would
certainly  have  altered  or  omitted  if  it  had  not  come  true.

(/)  The  expression  '  the  limit  of  the  west'  (rb  T^p/j.a
T???  Swrews)  itself  would  necessarily  denote  Spain  only
on  the  assumption  that  it  cannot  be  taken  otherwise
than  in  a  purely  geographical  sense.  Since  Paul,
however,  is  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  the  writer  can
very  possibly  have  meant  a  point  that  was  for  him  the
westward  limit  of  his  activities,  in  which  case  there  is
no  longer  any  necessity  to  hold  that  Spain — otherwise
so  poorly  attested  as  a  field  of  Paul's  activities  —  is
meant.  The  writer,  indeed,  had  he  been  very  anxious
to  make  it  quite  clear  that  Rome  and  Rome  alone  was
intended,  could  have  added  '  his '  (ai'roO)  to  '  limit '
(T{/>/J.O.)  ;  but  it  so  happens  that  it  is  good  Greek
precisely  to  refrain  from  doing  so.  The  passage  is  as
every  one  sees  highly  rhetorical  in  character.

This  being  so  it  could  surprise  no  one  if  the  author,  although
himself  a  Roman,  with  Paul's  starting-point  in  mind,  calls
Rome  'the  limit  of  the  west,'  just  as  in  Acts  18 47  it  is  called
'  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  '  (e<r\a.rov  TTJS  vis),  and  just  as
in  Ps.  Sal.  (17  14  [12])  Pompeius  sends  his  captive  Jews  'as  far
as  the  west '  («os  etri  Sv<Tfi.ioi')  or  as  Ignatius  (ad  Rom.  2  2)  is
transported  'to  west  from  east'  (fis  tv<ji.v  Into  draroATj?).  In  i
Clem,  itself  '  east  and  west '  (araroArj  Kai  6u(ris)are  used  shortly
before  (56)  as  geographical  indications  of  the  range  of  Paul's
activities,  but  from  this  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the  limit  of
the  west '  must  here  be  taken  in  an  absolute  sense  and  without
any  reference  to  the  apostle's  point  of  departure.  In  i  Clem.  67
'  having  taught  righteousness  unto  the  whole  world  '  (8iicaio<Tvi'T)c
6t8a£a?  o\ov  TOV  Ko<Tfj.ov)  only  repeats  what  was  expressed  in  the
preceding  clause  by  'having  preached  in  the  east  and  in  the
west '  (icrjpvf  yevo^evoi  ev  re  Tf}  dvaroAfl  (tal  ev  TJJ  Svcrei)  and
similarly  the  phrase  immediately  following  this  last  '  won  the
noble  renown  which  was  the  reward  of  his  faith  '  (TO  yevvaiov  TTJ?
mo-Tews  auToO  (tAf'os  eAa/3ei')  gives  already  a  hint  of  his  martyrdom
which  is  more  fully  described  in  the  succeeding  section.  Thus
it  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  the  whole
writing  if  by  'having  come  to  the  limit  of  the  west'  nothing
new  is  intended  but  only  a  renewed  reference  to  the  apostle's
sojourn  in  Rome.  Another  important  point  is  that  none  of  the
church  fathers  has  found  Spain  in  our  present  passage  ;  other
wise  Eusebius  at  least  would  not  have  left  unnamed  the  place
where  Paul  was  believed  to  have  laboured  between  his  first  and
his  second  captivity,  and  the  others  would  not  have  kept
complete  silence  as  to  his  liberation  from  the  first.

(,£•)  If  on  the  other  hand  Spain  were  meant  it  would
in  that  case  become  almost  necessary  to  understand  by
the  rulers  (r/yoi'/mfvoi)  before  whom  Paul  bore  his
testimony  the  Spanish  civil  authorities.  There  is  not  a.
single  tradition,  however,  in  favour  of  Spain  as  the
place  of  Paul's  martyrdom.  That  Rome  was  the  place
is  nowhere  doubted.  The  rulers  (riyov^fvoi)  can,

4600


SIMON  PETER

according  to  the  usage  of  i  Clem,  (see  MINISTRY,
§  47/',  middle),  mean  any  high  political  authority  ;  but
if  Rome  is  referred  to,  the  emperor  and  his  advisers  will
be  meant.

(A)  We  now  come  to  the  most  important  point —
which  is,  that  the  entire  passage  before  us  is  designed
to  set  forth  a  parallel  between  Peter  and  Paul.  Thus
it  becomes  necessary  to  pay  special  attention  to  the
points  in  which  the  parallel  is  not  carried  out.  Now,
at  the  very  outset,  we  notice  that  the  sufferings  of
Paul  in  the  service  of  the  gospel  are  much  more  fully
particularised  than  those  of  Peter.  "We  may  be  certain
that  the  author  would  have  been  equally  detailed  in
the  case  of  Peter  had  this  been  in  his  power.  Is  it
possible  that  in  Rome  so  little  that  is  definite  should
have  been  known  if  he  had  actually  died  there?  In
the  case  of  Peter,  further,  no  parallel  at  all  to  Paul's
'coming  to  the  limit  of  the  west'  and  his  'bearing
testimony  before  the  rulers '  is  offered.  Had  it  been
Spain  that  was  in  question,  we  should  not  have  wondered
to  find  that  the  same  things  could  not  be  said  of  Peter  as
of  Paul  ;  but  from  what  has  been  said  in  the  foregoing
paragraphs  of  this  section,  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is  with
Rome  that  we  are  dealing,  and  in  this  case  it  naturally
becomes  a  point  of  great  importance  to  notice  that
what  is  said  is  said  of  Paul  alone.  Yet,  even  if  '  the
limit  of  the  west '  were  to  be  taken  as  meaning  Spain,
we  should  still  have  to  reckon  with  the  fact  that  the
author  of  the  epistle  was  not  in  a.  position  to  say  of
Peter  that  he  had  borne  testimony  '  before  the  rulers. '
Even  should  '  the  rulers '  denote,  not  the  emperor  and
his  advisers  but  some  other  high  authority,  it  is  clear
that  the  author  knew  nothing  of  any  '  witnessing '
(/uLaprvpetv)  of  Peter  before  such  an  authority.  How
willingly  would  he  not  have  adduced  it  had  any  such
tradition  been  within  his  reach  !  For  he  names  Peter  '
even  before  Paul.  The  phrase  'rulers,'  however,
makes  it  still  more  clear  than  does  'limit  of  the  west,'
that  as  regards  Paul  both  must  be  sought  in  Rome.
This  being  so,  the  fact  that  only  of  Paul  is  it  said  that
he  was  'a  preacher  in  the  east  and  in  the  west'  (K^pi'f
Zv  re  rrj  di>aTo\ri  /ecu  ev  rrj  dvaei)  acquires  a  new  signifi
cance.  In  short,  this  writer  was  ignorant,  not  only  of
any  'witnessing'  (/j.apTVpeii>)  before  the  authorities  (in
Rome)  on  Peter's  part,  but  also  of  any  missionary
activity  of  his  at  all  in  the  west  ;  yet  he  wrote  in  Rome
about  93-97  A.u.  (at  latest,  but  not  probably,  about
120  A.D.  See  GALATIANS,  §  9  [but  cp  also  OLU-
CHKISTIAN  LITKRATURK,  §  26]).

(i)  This  conclusion,  however  clear  in  itself,  is  often
resisted  on  the  ground  that  no  other  place  than  Rome
is  ever  mentioned  in  tradition  as  the  scene  of  Peter's
martydoin,  and  that  it  would  be  too  extraordinary  if
Clement,  while  knowing  the  fact  of  Peter's  martyrdom,
should  be  ignorant  of  the  place  of  it.  But  neither
objection  is  conclusive.

If,  let  us  suppose,  Peter  had  perished  while  travelling  in  a
distant  land,  at  some  obscure  place,  not  as  the  result  of  ordinary
process  of  law,  but  perhaps  in  some  popular  tumult,  and  if  also
such  companions  as  he  may  have  had  perished  along  with  him,
then  information  of  his  death  could  reach  his  fellow-Christians
only  by  report ;  and  if,  even  at  a  later  date,  no  Christian  church
arose  at  the  place  where  it  occurred,  no  local  tradition  as  to  his
end  had  any  chance  of  surviving.  Let  us  only  suppose,  for
example,  that  Paul  had  died  of  the  stoning  at  Lystra  (Acts
14  19)  or  of  that  with  which  he  was  threatened  at  Iconium(14  5),
and  either  was  unaccompanied,  or  was  accompanied  even  in
death — what  should  we,  what  could  Clement — have  known  as
to  the  place  of  his  death?  Yet,  indeed,  there  is  no  need  for
supposing  such  an  extreme  case  as  this.  It  is  very  conceivable
that  Clement  actually  did  know  the  place  of  Peter's  death,  and
yet  did  not  name  it  because  this  was  not  required  for  his
purpose.  In  the  case  of  Paul  he  does  not  judge  it  in  the  least
important  to  name  the  place ;  all  he  thinks  worth  com
memorating  is  that  his  appearance  was  made  before  the  '  rulers '
(r/yovjueroi),  and  in  this  w7ay  only  indirectly  do  we  learn  the
locality.  That  of  Peter's  death  he  could  pass  over  all  the  more
easily  because  he  could  take  it  for  granted  that  his  readers  at
Corinth  knew  it  just  as  well  as  himself.  It  must  not  be  for
gotten  that  his  object  is  not  to  tell  them  anything  new,  but  to
draw  profitable  exhortation  for  them  from  known  facts.

(A)  It  is  therefore  quite  useless  to  conjecture  that  Peter

4601


SIMON  PETER

and  Paul  alone  are  selected  out  of  the  number  of  the
apostles  (notwithstanding  that  James  the  son  of  Zebedee
might  also  have  been  mentioned:  Acts  12 2),  only
because  they  were  specially  well  known  in  Rome.
Kven  if  this  were  the  reason,  it  still  would  be  no  proof
of  Peter's  having  ever  been  in  Rome :  even  without
this  he  was  famous  enough.  What  is  more  to  the
point  is  that  both  apostles  were  known  in  Corinth — in
a  general  way  as  well  known  as  at  Rome — and  over
and  above  this  in  a  special  manner,  because  the  church
there  had  been  founded  by  the  one,  whilst  the  other
had  been  chosen  by  a  party  there  as  its  head  (i  Cor.
1 12  822).

(/)  If  Peter's  death  was  not  at  Rome,  then  neither
was  it  during  the  Neronian  persecution,  which  so  far  as
we  know  did  not  extend  beyond  that  city.  Even  if  it
had  so  extended,  however,  Peter  could  not  be  regarded
as  one  of  its  victims,  according  to  the  passage  now
under  discussion,  for  in  the  provinces  the  persecution
would  naturally  break  out  later  than  in  Rome,  whilst
Peter  and  Paul,  according  to  the  order  followed,  and
the  '  gathering'  (avvridpoiffOij)  of  61,  preceded  the  great
multitude  of  Nero's  martyrs.  If  they  died  in  Rome  we
should  have  to  think  of  this  as  happening  immediately
on  the  outbreak  of  the  persecution.  This,  however,  as
we  have  seen,  does  not  apply  to  Peter  ;  and  even  in  the
case  of  Paul  we  have  no  right  to  assume  it,  although  he
did  die  in  Rome.

The  prevailing  opinion,  that  if  it  was  in  64  A.n.,  it  was  in
consequence  of  the  Neronian  persecution  that  Paul  was  con
demned  to  death,  is  very  rash.  The  judicial  procedure  of  Rome
was  not  so  utterly  arbitrary  as  would  be  implied  were  it  true
that  a  prisoner  who  was  kept  day  and  night  chained  to  a  soldier
should  be  found  guilty  of  fire-raising,  or  of  incitation  thereto.
The  process  against  Paul  followed  its  own  course.  That  in  the
general  hostility  to  Christians  it  was  hurried  on  is  likely  enough,
but  hardly  so  rapidly  that  Paul  should  have  preceded  the  great
bulk  of  the  Neronian  martyrs.

At a  date subsequent  also  to  that of  i  Clem, we

find  allusions  to  the  martyrdom  of  Peter,  but  without

ntVi mention of the place. (u) It is not

29.  utfler certaini it is true> whether ]n  ]336

01\S  OI  belongs  to this category. When Jesus

withlace  SayS :  <Whither  :  S°  thou  canst  not
.-  ,  follow  me  now '  he  means  his  going  to
•edl  heaven,  as  is  clear  from  734821  (to
both  of  which  passages  express  reference  is  made  in
1833) ;  and  that  it  is  into  heaven  that  Peter  is  to  follow
him  has  its  parallel  in  17  24.  Nevertheless,  it  is  open
to  us  to  understand  also  that  the  manner  of  the  enter
ing  into  heaven,  that  is,  the  manner  of  death,  is  to  be
the  same  for  Peter  as  for  Jesus.  1837  may  contain  an
allusion  to  this  when  Peter  says  '  I  will  lay  down  my
life  for  thee. '  It  would  be  quite  in  keeping  were  we  to
understand  the  words  of  Jesus  as  meaning  :  '  Thou  canst
not  follow  me  in  this  manner  now,  but  later  thou  shall
be  able.'  The  question,  therefore,  comes  to  be  whether
the  writer  already  knew  of  the  martyrdom  of  Peter.
On  the  assumption  that  the  martyrdom  is  historical,  it
is  very  probable  that  he  did.  But  even  if  it  was
legendary,  the  author,  who  wrote  about  132-140  A.u.,
could  very  easily  have  heard  about  it.  The  question,
however,  whether  he  thought  of  the  death  of  Peter
as  haying  happened  in  Rome,  will  depend  for  its  answer
on  our  determination  of  the  date  at  which  this  opinion
arose.  He  himself  gives  no  indication.

(£)  Jn.  21,  the  addition  of  a  later  hand  (§  22<r),
certainly  speaks  of  the  martyrdom  ;  whether  at  Rome
or  no  is  a  question  to  be  decided  in  the  same  manner
as  in  a.

(c)  2  Pet.  1 14  refers  back  to  Jn.  21 18/  Nowhere
else,  so  far  as  we  know,  did  Jesus  say  to  Peter  that
'the  putting  off  of  his  tabernacle  cometh  swiftly,'  and
in  view  of  the  late  date  of  2  Pet.  (see  §  24 a)  its  author's
acquaintance  with  Jn.  21  is  very  possible,  as  also  his
acquaintance  with  the  tradition  that  Peter  had  suffered
martyrdom  in  Rome.

(</) In the Muratorian fragment the  passin  Petri

4602


SIMON  PETER

is  referred  to  in  /.  37,  and  that,  according  to  the  almost
universally  accepted  restoration  of  the  text  ( '  seniota
passione  Petri  evidenter  declarat'),  as  one  of  the  events
by  his  silence  as  to  which  the  writer  of  Acts  makes
it  clear  that  he  has  incorporated  in  his  book  only  such
occurrences  as  had  happened  in  his  presence.  Thus
here  also  the  martyrdom  of  Peter  is  regarded  as  a  known
event,  and  can  very  easily  have  been  conceived  of  by
the  author  (who  wrote  between  170  and  200  A.L>.  )  as
having  happened  in  Rome.  Only,  as  he  says  nothing
as  to  this,  the  passage  before  us  is  not  any  more  decisive
on  the  question  in  hand,  than  the  other  three  which
have  been  already  considered.

(e)  In  Rev.  1820  ('  rejoice  over  her,  thou  heaven,  and
ye  saints,  and  ye  apostles,  and  ye  prophets  ')  the  apostles
seem  to  be  thought  of  as  in  heaven,  and  must  therefore,
according  to  69-11,  have  been  thought  of  as  martyrs.
We  may  be  certain,  however,  that  not  all  the  twelve
apostles  became  martyrs,  not  to  speak  of  the  saints  and
Christian  prophets  of  whom  this  would  equally  hold
good.  The  passage  is  thus  too  exaggerated  to  justify
us  in  inferring  the  martyrdom  of  Peter  with  certainty.

(_/")  In  Macarius  Magnes  (Apocrit.  822  ;  about  400
A.  D. )  the  heathen  with  whom  he  is  in  controversy  says
that  Peter  made  a  disgraceful  escape  from  prison  in
Jerusalem  (Acts  12 5-19),  and  was  afterwards  crucified
after  having  been  able  to  carry  out  the  command  of
Jesus,  'feed  my  lambs'  (Jn.  '21 15),  for  only  a  few
months.  Harnack  ( TL7.,  1902,  604)  will  have  it  that
this  heathen  was  Porphyry,  the  learned  opponent  of  the
Christians  in  Rome  (ob.  A.  D.  304)  and  that  what  he
says  regarding  the  few  months  and  the  death  by
crucifixion  has  reference  to  Rome  (in  44  the  same
opponent  of  Macarius  mentions  the  beheading  of  Paul
in  Rome,  and  thereafter,  without  specifying  the  place,
the  crucifixion  of  Peter)  and  is  drawn  from  satisfactory
Roman  tradition.  Carl  Schmidt  (below  §  49),  167-171,
observes,  however,  and  with  justice,  that  in  Porphyry's
time  Peter's  twenty-five  years'  sojourn  in  Rome  had  long
been  a  recognised  belief  (so  also  Harnack  himself;  above,
§  26  [/"]),  and  on  this  ground  supposes  that  Porphyry
is  drawing  from  the  Acta  Petri,  according  to  which  Peter
arrives  in  Rome  and  dies  in  the  interval  between  Paul's
departure  from  Rome  and  his  return  ;  and  in  fact  the
divine  prediction  of  the  death  of  Paul  in  Rome  (below,
§  33  a )  is  the  answer  to  the  request  of  his  followers  that
he  (Paul)  should  not  absent  himself  from  Rome  for
more  than  a  year.

All  the  more  important  in  our  present  investigation

are  those  writings  which  are  silent  upon  the  sojourn  in

_..  Rome,  and,  so  far  as  they  were  written

. i  ence after  6^  A  n  ^  a]so  Up0n  tne  martvrdom

, of Peter, although  some  such  reference
sojourn  (and mjght  have  been  expected  in  them At

martyrdom). lhe  same  tjme>  this  does  not  hok[  good  of

all  of  them  in  an  equal  degree.

(<?)  The  Kpistle  to  the  Romans  excludes  with  the
utmost  decisiveness  the  idea  that  at  the  time  of  its
composition  Peter  was  in  Rome,  or  even  without
staying  in  Rome  was  exercising  any  sort  of  super
vision  over  the  church  there.  Had  it  been  otherwise,
Paul  would  most  certainly  have  referred  to  the  fact.
He  is  at  very  great  pains  to  indicate  his  right  to  labour
in  Rome.  We  may  not  here  refer  to  his  arrangement
with  the  three  '  pillar '  apostles  at  the  council  of  Jeru
salem  (Gal.  2g  :  '  you  to  the  Jews,  we  to  the  Gentiles  ')  ;
for  this  arrangement  not  only  was  capable  of  various
interpretations,  but  had  also  shown  itself  to  be  un
workable  (COUNCIL,  §  9).  The  practice  of  the  Judaists,
however,  who  forced  their  way  into  the  churches  founded
by  Paul  and  sought  to  turn  them  against  him,  had  led
him  to  formulate  another  principle  by  which  division  of
labour  in  the  mission  field  might  be  regulated — this,
namely,  that  no  missionary  ought  to  invade  the  field
once  taken  possession  of  by  another  ( '  not  to  glory  in
other  men's  labours';  2  Cor.  10  is/-).  When,  how-

4603


SIMON  PETER

ever,  he  excuses  and  justifies  his  intention  of  visiting
Rome,  notwithstanding  this  principle,  he  always  does  so,
1  5-15  1620-29,  as  towards  the  church,  whilst  if  Peter  had
been  its  head  he  ought  to  have  done  so  in  the  first
instance  as  towards  him.

On  the  assumption  that  1620-24,  along  with  the  whole,  or
parts,  of  chap.  15  (and  1(5)  comes  from  a  later  time,  it  has
sometimes  been  thought  possible  that  here  already  the  opinion
of  Peter's  bishopric  of  Rome  is  presupposed.  The  expressions,
however,  arc  worded  so  generally  that  any  such  conjecture  does
not  admit  of  verification,  even  when  the  late  date  of  the  section
is  assumed.

(i>)  The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  which  according
to  1 13  422  was  very  probably  written  in  Rome,  makes
no  mention  of  Peter.  True,  Paul  had  not  exactly  any
urgent  occasion  to  mention  him  in  this  particular  epistle.
Nevertheless,  one  may  hazard  a  conjecture  that  1 15-18
would  have  been  somewhat  less  sharply  worded  had
Peter  been  then  at  the  head  of  the  church  in  Rome
(the  still  sharper  passage  82-6  does  not  come  into
account  here,  as  in  all  probability  it  is  directed,  not
against  Jewish  Christians  as  1 15-18  is,  but  against  non-
Christian  Jews,  and,  in  fact,  against  Jews  of  this  class
in  Philippi).

(c)  If  the  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Ephesians
were  written  during  the  captivity  in  Cajsarea,  they  do
not  need  to  be  referred  to  here.  On  the  assumption  of
their  genuineness,  however,  it  is  equally  possible  that
they  may  have  been  written  from  Rome.  In  that  case,
however,  the  apostle  had  no  more  pressing  occasion,  so
far  as  his  correspondents  were  concerned,  for  mentioning
Peter  (on  the  supposition  that  he  also  was  at  Rome)
than  he  had  in  writing  to  the  Philippians  (the  Epistle
to  the  Ephesians,  if  we  are  to  maintain  its  genuineness,
we  must  necessarily  regard  as  a  circular  writing).  If,
on  the  other  hand,  these  epistles  are  not  genuine  but
really  date  from  the  period  of  Gnosticism  between  100
and  130  (see  MINISTRY,  §  25^?,  n. ),  it  has  to  be  noticed
that  in  Col.  4io  there  is  a  greeting  from  Mark  who  is
held  to  have  been  the  interpreter  of  Peter,  yet  none
from  Peter  himself.  We  cannot,  nevertheless,  securely
infer  from  this  that  the  Roman  sojourn  of  Peter  was
unknown  to  this  writer.

Not  only  does  he  not  say  that  the  epistle  which  he  is  writing
under  Paul's  name  is  meant  to  be  taken  as  having  been  written
from  Rome  (the  place  of  composition  remains  obscure) ;  the
absence  of  mention  of  Peter  can  also  have  its  explanation  in  the
fact  that  the  writer  cared  only  for  Paul,  not  for  Peter,  and  that
he  therefore  introduced  into  his  letter  greetings  only  from  such
persons  as,  like  Mark,  had  been  fellow -labourers  witfc  Paul
(unless,  indeed,  the  list  of  greetings  in  4 10-15  be  a  genuine
fragment  of  Paul,  for  the  details  of  which  we  must  not  hold  the
post-apostolic  author  of  the  whole  epistle  responsible).

The  case  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  is  similar.
It  too  says  nothing  regarding  its  place  of  composition.
In  presence  of  the  great  interest  it  expresses  in  the  unity
of  the  church,  and  especially  in  the  complete  fusion  of
Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians  (\wf.  43-6  2 11-22,  etc.),
there  was,  in  point  of  fact,  an  opportunity  for  allusion
to  the  common  activities  of  Paul  and  Peter.  But  as  it
avoids  personal  matters  almost  entirely,  and  designates
the  apostles  and  XT  prophets  in  general  as  the  founda
tion  of  the  church  and  as  holy  (22085),  we  cannot
venture  on  any  far-reaching  inferences  from  the  absence
of  any  mention  of  Peter,  and  in  particular  must  not
infer  with  confidence  that  the  author  knew  nothing  of
Peter's  Roman  sojourn.

(</)  The  second  Epistle  to  Timothy  is  expressly  dated
from  the  captivity  in  Rome  (18  i6f.  2g),  and  names  Mark
along  with  other  missionary  companions  of  Paul  (4nK
although  perhaps  (just  as  with  Colossians)  in  a  genuine
fragment  of  Paul.  Some  mention  of  Peter  (if  his
Roman  sojourn  was  already  known)  would  have  been
appropriate  alike  in  the  case  of  the  genuineness  of  the
epistle  and  in  that  of  its  spuriousness,  but  cannot  be
expected  with  certainty  even  on  the  latter  alternative — -
which  is  certainly  the  one  to  be  chosen  (see  MINISTRY,  §  =;4
[cp  also  TIMOTHY,  ii.  §  16"]} — since  2  Tim.  unreservedly
declares  itself  to  be  a  '  Pauline'  writing  and  an  instruction

4604


SIMON  PETER

addressed  to  a  disciple  of  the  apostle,  and  sees  the
unity  of  the  church  in  its  doctrine  and  organisation,
not  in  what  can  be  said  about  the  persons  of  its
founders.

(e)  In  Acts  one  of  the  main  objects  is  to  draw  a
parallel  between  Peter  and  Paul  (see  ACTS,  §  4).  A
joint  activity  of  the  two  in  Rome  would  have  been  the
best  crown  which  the  author  could  possibly  have  given
to  this  work.  Indeed,  even  without  the  contempor
aneous  presence  of  Paul,  the  arrival  in  the  metropolis
of  the  world  of  Peter,  who  with  Paul  passes  as  the  real
originator  of  missions  to  the  Gentiles  (lOi-ll  18  1 5 7-11),
must  have  seemed  equally  important  with  that  of  Paul,
which  is  even  made  the  subject  of  repeated  predictions
(192i  23n).  If  Peter  is  to  be  held  to  have  come  to
Rome  nevertheless,  this  is  conceivable  only  as  having
happened  after  Paul's  death,  which  the  author  did  not
wish  to  refer  to  for  political  reasons  (see  ACTS,  §51.),
or  on  the  supposition  that  the  meeting  of  the  two  was  a
hostile  one,  and  therefore  will  have  been  passed  over  by
the  author  in  the  same  silence  with  which  he  passed
over  the  encounter  at  Antioch  (Gal.  2 11-21).  As  for
this  latter  supposition,  however,  it  is  surely  an  odd
procedure  to  excogitate  a  possibility,  in  order,  thereby,
to  support  a  tradition  which  declares  precisely  the
opposite  of  the  possibility  supposed — namely,  a  har
monious  co-operation  between  the  two  apostles.  If
we  disregard  this  attempt,  we  must  infer  that  in  the
author's  time,  that  is  to  say,  somewhere  between  105
(no)  and  130  (see  ACTS,  §  16),  nothing  was  known  of
a  contemporary  activity  of  the  two  apostles  in  Rome.
On  the  other  hand,  there  remains  the  possibility  that
Peter  arrrived  in  Rome  after  the  death  of  Paul ;  only,
neither  is  this  vouched  for  by  any  tradition.

(/)  The  Shepherd  of  Hennas,  which  was  written  in
Rome  about  140  A.D.  ,  makes  no  mention  of  Peter.
Xor  yet,  it  must  be  added,  of  Paul.  A  book  of  so
apocalyptic  a  character  is,  in  fact,  not  to  be  supposed  to
concern  itself  with  personal  details  from  a  past  time.
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  rock  (and  the  doors)  of
the  tower  which  represents  the  church,  are  interpreted
as  meaning  the  Son  of  God  (Sim.  ix.  12 1,  in  agreement
with  i  Cor.  104  and  Jn.  10 7  g).  This,  however,  proves
only  that  the  author  was  still  unacquainted  with  Mt.
16,8 — or  that  he  has  not  allowed  himself  to  be  influ
enced  by  it.

(g )  All  the  more  eloquent  is  the  silence  of  Justin
Martyr,  who  wrote  in  Rome  about  152,  as  to  the  Roman
sojourn  of  Peter.  He  has  much  to  say  regarding  the
sojourn  there  of  Simon  Magus,  but  nothing  of  Peter's
polemic  against  him,  of  which  we  are  to  hear  so  much
by  and  by  (§§  33,  34,  40  a).

(A)  Papias  (ap.  Eus.  HE  iii.  39  15)  reports,  as  one  of
the  communications  of  '  the  presbyter,'  that  Mark  accom
panied  Peter  as  interpreter  ;  but  it  is  very  rash  to  assume
that  in  making  this  statement  Papias  had  Rome  in  his
mind  (see  MARK,  col.  2939,  n.  i).  If  Papias  wrote  late
enough  he  could  have  heard  of  the  presence  of  Peter
there  ;  but  of  this  he  in  point  of  fact  says  nothing.  In
particular,  the  agreement  of  Papias  with  the  statement
about  Mark  which  Eusebius  (HE  ii.  152  ;  cp  GOSPELS,
§  80  b)  records  has  to  be  taken  merely  in  accordance
with  the  words  cited  in  the  other  passage  and  by  no
means  to  be  extended  to  everything  which  Eusebius
introduces  here  with  a  '  they  say  '  (<fta<rlv),  and  which,  by
the  connection  with  ii.  1 4  5/. ,  must  in  fact  be  interpreted
as  referring  to  Rome  (§25  </).  Still  more  certainly  wrong
would  it  be  to  extend  the  agreement  of  Papias  also  to
what  follows  in  ii.  152  after  the  mention  of  his  name,
where  we  read  '  it  is  said  '  (<paffiv)  that  Peter  in  his  First
Epistle  means  Rome  by  '  Babylon. '

(i)  Ignatius  writes  to  the  Romans  (4s)  :  '  I  do  not
enjoin  you,  as  Peter  and  Paul  did'  (oi>x  cos  IT^rpos  Kal
HauXos  5tard(T<ro,u.cu  V/MV).  If  this  was  in  170-180  A.D.
(see  MINISTRY,  §  53,  b-i),  we  might  suppose  the  phrase
quoted  to  rest  on  the  assumption  that  Peter  and  Paul

4605


SIMON  PETER

had  personally  laid  their  oral  injunctions  upon  the
Roman  church,  since,  so  far  as  written  precepts  are
concerned,  this  could  be  said  only  of  Paul,  not  of  Peter.
When  Ignatius  is  addressing  other  churches  he  expresses
the  same  thought  without  mention  of  Peter  and  Paul
(ad  Eph.Zi,  ad  Trail.  83).  Nevertheless  we  cannot
positively  affirm  that  the  expression  in  the  Epistle  of
Ignatius  to  the  Romans  inherently,  and  thus  even  if
written  at  an  earlier  date,  contains  the  presupposition
that  Peter  had  once  personally  visited  Rome.  As  what
he  means  to  say  is  simply,  '  I  do  not  address  myself  to
you  as  one  having  authority,"  it  was  very  natural  to
mention  by  way  of  example  two  famous  names  that  did
carry  authority,  even  if  they  had  not  personally  quite
equal  importance  for  the  readers.

(K)  i  Pet.  may  here  be  noticed  by  way  of  appendix.
Whether  it  is  relevant  to  the  discussion  will  depend  on
our  interpretation  of  it,  and  this  we  are  not  yet  able  to
settle  (cp  §  42).  Babylon  is  in  the  Apocalypse  '  the
great  city  '  (Rev.  18 10  21),  '  the  mother  of  the  harlots  and
of  the  abominations  of  the  earth,  drunken  with  the  blood
of  the  saints,  ruling  over  the  kings  cf  the  earth,  sitting
upon  seven  hills'  (17 5 f.  189) — in  other  words,  Rome.
It  is  certain,  however,  that  no  such  mysterious  name
could  have  been  bestowed  upon  the  world-metropolis
before  the  beginning  of  the  Neronian  persecution,  and
we  may  conjecture  that  it  first  owed  its  currency  among
Christians  to  the  Apocalypse  itself.  Should  i  Pet. ,  there
fore,  have  been  written  before,  or  at  the  beginning  of,  the
Neronian  persecution,  we  may  conclude  either  that  the
writer  could  not  possibly  have  intended  Rome  by  Babylon
or  at  least  that  in  referring  to  it  by  this  name  he  could
not  count  upon  being  understood.  This  he  could  do,  if
he  wrote  at  a  later  date.  But  this  possibility  by  no  means
excludes  the  other,  that  he  may  have  meant  the  literal
Babylon  on  the  Euphrates.

That  this  city  was  at  that  date  wholly  uninhabited  rests  upon
a  too  literal  understanding  of  Pausanins  (viii.  33  3  [cpi.  163]):
ovSeV  rt  fjv  ei  JATJ  TCI^OS,  '  nothing  is  left  but  the  walls ')  and
Pliny  (HN  vi.  2ti  [30]  122):  'ad  solitudinem  rediit.'  Cp  Lucian,
Charon,  23  :  '  Yonder  is  Babylon,  the  city  with  the  noble
towers,  the  city  of  vast  compass  ;  but  soon  it  too,  like  Nineveh,
will  be  sought  for  in  vain.'  According  to  Strabo  (xvi.  1  5,  p.
738  or  1073)  the  city  was  only  'desert  for  the  most  part'
(cprj/xo?  T;  TroAArj)  ;  according  to  Diodorus  (ii.  tig)  a  small  portion
was  inhabited.  To  understand  rightly  what  is  meant  one  must
bear  in  mind  the  enormous  compass  (360-385  stadia,  some  40  m.)
of  the  city  according  to  Diodorus  (ii.  7  3)  and  Strabo  (I.e.).
Under  Claudius  the  hatred  of  the  Babylonians  compelled  the
Jews  in  Babylon  to  take  refuge  in  Seleucia  ;  but  there  also  their
arrival  stirred  up  fresh  hatred  and  they  were  put  to  death  to  the
number  of  more  than  50,000  (Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  !'8_/,  §§  371-376).

Before  entering  upon  the  difficult  field  of  the  apocryphal
literature  it  will  be  convenient  to  sum  up  the  results  of

.  _.  .  .  ,  the  preceding  discussions  of  passages
31.  Provisional  m  £  NT  a ^  the  fathers

conclusions.  ^  A  Uventy_five  vears>  sojourn  Of
Peter  in  Rome  is  out  of  the  question.  Romans  and  Acts
are  decisive  against  it  (§  30  a,  e}.  Further,  the  manner
in  which  Peter's  presence  in  Jerusalem  as  a  resident  is
taken  for  granted  in  Acts  15  and  Gal.  2i-io  in  connection
with  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  as  also  in  Gal.  2  11-21  in
connection  with  his  subsequent  visit  to  Antioch,  cannot
be  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  favourite  theory  of  pro
longed  interruptions  of  his  Roman  sojourn.

(b)  As  Rom. ,  Acts  (and  Phil. )  show  (§  30  a,  b,  e),  Peter
had  never  been  at  Rome  at  all  at  any  date  before  or  during
Paul's  sojourn  there.

(c)  Peter's  bishopric  in Rome  (§  z6g.  A)  is  excluded
by  the  fact  that  throughout  the  first  century  and  indeed
even  down  to  the  time  of  Hermas  (about  140  A.  D. ),  and
particularly in Rome, no such thing  as monarchical
episcopacy  existed  at  all  (see  MINISTRY,  §§  46  b,  47),  as
also  by  this,  that  according  to  Gal.  2g  Peter's  wish  was
to  associate  only  with  Jews  and  Jewish  Christians,  and
according  to  w.  11-21  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  take
any  tenable  place  in  a  mixed  community. As  bishop
of  the  mixed  community  in  Rome  he  would  have  been
exposed  to  the  same  difficulties  as  in  Antioch,  and  would

4606


SIMON  PETER

soon  have  made  himself  as  impossible  in  the  one  place
as  in  the  other.

(d )  The  theory  also,  that  along  with  the  other  original
apostles  Peter  remained  for  twelve  years  in  Jerusalem
and  thereafter  set  out  on  missionary  journeys  is  false,
not  only  because  it  leads  chronologically  to  a  displace
ment  of  the  N'eronian  persecution  (bringing  it  down  to
67  A.  ix  ;  see  §  26  e) — an  error  which  would  admit  of
rectification  by  a  curtailment  of  the  twenty-five  Roman
years — but  also  because  it  presupposes  that  the  original
apostles,  contrary  to  Gal.  2g,  had  carried  on  missions  to
the  Gentiles. The  twelve  years,  however,  are  themselves
open  to  suspicion,  not  merely  because  twelve  is  a  sacred
number,  but  also  because  it  could  be  easily  arrived  at
by  computation  from  Acts  12s  17-24. Herod  Agrippa  I.
died  in  44  A.  D.  ;  shortly  before,  after  his  liberation  from
prison,  Peter  left  Jerusalem. Thus  it  was  possible  to
arrive  at  a  sojourn  of  twelve  years  in  Jerusalem  for  Peter
in  the  first  instance,  and  then,  schematically,  to  extend
the  same  determination  of  time  to  all  the  rest  of  the
original  apostles.

(e)  Of  all  the  spheres  of  activity  assigned  by  tradition
to  Peter  outside  of  Palestine,  the  only  one  that  deserves
serious  consideration along with Rome is Babylonia
(§  24). In  virtue  of  its  large  Jewish  population  Baby
lonia  was  very  well  suited  to  be  a  mission  field  for  the
apostle,  and  in  a  certain  view  of  the  passage  is  also  pre
supposed  to  have  been  so  in  i  Pet.  013  (§§  30/6,  42,  43).

(f)  Clement  of Rome, incomparably  the  most  im
portant  witness  (§  28),  is  decisively  against  a  Roman
sojourn  of  Peter. All  that  can  be  deduced  from  him  is —
not  indeed  as  anything  certainly  attested  but  yet  as  some
thing  which  need  not  be  gainsaid — -only  Peter's  martry-
dom,  but  outside  of  Rome  and  away  from  the  western
world  altogether. Nor  are  we  carried  any  further  by
the  notices  of  his  martyrdom  enumerated  in  §  29  where
no  place  is  specified.

(g )  If  Peter  suffered  martyrdom  it  by  no  means  follows
from  this  mere  fact,  as  Harnack  represents  the  matter
(ACL  ii.  1710),  that  the  martyrdom  was  in  Rome.

We  cannot  even  assent  to  Harnack's  first  sentence  as  certain,
'  if  the  fact  of  the  martyrdom  was  at  that  time  notorious,  the
place  of  it  was  also  known  '  (see  §  28  /)  ;  and  his  second  sentence,
'but  never  has  any  other  church  than  the  Roman  laid  claim  to
the  martyrdom  of  Peter,'  loses  its  demonstrative  force  as  soon
as  the  event  is  for  a  moment  supposed  to  have  happened  at  a
place  where,  during,  say,  the  next  hundred  years,  no  Christian
church  existed.  The  assumption  is  often  made  that  for  the
martyrdom  of  any  apostle  a  Christian  persecution,  or  at  least
some  formal  process  against  the  individual  martyr,  was  requisite.
Surely  it  would  be  well  to  remember  2  Cor.  11  25^,  '  once  I  was
stoned  ...  in  perils  from  my  countrymen,  in  perils  from  the
Gentiles.'  At  a  place  where  an  apostle  had  died  in  this  manner
memory  of  the  occurrence  would  naturally  be  less  vivid  and
tenacious  than  it  would  be  in  a  place  where  there  was  a
Christian  church,  and  could  easily  drop  into  the  background
and  finally  fall  into  complete  oblivion  when  the  opinion  became
widely  diffused  that  Peter  had  died  in  Rome.  See,  further,
under  (/),  and  §  40  b.

(h]  Justin  (about  152  A.n. )  knows  nothing  of  the
Roman  sojourn  of  Peter  (§  30^).  This  circumstance
ought  also  to  induce  caution  in  finding  a  testimony  for
such  a.  sojourn  in  Clement  of  Rome.

(/)  Of  the  authors  dealt  with  up  to  this  point  Dio-
nysius  of  Corinth  (about  170  A.D.  )  is  the  first  to  assert
a  Roman  sojourn.  Only,  he  does  it  in  connection  with
so  much  matter  that  is  fabulous  that  his  '  distinct  state
ment '  (so  Harnack,  710)  must  thereby  be  held  to  lose
all  credibility  (§25  a).  The  other  statement,  in  all
respects  parallel  to  the  assertion  of  Dionysius,  that  Peter
founded  the  church  of  Antioch  (§  24^),  is  characterised
by  Harnack  himself  (705 /.)  as  'a  gross  falsification  of
history. '

(£)  The  list  of  Roman  bishops  seems  to  have  the
advantage  over  Dionysius  that  it  rests  on  local  tradition.
Yet  we  have  no  certainty  that  it  bore  the  names  of  Peter
and  Paul  at  its  head  before  the  time  of  Irenreus  (§  25  c).

(I)  No  value  can  be  attached  to  the  statements  of
Gaius  as  to  the  places  of  death  of  Peter  and  Paul  (§  26  6)
because  in  his  time,  or  even  ten  years  before  his  time,

4607


SIMON  PETER

the  second  stage  of  the  Roman  Peter -tradition,  the
'  tendency  legend  '  of  the  twenty-five  years'  duration  of
his  sojourn,  had  already,  according  to  Harnack,  '  become
official'  (§  26t,f).

(m)  It  is  not  of  Peter  alone,  but  almost  without  ex
ception,  of  Peter  and  Paul  together,  that  the  exponents
of  the  above  tradition  aflinn  a  sojourn  (eventually  even,
in  fact,  an  arrival  together)  and  a  martyrdom  in  Rome
(§  2S/-  )•  If  Clement  of  Alexandria  mentions  only  Peter,
there  is  a  special  reason  for  this  (§  25^),  and  also  in
Origcn  (§  26  c)  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  he
thought  of  Peter  as  having  died  at  Rome  under  Nero  just
as  he  expressly  asserts  that  Paul  did.  If  one  decide
in  favour  of  Rome  as  the  place  of  Peter's  death  (but  see
above,  f-h],  there  is  no  longer  any  direct  possibility  of
disproving  that  this  event  was  practically  contempor
aneous  with  the  death  of  Paul.  This  circumstance,
however,  is  of  no  significance  ;  for  the  presence  together
of  Peter  and  Paul  in  Rome  during  the  period  described
in  Acts  (and  Philippians  ;  see  §  30*?,  b]  is  practically
excluded,  and  thus  can  continue  to  be  affirmed  only
when  the  hypothesis  of  a  second  captivity  of  Paul  is
called  in — a  hypothesis  which  is  quite  unhistorical  ($j  28
e,f)-  See  further,  under  p,  and  §  41  b.

(n)  Our  decision  must  therefore  decidedly  be  that
Peter  never  was  in  Rome  at  all.

We  read  in  Harnack  (709^?),  '  it  is  here  presupposed  [that  is
to  say,  throughout  the  whole  of  ACL,},  and  never  once  has  it
been  sought  to  prove  that  Peter  really  did  come  to  Rome  and
suffered  martyrdom  there.  This  fact,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  is
not  disputed  save  by  those  who  give  credence  to  a  certain
ancient  Simon-romance,  and  in  accordance  with  this  affirm  that
Peter  was  brought  to  Rome  by  '  tendency-legend '  in  order  to
controvert,  in  the  world-metropolis  also,  Simon-Paul  who  had
taken  his  journey  thither'  (see  below,  §  40*1,  A).  This  assertion
must  now  so  far,  at  any  rate,  be  qualified  by  the  fact  that  at
least  one  profane  historian  of  repute,  namely,  Soltau  (below,  t>),
has  come  forward  in  support  of  the  condemned  thesis.  Also,
the  preceding  discussion  shows  thus  much  at  least,  that  our
conclusion  has  been  arrived  at  without  any  resort  at  all  to  the
Simon-romance.

It  rests  essentially  upon  a  particular  view  of  i  Clem,
and  Ignatius  (§§  28,  30  i)  whom  Harnack  himself  calls
'  two  very  strong,  though  not  absolutely  secure,  supports
of  the  martyrdom,  or  of  the  sojourn  of  Peter  in  Rome,'
upon  a  distrust  of  the  '  testimony'  of  Dionysius  of  Corinth
and  his  companions  which  was  formerly  shared  (see
above,  §  28  e)  by  Harnack  himself,  and  upon  a  due  re
gard  to  Justin's  evidence,  upon  which  Harnack  is  quite
silent.  Just  as,  according  to  Harnack,  the  '  tendency-
legend '  of  Peter's  twenty-five  years'  sojourn  in  Rome
became  official  between  189  and  217  A.  i». ,  so  also  in
our  view  the  fable  of  the  simultaneous  presence  of  Peter
and  Paul  in  Rome  and  the  martyrdom  of  Peter  there
became  official  between  152  and  170  A.D.

(o)  A  point  upon  which  the  foregoing  discussions  have
shed  but  little  light  is  the  question  as  to  how  this  result
came  about,  and  as  to  whether  this  fable  also  deserves
the  name  of  tendency-legend.  Soltau,  who  uses  the
above  sources  only,  points  out  (pp.  26 /.  41  =  494^!  509  ;
below,  §  49)  how  strong  was  the  effort  on  the  part  of
individual  churches  to  be  in  a  position  to  claim  an  apostle
as  their  founder  (see  JOHN,  SUN  OF  ZEBKDEE,  §  6).

Now,  the  Jewish  Christians  in  Rome,  in  their  lively  struggle
against  the  Paulinists  there,  had  chosen  Peter  after  his  death  as
their  spiritual  head,  and  thus  the  belief  was  nourished  that  he
had  really  once  been  in  Rome  at  least  as  a  martyr.  According
to  the  theory  of  Acts  (8  14-17),  upheld  also  by  Harnack,  he
thereby  came  at  the  same  time  to  appear  to  be  the  founder  of
that  church.  Towards  this  belief  another  element,  Soltau
thinks,  may  have  co-operated,  namely,  that  Mark  the  interpreter
of  Peter  lived  subsequently  in  Rome,  and  thus  through  him  the
Romans  possessed  the  pure  doctrine  of  Peter.  Mark,  however,
figures  in  Rome  in  tradition  only  in  his  quality  of  interpreter  of
Peter.  The  historian  who,  like  Soltau,  denies  a  sojourn  in
Rome  to  Peter  cannot  maintain  it  for  Mark.  That  the  use  of
Acts  814-17  in  this  connection  is  illegitimate  has  been  already
argued  above  ($  23  a).

Soltau's  other  conjectures  of  a  special  kind  have
also  but  little  probability,  and  in  the  interests  of  his
point  of  view  it  would  perhaps  be  better  to  rest
satisfied  with  the  general  contention  that  churches  were

4608


SIMON  PETER

eager  to  have  apostles  as  their  founders,  and  in  the  case
of  Rome,  the  world -metropolis,  there  was  a  special
reason  for  wishing  to  be  able  to  claim  the  two  most
•prominent  names  of  all,  especially  as  these  represented
the  two  main  currents  of  doctrine  and  practice  within
the  church  (see  MINISTRY,  §  36).  To  this  Erbes  (Z.  /.
Kirchengesch.  22  [1901]  215-224)  adds,  besides  fuller
elaborations  of  this  fundamental  thought,  the  easy  mis
understanding  of  i  Clem.  5  and  of  '  Babylon '  in  i  Pet.
5 13  (see  §§  28,  30  k  ;  but  also  §§  39  e,  44  a).  In  fact  even
in  the  absence  of  still  more  special  reasons  for  the  rise  of
the  fable  of  the  Roman  sojourn  and  martyrdom  of  Peter
it  would  be  necessary  to  maintain  its  fabulous  character  ;
for,  rightly  understood,  all  the  witnesses  testify  with
overpowering  weight  against  it.  The  apocryphal  litera
ture,  however,  regarding  Peter,  with  which  we  have  not
yet  dealt,  will  yield  perhaps  more  light.

(/)  The  points  on  which  further  light  would  be  specially
welcome  are  these  :  Did  the  belief  in  Peter's  Roman
sojourn  and  martyrdom  exist  earlier  than  170?  Did  it
exist,  outside  of  Rome,  even  before  Justin  ?  In  fine,
did  it  exist  so  early  that  it  can  already  lie  at  the  founda
tion  of  i  Pet.  0:3?  Is  it  possible  to  account  for  its
origin  in  spite  of  its  erroneousness  more  completely  than
has  up  to  this  point  been  done  ;  and,  particularly,  to
explain  also  why  hitherto  we  have  met  with  Peter  in
Rome  almost  always  only  in  association  with  Paul,  and
why  his  martyrdom  is  reported  from  no  other  locality
than  Rome  (see  above,  m,  g}~!

Of  the  apocryphal  writings  relating  to  Peter  the  first

_. to  be  considered  are  those  which  admit

&i.  me j. being grouped under t

Apocryphal  desi tfon*  of'  Acta Petri>

Acts  on

Peter :


literary.


of being grouped under the general

other

words, as accounts of the missionary
activities of  Peter  and of  the close of
his  life. Of  these, three  groups  are  to
be  distinguished.

(a)  The  first  group  is  pronounced  Gnostic  by  Lipsius
(ii.  184-284,  and  particularly  258-270),  and  Zahn  (Gesch.
d.  NTlichen  Kanons,  2832-855  [1892]),  but  Catholic  by
Harnack  (ACL  ii.  1 549-560),  Erbes  (Z.  /  Kirchen
gesch.,  1901,  22163-171),  and  Carl  Schmidt  (below,
§  49),  111-151.  That  they  are  wholly  Catholic,
however,  the  three  last-named  scholars  are  unable
to  affirm.  As  the  settlement  of  the  question  is  not
indispensable  for  our  present  purpose,  let  us  call
them  —  to  choose  a  neutral  designation  —  the  pre-
Catholic  Acta  Petri.  The  employment  of  this  designa
tion  must  not  be  taken  as  meaning  that  the  Acts  in
question  are  actually  of  earlier  date  than  the  Catholic
ones — a  question  which  in  point  of  fact  is  doubtful  (see
§§  35~37>  39  ^) — ^ut  onty  l':at  tne'r  standpoint  is  less  in
correspondence  with  the  Catholic  than  that  of  the
Catholic  Acta  Petri  et  Pauli.  Another  widely  spread,
though  not  completely  prevalent,  name  for  them  is
llepioSoi  Ilerpov.  A  characteristic  story  from  them —
that  of  a  talking  dog  (§  33  b) — is  known  to  Commodian
(about  250  A.D.;  Carm.  Apol.  617-620  [623-626]).
The  date  is  assigned  concurrently  by  Lipsius  (275)  and
Zahn  (841)  to  160-170  A.D.  ,  whilst  Erbes  gives  it  as
190,  Carl  Schmidt  (pp.  99-109)  as  200-210,  i.e. ,  shortly
before  the  Philosophnmena  (above,  §  26(/),  and  Harnack
places  it  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the  third  century.1  At
the  same  time,  it  has  to  be  noted  that,  in  assigning
the  date  he  does,  Lipsius  means  only  that  of  the
origin  of  the  writing  that  lies  at  the  foundation  of  our
Acta  Petri,  the  date  of  their  present  form  being  in  his

1  Apart  from  other  indications,  Harnack  relies  upon  the
argument  that  the  end  of  Simon  Magus  is  told  in  a  different
way  in  the  Philosophununa  (<5  20  ;  about  235  A.D.)  from  that  in
which  it  is  told  in  the  Acta  Petri  (he  caused  himself  to  be  buried
by  his  disciples,  promising  that  he  would  rise  again  on  the  third
day  ;  but  he  did  not  rise  after  all  ;  cp  below,  §  34^,  SIMON
MAGUS,  §  5  [/]).  All  that  this  proves,  however,  is  that  the
author  is  following  another  tradition,  not  that  the  Acta  Petri
were  not  yet  in  existence.  The  author  of  the  1'hilosop/ittmena
as  a  zealous  confuter  of  heretics  had  even  strong  reason  for  mis
trusting  the  information  of  the  Acta.

4609


SIMON  PETER

opinion  later  :  for  example  the  Acts  of  the  so-called
Pseudo-Linus  (see  below,  no.  7)  he  places  (172  f.)
between  400  and  450  A.D.  Zahn  (833)  as  against  this
disputes  the  contention  that  the  Acta  at  an  earlier  date
had  a  different  form  from  their  present,  and  Harnack
holds  that  there  is  no  reason  at  all  for  assuming  a
Gnostic  basis  for  them  ;  it  is  merely  an  abstract  possi
bility  (559)-  Now,  Eusebius  (HE  iii.  82)  includes  the
Acts  of  Peter  (IIpd£«s  Ittrpov)  among  those  writings
which  were  never  handed  down  in  Catholic  circles,  and
with  this  agrees  his  general  survey  of  the  NT  literature
in  iii.  254  6.  according  to  which  the  Acts  of  Paul  (llpd^en
Hai'Xof)  belong  to  the  Antilegomena,  in  other  words  to
his  middle  class  (so  also  iii.  85),  whilst  on  the  other
hand  the  '  Acts  of  Andrew  and  John  and  the  other
apostles'  (II/)ci£ets  'Avdptov  KCU  'ludvvov  /ecu  rdv  &\\uv
d.TrocTToXiiJi') — those  of  Peter  thus  included — belong  to
his  last  class,  that  of  books  written  by  heretics  in  the
name  of  apostles,  and  never  cited  by  any  Catholic
writer,  but  'altogether  strange  and  impious'  (d'roTra
irdfT-rj  Kal  dvcrffe/Sf}).  In  accordance  with  this  is  the
very  close  relationship,  if  not  identity  o£  authorship
which  Lipsius  (265/1,  272  f.)  and  Zahn  (860 /. ),  again
in  agreement,  find  between  our  Acta  and  the  Gnostic
Acts  (llpd&is),  or  Circuits  (HepioSoi)  of  John  and  other
apostles,  attributed  to  Leucius  (Charinus).  James
(Apocr.  Anecd.  2  pp.  xxiv-xxviii  ;  in  Texts  and  Studies,
5  i,  1897)  positively  affirms  the  identity  of  the  author
of  the  Leucian  Acta  Johannis  with  the  author  of  the
Acta  Petri,  whilst  Carl  Schmidt,  90-99,  explains  the
agreement  from  use  of  the  Acta  Johannis  by  the  author
of  the  Acta  Petri.  Franko  (Z.NTIV,  1902,  315-335)
seeks  to  support  the  Gnostic  character  of  the  original
form  of  the  Acta  Petri  by  means  of  a  pronouncedly
Gnostic  fragment  which  he  translates  from  the  Ecclesi
astical  Slavonic.  Thus  for  every  one  who  does  not  hold
the  present  form  of  the  Acta  Petri  to  be  Gnostic,  there  is
very  urgent  occasion  for  finding,  if  possible,  a  Gnostic
primary  form  of  it.  So  far  as  our  present  purpose  is
concerned,  however,  we  may  dispense  with  further
detailed  inquiry  as  to  this  point.

The  principal  writings  in  which  those  pre-Catholic  Acta  Petri
have  been  preserved  for  us  are  as  follows  :  (i)  Actus  Petri  cum
Simone,  from  Paul's  departure  from  Rome  for  Spain,  and  the
arrival  of  Peter  in  Rome,  until  the  death  of  Peter ;  in
Latin,  in  a  MS  at  Vercelli,  therefore  known  also  as  Actus  Petri
Vercellenses.  (2)  The  conclusion  of  these  Acta,  namely  the  end
of  Peter's  contention  with  Simon,  and  the  entire  martyrdom  of
Peter,  exists  in  Greek  in  a  Codex  at  Mount  Athos.  (3)  The
martyrdom  alone,  also  in  Greek,  is  found  in  a  Codex  at  Patmos.
To  the  same  family  belon,u  further  (4)  an  Ecclesiastical
Slavonic,  (5)  a  Coptic,  and  (6)  an  Ethiopic  translation.  All  six
have  been  edited  (or  collated)  in  Acta  Apost.  Apocr.  l,ftl  ed.
Lipsius  (and  Bonnet),  1891,  45-103;  no.  3  for  the  first  time  in
JPT,  1886,  pp.  86-106  175  f.  Of  the  other  family,  which,  apart
from  its  divergences,  is  distinguished  by  its  more  copious  style
of  narration,  we  possess  (7)  the  martyrdom  of  Peter  which  is
ascribed  to  Linus  the  first  bishop  of  Rome  (see  above,  §  25  c)  (in
Acta  Apost.  Afocr.  1-22).  Lastly  there  is— closely  related  as
regards  details  of  the  text— (8)  the  Passio  Appstolorum  Petri
et  Pauli  which  is  incorporated  with  the  Latin  recension  of
Josephus'  Jewish  War,  dating  from  367-375  (or  about  395  ?)  A.D.,
and  which  also  includes  certain  events  before  the  martyrdom  of
Peter.1  As  for  the  contents,  everything  of  a  non-Catholic  nature
has  been  so  carefully  removed  that  the  text  belongs  rather  to
the  next  following  class.  The  mutual  dependence  of  the  texts
just  mentioned  has  been  determined  by  Zahn  (834-839,  845,
n.  2),  followed  by  Harnack,  otherwise  than  it  is  by  Lipsius
(109-173,  194-200) ;  this,  however,  may  be  left  out  of  account  in
our  present  investigation.

(b)  The  Catholic  Acta  (see  Lipsius,  284-366)  are,  as
already  seen  in  Pseudo-Hegesippus  (see  above,  a  [8]),
not  Acts  of  Peter  only,  but  Acts  of  Peter  and  Paul.
Both  contend  conjointly  with  Simon  Magus  in  Rome
and  there  suffer  martyrdom.

(i)  The  Latin  form,  in  which  this  writing  is  wrongly  attributed
to  a  certain  Marcel.lus  who  is  named  in  it,  dates  from  the
sixth  century  (Lips.  !.  169).  It  begins  :  '  Cum  venisset  Paulus
Romam.'  The  parallel  is  (2)  the  Greek  text  in  a  codex  of  the

1  This  Latin  recension  is  entitled  '  Hegesippus  [a  distortion
of  Josephus]  deexcidioHierosolym.'  edd.  Weber  et  Csesar,  1864.
The  section  forms  bk.  iii.,  chap.  2,  and  is  to  he  found  also  in  a
Marburg  Universitatsprogramm  (2oth  Aug.  1860 ;  cp  Lipsius,
194-200;  Schurer,  GJV\$}  73/)-
4610


SIMON  PETER

library  of  St.  Mark  in  Venice,  beginning  :  «A0di/TO«  <i«  TTJV
"Pui;un]i'  TOW  ayiou  IlaiiAou.  Both  are  met  with  in  juxtaposition  in
Acta.  A  fast.  Apocr.  \  118-177.  Ibid.  178-222  is  found  (3)  a
longer  Greek  text  in  which,  in  particular,  at  the  beginning
occurs  a  description  of  Paul's  journey  through^ltaly,  beginning  :
«yeV«TO  fieri  TO  f£e\9(lv  T'OV  iiyiov  IlauAof  airb  I'auSojueAeTrjs
(this  name  is  obtained  by  combination  of  Ka06a  or  KAaGSa  and
MeAi'rr),  Acts  27  16  28  i).  No.  2  exhibits,  according  to  Lipsius
(284-296X1116  relatively  original  form,  which,  however,  is  not  older
than  about  450  A.D.  (310-313).  On  the  other  hand  he  supposes
that  there  had  been  a  Catholic  original  form  of  this  account  of
Peter  and  Paul,  which  arose  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  second
century,  and  thus  approximately  at  the  same  time  with  the  pre-
Catholic  Acta  Petri,  and  may  have  been  known,  of  the  Fathers
cited  in  §26,  to  at  least  Tertullian,  Origen,  and  Eusebius(pp.  331-
358).  Erbes  (Z./.  Kircktngtsck.  2-.',  1901,  174-182)  tries  even
to  make  it  out  to  be  older  than  the  pre-Catholic  Acta  Petri
which  he  assigns  to  about  190  A.D,  and  would  fain  find  traces  of
its  employment  as  early  as  in  the  Prajdicatio  Pauli  in  Pseudo-
Cyprian  (above,  §  25  e),  whilst  according  to  Lipsius  (325-327,
337-333)  it  nas  only  in  isolated  points  preserved  traditions  of
older  date  than  the  pre-Catholic  Acta  Petri.

(c)  The  third  main  group  is  made  up  of  the  following
three  compilations.

(i)  A  Latin  Passio  Petri  et  Pauli  in  a  MS  of  the  Laurentian
Library  at  Florence,  relating  to  the  conflicts  with  Simon,  and
the  martyrdom  of  the  two  apostles,  beginning  with  the  words  '  in
diebus  illis,  cum  introissent  Romambeatus  Petruset  Paulus'  :  in
Acta  Apost.  Apflcr.  1  223-234  ;  (2)  a  '  Passion  of  the  holy  and
chief  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,'  which  forms  a  special  section  of
the  Ecclesiastical  Slavonic  translation  mentioned  above  (under
a  4)  ;  (3)  the  '  Virtutes  Petri  '  and  the  '  Virtutes  Pauli  '  in  the  collec
tion  of  apocryphal  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  wrongly  attributed  to
the  alleged  disciple  of  the  apostles  Abdias  and  entitled  '  Historia
certaminis  apostolici,'  or  Historia  apostolica,"  bks.  i  and  2,
printed,  e.g.,  in  Fabricius,  Codex  apooyphus  NT,  2,  begin.  All
these  pieces  are,  according  to  Lipsius  (366-390),  too  recent  to  be
of  importance  for  our  present  investigation.

Of  the  abundant  contents  of  this  literature  only  the
most  important  points  can  here  be  noted.

(n)  According  to  the  pre-Catholic  Acta  Petri,  Paul  journeys

at  the  divine  command  from  Rome  into  Spain,  after  it  has  been

proclaimed  by  a  voice  from  heaven  that

33.  Contents  Of he will afterwards be put  to death in

pre-CatholiC Rome  by  Nero  (ch.  i). After  some  days
A  />f  Q Potr-i  it  becomes  known  in  Rome  that  a  wontler-

Acta  rewi. workt-r  named  gimonj  who  calls  himself

the  great  power  of  God  (magnum  virtutent  del)  is  at  Aricia.
On  the  following  evening  he  appears  before  the  gate  of  Rome,
over  which  he  has  promised  to  fly,  disappears  and  then  appears
once  more  on  the  other  side  of  the  gate.  Shortly  after,  he  gains
so  great  repute  that  even  almost  all  the  Christians  go  over  to
him  (4).

(/>)  Simultaneously  God  lays  his  command  on  Peter,  on  the
expiry  of  the  twelve  years  during  which  he  had  been  ordered  to
stay  in  Jerusalem  after  the  death  of  Jesus  (above,  §§  261;  31  if),
to  journey  to  Rome  by  way  of  Ca:sarea  in  order  to  contend  with
Simon  (5).  Here  Peter,  who  has  been  eagerly  awaited  by  those
who  have  remained  faithful,  and  is  joyfully  welcomed,  goes  to
the  house  of  Marcellus  a  fonner  disciple  of  Paul  and  present
follower  of  Simon,  and  by  means  of  a  dog  that  speaks  with
human  voice,  causes  Simon  to  be  summoned  forth  (§  32  a).
Marcellus  comes  out  and  acknowledges  his  sin,  that  he  has
been  devoted  to  Simon  and  has  even  set  up  to  him  a  statue
with  the  inscription,  '  Simoni  juveni  deo  '  (9  /.).  The  dog,
which  Simon  within  the  house  has  asked  to  deny  his
presence,  foretells  to  Simon  the  inimicus  et  corrnptor  via
veritatis  the  impending  curse,  but  outside  the  house  promises
Peter  a  hard  struggle  with  Simon,  and  dies  (12).  Challenged
to  a  further  miracle,  Peter  takes  from  a  window  a  'sarda'
(pickled  sardine),  throws  it  into  a  pool  and  makes  it  swim
(i2_/^  ;  something  very  similar  is  related  of  Jesus  when  he  was
three  years  of  age  in  the  Latin  Gospel  of  Thomas  [1  4  ;  se
Eitanff.  apocr.  ed.  Tischendoif,!-)  164.^]).


SIMON  PETER


ngy ens  over e ea man a  sows e

how  he  raises  himself  up,  lifts  his  head  and  moves,  and


.  . .  ,  ..

(c)  Peter  tells  that  while  he  was  still  in  Jerusalem,  Simon  had
stayed  with  a  rich  woman  in  Juda:a,  named  Eubola,  and  by
means  of  two  of  his  companions  whom  he  had  made  invisible,
had  robbed  her  of  all  her  gold,  and  soon  afterwards  had  offered
a  portion  of  it,  a  golden  Satyiiscus,  to  a  goldsmith  named
Agrippinus,  for  sale.  Peter,  warned  beforehand  in  a  vision,
had  them  arrested  ;  Simon  thereupon  disappeared  altogether
from  Jud;ca  (17).

(if)  A  disputation  between  Simon  and  Peter  in  the  presence
of  senators,  officers  of  state,  and  the  whole  people,  is  arranged
for  in  the  forum.  Peter  begins  to  the  effect  that  Simon  is  con
demned  (reprchcnsum:  cp  SIMON  MAGUS,  §  4«).  He  reproaches
him  with  concealing  the  fact  that  for  his  theft  from  Eubola
(above,  c)  he  has  been  driven  from  Judaia.  'Didst  thou  not'
he  continues,  'in  Jeiusalem  (.v/V)  fall  at  my  feet  and  at  those  of
Paul  (j/f)  when  thou  beheldest  the  healings  wrought  by  us,  and
say  :  I  beseech  you  accept  from  me  a  price,  as  much  as  you  will,
that  I  may  be  able  to  lay  on  my  hands  and  do  like  deeds  of
power'  (virtutes:  cp  SIMON  MAGUS,  §  if).  Simon  makes
answer  by  disputing  the  divinity  of  Jesus  inasmuch  as  one  who
is  born  and  crucified,  and  has  a  Lord,  cannot  be  God  (23).

(e)  Peter  now  again  challenges  Simon  to  work  a  miracle,
saying  that  he  himself  will  then  counterwork  it  (24).  The

4611


ts,  an  eter  agrees  o  ee.  utse  e  cty  gate  esus
meets  him.  Peter  asks  :  Dotnine,  qiio  vadis  ?  Jesus  answers:
Rontatn  venio  iterum  crucifigi.  Peter  changes  his  mind  and
joyfully  turns  back  (35  =  Linus  3-6).  Agrippa  sentences  him  to
be  crucified  (36=  Linus  8).  Arrived  at  the  cross,  Peter  begs  to
be  fastened  to  it  with  his  head  downwards,  and,  his  request


,

Agrippa  loses  his  office  and  dies  under  the  torments  of  the
divine  judgment).  Nero's  rage  flames  forth  against  the
Christians  who  remain  ;  whereupon  there  appears  to  him  in
the  night  an  angel  who  severely  chastises  him  (according  to
Linus,  at  the  instance  of  Peter  who  likewise  appears  to  him),
so  that  he  ceases  from  his  persecution  of  the  Christians  (41  =
Linus  17).

In  the  case  of  the  Catholic  Acta  Petri  ct  Pauli  we


shall pass over, along with many other things, the
additions  of  the  longer  Greek  text.1 Of  the  common


.  ancestra at an to  controvert eter,  w

Of  Catholic  is  doing  away  with the  whole Mosaic  law

Acta  Petri  (cn-  ')• Paul  declares himself  a  true  Jew

i  p,,..!,-  who holds by the Sabbath and the true

eti  rauil.  circumcision  (below,  §  391:),  and  promises  to


fact,  however,  was  that  in  the  dark  place  where  te eeang
happened  he  brought  it  about  that  a  ram  was  beheaded  in  his


tea si.

(if)  At  two  separate  points  in  these  proceedings  Nero  nsks
aul  why  he  is  saying  nothing.  On  the  first  of  these  occasions
aul  simply  warns  the  Emperor  against  Simon  (29);  on  the


1  The  account,  with  which  it  begins,  of  Paul's  journey  through
Italy  (§  32^  3),  extends  over  twenty-one  chapters.  Therefore  the
numbering  of  the  chapters  of  this  text  will  always  be  higher  by
twenty-one  than  that  given  in  our  citations  here.


4612


SIMON  PETER

second,  in  answer  to  Nero's  express  question,  he  gives  informa
tion  as  to  his  doctrine  which  consists  in  inculcation  of  all  the
virtues  and  of  monotheism  (33-38).  Peter  confirms  all  this  (39)
and  Paul  again  in  turn  confirms  the  words  of  Peter  (41).

((.•)  Simon  continually  brings  forward  new  charges,  amongst
others  the  charge  that  Peter  and  Paul  are  circumcised  (40-42).
Peter  propounds  the  counter-question,  why  then  is  Simon  also
circumcised,  and  himself  answers  it  to  the  effect  that  he  had  to
deceive  the  people  in  order  to  succeed  with  them  and  that  he  had
to  give  himself  out  to  be  a  Jew  (42/1).  Simon  declares  that  he
was  circumcised  because  such  was  at  that  time  God's  command
(4.1).  Paul  asks  why,  if,  according  to  this,  circumcision  is  a  good
thing,  Simon  has  given  over  circumcised  persons  to  judgment
and  to  death  (45).  When  Peter  describes  the  Christian  doctrine
as  being  faith  in  God  the  Father  in  Christ  along  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  the  creator  of  all  things,  Simon  declares  that  he
himself  is  this  God  (48).

(/)  Simon  pledges  himself  on  the  following  day  to  fly  into
heaven  (49  f.  and  also  30).  At  Simon's  wish  Nero  for  this
purpose  causes  a  wooden  tower  to  be  erected  on  the  Campus
Martius  and  on  the  following  day  the  whole  people  and  all  the
official  persons,  with  Peter  and  Paul,  come  together  (51).  Paul
says  to  Peter  that  his  own  task  is  to  pray  but  that  Peter  is  to
carry  out  all  that  is  needful  since  he  has  been  first  chosen  by
the  Lord  to  be  an  apostle  (52).  Simon  promises,  when  he  shall
have  flown  into  heaven,  to  cause  Nero  also  to  be  carried  thither
by  his  angels,  and  begins  to  fly  (53  f.).  Paul  says  to  Peter  :
Why  delayest  thou?  Do  that  which  thou  hast  in  mind  (55).
Peter  adjures  the  angels  of  Satan  who  are  bearing  up  Simon,  to
let  him  fall.  Simon  falls  upon  the  Via  Sacra  and  breaks  into
four  pieces  (56  ;  the  Latin  and  the  longer  Greek  text  add  that
thereby  [by  his  blood,  is  doubtless  meant]  he  joined  together
four  flint  stones  which  can  still  be  seen  to  the  present  day  in
proof  of  the  triumph  of  the  apostles).

(§•)  Nero  causes  Peter  and  Paul  to  be  put  in  irons,  and
Simon's  body  in  the  expectation  of  his  rising  again  to  be
carefully  attended  to  for  three  days  (57).  He  orders  Peter  and
Paul  to  be  chastised  with  iron  rods  and  then  to  be  put  to  death
in  the  '  naumachia '  (or  circus,  in  which  also  naval  displays  were
given),  but  finds  the  advice  of  the  prefect  Agrippa  very  reason
able,  that  Peter  as  the  author  of  the  death  of  Simon  ought  to
be  crucified,  but  Paul  as  comparatively  innocent  to  be  beheaded.
In  Paul's  case  this  sentence  is  carried  out  on  the  road  to  Ostia
(58yC) ;  Peter  at  his  own  request  is  crucified  head  downwards
(60).  From  his  cross  he  reproves  the  people,  who  are  wishing
to  kill  Nero  and  relates  how  a  few  days  before,  in  his  flight
from  the  devices  of  Agrippa,  he  himself  had  been  met  by  Jesus,
who  had  said  he  wished  to  be  crucified  in  place  of  Peter  (61).
Peter  then  dies  (62).

(/i)  Forthwith  come  on  the  scene  prominent  men  who  had
journeyed  from  Jerusalem  on  the  apostles'  account ;  these  along
with  Marcellus,  the  former  follower  of  Simon,  bury  the  body  of
Peter  under  the  terebinth  hard  by  the  Naumachia  on  the
Vatican  (63).  These  Jerusalemites  foretold  the  soon  approach
ing  death  of  Nero.  In  point  of  fact,  in  consequence  of  a
popular  tumult,  Nero  had  to  fly  into  the  wilderness,  where  he
died  of  hunger  and  cold  ;  his  body  was  devoured  by  wild
beasts  (64/1).

(/')  Certain  pious  men  from  the  East  sought  to  carry  off  the
relics  of  the  martyrs ;  with  the  result  that  an  earthquake
immediately  ensued  in  Rome,  and  the  inhabitants  attacked  the
Orientals,  who  at  once  took  flight.  The  Romans  deposited  the
relics  3  R.  m.  outside  the  city  (the  Latin  and  longer  Greek  texts
add  :  at  a  place  named  Catacumbas  on  the  Appian  Way)  and
watched  over  them  for  one  year  and  seven  months  ;  at  the  expiry
of  which  time  they  brought  them  to  the  final  resting-place  which
had  meanwhile  been  in  preparation  (66).  The  death-day  of
both  apostles  was  June  29  (67).

Many  points  in  these  interesting  compositions  invite
inquiry  ;  but  we  must  here  confine  ourselves  to  the  one

fundamental question, that, namely,
35.  Conclusion  ag  to  the  rdative  pdority  of  the  pre.

.. . Catholic  and  the  Catholic  Acts. If  we
1C  Acts. are  {o  settje tne p0;nt  as  to  whether

Peter  ever  was  in  Rome,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance
to  know  which  of  the  two  assertions,  that  he  was  there
along  with  Paul,  and  that  he  was  not,  was  the  original
one.  (a)  Now  here  it  would  be  quite  useless  to

put  the  question  as  if  it  were  whether  the  priority
belongs  altogether  to  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  or  altogether
to  the  Catholic.  In  a  literature  which  exhibits  so  little
inward  unity  almost  every  indication  of  posteriority
admits  of  being  regarded  as  a  later  interpolation,  and
so  can  be  deprived  of  its  evidential  value.

In  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  Agrippa  and  Marcellus  are  two
leading  figures,  in  the  Catholic  their  appearance  is  quite
incidental  ;  at  the  same  time,  however,  in  the  Catholic  Acts
the  machinations  of  Agrippa  against  Peter,  and  the  fact  of  the
earlier  attachment  of  Marcellus  to  Simon  are  mentioned,
although  it  is  only  in  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  that  they  are  really
described  (§§  34  b,  g,  h,  33  6).  Peter's  flight  and  his  meeting  with
Jesus  are  in  the  Catholic  Acts  introduced  in  an  awkward  way
as  told  by  Peter  himself  while  on  the  cross  ;  in  the  pre-Catholic

46*3


SIMON  PETER

Acts  they  are  related  by  the  author  himself  in  their  proper
place.  Hut  all  these  and  similar  tmevennesses  in  the  Catholic
Acts  can  be  traced  back  to  later  interpolation.

(b)  One such interpolation is plainly seen in the
episode  of  the men who come from  Jerusalem '  on
the  apostles'  account'  and  bury  Peter  (§  34/6,  i).

According  to  the  representation  as  it  stands  at  present,  the
pious  men  from  the  East  who  wish  to  carry  off  the  relics  appear
to  be  distinct  from  these.  Piety,  it  must  be  said,  shows  itself
much  less  in  robbing  than  in  burying  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  the
coming  from  the  East  suggests  much  less  the  motive  of  burial
than  that  of  plunder.  If  this  be  so,  not  two  classes  of  persons
from  the  East  were  intended,  but  only  one,  and  the  story  is  an
indication  that  the  body  of  Peter  had  not  originally  its  resting-
place  in  Rome  but  in  the  East.  It  is  only  from  the  Roman
point  of  view  that  the  proposed  removal  is  thought  of  as  a
robbery  ;  in  reality  it  is  a  veiled  reminiscence  of  the  fact  that  the
apostle  died  in  the  East.  But  as  the  whole  story  is  an  appendix
merely,  and  moreover  has  been  distorted  by  redactions,  it  is
impossible  to  build  anything  on  it.  It  would  seem  to  be  meant
to  explain  either  why  for  a  while  it  was  impossible  to  show  any
burial-place  of  Peter  in  Rome  or  why  it  was  shown  not  at  the
spot  where  he  died  but  outside  the  city  in  the  piece  of  ground
ad  Catacumbas  (see  further,  Erbes,  Z.f.  K.-G.  22  [1901],  196-200).

(c)  The difference between Peter  and Paul  in  the
manner of their death  and in the place  of  it (also
according  to  Gaius,  see  §  26 />)  is  noticeable,  especially
as  for the  beheading  of Paul his Roman citizenship
which  could  have  been  adduced,  is not. After Xcro
has  ordered  («-e\e(5o;)  the  same  manner  of  death  for  the
two  apostles, the  opposite  advice  of  Agrippa  and  its
success  cannot  but  seem  strange. It  seems  intended  to
explain  the  fact  that  two  separate  places  of  death  of  the
apostles  were  known. This  fact  raises  doubts  as  to  the
simultaneity  of  their  deaths  and  thus  tells  against  the
priority  of  the  contents  of  the Catholic as compared
with  the  pre-Catholic  Acts. Against  the  priority  of  the
whole  book  it  cannot,  however,  have  this  effect,  as  this
feature  can  easily  have  been  introduced  later.

(</)  Let  us  therefore  fix  our  attention  in  the  first
instance  upon  one  point  that  is  really  central,  namely
the  tendency  of  the  Catholic  Acts.  It  is  quite
manifestly  Petro- Pauline.  The  appearance  as  if  Paul
will  have  to  come  forward  against  the  preaching  of
Peter  we  may  be  sure  has  been  deliberately  produced  at
the  outset,  in  order  that  the  complete  agreement
between  the  two  may  afterwards  become  all  the  more
conspicuous.  Peter  confirms  all  that  is  said  by  Paul,
and  conversely.  The  controversies  between  Jewish  and
Gentile  Christians  are  set  to  rest  by  both.  Both  carry
on  a  joint  polemic  against  Simon,  and  both  are  on  this
account  together  condemned  to  death.

(e)  Although,  however,  Paul  in  the  doctrinal  dis
cussions  is  represented  as  completely  on  a  level  with
Peter,  it  cannot  at  all  be  denied  that  in  the  conflicts
with  Simon  the  part  he  plays  is  quite  subordinate.  In
these  everything  of  importance  is  said  and  done  by
Peter.  In  order  to  have  any  part  at  all,  Paul  has  to  be
twice  asked  by  Nero  why  he  says  nothing,  and  even
then  he  does  not  intervene  in  the  action  with  Simon,
but  merely  expatiates  upon  his  own  doctrine.  The  few
words  which  are  put  into  his  mouth  in  the  further
dealings  with  Simon  cannot  alter  our  judgment  that  his
figure  came  only  at  a  later  stage  into  the  picture  which
originally  brought  Peter  alone  face  to  face  with  Simon.
This  conclusion  is  confirmed  in  the  best  possible  way
by  what  Agrippa  says  in  arguing  for  a  different  sentence,
that  Paul  is  relatively  innocent  and  therefore  deserves  a
milder  punishment,  as  it  is  also  by  the  facts  that  only
eleven  words,  neither  more  nor  fesver,  are  devoted  to
the  account  of  his  beheading,  and  that  it  is  nowhere
said  that  he  was  buried.  Here  accordingly  we  have
one  point  at  any  rate  in  which  the  posteriority  of  the
main  contents  of  the  Catholic  Acts  as  compared  with
the  pre-Catholic  is  clearly  discernible.  Cp  further  SIMON
MAGUS,  §  5^.

Or  are  we  to  suppose,  nevertheless,  that  the  pre-
Catholic  Acts,  on  this  principal  point  at  least — that  of
Peter's  presence  in  Rome  without  that  of  Paul — are  the
more  recent?  The  circumstance  that,  in  their  begin-

4614


SIMON  PETER

ning  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  Paul  travels  from
Rome  to  Spain  shortly  before  Simon,  and  after  him

„ _ . . Peter,  come  to  Rome,  and  that  Peter
36.  Conclusions  djes  before  the  retum  of  ,,au,  {o  RomC|

^M?  r  AP7  ~  which  has  Already  been  predicted
oatnouc  Acts.  ^^  can  be  taken  as  sll0wing  that

the  author  deliberately  wished  to  set  aside  the  con
temporaneous  presence  of  the  two  in  Rome  as  that  was
reported  in  the  Catholic  Acts.  At  the  same  time,
should  one  choose  to  take  it  so,  it  would  be  necessary
to  be  able  to  show  some  reason  which  could  have  led
him  to  wish  this.

(«)  No  such  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  dogmatic
sphere,  as  if  Peter  and  Paul  were  not  at  one  in  their
doctrine  and  the  author  therefore  did  not  wish  to  make
them  come  upon  the  scene  together.  Of  any  in
compatibility  in  their  doctrine  this  author  knows  as
little  as  does  the  writer  of  the  Catholic  Acts  ;  on  the
contrary,  Peter  is  anxiously  expected  in  Rome  by  Paul's
disciples  (§  33^).

(f>)  On  the  other  hand  there  is  much  that  is  attractive,
at  first  sight,  in  the  view  of  Erbcs  (Z.  f.  Kirchengesch.
22  [1901],  176-179)  that  Paul  was  in  the  pre-Catholic
Acts  taken  away  from  Rome  from  the  same  motive  as
we  have  already  (above,  §  26  g]  seen  to  be  operative
in  the  time  after  Irenaeus.  Peter  had  to  be  the  sole
head  of  the  church  of  Rome,  in  order  to  be  able  to
figure  as  the  first  bishop  there.  If,  however,  the
author  really  had  this  interest  at  heart,  we  shall  have
to  pronounce  his  mode  of  giving  effect  to  it  to  be
very  unskilful ;  for  in  the  account  he  gives  Paul  is  in
Rome  both  before  and  after  Peter,  and  after  an  explicit
prediction  suffers  the  death  of  a  martyr  there  (§  33 a}.

(c)  On  the  assumption  of  so  specifically  Roman  an
interest  as  this  we  should  further  expect  to  find  that  the
pre-Catholic  Acts  would  in  other  respects  also  betray
the  same  interest. Hut  of  anything  of  the  sort  there  is
surprisingly  little. The  burial-place  of  Peter  is  here
the  private  tomb  of  Marcellus  (§  33^),  not,  as  in  the
Catholic  Acts  (see  §  34  h],  a  famous  site  like  the  tere
binth  on  the  Vatican, where  he  is  said  to  have  died.
Further,  we  find  nothing  about  any  functions  of  Peter
which  could  be  regarded  as  episcopal.

(d)  It is clear, on  the contrary, that the  author's
interest  is  in  his  stories  as  such,  without  reference  to  the
scene where they  were enacted. He  takes manifest
delight in  the  grotesque  miracles  of  his  hero,  of  which
only  a  limited selection  has been given  above  (§  33,
/>,  e,  f) ; but  these  could  just  as  well  have  been  trans
ferred to any other place without diminution of  the
author's  interest  in  them. Moreover  the  detailed  parts
of  his  narrative are  but  little  united by  any  common
idea.

The  death  of  Peter  is,  strictly  speaking,  traced  to  his  con
version  of  Agrippa's  concubines  and  Alhinus's  wife  to  sexual
abstinence  ;  his  action  against  Simon  is  added  as  a  motive  for  it
only  in  Pseudo-Linns  (§  33  //) ;  indeed,  the  imprisonment  of
Peter,  related  only  by  Pseudo-Linus,  before  the  conversion  of
those  ladies  is  simply  traced  back  to  the  consideration  that  the
time  has  now  drawn  near  in  which  his  faith  and  his  labours
claim  their  reward  (§  33,4')-

(e)  The author's interest really attaches itself to
Rome  in  two  points  only. The  final  issue  of  the  whole
is  that  Nero  desists  from  persecution  of  the  Christians
(§  33^).  and  the  controversy  with  Simon  brings  Peter  to
Rome  for  the  reason that Simon is presupposed as
active  there  before  him. Yet  even here  it  is  hard  to
discover  anything  which  might  answer  to  the  episcopal
position of Peter in Rome. The cessation of the
persecution  is  not brought  about  by  the  living  Peter,
but  only  after  his  death  (and  only  according  to  Pseudo-
Linus through the appearance of Peter in Nero's
vision by  night)  ; the bringing of Peter to Rome  is
connected with  the person of  Simon, and Simon is
controverted  by  Peter  everywhere,  not  in  Rome  merely  ;
he  is  expressly  stated  (§  33^,  d)  to  have  been  already
controverted  by  him  in  Judaea.

4615


37.  Arrival
in  Rome


SIMON  PETER

(/)  Further  it  has  to  be  remembered,  that  the
contents,  in  respect  alike  of  doctrine  and  of  pre
suppositions,  though  by  some  designated  as  Catholic,
are  nevertheless  by  others  regarded  as  Gnostic  (§  32 a)
and  thus  cannot  easily  be  brought  into  connection
with  the  main  Catholic  '  tendency '  already  alluded
to,  to  establish  for  Rome  some  sort  of  episcopal
dignity  of  Peter.  Elements  to  be  taken  into  account  in
this  connection  are  such  as  these  :  the  mystery  of  the
cross,  the  docetic  Christology,  the  background  of
miracle,  the  use  of  apocryphal  citations,  and  the  like,
of  but  little  of  which  were  we  able  to  take  account  in
§  33-  See  in  Lipsius,  ii.  1258-270.

(a]  There  is  a  further  point,  in  connection  with  which
one  might  be  inclined  to  suppose  that  a  simultaneous

presence of Paul along with Peter in
Rome  had been  deliberately  suppressed
''-'  t*le  autnor  °^  tne  pre-Catholic  Acts  in
A  Vi  1  tlle  interests  of  his  theory  about  Peter  as

Acts the  head  °f  the  church  of  Rome; the
point, namely,  that  Peter  is  represented
as  having  come  to  Rome  as  early  as  in  the  second  year
of  Claudius,  in  other  words,  in  42  A.D.

So  Liidemann,  Prof.  Kirchcnzcitung,  1887,  p.  959^;  similarly
also  Harnack,  ACL  ii.  1  705,  with  the  difference  that  he  mentions
no  definite  name  (least  of  all  the  author  of  the  pre-Catholic
Acts,  which  he  assigns  to  about  250  A.U.),  hut  only  a  drift  of
things  that  began  to  set  in  about  200  A.D.,  and  that  he  seems  to
assume  with  less  detiniteness  than  Liidemann  a  conscious
purpose  in  the  alteration  of  the  history.  This  view  is  worthy
of  attention,  if  only  because  by  means  of  this  dating  the  twenty-
five  years  of  Peter's  Roman  sojourn  are  made  possible  (§  261'),
yet  also  because  such  an  artificial  separation  of  two  persons
would  find  an  analogy  in  the  procedure,  which  in  all  proba
bility  the  writer  of  the  canonical  book  of  Acts  has  followed  in
antedating  the  appearance  of  Simon  (89-24),  and  the  collection
brought  by  Paul  to  Jerusalem  (1127-30  1225).  See  SIMON
MAGUS,  §  14  a,  e.

Only,  here  also  we  must  call  attention,  as  before
(§  36  ^').  to  the  unskilfulness  with  which  in  that  case  the
author  of  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  has  carried  out  this
purpose,  supposing  he  had  it.  Not  only,  according
to  him,  is  Paul  by  express  prophecy  to  come  to  Rome
after  Peter's  death  and  suffer  martyrdom  there,  but  he
is  represented  as  having  also  been  in  Rome  before  Peter,
in  other  words,  before  42  A.  D.  (§  33  a}.  AYhat,  therefore,
can  be  clearly  made  out  here  is  not  any  tendency  but  only
gross  ignorance  or  indifference  regarding  chronology  ;
for  before  42  A.  n.  Paul  had  at  best  only  entered  upon
his  first  missionary  journey,  and  not  even  the  Council
of  Jerusalem  had  yet  taken  place.

(b]  Therefore,  also,  no  value  can  be  attached  to  the
conjecture  of  Erbes (above, §  36  /'), that the  author
betrays  his  knowledge  of  the  conjoint  activity  of  Peter
and  Paul  against  Simon  at  Rome  and  his  purpose  to  deny
it,  by  the  statement  that  it  was  in  Jerusalem  that  the  two
together  encountered  Simon  (§  33</).

If  Jerusalem  can  be  a  slip  of  memory  for  Samaria,  equally
well  can  Paul  be  a  slip  of  memory  for  John.  If  any  such
tendency  as  is  supposed  by  Liidemann  and  Erbes  was  operative,
it  must  have  led  notjnerely  to  the  obliteration  of  traces  of  Paul's
presence  in  the  conflict  with  Simon  in  Rome,  but  to  the  oblitera
tion  of  his  presence  in  Rome  altogether,  or — if  this  was  no
longer  possible,  in  view  of  the  too  firmly  established  tradition
of  his  death  there— at  least  of  his  presence  in  Rome  before
Peter.

(c]  As for the real origin of the fundamentally
erroneous  dating  of  Peter's  arrival  in  Rome  in  42  A.  D. ,
it  has,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  noted  that  we  first
hear  of  such  a  date  in  the  Chronicle  of  Eusebius,  but
must  carry  this  back  to  its  source  (§  261-). From  an
earlier  period  we  have  the  datum  established,  that  for
twelve  years  after  the  death  of  Jesus,  in  other  words,
from 30  to  42 A.  D. , Peter  remained  along  with  the
other  apostles in Jerusalem (§§  26  e, 31  d}. About
the  same  time,  or  perhaps  still  earlier,  Justin  informs
us,  but  without  specification  of  any  definite  year,  that
Simon the  Magician came  to Rome  in the  reign  of
Claudius  ;  this  is  repeated  by  Irenaeus  (i.  16[23]i),  and,
indirectly, by  Eusebius  when  (HE\\.  146)  he  says  of

4616


SIMON  PETER

Peter,  without  fixing  the  year,  that  '  he  came  to  Rome
in  that  same  reign  of  Claudius '  in  which  Simon  came.
According  to  ii.  17 1,  Peter  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  must
there  have  met  Philo,  who,  according  to  ii.  188,  had
already  come  to  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Gaius  Caligula.

(d)  On  this  point  the  most  important  views  are  as
follows  : —

Investigation  would  be  superfluous,  if  Kreyenbiihl  (Evang.
fi.  ii'ahr/u'it,  \  [1900]  200)  were  right  in  his  conjecture  that  by
Claudius  it  was  Claudius  Nero  who  was  originally  meant
(Nero  was  adopted  by  his  predecessor  Claudius).  This,  how
ever,  is  surely  too  bold.  Harnack  (ACL  ii.12^2)  thinks  the
definite  date  of  42  A.D.  for  the  arrival  of  Peter  in  Rome
cannot  come  from  the  date  given  for  Simon  Magus,  since
for  the  latter  no  definite  year  was  assigned ;  but  that  it
can  only  be  derived  from  the  tradition  of  the  twelve  years'
sojourn  in  Jerusalem  (30-42  A.D.).  On  p.  705  he  says  that
the  twenty-five  years'  sojourn  in  Rome  '  is  derived  from  the
admittedly  questionable  Simon-Magus-Peter-Clement  tradition
which  brings  Simon  to  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Claudius.  .  .  .
Legend  brought  Peter  as  his  opponent  to  Rome  in  like  manner
under  Claudius,  and  then  left  him  there.'  If  this  latter  view  is
not  in  contradiction  with  that  quoted  immediately  before,  the
reference  back  to  the  tradition  concerning  Simon  Magus  cannot
apply  to  the  exact  period  of  42-67  A.D.,  and  therefore  neither
also  to  the  precise  year  of  42  as  the  date  of  Peter's  arrival,  but
only  to  the  vaguer  statement  that  his  arrival  fell  in  the  reign  of
Claudius  ;  the  precise  year,  as  we  have  seen,  must,  according  to
Harnack,  be  computed  merely  from  the  twelve  years  in  Jeru
salem.  Lipsius  (ii.  1  68)  had  merely  stated  this  last  view,  adding
that  with  this  datum  for  Peter  the  approximately  similar  date
of  Simon  Magus  was  also  given.  Ludemanrr  (above,  a),  starting
from  the  view  shared  by  him  with  Lipsius.  that  Simon's  appear
ance  in  Rome  was  unhistorical,  and  that  all  that  is  said  regarding
this  had  been  derived  from  statements  regarding  Paul  (see  SIMON
MAGUS,  §js  i,f.,  12,  end),  insists  that  the  Simon  legend  must  have
assigned  the  appearance  of  Simon  Magus  in  Rome,  like  that
of  Paul,  to  some  date  under  Nero,  and  finds  just  for  this  reason
a  '  tendency  '-change  in  the  dating  under  the  reign  of  Claudius.
Only,  when  it  is  the  meeting  of  Peter  with  Simon  that  is  in
question,  there  come  into  competition,  on  Liidemann's  presup-
positions  also,  two  conflicting  dates,  as  soon  as  that  of  Paul,
which  determines  that  of  Simon,  and  that  of  Peter  do  not
from  the  first  coincide.  In  shaping  the  tradition,  therefore,  a
choice  had  to  be  made,  and  this  in  the  present  instance  can
easily  have  fallen  in  favour  of  that  of  Peter,  should  the  author
have  judged  this  view  the  more  trustworthy.

(e)  For  our present main purpose, that  of  deter
mining the  question of priority  as  between the pre-
Catholic  and the  Catholic  Acts, it  results  anew  from
what  has  been  said  that  we  are  under  no  necessity  to
ascribe  with Liidemann  a '  tendency '-change  of  dates
to the  pre-Catholic  Acts, or with Harnack even to
regard  the  statement of  Dionysius  of  Corinth  (above,
§ 25(7) as to the (approximately) contemporaneous
arrival  and  martyrdom  of  Peter  and  Paul  in  Rome  as
fitting in with history and as supported by earlier
testimony. Even  from  the  side  of  the  Catholic Acts
no  objection  can  be  raised  against  the  date  42  A.  n. ,
as  having  been  assigned  without  'tendency,'  for  Peter's
arrival in Rome. According to the Catholic Acts
Peter  is  in Rome before  Paul  ; for how  long  before
is  not  stated. This  can be  taken  as an after-effect
of  the statement that he was there from 42 A.D.  ,
and  the  subsequent  arrival of  Paul can  be  explained
by means  of the 'tendency,' which we  shall discuss
in  a  later  section (see  §  40^), to make him appear
in Rome  along  with Peter, just as the  statement  of
Dionysius  of  Corinth  is  capable  of  being  understood  as
a further  development of the same  tendency, to  the
extent  of  making  the  arrival  of  the  two  (nearly)  simul
taneous. Justin  alone constitutes  a serious objection
against Lipsius's  derivation  of  the  date  42  A.D.  ; for
all  that  he  does  is  to  place  Simon  in  Rome  in  the  time
of  Claudius without  saying  a  word  about  his  conflict
with  Peter. Upon  this  point, however,  we  shall  best
be  able  to  form  a  judgment  in  another  connection  (see
(§§39[/l  40  rf).

The  statements  as  to  the  day  of  death  of  Peter  and

38.  Day  of  death  Paul .  also  pron?ise  !ight  on.  the
according  to  the  1^™  as  '°  'hf.  relative  priority
ADocryphalActs.0/  the  Pre-Cathohc  and  Catholic

Acts, (a)  29th  June,  which  is  given
at  the  close  of  the  Catholic  Acts  for  both  apostles,  not

4617


SIMON  PETER

only  fits  in  exceedingly  ill  with  the  Neronian  persecution
to  which  the  martyrdoms  are  so  readily  referred — it
arose  out  of  the  burning  of  Rome  in  July  64 — but  also
rests  upon  a  confusion.  For  29111  June  is  the  day  of  the
removal  of  the  relics  of  the  two  apostles  which  took  place
in  258  A.  u.  (above,  g  26  b}.  The  confusion  is  found  first
in  the  Martyrology  of  Jerome.  Another  commemora
tion  is  on  22nd  February.  So  far  as  Peter  is  concerned,
the  day  on  which  he  assumed  the  episcopal  office,  in
Rome  or  in  Antioch,  is  said  to  be  intended  (cp  Lipsius,
ii.  1404-408).  According  to  Erbes  (7't/]9i),  it  is  the
true  anniversary  of  Paul's  death  (a  rather  bold  assump
tion),  whilst  for  Peter  its  historical  character  cannot  be
at  all  established.

(b]  It  would  be  natural to  suppose,  if  the  same  day
of  the  same  month  is  given  for  the  death  of  the  two
apostles, that the  year must, of  course, be  also the
same. A  whole series of  ecclesiastical writers from
Prudentius  onwards (last half  of  41)1  cent.),  however,
place  the  death  of  Paul  exactly  a  year  later  than  that
of  Peter,  others  only  a  day  later,  namely  on  3oth  June
(see  Lipsius,  ii.  1236-244).

Harnack  (ACL  ii.  1  joSf.)  leaves  the  last-mentioned  date  (a
day  later)  unnoticed,  and  argues  from  the  identity  of  the  month-
date  that  the  difference  of  the  year-date  is  incredible.  He  there
fore  supposes  that  the  death  year  of  the  one  apostle  was  from  the
fourth  century  onwards  for  some  unknown  reason  separated
from  that  of  the  other.  He  himself  sees  that  this  is  a  very
difficult  hypothesis,  and  would  be  inclined  rather  to  hold  the
identification  of  the  two  years  to  be  the  secondary  stage,  '  were
it  not  that  the  legend  has  as  a  constant  element  the  identity  of
the  days.'  In  making  this  remark,  then,  he  has  simply  left  out
of  account  not  only  the  dating,  which  separates  the  two  events
by  only  a  single  day,  but  also  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  altogether,
for  these  not  only  presuppose  quite  different  years  for  the  deaths
of  Peter  and  of  Paul,  but  also  quite  different  days,  since  they  do
not  name  any  day  at  all.  In  order  to  suggest  something  or
other  which  could  possibly  have  led  to  a  later  separation  of  the
years  originally  regarded  as  identical,  Harnack  refers  to  '  various
sorts  of  legends  about  the  death  of  the  apostles  which  are
unknown  to  us,"  and  adds:  'Lipsius  thinks  of  old  Gnostic
Trepiofiot  lleVpou  KOL  IlaiiAou,  but  none  such  ever  existed.'
Whether  they  existed  we  do  not  need  to  inquire  here,  fur  it  is
by  no  means  the  case  that  Lipsius  relies  upon  writings  that  can
only  be  hypothetically  inferred  ;  he  builds  upon  our  pre-
Catholic  Acts,  which  even  for  Harnack  himself  exist,  if  not  from  a
date  earlier  than  about  250  A.D.,  yet  at  all  events  from  more
than  100  years  before  Prudentius.

(c)  As  soon  as  due  heed  is  paid  to  this,  it  becomes
clear that the separation of the deaths of the two
apostles  by  a  year  or  a  clay  is  nothing  but  a  compromise
between  the  church's  assertion  of  the  simultaneousness
of  the  two  events,  and  the  opposite  tradition  set  down
in  the  pre-Catholic  Acts. On  Harnack's  own  principle,
accordingly,  we  must  regard  the  coalescence  of  the  days
as  the  secondary  stage,  and  on  this  point  also  the  pre-
Catholic  Acts  have  preserved  the  older  stage  as  com
pared  with  the  Catholic  Acts.

Whoever  regards  the  simultaneousness  of  the  two  apostles'
appearances  in  Rome  and  their  conjoint  conflict  with  Simon  as
the  secondary  form  of  the  tradition  (§  37  c)  is  all  the  less  in  a
position  to  doubt  that  this  form  of  the  tradition  must  necessarily
have  carried  with  it  that  of  the  coincidence  of  their  deaths.
That  the  difference  of  the  days  goes  back  to  non-Catholic
sources  (to  which  our  pre-Catholic  Acts  are  to  be  reckoned
according;  to  §  36  \f\)  is  expressly  stated  in  the  decree  of  Pope
Gelasius  (22,  ap.  Credner,  Zur  Gesch.  d.  Kanons,  1847,  pp.
•0)0  f.  =  198,0  dating  from  the  year  494.  yet  perhaps  even  from
the  time  of  Damasns,  382  A.D.:  [PaulusJ  qui  non  diverse,  ut
hreretici  garriunt,  sed  uno  tempore,  uno  eodemque  die  gloriosa
morte  cum  Petro  in  urbe  Roma  sub  Cajsare  Nerone  agonizans
coronatus  est.

Having  reached  this  point,  let  us  now  endeavour  to

sum up the provisional conclusions that seem to

p . . be deducible from our study of the

. one  USion  ^pOCrypjjai  ^cts,  in the  same  manner

A™ Vi i as has a'ready been done in § 31

At  fr°m  the  data  '°f  the  NT  and  Church

fathers. (a) In the most important

points  we  have  seen  that  the  contents  of  the  pre-
Catholic  Acts  are  the  more  original  as  compared  with
those  of  the  Catholic  ;  namely,  that  Peter  without  Paul

4618


SIMON  PETER

engaged  in  controversy  with  Simon  in  Rome  and
suffered  martyrdom.  This,  however,  is  confirmed  by
the  Catholic  Acts  also,  inasmuch  as  we  can  see  that  in
them  Paul  has  been  introduced  into  the  picture  as  the
fellow  combatant  of  Peter  against  Simon  only  by  an
after-thought  (§  35^').  In  view  of  this  fact,  one  would
have  to  postulate  the  existence  of  some  such  representa
tion  as  that  of  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  as  a  foundation  for
that  of  the  Catholic,  even  if  it  were  not  actually  extant.
All  the  less  is  there  any  reason  for  trying  to  discover  in
the  pre-Catholic  Acts  '  tendencies'  by  which  they  would
be  shown  to  be  secondary  as  compared  with  the
Catholic  Acts.

Let  it  be  added  that  the  Acta  Paul!  do  not  alter  our  judgment
upon  the  two  Acta  now  under  discussion.  They  tell  us  (in  Acta,
apost.  afiocr.  1  104-117)  that  Paul,  awaited  by  Luke  and  Titus,
came  (returned?)  to  Rome,  revived  from  the  dead  Patroclus  the
cup-bearer  of  Nero,  preached  Christ  to  Nero  himself,  and  was
for  this  sentenced  by  him  to  death  ;  all  this  without  any  mention
at  all  of  Peter  and  Simon.

(b)  Even  if  we  refrain  from  trying  to  frame  a  hypo
thesis  as  to  the  relative  priority  of  the  several  Acts  (or
their  sources)  regarded  as  literary  monuments  (§  3S«),  the
priority  of  the  most  important  points  in  the  contents
of  the pre-Catholic  Acts  is, nevertheless, a  result of
very great importance. In spite  of this priority  it
remains  open  to  us  to  hold  that  the  oldest  forms  of  pre-
Catholic  and  Catholic  Acts  alike  arose  approximately
at the same date, but in different Christian circles
(§  32^),  and  both  of  them  in  the  time  before  the  rise  of
the  idea  of  the Roman  bishopric of  Peter, and  thus
before  about  189-217  A.  D.  (§  26  [/]). This  last  idea  is
discountenanced, not only by  the pre-Catholic Acts
(§  36^-/K  Dut  also  quite  as  much  by  the  Catholic  with
their  co-ordination  of  Peter  and  Paul  (§  35 d).

(c)  The  theological  views and presuppositions  also
alike  of  the pre-Catholic  Acts  (§  36  [/]) and  of  the
Catholic,  fit  into  the  same  period  (from  about  160  A.  D.
onwards). The  essence  of  Christianity  is  in  the  Catholic
Acts  summed  up  in  belief  in  one  God  and  his  son  Jesus
Christ,  and  in  an  earnest  morality,  and  salvation  is  sought,
quite  as  in  Didachl,  9  3  10  2  f. ,  in  recognition  of  the  truth
and  in  the  life  eternal  ;  Peter,  precisely  as  in  the  canonical
book  of  Acts  (see  ACTS,  §§4.  7),  does  away  with  the
Mosaic  law,  and  Paul  appears  as  a  true  Jew,  with  the
sole  difference  that  he  substitutes  for  the  fleshly  circum
cision  the  circumcision  of  the  heart  (Rom.  228/.  4n/
against  Gal.  52/),  etc.  (§  34  a,  d,  e,  and  more  fully  in
Lipsius,  ii.  1350-358). The  interest also in composing
the differences of view between Jewish and Gentile
Christians  (ibid.  340-349)  was  no  longer  a  lively  one  in
the  later  time. The Acta Pauli (above, a) likewise
belongs  to  this  same  period.

(d)  Thus  it  is  in  itself  a  possible  thing  that many,
even  of  the  older  of  the  Church  fathers  mentioned  in
§§ 25 /". , 29, may have drawn upon our  apocryphal
Acts:  e.g. ,  Dionysius  of  Corinth,  Irenneus,  Tertullian,
Gaius  from  the  Catholic  ; the Muratorian  fragmentist
and Clement of  Alexandria, who  do not  name Paul
along  with Peter, from  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  (as  for
Clem. Alex., however, cp §§  25  (/, 41  l>), the Philo-
sophumena  from  both,  since  in  a  very  significant  way
we find it  following  both  traditions  within the  com
pass  of  a  single  line  (620): Simon  'journeying  as  far
also  as Rome, fell  in  with  the  apostles, whom Peter
opposed  in  many  ways  '  (?wj  KO.\  TT?S  'PtJ^T/s  eTTiS^yU^cras
avrfirefff  roil  dTrooToXots  Trpbs  6v  TroXXa Herpes  dvri-
KaT^ffTT)).1 At  the  same  time  in  no  single  case  can  one
be  sure  that  the  fathers  named  had  really  come  by  their
information  by  reading  and  not  by  oral  communication,
and  thus  it  becomes  impossible  to  fix  the  date  of  com
position  of  the  Acts  by  that  of  any  of  these  Fathers.

1  The  Didascalia  apostolo-nnn  (6  9).  the  Apostolic  Constitu
tions  (69),  Eusebius  (HE\\.  146-15  r),  and  others  (see  Lipsius,
ii.  1321,  n.  5)  rlso  mention  Peter  alone  as  the  controverter  of
Simon.

4619


SIMON  PETER

(e)  It  has  already  been  stated  in  §  31  n  as  one  of  our
results  that,  so  far  as  the  evidence  of  the  XT  and  the
Church  Fathers  goes,  Peter  never  was  in  Rome  at  all.
The  question  now  emerges  anew,  whether  our  examina
tion  of  the  apocryphal  Acts  supplies  any  fresh  material
which  might  help  us  to  understand  how  it,  nevertheless,
came  about  that  tradition  carried  him  there. The  new
element  we  find  in  these  Acts  is  the  importance  which  is
attached  in  them  to  the  conflict  with  Simon. On  this
account, Erbes  (Z..  /. Kirchengesch.'ll, 1901,  pp. 12-
16,  177-179)  makes  the  following  combination  : — Since
Simon  was,  according  to  Acts  89-24,  confuted  by  Peter
in  Samaria  and,  according  to  Justin  (see  SIMON  MAGUS,
§  2  a),  attained  to  divine  honours  in  Rome,  in  the  con
viction  that these  could  not have  continued  for any
time, it  was  assumed  for  Rome  also  that  Simon  was
confuted  by  Peter  there. As  further,  according  to  the
Epistle  of  the  Corinthians  to  Paul,  which  together  with
the  (apocryphal)  third  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians
belonging  to  it,  has  been  shown  to  be  a  constituent  part
of  the  Acta Pauli,1  Simon made his appearance  in
Corinth also, and  led  astray  members of the  church
there,  on  which  account  Stephanus  (so  here  for  Stephanas:
cp i Cor.  1 16 161517)  and  his  fellow-writers beg  the
speedy  return  of  Paul,  it  was  found  fitting  to  represent
Paul  as  the  opponent,  not  here  only,  but  also  in  Rome.
Such motives  can, indeed, have been  operative,  and
must  be  added  to  those  mentioned  in  §  3 1  o.

(f)  Nevertheless, these  motives  do  not  solve  every
question. According  to  Erbes,  they  can  have  become
operative  only  when,  through  Justin,  there  had  become
widely  spread  the  mistaken  notion that  a  statue  had
been  erected  to  Simon  in  Rome. The  question  whether
the  formation  of  a  legend  of  this  kind  was  possible  at  a
still  earlier  date  is  thus  wholly  foreclosed. Rightly,  it
would  seem,  since  Justin  mentions  only  Simon  in  Rome,
but neither Peter  nor  Paul  as his  opponents  (§  37  e,
end). It  will  be  shown,  however,  later  (§  40  a,  b}  that
there  are  conditions  which  point  to  a  much  earlier  date
for  the  origin  of  the  legend. Their  investigation  is  only
hindered  by  the  position  of  Erbes.

(g)  All  that  has  hitherto  been  said  still  leaves  unex
plained  one  matter  which,  nevertheless,  is  plainly  one
of  primary  importance  in  the  Catholic  Acts  : the  Petro-
Pauline  interest. Why  was  it  so  urgently  necessary  to
accentuate the harmonious agreement of Peter and
Paul  ? Who  was  there  to  dispute  this  after  the  middle
of  the  second  century  had  been  passed  ? With  this,  in
turn,  is  connected  the  further  question  : Why  was  it  so
urgently necessary  to controvert Simon  ? Why  is  it
that  we  learn  from  the  NT  so  little  concerning  him  if
he  had  been  in  the  East,  and  in  Rome,  even  from  pre
Pauline  times,  so  formidable  an  enemy  of  Christianity?
Are  the  two  questions  perhaps  so  intimately  connected
that one  and the  same  cause  rendered  necessary  the
confuting  of  Simon,  and  the  bringing  into  prominence  of
the  harmony  between Peter  aud Paul  ? For further
light  upon  this,  we  must  try  to  find  new  material. Thus,
our  examination  of  the apocryphal Acts  ends  not  so
much  in  solution  of  our  main  problem,  as  in  the  raising
of  new  questions  regarding  Peter's  Roman  sojourn.

The  body  of  literature  still  remaining  for  our  con
sideration  with  reference  to  the  question  whether  Peter
T .  was ever in Rome, consists of  the

40.  inference pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  and  Re-
from  PS--Clem.  cognitions  (a}  We  begin  with

om.  ana  tfecog.  the  following  results  derived  from  a
careful  examination  elsewhere  (see  SIMON  MAGUS,  §§

1  Carl  Schmidt  has  obtained  this  result  from  a  Coptic  transla
tion  not  yet  published.  See  his  communication  in  the  Neiien
Heidelberger  Jahrbb. ,  1897,  pp.  117-124,  and  Harnack's  review
of  it  in  TLZ,  1897,  pp.  625-629.  For  the  Corinthian  correspond
ence,  see,  for  example,  Carriere  et  Berger,  La  correspondence
apocryphe  de  St.  Paul  et  des  Corinthiens,  Paris,  1891  (reprint
from  Revue  de  Thiologie  et  de  Pkilosophie,  1891,  pp.  333-351).
Cp  Zahn,  Gcsch.  d.  NTlichen  Kanons-  2  592-611  1016-1019
[1892].

4620


SIMON  PETER

3/,  9-11).  The  Simon  who  is  opposed  in  these
writings  by  Peter  was  originally  the  apostle  Paul,  yet
in  a  form  which  has  been  distorted  by  the  hostility  of
the  authors.  Only  later  were  Gnostic  features  added
to  him,  and  thus  in  his  figure  the  Gnosticism  of  the
second  century  was  controverted.  This  does  not  con
cern  us  here.  The  fundamental  idea  was  that  Peter
must  everywhere  follow  '  Simon  '  (who  seeks  in  his  travels
to  win  adherents  for  himself  everywhere)  in  order  to
refute  his  pernicious  doctrines  by  disputations,  and  to
outdo  his  magical  arts  by  still  greater  wonders.  If  not
in  writing,  yet  at  all  events  orally,  there  was  current  a
coherent,  comprehensive  form  of  this  romance  in
which  Peter  followed  '  Simon  '  to  Rome  also.

(b)  The  thesis  which  has  been  based  on  this  founda
tion  since  the  days  of  Baur  is  the  following.  Peter
was  never  in  Rome.  It  was  merely  the  idea  of  the
romance — that  he  had  to  follow  '  Simon  '  everywhere —
that  led  to  the  assertion  of  his  having  come  to  Rome
also.  This  was,  in  the  end,  accepted  for  a  fact  in
churchly  circles  also,  and  this  all  the  r.iore  readily
because  it  subserved  churchly  interests.  For,  since
Paul  had  notoriously  been  in  Rome,  it  now  became
possible  to  appeal  to  the  activity  of  both  these  leading
apostles  in  the  metropolis.  Their  mutual  relation  was,
of  course,  represented  as  one  of  the  most  absolute
agreement.  Thus,  to  the  assertion  that  Peter  had
withstood  Simon,  it  ceased  to  be  possible  to  attach  the
original  meaning,  according  to  which  Simon  stood  for
Paul  ;  Simon  must  figure  as  a  third  person,  and  Paul
could  range  himself  on  the  side  of  Peter.  So  the
Catholic  Acts  and  the  Church  fathers  from  Dionysius
of  Corinth  (about  170  A.u. )  onwards.  Some  of  them
name  only  Peter  as  the  opponent  of  Simon  in  Rome
(§  39  d)>  Just  as  tne  pre-Catholic  Acts  do.  This  stage
in  the  development  of  the  legend  is  now  definitely  per
ceived  to  be  the  earlier.

(t)  The  whole  development,  however,  is  seen  to
present  a  perversion  of  historical  truth  such  as  it  would
be  almost  impossible  to  surpass,  and  which  throws  a
lurid  light  upon  the  hostility  to  history,  as  well  as  upon
the  power,  of  the  idea  of  a  Catholic  church.  For  some
thing  analogous  see  §  24  d.  Even  although  we  are  not
at  this  distance  of  time  able  to  say  with  certainty  how
far  the  churchmen  who  had  a  hand  in  this  transforma
tion  were  conscious  of  the  falsification  of  history  which
was  being  brought  about  by  their  action,  the  effect  of
it,  at  all  events,  was  that  the  Catholic  church,  while
gratefully  accepting  from  sources  so  questionable  as
in  its  view  the  Clementines  were,  the  statement  of  the
presence  of  Peter  contemporaneously  with  Paul  in
Rome,  at  the  same  time  changed  the  mutually  hostile
attitude  of  the  two  apostles  into  a  friendly  one,  and
gained  from  a  very  hostile  and  embittered  exaggeration
of  the  real  antagonism  between  Peter  and  Paul  the  best
foundation  it  could  show  for  its  claim  to  world-wide
dominion.

(d)  To  many  students  this  combination  appears  from
the  very  outset  inadmissible,  because  they  are  unable
to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  a  falsification  so  gross
and  audacious  as  that  of  representing  Peter  as  having
been  in  Rome  if  this  was  really  not  the  fact.  As
against  this,  however,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
the  statement  in  question  was  not  at  first  put  forward  as
the  assertion  of  a  fact,  but  merely  as  an  incident  in  a
romance  the  authors  of  which  had  not  the  remotest
notion  that  strict  adherence  to  historical  fact  could  be
reasonably  demanded  of  them  and  whose  only  thought
was  as  to  how  they  could  give  fullest  utterance  to  their
hatred  of  Paul.

It  is  Justin,  in  particular,  who  shows  how  this  romance  came
to  he  regarded  as  actual  history  only  by  slow  degrees.  Justin
took  from  it  the  datum  that  Simon  had  actually  appeared  in
Rome,  and  in  fact  he  was  able  to  credit  it  because  it  seemed  to
him  to  be  attested  by  the  statue  which  he  found  in  Rome.  The
other  datum,  that  Peter  also  had  been  in  Rome  and  come  into
conflict  with  Simon,  he  did  not  accept — in  all  probability  because

4621


SIMON  PETER

it  did  not  seem  to  him  to  be  supported  by  the  traditions  with
which  he  had  become  acquainted  in  Rome  itself  (c;>  §§  30^-,
31-4,  37  e,  39  If],  SIMON  MAGUS,  §  ne,f).

How  this  feature  in  the  romances  should  on  the
other  hand  afterwards  have  come  to  be  accepted  as
history  is  not  difficult  to  understand,  when  we  reflect
how  admirably  it  subserved  the  idea  of  the  Catholic
church  and  remember,  further,  that  the  Pauline  features
of  the  figure  of  Simon  had  already  been  greatly  dis
guised  by  the  Gnostic  touches  that  had  been  added  to
them.

(e)  Soltau,  who  does  not  accept  this  whole  combination  never
theless  concedes  (p.  35)  that  the  Simon-legend  if  it  did  not  give
rise  to  that  of  Peter's  Roman  sojourn,  at  all  events  favoured  its
spread  ;  and  Harnack  (above,  §  37</),  who  accepts  Peter's  Roman
sojourn  as  historically  true,  declares  nevertheless  that  the  Simon
legend  had  the  effect  of  causing  Peter's  arrival  in  Rome  to  be
assigned  along  with  that  of  Simon  himself  to  about  42  A.n.
That  mere  ideas,  though  historically  unfounded,  were  enough
to  produce  a  false  representation  that  Peter  had  come  to  Rome
is  assumed  by  Soltau  and  Erbes  (above,  §§  310,  39*')  in  a  process
of  reasoning  which  is  not  nearly  so  simple  or  cogent  as  that  by
inference  from  the  Homilies  and  Recognitions  which  is  now
under  discussion.  Thus  we  need  not  shrink  from  it.  Soltau
(p.  10)  says  further  that  the  Roman  sojourn  of  Peter  is  incredible
also  because  according  to  the  apocryphal  Acts  it  is  full  of  the
wildest  fables  about  the  conflict  with  Simon.  The  combination
we  are  now  contending  for  goes  only  a  single  step  farther  and
finds  in  these  fables  the  foundation  and  not  merely  the  adorn
ments  of  the  unhistorical  statement  that  Peter  had  been  in
Rome.

The  only  assertion  calling  for  serious  attention  here
is  that  which  claims  for  the  tradition  as  to  Peter's

41.  No  counter  R°man fs°jour"  that  jf  aros*  indeP<-'»d-

testimonv ently  of  the  Simon  legend'  (d)

' '* First  of  all, it  is  pointed  out  that  no

Church  father  affirms  that  Peter  and  Paul  came  to  Rome
simultaneously.  We  shall  not  insist,  in  reply,  that
Dionysius  of  Corinth  (above,  §  25^)  is  not  very  far  from
making  this  affirmation.  What  is  more  to  the  point  is
that  neither  also  does  the  Simon-legend  say,  or  need  to
say,  that  Peter's  arrival  at  all  places  was  simultaneous
with  that  of  Simon.  In  fact  it  rather  gives  to  Simon  in
each  case  some  space  of  time  within  which  he  may  win
the  people  over  to  his  side,  and  only  after  this  has
happened  does  it  bring  Peter  upon  the  scene  (cp,  for  the
pre-Catholic  Acts,  above,  §  33«,  I')-  Moreover,  as  soon
as  it  is  Peter  and  Paul  who  have  to  be  dealt  with,  there
come  into  consideration  a  variety  of  historical  data
which  cannot  be  brought  together  at  one  point  of  time
so  easily  as  would  be  the  case  with  incidents  in  a  mere
romance  (above,  §  37</).  Besides,  for  the  Catholic  use
that  is  made  of  this  romance,  it  is  no  longer  a  simul
taneous  arrival  but  merely  some  sort  of  contemporane
ous  activity  of  the  two  apostles  that  is  of  interest.  Thus
even  considerable  intervals  between  the  arrivals  of  the
two  apostles  would  not  of  themselves  be  any  evidence
that  the  allegation  of  their  having  been  in  Rome  together
does  not  rest  upon  the  Simon  romance.

(b]  What  would  be  more  important  would  be  the
existence  of  a  tradition  which  spoke  only  of  the  presence
of  Peter  in  Rome,  without  mentioning  that  of  Paul.
Such  a  tradition  seems  to  be  found  in  Clement  of
Alexandria  ;  but,  as  has  already  been  shown  (above,
§25^),  since  Clement  in  the  connection  in  which  he
was  writing  had  no  occasion  to  mention  Paul,  it  does
not  follow  that  he  was  not  aware  of  his  activity  con
temporaneously  with  Peter.  In  the  pre-Catholic  Acts
(above,  §  33  «)  Paul  sets  out  from  Rome  before  Peter's
arrival  there,  and  is  represented  as  returning  only  after
the  death  of  the  latter.  Here  accordingly  is  a  case
where  we  actually  find  Peter  without  Paul  in  Rome.
Not,  however,  without  Simon  ;  and  this  is  the  im
portant  thing.  In  one  form  or  another  Paul  in  Rome
is  always  by  his  side,  as  a  foe  or  as  a  friend.  There
exists  no  tradition  regarding  Peter  in  Rome,  which
rested  content  with  bringing  him  personally  to  Rome  ;
every  such  tradition  connects  with  his  presence  there
some  declaration  as  to  his  relations  with  Paul.  It  is

4622


SIMON  PETER

this  circumstance  that  gives  so  great  inherent  probability
to  the  supposition  that  the  allegation  of  his  peaceful  co
operation  with  Paul  in  Rome  (which,  even  irrespective
of  the  pseudo-Clementine  Homilies  and  Recognitions,
we  have  already  found  to  be  inadmissible  :  see  §  31  ft)
arises  from  a  transformation  of  the  tradition  as  to  his
conflict  with  Paul  in  the  same  place.

The  transformation  cannot  possibly  have  taken  place  in  the
opposite  direction.  In  such  a  case  the  conflict  with  Simon
would  have  first  begun  to  be  alleged  at  a  date  so  late  as  would
render  it  impossible  that  Simon  could  be  Paul,  Paul  having  by
this  time  come  to  be  held  in  general  reverence.  If,  therefore,
the  transformation  in  this  direction  were  to  be  insisted  on,  it
would  be  necessary  fir>t  of  all  to  set  aside  everything  that  has
been  brought  forward  in  SIMON  MAGUS  (8  $f.)  with  a  view  to
showing  that  Simo:i  is  a  caricature  of  Paul.

(c )  Thus  we  are  precluded  also  from  attaching  value,
as  evidences  for  a  tradition  independent  of  the  Simon
legend,  to  those  passages  of  the  Church  fathers  which
mention  the  contemporaneous  activity  of  Peter  and  Paul
in  Rome  without  at  the  same  time  mentioning  Simon
Magus.

In  those  passages  it  is  already  the  transformed  Simon  legend
which  we  have.  It  can  take  the  form  of  representing  Peter  and
Paul  as  making  common  cause  against  Simon  (so  the  Catholic
Acts,  the  P/u£osi>/>/iui>itna,  etc.  ;  above,  §§  34,  26 d,  c)\  but  it
does  not  need  to  do  so.  Inasmuch  as  on  this  presupposition
Simon  at  once  appears  as  a  Gnostic  merely,  he  loses  for  the
Church  fathers  all  that  independent  interest  which  he  possesses
in  the  Simon  romance.  Moreover,  in  many  cases  the  connection
does  not  admit  of  his  being  mentioned.  Such  passages  accord
ingly  prove  still  less  than  do  the  converse  cases  in  which  Simon
is  spoken  of  as  being  in  Rome  without  Peter  (see  SIMON  MAGUS,
§n,  e,f).

(</)  The  only  kind  of  evidence  that  would  be  con
clusive  in  the  matter,  would  be  the  production  of  a
statement  relating  to  the  presence  of  Peter  in  Rome,
which  could  be  shown  to  belong  to  a  time  when  the
Simon-legend  could  not  yet  have  exercised  an  influence
on  the  shaping  of  the  history.  Such  a  statement,  how
ever,  is  to  be  found  neither  in  Clement  of  Rome  (above,
§  28),  nor  in  any  of  the  other  writers  named  in  §  2<)f.
At  the  same  time,  if  one  reflects  that  the  Simon  legend
could  have  begun  to  exert  its  influence  even  in  its  oral
form  (s.-e  SIMON  M.u;i:s,  §  io<'),  and  thus  during
and  shortly  after  the  lifetime  of  Paul,  it  will  be  seen
that  the  attempt  to  find  a  testimony  to  the  presence  of
Peter  in  Rome  which  shall  be  \\  holly  independent  of  it
must  be  regarded  as  hopeless  from  the  outset.

Only  i  Pet.  offers  any  inducements  to  any  such
attempt  (cp  above,  §  30^').  (a)  In  fact,  however,

42.  Babylon t,his  -epistle can"ot  o"pply.  US wUV
. p  , J  . decisive  answer  that  Rome  is  meant  by

^Rorne'?3  Bab>'lon-  x«ther,  indeed,  it  is  true,
with  a  secure  negative  answer.  Stress
has  often  been  laid  upon  the  consideration  that  the
order  of  the  provinces  to  which  it  is  addressed —
Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia  (i.e.  the  W.  coast
of  Asia  Minor)  and  Bithynia — is  not  a  suitable  one  if
the  epistle  was  written  from  Rome.  But  neither  is  it
suitable  if  Babylon  was  the  place  of  origin  ;  it  is  not
arranged  in  such  a  way  that  the  five  provinces  can  be
brought  into  line  on  any  hypothesis  as  to  the  writer's
view-point.  Yet  neither  does  the  mention  of  Babylon
(013)  contain  the  slightest  hint  that  the  name  is  to  be
taken  in  any  secondary  sense.

The  case  is  quite  different  when  in  4  Ezra  1  i — that  is  to  say,
in  an  apocalypse — Babylon  on  the  Euphrates,  where  Salathiel,
the  father  of  Zerubbabel,  is  living  in  the  thirtieth  year  after  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  i.e.,  in  557  B.C.,  is  named  with  some
sort  of  suggestion  that  the  statement  is  to  be  taken  as  a  veiled
one,  and  that  in  reality,  the  book  having  been  written  towards
the  end  of  the  first  Christian  century,  Rome  ought  to  be  under
stood.  In  like  manner  the  case  is  different  from  that  of  i  Pet.,
if,  according  to  a  Sibylline  prophecy  (0137-142  issyC  [138-143
I59/C])  Xero,  'the  great  king  of  great  Rome  .  .  .  shall  flee  from
Babylon'  (T^?  /oieyoiAiji  'Pui^rfs  /SacriAevs  /ae'ya?  .  .  .  <£evferai
fK  Baj3uAu>i>o«),  and  a  great  star  shall  fall  into  the  sea,  '  and  shall
burn  up  the  deep  sea  and  Babylon  itself  and  the  land  of  Italy'
deal  (^Ae'fci  novroi^  ftaOvv  avTrjV  re  Baj3uAu>i>a  'IraAi'^c  yalav  re).
Here  care  is  taken  by  the  naming  of  Rome  and  Italy  to  warn  the
reader  that  he  is  not  to  suppose  Babylon  on  the  Euphrates  to  be
meant,  just  as  in  Rev.  17  15  by  the  note  that  the  many  waters  on

4623


43.  Babylonia


countries

as  Peter's

mission-field.


SIMON  PETER

which  the  great  whore—  i.e.,  according  to  17  5,  Babylon  —  sits
(17  i)  are  nations,  and  not  literal  waters.

(t>)  In  the  case  of  i  Pet.  the  position  of  matters  is
that  a  decision  as  to  the  presence  of  Peter  in  Rome
cannot  be  gained  by  interpreting  Babylon  one  way  or
other,  but  contrariwise  our  interpretation  of  what  is
intended  by  Babylon  will  be  determined  by  our  inde
pendent  conclusion  on  the  other  point.  If  now  we  bear
in  mind  that  in  Rome  itself,  as  late  as  152  A.D.  ,  Justin
knew  nothing  of  Peter's  having  l>een  there  (above,  §  30^),
and  thus  that  the  Simon-romance  which  brought  Peter
to  Rome  was  not  yet  at  that  date  in  church  circles  taken
for  history,  it  becomes  extremely  improbable  that  this
romance  should  have  been  accepted  in  112  A.D.  by  the
author  of  i  Pet.  (on  the  date  see  CHRISTIAN,  §  8)  and
made  the  basis  of  his  designation  of  the  place  of  writing,
although  it  had  been  in  circulation  in  strict  Jewish
Christian  circles  from  a  time  when  Paul  was  still  alive,
or  at  any  rate  shortly  after  his  death.  If  this  be  so,
then  the  dating  from  Babylon  tells  us  at  once  where
it  was  that  about  112  A.D.  Peter's  chief  activity  was
supposed  to  have  been  exercised  between  his  departure
from  Jerusalem  and  his  death  ;  and  it  tells  us  so  even
if  it  should  so  happen  that  the  Epistle  was  really  after
all  composed  in  Rome.

Thus  we  are  thrown  back  upon  the  scattered  notices
referred  to  above  (§  24)  regarding  the  various  fields  of

acti,vity> T* from I5ome> "hich
tradition has assigned to Peter.

(a)  Among  all  these,  only  Babyloniaand
perhaps  also  the  Black  Sea  coast  can
be  considered  seriously.  According
to  Lipsius  (1611613)  the  tradition  that
Peter  laboured  along  with  his  brother  Andrew  on  the
shores  of  the  Black  Sea  goes  as  far  back  as  to  the  second
century.  i  Pet.,  however,  in  its  allusion  to  Babylon  as
a  mission-field  of  Peter  takes  us  still  farther  back  than
any  of  the  apocryphal  Acts  of  the  Apostles  made  use
of  by  Lipsius.

(b]  It  is  specially  interesting  to  observe  that  according
to  late  redactions  (for  example,  in  Epiphanius  Monachus
in  the  gth  cent.) Peter  takes  leave  of  Andrew  in  order
to  travel  westward,  and  that  thereafter  the  other  apostle
called Simon, surnamed Zelotes or the Canaanite,
suddenly  appears  as  Andrew's  companion. The  journey
into  the  West  plainly  originates  in  the  wish  to  bring  the
tradition  of  Peter's  activity  in  Asia  into  connection  with
that  regarding  his  labours  in Rome. The  appearance
of  the  second  Simon  on the  other  hand, points  to  a
substitution  for  Simon  Peter. Whilst  at  first  there  was
no  idea  that  any  other  than  Simon  Peter  was  intended,
it  was  inevitable,  as  soon  as  the  later  idea  of  his  de
parture  for  the  West  had  come  to  be  accepted,  that  the
Simon who was named in the  subsequent course  of
these  tales  of  the  apostles  should  be  taken  to  be  Simon
the  Canaanite.

(c)  The  same  vacillation  between  the  names  of  Peter
and  the  Canaanite  recurs  also  in  what  is  said  about
Babylonia. According  to  the  Acts  of  Judas  Thadda-us,
Peter  laboured  with  Judas  in  (Syria  and)  Mesopotamia  ;
according  to  other  accounts  (chiefly  western), Simon
the  Canaanite  laboured  along  with  Judas  in  Babylonia
as  well  as  in  Persia,  and  they  suffer  martyrdom  together
in  Suanir  in  Colchis. By  this  last  statement  the  tradi
tion as  to  Babylonia  and  Persia  is  thus  brought  into
combination  with  that  as  to  the  coast  lands  of  the  Black
Sea  (above,  a  ). Lipsius  conjectures  that  here  also  Simon
the  Canaanite  was  erroneously  taken  for  Simon  Peter
after  the  triumph  of  the  tradition  that  Peter  had  laboured
in  Rome  (i.  27  30611-613,  ii.  2i45/!  175-177).

(</)  Seufert  (ZIl'T,  1885,  I50./C)  urges  against  this,  that  the
combination  would  be  convincing  only  if  evidence  for  the
Babylonian  sojourn  of  Peter  earlier  than  the  date  of  i  Pet.
be  adduced  ;  otherwise,  it  remains  possible  that  in  i  Pet.  Rc.me
is  meant  by  Babylon,  and  thus  that  Peter's  sojourn  in  Rome
was  at  that  time  presupposed,  but  that  afterwards  in  conse
quence  of  a  literal  interpretation  of  i  Pet.  613  his  place  _  of
sojourn  was  removed  to  Babylon,  while  at  a  still  later  date,  with

4624


SIMON  PETER

a  view  to  harmony  with  the  tradition  of  his  Roman  sojourn,
Simon  the  Canaanite  was  put  in  his  place  as  sojourning  in
Babylon.  We  shall  not  here  urge  how  difficult  must  at  any
time  have  been  a  literal  interpretation  of  '  Kabylon '  in  i  Pet.
613,  if  Rome  had  already  come  to' be  so  generally  accepted  as
the  scene  of  Peter's  labours,  that  the  author  could  have  counted
on  being  understood,  although  he  chose  to  designate  it  by  the
word  Babylon.  The  essential  point  is  this :  on  the  view  which
is  being  here  upheld,  Babylon  must  have  been  meant  literally
by  the  author  of  i  Pet.,  because  at  that  early  date  he  had  not
as  yet  any  idea  of  Peter  as  having  ever  been  in  Rome  ;  in
harmony  with  this  view  are  those  apocryphal  Acts  which  repre
sent  him  as  labouring  in  Babylonia,  so  that  the  substitution  of
Simon  the  Canaanite  in  his  place  is  found  to  be  due  to  a  subse
quent  alteration.

Even  if  Babylonia  was  Peter's  most  important  field
of  labour,  it  does  not  by  any  means  immediately  follow

Wh H'd  l'lat ^e ^'e<^  tnere- If it is certain
? „ that  he  did  not  die  in  Rome,  there  is

Jr6u6r  C116  ' n  Ai  r  i  •  11

all  the  more  reason  for  asking  whether
any  other  place  can  be  named  with  any  probability.

(«)  Erbes  (Z.tsckr.  f.  Kirchcngesch.  22,  1901,  180-
219)  names  Jerusalem.

In  the  pre-Catholic  Acts  it  is  not  Nero  who  sentences  Peter
to  death  but  the  city-prefect  Agrippa.  By  Agrippa,  it  is  argued,
cannot  be  intended  the  M.  Vipsanius  Agrippa  who  died  in
12  B.C.  Along  with  Agrippa  is  mentioned,  as  a  persecutor  of
Peter,  the  emperor's  friend  Albinus,  whose  wife  withdrew  her
self  from  his  society  from  motives  of  chastity  (above,  §  33^).
In  this  Albinus  Erbes  discerns  the  procurator  Albinus  who
succeeded  Festus  in  Judaea  in  62  A.D.,  and  who  had  a  faithful
high-toned  wife  ;  while  Agrippa  on  the  other  hand  he  identifies
with  King  Agrippa  II.  who  was  master  of  north-eastern  Palestine
from  53  to  100  A.D.  (see  HEROD,  §  13).  King  Agrippa  is  not
known  to  have  been  married,  and  Erbes  presumes  his  domestic
circumstances  to  have  been  similar  to  those  of  the  Agrippa  of
the  pre-Catholic  Acts.  It  is  in  Palestine  only,  not  in  Rome,
that  the  two  men  can  be  shown  to  have  been  contemporaries;
the  city-prefect  of  Rome  in  a  Latin  recension  of  the  Passio
Petri  et  Paul!  (chap.  13,  in  Acta  Apast.  Apocr.  1  233  ;  also,  we
add,  in  cod.  M  of  the  principal  form  of  this  Passio  Petri  et  Pauli
[chap.  58]  discussed  abos'e,  §  32 /'  i)  is  named  not  Agrippa  but
Clement.  But  further,  King  Agrippa  II.  has  been  confused
with  Herod  Agrippa  I.  who,  according  to  Acts  123,  cast  Peter
into  prison  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  his  liberation  from  this  captivity,
Krbes  thinks,  which  constitutes  the  basis  of  what  is  related  in
the  Catholic  and  pre-Catholic  Acts  as  to  Peter's  flight  from
Rome  (above,  §§  34,4,',  33^)-  As  to  his  death,  on  the  other  hand,
Krbes  conjectures  that  in  reality  Peter  suffered  crucifixion  under
Albinus  towards  the  end  of  64  A.D.,  and  that  Mt.  2^34  contains
an  allusion  to  this  fact.  Among  the  messengers  of  Jesus  of
whom  he  says  to  the  Jews,  'some  of  them  shall  ye  kill,'  allusion
is  made  to  James  the  elder  (Acts  12  2)  :  it  is  Paul  who  is  alluded
to  in  the  words  'some  of  thorn  shall  ye  scourge  in  your  syna
gogues  and  persecute  from  city  to  city,"  and  he  whom  the  Jews
'shall  crucify'  is  not  the  second  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  Simeon
the  son  of  Clopas,  whose  crucifixion  (under  Trajan,  according
to  Hegesippus  in  Euseb.,  II K  iii.  32?)  falls  too  late  to  allow
the  pos-ibility  of  its  being  referred  to  in  Mt.,  but  Simon  Peter.
Erbes,  that  is  to  say,  accepts  as  historical  the  statement  which
Eusebius  (f/E3n)  introduces  with  a  Adyos  (care'^et  —  on  the
force  of  which  formula  see  above,  §  28  c)—  that  after  the  death
of  James  the  Just  in  62  A.D.,  all  the  surviving  apostles  met  in
Jerusalem  in  order  to  choose  a  successor  to  James — namely  the
Simeon  referred  to  above.  Peter  after  this  continued  in  Jeru
salem  until  the  outbreak  of  Nero's  persecution  of  the  Christians
in  Rome,  and  in  Jerusalem  as  a  result  of  the  activity  aroused
in  zealous  procurators  by  this  persecution,  he  was  crucified  by
Albinus.  It  was  in  this  manner,  it  is  urged,  that  it  became
possible  for  Peter  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  Nero's  victims,  and
his  death  to  be  at  the  same  time  transferred  erroneously  to
Rome.  The  twofold  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  first  by  Titus
and  afterwards  by  Hadrian,  explains  how  it  was  possible  that
the  fact  of  its  having  been  the  scene  of  Peter's  death  should
pass  out  of  memory.  The  whole  combination,  however,  not
withstanding  other  arguments,  brought  by  Erbes  to  its  support,
which  cannot  be  recapitulated  here,  is  much  too  bold  for  ac
ceptance.

(^)  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the
supposition  already  set  forth  (§§  28 /,  31^),  that  Peter
met  liis  death  in  an  unknown  and  obscure  place,
perhaps  without  legal  process,  perhaps  on  a  journey,
perhaps  without  any  companion,  so  that  no  tradition
regarding  it  survived  which  could  have  asserted  itself
against  the  steadily  advancing  belief  that  he  had  died
in  Rome.  Here  accordingly  we  must  rest,  as  we  have
no  more  detailed  accounts,  in  particular  none  from
Clement  of  Rome,  from  whom  we  should  most  naturally
have  expected  them.  When  Soltau  lays  it  down  (pp.
23  25)  that  no  one  disputes  the  martyrdom  of  Peter  in
4625


SIMON  PETER

the time  of  the  Xeronian  persecution, though it was
not  in  Rome,  the  date  is  by  no  means  to  "be  accepted.

But  neither  have  we  any  other  means  of  learning  the  date  of
Peter's  death.  in  particular,  we  may  not  say  with  Krenkel
(Josephus  u.  Luctis,  1894,  p.  183,  n.  3)  that  he  must  have  died
before  Paul's  last  journey  to  Jerusalem  because  Paul,  according
to  Acts  21  18,  at  that  date  found  no  one  but  James  at  the  head  of
the  Church  there.

That Peter never  was in Rome  has already been

inferred  from  the  NT  and  the  Church  fathers  (§31).

45.  Conclusion  Discussion of the apocryphal Acts

,„  ,rt  TJ  , , showed,  further, that  Peters  presence

elS \iO  i  C  uCi  S • T ,  , . ,,.

activity  and m  was  PresuPPosed  m  Church

death  outside  circ,les  not  "^  atter  '7°  A.D.  but

f  T,0i__4  perhaps  even  from  as  earlv  a  date  as

OI  ir clJ.eSLin6. ,-  i  i

160  A.D. ,  that  the  purpose  of  his
presence  there  is  to  be  sought  entirely  in  the  conflict
with  Simon  Magus  (and  in  the  martyrdom),  and  also,
so  far  as  the  Catholic  Acts  are  concerned,  in  the  desire
to  bring  into  prominence  his  harmonious  accord  with
Paul  (§  39).  Not  till  w_e  came  to  the  pseudo-Clementine
Homilies  and  Recognitions,  however,  were  we  able  to
perceive  that  under  the  name  of  Simon  it  was  originally
Paul  that  was  controverted,  and  that  nothing  but  the
fundamental  idea  of  the  Simon-romance  that  Peter  must
necessarily  follow  'Simon'  every  where  »gave  rise  to  the
allegation  that  he  had  come  to  Rome  also.  It  is  these
writings,  moreover,  that  first  point  the  way  clearly  to  a
recognition  of  the  fact  that  in  the  apocryphal  Acts  also
the  figure  of  Simon  has  an  anti-Pauline  basis  (SiMox
MAGUS,  §  5).  At  the  same  time  it  was  also  through
the  Homilies  and  Recognitions  that  we  first  became
aware  that  the  harmonious  co-operation  of  Paul  with
Peter  in  Rome  was  a  fundamentally  altered  form  of
their  hostile  meeting  in  Rome  reported  in  the  romance
— an  alteration  made  in  the  interests  of  the  Catholic
church.  Lastly,  they  showed  us  that  this  romance
had  already  arisen  and  begun  to  take  shape  in  the
lifetime  of  Paul  and  the  period  immediately  follow
ing.  In  church  circles,  however,  it  did  not  find  ac
ceptance  until  Gnostic  features  also  had  been  given  to
Simon  and  thereby  the  Pauline  features  had  been  so
greatly  obscured  that  it  became  possible  to  assume  a
harmonious  instead  of  a  hostile  conjunction  of  Paul  with
Peter  in  Rome.  Thus  we  see  that  the  key  to  the  whole
riddle  is  found  only  in  the  Homilies  and  Recognitions,
and  how  great  is  the  injustice  done  to  themselves  in
the  complete  neglect  of  these  by  those  scholars,  like
Erbes  and  Soltau,  who  seek  to  reach  the  right  con
clusion  that  Peter  never  was  in  Rome  by  other  and  much
less  conclusive  arguments,  or  who  like  Harnack  accept
the  tradition  of  the  presence  of  Peter  in  Rome  as  true
history.

But  also  the  anti-Pauline  basis  of  the  Acta  Petri  is  com
pletely  misknown  when  Carl  Schmidt  (below,  g  49),  88-90,  arguing
correctly  from  the  view  of  Harnack,  declares  it  to  be  an  '  assured
result '  that  the  whole  legend  contained  in  it  about  the  meeting
between  Simon  Magus  and  Peter  has  been  derived  by  the  author
from  combination  of  what  Justin  says  about  Simon  with  the  fact  of
the  Roman  martyrdom  of  Peter,  adding  that  Simon  is  exclusively
the  magician,  and  that  the  author  remains  without  any  idea
that  Paul  is  concealed  under  this  mask,  because  the  Pseudo-
Clementines  were  not  yet  in  existence.

In  truth  the  interest  of  the  Catholic  church  succeeded

very  well, thanks  to  great skill, persistence, and un-

46 Imtiort scruPu'os't}'' m obscuring the actual

". facts  of  the  case  (cp  the  suppression  of

, . T>  the  tradition  according  to  which  Barnabas

Ch h was  t^ie  ^rst Preacner  °f  tne  §?osPel  >n
Rome; BARNABAS, §  4); yet  it  is  not
wholly  impossible  for  us  to  bring  them  again  to  light.

Still,  the  whole  question,  after  all,  is  a  purely  historical
one.  A  claim  on  the  part  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  to
supreme  authority  over  the  world  would  not  be
established  even  if  it  were  a  fact  that  Peter  had  been  in
Rome  or  that  Mt.  16i8/.  as  well  as  Lk.  2232  or  Jn.
21 15-17  were  genuine.  In  §  z&g,  h  it  has  been  shown
how  late  was  the  date  at  which  Peter  came  to  be

4626


SIMON  PETER


SIMRI


regarded  as  bishop  of  Rome  in  spite  of  this  pre
supposition.  In  Peter's  lifetime  there  were  no
monarchical  bishops  at  all  (MINISTRY,  §§  46^,  47),  and
even  if  there  had  been,  his  office  was  that  of  an  apostle,
never  that  of  bishop.  And  even  if  he  had  been  bishop,
his  special  dignity  would  not  have  passed  over  to  his
successor  ;  for  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  apostolical
succession  was  not  believed  in  till  a  date  long  after  the
lifetime  of  Peter  (MINISTRY,  §  37),  it  is  in  itself  an
empty  doctrine.  Tertullian  has  well  expressed  this  as
against  Calixtus  of  Rome  (Pudic.  21,  middle)  :  '  qualis
es,  evertens  atque  commutans  manifestam  domini
intentionem  personaliter  hoc  [Mt.  16 18/!]  Petro  con-
ferentem  ?'

Only  a  brief  account  of  later  traditions  can  be  given. The

wife  of  Peter  (i  Cor.  i>4./0  is  said  to  have  been  a  daughter  of

Aristobulus, brother  of  Barnabas. Peter by

47.  Later prayer  inflicts  gout  on  his  own  daughter  Petro-

traditiOHS.  "'"a  i"  order  to  preserve  her  from  danger  with
which  she  is  threatened  on  account  of  her  beauty.
To  show  that  he  has  the  power  to  do  so  he  heals  her,  but
forthwith  permits  the  malady  to  return.  This  is  related  in  a
Coptic  fragment  with  the  subscription  7rpa£«ts  IleVpov  (discussed
by  Carl  Schmidt  [below,  §  49],  1-25  and  already  in  Sh'A  U',  1896,
p.  841  f.)  Thus  the  conjecture  of  Lipsius  (ii.  1203-206)  is  con
firmed  that  the  Acts  of  Nereus  and  Achilles  and  the  Acts  of
Philip  from  which  he  adduces  the  same  story  derived  it  from
the  old  Trpafei?  llerpov.  Vet  the  Coptic  fragment  gives  the
beginning  to  the  effect  that  a  heathen,  Ptolema;us,  had  carried
off  the  daughter  of  Peter  (here  she  does  not  yet  bear  the  name
'  Petronilla  '),  but  brought  her  back  when  she  had  lost  her  health.
Clement  of  Alexandria  clearly  knew  the  story,  as  he  says  (Strom.
36,  §  52,  p.  535,  ed.  Potter;  also  up.  Eus.  HE'rn.  30  i),  'for
Peter  indeed  and  Philip  both  became  fathers,'  and  only  with  re
gard  to  Philip  adds,  '  Philip  also  gave  his  daughters  to  husbands  '
(see  PHILIP,  §  4  c,  col.  3699).  According  to  Strom.  7  u,
§  63,  p.  869  (ap.  Eus.  HE  iii.  30  2)  Peter's  wife  suffered
martyrdom  before  his  eyes.  He  himself  is  said  to  have  been
bald  (cp  the  '  tonsura  Petri ').  For  a  detailed  description  of  his
appearance,  from  John  Malalas  after  older  authorities,  see
Lipsius,  ii.  1213,  n.  i.  Of  the  miracles  of  Peter  reference  may
be  made  here  to  that  mentioned  in  the  '  Acta  Petri  et  Andreae '
according  to  which,  in  order  to  convince  a  certain  rich  man
named  Onesiphorus  of  the  truth  of  Christianity,  he  causes  a
camel  to  go  twice  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  and  afterwards,
again  twice,  another  camel  with  a  woman  of  loose  character  on
its  back.

We  possess  no  genuine  writings  of  Peter  ;  nor  can  the  speeches
attributed  to  him  in  Acts  lay  any  claim  to  authenticity  notwith
standing  their  archaic  colouring  (§  $g,  ACTS,

48.  Writings  §  M). On  the  Canonical  Epistles  see  PETER
attributed (EPISTLES), and CHRISTIAN, § 8  ; also, on

to  Peter  2  Pet->  a')ove>  §  24rt-  As  apocryphal  writings
of  Peter,  a  book  of  Acts  (not,  however,  claiming
to  be  by  him),  a  Gospel,  a  'Preaching'  (KrjpvyMcO  and  an
Apocalypse  are  enumerated  by  Eusebius  (H  L  iii.  3  2).  Cp
APOCRYPHA,  §§  2(3  4  30 1  31 2  ;  Zahn,  Gesch.  d.  NTlichen
Kanons,  2742-751,  810-832;  Harnack,  ACL,  ii.  1470-475,
622-625.  On  the  '  Preaching '  of  Peter  see  also  above,  §  25  e.
Of  the  gospel  of  Peter  the  second  half  is  fully  considered  under
RESUKKECTIOX-NAKRATIVES,  §  5  et  passim.  Lastly,  mention
must  be  made  of  the  Epistle  of  Peter  to  James  prefixed  to  the
pseudo-Clementine  Homilies,  on  which  see  SIMON  MAGUS,

§  15-

On  the  life  of  Peter  generally  see  the  Bible  Dictionaries ;  also

Harnack in EB$) and the literature relating to  the  life  of

Jesus  and the  apostolic  age. Of  Catholic

49.  Literature,  accounts may  be  named  (the very  title  is

characteristic)  that  of  Janvier,  Histoire  tie
St.  Pierre,  prince  lies  apotres  et  premier  pape  (Tours,  1902).
Against  the  Roman  sojourn  of  Peter  :  Baur,  Tub,  Ztschr.  f.
Theol.,  1831  d,  pp.  136-206,  and  Paultis,  1845,  PP-  212-243  =
t">  1,  1866,  pp.  243-272;  Lipsius,  Chronol.  der  ro'm.  BischSfe,
1869,  especially  pp.  162-167,  Quellen  der  rSm.  Petrussage,  1872,
JPT,  1876,  pp.  561-645,  and  Apokr.  Ap. -Gesch.  ii.  1,1887;
'Hausrath,  NTlicke  Zt.-gesch.  3,  1874,  PP-  326-346  =  '2»,  1877,
pp.  131-153;  Zeller,  ZIl'T,  1876,  pp.  31-56;  Erbes,  TU  19i,
'  Todestage  d.  Paulus  u.  Petrus,'  1899,  anc<  Z.f.  Kirchengesch.
22,  IQOI,  pp.  1-47,  161-224;  Soltau,  Petrus  in  Rom,  in  '  Samm-
lung  gemeinverstandl.  wissensch.  Vortrage'  edd.  Virchow  and
Holtzendorff,  Hft.  349  =  Neue  Folge,  Serie  15,  1900,  pp.  469-509.
In  support  of  the  Roman  sojourn  of  Peter  see  Hilgenfeld,  ZWT,
1872,  pp.  349-372;  1876,  pp.  57-80;  1877,  pp.  486-508;  Joh.
Delitzsch,  St.  A'r.  1874,  pp.  213-260;  Schmid  (Roman  Cath.),
Petrus  in  Rom,  Lucerne,  1879;  Lightfoot,  Apostolic  Fathers
\.  (S.  Clement  of  Rome),  2481-502  (' S.  Peter  in  Rome')  and
also  1  201-345  (' Early  Roman  Succession');  Harnack,  ACL  ii.
(  =  Chronol.)  1240-243,  703-710  et  passim;  Clemen,  Preuss.
Jahrbb.  106  (Oct.-Dec.  1901)  405-417;  Kneller,  Z.  f.  katliol.
Theol.  1902,  pp.  33-69,  225-246,  and  (against  Erbes)  351-36:  ;
Carl  Schmidt,  'Die  alien  Petnisakten,'  in  tTU  24  (  =  Neue
Folge  ix)  i,  1003  (a  work  which  did  not  appear  until  the  present
article  was  already  in  print).  Cp  also  SIMON  MAGUS,  §  15.

P.  VV.  S.

4627


SIMRI  POP'),  i  Ch.  26 10  AV,  RV  SHIMRI  (<j.r.).

SIN  ("D;  for  (S's  readings  see  below)  an  Egyptian
city,  Ez.  30 15:  'and  I.  will  pour  my  fury  upon  Sin
(AVmK-,  Pelusium),  the  strength  of  Egypt.'  It  stands
parallel  to  Noph-Memphis  (r.  13),  Pathros,  Zoan-Tanis
and  No-Thebes  (v.  14),  in  direct  parallelism  to  No
(Cornill  :  Noph-Memphis  after  (5).  Verse  16  groups
together  Sin  (but  © — except  Q  which  has  Zai's  as  in
v.  15 — Syene,  and  thus  with  great  probability  Cornill,
pa ;  see  SYENE),  No,  and  Noph  ;  in  w.  17  f.  less
important  cities  are  enumerated.  As  in  v.  16  <J5  seems
to  be  right,  only  v.  15  remains  for  Sin.  Nothing  can
be  concluded  from  the  parallelisms,  especially  because
the  text  (No  occurs  3  times  in  the  present  Hebrew  text)
has  been  corrupted  in  several  places,  except  that  Sin
must  have  been  a  very  important  city  ;  in  view  of  the
parallelism  with  Memphis  (<5,  see  above),  it  would  seem
to  belong  to  northern  Egypt.  More  important  is  the
designation  'strength  (RV  stronghold,  T'IJ;C)  of  Egypt,'
which  seems  to  point  to  the  eastern  frontier  of  the  Delta.
<SB  renders  'Zatv  (accusative  of  Sais  or  transliteration  ?),
(SA  favii'  (of  course  incorrectly,  as  Tanis  is  ZOAN,  q.v. ),
Vg.  Pelusium.  Modern  scholars  have  always  adhered
to  the  Vulgate's  identification  with  Pelusium,  because
Pelusium  would  meet  the  requirements  best  and  because
of  the  Aramaic  word  sfydn,  Syriac  s'ydna  '  mud,'  which
seemed  to  furnish  the  Semitic  equivalent  for  the  Greek
IlrjXovffiov — i.e.,  mud-city  (cp  Lutetia).  This  identi
fication  has  been  often  repeated  by  Egyptologists  (still
by  Steindorff,  Beitrdge  zur  Assyr.  1599  as  late  as  1890),
but  on  the  basis  of  erroneous  conclusions  Hrugsch  (Diet.
Geogr.  1091  ;  cp  Dtimichen,  Gesch.  Aeg.  263)  had
assumed  that  Coptic  ome,  'dirt,  mud,'  furnished  the
etymology  for  the  great  fortified  frontier-city  Ame(t),
and  that  the  latter,  consequently,  was  Pelusium.  The
city  in  question — Amc(t)1 — had  its  official  etymology
rather  from  a  word  meaning  '  prince  of  Lower  Egypt ' ;
but  this  might  have  been  artificial.  The  city  itself
was,  however,  discovered  by  the  excavations  and  investi
gations  of  Petrie  and  Griffith,  at  the  modern  Nebisheh,
8  miles  SE  of  Tanis;  cp  Petrie,  Tunis  II.  (On  the
proposed  identification  with  Tahpanhes,  see  TAH-
PANHES.  )  For  the  identification  Pelusium-Sin  there
remains  only  the  fact  that  Pelusium  (or  a  fort  near
it?)  is  called  by  some  Arabic  sources  (et)-  Tlneh  (i.e.,
piece  of  clay,  lump  of  mud)  ;  but  this  seems  to  be
only  a  translation  of  the  Greek  name  or  a  popular
etymology  of  Pelusium  which  also  Strabo  (803)  derives
from  the  muddy  surroundings.-  At  any  rate,  a  com
parison  of  the  words  Sin  or  the  Aramaic  s'vdn  with
Arabic  fin  is  inadmissible  for  the  Semitist.  Pelusium,
besides,  does  not  seem  to  have  had  any  importance
before  Greek  times;  Herodotus  (2 141,  etc.)  knows
it  as  the  entrance  to  Egypt,  and  in  this  capacity  it
appears  in  many  Greek  writers  ;  but  no  hieroglyphic
name  for  it  has  been  found  so  far,  and  it  is  not  unlikely
that  cities  more  to  the  East  (see  above  on  Amet-
Neblsheh)  had  formerly  the  strategic  position  of  Pelu
sium.  According  to  Strabo  (803),  Pelusium  was  20  m.
distant  from  the  sea  ;  in  his  time  it  was  much  decayed,
although  later  it  was  still  the  seat  of  a  Coptic  bishop.
The  Coptic  name  was  nepe/woyN.  Arabic  Far(a}ma.
The  easternmost  branch  of  the  Nile  was  known  as
the  Pelusiac  ;  the  Pelusiac  mouth  is  now  dried  up  com
pletely,  and  the  insignificant  ruins  of  the  ancient  city  are
situated  in  the  desert.3

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  popular  identifica
tion  with  Pelusium  rests  on  very  feeble  grounds.  Jerome
(see  above)  was  most  likely  guided  by  the  Aramaic


1  The  ambiguous  letter


lad  here  the  value  of  Aleph,  to


judge  from  demotic  transcriptions.

'-  Other  classical  writers  think  of  mythical  persons  such  as
Peleus,  Pelusius,  etc.  See  Wiedemann's  excellent  commentary
on  Herodotus  (  p.  89).

3  On  these  and  the  history  of  the  city  see  Wiedemann,  tit  stipr.

4628


SIN, WILDERNESS  OF

etymology  given  in  his  time  to  the  old  name  by  Jewish
scholars.  It  seems  quite  plausible  that  Ezekiel's  Sin
was  a  fortress  similar  to  (perhaps  not  very  far  from)
Pelusium,  but  of  a  somewhat  ephemeral  importance.  In
the  critical  sixth  century  B.C.  ,  fortifications  and  garrisons
along  the  entrance  to  Egypt  between  the  sea  and  the
modern  Ballah-lakes  seem  to  have  changed  consider
ably,  and  even  before  the  great  revolution  caused  by
the  Persian  conquest  in  525  B.C.,  the  withdrawal  of  the
large  garrison  to  a  better  location  may  have  reduced  a
populous  city  to  the  position  of  an  obscure  village.
This  must  have  been  the  case  with  Ezekiel's  Sin,  as  (5
could  no  longer  identify  it.1  w.  M.  M.

[Cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Ezek.  29  10  30  14-16,  where  an  underlying
&N'<y  is  supposed.  That  Ezekiel's  prophecies  have  been  worked
over  by  a  redactor  who  changed  the  geographical  setting,  is
pointed  out  in  PROPHET,  §  27.  The  '  Shunem '  supposed  to  be
referred  to  would  be  that  in  the  Negeb.  See  SHUNEM.]

SIN,  WILDERNESS  OF  (}'D  T3n»),  Ex.  16 1.  etc.
See  GEOGRAPHY,  §  7,  and  WANDERINGS.

SIN  OFFERING  (TINGR),  Lev.  4 3,  etc.  See
SACRIFICE,  §§  z'&ff.

SINAI  AND  HOREB

Two  names  (§  i).  Hebrew  traditions  (§  \of.\

Cosmological  theory  (§  2).  Oldest  Arab,  civilisation  (§  12).

Hearing  on  Horeb-Sinai  (§  3).  Moses  story  (§  13).

Babylon  and  Egypt  (§  4).  Mount  variously  placed  (§§  14-

Musri  (§  5).  1 6).

Minaeans  and  Saba;ans  (§  6).  Early  sacred  places  (§  17).

Magan  and  Meluha  (§  7).  Serbal  and  J.  Musfi  (§  18).

Ainarna  period  (§  8).  Gal.  4  25  (§  19).

Ma'  in  (§  9).  Various  views  (§  20).

Sinai  is  the  usual  name  for  the  mountain  where,
according  to  one  tradition,  Yahwe  had  his  seat  and
where,  accordingly,  Moses  received  the  divine  com
mands.  Sinai  is,  therefore,  the  mountain  of  the  giving
of  the  law.

Even  the  most  superficial observation  does  not  fail

to  note  that  the  mountain  where  Yahwe  dwells  has  also

1 The  two  anotner name — Horeb. In pre-critical

'  names  da^s  the  explanat'on  offered  and  accepted
was  either  that  Horeb  was  the  name  of
the  whole  range  and  Sinai  that  of  the  individual
mountain,  or,  alternatively,  that  Horeb  designated  the
northern  part  of  the  range  and  Sinai  the  southern,  and
more  especially  the  highest  point  of  this.  Criticism
shows  that  the  various  sources  can  be  sharply  dis
tinguished,  (a)  Horeb  is  the  name  of  the  mountain  where
Yahwe  has  his  seat  in  E  (the  principal  passage  is  Ex.
3 1  ;  next  come  176,  where  it  occurs  in  a  passage  of  the
nature  of  a  gloss,  and  336.  In  the  last  cited  passage,
however,  the  words  'from  Mt.  Horeb"-  are  out  of
place,  having  been  introduced  into  the  text  from  the
margin;  it  properly  belongs  to  the  E  section  887-11,
and  more  particularly  to  v.  g  :  '  when  Moses  entered
into  the  tent  the  pillar  of  cloud  descended  from  Mount
Horeb  and  stood  at  the  door  of  the  tent').  In  this  as
elsewhere  E  is  followed  by  D,  and  the  mountain  is
called  Horeb  throughout  in  Dt.  (16  4  10  etc. )  except  in
the  older  non-deuteronomic  song  (882),  the  opening
portion  of  which  is  a  counterpart  to  the  Song  of  Deborah
(Judg.  53f.,  cp  Ps.  68).  (/;)  On  the  other  hand  the
mountain  of  Yahwe  is  called  Sinai — generally  Mt.  Sinai
('rain)— in  J  (Ex.  19n344)  and  P  (Ex.  16i  24 16
342832  Lev.25i  26462734).  A  'wilderness  of  Sinai '
(TO  naiD)  is  spoken  of  only  in  P  (Ex.  19i/  Lev.  738
Nu.  1 1 19  9i).  This  is  in  agreement  with  the  fact  that
Sinai  came  to  be  the  more  usual  name,  the  later  form
of  the  tradition  having  as  usual  gained  the  upper  hand.

We  have  no  information  from  the  older  times  regard
ing  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula  and  the  adjacent  parts  (see

1  <S's  reading  SaTs  (*»a)  for  pa  would  furnish  a  good  emend
ation,  but  is  forbidden  by  the  place  being  described  as  a  fortress.

-  3Tin  iria.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Hebrew  corresponding
to  RV's  'onward.'


148


4629


SINAI  AND  HOREB

below),  and  it  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  speak  with
any  definiteness  as  to  the  relative  frequency  of  the  two
names  or  their  connotations.  On  the  other  hand,  we
are  able  to  arrive  at  a  quite  clear  perception  of  the  idea
that  was  connected  with  their  use  in  the  circle  of  legend
and  of  the  facts  which  caused  the  change  of  usage.

In  the  thought  of  the  ancient  East  every  land  that
can  be  looked  upon  as  a  geographical  or  political  unity

2.  Cosmological  ~*n(\  s?  also  ' th^  pro"lised  land  '~^'
theorv regarded  as  a  reflected image of  the

expounded earth  and  of  the  cosmos  (KA  r(3)  J76) :
the  points  which  fix  the  limits  of  the

earth  as  a  whole  must,  therefore,  reappear  also  in  the
lesser  cosmos,  the  country,  and  once  more,  again,  in
the  district.  It  is  precisely  by  this  that  the  land  is
shown  to  be  a  natural  unity — i.e.,  a  unity  determined
and  ordained  by  God.  According  as  a  twofold  or  a
fourfold  division  is  adopted,  the  earth  is  denned  by  two
or  four  points  :  E.  and  W. ,  or  N.  and  S. ,  or  else  E. ,
S. ,  W. ,  and  N.  So  also  the  year  and  the  day  are
divided  into  two  halves  or  four  quarters  in  accordance
with  the  corresponding  points  in  the  course  of  the  sun.
Any  one  of  these  two  or  four  points  can  be  taken  as  the
beginning  of  the  year  or  of  the  course  of  the  sun  ;  the
year  can  begin  in  spring  as  in  Babylon,  or  in  winter  as
with  us  (following  Egyptian- Roman  reckoning),  in
autumn  as  in  the  time  before  the  rise  of  Babylon  (end
of  the  third  millenium  B.C.)  in  Hither  Asia,  and,  there
fore,  with  the  Canaanites  and  the  Israelites  ;  lastly,  in
summer.  The  beginning  selected  corresponds  with  the
nature  of  the  divinity  who  is  principally  worshipped.
Because  Marduk  is  the  god  of  spring  the  year  is  held  to
begin  with  spring,  and  because  in  the  W.  the  western
(i.e.,  the  autumn)  god  prevails,  an  autumn  new  year
prevails  in  western  lands,  including  Canaan,  as  long  as
there  is  independence.

In  this  connection  between  the  year — i.e. ,  the  course
of  the  sun  —  and  geographical  conceptions  we  can
already  discern  the  essential  character  of  all  oriental
religion  and  science,  which  is  to  regard  all  that  is  and
all  that  happens  as  flowing  from  the  activity  of  the
deity.  But  the  deity  reveals  himself  primarily  and
before  aught  else  in  the  heavenly  bodies  and  their
motions  ;  for  the  deities  of  Babylon  and  of  all  Hither
Asia — as  the  OT  itself  abundantly  shows — without  ex
ception  bear  an  astral  character.1  The  heavenly  bodies
which  most  plainly  reflect  the  deity  in  its  working,  in
other  words  the  most  conspicuous  forms  of  the  divine
manifestation,  or,  in  ordinary  language,  the  gods  prin
cipally  worshipped  are  the  moon,  the  sun,  and  the  five
planets.  Their  periods  of  revolution  mark  the  divisions
of  time — month,  year,  and  larger  cycles — and  compel
attention  by  their  importance  for  the  course  of  natural
life  (Gen.  1 14  822).  In  the  Babylonian  view  of  these
seven  great  divinities  the  planet  Venus  is  associated
with  the  moon  and  the  sun,  so  that  the  three  together
become  rulers  of  the  Zodiac  (the  supuk  same — i.e.,  the
highway  of  heaven,  along  which  the  seven  travel).
'  He  (Bel)  appointed  Sin,  Samas,  and  Istar  to  rule  in
the  Zodiac. '  These  three  have  each  of  them  four
quarter  or  two  half  phases  ;  for  Venus,  as  an  inner
planet,  shows  the  same  phases  as  the  moon,  and  the
positions  of  the  sun  in  the  two  or  four  seasons  of  the
year  are  reckoned  also  as  phases.  The  four  remaining
planets  represent  each  one  phase  (one  quarter)  of  the
greater  stars;  thus  Jupiter  (Marduk)  =  the  spring-sun,
Mars  (Ninib)  =  the  summer  sun,  Mercury  (Nabu)  =  the
harvest  sun,  and  Saturn  (Xergal)  =  the  winter  sun.

To  each  of  these  four  planets  accordingly  belongs  one
of  the  four  points  which  regulate  the  sun's  course  and
thus  the  universal  order.  When  the  division  is  by  two,
Mars  and  Saturn  are  eliminated  ;  the  reckoning  in  that
case  is  by  the  two  solar  phases  from  equinox  to  equinox
(spring  to  autumn,  or  autumn  to  spring).  The  sun,

1  For  what  follows  cp  Wi.  AOFZi^ff.,  and  in  Der  altc
OHcrtt,  3,  parts  2  and  3.

4630


SINAI  AND  HOREB

moreover,  is  regarded  as  the  god  of  the  underworld,  for
the  stars  as  they  approach  the  sun  become  invisible,  in
other  words,  have  their  abode  in  the  underworld.
Now,  this  '  underworld '  aspect  of  the  sun  corresponds
to  Saturn  (Xergal),  the  winter  sun  or  the  god  of  the
underworld  (Pluto).  To  the  moon  accordingly  (since
the  full  moon  is  in  opposition  to  the  sun)  belongs  the
opposite  pole  of  the  universe  and  the  opposite  planet
Mars  (Ninib),  which  represents  the  summer  sun.  By  a
complete  reversal  of  all  our  modern  notions,  the  sun  is
the  deity  of  winter  or  the  underworld,  the  moon  the
deity  of  summer  and  the  upper  world.

Now  when  the  sun  takes  up  the  position  which
properly  lx.'longs  to  it  in  the  universe,  that  is,  when  it  is
a  winter  sun,  it  is  at  the  most  southerly  point  of  its
course  in  the  zodiac  ;  and  the  corresponding  full  moon
being  in  opposition  is  at  the  most  northerly  point.  In
other  words,  the  sun  is  at  the  Saturn-sun  point,  the  S.
pole  of  the  ecliptic,  the  moon  at  the  Mars-moon  point,
the  N.  pole  of  the  ecliptic.

The  course  of  nature  shows  a  similar  cycle  ;  day  is
succeeded  by  night,  summer  by  winter,  and  in  the
larger  periods  of  time,  the  ceon,  a  similar  procession  is
repeated.  Everything  that  happens  is  divine  ordering,
the  godhead  is  constantly  manifesting  itself  anew  in
changed  attitudes  and  changed  activities.  Thus  Marcluk
becomes  Nabu  in  autumn,  and  conversely.  The  same
holds  good  of  the  N.  and  S.  phase  (summer  and  winter)
of  the  sun  or  of  the  godhead  in  general  ;  they  pass  each
into  its  opposite.  Further,  the  four  (or  two)  quarters  of
the  world  present  themselves  in  various  aspects  accord
ing  to  the  character  of  the  worship  exercised  at  each
given  place,  and  according  to  the  different  methods  of
reckoning  there  employed.  The  Babylonian  view,  with
the  Marduk  (or  spring-)  cult,  takes  as  its  point  of
orientation  (Mohammedan  kib/a]  the  E.  (=that  which
is  before,  crip),  and  thus  for  it  the  N.  is  to  the  left,  the
S.  to  the  right,  and  the  W.  behind.  To  the  older
view,  which  faces  westward,  the  N.  is  to  the  right  and
the  S.  to  the  left.  Thus  arises  for  a  later  time  the
possibility  of  an  interchange  of  diametrically  opposite
points,  according  to  the  point  of  view  assumed  by  each
writer  in  his  theory.  Hence  the  phenomenon  constantly
observed  in  all  forms  of  mythology,  and  therefore  also
of  cosmology,  that  opposites  pass  into  one  another,  that
a  given  form  bears  also  the  marks  of  its  antithesis.

The  selection  of  the  two  names,  Horeb  and  Sinai,
and  their  cosmological  meaning  thus  become  clear.  As


3.  Bearing  on


soon  as  scholars  discovered  the  import-


TT  °  , ance of  the  moon  worship  in  ancient

Horeb  and

_. .  Babylonia,  and  the  name  of  the  moon-

goddess  Sin,  the  explanation  of  the
name  Sinai  as  Mountain  of  the  Moon  became  natural.
Proof,  indeed,  for  this  explanation  of  the  word  can  be
had  only  when  the  significance  of  this  mountain  in  the
cosmic  scheme  as  a  whole  has  been  made  out  ;  but  this
is  accomplished  precisely  by  means  of  the  other  name
of  the  mountain  of  Yah  we — Horeb.

The  earth — and  so  also  on  a  smaller  scale  each  land
and  each  separate  district — is  imagined  as  a  mountain
with  two  summits,1  the  'mountain  of  the  countries'  of
the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians  (Sad  mAtate,  nrsag  kur-
kurra).  According  to  the  orientation  in  each  case  (and
as  regulated  by  this  the  time  at  which  the  year  was  held
to  begin,  and  so  forth)  these  two  points  are  conceived  of
as  E.  and  W.  (equinoctial),  or  as  N.  and  S.  (solstitial).
The  E.  (or  N. )  point  is  that  of  the  light  half  of  the  day
or  year,  the  W.  (or  S.)  that  of  the  dark  half.  For
when  the  sun  is  in  the  E.  the  day  (or  the  year)  begins,
when  it  is  at  the  northern  point  of  its  path  it  is  midday
or  midsummer,  and  so  on.  This  is  the  thought  which
lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  religious  observances  on
Ebal  and  Gerizim2  (Dt.  11 29  '2luff.  Josh.  830^);

1  Cp  Hommel,  Aufsiitzcu.  Abhandhing'cn,  344^  ;  \Vinckler
in  .17/77,  1901,  241,  283.

2  Both  are  brought  into  connection  with  the  goddess  worshipped

4631


SINAI  AND  HOEEB

Gerizim  is  the  mount  of  blessing,  Ebal  that  of  cursing,
that  is,  of  the  light  and  dark  halves  respectively,  of
good  and  evil  omen  (right  and  left  are  the  lucky  or
unlucky  sides  according  to  the  orientation)  ;  on  each
mountain  stand  six  tribes,  for  each  half  of  the  year  has
six  signs  of  the  zodiac  or  six  months.1

When  the  two  summits  of  the  sad  matatc  are  the
N.  and  S.  points  of  the  cosmos  they  belong  respectively
to  the  moon  and  to  the  sun.  If  Sinai  takes  its  name
from  the  moon-goddess  Sin,  Horeb  is  derived  from  the
sun,  for  the  name  means  Mountain  of  Glowing  Heat
(ain  and  3~nn),  the  sun  at  the  most  northerly  part  of  its
course  (our  sign  of  cancer,  summer-solstice)  is  the  glowing
sun.  Thus  Sinai  and  Horeb  both  express  like  cosmo
logical  conceptions.

Making  the  moon  point  the  most  northerly  of  the
ecliptic  belongs  to  the  old  Babylonian  order  of  ideas,

. P  , ,  , according  to  which  the  moon  stands

tfaDyion  w  a &t  ^  head  of  th<j  pantheon  and  the

sun  is  regarded  as  god  of  the  under
world.  The  opposite  is  also  equally  admissible,  the
moon  being  regarded  as  the  star  of  the  night  and  the  sun
as  the  power  that  quickens  nature,  as  the  star  of  the  upper
world,  and  as  supreme  deity.  In  this  last  interpreta
tion,  and,  indeed,  as  the  sole  expression  of  the  god
head,  Chuen-aten  (Amen-hotep  IV.,  see  EGYPT,  §  56}
sought  to  carry  out  a  monotheistic  worship  of  the  sun.
This  would  be  of  importance  if  it  were  held  proven  that
it  is  Chuen-aten  that  is  intended  by  the  Pharaoh  of
Joseph.2  It  would  seem,  in  any  case,  as  if  a  like  view
underlay  the  designation  of  Sinai  (as  of  Horeb),  for  the
mountain  upon  which  Yahwe  reveals  himself  lies  on  the
S.  of  the  promised  land.  If,  now,  Yahwe  has  his
dwelling  on  the  moon-mountain  situated  in  the  S.,
clearly  the  underlying  cosmic  orientation  is  the  Egyptian
one  which  regards  the  S.  as  being  above  (corresponding
to  the  course  of  the  Nile),  whilst  the  Babylonians  had
the  conception  (corresponding  also  to  the  course  of  the
Euphrates)  according  to  which  it  is  the  N.  that  is  above
— the  N.  pole  of  the  cosmos,  as  also  of  the  ecliptic
(this  last  the  moon -point).  For  the  highest  godhead
dwells  above  on  the  summit  of  the  sad  matate.  Toil,
therefore,  belongs  the  highest  part  of  the  ecliptic  (the
path  of  the  sun)  as  of  the  sky  ;  the  portion  which  lies  to
the  N.  of  the  zodiac  and  thus  around  the  N.  pole.
The  Egyptian  view  presupposes  the  opposite  conception,
and,  therefore,  looks  for  all  these  things  in  the  S.

The  assumption,  accordingly,  which  should  look  for
the  seat  of  the  highest  godhead  in  the  S.  of  the  country,
would  rest  more  upon  Egyptian  conceptions,  though  at
the  same  time  for  the  present  we  must  hold  fast  that
the  Egyptian  doctrine  and  the  Babylonian  alike  are
daughters  of  a  common  view  of  the  universe,  and  that
their  relation  to  this  is  somewhat  the  same  as  that  of
the  political  doctrine  of  two  modern  European  civilised
states  to  European  culture  and  conception  of  the
universe  ;  diverse  in  details,  the  views  of  the  two  are  on
the  whole  identical.  It  is  in  agreement  with  this  that
the  rise  of  the  nation  of  Israel  is  carried  back  by  legend
to  Egypt ;  and  that  the  region  where  the  nation  found
its  god — i.e. ,  the  expression  of  its  political  unification
and  its  political-religious  right  to  an  independent  exist
ence  as  a  people,  in  other  words,  to  sovereignty — was
still  known  to  legend  as  Musri  (see  MIZRAIM,  MOSES).
Egypt  and  Musri  alike  are  also  in  the  Babylonian  con-


at  Shechem,  who  is  identical  with  Tammuz— i.e.,  the  god  of  the
two  halves  of  the  year.  Joseph  and  Joshua  are  the  correspond
ing  heroic  figures:  Wi.  GI  li^jff.  <3t>ff.  Joseph  is  mentioned
principally  in  connection  with  Shechem,  Joshua's  life-work  cul
minates  in  Shechem  (Josh.  24).  For  Joshua  the  attainment  of
Shechem  is  what  the  arrival  at  Mt.  Nebo  was  for  Moses;
Marduk  (Moses)  dies  when  the  sun  reaches  the  western  point
where  the  kingdom  of  Nabu  (winter  half  of  the  year)  begins.

1  The  number  twelve  always  symbolises  the  twelve  signs  of
the  zodiac.

2  The  deduction  would  be  that  the  doctrine  of  Yahwism  con
sciously  links  itself  on  to  this  monotheism  as  its  predecessor :
see  A'^r(3)2ii.

4632


SINAI  AND  HOREB


SINAI  AND  HOREB


5.  Musri.


ception  the  land  of  the  sun,  representing  as  they  do  the
S.  so  far  as  the  earth  is  concerned  ;  but  the  S.  of  the
sky  is  the  celestial  underworld  where  the  sun  has  his  place
during  winter,  and  thus  in  the  Babylonian  conception
in  the  case  of  a  revelation  of  the  deity  in  Musri  a  reference
to  the  Egyptian  doctrine  of  the  sun  is  presupposed.

Fresh  light  would  certainly  be  shed  on  this  side  of
the  question  should  we  ever  come  into  possession  of
fuller  information  as  to  the  state  of  civilisa
tion  and  the  religious  and  political  con
ditions  of  the  region  in  question  (Musri)  in  early  times.
In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  all  that  can  be
affirmed  is  that,  the  higher  the  antiquity  we  reach,  the
higher  also  the  civilisation  so  far  as  the  ancient  orient
is  concerned.  The  Amarna  period — -that  which  comes
under  consideration  in  the  present  discussion — already
seems  to  presuppose  a  retrogression  so  far  as  Palestine
is  concerned,  and  this  would  imply  like  conditions  for
the  S.  also.  It  is  quite  a  mistake  to  picture  to  oneself
the  Sinaitic  peninsula  and  the  adjoining  parts  of  Arabia
as  having  then  been  under  the  same  conditions  as
prevail  to-day.  We  already  know  enough  to  justify  us
in  affirming  that  these  parts  in  ancient  times  were  not
wholly  given  up  to  nomads,  and  that  the  country
possessed  ordered  institutions  and  seats  of  advanced
civilisation.  The  Nabattean  state  about  the  time  of
the  Christian  era,  and  that  of  the  Ghassanids  at  a  later
period  had  their  earlier  predecessors  (see  KA  7"(3'  136^ ).
All  of  them  were  states  in  touch  with  the  civilisation  of
their  respective  periods — pre-eminently  with  that  of
Egypt  and  Assyria-Babylonia — just  as  much  as  that
Nabatoean  kingdom  with  which  we  are  in  some  measure
acquainted  through  the  monuments  that  have  come
down  to  our  day  and  through  the  notices  in  classical
authors.  It  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  we  may
yet  come  into  possession  of  monumental  evidence  with
regard  to  the  region  of  ancient  Musri  dating  from  times
which  we  at  present  ordinarily  think  of  as  completely
without  either  history  or  civilisation.  This,  at  least,  is
even  already  clear,  that  long  before  the  period  assumed
for  the  sojourn  of  the  Israelites  oriental  civilisation  had
been  at  work  in  these  parts  in  a  higher  degree  than  was
at  a  later  date  shown  by  Islam.1

Above  all,  it  has  to  be  pointed  out  that  we  are  in  no
position  to  decide  definitely  as  to  the  state  of  civilisation
of  those  regions  during  the  times  in
question,  as  long  as  the  countless  re
cords  of  S.  Arabia,  the  inscriptions  of
the  Minreans  and  the  Sabasans,  have  not  been  made
accessible  and  investigated.  The  commercial  states  of
S.  Arabia  exercised  political  ascendency  also  in  these
regions  at  the  time  when  they  flourished  ;  they  extended
their  civilising  influence  as  far  as  to  the  havens  of  the
Philistines  and  the  gates  of  Damascus,2  and  even  left
behind  them  in  those  parts  a  civilisation  that  can  be
directly  traced  to  them.3  Very  specially  it  is  from  the
Mincean-Sabasan  inscriptions  that,  after  what  the  cunei
form  inscriptions  and  Egyptian  documents  have  yielded
or  may  yet  yield,  we  may  hope  for  glimpses  alike  into  the
political  relations  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  and  adjacent
regions,  and  still  more  into  their  civilisation — in  other
words  into  the  spiritual  development  of  the  peoples  and
times  by  which  the  occurrences  of  the  period  of  Israel's
sojourn  in  Sinai  were  determined.  It  is  chiefly  on
these  inscriptions  that  we  must  depend  for  any  know
ledge  as  to  the  civilisation  and  manner  of  thinking —
the  '  genius  '  (geist,  gtnie] — of  the  Semitic  peoples  in  that
quarter,  where  they  received  their  purest  development,
and  from  which,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  tribes  of  Israel
also  took  their  origin  (KAT^  8).

\  Against  the  notion  of  Arabia  and  the  '  Arabian  spirit '  as
being  the  sole  basis  of  '  Semitism '  see  Winckler,  '  Arabisch-
Semitisch-Orientalisch  '  in  MVG,  1901,  4-5.

2  The  '  Harra '  inscriptions  are  in  an  alphabet  which  shows  a
prevailingly  S.  Arabian  influence.

3  Cp the '  Libyan ' inscriptions (ed. D. H. Muller, Epi-
grafhisclie  Denkniiiler  aus  Aralnen,  1889).

4633


6.  Minseans
and  Sabseans.


All  that  we  as  yet  have  come  to  know  in  the  way  of
actual  historical  fact  regarding  the  Sinaitic  peninsula
and  adjacent  regions,  is  still  in  the  highest  degree  in
adequate.  The  oldest  monuments  are  the  Egyptian
inscriptions  in  Wady  Maghara  and  those  of  Sarbut  el-
Khadem  (EGYPT,  §  45).  The  Pharaohs  designate  the
people  whom  they  have  subjugated  there  by  the  name
of  Mentu.  The  still  extant  mines  show  how  it  was  that
the  much  prized  mafkat  (malachite,  or  '  kupfergriin  ')
was  obtained.  The  oldest  known  Pharaohs  exploited
the  country  for  this  :  Snefre  (first  king  of  the  Fourth
Dynasty),  Chufu  (Cheops,  the  builder  of  the  Great
Pyramid),  various  kings  of  the  Fifth  and  the  Sixth
Dynasty,  Usertesen  II.  and  Amenemhe't  of  the  twelfth  ;
the  last  whose  name  is  recorded  in  any  inscription  is
Kameses  II.

Babylonian references can be adduced only in a

general  way  in  so  far  as  already  in  the  earliest  times  we

7 M a have evidence of a lively commerce

d  Meluha  between  Babylonia  and  the  whole  of
Arabia  ;  the  information  in  our  possession
does  not  enable  us  to  go  into  details.  The  Babylonian
designation  for  Arabia  is  '  Magan  and  Meluha '  and  the
two  expressions  are  used  distinctively,  the  one  (Magan)
to  denote  the  eastern  and  southern  part — that  situated
nearest  to  Babylonia,  the  other  (Meluha)  to  denote  the
N.  and  W.  The  district  of  Sinai  would  thus  form  part
of  Meluha.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  in  the  many
centuries  of  Babylonian  -  Assyrian  history  the  relations
with  the  two  countries  waxed  and  waned  in  importance
with  the  fluctuations  in  political  power  and  in  the
developments  of  trade ;  so  also  did  the  degree  of
knowledge  regarding  the  regions  of  which  we  are
speaking  vary  and  the  connotation  of  the  names  grow
or  shrink.  Thus  at  certain  times  what  was  spoken  of
as  Meluha  will  have  been  not  much  more  than  the
northern  fringe  and  the  road  to  Egypt.  The  derivation
of  the  name  of  the  characteristic  product  of  the  Sinaitic
peninsula — malachite — from  Meluha  seems  obvious.

The  ideas  of  antiquity  as  to  the  form  of  the  earth  are
very  far  removed  from  the  actual  facts.  Thus  it  is  an
essential  element  in  the  Babylonian  conception  that  the
whole  of  the  southern  part  of  the  earth  is  regarded  as  a
continuous  territory  stretching  from  utmost  Nubia
(Ethiopia)  through  South  Arabia  to  India.  The  Red
Sea  and  the  Persian  Gulf  have  nothing  like  their  true
importance  assigned  to  them.  Thus  if  '  Magan  and
Meluha '  in  the  widest  sense  covers  the  whole  of  what
lies  to  the  S.  we  must  include  in  Magan  India  and  in
Meluha  Ethiopia  (KA  T^  137).  This  will  explain  how
it  is  that  Cush,  the  name  of  the  upper  valley  of  the
Nile — thus  the  land  to  the  S.  of  Musri  =  Egypt —
designates  also  those  lands  which  in  Arabia  are  situated
to  the  S.  of  Musri.

It  is  often  possible,  therefore,  in  cases  where  there
are  no  special  indications  to  guide  us,  for  us  to  be  in
doubt  as  to  what  special  regions  ought  to  be  understood
by  the  names  Magan,  Meluha,  Kus,  Musri — precisely
as  we  are  when  we  hear  '  America  '  or  '  Africa '  vaguely
mentioned.  It  is  thus  beyond  our  power  to  determine
with  precision  whence  it  was  that  Gudea  prince  of
Lagas  derived  the  material  for  his  buildings  which  was
brought  (we  are  told)  from  '  Magan  '  and  from  '  Meluha.'
We  cannot  be  sure  whether  the  usual  opinion,  which
takes  Sinai  with  its  malachite  to  be  meant  by  Meluha
as  the  mountain  of  the  samtu  stone  (II.  R.  51^^  17),  is
correct,  for  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  say  what  the
samtu  stone  really  is.

The  Amarna  Letters  seem  to  show  that,  essentially,  the

Egyptian  sovereignty  did  not  extend  beyond  the  borders

- .  of  southern  Palestine. This  is  in  agree-

' - , ment with  the supposition that it  was

precisely  in these  times  that the  newly

immigrating  tribes  of  the  '  Hebrews  '  from  North  Arabia,

to  which  also  the  Israelites  belonged,  pressed  forward

Into the regions of civilisation. We may take it,

4634


SINAI  AND  HOREB

accordingly,  that  this  period  was  marked  by  a  retrogres
sion  from  the  prosperity  of  a  somewhat  earlier  time.  It
is  impossible  to  tell  with  any  certainty  who  were  the
'  Meluha- people '  whom  Rib-Addi,  prince  of  Gebal,
summoned  to  his  aid  along  with  the  Egyptians  ;  it  is,
however,  likely,  in  the  known  circumstances,  that  the
Egyptian  troops  did  not  consist  in  the  main  of  bands
of  Bedouins  from  Sinai  and  Midian  ;  more  probably
Nubians  are  intended.

With  the  single  exception  of  the  inscription  of
Kameses  II.  in  Wadi  Maghfira  we  have  no  information
M  'T  frorn  these  times  relating  to  the  regions  at
present  under  consideration  ;  but  this  is
precisely  the  period  which  covers  the  time  of  Israel's
sojourn  in  Sinai.  It  is  what  usually  and  naturally
happens  ;  of  times  during  which  great  states  have  not
dominated  the  border  lands  we  hear  nothing.  So  far
as  our  present  light  carries  us,  however,  it  would  seem
that  to  this  period  also  belongs  the  development  of  the
power  of  the  S.  Arabian  kingdom  of  Ma'in  (Minoeans).
For  this  kingdom  was  annihilated  sometime  in  the
eighth  or  seventh  century  B.C.,  and  its  beginnings  must
therefore  be  carried  back  at  least  as  far  as  to  the
thirteenth  century.1  A  period  of  weakness  in  the  great
civilised  states  has  also  always  been  favourable  to
the  rise  of  petty  states  and  to  the  development  of
separate  kingdoms  on  the  borders  of  the  region  of
civilisation  ;  and  a  period  of  prosperity  in  the  trading
states  of  S.  Arabia  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  trace
their  history  also  occurred  precisely  at  such  a  time.
We  may  venture,  therefore,  to  hope  some  time  or
other  to  obtain  some  information  regarding  the
regions  of  Sinai  from  the  inscriptions  of  the  Minaeans
just  as  we  are  indebted  to  a  Minaean  inscription  of
about  the  ninth  century  for  an  illustration  of  the  con
ditions  prevailing  on  the  S.  Palestinian  borders  (Hakjvy,
535=Glaser,  1155). 2  We  must,  accordingly,  figure  to
ourselves  the  Miruuan  rule  in  those  parts  as  having  been
after  the  manner  of  that  of  the  Nabatajans.  Just  as
these  bore  rule  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  and  left  settle
ments  and  inscriptions  behind  them,  so  we  may  be
certain  that  the  rule  of  the  Miiuuans  had  a  deter
mining  influence  on  the  civilisation  and  therefore  also
on  the  religion  of  those  parts.  As  the  Mintean  rule  in
el-'Ula  in  N.  Arabia  has  left  its  traces  in  numerous
inscriptions,  so  we  must  suppose  Mimean  settlements
to  have  existed  all  along  the  caravan  routes  to  Palestine
and  to  Egypt.

We  must  conceive  of  the  relations  between  the  regions
of  Sinai  and  S.  Arabia  in  those  days,  then,  somewhat
after  the  analogy  supplied  by  Islam  ;  they  were  not
a  mere  El  Dorado  of  Bedouin  tribes  who  had  remained
stationary  in  some  primitive  phase  of  development  and
had  remained  wholly  untouched  by  the  civilisation  of  the
orient  and  its  knowledge  (which  is  identical  with  its
religion).  Of  course  we  are  to  believe  that  Bedouin
tribes  also  did  live  there,  and  these  were  doubtless  not
genuine  representatives  of  old  oriental  civilisation  exactly
as  the  peasant  of  to-day  does  not  represent  modern  science
and  philosophy  ;  but  they  were  just  as  far  from  remaining
untouched  by  it  as  any  section  of  a  population  can  be
from  remaining  altogether  outside  of  the  influences  of
an  enveloping  civilisation.  And  the  higher  the  oldest
civilisation,  the  more  lasting  must  have  been  its  effect
upon  all  sections  of  the  population.  True,  the  Bedouin
is  never  anything  but  a  bad  Moslem  ;  still  he  is  one  ;
his  religious  and  other  conceptions  are  influenced  by
Islam,  and  if  anywhere  among  the  Bedouins  of  Arabia
any  intellectual  or  political  movement,  any  impulse
towards  higher  forms  of  development  arises,  it  must  in
these  days  associate  itself  with  Islam,  just  as  in  those
days  any  similar  movement  was  inevitably  associated

1  A'ATW  141 O.  Weber  in  .1/777,  1901,  1.

2  See  Winckler, '  Mujri-Mclu'ja-Ma  in ' in  Ml'G,  1808,  1;
Hommel,  Aufsiitze  u.  Abhandl.  230^".  (Hommel would  give
the  inscription  an  earlier  date).

4635


SINAI  AND  HOREB

with  the  doctrines  which  then  dominated  the  East  and
Arabia  with  it.

Tradition  itself  brings  this  out  very  clearly  in  so  far  as
it  has  not  been  artificially  shaped  with  the  design  of
10  Hebrew  rePresentmg  tne  nation  of  Israel  as  a
tradition  Purelv  religious  community,  but  still
proceeds  upon  the  ordinary  presupposi
tions  as  to  the  national  conditions  of  national  life  ;
the  older  tradition  does  so.  To  the  sphere  of  Musri
belongs  the  region  of  Midian  and  this  last  comes
within  the  sphere  of  influence  of  the  S.  Arabian  states.
The  Elohist J  here  also  exhibits  the  original  and
natural  view.  He  presupposes  that  Israel  was  heathen
before  Moses2  and  that  Yahwe  first  revealed  himself
to  Moses  during  his  sojourn  at  Horeb  before  the
Exodus  (Ex.  89-14).  In  E  JETHRO  the  father-in-law  of
Moses — whom,  however,  the  author  never  calls  priest  of
Midian  3 — still  appears  quite  clearly  in  a  role  which  con
nects  him  with  the  worship  of  the  god  of  the  place — the
Yahwe  of  Horeb  (Ex.  18).  When  the  Yah  wist  proceeds
to  make  him  priest  of  Midian  he  is  giving  true  expression
to  the  dependence  of  Mosaism  on  the  civilisation  pre
vailing  there  (writing  of  course  from  the  standpoint  of
his  own  time — the  eighth  century — when  Musri  actually
was  a  state  ;  see  KA  T^}  although  in  turn  he  suppresses
the  old  representation,  made  by  the  Elohist,  of  a  con
nection  between  Yahwe  and  the  older  culture  of  these
regions  in  favour  of  a  more  spiritualised  doctrine  thrown
into  stronger  contrast  with  the  ancient  religions.

Every  historical  delineation,  however,  can  only  depict
past  conditions  in  terms  of  the  conceptions  of  the
historian's  own  time.  Our  oldest  source


11.  Value  of
traditions.


can indeed conceive and set forth the


subjects  it  deals  with  in  the  lively  colours
of  its  own  age  ;  but  the  question  as  to  the  value  of  the
historical  contents  of  its  narrative  is  to  be  carefully
distinguished  from  that  as  to  the  correctness  of  its
apprehension  and  representation  of  the  milieu.  The
historical  value  of  the  accounts  themselves  is  to  be
judged  of  solely  by  the  antiquity  of  the  date — i.e.,  by
the  possibility  of  a  genuine  historical  tradition.  The
date  at  which  the  sources  E  and  J  were  finally  fixed  in
writing  is  to  be  sought  somewhere  in  the  eighth  century  ;
how  far  these  in  turn  rest  on  written  authorities — the
only  ones  possessing  historical  validity  —  we  do  not
know  ;  but  in  no  case  can  they  be  supposed  to  go  so  far
back  as  to  the  days  before  the  monarchy.  An  oral  or
popular  tradition  about  earlier  times  possesses  no  direct
historical  value  ;  no  people  preserves  definite  recollec
tions  of  its  career  going  more  than  two  or  three  gener
ations  back.  What  any  Israelitic  or  Judahite  source
hands  down  to  us  from  the  tradition  of  its  own  people
must  always  be  judged  therefore  by  reference  to  the
possibility  of  historical  —  i.e.,  written — sources  having
been  used  (A".-/7^3)  204 ff.\  What  does  not  rest  upon
these  possesses  no  other  value  than  that  of  the  purely
theoretical  doctrine  of  an  ancient  writer  upon  a  subject
of  which  he  knew  nothing.  And  such  theories  are  of
course  of  less  value,  not  more,  than  those  of  modern
science.

A  Judahite-Israelite  historical  tradition  in  the  sense
just  indicated  is  excluded  for  the  times  of  the  sojourn
in  Sinai  ;  even  were  we  to  regard  these  as  historical  we
could  not  carry  the  tradition  back  to  the  Sinaitic  time.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  present  case,  as  with  the
whole  body  of  tradition  relating  to  the  patriarchal  period

1  According  to  the  present  writer's  view  the  oldest  source  ;
see  KA  TV).

2  Stade,  C!  '1 1 131  ;  Hen.  35  ;  Josh.  24.

3  Whether  his  name  was  Jethro  in  E,  or  whether  he  was  not
rather  called  Hobab  the  Kenite  may  be  left  an  open  question.
On Hobab see Nu.  102g Judg.  Ii64n. For our present
inquiry  it  is  indifferent  which  name  belongs  to  E  and  which  to
J. The  view  which  speaks  of  him  as  a  Kenite  appears  to  be  the
older  and in  that  case  would  belong to E. This, however,
would  imply  that  Horeb  was  thought  of  as  being  not  in  the
Sinaitic  peninsula  but  much  nearer  the  Israelite  territory,  in  the
region  of  the  tribe  of  Kain  (cp  §  15).

4636


SINAI  AND  HOREB


SINAI  AND  HOREB


as  above),  we  have  always  to  apply  the  dis
tinction  drawn  between  'nation'  in  the  ethnological  sense
and  the  same  word  in  its  kulturgeschichtlich  and  there
fore  also  its  religious  sense.  In  the  view  of  antiquity  and
therefore  of  Judah  there  was  no  such  distinction,  and
hitherto  the  tradition  has  always  been  followed.  The
nation  is  alone  the  bearer  of  religion,  of  truth,  of  civilisa
tion,  and  thus  of  the  right  that  alone  is  divine,  and  all
tradition  as  all  thought  is  valid  for  this  people  alone,
alongside  of  which  no  others  possess  any  right  in  any
truth.  In  reality  every  nation,  like  every  individual,
belongs  to  the  world  around  it  in  all  its  ideas  and  in  the
treasures  of  its  material  and  spiritual  possessions.  The
nation  of  Israel  is  therefore  in  an  ethnological  sense  to
be  distinguished  from  that  spiritual  movement  —  or
religion  —  of  which  it  is  represented  by  tradition  as
having  been  the  bearer,  but  in  which  in  its  purity
neither  a  complete  nor  an  exclusive  part  can  be  claimed
by  the  nation  as  an  ethnological  whole.  The  religious
idea  in  its  purity  was  grasped  only  by  the  spiritual
leaders  in  Israel,  and  these,  as  we  now  know,  and  as
indeed  is  in  itself  self-evident  and  in  accordance  with
the  nature  of  things,  stood  in  spiritual  connection  with
those  of  the  great  civilised  nations.  It  is  therefore
possible  that  for  the  Sinai-period,  as  well  as  for  the  rest
of  the  body  of  patriarchal  legend,  the  historical  tradition
at  bottom  has  a  connection  with  older  extraneous
sources,  a  connection,  the  object  of  which  is  to  set  forth
the  relations  between  the  religion  of  Yahwe  in  its
principles  and  the  religious  and  spiritual  movements  of
the  leading  lands  of  civilisation  :  Abraham  comes  from
Babylon  ;  Joseph  goes  to  Egypt  ;  the  revelation  of
religion,  the  close  of  the  development,  takes  place  in  the
region  of  a  third  civilisation,  and  is  brought  into  clearly
expressed  connection  therewith  in  the  oldest  tradition
12  Oldest  ky  means  of  the  figure  of  Jethro.  Thus
A  ah'a  ^or  l^e  sPec'a'  question  as  to  how  we  are

civilisation.  |°,  pictu/Te  to  ,  °urfselve?  the  life  of  the
tribes  ot  Israel  before  the  immigration  we

are  again  led  back  to  investigation  of  the  history  of  the
oldest  Arabian  civilisation.  Whether  we  may  venture
to  hope  for  a  satisfactory  answer  to  this  question,
whether  we  shall  ever  find  in  that  quarter  the  definite
starting-point  for  those  movements  of  a  combined
religious  and  political  nature  which  are  presupposed  in
the  figure  and  the  activity  of  a  Moses,  may  perhaps
seem  doubtful  when  it  is  considered  how  far  we  still  are
even  in  the  case  of  the  Babylonians,  notwithstanding
the  much  greater  fulness  of  the  information  we  actually
possess  or  may  still  hope  for,  from  having  reached  any
indication  as  to  the  historical  facts  of  which  perhaps
tradition  is  taking  account  in  what  it  hands  down  to  us
respecting  Abraham  and  Jacob.  Possibly  we  are  some
what  better  off  in  the  case  of  Joseph  (see  JOSEPH,
col.  2591).

Thus,  for  any  conception  as  to  the  general  lie  of
things,  the  conditions  under  which  this  great  movement
(to  assume  its  historicity)  may  possibly  have  been
brought  about,  we  must  be  content  to  fall  back  upon
historical  parallels  ;  and  these  are  very  numerous.  The
first  rise  of  Islam,  and  many  of  the  religious  political
movements  within  Islam,  enable  us  to  form  a  conception
of  the  manner  in  which  also  the  national  unification  of
Israel  must  have  come  about.  The  nation  must  have
a  god,  and  therefore  also  a  worship  ;  in  this  manner
only  does  it  come  to  possess  a  claim  to  an  independent
existence  as  a  political  unity.  The  law  according  to
which  it  lives  and  without  which  a  nation  cannot  exist
is  in  all  oriental  antiquity  revealed  by  God  and  in
every  case  rests  upon  (divinely  imparted)  knowledge.
All  knowledge  and  all  law  is  thus  of  divine  origin,
—  is  religion.  Hence  political  movements  generally
assume  a  prevailingly  religious  character,  the  secular
demands  being  based  upon  divine  right.  So  it  was
with  Mohammed  and  many  other  prophets  in  Islam  ;
so  also  in  our  own  Middle  Ages  down  to  the  Reformation.

4637


The  activity  of  Moses  —  or,  if  you  will,  the
political  developments  which  form  the  groundwork  of
13.  The  Moses  theu  Moses  legend-must  be  regarded
storv  as  navln£  been  a  movement  of  this

*"  sort.  The  Sinai-period  would  in  that
case  represent  in  some  sense  the  crowning  of  the  work,
the  giving  of  the  charter,  in  a  word  the  political
organisation  of  the  movement.  As  such  it  is  repre
sented  even  in  the  legend,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
about  the  matter.  For  the  theophany,  etc.  ,  see  MOSES,
§13-

The  attempt  at  a  historical  criticism  of  the  Exodus
legend  and  its  culminating  point  the  legislation  at
Sinai,  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  the  Bedouin
manner  of  life  with  its  forms  of  organisation  must
supply  also  the  key  to  any  historical  contents  this
episode  may  have  as  also  to  those  of  the  whole  legend
of  the  early  history  of  Israel.  The  '  Semitic  peoples  '
are  regarded  as  '  nomads'  who  develop  their  distinctive
views  and  so  also  their  religion  from  the  midst  of  their
primitive  surroundings.  The  essence  of  their  forms  of
organisation  is  held  to  find  its  clearest  expression  in  the
Arab  Bedouin  life  as  this  is  disclosed  to  us  in  Arabian
poetry  and  in  the  tradition  of  Islam  based  upon  this.

On  this  view  the  form  of  organisation  that  lies  at  the
root  of  the  Israelite  national  consciousness  is  the  tribal.
It  is  indisputable  that  this  is  the  view  presented  also  in
the  OT,  and  that  Israel  also  in  actual  fact,  exactly  like
other  peoples  of  the  East  in  a  similar  comparatively  low
stage  of  culture,  is  not  unacquainted  with  this  view  and
this  form  of  organisation.  This  being  so,  the  god  who
was  to  be  the  God  of  Israel,  had  of  necessity  to
be  the  god  of  the  leading  tribe  which  laid  hold  on
the  hegemony,  and  thus  made  its  tribal  god  into  a
national  god  in  the  same  way  as  its  chief  or  sheik
raised  himself  to  the  position  of  king  of  the  nation.
Stade  ((.il'I  1131)  supposes  Kain  to  have  been  such  a
tribe,  because  the  father-in-law  of  Moses  (see  above)  the
priest  is  brought  into  connection  with  Kain.  Carrying
this  further,  we  should  then  have  to  suppose  that  the
sanctuary  of  the  god,  and  thus  the  tribal  centre  of
worship,  must  be  thought  of  as  being  at  the  place  which
the  corresponding  legend  thinks  of  as  Sinai  (\Yi.  (/'/


This,  however,  would  give  only  the  one  side  of  the
legend,  that  which  corresponds  to  the  ethnological
character  of  the  entire  conception,  and  looks  upon  the
nation  of  Israel  through  the  eyes  of  antiquity.  All  that
follows  from  this  is  that  in  Judah-Israel,  that  is  to  say
in  the  historical  period  or  period  of  the  monarchy,  a
tribe,  royal  house,  and  worship  was  in  the  ascendant
which  traced  its  home  to  the  Sinai  -region.  The
religious  or  kulturgeschichtlich  side  of  the  question
will  have  to  be  kept  quite  separate.  Whence  did  the
worship,  which  is  that  of  the  nation  of  Israel  in  the
kulturgeschichtlich  sense,  receive  its  real  contents,  its
doctrine  ?  Legend  answers  the  question  with  the  word
revelation  ;  but  if  the  matter  is  looked  at  from  the
historical  and  genetic  point  of  view,  it  is  necessary  to
assume  a  doctrine  which  had  grown  up  on  the  soil  of
the  ancient  civilisations.  For  it  is  peoples  of  civilisation,
not  nomads  and  peasants,  that  develop  new  and
higher  ideas  in  the  struggle  with  those  of  a  lower  and
now  no  longer  sufficient  view  of  the  world  —  Religion,
i.  e.  ,  ethic  and  law.

The  question  which  arises  out  of  the  possibility  that
Sinai  or  Horeb  had  been  the  centre  of  worship  of  a

14 Sinai  °'an  or  tr'ke  l^at  ksvd  tne  predominance

•jj . "  in  Judah-Israel  leads  us  to  consideration

. .  of  the  position  of  this mountain. For

, ,  even though  we  are  a


, ,
^  '


though  we  are  able  to  prove  that
cosmological  ideas  nre  here  involved,
many  analogous  phenomena  show  that  the  localities  so
viewed  need  not  necessarily  be  pure  figments  of  theory,
that,  on  the  contrary,  a  localisation  of  these  theo
retical  ideas  is  the  general  rule.  As  is  usually  the  case,

4638


SINAI  AND  HOREB


SINAI  AND  HOREB


however,  so  also  in  the  present  instance,  a  comparison
of  the  different  sources  shows  that  relative  objects  of
worship,  or  the  earthly  copies  of  heavenly  places,  are
located  by  the  various  sources  or  traditions  in  very
diverse  situations.  This  holds  good  of  the  mountain
upon  which  Yah  we  dwells,  exactly  as  it  holds  good  of
any  other  seat  of  deity.  Every  nation,  or  every  tribe,
must  necessarily  point  to  it  within  its  own  domain  ;
but,  as  in  every  nation  and  state  various  strata  of
culture  and  population  are  represented,  and  in  the
course  of  time  also  various  doctrines  arise,  so,  in  like
manner,  different  localisations  can  be  handed  down  in
the  various  strata  of  the  tradition.  A  classical  example
of  this  is  presented  by  Mts.  Ebal  and  Gerizim  (see
above,  §  3).  The  tradition  (J)  which  places  them
beside  Shechem  has  held  its  ground  victoriously.  In
their  cosmic  meaning,  however,  as  the  two  summits  of
the  Mountain  of  the  World,  they  can  be  shown  to  have
been  held  in  reverence  also  in  other  seats  of  worship,
in  the  territory  of  other  gods  as  well  as  at  Shechem
(Ephraim).  So,  for  example,  in  the  domain  of  worship
of  the  once  more  extensive  tribe  (Winckler,  GI  2)  of
Benjamin,  in  the  region  of  Bethel.  This  is  the  meaning
of  the  gloss  in  Dt.  11 30  (cp  GERIZIM,  §  2):  they  are
situated  near  the  Gilgal,  the  political  centre  of  Benjamin
which  stands  in  connection  with  the  sanctuary  of  Bethel.
Ebal  and  Gerizim  are  other  names  for  Jachin  and
Boaz  in  so  far  as  these  stand  for  definite  cosmological
ideas  (N.  and  S. ,  or  E.  and  W.  point)  precisely  as
Sinai  and  Horeb  do.  Thus  no  difficulty  ought  to  be
felt  if  the  mountain  of  Yahwe  also  is  placed  in  various
p  localities.  The  view  which  brings  it  into

"... " connection  with  the  Kenite  tribe  and  which
GXlllC

we  must  regard  as  the  oldest,  doubtless  has
in  mind  not  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  but  the  region  to  the
S.  of  Judah,  that  is  to  say  Edoni.  This  still  finds  clear
expression  in  the  Song  of  Deborah  (Juclg.  54) :  '  Yahwe,
when  thou  goest  forth  from  Se'ir  and  comest  down  from
the  mountain  (rnc'  =  Ass.  sadfi;  see  FIELD,  i)of  Edom  '  ;
similarly  also  in  Dt.  3321  (see  PAKAN,  and  cp  \Ye.
Pral.(3>  359,  and  Di.  ad  loc. ).  In  like  manner  i  K.  198
originally  placed  Horeb  (thus  belonging  to  E,  the
oldest  source  on  which  Dt.  rests)  in  the  region  of
Edom,  that  is,  of  Ken,  for  Elijah  cannot  have  under
taken  any  remote  desert  journey  when  he  is  already
at  the  point  of  fainting  at  the  close  of  a  single  day.2
The  forty  days  were  first  introduced  in  order  to  estab
lish  a  parallelism  with  the  Moses-legend.3  The  words
of  the  Song  of  Deborah  (Judg.  5s)  indicate  that  even  the
tradition  which  used  the  name  Sinai  was  influenced  by  the
same  view  with  regard  to  its  situation.  This  would  go
to  show  that  the  Yahwistic  tradition  also — for  Dt.  follows
E  (cp.  §  i ) — looked  at  matters  in  the  same  light.  J  and
E,  however,  comprise  the  whole  tradition  which  comes
from  the  times  of  Judah's  national  existence.  This
would  be  in  entire  agreement  with  all  that  we  have  to
presuppose  for  a  period,  the  conceptions  of  which
must  have  confined  themselves  within  the  limits  of  the
P  t  ac*ual  and  possible.  The  free  play  of  fancy,
...  as  well  as  the  enlargement  of  the  claims  of
Judah  to  territory  outside  of  its  proper
limits,  could  first  come  to  their  rights  only  after  the
nation  had  been  torn  away  from  its  native  soil,  when
Judah  had  come  to  be  no  longer  a  nation  but  only  a.
religious  community,  the  sphere  of  whose  activity  was

1  [Cp  Dt.  33 16,  where  Renan,  Wellhausen,  and  Steuernagel
read  '3'D  'JSP,  'he  who  dwells  in  Sinai.']

2  Wi.  G71  23  ;  Smend,  A  TJiche  Rel.-gesch.W  35. [See  also
PROPHET, j>§  7  9. Kittel  (//A~,  A'ffn.  150)  still  supposes  the
Horeb  of  the  narrative  to  be  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  ;  so  too
von  Gall,  Altisroel. Kultstdtten, 15  (cp  Ritter,  Erdkun(ic,Cb
viii.  2,  Abschn. i,  p.  576). A somewhat keener  criticism  of
the  text,  however,  is  adverse  to  this  view  (see  Crit.  Bib.  on
i  K.198). Cp  the  remark  on  col.  1272,  lines  'nff. — T.  K.  c.]

3  Ex.  24  18  [P]. The  forty  days  of  absence  in  the  wilderness
(cp  the  temptation  of  Jesus). On  the  significance  of  the  number
see  Wi.  Gl  2  83  £5  (cp  NUMBER,  §  8X

4639


limited  only  by  the  bounds  of  the  civilisation  of  Hither
Asia.

The  writing  which  arose  out  of  such  ideas  as  these  is
what  is  now  known  as  P  ;  we  could,  almost,  therefore,
have  guessed  beforehand  that  the  transference  of  the
cosmic  idea  of  Sinai  as  the  seat  of  Yahwe  to  the
Sinaitic  peninsula  proceeds  from  this  source  or  from
the  view  upon  which  this  source  is  based.  It  finally
became  the  basis  for  a  conception  of  Israel — of  its
proper  significance  and  of  its  past— which  could  never
have  arisen  in  the  times  in  which  Judah  had  a
national  existence.  All  those  alterations  and  trans
positions  of  geographical  ideas  which  extend  Israel's
power  far  beyond  its  historical  frontiers 1  are  post-
exilic.  With  this  it  would  agree  that  the  list  of  stages,
the  precise  itinerary  of  Israel's  journey  to  Sinai  and
from  Sinai  to  Canaan,  is  peculiar  to  P.

The  localisation  of  the  Mt.  of  God  in  the  Sinai
peninsula  must  thus  at  the  earliest  belong  to  a  late —
that  is,  post-exilic — date.  Thus  we  cannot  assign  to  it  a
historical  value,  nor  can  it  prove  anything  for  the  know
ledge  of  the  older  views  of  Israel,  or  of  the  religious  and
cosmographical  conceptions  of  Judah  before  the  exile.
For  the  intellectual  contents  of  the  Judaism  codified  by
P,  however,  the  inquiry  as  to  the  site  assumed  for  the
mountain  by  P  would  be  unimportant  ;  the  essential
thing  to  notice  is  that  it  has  been  transferred  from
regions  which  the  national  consciousness  had  regarded
as  adjoining  (in  the  S. )  to  regions  more  remote.

Yet  in  this  case  we  must  also  leave  it  open  as  a
possibility  that  the  transposition  was  not  made  in  a
wholly  arbitrary  manner.  The  old  orientals  knew
their  world,  and  even  the  waste  mountain  massif  of
Sinai  was  not  for  them  a  mere  land  of  fairy  tales  in  which
all  things  are  possible.  Just  as  little  as  the  localisation
of  Ebal  and  Gerizim  beside  Shechem  or  beside  the
Gilgal  (Bethel)  was  possible  without  some  definite  point
of  attachment  in  the  adjacent  cults,  would  it  have  been
possible  for  the  mountain  of  Yahwe  to  be  transferred  to
the  Sinaitic  peninsula  without  a  similar  reference.

On  this  point,  also,  history  fails  us  as  well  as  the  data
of  archaeology  ;  we  possess  no  fact  from  the  older  time
which  would  enable  us  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  centre
of  worship  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai.  About  this  time,
in  all  likelihood,  Kedar  (A~A7'(3>)  ruled  in  the  then
Musri  and  Meluha  as  predecessors  of  the  Nabata:ans.  •
In  view  of  the  likeness  of  all  oriental  worships  in  their
fundamental  thought,  it  is  very  easily  possible  that  in
pre-Christian  times  also  the  same  spots  which  Judaism
pointed  to  as  its  Sinai,  and  Christianity  afterwards
took  over  were  already  holy.  What  we  can  learn
of  the  cults  of  those  regions  shows  the  same  forms  of
worship  and  secret  doctrine  as  Christianity  has  taken
over  from  the  ancient  East.  The  worship  of  the
morning-star  (Lucifer — i.e. ,  the 'Athtar  of  the  southern
_  Arabs)  is  to  be  supposed  to  have  ex-

1 '•  ar  y  isted  there  from  the  earliest  Minaean
sacred  places.  times  and  all  subsequent  conquerors
successively  took  it  over  in  its  essential  features.  'Athtar,
however,  is,  alike  in  substance  and  in  form,  essentially
identical  with  the  Marduk  of  Babylon.  Marduk  is  the
spring  sun  and  the  morning  sun,  which  is  also  repre
sented  by  the  kindred  body  which  is  the  morning  star,
according  as  the  sun  is  regarded — as  in  Babylon — as  a
masculine  divinity,  and  the  morning  planet  Istar  as  the
feminine,  or  'Athtar  is  regarded  as  masculine  and  the
sun  as  feminine — as  with  the  Arabs  (see  KAT^}.  The
worship  of  the  morning  star  is  borne  witness  to  by  St.
Nilus  about  400  A.  D.  as  being  that  of  the  Saracens  of
the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  and  the  Nabatnean  Dusara  merely
gave  to  the  primeval  deity  a  Nabataean  name.  The
mystic  doctrines  of  his  worship  are  exactly  the  same  as
those  of  the  vernal  god  at  all  his  seats  and  the  same
as  were  taken  over  by  Christianity.  Thus  Isidore

1  The  conception  of  Aram  as  Damascus,  of 'eber  ha-nahar  as
Syria,  and  so  forth.  See  Wi.  GI  2.

4640


SINAI  AND  HOREB

Characenus  (see  Hesychius,  s.v.  Aovcrap-njs)  knows  him
as  '  Dionysus,'  that  is,  the  son  of  the  virgin  Semele,
who  as  summer  and  winter  deity  is  the  Tammuz  of
the  Canaanites  —  i.e. ,  the  Marduk  (and  Nebo)  of  the
Babylonians,  the  Horus  of  the  Egyptians  (J//'(/',  1901,
p.  278).  This  is  not,  as  might  perhaps  be  thought,  a
copying  of  Christian  doctrine  ;  on  the  contrary,  both
alike  spring  from  the  same  root,  the  primeval  oriental
one.  So  too,  we  hear  in  the  regions  of  the  Sinai
peninsula  down  to  the  time  of  Mohammed,  at  Elusa  (  ==
Hala.sa)  of  the  worship  of  the  alone  God  who  is  wor
shipped  as  dhu- l-halasa  and  whose  designation  ulti
mately  means,  as  indicated,  the  only  God.1  Here,
also,  the  assumption  of  '  Christian  influence '  is  merely  a
distortion  of  the  question  ;  we  are  dealing  with  ancient
oriental  doctrines  and  seats  of  worship  which,  with  new
masters,  changed  only  their  names,  not  their  forms  or
the  fundamental  thoughts  underlying  them.  If,  accord
ingly,  that  writing  and  body  of  doctrine  of  Judaism
which  sets  forth  monotheism  in  its  strictest  and  most
abstract  presentation,  namely  P,  removed  the  seat  of
Yahwe  to  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  it  may  very  well  have
connected  it  with  actual  seats  of  worship  which  in  their
worship  set  forth  doctrines  similar  to  those  of  Elusa.

Thus  arises,  finally,  the  question  as  to  the  value  to

be  attached  to  the  identification  of  the  mountain  in  the

_ . Sinaitic  peninsula  for  which  the  claim  is

,  _ made  that  it  was  the  mountain  of  revela-

_. ' tion. If  what  has  already  been  said  be

accepted,  the  only  possible  question  is  as

to  an  identification  of  the  doctrine  of  late  exilic  Judaism

with  localities  that  had  already,  at  an  earlier  date,  been

rendered  sacred  by  a  worship  that  was  analogous  so  far

as  outward  form  was  concerned.

By  tradition  two  mountains  have  from  the  first  been
put  forward,  each  as  having  been  the  mountain  of
revelation,  and  the  question  between  them  has  continued
under  discussion  down  to  the  present  day  ;  these  are
Mt.  Serbal  in  the  \V.  and  Jebel  Musa  in  the  heart  of
the  mountain  massif  of  the  peninsula.

If  we  are  to  attach  any  value  to  the  tradition  at  all,
then  unquestionably  Mt.  Serbal  has  most  to  be  said  in
its  favour.  The  oldest  witnesses,  from  Eusebius  down
to  Cosmas  Indopleustes,  testify  to  it,  and  the  numerous
/auras  or  monastic  settlements  show  that  the  first
centuries  of  Christianity  paid  honour  to  the  holy  sites
in  Serbal  and  in  Wady  Firan  near  the  episcopal  town
of  Pheiran  situated  there  (which  is  mentioned  by
Ptolemy  in  the  second  century).  Jebel  Musa  was  first
declared  to  be  a  holy  place  by  Justinian  (527-565),  who
there  founded  a  church  in  honour  of  St.  Mary  the
Virgin.  There  is  no  earlier  tradition  in  its  favour.  On
the  other  hand,  the  reasons  are  transparently  clear  why,
from  henceforth,  the  dignity  thus  conferred  upon  the
new  site  should  remain  with  it.

The  monastic  settlements  on  Serbfil  were  exposed  to  the
attacks  of  the  Saracens  and  were  more  than  once  devastated  by
them  (so,  for  example,  in  373  and  again  in  395  or  411,  of  which
latter  incident  Ammonias  and  Nilus  have  given  us  accounts  as
eye-witnesses).  Justinian  supplied  to  his  argument  in  favour  of
the  sacred  site  the  necessary  support  by  erecting  a  fort  also  which
gave  the  monks  the  protection  they  needed  against  the  Bedouins,
so  that  they  gradually  withdrew  from  Mt.  Serbal  to  the  safer
neighbourhood  of  Jebel  Musa.  The  true  reason  for  the
abandonment  of  Serbal  and  the  transference  of  its  associations
elsewhere,  however,  is  most  likely  to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that
in  the  fifth  century  the  monks  of  Pharan  were  threatened  by  the
orthodox  synods  as  Monothelete  and  Monophysite  heretics.
Justinian's  measure  was  therefore  dictated  by  policy  and  was
simply  a  confirmation  of  the  decisions  of  the  councils.

Even  if  we  choose  to  assume  a  connection  of  the
post-exilic  but  pre-Justinian  identification  with  the
institutions  of  an  older  cultus,  the  sole  witnesses  that
we  have,  the  Nabatcean,  testify  decidedly  for  Serbal.

1  See  MVG,  1901,  p.  278,  on  the  meaning  of  dhii'1-halasa  in
the  same  sense  as  Mohammed's  ahlas  (Sur.  112).  Elusa— -Halasa
according  to  Tuch  (cp  WRS,  Rel.  Sent. ('-').  On  Halasa  see
Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  423  [also  BERED,  NEGEB,  §  7,
ZIKLAG],

4641


SINAI  AND  HOEBB

Many  Sinaitic  inscriptions,1  which  essentially  contain
merely  the  names  of  passing  pilgrims  and  date  from
Nabatasan  times  onwards,  are  found  in  by  far  the
greatest  numbers  in  the  Wady  Mokatteb  (Valley  of
Inscriptions)  of  the  Serbal  group  ;  the  Mfisa  group
comes  far  behind  it  in  this.  The  inscriptions  cannot,
however,  be  regarded  as  the  idle  scribblings  of  passing
trade  caravans  ;  without  a  doubt  they  are  connected
with  the  sanctity  of  the  spot,  and  for  the  most  part  are
the  work  of  pilgrims.

If  in  these  circumstances  the  question  as  to  what
mountain  was  thought  of  in  later  times  is,  in  itself  con
sidered,  one  of  little  profit,  we  have  the  additional
difficulty  which  stands  in  the  way  of  the  identification
of  the  other  s'ites  which  might  be  supposed  to  be  made
certain  by  the  narrative  of  Exodus  (Rephidim,  etc.).
It  is  doubtless  true,  indeed,  that  Judaism,  like  the
ancient  East  in  general,  had  a  definite  conception  regard
ing  the  lands  of  which  it  spoke.  If,  accordingly,  any
one  wanted  to  describe  a  definite  route  as  that  of  the
Exodus,  he  was  quite  able  to  do  so.  Hut  the  Exodus-
legend,  like  all  OT  narratives,  is  full  of  mythological
allusions,  and  in  order  to  bring  in  these  there  is  never  any
aversion  to  that  arbitrariness  which  is  so  irreconcilable
with  our  modern  ideas  of  geographical  fidelity.  If
Sinai  was  thought  of  as  the  earthly  image  of  a  definite
cosmical  idea  then  must  also  the  legend — which  also
lay  before  P — indicate  on  the  way  to  Sinai  the  corre
sponding  phenomena  of  the  heavenly  path  to  the  cul
minating  point  of  the  universe  ;  but  it  may  well  be
questioned  whether,  when  this  was  being  done  in  a.
representation  so  condensed  and  so  excerpt-like  as  that
of  P,  sufficient  points  of  attachment  would  be  given  to
render  possible  a  comparison  between  the  writer's
representation  and  the  actual  geographical  facts.

For  the  partisans  of  Jebel  Musa  there  still  remains
the  secondary  question  whether  the  actual  Jebel  Musa
itself  was  the  mountain  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  or
whether  (so  Robinson)  this  is  not  rather  to  be  sought  in
the  Ras  es-Safsaf,  NW  of  Jebel  Musa.

From  the  point  of  view  of  historical  criticism  the  Sinai  ques
tion  has,  in  common  with  so  many  other  questions  of  biblical
archaeology  and  geography,  received  but  little  attention.  That
the  separate  particulars  regarding  the  occurrences  and  dates  of
the  Sinai  episode  have  but  a  limited  attestation  lies  in  the  nature
of  the  legends  themselves,  and  in  the  form  of  their  development.
It  is,  however,  upon  an  uncritical  faith  in  these  that  all  those
researches  and  constructions  rest,  of  which  the  most  important
are  those  of  Lepsius  (Reisc  von  Tluben  nach  tier  Halbinsel  ties
Sinai),  and  the  works  of  travel  by  Burckhardt.  Riippell,  Fraas,
Robinson,  Palmer.  The  geographical  details  are  presented
clearly  but  uncritically  in  Ebers  (Durck  Gosen  zu»i  Sinai).  As
the  Sinai-peninsula  is  pretty  frequently  visited  by  tourists,  the
handbooks  also  (see,  e.g.,  Baed.  Pal., *5)  1901)  give  the  needful
particulars  as  to  the  topography  of  the  region.  An  attempt  to
apply  the  principles  of  geographical  and  historical  possibility  to
the  explanation  of  the  biblical  narratives  was  made  by  Greene,
The  Hebrew  Migration  from  F.gy/>t  (2  ed.  London,  1883).
The  stay  in  Egypt  is,  as  usual,  taken  to  be  historical,  and  then
it  is  conclusively  shown  that  a  4o-years  stay  in  the  desert  and
the  march  through  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  are  impossible,  that
therefore  an  exodus  from  Egypt  to  Palestine  cannot  have  been
achieved  otherwise  than  by  the  ordinary  caravan-route  (Greene
proves  his  point ;  only,  the  real  historical  impossibility  lies  rather
in  what  he  assumes  :  the  stay  in  Egypt).  Although  he  takes  no
account  of  variety  of  sources  (cp  $  10)  Charles  Beke  (Discoveries
of  Sinai  in  Arabia  and  of  Mi<nan,  London,  1878)  is  led  so  far
by  his  sound  sense  on  the  right  track  in  his  attempts  at  identifica
tion  as  to  find  Sinai  in  the  territory  of  Midian.  Only,  here  too,
all  the  data  of  the  legend  are  treated  as  available  for  geographi
cal  definition.

The  allegorical  interpretation  of  Sinai  as  Hagar  by
Paul  in  Gal.  425  rests  doubtless  upon  the  same  astro-
.  logical  and  cosmological  identifications

19.  Ual.  25.  as  £joes  tjie  ^Qukie  name  Of  tnt.  moun
tain.  For  if  there  is  also  a  play  upon  the  name  of
Hagar,  that  in  the  writer's  mind  cannot  be  the  Arab.
hagar  ('  stone') — for  this  does  not  mean  rock — but  the


4642


SINIM,  THE  LAND  OF

Arab,  hagr,  'midday,'  i.e.,  culmination  point.1  Thus  it
becomes  synonymous  with  Horeb.  The  culmination
point  —  i.e.  ,  the  N.  point  of  the  ecliptic  —  corresponds,
however,  in  the  old  cosmology  to  the  N.  point  of  the
Universe  (the  X.  pole),  and  this  is  represented  upon
earth  by  the  terrestrial  Jerusalem,  of  which  the  heavenly
antitype  is  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  (yvvffToix.fi  5t  rjj  vvv
'Itpoi'traXri/j.}.  H.  W.

[Von  Gall  (Altisr.  Kullstdtten,  15)  regards  the  iden
tification  of  Horeb  and  Sinai  as  a  post-exilic  confusion

<See MaL  3" Ps"  106  '9>' Or'ginally


Various
.  various

W8>


they  were  distinct Horeb  ]ay  in the

Sinaitic  peninsula,  Sinai  in  Midian,  on
the  W.  coast  of  Arabia  (cp  We.  /-VW.<3)  359  ;  Moore,
fudges,  140,  179;  Stade,  Entst.  des  Volkes  Israel,  12).
But  see  remarks  above  on  1  K.  198,  and  cp  MOSES,  §  5.
Not  all  critics,  however,  admit  that  the  prevalent
opinion  is  free  from  serious  objections.  Holzinger
(KHC,  Ex.,  p.  66)  remarks  that  there  are  difficulties
attending  all  attempts  to  locate  the  mountain  of  legisla
tion.  If  we  had  only  Judg.  64  before  us,  we  should
naturally  seek  for  the  mountain  near  Kadesh  ;  at  any
rate,  IK.  198  does  not  favour  a  site  in  the  Sinaitic
peninsula.  Captain  A.  E.  Haynes,  R.E.  (of  the
Palmer  Search  Expedition)  placed  Mt.  Sinai  in  the
desert  of  Et-Tih,  on  the  way  from  Egypt  to  Kadesh
(PEFQ,  1896,  p.  I75/".).  Sayce  (Crit.  Mon.  263  ff.}
considers  a  site  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  to  be  excluded
by  the  presence  of  an  Egyptian  garrison  in  charge  of
the  mines,  and  places  Sinai  in  the  eastern  mountains  of
Seir.  Cheyne  (E.  Bib.,  col.  3208)  prefers  some  moun
tain-group  near  Kadesh  on  text-critical  grounds,  which
favour  the  supposition  that  the  Moses-clan  was  admitted
to  the  jus  connubii  and  to  religious  communion  by  a
tribe  of  Misrites  (not  Midianites)  or  Kenites  which
dwelt  near  Kadesh.2

As  to  the  names  '  Sinai  '  and  '  Horeb  '  the  most
different  theories  have  been  offered.  Gesenius  (  Thes.
9481;)  suggests  '  muddy  '  as  opposed  to  ann  '  dry.'  The
usual  critical  theory  connects  '3*0  with  j«o.  '  Sin,'  the
moon-god  ;  the  plausibility  of  this  is  manifest  (see  §  3),
even  without  referring  to  the  fact  that  as  late  as  the  end
of  the  sixth  century  A.D.  moon-worship  was  practised
by  heathen  Arabs  in  the  Sinai  peninsula  (  Bathg.  Beitr.
105;  ZDMG  3  202/f!  ).  The  article  ZlN,  however,  sug
gests  another  explanation  ;  both  ps  and  po  may  be
corruptions  of  ^Ni'cs/"  (parallel  corruptions  are  frequent)  ;
consequently  -ro  maybe  a  corruption  of  '^NycsT-3  This
would  correspond  to  ain,  regarded  as  a  corruption  of
VNCITV  (see  MOSES,  §  5)  ;  tradition  knew  no  other  name
for  the  sacred  mountain  than  '  Jerahmeelite,'  '  Ishmaelite.'
A  more  obvious  explanation  is  'drought'  (from  ^'mn,
'  to  be  dry  '),  or  as  Winckler  explains,  '  glowing  (heat  )';
see  §  3,  end.  Lagarde,  however  (Uebers.  85),  con
nects  with  Aram,  ana,  '  to  plough.'  —  T.  K.  c.]  H.  w.

SINIM,  THE  LAND  OF  (D»rp  pS  ;  |-H  rrepcooN
[BXAQ];  terra  australis  ;  Pesh.  J^iSO),  Is.  49i2f.
Formerly  biblical  geographers  were  inclined  to  see  here
a  reference  to  China  —  the  land  of  the  Sinae  or  Thinae
of  the  geographer  Ptolemy  (Ar.  and  Syr.  sin).  It  was  not
supposed  that  the  writer  knew  of  Jewish  exiles  in  China,
but  that  he  wished  to  express  the  idea  that  from  the
very  farthest  possible  point  the  children  of  Zion  should
return.  The  theory,  first  suggested  by  Arias  Montanus
(:6th  cent.),  has  been  both  defended  and  opposed  with'

1  [On  the  reading  of  Gal.  425,  and  on  the  bearing  of  the  text-
critical  problem  on  the  question  here  discussed,  see  HAOAR,  §  3.]

a  The  theory  is  that  this  is  the  view  of  things  out  of  which
the  representation  in  our  Hebrew  text  has  arisen.  It  is  based
on  a  new  criticism  of  the  form  of  the  Moses-narrative.

3  The  alternative  would  be  to  connect  'Snycsr  w'th  the  name
of  the  Babylonian  Moon-god.  The  same  connexion  would  then
have  to  be  supposed  for  the  other  members  of  the  group  of  (prob.
ably)  related  names  —  SNI^C-,  V|K'nei,  ^2iC',  ^iNB'  (cp  SAUL,
SHOBAL,  SHEMTKI.).  On  the  ground  of  numerous  phenomena,
not  all  of  which  are  indicated  in  the  present  work,  the  writer
hesitates  to  suppose  this  connection.

4643


SINITE

much  learning  (see  Strauss -Torney  in  Del.  Jes.W
688/i,  cp'4>  488^:  ;  Che.,  Proph.  /j.ffl  'Imff.;  Terrien
de  Lacouperie,1  BOR\  [1886-7],  45/^  l83/^).  but  the
philological  and  historical  difficulties  have  decided  recent
critics  against  it  (see  Dillm.-Kittel,  Duhm,  Che.  in
SHOT,  Marti).  China  became  known  too  late,  and
we  should  expect  D'rs-  In  accordance  with  his  theory
of  the  place  of  composition,  Duhm  thinks  of  the
'  Phoenician  Sinites'  mentioned  in  Gen.  10 17  ;  Kloster-
mann,  Cheyne  (in  SHOT),  and  Marti  would  read  D'Jip,
and  see  a  reference  to  SYENE  [q. v. ] — i.e. ,  Assouan  on
the  Nile.

If  however  ( i )  the  view  expressed  elsewhere  (  PROPHET,
§  43)  is  correct,  and  the  Prophecy  of  Restoration  relates
to  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  a  N.  Arabian  captivity,
and  if  (2)  the  geographical  horizon  of  Gen.  10  has  been
expanded,  so  that  only  a  keen  observer  can  discern  its
original  limitation  to  the  Negeb  and  Arabia,  the  problem
of  '  Sinim '  is  solved,  and  the  remark  of  Skinner  and
Marti  that  it  is  a  hopeless  enigma  is  refuted.

Critically  investigated,  the  ethnic  names  of  Gen.  10  15-18/1
(which  have  been  transformed  by  the  redactor)  are  probably  as
follows  :—

Kenaz(or  Kain),  Missur,  Rehoboth,  Ishmaelite,  Arammite,
Geshurite,  Horite,  Jerahmeelite,  Sinite,  Aradite  (or  Arpadite?),
Misrite,  Maacathite.

That  the  name  '  Sin '  was  firmly  rooted  in  the  Negeb
is  shown  by  the  occurrence  of  '  Sin '  for  a  wilderness
(Ex.  16i)  and  of  'Sinai'  (in  Musri  ;  see  MOSES,  §
14,  SINAI,  §§  4,  15)  for  a  mountain.  From  this  point
of  view,  Duhm's  theory  was  a  step  towards  the  true
solution.  Whether,  however,  Sin,  Sini,  Sinim  are
original,  and  connected  with  Sin  the  Babylonian  moon-
god,  may  be  questioned.  Analogy  favours  the  view
that  Sin  likeZin  (|s)  is  a  corruption  of  VKJ.'CC''  (Ishmael)  ;
see  SINAI,  §  20,  and  cp  SHEM.

Filling  up  one  obvious  lacuna,  the  passage  now
becomes —

Lo,  these  come  from  Jerahmeel  (^KCrlTC)>

And  lo,  these  from  Zaphon,2

And  [lo,  these]  from  Arabia  (p'3lj,'c)>

And  these  from  the  land  of  Sinim  (or,  Ishmael?).

T.  K.  C.

SINITE  (T'Dn— i.e.,  the  Sinite;  AceNNAiON  [AEL],
ceiNAlOY  [Jos-  ^nt-  '•  62]  ;  six.-r.rM),  a  Canaanite
(Phoenician)  tribe,  Gen.  10 17=1  Ch.  1 15(0111.  B,  ACEN-
Nei  [L]).  In  Ass.  inscr.  (Siannu),  as  well  as  in  OT,
the  name  is  grouped  with  Arka  (ARKITE),  and
Simirra  (ZEMARITE),  in  the  former  sometimes  also
with  L'snu  (e.g.,  KB\.  172  ii.  27 26)  which  Fried.  Del.
(Par.  282)  proposes  to  find  in  A'al'at  el-Hosn  NE.
of  Tripoli  and  W.  of  Horns.  In  spite  of  the  different
sibilant  it  is  no  doubt  the  same  as  the  land  of  Si-a-rta-ai,3
mentioned  in  the  monolith  of  Shalmaneser  II.,  im
mediately  after  Irkanat  ( ARKITE,  n.  i),  Arvad,  and
Usanat  (cp  Usnu)  ;  the  king  bears  the  characteristic
name  Adunuba'li  (cp  SjnnK  C/-S  i.  no.  138,  etc.).  It
is  less  certain  whether  Sin  is  to  be  found  in  the  list  of
N.  Syrian  cities  visited  by  Thotmes  III.4

Apart  from  such  help  as  the  above  evidence  yields,
the  site  of  '  Sin  '  is  uncertain.  The  identification  with
Syn  near  the  Nahr' Arka  (see  GEOGRAPHY,  §  16  [2])
finds  some  support  in  the  Targ.  rendering  'Orthosia,'

1  This  clever  and  much-regretted  scholar  thought  of  the  tribes
of  the  Sina  on  the  slopes  of  the  Hindu-cush. '  They  are  enumer
ated  in  the  laws  of  Manu,  in  the  Mahabharata,  the  great  epos
of  India,  in  the  Lalita  vistara,  in  the  Kamayana,  the  Puranas,
and  elsewhere,  a  body  of  evidence  which  goes  back  to  the  times
before  the  Christian  era.' They  are  now,  it  is  added,  five  in
number,  and  still  live  in  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  region.

2  Duhm  and  Marti  (cp  also  SBOT)  omit  pEVC,  as  an  inter
polation from Ps.  107  3. This  arises  from their  not  rightly
understanding  prs  (see  ZAPHON),  and  involves  inserting  a  new
stichus,  pun  nspO  fl^KV See  Crit.  Bib,

3  So  Craig,  KB\  172!  94  ;  the  older  reading  is  Si-za-na-ai,  cp

A"^ri2»  196.

4  Viz.  :  Sa'i-na-r-ka-y  (207)  and  Sfti-no-ra-g-n-na  (zu):  the
former  may 'mean  'Sin  the  hinder' (cp  Ass. arka,  'behind");
see  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  289.

4644


SIGN


SIRACH


the  ruins  of  which  town  are  probably  situated  a  little  to
the  S.  of  the  Nahr'Arka  (see  OKTHOSIA).  This,  how
ever,  seems  too  close  to  ' Arka,  and  it  might  be
better  to  look  further  N.  and  find  a  trace  of  the  name
in  the  Nahr  es-Sin  (or  Nahr-el-Melek) 1  about  two  hours
N.  from  Baniyas  on  the  road  to  el-Ladikiveh  (Laodicea)  ;
so  Baed.  <3'  411.  But  the  Ass.  siannu  (=sidnu)  pre
supposes  the  form  ':>p  (cp  Fr.  Del.  I.e.),  which  is
certainly  older  and  presumably  more  correct  than  the
MT  'yp  (with  which  (@  Vg.  agree),  and  the  difficulty
of  reconciling  the  two  forms  is  a  grave  objection  to  the
identifications  hitherto  proposed.  The  same  applies
also  to  the  suggested  connection  with  the  fortress  of
Sinna  (Strabo,  xvi.  11 18  ;  Di.  ;  BOB).  s.  A.  c.

SIGN.  i.  |'K'C;;  CHWN[BAF],  ciu>N[L];  Dt.448.
See  SIR  ION.

2.  <n.iav,  i  Mace.  437,  etc. See  ZION.

SIPHMOTH  (niOSb  [Gi.],  ni»ge>  [Ba.]),  one  of
the  places  where  David,  when  in  Ziklag,  had  allies,  i  S.
3028f  (c&d>€l  [B],  but  also,  in  a  doublet  [see  v.  29]
C&4>€K  ;  C&cb&Mcoc  [A],  cecbeiMOoG  [L]).  The  idea
that  the  name  may  be  connected  with  cat?  (Nu.
34 10  f. )  is  rejected  by  Wellhausen  as  impossible.  But
there  is  reason  to  think  that  the  geographical  references
both  of  Nu.  342-12  and  of  i  S.  8027-31  have  been  mis
understood  and  consequently  misrepresented  by  the
editor  ;  originally  both  passages  referred  probably  to
the  Negeb  (cp  RIBLAH).

In  Nu.  34  ii  Shepham  and  Riblah  (i.e.,  probably  Jerahmeel)
are  mentioned  together.  So  too  in  i  S.  8029  (<SB)  o-a^eic,  which
corresponds  with  Siphmoth,  is  mentioned  after  Ket/ia0  (  =
Maacath,  a  region  in  the  Xegeb),  and  in  v.  28  MT  and  ©  agree
in  combining  Siphmoth  (erou^ei)  with  Eshtemoa  (ecrfleie  [v.  28],
SfifjiaB  [v.  29])  and  Racal  (icap/iT)Aos) — i.e.,  Jerahmeel.  \Ve  also
find  a  gentilic  SHIPHMITE  [y.->.],  which  certainly  belongs  to  the
far  S.  This  view  may  require  us  to  substitute  '  Rehoboth  '  for
'Hebron'  as  David's  first  centre  after  leaving  'Ziklag,'  and  to
suppose  '  Eshtemoa'  to  be  identical  with  SHE.MA  [q.v.}.  It  is  at
any  rate  plausible.  X.  K.  C.

SIPPAI  ("'SO),  a  Rephaite  slain  by  Sibbechai  the
Hushathite:  i  Ch.  204(c&d>OYT[B],  ce4>d>l  [A],  CATT(}>I
[L]).  In  2  S.  21 18  he  appears  as  Saph  (rp  ;  cre<f>  [B],
<re0e  [A]).  The  Pesh.  in  the  superscription  prefixed  to
Ps.  143  [144]  has:  'To  David,  when  he  slew  Asaph
[Saph]  brother  of  Gulyad  [Goliath]'  (cp  ©).  In  2  S.
21 18  <5L  reads  eVdra^e  .  .  .  roi'S  ^Triffvvijj/j^vovs  rGiv
diroyjvwv  .  .  .  which,  as  Klostermann  has  shown,  pre
supposes  the  form  'spx  (a  name  analogous  to  the  further
abbreviated  ASAPH),  and  this  may  be  near  the  correct
reading,  «  being  easily  dropped  after  the  final  «  of  ^20-

SIRACH. The  present  article  will  deal  with  those
portions  of  the  Hebrew  text  of  Ben-Sira  that  have  been
1 Extent  Polished  since  the  completion  of  the  article
of  Heb ECCLESIASTICS (March 1900). To the
material *'st  °^  new  ^ragments  given  there  (col.  1166,
n.  4)  we  have  up  to  this  time  (Jan.  1903)
to  add  only  1831-33  19 12  205-713  3719222426  published,
with facsimile, translation, and annotations, by M.
Gaster  in  JQR  for  July  1900. The  material  now  pub
lished  includes  35^-1626  1831-33  19 12  205-713  2583  13
17-24  26i2«  30n-333  309-8827  39i5-5l3o:  about  two-
thirds  of  the  whole  book.

The  new  fragments  agree  in  the  main  in  character
2 New w'tn tnose previously  known, but  also
fragments c^er  ^rom  them  in  some  interesting  par
ticulars.

(a)  Adler  fragment. — The  passage  published  by
Adler,  ~29-12i  (AAdler),  is  written  astichometrically,
agreeing  in  this  regard  with  MS  A  of  Schechter  and
Taylor  (ASch-).  The  text  is  corrupt  ;  but  in  most  cases
it  is  possible  to  emend  it  with  considerable  probability.
It  has  one  kere  (82)  and  one  marginal  note  (10 13),  and
over  several  words  (10i,  etc. )  are  placed  dots  indicating

1  This  suggests  that  Sin  has  derived  its  name  from  the  moon-
god  (Sin).

4645


the  necessity  of  correction.  9s/.  102  116-8  are  provided
with  vowel-points  and  accents,  and  a  few  other  words
are  pointed  in  whole  or  in  part.1  It  thus  appears  that
the  passage  has  been  revised  by  a  scribe  who,  un
fortunately,  did  not  possess  the  material  or  the  ability
to  correct  the  more  serious  errors  of  the  text.  Doublets
occur  in  81  9s  103ot,</-3i  112527^,  b  \\2yc,  d-?%  ;  in
8  1  the  second  clause  is  corrupt  in  the  first  couplet,  correct
in  the  second,  and,  as  the  first  clause  of  the  second
couplet  is  nearly  identical  with  the  Syriac  (S)  —  employ
ing  the  word  rtvp  in  a  Syriac  non-  Hebrew  sense  —  the
verse  may  have  been  revised  in  accordance  with  the
Syriac,  or  it  may  offer  a  variant  reading  which  was
followed  by  S  ;  10  y^c,d  is  defective,  v.  31  is  complete
and  independent  of  <5  and  S;  11  25  =  8,  v.2ja,b  =  ^
nearly  (emend  H  r^y  to  rc-yc);  11  271:  ,  </=S,  v.  28  =  ©
nearly  (@  renders  jrnrm  badly  by  'children').  The
agreement  of  the  two  couplets  of  a  doublet  with  <S  and
S  respectively  may  suggest  imitation  of  these  versions
by  H,  and  in  some  cases  doubtless  there  has  been
imitation.2  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  number  of  couplets,
as  733  (unless  jn  is  error  for  jn)  867^111416  941115
10571017/1  22  1128,  in  spite  of  the  occurrence  of  a
couple  of  Syriasms,  it  is  clear  that  the  text  of  H  is  not
dependent  on  ©  or  S.  The  obvious  cases  of  depen
dence  are  rare,  and  the  impression  made  by  the  passage
as  a  whole  is  that  it  represents  a  genuine,  though  cor
rupt,  Hebrew  text.

That  the  MS  has  passed  through  the  hands  of  an  Aramaic-
speaking  scribe  is  shown  by  the  occurrence  of  Syriasms  :  ne'p
(8  i),  mtn  (8  n),  n:y  apparently  (0  14),  and  probably  i,TS  fy  Nii'3
(9  18,  cp  S  nClS  Sy  3D})-3  There  is  no  case  of  an  Arabism  in  the
present  text  ;  but  there  is  an  indication  that  in  the  text  from
which  our  S  was  made  the  word  pSn  occurred  in  the  sense  of
'create':  in  10  18  H  reads:  'pride  is  not  becoming  '  (niN}),  for
which  ©  has,  '  pride  was  not  created  '  (K-QJ),  whilst  the  jSs;  of
S  represents  Heb.  pSn  ;  it  would  seem,  therefore,  that  in  some
Heb.  MS  or  MSS  pSn  was  employed  in  the  sense  of  jro.4  An
example  (S  i)  of  apparent  translation  from  Syriac  is  given  above,
and  a  probable  second  example  is  found  in  11  25*:,  which  seems
to  be  a  corrupted  doublet  (rvnn  f°r  TJ')-  For  quotations  from
this  portion  of  Ben-Sira  in  Saadia  and  the  Talmud,  see  below
(§3)-

(b)  Uvi  fragment.—  The  fragment  36  24-881  (CL^vi),
edited  by  LeVi  in  REJ,  Jan.  -March  1900,  with  facsimile,
translation,  and  annotations,  offers  a  new  recension  of
material  already  published  (by  Schechter  and  Taylor  in
their  'Ben-Sira,'  and  G.  Margoliouth  in  JQR,  Oct.
1899).  Unlike  the  latter  it  is  written  astichometrically  ;
this,  however,  is  a  difference  to  which  no  importance
can  be  attached.  It  abounds  in  scribal  errors,  has  harsh
constructions  (as  in  37  1),  and  employs  late  Hebrew
expressions  (for  example,  pi,  372,  in  the  sense  of  '  grief,
misfortune').5  In  general,  however,  it  is  superior  to
the  text  of  MS  B  of  Schechter  and  G.  Margoliouth.  It
sometimes  accounts  for  the  errors  of  the  versions  ;  for
example,  its  tos  ITU  in  8626  shows  how  the  readings
evfuii'u  and  AA^^.^  V^°?  arose.  In  a  couple  of  cases


1  Saadia  remarks  that  the  text  of  BS  known  to  him  was  pro
vided,  like  the  biblical  books,  with vowel-points  and  accents.
If  the  statement  is  to  be  taken  literally  it  points  to  a  MS  written
more  carefully  than  those  that  have  come  down  to  us.

2  On  the  interpretation  of  doublets  see  the  remarks  of  Xoldeke
in  ZA  Til',  1900,  p.  i. D.  S.  Margoliouth  in  Exp.  T,  April  1902,
calls  attention  to  a  doublet  in  Ben-Zev's  translation  of  Ben-Sira
(40  16),  in  which  one  couplet  agrees  with  S,  and  the  other  with  (5.

3  ~2-|j-|  (9  4)  is  probably  scribal  miswriting  for  "DCD-

4  SoLeviin/(?tf,Oct.  1900. Noldeke  (ZA  TIV,  1900,  p.  i)and
Houtsma  (Th.T, 1900)  hold  that  psn=  '  create  '  is  a  genuine
Hebrew  stem. The  fundamental  sense of  the  stem  may  be
'  divide,  cut  up  '  (as  Noideke  suggests),  whence,  on  the  one  hand,
'number,  arrange,  create,'  and,  on  the  other  hand,  'destroy.'
These meanings are variously distributed in the Semitic
languages  ;  but  no  North-Semitic  dialect,  as  far  as  our  documents
go,  employs  the  stem  in  the  sense  '  create  '  —  this  particular  sense
is  found  only  in  Arabic,  in  which  it  is  the  usual  one. Still  the
possibility  of  this sense in Hebrew must be admitted. Cp
Konig,  Die  Originalitat  d.  heb.  Sirachtextes,  &)/.,  and  Ryssel
in  St.  Kr.,  1901,  p.  579.

5  pi  here  appears  to  be  identical  with  Aram,  jn  'anxiety*
yOOj  ;  the  writing  pi  may  represent  a  local  pronunciation,  or
may  be  a  scribal  error  for  p-|.

4646


SIRACH

(37  26  28)  L  agrees  with  H  against  <£5.  The  most  interest
ing  feature  of  this  fragment  is  that  in  many  cases  its  text
is  identical  with  the  marginal  readings  of  MS  B,  whence
it  appears  that  these  readings  are  not  the  emendations
of  the  scribe  but  are  derived  from  another  MS.  This
MS  was  not  identical  with  CLivi  since  it  sometimes  differs
from  this  latter  ;  but  the  two  are  derived  from  one  earlier
text.  It  is  probable  (as  Levi  points  out)  that  the
marginal  readings  in  the  rest  of  B  (the  Cowley-Neubauer
fragment)  come  from  the  same  or  a  similar  source,  and
we  thus  have  an  indication  of  the  existence  of  a  third
family  of  Ben-Sira  manuscripts  in  addition  to  those
represented  by  A  and  B.

(c)  Selections.  —  Still  a  different  type  of  text  is  presented
by  three  fragments  containing  selections  from  Ben-Sira  :
one,  containing  423^30^".  54-79-13  36  19;?  2017-1922-24
26iz<z  and  bits  of  258  1320/1  published,  with  annota
tions,  by  Schechter  (in  JQR,  April  1900)  ;  a  second,
containing  618^192835  71461720^  23-25,  published,
with  translation  and  annotations,  by  LeYi  (in  KEJ,
Jan.  -March  1900)  ;  and  a  third,  containing  1831  (one
word)  32  /  19i/.  205-7  3719222426  20i3,  published,
with  facsimile,  translation,  and  annotations,  by  Gaster
(in  JQR,  July  1900).  Possibly  a  number  of  such
selections  existed  ;  this  would  \vi  a  natural  result  of  the
popularity  of  the  book.  Groups  of  couplets,  taken  from
different  parts  of  Ben-Sira,  occur  in  the  Talmud  ;  for
example,  in  Sanhedrin,  ioo/'.  In  such  cases  the  object
is  to  bring  together  the  aphorisms  relating  to  some  one
subject  (women  and  the  household  in  Sank.  looA);  these
need  not  have  been  taken,  and  probably  were  not  taken,
from  a  book  of  extracts  ;  but  they  may  have  suggested
the  compilation  of  such  books.  In  the  fragments  under
consideration,  whilst  the  couplets  show  a.  variety  of
subjects,  a  certain  unity  is  observable  ;  in  that  of
Schechter  the  chief  points  are  the  desirableness  of  moral
firmness  and  the  wickedness  of  women  ;  in  that  of  Levi,
the  pursuit  of  wisdom  and  the  cultivation  of  humility  ;
in  that  of  Gaster,  the  characteristics  of  the  wise  man.
For  the  sake  of  distinction  these  books  of  extracts  may
be  designated  by  the  letter  E.

The  Schechter  fragment  (ESch-,  =  his  C)  is  in  tolerably
good  form,  having  only  two  badly  corrupted  passages,
5  it  and  613  (i)ffl  (  =  86190).  It  accords  now  with  the
Greek,  now  with  the  Syriac,  differing  in  this  regard
sometimes  in  the  same  couplet.1  Often  it  goes  its  own
way,  being  sometimes  (as  in  012)  of  a  curtness  that
suggests  originality  ;  and  its  irregular  oscillation  between
<P  and  S  indicates  that  it  is  not  based  on  either  of  these
versions.  It  is  in  general  agreement  with  the  Greek  in
several  cases  in  which  MS  ASch-  agrees  with  the
Syriac.

The  Levi  fragment  (ET-^vi,  =hisD)coincides  in  material
with  part  of  MS  ASch-,  and  gives  a  better  text  than  that
of  the  latter.  From  6  18  to  7  20  it  is  nearer  to  ©  than  to
S,  and  in  the  remaining  couplets  is  nearer  to  S.  It  is
carefully  written  ;  there  are  two  or  three  scribal  mis-
writings  of  letters,  and  a  word  is  omitted  in  76  and
probably  also  in  721.  It  contains  no  Syriasms  or
Arabisms,  and  has  the  tone  of  an  independent  text.

The  Gaster  fragment  (EGaster)  resembles  ESch-  in
agreeing  sometimes  with  ©,  sometimes  with  S.  In
several  couplets  (1832  f.  19i  206)  it  serves  to  explain
the  errors  of  one  or  both  of  the  versions  ;  clearly  in
some  cases  these  last  are  free  renderings  of  H.  The
Hebrew  text  is  corrupt  or  defective  in  192^  20s,  and
has  apparently  one  Syriasm  (37  19,  C2~3  for  c:rr).

With  the  light  got  from  the  new  fragments  we  may
now  speak  more  definitely  than  was  possible  two  years
ago  of  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn
from  the  whole  of  the  Ben-Sira  Hebrew
material.  In  the  first  place,  we  may
consider  the  facts  that  make  for  the  genuineness  of  the


3.  Genuineness
of  the  Heb.


1  In  2.r>  17  it  agrees  with  (pNAVJ,  in  the  expression  '  like  a  bear,'
while  <pn  and  S  read  '  like  sackcloth  '  ;  if  op/cos  is  Gk.  corruption
of  craKicov,  H  here  follows  a  Greek  text

4647


SIRACH

Hebrew  text — that is to  say,  against  the  supposition
that  it  is  a  translation  from  versions.

(<j)  Talmud. — The  question  of  the  quotations  from
Ben-Sira  in  the  Talmud  is  complicated  by  the  corrup
tions  of  the  Talmud  text  as  well  as  by  the  peculiar  habits
of  the  Talmudic  doctors  :  their  frequent  disregard  of
literalness,  and  their  foadness  for  grouping  clauses  or
couplets  from  different  parts  of  the  book  and  adding  or
interweaving  passages  from  the  canonical  books.  Their
citations  are  not  necessarily  authority  for  the  wording  of
the  original,  but  may  testify  to  a  form  or  forms  current
in  the  Talmudic  period,  and  may  help  to  establish  the
original  text.1

There  are  indications  (though,  for  the  reasons  men
tioned  above,  these  are  not  clear)  that  the  two  Talmuds,
the  Jerusalem  and  the  Babylonian,  had,  in  some  cases
at  least,  different  texts  of  Ben-Sira.  Thus  in  3 21  Talm.
Jer.  Hag.  -j"jc,  agrees  with  H  in  the  first  word  (where
Talm.  Bab.  and  Saad.  have  a  different  word)  and  also
in  the  last  word,  but  in  the  rest  of  the  couplet  has  a
wholly  different  reading  (perhaps  based,  on  Job  11  8)2;
in  the  same  passage  Bab.  Talm.  Hag.  13*1  (and  so  Midr.
Rab. ,  Gen.  8)  has  a  doublet,  in  which  the  first  couplet
is  identical  with  the  form  in  (5  and  S,  whilst  the  second,
although  diverging  from  Jer.  Talm.,  <5,  S,  and  H,
agrees  with  H  and  Saad.  in  one  peculiar  expression
(woo) ;  in  this  doublet  we  may  have  an  indication  of
at  least  two  forms  of  the  Ben-Sira  text  in  the  fifth  century,
one  of  which  is  here  represented  by  (5  and  S,  and  the
other  by  H  (there  being  also  in  this  latter  scribal  variants) ;
possibly,  however,  both  couplets  are  original,  and  H  has
taken  one,  and  ©  the  other.  In  7  17  the  'hope'  of  H
is  supported  by  Abvtk  4?  (against  (5  and  S  '  fate'),  but
Abdth  and  the  versions  agree  in  reading  '  humble  thyself
instead  of  H  '  humble  pride '  ;  in  both  cases  the  readings
of  the  versions  are  the  better.  A  noteworthy  group  of
selections  from  Ecclus.  9  occurs  in  Talm.  Bab.  Sank,
loot,  Yfbdm.  63^,  the  order  of  lines  being  :  8a,  3^,  ga.fi
(in  part),  8c  (to  which  is  added  Prov.  726^);  8<z  =  H
(emended),  (5  (S  being  different)  ;  3^  (where  H  has  a
doublet)  agrees  in  part  with  one  form  of  H,  in  part  with
the  other  ;  in  9  the  text  of  Bab.  Talm.  seems  to  be  in
disorder,  or  to  be  very  free  ;  it  has  '  beside  her'  (nSsN)3
instead  of  'with  a  married  woman'  (<&,  S,  and,  by
emendation,  H  n^ij'3)'  anc^  ' to  mingle1  instead  of  'do
not  drink '  ;  8c  is  a  slightly  expanded  form  of  emended
H  (=S).  In  Hid  29<z  1825  the  Talmudic  text  is  sub
stantially  the  same  as  that  of  H  and  ©,  S.  It  is  in
general  more  correctly  written  than  H,  which  is* full  of
scribal  blunders  ;  yet  the  two  are  sufficiently  alike  to
suggest  that  our  H  rests  on  a  genuine  Hebrew  text.
We  cannot  be  surprised  at  scribal  errors,  doublets,
omissions,  and  additions  in  a  text  of  the  tenth  or  the
eleventh  century  when  we  find  similar  occurrences  in  the
Talmud  as  well  as  in  the  versions.4

(f>)  Saadia. — The  resemblance  between  Saadia  and
H  is  very  close,  the  differences  between  the  t\so  being
little  more  than  variations  of  diction,  and  the  advantage
lying  sometimes  with  one,  sometimes  with  the  other  ;  in
5s/.  (H  uri,  Saad.  uj?)  and  66  (H  ^j-a.  Saad.  rbi)  the
wording  of  H  is  the  better,  but  in  66a  the  order  of  words
in  Saadia  is  the  more  correct  ;  on  the  other  hand,  in  67
13  ii  the  Aramaic  JVD:  of  H  is  probably  to  be  emended
into  the  naa  and  HMD  of  Saadia.  He  appears  to  have

1  On  the  quotations  in  the  Talmud  and  Saadi.-v  in  addition  to
the  authors  mentioned  above,  col.  1172,  n,  2,  see  Bacher  (.fQK,
Jan.  1900),  Edersheim  (in  Wace),  Levi  (Co»i»i.  and  REJ  and
JQR)  and Ryssel (in Kautzsch's Apokryphfn and St. A'r.,
1901-1902)  ;  cp  Schechter  in  JQK  3  and  4.

2  Bacher  suggests  thar  Jer.  Talm.  j-in  is  an  erroneous  com
pletion  of  the  abbreviation  'in,  which  should  lie  read  c"nn-

3  Rashi,  nSv3  ^N- The  text  of  Bab-  Talm.  should  perhaps
be  emended  after  H  and  the  versions. But  in  7:  9,  where  H  has
only  '  strong  drink  '  and  (pBNAC  only  '  wine  '  (S  '  old  wine  '),  Bab.
Talm.  has  lioth  terms,  possibly  accounting  for  the  differences
between  H,  »P,  and  S.

4  On  the  Syriac  of  Ecclus.  9  s_f.  see  Levi,  in  JQK,  Oct.  1900
p.  8/

4648


SIRACH

had  a  text  that  was  substantially  identical  with  ours ;
his  citations  may  be  considered  to  establish,  as  far  as
they  go,  a  text  of  the  tenth  century,  though  of  its  history
\ve  know  nothing.1  Its  special  similarity  to  that  of  our
Hebrew  MSS  may  be  a  result  of  the  proximity  in  time
of  the  two.  Saadia  also  quotes  as  from  the  '  Wisdom  of
Eleazar  ben  Irai '  a  passage  that  is  found  in  our  Ben-Sira
(32i/. ),  and  the  text  quoted  by  him  differs  from  that  of
our  Hebrew  in  only  a  couple  of  unimportant  forms  (H
niN^Si  Saad.  K^smi ',  H  &  nan,  Saad.  ic-to) ; 2  the
natural  conclusion  is  that  the  book  of  Eleazar  ben  Irai
(if  this  name  really  belongs  to  a  separate  author  and  is
not  a  corruption  of  '  Eleazar  ben  Sira ' )  contained  ex
tracts  from  Ben-Sira  or  from  some  work  based  on  Ben-
Sira.

(c)  Relation of  H  to  © and  S. — It  is  a  common
remark that the Hebrew MSS of BS  fall  into two
divisions  : those  that more  resemble  the  Greek, and
those  that  are  nearer  the  Syriac  ;  to  the  former  division
belongs  the  B-group,  to  the  latter  the  A-group. This
classification  holds  in  a  general  way,  but  may  easily  be
pressed  too  far. Even  in  the  earlier  A  and  B  material
there  are  a  number  of  passages  that  are  adverse  to  such
a classification, and many  more appear in the new
fragments. The division into these two classes  has,
however, been  held  to  indicate  that  our  Hebrew  is  a
translation from  the  Greek or the  Syriac. With the
new  material  at  our  disposal  it  may  be  said  that  this
supposition,  as  an  explanation  of  the  Hebrew  as  a.  whole,
seems  to  be  definitely  excluded. It  appears  to  be  set
aside  by  the  irregularity  of  the  accordance  of  H  with  <S5
or  S,  by  its  not  infrequent  divergence  from  and  correc
tion  of  both  the  versions,  by  its  relation  to  the  quotations
in  the  Talmud  and  Saadia,  and  by  its  tone,  which  in
many  places  is  free  and  independent  and  is  characterised
by  an  aphoristic  curtness  that  a  translator  would  not  be
likely  to  attain. We  must  rather  account  for  the  general
relation  between  H  and  the  versions  by  supposing  that
H is the descendant  of  early texts,  some  of  which
were the basis of (5, others the basis  of  S. The
omissions  in  S  call  for  fuller  treatment  than  they  have
yet  received. They  may  be  due  in  part  to  the  frequent
fondness  of  this  version  for  clearness  and  condensation,
in  part  to  the  defectiveness  of  the  i\IS  from  which  it  was
made.

(d)  Diction. — The  testimony  of  the  new  fragments
confirms  the  judgment  of  the  language  expressed  under
ECCLESIASTICUS. After  allowance  has  been  made  for
obvious  scribal  errors  the  diction  of  H  does  not  differ
materially  from  that  of  Koheleth. Aramaisms  and  New-
Hebrew  forms  and  expressions  may  well  have  been  em
ployed  by  Ben-Sira  himself  (such  forms  occur  even  in  the
Book  of  Proverbs),  and,  as  regards  the  fragments,  there
was  no  time,  from  200  B.C.  to  1000  A. D.,  when  Jewish
scribes  would  not  be  likely  to  insert  familiar  Aramaic
words — the  more  that  the  text  of  Ben-Sira  was  not  pro
tected  by  canonical  sanctity. The  vocabulary  of  the
fragments  furnishes  abundant  material  for  lexicographical
research.3 The  limits  of  the  '  New- Hebrew  '  vocabulary
are  not  sharply  defined  ; at  present  it  is  hardly  possible
to  draw  the  line  distinctly  between  '  Neohebraisms '  and
'  Syriasms,'  and  there  is  a  similar  indistinctness  (though
a  less  clearly  marked  one)  as  to  Arabisms. In  respect
of  purity  of  style  the  fragments  differ  among  themselves  :

1  The  question  whether  the  '  Sefer  ha-Galuy'  (in  which  the
citations  occur)  is  the  work  of  Saadia  is  discussed  by  D.  Mar-
goliouth,  Harkavy,  and  Bacher  in  JQR  12  (1899-1900).  There
seems  to  be  no  good  reason  to  doubt  its  genuineness.

"  Here,  as  elsewhere,  Saadia  is  nearer  than  H  to  the  classic
usage  ;  the  scribes  of  H  (except  in  CLevi  and  AAdler)  are  fond
of  the  short  rel.  pron.  jj>.  But  this  usage,  though  distinctive  for
a  given  MS,  is  not  a  mark  of  the  date  of  a  Ben-Sira  text,  since
it  is  common  in  late  OT  writings  and  in  the  Talmud.

3  On  this  point  cp  the  Comms.  of  L6vi  and  Ryssel  ;  the
articles  of  Noldeke  and  Houtsma  (see  above,  col.  4632  n.  4) ;
Schwalry,  Idioticon  d.  Christl.-pttl.  Aram.  (1893);  Fraenkel,
in  MGWJ,  1899;  Jacob,  in  ZATIV,  1902;  art.  ARAMAIC
LANGUAGE,  above,  col.  281  f.  ;  and  various  discussions  in  JQR
and  REJ.

4649


SIEACH

£Levi  is  relatively  free  from  faults  ;  parts  of  A  and  B
are  greatly  disfigured.  The  blemishes  testify  mostly  to
the  number  of  hands  through  which  the  MSS  have
passed,  not  to  the  work  of  a  translator.  The  aphoristic
curtness  of  style  of  the  fragments  has  been  referred  to
above.

On  the  other  hand,  whilst  the  fragments  produce  a
general  impression  of  originality,  the  text  appears  in

_, .  ,  some  passages  to  have  been  translated

*•  -t^pioyment  from  or  conformed  to  that  cf  a  Version
of  Versions


and  Talmud.


or  of  the  Talmud. Some  instances  of


probable  and  apparent  imitation  of
Versions  are  mentioned  above  ( ECCLESIASTICUS,  §  5),
and  others  have  been  pointed  out  by  critics  ;  most  of
the  examples  cited  relate  to  the  Syriac,  a  few  only  to
the  Greek.1  These  cases,  which  are  relatively  not
numerous,  do  not  prove  a  general  translation  or
imitation,  but  exhibit  the  procedures  of  particular  scribes
in  the  passages  in  which  they  occur.  The  same  remark
is  to  be  made  of  cases  in  which  H  appears  to  follow  the
Talmud  ;  2  such  imitations  by  late  scribes  are  natural.
The  corruptions  of  the  BS  text  began  early  and  con
tinued  a  long  time ;  there  was  little  to  restrain  the
fancies  and  the  negligence  of  copyists.  Taking  into
consideration  the  two  sets  of  facts — the  evidences  of
originality  and  the  evidences  of  slavish  imitation — the
more  reasonable  conclusion  seems  to  be  that  the  text  of
the  fragments  is  in  general  genuine,  but  full  of  cor
ruptions.

It  is  hardly  possible  at present  to make  a  helpful
classification  of  the  Heb.  MSS  of  Ben-Sira  ; for  such  a
_. ._ classification we need more Heb.
Ca~ material. An obvious and simple


tion  of  Heb.
MSS.


principle  of  division  would  be  the  rela


tion  of  the  fragments  to  the  two  main
groups  of  Greek  texts  ((5xa-c  etc-  and  <SBetc-)  or  to  the
two  Greek  and  the  Syriac.  But,  in  addition  to  the  fact
that  the  relations  of  the  versional  texts  to  one  another
and  to  the  original  Hebrew  are  not  clear,  there  is  the
difficulty  that  the  fragments  show  a  confusing  variety  of
similarity  and  dissimilarity  to  the  Versions  and  to  one
another.  This  is  true  of  all  the  Heb.  MSS  so  far
published :  in  the  same  paragraph,  and  even  in  the
same  couplet,  the  text  sometimes  turns  from  one
version  to  another,  or,  abandoning  both,  goes  its  own
independent  way.  It  is  obvious  that  it  has  experienced
a  variety  of  fortunes,  and  that,  whilst  it  sometimes
corrects  the  Versions  or  is  corrected  by  them,  it  in  some
cases  goes  baok  to  sources  different  from  theirs.  It
can  be,  therefore,  only  a  rough  classification  that  is
based  on  resemblances  to  the  Versions.  The  direct
testimony  to  the  Hebrew  text  is  contained  in  the  Talmud
(about  760  years  after  the  composition  of  Ben-Sira' s
book)  and  Saadia  (about  400  years  after  the  Talmud).
The  Talmudic  readings  differ  a  good  deal  from  our  H,
but  Saadia  is  substantially  identical  with  the  latter  ;  the
differences  between  the  citations  in  the  Talmud  and
those  in  Saadia  may  be  taken  to  represent  roughly  the
changes  undergone  by  the  Heb.  text  in  the  interval
between  the  two.  The  text  of  the  Talmud  is  in  general
accord  with  the  unglossed  Greek  (<5B),  but  is  free  from
the  scribal  variations  that  crept  into  the  latter  ;  it  may,
thus,  represent  a  Hebrew  text  (perhaps  as  early  as  the
and  cent,  of  our  era)  which  was  in  substantial  accord
with  the  Gk.  text  that  underlay  our  two  main  Gk.
recensions.  This  Heb.  text  was  probably  the  basis

1  On the acrostic, 51  13-30, see Taylor, in Schechter and
Taylor's Wisdom of  Ben Sira,  p. Ixxvi  ff. Leyi, in  REJ,

1899,  gives  a  number  of  cases  of  imitation. But  4(5  20  is  not  a
case  in  point. H  -p-|  is  not  a  translation  of  corrupt  S,  but  a
variant  of  earlier  H rpNi which  was  a  scribe's  corruption  of
original H rrinx- If  H had  translated S  (nmix).  !t  would
have  written  niN- See  REJ  30  188.

2  A  probable  example  is  given  by  Professor  L<5vi,  in  JQR,  Oct.

1900,  p.  15,  and  another  by  Professor  Margoliouth,  in  Exp.T,
April, 1902. Cp Bacher, in  JQR, vol. 12 (1899-1900), p.
286^

4650


SIRAH,  WELL  OP

of  our  fragments.  \Ve  may  suppose  that  the  Heb.
(handed  clown  through  Jewish  circles)  and  the  Gk.
(made  132  B.C.,  and  transmitted  by  Alexandrian
Jews  and  by  Christians)  did  not  differ  materially
from  each  other  in  the  second  century  A.D.  After
that  time  they  went  their  separate  ways :  the  Gk.
(under  what  circumstances  we  knosv  not)  fell  into
two  divisions,  with  one  of  which  the  Syriac  stood  in
some  close  relation ; T  the  Heb.  was  not  similarly
divided  into  families,  but  was  roughly  treated  by  scribes,
who  obscured  its  readings,  and  in  a  few  cases  copied  or
imitated  the  Versions,  especially  the  Syr.2  Our
Hebrew  fragments,  after  they  have  been  freed,  as  far  as
possible,  from  scribal  errors,  must  be  classified  accord
ing  to  the  degree  of  their  purity  or  impurity,  and
according  to  their  peculiarities  of  diction.3  Such  a
classification,  however,  yields  no  very  striking  or
important  results — the  differences  between  the  fragments
in  correctness  and  style  are  not  great.  They  must  be
examined  and  judged  every  one  for  itself.  So  far,  they
have  not  contributed  much  to  the  restitution  of  the
original  text  in  passages  in  which  the  Versions  are
obscure.  They  often  confirm  one  or  more  of  the  Versions,
and  sometimes  correct  or  explain  words  or  lines  ;  but
in  general  the  text  of  Ben-Sira  remains  nearly  as  it  was
before  the  discovery  of  the  fragments.  These,  however,
apart  from  the  emendation  of  the  text,  have  called  forth
renewed  study  of  the  book,  and  have  added  to  the
vocabulary  of  the  Hebrew  language.

In  addition  to  the  works  on  Hen-Sira  given  above  (col.  1178)
the  following  may  be  mentioned  : — Raebiger,  Ethice  apocr.

(1838);  Daubanton,  in  Theol.  Stud.  4  (1886);
6. Literature. Houtsma, in '/'//.  T  343 (1900); Ryssel's

Comm.  in  St.  A>.  (1900-02)  (completion  of
his  comm.  on  the  Hebrew  text) ;  Grimme,  Metres  et  strophes  d.
I. fragments  heb.  d.  Manuscrit  A.  d.  r  Ecclcs.  (Fr.  trans.)  (1901) ;
Kartir,  Die  Scholien  d.  Greg.  Abulf.  Bar-Heb.  z.  Weisheitb.
d.  losuab.  .SYra  (180.2);  and  various  short  arts.  \\\JQR,  R  KJ ',
ZA  Til',  Rev.  Bib!.,  Th.  Rundschau.  c.  H.  T.

SIRAH,  WELL  OF  (irVpn  113,  '  walled  cistern  '?
cp  on  "IHD,  PRISON,  §  2  (9)),  2  S.  826,  the  name  of  the
spot  from  which  Abner  was  enticed  back  to  Hebron,  after
he  had  concluded  his  interview  with  David  (see  ABNER],
and  had  set  out  on  his  return  journey  northward.
Josephus  calls  it  J3ri[p](rr)pa — i.e. ,  mo  IN  3 — and  says  that
it  was  20  stadia  from  Hebron  (Ant.  vii.  1  5).  Rosen
has  called  attention  (ZDMG 12486)  to  a  spring  and
reservoir,  situated  about  a  mile  out  of  Hebron,  a  few
steps  to  the  W.  of  the  old  northern  road,  and  now
called  'Ain  Sara.  Grove  (/?/?,'-'  s.v.  'Sirah')  and
Conder  (Tcntwork  286)  agree  that  this  may  be  the
ancient  'well  of  (the)  Sirah'  ;  indeed,  Conder  goes  so
far  as  to  say  that  '  this  may  be  considered  one  of  the  few
genuine  sites  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hebron.'  It  is
true,  the  original  form  of  the  name  may  have  been
rrvnp,  Sehirah  (i.e.,  'enclosed'?),  for  <§BA  gives  (dtr&
rov  </>p<?aros)  TOV  ffeeipa/jL,  where  fj.  may  of  course  be
disregarded  (cp  <T7;Xw/a  =  Shiloh),  <5>L  .  .  .  <f>p.  creeipa,
Vg.  a  cisterna  Sira ;  Targ.  NDTDI  N21JS  ;  Aq.  OTTO
TOV  \dnKov  TTJS  diroffTdffetjjs  (men).  It  is  more  prob
able,  however,  that  '  Hassirah '  covers  over  some
gentilic  or  ethnic,  and  if  '  Hebron  '  is  a  corruption  of
'  Rehoboth,'  and  David's  first  kingdom  was  really  in  the
Negeb  (as  some  recent  articles  in  the  present  work
assume),  some  gentilic  or  ethnic  of  the  Xegeb — such  as
•nne'Ki  Ashhur  (cp  Din.  Heres) — is  to  be  expected.

T.  K.  C.

SIRION  (pi!',  linb';  CANICOP  [BAFL]  in  Dt.  ;
O  HrMTHMCNOC  [BKARTU]— i.e.,  i-niT,  in  Ps.),  a
'  Sidor.ian '  or  Phoenician  designation  of  Hermon,  Dt.

1  for  some  illustrations  of  the  diversities  of  Gk.  readings  see
N.  Peters,  'Die  sahidisch-koptische  Uebersetz.  d.  B.  Ecclus.'
57  ff.  in  Bibl  Stud.  83  (1898).

*  The  acrostic,  51  13-30,  seems  to  be  the  only  example  of
copying  on  a  large  scale  ;  the  other  cases,  not  numerous,  affect
only  single  words  or  expressions.

3  On  palaeographic  peculiarities  see  Schechter,  in  Schechter
and  Taylor's  Ben  Sira,  and  Gaster  \nJQR  for  July,  1900.

4651


SKIRT

3  9  Ps.  29  6.  It  is  also  recognised  by  Pesh.  in  Dt.  4  48  I  pX"
for  JK^J*)  ;  and  in  Jer.  18 14^,  by  Gratz  and  Cornill,
according  to  whom,  to  show  the  unnaturalness  of
Israel's  desertion  of  Yahwe,  Jeremiah  asks,  '  Does  the
snow  of  Lebanon  melt  away  (airn)  from  the  rock  of
Sirion'  (read  p"i2>  "nxs  for  ne'  'c,  '  from  the  rock  of  the
field')?  It  is  not  clear,  however,  that  'Sirion'  is  the
right  form  ;  it  is  hardly  confirmed  by  the  Ass.  sirara
(A'A'2@>  159,  184  ;  cp  Del.  Par.  101,  103/1).

It  is  probable  that  '  Hermon  '  was  also  a  designation  of  the
mountains  of  'Jerahmeel.'  Dt.  SHJ?.,  in  its  original  form,  seems
to  have  described  the  territoiy  of  Cusham,  where  OG  ('/•?'.)
reigned;  similarly  Dt.  448.  'Sirion'  can  now  be  explained.
Like  '  Hermon/  it  represents  an  ethnic — perhaps  SKI:;"  (Israel).

T.  K.  C.

SISAMAI,  RV  SISMAI  (n?pp,  or  V?pD  [see  Gi.];
COCOM&i  [BA],  cAC&Mei  [L]).  a  jerahmeelite ;
i  Ch.  24of.

Baethgen  (Bcitr.  65)  and  Kittel  on  i  Ch.  I.e.  call  attention  to
the  Ph.  name  "ODD  'n  a  bilingual  where  Gr.  has  <re<r/iao; ;  and
Baethgen,  following  Renan,  accepts  CDD  as  *  divine  name.
But  in  spite  of  Kittel's  implied  suggestion  (see  SHALLUM,  3)  it
may  well  be  questioned  whether  Sismai  can  be  =  COD  13i? '  servant
of  (the  god)  Sisam.'  Of  all  the  other  names  in  i  Ch.  234-41
there  is  hardly  one  which  cannot  be  at  once  with  some  confidence
pronounced  to  be  a  clan-name.  The  names  which  follow  Sismai
are  Shallum,  Jekamiah,  and  Elishama,  names  which  may
plausibly  be  regarded  as  related  to  Ishmael  and  Jerahmeel.
DID  ar"d  D'DID  have  sometimes  arisen  by  corruption  out  of
C'13  and  D'C'13  ;  it  is  possible  that  'COO  represents  'CC'3,  'one
from  Cusham '(  =  the  N.  Arabian  Cush).  Cp  jt-'B'  (Sheshan  ??),
v.  34,  the  name  of  a  Misrite  slave,  which  may  represent  jtyj
(Cushan);  see,  however,  SHESHAN.  T.  K.  C.

SISERA  (frOp^D,  §  51  ;  on  meaning,  see  below;
ceic&p*.  [B],  CICAP&  [AL] ;  in  Judg.  5zo,  mA  [A]).

i.  The  leader  of  the  Canaanites  opposed  to  Deborah
and  Barak  (Judg.  4  f. ).  The  narrative,  however,  is
inconsistent,  and  presents  Sisera  in  a  twofold  aspect  ;
according  to  the  poem  (5)  he  is  the  greatest  of  the
confederate  Canaanite  kings,  whilst  the  prose  account
(4)  represents  him  merely  as  the  general1  of  Jabin
king  of  Hazor,  and  as  having  his  abode  in  Kadesh  (so
Marq.,  see  HAROSHETH).  See  further  DEBORAH  and
SHAMGAR.  In  the  latter  article  the  difficult  name
Sisera  is  considered  ;  it  has  probably  not  a  Hittite  but
a  N.  Arabian  origin.  If  the  Nethinim  are  really  (see
Che.  Amer.  J.  of  Theol.,  July  1901,  pp.  433^)
Ethanites  or  N.  Arabians,  the  explanation  here  offered
will  be  confirmed  (see,  however,  NETHINIM).  See  2,
below.  The  royal  city  of  Sisera  (or  Jabin)  is  (ex
//r/.)  not  the  Hittite  city  Kadesh  (see  HAROSHETH)
but  the  place  known  as  Kadesh-barnea  (Kadesh-jerah-
meel).

2.  The  name  of  a  family  of  (post-exilic)  Nethinim  :  Ezra  2  53
(Bom.  cricrapa[a.]  [AL]) ;  Xeh.755  (creicrapad  [A],  <re<m.  [RK],
om.  L]);  i  Esd.  632  (crepap  [BA],  ASEKEK  [AV],  SERAR  [RV]).

SISINNES  (CICINNHC).  'governor  of  Syria  (Ccele-
syria)  and  Phoenicia,'  i  Esd.  67  7i.  The  name  is  also
that  of  a  faithful  courtier  of  Darius,  Arr.  i.  263  vii.  64
(—iaii>r]s).  On  its  possible  origin,  see  TATNAI  (the
corresponding  name  in  Ezra,  Neh.).

SISMAI  (TOpp),  i  Ch.  24ot  RV,  AV  SISAMAI.

SISTRA. See  Music,  §  3  (3).

SITNAH  (njlptr  ;  e\epi&  [ADL,  om.  E]),  the  name
of  one  of  the  contested  wells  in  the  story  of  Isaac  and
Abimelech,  Gen.  2621.  The  name  still  lingers  ;  see
REHOBOTH.

SITHRI  CnnV)-  Ex-  6"  RV,  AV  ZITHRI.
SIVAN  (fVD; Esth.  89; Bar.  18). See  MONTH,
§2.

SKIRT,  i.  //?/.  7&  (Ex.  2833  RV  [AY  '  hem  '],  Is.
6 1  RV'"K-  [EV  'train']).2  The  word,  like  the  cognate

1  This  seems  to  be  not  original ;  cp  JABIN  and  see  JUDGES,
-  In  Is.  6  i  the  Tg.  and  ©  avoid  the  anthropomorphism  of  the
4652


SKULL


SLAVERY


Sobel  (^aV,  Is.  17 2^,  RV  '  train  ')  is  derived  from  a  root
meaning  'to  hang  down.'  It  is  only  the  mantle  that
has  a  skirt  or  train,  and  in  this  lies  the  whole  point  of
Is.  47a  ;  the  '  tender  and  delicate'  maidens  remove  the
veil  and  flowing  robe  to  perform  the  work  of  slaves.

2.  kanHph, H33, rather '  corner '  or  loose-flowing end. See
FRINGES,  and  cp  SACK.

3.  peh,  ns. See  COLLAR,  2  (col.  858).  I.  A.
SKULL. See  CALVARY,  GOLGOTHA.

SLAUGHTERMEN  (Gen.  37 36  AVms-,  etc.).  See
EXECUTIONER,  i.

SLAVERY.  The  word  does  not  occur  in  EV.
'Slave'  is  found  only  twice  in  AV  (Jer.  ~1 14,  and  here  only  in
italics  as  an  explanation  of  JV3  T1?;  ['  home-born  slave  '] ;  Rev.
18  13  for  (Tia^aruiv),  and  twice  in  RV  (Dt.  21  14  247,  2  ~^V^,
' deal  with  as  a  slave  [marg.  chattel]';  AV  'make  merchandise
of).  The  Heb.  -\^y,  'ebeci,  is  rendered  '  servant '  (i  K.  "1 39  etc.).

Among the Hebrews, as in the ancient  world in

general,  there  was  no  such  thing  as  free  labour  in  the

1 Hebrew nlO(^ern  sense  < men-servants  and  maid-

'  .  servants  were  the  property  of  their

°°  masters — in  other  words,  were  slaves.
\Ve  must  carefully  dissociate  this  word,  however,  from
certain  ideas  inseparably  connected  with  it  in  the  modern
Christian  world.  In  the  Hebrew  conception  there  was
no  such  profound  difference  between  the  slave's  relation
to  the  head  of  the  house,  and  that  held  by  the  other
members  of  the  family.  Free-born  wives  and  free-born
children  are  legally  all  alike  under  the  power  of  the
master  of  the  house.  The  father  can  sell  his  children
as  well  as  his  slaves  to  another  Israelite.  The  slaves
are  not  regarded  as  beings  of  an  inferior  order,  but  are
true  members  of  the  family,  and,  though  destitute  of
civil  rights,  are  nevertheless  regarded  as  fellow-men,
and,  indeed,  if  of  Israelite  descent,  are  held  in  as  high
esteem  as  freemen  who  at  the  same  time  are  foreigners.
Considered  in  itself,  therefore,  there  is  no  degradation
attaching  to  slavery.  This  is  sufficiently  shown  by  the
one  notorious  fact  that  a  man  would  not  infrequently
sell  himself  into  slavery,  and  voluntarily  remain  in  that
condition.

In  the  legal  and  actual  standing  of  the  slave  the
point  whether  he  was  an  Israelite  or  not  was  exceedingly
2.  Slaves:  their  !mP°«ant-  Th,c  bujk  of  the  slaves

position,  etc.  Jn  ,anclent  Israel  would  seem  to  have
belonged  to  the  non-Israelite  cate
gory.  In  the  main  they  had  become  slaves — as  all
ancient  law  sanctioned  —  through  the  fortune  of  war.
There  existed,  indeed,  also  in  Israel  the  barbarous
custom  of  the  herein  (see  BAN).  The  war  being  re
garded  as  a  war  of  Yah  we,  the  entire  booty  was  often
devoted  '  to  Yahwe '  ;  that  is  to  say,  every  living  thing
was  put  to  death,  and  every  lifeless  thing  destroyed  (see,
e.g. ,  i  S.  15).  In  the  otherwise  humane  Dt.  even,
only  the  women  and  children  of  conquered  towns  are
to  be  spared — i.e.,  made  slaves.  Desire  of  gain  doubt
less  often  interposed  as  a  practical  corrective  of  this
cruel  precept,  and  it  is  probable  that,  as  a  rule,  the
custom  was  to  turn  to  account  as  slaves  the  men  as
well  as  the  women  ( r  S.  15  i  K.  20  39 /  etc. ).  Israelites
also,  we  may  be  sure,  had  frequent  opportunities,  if  so
minded,  for  buying  slaves  in  foreign  markets.  Their
Phoenician  neighbours,  with  whom  they  always  had
active  commercial  relations,  were  famous  throughout
antiquity  as  slave-dealers  (cp  Am.  16).  The  '  strangers
within  the  gates '  must  also,  occasionally  at  least,  have
found  themselves  compelled  to  sell  themselves  or  their
children.  And,  lastly,  the  slave  population  was  con
stantly  augmented  by  the  birth  of  children  to  slaves  in
the  home  of  their  master — the  ytlide  bdyith  (n'3  n1?')  of
Gen.  14 14 — children  who,  of  course,  were  themselves
also  slaves.

The  master's  right  of  property  in  his  slaves  of  foreign

figure  by  rendering  ,Ti,T  V7  ('the  brilliancy  of  his  glory')  and
Sofa  respectively.

4653


3.  Master  and
slave.


origin  was  unlimited.  He  could  sell  them,  or  give
them  away  to  Israelites  or  non- Israelites
as  he  chose.  Yet  these  slaves,  too,
were  by  no  means  left  absolutely
defenceless  to  the  caprice  of  their  owner.  The  old
consuetudinary  law  interposed  energetically  on  their
behalf.  The  master  was  not  entitled  to  kill  them  ;  the
killing  of  a  slave  was  a  punishable  offence — a  provision
which  becomes  all  the  more  noticeable  when  it  is
remembered  that  in  the  case  of  children  the  father  did
possess  a  limited  power  of  life  and  death  (see  LAW  AND
JUSTICE,  §§  10  14).  With  the  Greeks  and  Romans  this
power  was,  as  regards  slaves,  a  matter  of  course.  The
master's  right  of  punishment  was,  in  Israel,  further
restricted,  and  the  slave  protected  from  serious  mal
treatment,  by  the  rule  that  the  slave  became  entitled  to
his  freedom  if  his  master  in  chastising  him  had  done
him  some  lasting  bodily  injury,  such  as  the  loss  of  an
eye  or  of  a  tooth  (Ex.  21 26^).  Even  in  such  cases,
indeed,  the  principle  that  the  slave  was  the  property  of
his  master  was  not  lost  sight  of.  The  law  exempted  the
master  from  punishment  if  an  interval  of  at  least  a  day
had  elapsed  between  the  maltreatment  of  the  slave  and
his  death.  The  presumption  was  that  the  death  had
not  been  intended,  and  it  was  held  that  the  master  had
suffered  penalty  enough  in  the  loss  of  his  property,  '  for
he  is  his  money '  (Ex.  21 20  [21]).  The  killing  or  maiming
of  another  man's  slave  was  also  regarded  only  as  injury
done  to  property,  for  which  compensation  was  required.
Thus,  if  a  slave  were  gored  by  a  vicious  ox  the  owner
of  the  ox  had  to  pay  a  compensation  of  thirty  shekels  to
the  owner  of  the  dead  slave  for  his  negligence  in  not
looking  after  an  ox  known  to  be  dangerous.  (The  sum
mentioned  clearly  represents  the  average  value  of  a
good  slave  at  the  time  of  the  enactment. )  The  owner
of  the  ox  was  not  liable  to  any  further  penalty,  however,
though  when  a  free  man  was  killed  in  like  circumstances
the  case  was  one  of  murder  and  the  owner  of  the  ox
was  punished  with  death  (Ex.  2128^!).  The  runaway
slave  also  enjoyed  the  protection  of  ancient  custom.
The  prohibition  of  extradition  indeed  is  not  met  with  in
express  terms  earlier  than  Dt.  (23 is/);  but  we  may
safely  take  it  that  ancient  custom,  at  least,  did  not
require  extradition  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  decision
in  each  case,  as  it  arose,  lay  in  the  discretion  of  the  city
to  which  the  fugitive  had  betaken  himself.  Shimei,  for
example,  must  in  person  come  and  fetch  his  slaves  who
had  fled  to  Gath  (i  K.  239/).  Lastly,  the  slave  was
protected  against  over-driving  by  the  institution  of  the
Sabbath,  which,  in  the  view  of  the  ancient  law-giver,
aimed  specially  at  the  benefit  of  slaves  and  the  lower
animals  (Ex.  23 12  Dt.  5 12^).

The  legal  position  of  the  foreign  female  slave  was
still  better.  She  was  often  her  master's  concubine — as
is  shown  by  the  loan-word  pittges  (c'jSs;  Gr.  7ra\\a/a?),
which  the  Hebrews  doubtless  got  from  the  Phoenicians.
Dt.  (21io^i)  gives  precise  regulations  for  the  case  of  an
Israelite  owner  who  seeks  thus  to  appropriate  a  female
captive.  He  is  not  allowed  to  take  her  at  once  ;
she  must  after  coming  into  his  house  shave  her  head
and  pare  her  nails  and  bewail  her  father  and  mother  for
a  full  month,  after  which  her  master  may  espouse  her.
This  regulation,  also,  we  may  safely  assume  to  have
rested  on  ancient  custom.

It  must  further  be  remembered  that  to  ancient  feeling  there
was  nothing  degrading  in  the  idea  of  the  master  of  a  female
slave  being  lord  also  of  her  body,  any  more  than  there  now  is
in  modern  Islam.  As  is  shown  elsewhere  (see  MARRIAGE,  S  i),
the  freewoman  also  became  a  wife  by  purchase,  and  there  is  no
essential  difference  in  the  position  of  a  secondary  wife.  The
position  of  the  concubine  is  superior  to  that  of  the  ordinary  slave
m  this,  that  her  master  is  not  at  liberty  to  sell  her  again.  As
regards  the  foreign  concubine  indeed  this  is  expressly  laid  down
only  in  Deuteronomy  :  her  master  must  free  her  if  he  desires  to
put  her  away.  But  this  also  certainly  comes  from  ancient
practice  common  to  the  Israelites  with  other  Semitic  peoples.
Even  now  it  is  held  among  the  Arabs  to  be  a  shameful  thing  for
a  master  to  sell  a  slave  who  has  been  his  concubine,  especially  if
she  have  borne  children  to  him  ;  and  this  had  the  sanction  of
antiquity  even  in  Mohammed's  time  (cp  \VRS,  Kin.  73).

4654


SLAVERY

Slaves  of  Israelite  descent  were  in  the  minority.
Kidnapping  of  slaves  within  the  tribes  of  Israel  was
severely  prohibited  both  by  law  and  by  ancient  usage
(Ex.  21 16),  though  this  did  not  prevent  its  occasional
occurrence  (Gen.  37z6/:),  in  which  case,  however,  it
was  prudent  to  send  the  victims  abroad.  There  were,
however,  other  ways  in  which  Israelites  could  become
the  property  of  Israelites.  The  Hebrew  parent  was  at
liberty  to  sell  his  children  into  slavery,  only  not  to  a
foreigner ;  and  doubtless  there  \\  ere  many  cases  in
which  poor  men  availed  themselves  of  this  right  (Ex.
21 7 /.}.  The  insolvent  debtor  also  was  sold  (2  K.  4i
Am.  26  86  Neh.  5s  8).  So  too  the  convicted  thief,
who  was  unable  to  make  good  his  theft  (Ex.  22 a/.)  ;
according  to  Josephus  (Ant.  iv.  82)  he  was  in  this  case
given  to  the  person  he  had  robbed  (cp  a  provision  in  the
law  of  the  twelve  tables).  Finally,  in  cases  of  great
poverty,  a  last  resort  was  for  a  man  to  declare  himself
and  his  family  the  property  of  some  well-to-do  person
(Lev.  2639  47>-  What  is  related  of  the  patriarch  Jacob
may  also  have  frequently  occurred  ;  a  suitor  who  was
unable  to  pay  the  mohar  or  purchase-money  demanded
for  the  bride  would  voluntarily  hire  himself  as  a  slave
for  a  fixed  time  to  the  father  of  the  girl  (Gen.  29 18  ;  cp
MARRIAGE,  §  i).

The  position  of  such  Israelite  slaves  was  considerably

better  than  that  of  those  of  foreign  origin. The  main

difference,  so  far  as  the  law  was  con-

4.  Manumission.  cernedi  hiy  in  thiSi  that  lhe  foreign

slave  remained  a  slave  all  his  life,  whilst  the  Hebrew  slave
had  a  legal  right  to  manumission,  and  within  a  definite
time  had  to  be  released  for  nothing.  According  to  the
Book  of  the  Covenant  the  slavery  of  an  Israelite  lasted
six  years  ;  in  the  seventh  year  he  again  became  free
(Ex.  21 1 ff-\  The  story  of  Jacob  warrants  the  con
jecture  that  in  the  original  custom  the  Hebrew  slave
served  for  seven  full  years,  and  that  later,  under  the
influence  of  the  Sabbatical  idea,  the  beginning  of  the
seventh  year  was  taken  as  fixing  the  date  of  the  release
(cp  Stade,  Gl'l  I  378).  By  the  seventh  year  of  course  is
meant,  not  the  Sabbatical  year  of  a  still  later  time,  but
a  relative  term  reckoned  from  the  date  of  the  beginning
of  the  bondage.  If  the  slave  had  brought  a  wife  along
with  him,  she,  and  doubtless  also  their  children,  became
free  along  with  himself.  If,  however,  he  had  entered
into  bondage  alone  and  afterwards  as  a  slave  had
received  a  wife  from  his  master,  she  and  also  the
children  remained  the  property  of  the  master  (Ex.
21 1 jf-\-  Manifestly,  in  the  case  of  a  wife  being  given
to  a  slave,  only  a  foreign  woman  could  be  intended  ;
for  the  Hebrew  female  slave  the  master  had  either  to
take  to  himself  or  give  to  his  son  (see  below).  A
characteristic  light  on  the  whole  position  of  the  Hebrew
slave  is  shed  by  another  fact  ;  the  law  can  presume  that
in  many  cases  the  slave  will  prefer  not  to  use  his  legal
right  to  his  liberty,  but  will  voluntarily  elect  to  remain
in  bondage.  The  rule  just  mentioned,  regulating  the
retention  of  wife  and  children,  must  frequently  have
produced  such  cases  ;  another  cause  will  be  mentioned
later.  If  the  slave  desired  to  remain  with  his  master  in
perpetuity,  his  master  was  to  bring  him  before  '  glohim  '
and  there  fix  his  ear  with  an  awl  to  the  door-post  (Ex.
21  s/i ;  cp  Dt.  15  idf. ).  Interpreters  are  not  agreed  as  to
whether  by  '  elohim  '  we  are  to  understand  the  sanctuary,
and  that  the  declaration  could  only  be  duly  made
there.  See  col.  3224,  note  2.  Deuteronomy  says
nothing  about  the  sanctuary,  but  doubtless  assumes  that
the  ceremony  will  l)e  in  the  house  of  the  master.  This
might  be  a  result  of  the  concentration  of  the  cultus  at
Jerusalem  ;  but  it  might  equally  well  be  held  to  show
that  neither  also  did  the  ancient  custom  reflected  in  the
Book  of  the  Covenant  prescribe  a  ceremony  at  the
sanctuary,  and  that  by  'elohim'  are  meant  the  house
hold  gods,1  the  Penates  which  in  old  times  were  found

1  [See Nowack,  HA  177,  and  especially  Eerdmans, TA.T,
'  De  beteekenis  van  elohim  in  het  Bondsboek,'  28  272^".  (1894).]

4655


SLAVERY

in  every  hoase  (cp  e.g.  ,  iS.  1913;  see  TERAPHIM).
The  ceremony  can  have  had  no  other  meaning  than
that  the  ear  of  the  slave  —  that  is,  his  obedience  —  is
firmly  nailed  to  this  house  and  pledged  to  it  for  all  time
coming.

Elsewhere  also  boring  the  ears  is  met  with  as  a  sign  of  slavery  ;
e.g.,  among  the  Mesopotamians  (Juv.  1  104),  Arabs  (Petr.  Sat.
102),  the  Lydians  (Xen.  Ana/',  iii.  1  31),  and  others  (see  Di.  on
Ex.!215/).

Deuteronomy  advances  a  step  (15  13/.),  and  requires
of  the  master  that  he  shall  not  send  his  slave  assay
empty  but  shall  give  him  a  liberal  present  from  flock
and  threshing-floor  and  winepress.  Here  we  catch
sight  of  another  motive  which  may  have  often  induced
the  slave  to  remain  in  voluntary  bondage  :  the  emanci
pated  slave,  if  quite  destitute,  was  in  worse  case  in  a
state  of  freedom  than  before  —  left  to  his  own  resources,
exposed  to  every  hardship  and  oppression.  To  the
man  who  had  no  land  of  his  own  the  position  of  a  free
working  man,  or  any  other  favourable  opportunity  of
earning  a  livelihood,  was  hardly  attainable  at  all,  or,  if
attainable,  only  to  a  very  limited  degree.  Many  a  man
might  therefore  prefer  slavery  with  comfort  to  freedom
with  destitution.  The  precepts  of  Deuteronomy  are
not  complied  with.  The  legislator  himself  feels  that  he
is  leaving  much  to  the  discretion  of  masters,  and  therefore
exhorts  them  all  the  more  earnestly  (v.  18)  :  '  It  shall
not  seem  hard  to  thee  ;  ...  for  Yahwe  thy  God  shall
bless  thee  [therefore]  in  all  that  thou  doest.'  What  we
read  in  Jer.  34  "&/.  is  significant  of  much  ;  in  the  time
of  a  great  distress,  when  Jerusalem  was  under  siege,
Zedekiah  ordered  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  to  free
their  Israelite  bondmen  and  bondwomen,  :md  so  to
fulfil  the  commandment  that  had  been  so  neglected.
But  hardly  had  delis'erance  come  and  the  siege  been
raised  before  the  liberated  slaves  were  again  reduced  to
bondage.

P will  not  have  any  such  thing  as  slavery  for  an
Israelite. If an Israelite finds himself driven by
poverty  to  sell  himself  into  slavery, he  is


not  'n  reanty  to


as  a  slas-e,  but


5.  Year  of

juoiiee.  as  a  ^ree  wage_earner  or^r£r  ( Lev.  25  35  39 /. ,.
For  all  Israelites  together  are  the  servants  of  Yahwe,  who
brought  the  nation  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ;  they
must  not  therefore  treat  one  another  as  slaves  (Lev.
2542).  In  the  matter  of  emancipation,  indeed,  the
lasv  had  to  yield  to  the  force  of  custom  ;  but  the  eman
cipation  of  the  Hebrew  slave  was  no  longer  to  occur  in
the  seventh  year  of  his  slavery,  but  only  in  the  year  of
jubilee,  every  fiftieth  year.  In  this  year  (see  JUBILEE)
all  land  reverts  to  its  original  owner  ;  the  liberated  slave
thus  has  the  means  of  subsistence  secured  for  himself
and  his  family.

The  attempt  (Oehler,  PR  EM  1434i/)to  interpret  this  law  as


years'  release,  finds  no  support  in  the  text  itself;  neither  can  we
(so  Di.)  interpret  the  law  as  relating  only  to  those  slaves  who,
previously,  at  the  seventh  year's  release,  had  voluntarily  re
mained  in  bondage,  and  who  now  in  any  case  have  to  go  free  in
the  year  of  Jubilee  ;  had  this  been  meant,  it  would  have  been
said.

It  is  only  in  the  case  of  his  having  been  compelled  to
sell  himself  to  a  ger  or  foreigner  in  the  land  that  the
law  offers  the  Israelite  the  possibility  of  an  earlier  release
(in  such  a  case  he  cannot  reckon  on  the  same  brotherly
treatment  as  with  a  brother  Israelite).  Here  a  redemp
tion  svas  possible,  the  right  of  which  belonged  not  only
to  the  nearest  kinsman,  the  brother  or  uncle  on  the
father's  side,  but  also  to  the  bondman  himself  if  in  the
meanwhile  he  had  come  into  possession  of  means.  The
price  of  redemption  also  was  fixed  by  law,  and  in  a
sense  very  favourable  to  the  slave  or  his  redeemer.  The
purchase  -  money  originally  paid  by  his  present  owner
was  to  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  hire  paid  in  advance  for
the  years  of  service  from  the  date  of  purchase  till  the
next  jubilee,1  and  above  this  a  sum  proportionate  to  the

1  An  indirect  confirmation  of  what  has  already  been  said —
4656


SLAVERY

time  which  may  have  been  spent  up  to  the  time  of  the
Jubilee  year  was  to  be  paid  as  redemption-money,  so
much  for  each  year  (Lev.  2547^).  Such  a  regulation
clearly  presupposes  post-exilic  conditions.  Before  the
exile  the  case  of  an  Israelite  being  compelled  to  sell
himself  to  a  foreigner  was  hardly  conceivable.  The
foreigners  in  the  land  were  few,  and  were  themselves
in  a  position  more  closely  approaching  that  of  the  slave
than  that  of  the  freeman  (see  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,
§  14  fi).  Since  the  exile,  however,  a  large  non-Jewish
population  had  settled  in  Judaea,  and,  to  the  great
mortification  of  the  Jews,  had  attained  a  position  of
wealth  and  prosperity  in  marked  contrast  with  that
of  the  poor  returning  exiles.

In  so  far  as  these  laws  are  bound  up  with  the  idea  of
a  year  of  jubilee  they  of  course  were  never  carried  into
practical  effect  any  more  than  the  year  itself  was  ob
served.  But  the  idea  underlying  them  nevertheless
gained  the  upper  hand  ;  the  idea,  namely,  that  for  an
Israelite  to  own  his  brother  Israelite  as  a  slave  is  irre
concilable  with  the  essential  nature  of  the  theocracy.
The  poor  who  had  sunk  to  such  a  degree  of  poverty
realised  the  ignominy  of  such  a  position  as  they  had
never  done  before  ;  essentially  they  knew  themselves
the  equals  of  their  rich  brethren  and  the  possessors  of
equal  privileges.  When  in  Nehemiah's  day  the  severe
stress  of  the  times  had  compelled  numbers  of  the  poorer
people  to  pledge  themselves  and  their  children  to  their
richer  brethren  to  save  themselves  from  starvation,  the
situation  was  shocking  to  them,  and  they  turned  to
Nehemiah.  Nehemiah  took  their  part,  censured  the
nobles  and  wealthier  classes  for  their  impiety,  and
succeeded  in  inducing  them  to  free  their  poor  brethren
from  their  mortgages  (Neh.  5 iff.).  This  fundamental
principle — that  no  Jew  can  ever  be  a  slave — was  taken
over  by  the  later  Talmudic  law  ;  even  the  thief,  who
had  been  sold  for  his  crime,  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  a
slave  (see  Winter,  op.  cit.  loff. ).  And  when  the  manifold
wars  of  Seleucids  and  Ptolemies  again  and  again  reduced
multitudes  of  Jews  to  slavery  under  heathen  masters,
their  redemption  was  regarded  as  a  sacred  duty  and  a
meritorious  service  (i  Mace.  841  2  Mace.  811).

The  same  legal  principles  apply  substantially  to  the  Israelite
female  slave  ;  but  in  the  older  period  the  release  at  the  end  of
the  seven  years  could  not  apply,  the  woman  being  her  master's  con
cubine.  If  an  Israelite  girl  was  sold  by  her  father  to  a  master —
which  of  course  happened  only  when  he  was  unable  to  sell  her
to  a  husband — the  purchaser  was  bound  to  treat  her  as  his  wife  in
respect  of  'food  and  raiment  and  duty  of  marriage/  If  he  failed
in  any  of  these  respects,  he  had  to  set  her  at  liberty  for  nothing.
If  the  purchaser  did  not  desire  to  marry  her  at  all,  he  could  give
her  to  his  son  as  concubine.  If,  however,  he  did  not  wish  this
either,  then  he  could  sell  her  only  to  a.  purchaser  who  wished
her  for  a  concubine,  not  to  a  foreigner ;  but,  holding  this
position,  she  could  not  become  a  freewoman  in  the  seventh  year.
Not  till  we  reach  the  time  of  D  do  we  find  the  privilege  of  release
in  the  seventh  year  claimed  for  her  with  the  option  of  voluntarily
remaining  in  slavery.  It  appears  that  in  the  time  of  D  the
ancient  custom  according  to  which  the  female  slave  had  the
position  of  concubine  no  longer  prevailed.  According  to
Talmudic  decisions  a  wife  can  never  be  sold  as  a  slave  ;  but  the
father  had  the  right  to  sell  his  daughter  as  long  as  she  was  under
marriageable  age  (cp  Winter,  op.  cit.).

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  manifest  that  the
lot  of  slaves,  in  its  legal  aspects,  was  not  specially
-  P  .  ,  hard,  and  custom,  even  if  in  various

e  respect.  reSpects  Often  coming  short  of  the  law,
in  other  important  respects  demanded  more.  From
everything  that  we  read  about  slaves  we  gather  that  they
were  treated  as  members  of  the  family,  and  that  the
head  cared  for  their  well-being  as  for  that  of  his  own
children.  The  whole  manner  of  their  relations  with
their  masters  shows  that  they  were  treated,  not  as
dumb,  driven  creatures,  but  as  men  with  minds  of  their
own  which  they  were  free  to  express.

Saul  is  indebted  to  his  slave  for  his  information  about  Samuel
the  seer  and  his  importance,  and  it  is  his  slave  who  lends  him
the  prophet's  fee  (i  S.  Sdff.).  It  is  a  slave  who  advises  Abigail

that  the  law  knows  nothing  of  a  release  in  the  seventh  year.
Otherwise  the  reckoning  would  have  to  refer  to  the  seventh  year
also,  and  not  merely  to  the  year  of  Jubilee.

4657


SLING

to  make  peace  with  David — quite  against  the  will  of  the  master
of  the  house — and  she  follows  his  advice  (i  S.  20  14  ff.).  Eliezer
in  the  patriarchal  legend  figures  as  the  comptroller  of  the  house
hold,  and  is  invested  with  a  sort  of  guardianship  over  Isaac,  the
son  of  the  house  (Gen.  24  iff?).  Compare  also  the  relation  of
Ziba  to  Meribbaal,  Jonathan's  son  (2  S.  §iff.  10  'iff.).  The
slave  could  even  marry  the  daughter  of  the  house  (i  Ch.  234^),
and,  failing  a  son,  become  the  heir  (Gen.  15  iff.).

In  the  last  resort  this  favourable  position  of  slaves
arose  from  the  fact  that  as  members  of  the  family  they
were  admitted  to  the  family  worship.  To  the  ancient
view  this  came  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  slave  could
not  have  his  own  worship,  his  own  god  ;  as  housemate
he  must  necessarily  participate  in  the  worship  of  the
master  of  the  house.  So  Eliezer  prays  to  '  the  God  of
his  master  Abraham'  (Gen.  24 12,  etc.).  The  Priestly
Code  expressly  demands  the  circumcision  of  slaves
(Gen.  17 12).  This,  too,  must  have  been  in  ancient
times  a  matter  of  course.  Otherwise  the  alien  slave
would  have  been  a  continual  source  of  religious  pollution
for  the  whole  house.  This  also  is  the  tacit  presupposi
tion  of  Deuteronomy  when  in  its  humane  concern  for
the  slave  it  requires  that  he  be  allowed  to  participate  in
sacrifice  and  feast  (12i8  16n).  The  non-Israelite,  the
uncircumcised  person,  could  not  possibly  be  admitted
to  a  share  in  the  sacrificial  meal.  The  slave,  being
admitted  to  the  family  worship,  becomes  (in  the  earliest
times  when  ancestor-worship  comes  in)  capable  of  con
tinuing  this  worship  and  thus  of  inheriting  (see  above).
It  is  in  this  standing  which  the  slave  enjoys  as  a  co-reli
gionist  and  fellow-worshipper  that  the  most  powerful
possible  motive  is  found  for  his  master  to  treat  him  with
kindness  and  fatherly  care,  just  as  to-day,  in  Islam,
slaves  as  fellow-believers  are  treated  with  all  humane
ness.  The  brotherhood  in  the  faith  in  Islam  now,  as
in  Israel  of  old,  is  not,  as  unfortunately  it  has  come  to
be  in  the  Christian  world,  a  mere  empty  phrase,  but  a
very  real  force.

See,  besides  the  handbooks  of  Hebrew  archaeology,  Michaelis,

Mas.  Recht,  §  1277^  ;  Saalschutz,  Das  inosaische  Recht,  '2  236^;

the  articles  on  slavery  in  Winer,  Schenkel,

7.  Bibliography. Riehm, Herzog-Plitt,  Guthe  ; the  mono
graphs  by  Mielziner(Z>/V  Verh&ltnisseder

Sklavenbei  den  alten  Hcbraern,  1859),  Mandl  (Das  Sklaven-
recht  etss  A  7',  1886),  Griinfeld  (Die  Stellung  der  Sklavcn  bei
den  fuden  nac/t  bibl.  it.  talmud.  Quetlen,  1886),  Winter  (Die
Stclhing  der  Sklaven  bei  den  Judcn  in  rechtlicher  u.
gesellschaftlicher  Beziehung  nach  talm.  Qucllen,  1886).

I.  H.

SLEEVE  (DS),  Gen.  373/:  2  S.  13i8  RVms-  See
TUNIC,  §  i.

SLIME  (1Onr  Accb&ATOC1;  in  Ex.  AccbAAro-
TTICC&).  heniiir,  as  distinguished  from  homer,  '  mortar,
clay,'  always  denotes  the  raw  material,  RV11*-  correctly
'bitumen'  (Gen.  US  14 10  [where  Var.  Bib.  suggests
'  naphtha'],  Ex.  2sf  [see  PITCH]).  On  the  philology  of
the  two  terms  see  Fraenkel,  Aram.  Fremdw.  161,  and  on
the  biblical  passages  cited,  see  BABEL  [TOWER  OF],
SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH,  and  MOSKS,  §  3  (col.  32071,
respectively,  and  cp  generally  BABYLONIA,  §  15  ;  BITU
MEN  ;  CLAY  ;  DEAD  SEA,  §  6  ;  MORTER.

SLING. Two  Hebrew  words  have  been  so  rendered.

1.  J77p,  kela',  <T<f>fi'&6vr]  [>£Tpo|3dAos  in  Job  41  20],  funda  ;  i  S.
174050  2629  2Ch.  20  14  Job  41  20  Zech.  815  Ecclus.  4V  4.

2.  ncs"l!2,  warglma-h, cr^eycSdn), Prov.  26 8t,  AV  and  RVnij;.
(RV 'heap of stones'; so Frankenberg). 'The lenst im
probable  translation  is  that  of  A  V  '  (Toy,  ad  loc.~)  ;  but  the  sense
of 'sling'  seems  incapable  of  proof. Like  rtOj"!  i"  Ps.  08  28  the
word  is  probably  corrupt.

3.  o-Qei'Soinj, i  Mace.  051 ('instruments  for  casting  fire  and
stones,  and  pieces  to  cast  darts  and  slings'). See  SIEGK,  §  4.

[In  i  S.  14  14^,  the  text  of  which  in  MT  is  corrupt  (as  a  refer
ence  to  AV  and  RV  will  suggest),  ©  introduces  a  mention  of
'pebbles,'  apparently  meaning  sling  stones.  The  words  are  ei>
/SoAiVi  <cal  [fv  Trerpo/SoAois  Kal  iv}  xoxAafii/  ^o\>  TreSiov.  For
••ni(MD:»  (5  seems  to  have  read  rniS'n  '112J31,  'and  with  flints  (of
the  plain).'  But  this  does  not  at  all  suit.  We  must  look  further.
There  are  many  parallels  for  this  correction  of  riltP  "IOS  (RV  'in

1  Derivation  unknown.  Possibly  Semitic,  though  the  sug
gested  connection  with  the  root  found  in  the  Heb.  ttlphal,  'be
smear,'  does  not  commend  itself.

4658


SLING


SMYRNA


an  acre  of  land';  cp  ACRE),  into  31(2rT,  'the  garrison'  (see
?•.  15).  The  scribe  first  wrote  3x0,  and  then,  having  omitted  the
article,  wrote  it  again  more  correctly  3SD.T  Out  of  3i'cn  3i'O,
by  transposition  and  corruption,  mtyios  arose.  '  Pebbles '
(icoxAaf)  also  appears  in  i  Mace.  1073;  slingers,  it  is  implied,
would  rind  a  lack  of  sling-stones  in  the  Philistian  plain  (cp
FLINT).— T.  K.  c.]

From  its  simplicity,  it  might  have  been  inferred  that
the  sling  (ySp),  an  improvement  upon  the  simple  act  of
throwing  stones,1  was  one  of  the  earliest  forms  of
weapon.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  find  that
it  was  employed  in  quite  remote  times  by  shepherds
as  a  protection  against  wild  animals,  by  agriculturists
to  drive  away  birds  (Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.  1381),  and  also  by
hunters  (Dennis,  Cities  and  Cemeteries  of  Etruria,  1312
[1878]),  and  by  the  light-armed  soldier  in  warfare  (ibid.
1 210  ;  for  the  Arabians  cp  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  2 176).
In  Palestine  the  shepherd  carried  a  sling,  in  addition  to
his  staff,  and  a  bag  to  hold  his  smooth  stone  bullets
(18.1740);  and  the  Benjamite  warriors  are  supposed
to  have  been  renowned  for  their  effective  use  of  this
weapon,  employing  it  as  well  with  the  left  hand  as
with  the  right  (cpjudg.  20i6  i  Ch.  122).  In  Judith
9?  it  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  weapons  in  which  the
Assyrians  trusted.

We  possess  illustrations  of  the  sling  from  Egypt,  from
Assyria  (Layard,  Nineveh  [1852],  332),  and  from
Rome.  The  Egyptian  slinger  is  in  the  act  of  throwing
(\Vilk.l2io).  The  sling  is  made  of  a  plaited  thong,'-2
the  centre  being  broad  enough  to  form  a  receptacle  («]3,
kaph,  18.2029)  for  the  stone.3  One  end  seems  to  be
attached  to  the  hand,  the  other  being  simply  held  ;  the
part  of  the  sling  in  which  the  stone  is  lodged  is  loosely
supported  by  the  other  hand.  The  sling  is  swung  over
the  head  (cp  Ecclus.  474),  apparently  with  some  such
motion  as  in  bowling,  the  loose  end  flying  into  the  air.
The  stones  are  carried  in  a  bag  which  hangs  from  the
shoulder.  In  the  illustration  from  Rome  the  sling
(funda]  seems  to  be  of  the  same  kind  (see  Rich,  Diet.
under  '  funda')  ;  but  only  one  hand  is  employed,  whilst
the  stones  are  held  in  a  fold  of  the  slinger's  mantle  by
the  other.4  The  slingers  seem  to  have  worn,  as  a  rule,5
no  armour,  and  to  have  carried  no  other  weapons
(Erman,  Anc.  Eg.  524  ;  cp  Rich,  under  '  Funditores ' ).
A.  Lang  (Homer  and  the  Epic,  375  f.)  explains  why
there  are  so  few  references  to  the  sling  in  Homer
(see  //.  18599  7'6)  by  the  remark  that  Homer  '  scarcely
ever  speaks  at  all  of  the  equipment  of  the  light-armed
crowd '  ;  the  sling  '  was  the  weapon  of  the  unarmed
masses,  as  of  David  in  Israel.'

The  sling  is  still  used  in  Syria,  in  Egypt,  and  in  Arabia.  You
may  still  come  upon  young  Syrian  shepherds  practising  with  their
slings  (see,  e.g.,  Harper,  In  Scripture  Lands,  140);  Doughty
speaks  of  Arab  boys  '  armed  as  it  were  against  some  savage
beast  with  slings  in  their  hands '  (Ar.  Des.  1  432),  but  Thomson
(Land  and  Book  [1894],  572)  only  saw  it  used  at  Hasbeiya,  on
Mount  Hermon,  by  boys  in  '  mimic  warfare.'

It  was  long  in  use  among  Europeans,  too,  even  the  simplest
form  of  it  (see  above)  surviving.  Thus  it  was  used  by  the
Anglo-Saxons,  though  '  whether  for  warfare  or  the  chase  alone,
it  is  not  easy  to  determine'  (Hewitt.  Ancient  Armour  in
Europe,  \  58  f.,  fig.  on  p.  59).  Hewitt  also  gives  later  instances
(1  156;  see  the  interesting  plates,  xxvii.  1.  h.);  it  was  used  in
battle  as  late  as  the  sixteenth  century  (8605).  M.  A.  C.

1  Still  skilfully  exercised  by  the  Arabs  (Doughty,  Ar.  Des.
2238402),  as  it  was  amongst  the  N.  American  Indians  (School-
craft,  as  quoted  in  Keller,  Lake  Dwellings  [ET],  1 141  ;  '  there
is  evidence to show that, as an amusement, it was "very
common  amongst  the  ancient  races  "  '). The  practice  seems  to
have  continued,  even  among the  Romans,  in  addition to  the
other  ;  the  accensi,  as  distinguished  from  the  funditores,  threw
the  stones  with  their  hands  (see  Rich, Diet, under  '  Fundi
tores  ').

2  Slings  were  also  made  of '  twisted  hair,  sometimes  human
hair  '  (Schliemann, Ilia.*,  437  [i88ol).

»  Cp  Keller,  Lake  Dwellings  [ET],  1141,  'broader  in  the
middle,  in  order  to  keep  the  projectile  as  in  a  hood  or  cap.'

*  '  Like  the  bow,  the  sling  gained  its  real  importance  after  the
Carthaginian  wars,  owing  to  the  skill  of  the  Balearic  allies '
(F.  Haeffer,  The  Life  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  [ET],  574^).

5  There  were,  no  doubt,  exceptions.  Cp  F.  Haeflfer,  The
Life  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  [ET],  574^

4659


SLUICE  O3L"),  Is.  19  10  AV,  after  Tg.  Most
moderns  render,  '  all  those  who  work/iv  hire  (IDK-)  will
be  grieved  ('DJK,  cp  POOL,  i)  in  soul.'  So  virtually  RV.

SMITH, i.  thn  ; see HANDICRAFTS, § i  ; cp

CllAKASniM.

2.  "I3DC,  masger;  2  K.  24  1  16  Jer.  24  i  29  2,  everywhere  \\  chn
(i.  above).

SMYRNA  (CMYPNA  WH, 2M.  Ti, Rev.  In; ev

'Lfvupfjf,  Rev.  28).  J Smyrna  is  a  very  ancient  town  ;  its

1 Historv n'story fa^s 'nto two Distinct periods,

i u -4. associated  with  two  distinct  sites. Old

oi  old  city. ,,  ,  . . ,  „ , 0.

Smyrna  (TI  iraXaia  2,/ui'pca,  Strabo,  646  ;

cp  Paus.  vii.  5i)  stood  at  the  NE.  corner  of  the  bay
under  Mt.  Sipylos  above  the  alluvial  plain  of  the  mod.
Burnabat.  It  was  said  to  have  been  built  by  the
Amazons  (Strabo,  550),  in  whom  we  may  trace  a
tradition  of  the  Hittite  occupation  of  Lydia.  To  them
also  was  ascribed  the  foundation  of  Ephesus,  Cyme,  and
Myrina.2

The  Amazons  were  primarily  the  priestesses  of  that  Asiatic
nature-goddess  whose  worship  the  Hittites  introduced  into
western  Asia  Minor  (see  EPHESUS,  DIANA).  Upon  the  arrival
of  the  Greeks  in  Asia  Minor  the  town  was  occupied  by  the
northein  section,  who  are  called  the  Cohans;  but  the  Colo-
phonians  seized  it  by  treachery,  and  thenceforth  it  ranked  as  an
Ionic  city  (Herod.  1  150).  Its  position  gas'e  it  the  command  of
the  trade  of  the  valley  of  the  Hermus  which  flows  into  its  gulf,
and  made  it  the  most  powerful  rival  of  the  Lydian  capital,
Sardis,  which  lay  on  the  middle  Hermus,  about  54  R.  m.  to  the
East.  Hence  a  primary  object  of  the  policy  of  the  Lydian
dynasty  of  the  Mermnada;  was  to  make  themselves  masters  of
Smyrna  and  the  other  Greek  towns  on  the  coast  (see  LVDIA).

Smyrna  successfully  resisted  the  attack  of  Gyges
(Paus.  iv.  21s  ix.  292),  but  succumbed  to  that  of
Alyattes  (about  580  B.C.  ;  Herod.  1  16).  Smyrna  was
destroyed,  and  its  inhabitants  dispersed  in  villages  ;  '  it
was  organised  on  the  native  Anatolian  village  system,
not  as  a  Greek  ir6\is'  (Rams.  Hist.  Geog.  AM  62,  n.  ;  cp
Strabo,  646,  AvS&v  de  Karacnra.cra,i>Tii)v  rrfv  —/jLVpi>ai>
irepi  TerpaKoata  ZTTJ  SiereXecrfy  oLKOv/j.evrj  K<i)/J.r)d6v).
The  trade  of  Smyrna  was  taken  over  by  Phocaea,  which,
like  the  other  Greek  towns,  was  absorbed  in  the  Lydian
empire  ;  when  Phocasa  in  its  turn  was  destroyed  by  the
Persians,  Ephesus  became  the  chief  commercial  city  in
this  region.  Some  of  the  extant  early  electrum  or  gold
coins  with  the  lion  type,  usually  classed  as  issued  by
Sardis,  may  really  be  mementoes  of  the  early  com
mercial  greatness  of  Smyrna  (so  Rams.  op.  cit.  62).

Alexander  the  Great,  warned,  it  is  said,  by  a  vision
(Paus.  vii.  5i),  conceived  the  design  of  restoring  Smyrna

2  The  new  citv as  a  city' This  design  was  actuall-v
J  ' carried  into  effect  by  his  successors

Antigonus  and  Lysimachus  ;  the  earliest  undoubtedly
Smyrnrean  coins  are  in  fact  tetradrachms  of  Lysimachus,
bearing  the  turreted  head  of  Cybele  with  whose  worship
Smyrna  was  always  prominently  associated.  New
Smyrna  thus  arose,  nearly  three  hundred  years  after  its
destruction.  The  new  site,  about  three  miles  (Strabo,
634,  irtpl  ef/cocrt  crTadious)  S.  of  the  old  site,  was  on  the
shore  of  the  gulf,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Pagos,  the  last
western  member  of  that  chain  of  hills  which,  under
various  names  (Olympus,  Tmolus),  divides  the  valley
of  the  Hermus  from  that  of  the  Cayster.  The  natural
beauty  of  the  mountain-girt  plain  was  remarked  by  the
ancients.3

The  architecture  of  the  city  was  worthy  of  its  setting.
The  streets  were  laid  out  in  straight  lines  at  right  angles

1  'S.fj.vpva.v  is  read  in  the  '  western  '  text  for  Mvppa  in  Acts  27  5
in  D.  The  more  ancient  form  of  the  name,  down  to  the  end  of
Trajan,  was  'i^vpva  or  'Ifivpni  ;  later  it  was  written  in  the
familiar  form  2/uv'pi/a  (Cfivpya).  See  the  coins,  and  cp  Furneaux,
note  on  Tac.  Ann.  863.

-  The  part  of  Ephesus  which  owed  its  foundation  to  the
Amazons  was  called  Samorna  or  Smyrna  (Strabo,  633^).  And
Myrina  is  evidently  the  same  word,  initial  2  being  lost,  as  in
/xtKpot  for  crjuixpos  (Sayce  on  Herod.  1  15).

3  Pliny,  7/7^631  'monies  Asia;  nobilissimi  in  hoc  tractu  fere
explicant  se'  ;  Strabo,  646,  Ka\\i<mri  •nil'  iratnor.  /uepos  /jieV  TI
-'


e\ou(7a  en-'  opc


',  K.T.A.
4660


SMYRNA

to  one  another,  after  the  system  of  Hippodamus  of  Miletus,
who  had  so  laid  out  Thurii  (443  H.C.)  and  the  Piraeus
for  Pericles  (for  the  'ImToSdfj.eiO'i  rpoTros  see  Aristot.  Pol.
4(7)11  =  1330  b,  21  /.).  Extending  from  the  temple  of
Cybele,  the  '  Golden  Street '  ran  right  across  the  city  to  the
opposite  temple  of  'Zeus  upon  the  Heights.'  The  only
drawback  was  that,  being  unprovided  with  drains,  the  streets
were  sometimes  flooded  by  storm-water  (Strabo,  646).  Many
temples  (those  of  Cybele,  Zeus,  the  Nemeses,  Apollo,  Asklepios,
and  Aphrodite  Stratonikis  were  the  chief),  a  Stadium,  an
Odeum,  a  Public  Library,  an  Homerium  dedicated  to  Homer,
a  Theatre  (one  of  the  largest  in  Asia  Minor),  and  several  two-
storied  Stoai  (Strabo,  I.e.  <noa.i  re  jneyaAai  rerpayuivoi,  eirtirfSoi
re  (cal  uirepaioi)  made  Smyrna  one  of  the  most  magnificent  cities
of  the  East.  Few  remains  of  this  ancient  splendour  survive.

Smyrna  also  possessed  a  good  harbour,  which  could  be  closed
(Strabo,  I.e.  Ai/ur)i>  (cAeiirTos).  Apart  from  the  prosperity  arising
from  the  fact  that  the  bulk  of  the  trade  of  the  Hermus  valley
passed  through  its  port,  the  territory  of  Smyrna  was  very  fertile
and  produced  much  wine.

The  people  of  New  Smyrna  were  gifted  with  political
sagacity  which  stood  them  in  good  stead  in  dealing  with
the  Seleucidce  and  afterwards  with  the  Romans.  The
decree  is  still  extant  (243  B.C.)  in  which  mention  is
made  of  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  Stratonikis,  which  was
(by  a  sort  of  false  etymology  or  play  upon  words)
associated  with  the  honour  paid  by  the  Smyrnceans  to
Stratonice,  wife  of  Antiochus  I.  (see  CIG  3137  =  Hicks,
Manual,  no.  176).  In  return,  Seleucus  II.  declared
both  the  temple  and  the  city  to  have  rights  of  asylum.
By  this  pronouncement  the  city  was  removed  from  his
jurisdiction  and  probably  exempted  from  the  necessity
of  providing  troops  or  of  receiving  his  garrisons  (see
Holm,  Gk.  Hist.,  ET,  4449).  During  the  war  with
Antiochus  the  Great  the  Smyrnasans  embraced  the
Roman  cause  and  were,  upon  its  conclusion,  granted
the  privileges  of  a  civitas  (sine  fosdere]  lit/era  et  immnnis
for  their  loyalty  (cp  Polyb.  21 48  and  CIG  3202,  3204 /. ).
When  the  Romans  finally  occupied  Asia,  Smyrna  became  the
centre  of  a  conventits  juridicus  which  embraced  the  region  from
Myriua  to  Teos  and  the  skirts  of  Mount  Sipylos  as  far  as
Magnesia  (Pliny,  HNby,  Cic.  Pro  Place.  29).  In  the  war
with  Mithridates  it  retained  its  loyal  attitude  (cp  Tac.  Ann.  4  56).
The  sole  exception  to  the  course  of  prosperity  arose  when
Trebonius,  one  of  Cesar's  murderers,  took  refuge  within  its  walls
and  was  besieged  by  Dolabella,  who  finally  captured  the  city
and  put  Trebonius  to  death  (Strabo,  646  ;  Dio  Cass.  47  20  Cic.
Phil.  11  2).

According  to  Tacitus  (Ann.  4  56),  the  Smyrnceans  had,
as  early  as  the  consulship  of  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  (195
B.C.),  erected  a  temple  dedicated  to  Roma.  On  the
ground  of  their  constant  loyalty,  and  this  display  of  it,
they  made  claim  before  Tiberius  in  26  A.u.  to  the
privilege  of  erecting  a  temple  to  the  emperor.  Out  of
the  list  of  the  contending  Asiatic  cities  Sardis  and
Smyrna  were  preferred,  and  Smyrna  won  the  day  (see
NEOCOROS).  There  is  extant  a  Smyrncean  coin  bearing
on  the  obverse  a  figure  of  Tiberius  in  the  centre  of  a
temple,  with  the  inscription  Se/3acn-6y  TijStpios  (Eckh.
2S47).

It  is  not  surprising  to  find,  therefore,  that,  Asia  Minor
being  under  the  Empire  the  '  paradise  of  municipal
vanity'  (Mommsen,  JKG  6302),  Smyrna  vied  with  its
neighbours  in  the  accumulation  and  assertion  of  empty
tides.  Like  Sardis,  Pergamos,  and  other  cities  (see
Momms.-Marq.  Rom.  Staatsvetw.  1  343),  she  held  the
title  of  metropolis.

_  Her  great  rival  in  this  respect  was  Ephesus,  who  enjoyed  the
high-sounding  titles  wptarr\  Tta&tuv  KCU  fj-tyia-n],  and  /LtrjrpOTroAis
TTJS  'Ao-io*.  What  exactly  the  possession  of  the  title  wpuirr)
implied  that  the  mutual  strife  for  this  '  primacy '  (wpiuTfia)
should  have  been  so  keen  (cp  Aristides,  Or.  1/71,  Dind.  ;  Dio
Chrys.  Or.  2  148  R.)  is  not  certainly  known  ;  but  probably  it  was
connected  with  the  question  of  precedence  at  the  games  of  the
icou'bi/  'Atrias  (see  ASIAKCH).  The  strife  between  Smyrna  and
Ephesus  continued  until  the  emperor  Antoninus  settled  the
dispute  (Philostr.  O/>.,  ed.  Kayser,  p.  23124,  ical  dn-rjAflej/  r;
2/x.uppa  TOL  Trptureta  VIKUXTO}.

The  coinage  of  Smyrna  richly  illustrates  the  above  points.
From  the  time  of  its  ruin  by  Alyattes  to  that  of  its  restoration,
there  was  of  course  no  issue  of  coins.  The  usual  silver  coins  of
Roman  Asia,  the  Cistof>hori,  in  the  case  of  Smyrna  bear  the
legend  ZMYP,  with  the  head  of  Cybele  as  a  symbol.  The  im
perial  coins  bear  the  honorary  titles  NeuKopur  ;  irpwriav  'Ao-ias,
or  wptarwv  'Awia?  y'  VftaKOpuiv  TU>I>  mftaa'T^i'  KciAAei  KO.L  fj.e-ye9ei
(the  third  Neocorate  here  asserted  begins  towards  the  end  of
Sept.  Severus).  Certain  coins  bearing  a  figure  of  Homer  seated


149


4661


SNAIL


were  called  'OfXTjpeia  (Strabo,  646),  and  perhaps  reproduced
some  statue  in  the  Homerium,  In  addition  to  the  worship  of
the  Sipylene  Mother  (Cybele)  to  which  the  epithet  2i7rvAr)>'>)  on
certain  coins  refers,  the  cult  of  the  Nemeses  was  largely
practised  in  Smyrna,  and  on  some  coins  are  seen  figures  of  two
Nemeses  appearing  in  a  vision  to  Alexander  and  charging  him
to  restore  the  city  (Paus.  vii.  5  if.).  The  Griffin,  a  frequent
Smyrna;an  type,  symbolises  this  worship,  just  as  the  Lion
symbolises  that  of  Cybele.

Points  of  contact  between  the  above  and  the  address
in  Rev.  28/1  are  not  very  obvious,  though  not  entirely
3  NT  refer-  wantinS-  Probably  many  phrases  would
ences  "  ^  uPon  tne  ears  °*  tnose  for  whom  the
message  was  intended,  with  a  force  which
is  now  quite  lost.  Especially  may  this  have  been  the
case  at  Smyrna,  where  much  importance  was  attached  to
a  method  of  divination  from  chance  phrases  (Paus.
ix.  I!/,  '  divination  by  means  of  voices  ...  is,  to  my
knowledge,  more  employed  by  the  people  of  Smyrna
than  by  any  other  such  people  '  ).  Outside  the  walls
there  was  a  'sanctuary  of  voices.'  It  has  been  sug
gested,  therefore,  that  the  words  with  which  the  message
opens  would  come  with  peculiar  force  to  those  who
perhaps  had  heard  similar  phrases  in  the  pagan  mysteries.
Similarly,  the  phrase  '  crown  of  life  '  (v.  10,  rbv  ffre^avov
TTJS  farjs)  must  inevitably  have  suggested  or  have  been
suggested  by  a  prominent  feature  of  life  at  Smyrna  —
the  public  Games  (cp  Paus.  vi.  14s/  for  a  striking  in
cident  occurring  at  one  of  the  celebrations  held  at
Smyrna,  in  68  A.  D.  ).  It  was  on  such  an  occasion
that  the  Asiarch  Philippus  was  forced  by  popular  clamour
to  doom  the  aged  Polycarp  to  death  (155  A.  u.  ).  The
Games  were  characteristic  of  pagan  life,  and  socially,
though  not  politically,  they  would  serve  as  an  effective
touchstone  of  sentiment.  The  fact  that  on  the  occasion
of  Polycarp'  s  martyrdom  the  Jews  also  took  part  in
accusing  him  of  enmity  to  the  state  religion,  is  strikingly
in  accord  with  the  words  of  Rev.  2  9,  where  the  Jews
of  Smyrna  are  called  'a  synagogue  of  Satan.'  'He
that  overcometh  '  must  also  be  used  with  reference  to
the  gymnastic  and  other  contests  familiar  to  the  Smyr
nceans.  It  would,  however,  probably  be  a  mistake  to
confine  the  suggestiveness  of  the  phraseology  too
narrowly.

The  'crown  of  life,"  for  example,  may  also  have  associations
connected  with  the  complimentary  crown  bestowed  upon
municipal  and  other  officials  for  good  service.  It  is  also  note
worthy  that  many  Smyrnaean  coins  show  a  wreath  or  crown
within  which  is  the  Lion  symbol,  or  a  magistrate's  name  or
monogram  (see  illustration  in  Head,  Hist.  Nutnin.  509).  This
emblem  also  might  enter  into  the  complex  associations  of  the
words,  which  it  is  the  task  of  historical  imagination  to  revivify.

Smyrna,  now  Isinlr,  is  the  commercial  capital  of  Turkey.
Plan,  with  very  full  account  of  ancient  remains  and  modern
town,  in  Murray's  Handbook  of  Asia  Minor,  i&f.  For  the
older  Smyrna,  see  Curtius,  Beitr.  z.  Gesck.  und  Topographit
KUinasiens,  Berl.  1872.  \v.  j.  w.

SNAIL  occurs  twice  in  the  OT  as  the  translation  of
two  terms.

i.  BCil,  hornet  (Lev.  11  30),  where,  however,  some  kind  of
LIZARD  (q.v.)  is  meant  (RV  '  sand-lizard  ').

2.  WfSUp,  sabbgliil  (  Ps.  588  [9]),  a  word  of  uncertain
etymology,  which  is  found  in  the  Targ.  under  the  form
«7^3'fl.  The  rendering  '  snail  '  is  probable  and  is  sup
ported  by  the  Talm.  Shabbtlth,  77  b,  where  Rashi,  in
his  commentary,  explains  it  by  limace.  Ewald,  with
less  probability,  follows  (5  and  Vg.  (/oj/ws,  cera]  and
renders  '  melted  wax."  Some  land  snail  is  probably
referred  to,  and  the  allusion  to  its  melting  away  may
have  reference  to  the  trail  of  slime  which  the  mollusc
leaves  behind  it  as  it  crawls,  or  may  refer  to  the  retire
ment  of  these  animals  into  cracks  and  crevices,  where
they  are  no  more  seen,  at  the  approach  of  the  dry
season.  The  land  and  freshwater  mollusca  of  Syria
are  fairly  numerous  and  varied,  and  it  is  interesting  to
note  that  the  Dead  Sea  contains  no  molluscs,  whilst  the
sea  of  Tiberias  has  a  rich  molluscan  fauna.  Bliss  I  A
Mii  und  of  Many  Cities,  no)  found  a  quantity  of  snail
shells  ;  '  snails  had  doubtless  been  used  for  food.  '  [A

4662


SNARE

strong  protest  is  raised  against  the  prevalent  view  of  the
text  of  this  passage  by  Cheyne,  Ps.M. ]

A.  E.  S. — S.  A.  C.

SNARE.  For  tTpiD,  mokVS ;  HE),  pah  ;  ^OPI.  Mbhel ;
also  fipo\o<;  (  =  >iri>£i's)  and  way  if  (  =  tnPkes  and  /«/*),  see  FOWL,
g  9.  For  iTTSS,  Hicsfliidfi,  see  NET,  4,  and  for  11331?,  scbilktih
(Job  18  8  AV),  see  NET,  5.  For  nnp./rf/uz/A  (Lam.  847  AV),
cp  PIT,  7.

SNOW  (Xfl?,  meg;  Bib. -Aram.  37PI,  ^/^/  Ass.
ialgu  ;  xi CON)-  Like  rain  and  hail,  the  snow  was  tradi
tionally  supposed  to  be  kept  in  store-chambers  in  the
sky  (Job  38  22).  It  is  at  God's  command  that  it  falls
(Job  376  Ecclus.  43is) ;  it  is  he  who  'plucks  out  snow
like  wool'  (Ps.  147i6,  read  prtjn).  Its  sure  effect  in
fertilising  the  ground  supplies  a  figure  for  the  certainty
of  prophecy  (Is.  55  iof. )  ;  its  brilliant  whiteness,  for  the
clear  complexion  of  those  exempt  from  agricultural  toil
(Lam.  47),  for  a  conscience  free  from  the  sense  of  guilt
(Ps.  51  7  [9]  Is.  Ii8),  for  the  appearance  of  lepers  (Ex.
46  Xu.  12io  2  K.  527),  for  the  shining  raiment  (Dan.
7g)  and  hair  (Rev.  114)  of  a  heavenly  or  divine  being.
No  less  than  five  references  to  snow  occur  in  the  Book
of  Job.  In  describing  the  treachery  of  his  friends,  Job
refers  to  the  ice  and  snow  which  help  to  swell  the
streams  from  the  mountains  in  spring1  (Job6i6)  ;  and
tsvice  again  he  refers  to  the  snow  water  (9 30  24 19  [not
in  <5]).

The  phrase  'it  snowed  on  Zalmon '  (so  Driver,  Par.  fs.)  in
Ps.  (18  14  [15]  is  puzzling  ;  we  should  have  expected  'onHermon.'
Appearances  point  strongly  to  the  view  that  the  passage  is  cor
rupt.  See  ZALMON.

A  beautiful  proverb  (Prov.  25 13)  reminds  us  how
enduring  Oriental  customs  are.

Like  the  cooling  of  snow  [in  a  drink]  in  time  of  harvest,
Is  a  trustworthy  messenger  to  him  who  has  sent  him  ;
He  refreshes  the  soul  of  his  lord.

One  could  think  that  this  proverb  had  been  written
in  Damascus  ;  sherbet  cooled  with  snow  was  hardly
a  summer  drink  at  Jerusalem.  Indeed,  '  snow '  and
'  summer  '  to  an  ordinary  citizen  of  Jerusalem  suggested
incongruous  ideas  (see  Prov.  26  i,  ©  5p6<ros).  Jeremiah
refers  to  the  eternal  snows  of  Lebanon  ( Jer.  1814  ;  see
SiKiox),  and  in  the  eulogy  of  the  pattern  woman  it  is
said  (Prov.  3l2i2)  that  she  needs  not  to  be  afraid  even
of  'snow'  (i.e.,  of  the  coldest  days  of  winter)  for  her
household  because  '  they  are  clothed  with  scarlet'  (or,
'with  double  clothing';  see  COLOURS,  §  14).  In  a
famous  passage  (2  S.  2820=  i  Ch.  11 22)  Benaiah,  the  son
of  Jehoiada,  is  said  to  have  slain,  not  only  two  lion-like
men  of  Moab  (so  AV)  and  a  'goodly'  Misrite  (see
MI/KAIM,  §  2  b,  col.  3164),  but  also  'a  lion  in  the
midst  of  a  pit  in  time  of  snow. '  Why  the  snow  is
referred  to,  however,  is  not  clear.  An  old  French
Hebraist  (Vatable  in  Crit.  Sac.  22462)  says  it  is  because
lions  are  strongest  in  the  winter.  The  Hebrew,
however,  has  not  '  in  time  of  snow,'  but  '  in  the
day  of  the  snow' — i.e.,  on  some  one  day  on  which
heavy  snow  had  fallen.'3  Such  a  snowfall  might  be
mentioned  as  something  remarkable  from  its  rarity.  In
I  Mace.  1822  we  read  of  'a  very  great  snow'  which
hindered  the  movements  of  Trypho,  the  opponent  of
Jonathan  and  Simon  the  Maccabees.  It  is  conceivable
that  a  lion  '  had  strayed  up  the  Judrean  hills  from
Jordan,  and  had  been  caught  in  a  sudden  snowstorm  '
(GASm.  //(765),  and  that  Benaiah  went  down  into  the
cistern  into  which  the  animal  had  fallen  and  killed  it  ;
but  the  passage  is  full  of  textual  errors.

Klostermann  and  Budde  read  thus  (cp  ARIEL)—

'  The  same  (Benaiah)  slew  two  young  lions  near  their  lair;*
he  also  went  down  and  slew  the  (parent)  lion  in  the  midst  of  the
pit  on  the  day  of  the  snow.'  More  probably,  however,  the


1  Cp  Geikie,  The  Holy  Land  and  the  Bible,  1 124.

2  <PB,  however,  has  no  mention  of  snow.

3  H.  P.  Smith  gives  the  very  improbable  sense,  '  He  used  to
go  down  (TV)  and  smite  the  lions  in  the  pit  on  snowy  days.'

4  CKina-^K  "1K!J '33  (Klo.,  Bu.).

4663


SO


passage  records  the  slaying  of  two  Jerahmeelites

in Maucath-'arab  —  i.e., Arabian Maacath, on the day  (i.e.,

famous  battle)  of  Ishmael. See  Crit.  Bill.

South  of  Hebron  snow  is  rare,  and  along  the  sea
board  of  Philistia  and  Sharon,  as  well  as  in  the  Jordan
valley,  it  is  altogether  unknown.  In  Jerusalem  it  is  to
be  seen  in  the  streets  two  winters  in  three  ;  but  it  soon
disappears.  Very  snowy  winters,  however,  do  occur.

In  the  winter  of  1857  the  snow  was  8  inches  deep  and  covered
the  eastern  plains  for  a  fortnight.  The  results  were  disastrous.1
Nearly  a  fourth  of  the  houses  of  Damascus  were  injured,  and
some  of  the  flat-roofed  bazaars  and  mosques  were  left  in  heaps
of  ruins.  The  winter  of  1879  was  still  more  remarkable  ;  17
inches  of  snow,  even  where  there  was  no  drift,  are  recorded.2

T.  K.  C.

SNUFFDISHES  (JTinnp),  Ex.  25  38  etc.  See  CEN
SER,  2  ;  CANDLESTICK,  §  2.

SNUFFERS, i.  n'rnpnp  U/IOT,  -to  Piuck'?v

mezannnfrOth, i  K  7  50 2  K.  12  13  [14] 2614 Jer.  52  18 2Ch.
422t, Cp  CANDLESTICK,  §  2.

2.  n;n/T'C,  melkaMyim,  Ex.  37  23.  RV  '  tongs.'  See  TONGS,
CANDLESTICK,  §  2  ;  COOKING,  §  4.

SO  (X'lD  ;  CHfOOp  [B],  CCOA  [A],  on  ©L  see  below  ;
Vg.  Sua).  In  2  K.  17  4  we  read  'the  king  of  Assyria
found  conspiracy  in  Hoshea,  for  he  had  sent  messengers
to  So,  king  of  Egypt.'  This  happened  in,  or  directly
before,  725  B.C.  Egyptologists  formerly  looked  to  the
first  two  names  of  the  Ethiopian  or  twenty-fifth  dynasty
of  Egypt,  Shabaka  or  his  successor  Shabataka.  In  ac
cordance  with  an  erroneous  chronology,  that  dynasty
was  believed  to  have  begun  in  728,  and  the  conquest
of  Egypt  and  Hoshea's  embassy  seemed  to  coincide
very  remarkably.1  In  the  first  place,  however,  the  names
of  Shaf>a(or  bi}ka  (Sabaku  in  cuneiform  transcription,
Sabak5n  in  Herod  2  137,  and  in  Manetho)  or  Shaba
(or  bi}taka  (Sebichos,  Manetho)  could  not  satisfactorily
be  compared  with  So,  which  would  have  been  an
unparalleled  mutilation,  not  to  mention  the  insuperable
difficulty  of  Egyptian  s  as  Semitic  s.  In  the  second
place  the  chronology  must  now  be  considered  impossible.
We  know,  as  the  only  firm  point  for  the  chronology  of
the  Ethiopian  kings,  that  Tirhaka-Tah(a)rko  died  in
668/67  and  that  his  successor  (Tandamanil  was  expelled
from  Egypt  during  the  following  year.  Manetho  gives
to  the  first  three  Ethiopian  kings,  40  (Africanus)  or  44
years  (Syncellus),  Herodotus  50  years  to  the  only
Ethiopian  king  whom  he  knows,  Diodorus  36  years  to
all  four  kings.  The  monuments  insure  12  +  26  (not
more)  +3  +  3  (alleged,  and  not  counted)  years  to  the
dynasty.  The  maximum  for  the  beginning  of  the
Ethiopian  family  in  Egypt  would  thus  be  712  ;  probably
it  is  rather  to  be  assumed  some  years  later  (about  709  ?).
Consequently,  Samaria  had  been  destroyed  and  Hoshea
had  perished  before  the  Ethiopians  conquered  Egypt.
As  kings  of  Ethiopia  alone,  they  could  not  come  into
consideration  for  Syrian  politics.  Winckler  (Ml'AG,
1898,  p.  29)  has  made  it  probable  that  Shabaka,  the
Ethiopian  conqueror  of  Egypt,  lived  in  peace  with  As
syria,  exchanging  presents  with  Sennacherib.  Further
more,  we  should  expect  the  title  '  king  of  Rush-Ethiopia*
in  the  case  of  the  alleged  Ethiopian  ruler,  or  Pharaoh
in  the  case  of  a  true  Egyptian  prince.

The  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  Sargon  tell  us  of  SiPe,
a  tuftann  —  i.e.  ,  general  or  viceroy  —  of  Pir'u,  king  of
Musri,  who  vainly  assisted  the  rebellion  of  Hanunu  of
Gaza  against  Assyria  and  suffered  a  complete  defeat  at
Raphia  (Rapihi]  in  720  by  Sargon.  We  see  from  the
cuneiform  orthography  that  the  biblical  form  So  ought
to  be  vocalised  Sevie  or,  better  still,  that  the  w  is  a
corruption  for  b  and  the  original  reading  was  Sib'e.
Winckler's  first  suggestion  of  the  possibility  that  this
Sib'e  was  not  a  petty  Egyptian  prince  but  a  Musrite,  a

1  J.  L.  Porter  (Kitto,  Cyc.  Bib.  Lit.  8399).

-  Geikie,  The  Holy  Land  and  the  Bible,  '2  58.

3  The  present  writer  was  still  under  this  impression  when  pre
paring  the  article  EGYPT  (§  66  a).  Wiedemann  (Gesc/t.  Aeg.  587)
compared  So  with  the  fabulous  SethOn  of  Herodotus.

4664


SOAP

representative  of  the  king  Pir'u  (not  Pharaoh)  of  Musri
— i.e. ,  Northern  Arabia— was  in  AOF  126  (cp  GI 1 170)  ;
in  Ml'AG,  1898,  pt.  i. ,  he  finally  treated  it  as  certain
(see  now  KA  T(®>  146).  The  correctness  of  this  view  is
evident  (cp  HOSHKA,  col.  2127),  although  the  old,
impossible  theory  (see  above)  is  still  frequently  found
repeated.

Very  remarkable  is  the  form  of  2  K.  17  4  in  <5L,  which
substitutes  for  So,  '  Adramelech,  the  Ethiopian,  residing
in  Egypt '  ( 'A5pa,u.eXex  Tb"  A-iOiotra  rov  KO.TOLKOVVTO,  ev
Alyi/irT<t>).  Seductive  as  this  piece  of  information  looks
—only  the  name  Adramelech  could  never  be  treated  as
an  Egyptian  or  Ethiopian  name — it  is  shown  by  the
data  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  to  be  an  exegetical
addition,  quite  in  harmony  with  the  paraphrastic  char
acter  of  (§  which  presents  such  an  analogy  to  the
Targum.  It  is  quite  remarkable  that  the  Jewish
scholars  who  inserted  this  addition  knew  enough  about
the  history  of  Egypt  to  think  of  that  Ethiopian  dynasty
(the  date  of  which  they,  like  modern  Egyptologists,  put
too  high,  see  above)  and  to  conclude  that  an  Egyptian
ally  of  Israel  could  have  been  only  a  governor  under
the  king,  residing  in  remote  Xapata.  This  imperfect
(cp  the  date  and  the  impossible  name  Adramelech)
knowledge  cannot  be  accepted,  however,  as  historical
evidence  outweighing  the  direct  testimony  of  the  monu
ments.  [See  further  Crit.  Bil<.~\  w.  M.  M.

SOAP,  or  SOPE,  in  modern  language,  means  a
compound  of  certain  fatty  acids  with  soda  or  potash,
the  potash  forming  the  'soft,'  the  soda  the  'hard'
soaps  of  commerce.  Soap  is  believed  to  have  been  in
vented  by  the  Gauls,  and  became  known  to  the  Romans
at  a  comparatively  late  date.  Pliny  saysyfV  ex  sebo  ct
cinere,  and  that  the  best  is  prepared  from  goat-tallow
and  the  ashes  of  the  beech-tree.  A  soap-boiling  estab
lishment  with  soap  in  a  good  state  of  preservation  has
been  excavated  at  Pompeii.

The  word  '  soap  '  is  used  in  EV  to  translate  the  Heb.
borith  (n"i3,  a  derivation  of  ^/-ru,  cp  na,  'cleanness')
in  two  passages  (Jer.  222  Mai.  82!) '  which  allude  to  the
cleansing  of  the  person  and  of  fabrics  respectively.  It
is  not  possible  to  ascertain  exactly  what  substance,  or
substances,  are  intended.  As  a  rule  the  ancients
cleansed  themselves  by  oiling  their  bodies  and  scraping
their  skins,  and  by  baths,  and  they  cleaned  their  clothes
by  rubbing  with  wood  ashes  and  natural  earths,  such  as
fuller's  earth,  carbonates  of  sodium,  etc.  They  cleansed
their  wine  and  oil  casks  and  their  marble  statues  with
potash  lyes.a  Natural  carbonate  of  soda  (see  NITRE)
was  also  used,  as  well  as  the  juices  of  certain  plants
(see  below)  which,  owing  to  the  presence  of  saponin,
form  a  soap-like  lather  with  water.  See  EYE,  NITRE.

Canon  Tristram  states  that  considerable  quantities  of  soft
soap  are,  at  the  present  day,  manufactured  in  Palestine  by  boil
ing  olive  oil  with  potash,  procured  by  burning  several  species  of
Salicornia  (glass  wort)  and  Sahola  (salt  wort),  especially
S.  Kali,  which  abound  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea
and  in  the  salt  marshes  which  fringe  the  coast.  Cp  Low,  43.

A.  E.  S.

SOCHO  (toil"),  iCh.  4i8  AV,  RV  Soco,  a  name  in
the  genealogy  of  the  b'ne  JUDAH,  cp  Socnn,  i.

SOCOH  (rb'lb  in  Josh.  Kt. ;  but  Kr.  nib  as  in  Ch.,
where  RV  has  Soco  ;  in  S.  and  K.  ,-pjv  [Kt.]  \-&  [Kr.] ;  CTIUVW
[BAL]).

i.  A  town  in  the  Shephelah  of  Judah,  grouped  with
Jarrauth,  Adullam,  Azekah,  etc.;  (Josh,  loss  aacaxu
[B]),  and  mentioned  with  Azekah  in  the  description  of
the  encampment  of  the  Philistines  in  i  S.  17  i  (cp
EPHES-DAMMIM),  where  AV  has  Shochoh  ([«'s]  <TOKX^&  s

1  In  both  passages  ©  has  Troi'a  or  Troa,  N*  by  a  curious  mistake
in  Mai.  82  TrAoia  (' grass '); Vg.  in  Jer.  has  herbam  borith,  in
Mai.  herbafullonuin.

2  Fullers  also  used  putrid  urine,  which  was  so  offensive  that
they  were  compelled  to  live  beyond  the  walls  or  in  remote  parts
of  the  city  of  Rome.

3  The  reading  2cwc^w<?  represents  a  plur.  form  ;  cp  Eus.  OSC^
293  32  (2,oK\ia- Kuifj.ai  firri  Svo  ...  17  ^.ei-  avaiTepa,  rj  5e  xariarfpa
2oic,x<u0  xpr)uaTi'£bu<7a(.)  and  Jer.  ib.  151  21 . . .  unus  in  monte

4665


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

[BE],  eiaoyxu  [A],  Jos.  Anf.vi.9i  <TWKOVS).  Socoh
was  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2Ch.  11 7  Shoco  AV,
(TOKXU0  [BA],  ffOKxu  [Lj,  (Twxw  [Jos.  Ant.  viii.  10  i])[
but,  according  to  the  Chronicler,  was  taken  by  the  Philis
tines  in  the  reign  of  Ahaz  (aCh.  28  i8[Shocho  AV,  aoKx^O
[L]).  The  site  intended  is  no  doubt  esh-Shuweikeh  (as
if  a  diminutive  form  of  nihb).  The  ruins  which  bear  this
name  occupy  a  strong  position  (1145  ft.  above  the  sea
level)  on  the  S.  side  of  the  great  valley  of  Elah  (see  ELAH,
VALLEY  OF),  at  the  point  where  the  Wady  es-Sur  becomes
the  Wady  es-Sant  (cpGASm.  HGzz'&ff.;  Che.  Aids,  85).
Perhaps  this  Socoh  was  the  birthplace  of  the  Antigonus
who  came  after  Simon  the  Righteous  and  preached  dis
interested  obedience  (Pirke  Aboth,  1  3,  ijig  B"N  DIJJ'DJN).
The  gentilic  is  plausibly  found  in  the  '  Sucathites '
(Socathites)  of  i  Ch.  255  ;  see  JABEX.

[The  trend  of  the  present  writer's  criticism,  however,  is  to  show
that  the  geography  of  the  OT  narratives  has  often  been  mis
understood  and  consequently  misrepresented  by  the  redactors
spoken  of  above.  Saul's  struggle  with  the  arch-enemies  of  his
people  (the  Zarephathites,  miscalled  the  Philistines  ;  see  SAUL,
§  4<r)  was  in  the  Negeb.  The  fight  described  in  i  S.  17  was  in
the  valley  (?)  of  Jerahmeel  ('emck  hd-'elah,  and  'ephes  daminiin)
near  Maacah — '  which  belongs  to  Jerahmeel ' — and  Azekah.  A
Socoh,  or  perhaps  rather  Maacah,  in  the  Negeb  was  probably
meant  in  the  other  passages  referred  to  above,  as  they  were
originally  read.  The  Sucathites  too  (i  Ch.  255)  should  rather
be  designated  the  '  Maacathites.'  See  SHABBETHAI.

T.  K.  C.J

•2.  A  second  town  of  this  name  is  grouped  with
Shamir,  Jattir,  etc. ,  in  the  mountain  district  of  Tuclah
(Josh.  1048  ffii3xa  [K]),  and  is  identified  with  another  t-sA-
Shuweikeh,  situated  10  in.  S\V.  of  Hebron  and  E.  of
the  Wady  el-Khalil  (Z?A"2i95).  According  to  the
ordinary  view  of  the  sphere  of  action  of  Solomon's
twelve  prefects  (see,  however,  SOLOMON*,  §  6,  note  i)
this  is  probably  the  Socoh  which  formed  part  of  the
prefecture  of  BE.NHESED  [</.v.]  (iK.4io  RV,  AV
Sochoh,  <rox\w  [A],  cro/j.r]i'xafa  [K.AE]  Pcra/w/i'xa  [B],

The  Egypt,  sa-a-kd,  sct-o-ko  in  the  list  of  Sosenk  can  hardly  be
identified  with  either  of  the  above.  From  its  position  in  this
list  a  more  northerly  situation  seems  necessary  (cp  WMM
As.  u.  Eiir.  i6of.  166).

SODA  ("103),  Prov.  2520  RVm£-,  EV  NITRE  (q.v.}.
Cp  SOAP.

SODI  (HID  ;  coyA[e]l  [BAP1!.]),  father  of  Gaddiel,
Zebulunite  (Nu.  13  10).

SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

New  theory  (§  7).

Stucken's  '  dry  '  deluge  (§  8).

Lot-story  not  historical  (§  3). Judg.  1!'  15-30  (§  9).
Possible  classification  (§  4).  Result  (§  10).

Difficulties  (§  5).  Religious  suggestions  (§  n).

Text  of  Gen.  1924yC,  etc.  (§  6). Literature  (§12).

SODOM  (D'lp;  coAOMA  [BS'ADEQZP],  plur.),
coAo/v\[e]iTAi  Gen.  194,  and  GOMORRAH  (iTlbl?,  po-
[BAL],  in  OT  sing,  and  plur.  ;
in  NT  (AV  GOMORRHA)  plur.,  except
in  Mt.  10  15  according  to  Treg.  [but  not  Ti.  WH],  with
CDPL  [DL  rOMOpAC,  so  fOMORA  Jer.  23i4Nj),  two
cities  represented  in  the  traditional  text  of  Gen.  1.3 10-12
1925  as  situated  in  the  '  Circle  (~I33,  AV  'plain,'  RV
'  Plain  ')  of  Jordan,'  and  less  distinctly  in  14s  as  in  the
Vale  of  SIDDIM  (ij.v.}.  According  to  the  same  text,  the
kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  their  allies  were  de
feated  by  CHEDOR-LAOMER,  king  of  Elam,  and  his  allies,
who  carried  away  both  the  people  and  the  goods  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  but  were  forced  to  give  these  up  by  the
rapid  intervention  of  the  warrior  '  Abram  the  Hebrew  '
(Gen.  14i-i6).  In  Gen.  1816-33  19i-2g  we  have  the
account  of  (i)  a  dialogue  between  Abraham  and,  first
of  all,  the  Elohim  who  visited  him,  and  then  Yahwe
alone,  respecting  the  fate  said  to  be  impending  over

et  alter  in  campo  situs,  qui  Sochoth  ntincupantur.  Both  Euse.
bins  and  Jerome  strangely  confuse  Socoh  with  Succoth-benoth
(2  K.  17  30).

4666


Biblical  references  (§  i).
Critical  analysis  (§  2).


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

1  Sodom  and  Gomorrah ' J  (virtually  equivalent  to
'  Sodom  ') ;  (2)  the  circumstances  leading  up  to  the  cul
minating  act  of  wickedness  committed  in  Sodom  ;  and
(3)  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  other
cities,  and  the  escape  of  Lot  and  his  two  daughters.
The  sin  of  Sodom  is  often  referred  to  as  typical  of
horrible  and  obstinate  wickedness,  Is.  1 1089  Jer.  23  14
Dt.  3232  ;  and  its  destruction  as  a  warning,  Is.  179  13 19
Jer.  49 18  Zeph.  2$>  Dt.  2922  Am.  4u  Lam.  46  (for  EV's
'iniquity'  and  'sin'  read  'punishment').  Sometimes,
too,  it  is  mentioned  alone  as  the  destroyed  guilty  city,
Gen.  19 13  ('  this  place  '  =  Sodom)  Is.  1?  89  Lam.  46  (cp
Gen.  14  17^!  [but  in  v.  17  ©'-  inserts  Ka.ij3a.cr.  70/11.],  where
the  king  of  Sodom  figures  alone) ;  but  Gomorrah
is  often  mentioned  too,  Gen.  13io  18 20  192428  Is.
l9/.  13  19  Jer.  23  14  Am.  4  n  Zeph.  2  9  Dt.  3232.
'Neighbour  cities'  are  also  referred  to  in  Jer.  49 18
5040;  cp  Ezek.  1646^  ('Sodom  and  her  daughters').
In  Hos.  11  8  Aclmah  and  Zeboim,  and  in  Dt.  29  23  [22]
Sodom,  Gomorrah,  Admah,  and  Zeboim  are  given  as
the  ruined  cities  ;  cp  Gen.  10  19  and  142,  where  in  like
manner  these  four  cities  are  mentioned  together.  In
Wisd.  106  the  inexact  phrase  '  Pentapolis '  is  used  (see
RV).  The  description  of  the  sin  of  Sodom  in  Ezek.
1649^500  is  evidently  based  on  the  legend  known  to  us
from  Gen.  19,  and  similarly  that  of  the  punishment  in
Dt.  29  23  [22]  agrees  with  that  given  in  the  traditional
text  of  Gen.  1924-26.  Allusions  to  the  fate  of  Sodom
appear  to  occur  in  Ps.  116  [but  see  below]  140io[u]
JoblSis  Is.  349/  Jer.  20i6  Kzek.  8822.  Curiously
enough,  in  a  geographical  passage  (Gen.  10  19),  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  and  Admah  and  Zeboim  are  spoken  of
as  if  still  in  existence.  These  are  the  data  relative  to
the  history  of  Sodom  and  the  other  cities  supplied  by
the  traditional  text.

The  references  to  Sodom  (Gomorrah  is  rarely  added)  in  the
Apocrypha  and  in  the  XT  are  as  follows — 2  Esd.  28  67  7313
Ecclus.  168  Wisd.  1!' 14  Mt.  10  15  (Mk.  tin  [not  in  best  texts]
Lk.  10  12)  Lk.  17  29  Rom.  929  (quotation)  2  Pet.  '16  Jude7  Rev.
Il8(cp  Ezek.  283,  etc.).

Hefore  proceeding  further  it  is  necessary  to  refer
briefly  to  the  critical  analysis  of  the  section  in  which

p  ... . the Sodom-story  is contained (Gen.  18-
i.  Critical T92g)_ Thal  7,  -2g  belongs  lo  the  i>riest]y

ana  ysis.  \\-riter  is  admitted  ;  its  true  place  is  prob
ably  after  13i2«  (P),  which  states  that  'Lot  dwelt  in
the  cities  of  -133,1'  (rather  S.xcrtT,  '  Jerahmeel ').  With
regard  to  the  rest  of  the  section,  it  is  admitted  that  there
has  been  a  prolonged  process  of  editorial  manipulation.
Only  thus  indeed  can  we  account  for  the  singular  com
bination  of  passages  which  refer  to  Yahwe  as  the
speaker  and  actor  with  other  passages  which  indicate
three  men  as  charged  with  representative  divine  func
tions,  and  for  the  not  less  singular  fact  (i)  that  whereas
Abraham's  hospitality  is  claimed  by  'three  men,'  Lot
receives  into  his  house  only  two  men,  who  are  called
in  the  present  text  of  19 1  'the  two  mafdkim  (EV
'angels'),'  and  (2)  that  in  19i7,  whereas  the  first  verb  is
in  the  plural  ('when  they  had  brought  them  forth'),
the  second  is  in  the  singular  ( 'he  said  ';  so  again,  r.  21).
It  was  long  ago  suggested  (and  the  same  idea  has
lately  been  worked  out  by  Kraetzschmar '-')  that  there
have  been  imperfectly  fused  together  two  versions  of  the
story  of  '  Sodom,'  in  one  of  which  Yahwe  was  said  to
have  appeared  in  a  single  human  form,  and  in  the  other
in  a  group  of  men  ;  whether  we  regard  these  men  as
'  £16him  '  (cp  Gen.  126  822  117)  or  divine  beings,  the
chief  of  whom  is  Yahwe,  or  as  '  mal  akim  '  (commonly
rendered  'angels'),  does  not  affect  the  critical  inquiry.
It  is  impossible,  however,  to  work  out  this  theory  to  a
satisfactory  result  ;  the  original  narrative  may  have
been  modified  by  editors,  but  we  cannot  to  any  large

1  Regretfully  we  abstain  from  drawing  out  the  beauties  of
the  story  in chap.  IS. For parallels to  the  divine  visit see
Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  pp.  xxxiv-xxxvii,  and  312^;  cp
also  Horn.  Oii.  \~  tp^Jf.

2  '  Der  Mythos  von  Sodoms  Ende,'  ZA  TU'l78i-Q2  ;  cp  Xew
World,  la 36.

4667


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

extent  admit  the  theory  of  independent  literary  strata.
Fripp,  therefore,  was  justified  in  attempting  to  show *
that  in  the  earliest  form  of  the  story  Yahwe  himself  was
the  only  speaker  and  agent.  Comparing  this  story,
however,  with  analogous  stories  in  Genesis  and  else
where,  it  is  much  more  natural  to  suppose  that  in  its
original  form  three  men  —  i.e. ,  three  '  elohim  ' — were
spoken  of,  and  that  the  distinction  between  Yahwe  (who
remained — see  1822^ — to  talk  with  Abraham)  and  the
'  two  mafdkim  '  who  went  to  '  Sodom '  was  due  to  the
same  later  writer  who,  as  Wellhausen  (0/27  /)  has
rendered  probable,  introduced  1817-19  and  220-33^,  a
passage  which  reveals  the  existence  in  the  writer's  mind
of  doubts  as  to  the  divine  justice,  such  as  we  know  to
have  been  felt  among  the  Jews  in  later  times.  There  is
also  reason  to  think  that  the  references  to  Lot's  wife
(19  is/.  26  ;  contrast  v.  12)  and  the  whole  of  the  Zoar
episode,  together  with  the  account  of  the  birth  of  Moab
and  Ben-ammi  (?),  are  later  insertions,  though  by  no
means  so  late  as  the  two  insertions  in  ch.  18  mentioned
above.2

Here,  however,  we  are  chiefly  concerned  with  the
contents  of  the  Lot-story  (ch.  19).  We  are  told  that  as
-  ,  a  punishment  for  disregard  of  the  sacred
,  '  ,  law  of  hospitality,  and  for  a  deadly  sin

historical  comm'tted  at  least  in  intention,  '  Yahwe
rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorrah
brimstone  and  fire  from  Yahwe  out  of  heaven,  and  over«
threw  those  cities,  and  all  the  Plain,  and  all  the  inhabit
ants  of  the  cities,  and  that  which  grew  upon  the  ground'
(1924  f.  RV).  Is  it  possible  to  explain  the  origin  and
meaning  of  this  story,  accepting  provisionally  the  form
in  which  it  is  given  in  the  traditional  text  ?  3

That  the  story  is  historical  (however  laxly  the  word
be  interpreted)  ought  to  be  at  once  denied  by  those
who  have  read  the  earlier  legends  of  Genesis  in  the
light  of  the  comparative  critical  method.  If  the  Deluge
is  not  historical,  and  if  Abraham  and  Lot  are  ultimately
the  creations  of  the  popular  imagination,  how  can  the
strange  story  in  Gen.  19,  for  which,  as  we  shall  see,
there  are  so  many  parallels  in  folk-lore,  be  regarded  as
historical?  It  is  surely  no  answer  to  appeal  to  the
accordance  of  the  phenomena  of  the  catastrophe  of
Sodom  with  those  which  have  happened  elsewhere  in
'similar  geological  formations,'  or  to  the  justification
of  the  traditional  description  of  that  catastrophe  by
'  authorities  in  natural  science '  (but  not  in  historical
criticism)  and  by  some  competent  critics  of  the  OT.
For  the  narratives  of  the  Hebrew  Origines  must  be  ac
cepted  or  rejected  as  wholes.  Plausible  as  Dawson's
view4  may  be,  that  the  description  of  the  catastrophe
of  Sodom  is  that  of  '  a  bitumen  or  petroleum  eruption,
similar  to  those  which  on  a  small  scale  have  been  so
destructive  in  the  region  of  Canada  and  the  United
States  of  America,'  and  the  more  ambitious  theory  of
Blanckenhorn,3  that  the  catastrophe,  which  was  a  real
though  not  a  historical  event,  began  with  an  earthquake,
continued  with  igneous  eruptions,  and  ended  with  the
covering  of  the  sunken  cities  by  the  waters  of  the  Dead
Sea,  it  would  require  great  laxity  of  literary  interpreta
tion  to  assert  that  this  is  what  either  the  Yahwistic
narrative,  or  the  earliest  references  in  the  prophets,
intend.  As  Lucien  Gautier  remarks  (above,  col.  1046),
'  The  text  of  Genesis  speaks  of  a  rain  of  fire  and  brim
stone  and  a  pillar  of  smoke  rising  to  heaven,  but  neither

1  Composition  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  50-53  (1892),  and  ZA  Til'
12  ^ff.  (1892).

2  In  an  essay  in  the  New  ll'orlii,  1243,  only  the  geological
myth  in  7'.  26  relative  to  the  pillar  of  salt  is  regarded  as  an  ac
cretion. Gunkel  (//A",  Gen.  i88_/?~.)  holds  that  Lot's  wife  played
no  part  in  the  original  story,  and  that  the  Zoar  episode  is  also
a  later  insertion,  but  he  claims  r'r'.  30/1-38  for  the  original  story.

3  Knohel  has,  at  any  rate,  noticed  that  the  Sodom  catastrophe
closes  the  second  stage  in  the  early  narrative,  corresponding  to
the  Deluge.

*  Expositor,  1886  (i),  p.  74  ;  Modern  Science  in  Bible  Lands,
486.

5  Z/>/T(see  end  of  article).

4668


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

of  an  earthquake,  nor  of  an  igneous  eruption,  nor  of
an  inundation.'  Nor  can  we  venture  to  pick  and  choose
among  the  details  of  the  story  in  Gen.  19.

It  is  of  no  more  use  to  justify  with  some  plausibility  two  or
three  expressions  in  a  part  of  the  Sodom -story  by  means  of
'  scientific '  lore  than  to  make  it  out  to  be,  modestly  put,  not
impossible  that  'Chedorlaomer,  king  of  Elam,'  may  have  invaded
Palestine  at  a  time  when  Abraham  may  have  lived.  If  '  authori
ties  in  natural  science '  sometimes  speak  as  if  Gen.  19  were  in
part  historical^  (more  plausibly,  based  on  a  tradition  of  a  real
occurrence),  we  must  remember  that  historical  criticism  and
natural  science  are  both  studies  which  require  a  special  training,
and  if  critics  of  the  OT  even  in  the  nineteenth  century  have
thought  that  they  could  (here  and  in  the  Deluge-story)  disengage
a  true  tradition  of  a  prehistoric  natural  fact  from  the  mass  of
superimposed  legend,  one  may  remark  in  explanation  that  these
critics  belong  to  a  transitional  period,  and  that  the  criticism  of
to-day  has  to  throw  off  the  weaknesses  which  it  has  inherited
from  the  past.

The  chief  extra- biblical  passage  in  which  distinct
reference  is  made  to  the  destruction  of  the  cities  as
historical  is  in  Strabo  (xvi.  244),  where,  after  describing
the  rugged  and  burnt-up  rocks,  exuding  pitch,  round
about  MoacrciSa  (i.e.,  the  stupendous  rock  -  fortress
Masada,  near  the  SW.  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea),  the
geographer  mentions  the  native  tradition  that  here
thirteen  cities  once  flourished.  The  ample  circuit  of
Sodom  their  capital  can,  he  says,  still  be  traced.  In
consequence  of  an  earthquake,  and  of  an  eruption  of
hot  springs,  charged  with  bitumen  and  sulphur,  the
lake  advanced  suddenly  (17  \i/j,vf)  TrpoTreo-oi)  ;  some  of
the  cities  were  swallowed  up,  and  others  were  deserted
by  as  many  of  the  inhabitants  as  could  flee.  Josephus
(Z?/iv.  84),  speaking  of  the  lake  Asphaltitis,  upon  which
the  country  of  Sodom  borders,  uses  similar  language: — •
'  There  are  still  the  remains  of  the  divine  fire,  and  the
shadows  (cr/ads)  of  five  cities  are  visible  as  well  as  the
ashes  produced  in  their  fruits.'  2  It  is  hardly  possible  to
avoid  taking  these  reports  together,  and  assuming  that
Strabo's  informant  was  of  the  Jewish  race.  If  we  reject
the  claim  put  forward  by  critics  in  behalf  of  the  state
ment  in  Gen.  19  247"".,  \ve  must  still  more  certainly  reject
the  statement  of  Strabo  as  historical  evidence.11

1  E.g.,  besides  the  late  Sir  J.  \V.  Dawson,  Canon  Tristram
(The  Land  of  Israel,  356).  Describing  a  valley  at  the  N.  end
of  the  salt-range  of  Usclum,  he  says  'The  whole  appearance
points  to  a  shower  of  hot  sulphur,  and  an  irruption  of  bitumen
upon  it,  which  would  naturally  lie  calcined  and  impregnated
with  its  fumes  ;  and  this  at  a  geological  period  quite  subsequent
to  all  the  diluvial  and  alluvial  action  of  which  we  have  such
abundant  evidence.  The  catastrophe  must  have  been  since  the
formation  of  the  valley,  and  while  the  water  was  at  its  present
level — therefore  probably  during  the  historic  period.'  Hlancken-
horn,  however,  is  more  in  touch  with  biblical  critics.  In  his
second  article  he  expresses  his  adhesion  to  the  views  (then  just
published)  of  Kraetzschmar,  and  says,  '  This  makes  it  plain  that
while  it  is  certainly  very  probable  that  the  account  in  Genesis
points  to  a  natural  occurrence  which  was  real  but  not  "  historic,"
the  Yahwistic  form  ...  is  altogether  different  from  the  original
tradition,  which  is  rather  to  be  sought  in  the  references  and
figurative  statements  of  the  prophets'  (Z D P 'V  21  (19  [1898]).
Whether  this  stress  on  the  prophetic  references,  only  two  of
which  can  be  at  all  early,  is  justifiable,  need  not  here  be  dis
cussed.


2  See  also  Tacitus,  Hist.  5  37.  The  reference  may  be  (i)  to
the  fruit  of  the  'osAer-tree  ('iisar,  Calotropis  procera,  of  the
family  Asclepiadacece),  which  Hasselquist  {Travels,  1766)  calls
poina  sodoinitica,  and  found  in  abundance  about  Jericho  and


and  of  a  beautiful  colour.'  The  tree,  says  Tristram  (NHB /$£),
grows  to  a  height  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet,  and  the  fruit  is
'as  large  as  an  apple  of  average  size  of  a  bright  yellow  colour,
hanging  three  or  four  together  close  to  the  stem.'  It  easily
bursts  when  ripe,  and  '  supports  a  very  singular  orthopterous
insect,  a  very  large  black  and  yellow  cricket,  which  we  found
in  some  plenty  on  all  the  trees,  but  never  elsewhere.'  But  (2)
Tristram's  suggestion  that  the  fruit  of  the  colocynth  is  meant
deserves  attention.  See  GOURDS  [Wn.D].  The  fruit,  though
fair  of  aspect,  has  a  pulp  which  dries  up  into  a  bitter  powder,
used  as  medicine.  But  to  suppose  that  the  phrase  '  the  vine  of
Sodom  '  (Dt.  32  32)  has  any  reference  either  to  the  colocynth  or
to  any  other  botanical  plant,  is  plainly  a  mistake  (see  the  com
mentators).

3  Still  more  obviously  worthless  for  critical  purposes  is  the
statement  of  Trogus  (Justin,  xviii.  3  3)  that  the  Phoenicians  were
forced  to  leave  their  home  beside  the  Assyrhint  stagnuin  by  an
earthquake.  Bunsen  took  this  stagnum  to  be  the  Dead  Sea.

4669


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

From  the  point  of  view  which  is  here  recommended
it  is  all-important  to  bring  the  Sodom-story  into  the

4 Possible r'gllt class °^ mvtns or  semi -mythic
,'.,;'  „ legends. It is not necessary that

classification.

mythic  stones  of  the  same  class  should

all  give  the  same  particulars  ;  it  is  enough  if  they  agree
in  some  leading  '  motive. '  Lack  of  space  prevents  us
from  mentioning  more  than  a  few  such  stories.  Let  us
refer  first  to  the  story  of  the  punishment  of  the  guilty  city
Gortyna.  '  The  people  of  this  city  led  a  lawless  exist
ence  as  robbers.  The  Thebans,  being  their  neighbours,
were  afraid,  but  Amphion  and  Zethos,  the  sons  of  Zeus
and  Antiope,  fortified  Thebes  by  the  magic  influence  of
Amphion's  lyre.  Those  of  Gortyna  came  to  a  bad  end
through  the  divine  Apollo. ' J  '  The  god  utterly  over
threw  the  Phlegyan  race  by  continual  thunderbolts  and
violent  earthquakes  ;  and  the  survivors  were  wasted  by
a  pestilence. '  2  Usually,  however,  it  pleases  the  creators
of  folk-lore  to  represent  the  punishment  of  wicked  cities
as  consisting  in  their  being  submerged  by  water.
Homer  (//.  16384^*!)  speaks  of  the  pernicious  floods
which  Zeus  brings  by  autumnal  rain-storms  on  godless,
unjust  men.  The  well-known  story  of  Philemon  and
Baucis  (Ovid,  Met.  8611-724)  belongs  to  the  same  sub
division.  Similarly  a  place  on  the  Lake  of  Thun  is
popularly  said  to  have  been  destroyed  because  a  dwarf
was  refused  hospitality  during  a  storm  by  all  the  inhabi
tants  except  an  aged  couple  who  dwelt  in  a  miserable
cottage.3  A  French  journal  of  folk-lore  contains  a  long
series  of  folk -tales  about  these  swallowed -up  cities,
most  of  which  have  a  moral.4  It  is  true,  the  moral
may  be  omitted.  Thus,  according  to  Prof.  Rhys,5  each
of  the  Welsh  meres  is  supposed  to  have  been  formed
by  the  subsidence  of  a  city,  whose  bells  may  even  now
sometimes  be  heard  pealing  merrily.

For  further  European  examples  see  Tobler,  /;;/  neuen  Reich,
J66  ff.  (1873);  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  546  _/.,  and  cp
Usener,  Religionsgeschichtl.  Untersuclmngen,  'A  246.  A  story
similar  to  that  of  Lot  told  by  the  Chinese  Buddhist  pilgrim,
Hiouen  Thsang,  who  travelled  in  India  (7th  cent.  A.D.),  may  be
added.  There  was  a  city  called  Holaolokia,  which  was  very
rich  but  addicted  to  heresy.  Once  an  Arahat  (one  made  free
by  insight)  came  there,  and  was  treated  inhospitably  :  earth
and  sand  were  thrown  upon  him.  Only  one  man  had  pity  on
him,  and  gave  him  food.  Then  said  the  Arahat  to  him, '  Escape  ;
in  seven  days  a  rain  of  earth  and  sand  will  fall  upon  the  city,
and  no  one  will  be  left,  because  they  threw  earth  upon  me.'
The  man  went  into  the  city  and  told  his  relations  ;  but  they
mocked  him.  The  storm  came,  and  the  man  was  the  only  one
who,  by  an  underground  passage,  escaped  (Paulus  Cassel,
Mischle  Sindbad,  7  [Berlin,  1888]).

A  similar  story  is  also  told  in  Syria.  The  well-
known  Birket  Ram,  two  hours  from  Banias,  which  is
evidently  the  crater  of  an  extinct  volcano,  is  said  to
cover  with  its  waters  a  village,  whose  population,  under
aggravating  circumstances,  refused  hospitality  to  a  poor
traveller.  Usually,  however,  such  villages  or  cities  in
Arabian  legend  are  classified  as  makltibat  '  overturned
ones,'  which  at  any  rate  implies  destruction  by  other
means  than  a  flood  ;  one  thinks  at  once  of  the  technical
term  mahpckah  ('overturning')  used  in  the  OT  for
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  of  Job  15  28  where  the
wicked  man  is  described  as  dwelling  in  '  desolate  cities
.  .  .  which  were  destined  to  become  heaps.'  E.  II.
Palmer  tells  us6  how  the  Arabs  of  the  neighbourhood
account  by  a  myth  for  the  blocks  of  stone  at  the  base
and  on  the  summit  of  Jebel  Madara  ;  stones  here  take
the  place  of  the  brimstone  and  fire  in  our  present  form
of  the  Sodom-story.  Nor  is  it  only  in  et-Tih  that
stories  of  ruined  cities  are  handed  down  among  the
Arabs,  and  that  the  desolation  is  accounted  for  by  the

But,  as  A.  von  Gutschmid  (Beitr.  zur  Gcsch.  des  Orients,  26)
pointed  out,  the  Assyrium  stagnuin  is  certainly  not  the  Dead
Sea,  but  the  lake  of  Bambyke  (Mabug  or  Hierapolis).

1  So  in  effect  Pherecydes  (Fragmenta,  128).

2  Pausanias,  936(Frazer).

3  Tobler  (op.  cit.\

4  Revue  des traditions locales, 1899-1900, '  Les  villes  en-
gloutees.'

5  The  Arthurian  Legend,  360^

6  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  416.

4670


_._. ...
ficulties.


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

infidelity  and  the  abominable  deeds  of  the  former
inhabitants.1  \Vetzstein  (in  Delitzsch's  Job,  Ger.  ed.
197)  gives  a  number  of  such  stories  ;  one  of  them
contains  a  detail  illustrative  of  the  '  pillar  of  salt  '  which
was  once  Lot's  disobedient  wife.  At  the  source  of  the
Rakkad  (in  the  Jaulan)  this  explorer  saw  some  erect  and
singularly  perforated  jasper  formations,  called  el-fdrida,
'  the  bridal  procession.  '  Near  them  is  its  village,
Ufuna,  which,  in  spite  of  repeated  attempts,  can  be  no
more  inhabited.  It  remains  forsaken,  according  to  the
tradition,  as  an  eternal  witness  that  ingratitude,  especi
ally  towards  God,  does  not  escape  punishment.

To  put  aside  such  facts  (of  which  only  a  selection  has  been
given)  as  irrelevant,  and  to  substitute  for  them  tne  speculations
of  'authorities  in  natural  science'  unversed  in  critical  researches,
would  involve  a  serious  lapse  from  sound  critical  method.  The
case  of  the  Sodom-story  is  parallel  to  that  of  the  Creation-story,
and  still  more  of  the  Deluge-story,  in  the  Hebrew  Origines,  to
explain  which  in  any  degree  by  taking  account  of  the  subtle
theorisings  of  geologists  would  detract  from  the  clearness  and
validity  of  the  approximately  correct  solutions  of  the  critical
problems  involved.  It  is  now  beyond  gainsaying  that  naive
races,  in  viewing  certain  striking  phenomena  of  nature,  sugges
tive  of  special  divine  interventions,  are  led,  by  a  mental  law,
to  form  mythic  narratives  respecting  calamities  which  have
happened  to  individuals  or  to  populations  under  circumstances
which  in  the  most  widely  separated  regions  resemble  each  other.
The  Sodom-story  in  the  traditional  text  can  be  in  its  main
features  explained  as  such  a  mythic  narrative,  and  cannot  other
wise  be  accounted  for  in  any  way  that  is  not  open  to  well-founded
critical  objection.

There  are  no  doubt  several  difficulties  which  still
remain  to  be  dealt  with,  (i)  There  are  some  features

in  the  Sodom-narrative  which  remind
us  of  the  strange  slory  .n  Judg  19  .

the  introduction  of  these  features  requires  explanation.

(2)  There is one reference (Gen.  14  3) to the site
of the ruined cities which suggests that they were
swallowed up by the waters of the Dead Sea  ; if
the  text  is  correct it appears to  contradict  the  state
ment in 1024, which  makes no reference to  a  Hood.

(3)  The  expression  '  overthrew  '  (-£~'i)  in  1925  is,  strictly
speaking,  inconsistent  with  the  representation  in  v.  24.
Blanckenhorn  ,  it  is  true,  has  a  speculative  justification
for the  expression. Hut the fact  that '  overturning  '
became  the '  technical term  '  in literature  for the  de
struction  of  Sodom  may  well  make  us  hesitate  to  follow
this  eminent  geologist. (4) It  is  almost  as  difficult  to
localise  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  as  to  localise  Paradise.

It  is  only  on  the  last  of  these  points  that  we  are
tempted  at  present  to  dilate  ;  but  here  we  prefer  to
adopt  the  clear  and  full  statement  (//(/',  505-8)  of  Prof.
G.  A.  Smith.  (It  should  be  mentioned,  however,  that
the  question  is,  for  us,  of  importance  only  in  so  far  as  it
opens  up  problems  as  to  the  successive  phases  of  the
Sodom-story.  The  historical  character  of  the  narrative
could  not  be  rescued  even  if  the  geographical  difficulty
referred  to  were  removed.  )

'There  is  a  much-debated  but  insoluble  question
whether  the  narratives  in  Genesis  intend  to  place  the
cities  to  the  N.  or  to  the  S.  of  the  Dead  Sea.

'  For  the  northern  site  there  are  these  arguments  —  that  Abraham
and  Lot  looked  upon  the  cities  from  near  liethel,  that  the  name
Circle  of  Jordan  is  not  applicable  to  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,
that  the  presence  of  five  cities  there  is  impossible,  that  the
expedition  of  the  Four  Kin^s,  as  it  swept  N.  from  Kadesh-
Harnea,  attacked  Ha/a/on  Tamar,  which  is  probably  Kngedi,
before  it  reached  the  Vale  of  Siddim  ami  encountered  the  king
of  Sodom  and  his  allies;  that  the  name  (  Jomorrah  perhaps
exists  in  Tubk  'Antriyeh,  near  A  in  el-h'tshkhah;  and  that  the
name  of  Zoar  has  been  recovered  in  Tell  Shagiir.

'  On  the  other  hand,  however,  at  the  S.  end  of  the
Dead  Sea  there  lay  throughout  Roman  and  medieval
times  a  city  called  Zoara  by  the  Greeks  and  /.ughar  by
the  Arabs,  which  was  identified  by  all  with  the  Zoar  of
I  .ot.  Jebel  Usdum  is  the  uncontested  representative  of
Sodom.  Hazazon  Tamar  may  be  not  Engedi,  but  the
Tamar  of  Ezekiel,  S\V.  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  name
"  Kikkar"  may  surely  have  been  extended  to  the  S.  of
the  Dead  Sea,  just  as  to-day  the  Ghor  is  continued  for

1  Cp  Koran,  Sur.  7  <)<)/•
4671


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

a  few  miles  to  the  S.  of  Jebel  Usdum  ;  Jewish  and  Arab
traditions  fix  on  the  S. ;  and,  finally,  the  natural  condi
tions  are  more  suitable  there  than  on  the  N.  to  the
descriptions  of  the  region  both  before  and  after  the
catastrophe,  for  there  is  still  sufficient  water  and  verdure
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Ghor  to  suggest  a  garden  of
the  Lord,  while  the  shallow  bay  and  long  marshes  may,
letter  than  the  ground  at  the  N.  end  of  the  sea,  hide
the  secret  of  the  overwhelmed  cities.

'  Such  is  the  evidence  for  the  rival  sites.  We  can
only  wonder  at  the  confidence  with  which  all  writers
dogmatically  decide  in  favour  of  one  or  the  other. '

It  may  be  added  that  Grove  (in  Smith's  Dli^,  art.
'Salt  Sea')  has  argued  at  length  for  a  northern  site  as
the  real  one.  He  is  supported  by  Canon  Tristram
(Land  of  Israel,  360-363)  and  Prof.  Hull  (Mount
Seir,  165).  The  latter  writes  thus,  '  From  the  descrip
tion  in  the  Bible,  I  have  always  felt  satisfied  that  these
cities  lay  in  some  part  of  the  fertile  plain  of  the  Jordan
to  the  N.  of  the  Salt  Sea,  and  to  the  \V.  of  that  river  ;
and  when  visiting  the  ruins  of  Jericho,  and  beholding
the  copious  springs  and  streams  of  that  spot,  how
applicable  to  it  would  be  the  expression  ' '  that  it  was
well- watered  everywhere"  (Gen.  13 10),  the  thought
occurred,  May  not  the  mdre  modern,  city  (ancient
Jericho)  have  arisen  from  the  ruins  of  the  Cities  of  the
Plain  ? '  We  may  add  that  the  name  '  Jericho  '  most
probably  comes  from  nnr  (Jeroham,  Jarham)  =  VKDrrv
(Jerahmeel ).

Up  to  this  point  we  have  accepted  the  biblical  texts
in  their  present  form. The  gains  of  the  criticism  based
6 Text  of  Gen  uPon  tnese  texts  have  not  been  trifling
..,. .  '  or unimportant  ; but the difficulties

' '  connected  with the story of  the de

struction  of  Sodom  have  not  all  of  them  been  overcome.
The  passages  which  have  now  to  be  criticised  textually
are  Gen.  10 19  13 10  14  19 17-25  193o  Am.  4n  (Is.  17)
Hos.  118  Zeph.  2 9  Ps.  116.

(a)  Gen.  10 19  defines  the  territory  of  the  Canaanite
as  extending  '  from  Zidon  in  the  territory  of  Gerar,  as
far  as  Gaza  ;  in  the  direction  of  Sodom,  Gomorrah,
Admah,  and  Zeboim,  as  far  as  Lasha. '  But  can  this
be  right?  Zidon,  Gerar,  Gaza,  Sodom,  Lasha?  That
the  rest  of  Gen.  10  has  first  of  all  become  corrupt
and  then  been  manipulated  by  an  ill-informed  redactor
is  clear  ;  can  v.  10  be  an  exception  ?  Evidently
'Canaanite'  should  be  '  Kenizzite,'  and  most  probably
the  names  in  v.  19 £  should  be  Ishmael,  Jerahmeel,
Shaul. !

(b}  Gen.  13io.  The  awkwardness  of  the  clause  'before
Yahwe  destroyed  Sodom  and  Gomorrah '  has  been
noticed  by  critics  ;  how  could  Lot  know  anything  of  the
impending  catastrophe?  Other  interpolations  have  also
been  noticed  and  yet  neither  the  true  limits  of  the
passage,  nor  its  meaning,  have  been  fully  understood.
If  we  apply  the  right  key,  a  full  solution  of  the  problem
becomes  possible.  Read — 'And  Lot  lifted  up  his
eyes  and  beheld  that  Jerahmeel  was  everywhere  well-
watered  [before  Yahwe,  etc.],  like  the  garden  of  Yahwe,
[like  the  land  of  Misrini  in  the  direction  of  Missur]. ' 2
The  description  derives  its  points  from  the  circumstance
that  Paradise  was  localised  by  earl}'  tradition  in  the
j  land  of  Jerahmeel.  Cp  PARADISK,  §  6.  It  is  a  most
interesting  fact  that  (if  our  restoration  of  the  text  is
j  accepted)  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were,  like  the  primaeval
Paradise,  placed  by  Israelitish  writers  in  lerahmeel.

(c)  Gen.  14. The  huge  difficulties  arising  out  of  this

] passage  are  well-known. Critical  opinion  leans  for  the

) most  part  to  the  view  that  it  is  a  post-exilic  Midrash  in

I honour  of  Abraham,  but  that  it  contains  some  material

drawn  directly  or  indirectly  from  a  Babylonian  source.3

1  'Admah '  and 'Zeboim were naturally  added after the
redactor  had  succeeded  in  producing  '  Sodom'  and  'Gomorrah.'

2  The  words  within  []  are  interpolated. 'Missur'  means  the
capital  of  Misrini.

3  Moore,  however,  whilst  not  questioning  the  present  text,

4672


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

Gunkel  evan  thinks  that  the  scenes  between  Abraham
and  Melchizedek  and  the  king  of  Sodom  sound  like
popular  tradition.  He  also  remarks  that  the  old
tradition  speaks  either  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  or  of
Adman  and  Seboim ;  l  the  combination  of  the  four
seems  to  him  to  rest  on  a  later  fusion  of  the  current
traditions.  Winckler,  too,  deals  with  the  question  of  the
names.  In  v.  10  we  hear  only  of  the  two  kings  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (€5  and  Sam.,  may^Di;  the
verb  is  plural).  This  critic,  however,  thinks  that,  as  in
18  20  and  19  24,  both  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  are  regarded
as  subject  to  the  same  ruler  ;  later  editors,  amplifying
as  usual,  increased  the  number  of  kings.  Far  be  it
from  us  to  deny  the  acuteness  of  previous  critics,  especi
ally  Winckler  ;'a  it  appears  to  the  present  writer,  however,
that  a  keener  textual  criticism  is  urgently  needed  to  bring
out  the  real,  as  opposed  to  the  imaginary,  problems  of
the  narrative.  The  true  story  seems  to  have  stated  that
in  the  days  of  Abram  war  broke  out  between  Jerahmeel
king  of  Geshur  (disguised  as  'Shinar')  or  Ashhur
(disguised  as  '  Arioch')  and  Ishmael  king  of  Selam  (or
Se'ulam?3).  For  twelve  years  the  latter  had  been
Jerahmeel's  vassal ;  after  this  he  rebelled.  A  year
passed,  and  then  king  Jerahmeel  came  and  made  a  raid
among  the  Jerahmeelites  of  Zarephath,  Rehoboth,  and
Kadcsh.  The  king  of  Selam  came  out  to  oppose  him  ;
but  he  and  his  army  were  put  to  flight  ;  the  city  of
Selam  was  plundered,  and  Lot  was  one  of  the  captives.
News  of  this  came  to  Abram  the  Hebrew,  who  lived  at
Rehoboth  (miswritten  'Hebron')  and  was  in  close
alliance  with  the  Jerahmeelites.  At  once  he  called
together  his  Kenite  and  Jerahmeelite  neighbours,4
pursued  the  spoilers  as  far  as  Rehob  in  Cushan,  and
brought  back  the  captives  and  the  property  which  the
spoilers  had  taken.  On  his  return  two  kings  came  out
to  meet  him.  One  was  the  king  of  ZIKLAG  (Halusah  ?),
a  specially  sacred  city,  whose  king  was  also  priest  of
the  God  of  Jerahmeel,5  and  solemnly  blessed  Abram — a
blessing  which  Abram  acknowledged  by  the  payment  of
tithes  (cp  Gen.  2822).  The  other  was  the  king  of
Selam,  who  offered  Abram  the  whole  of  the  recovered
property.  Abram,  however,  generously  refused  this,
swearing  by  Yahwe,  the  God  of  Jerahmeel,  that  he
would  not  commit  such  a  sin  against  Jerahmeel's  land,8
or  receive  anything  that  belonged  to  the  king  of  Selam,
lest  the  king  should  thus  be  entitled  to  say  that  he  (and
not  Yahwe)  had  enriched  Abram.  Only  the  clans  which
accompanied  Abram — Eden  [Aner],  Heles  [Eshcol],
and  Jerahmeel  [Mamre] — required  their  just  share  of
the  spoil.

The  war  was  therefore  between  two  branches  cf  the  Jerah
meelite  race,  and  Abram  the  Hebrew,  himself  half  a.  Jerah
meelite,7  interposed  in  the  hour  of  need  for  his  neighbours  and
relatives.  Selam,  generally  miswritten  c~IO  (MT  Sedom),  but
once  QSjy  (?/.  18  MT  Salem),  was  not  situated  anywhere  near  the
Dead  Sea,  but  in  Jerahmeel.  Whether  the  earlier  tradition
really  knew  anything  of  a  place  called  'Gomorrah,'  is  already


thinks the  assumption of  a  special  source  for  the  few  details
about  the  campaign  superfluous  (GENESIS,  §  8  ;  col.  1677).

1  Admah  and  Zeboim,  however,  take  the  place  of  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  only  in  a  single  passage  (Hos.  11  8),  which  is  not  free
from  the  suspicion  of  corruptness.

2  AOFlioijtF.;  C,fl  26-42.

'  Sa'ul  being  probably  a  name  belonging  to  the  Negeb.
Cp  Semu'el,  Isma*  'el.

4  Read  in  v.  14  [D'SNJffitH  "?NCnT  IV  21  D'rpVIK  «np'V
'Three  hundred  and  eighteen,'  in  which  Hitzig  sees  Gematria,
and  Winckler  ((7/227)  an  astronomical  number,  is  simply  due
to  an  editor's  manipulation  of  corrupt  repeated  fragments  of
C>sxy2B">  '  Ishmaelites.'


Jl'Sj


in  21  33,  comes  from  SxCn


6  '  If  from  a  thread  to  a  shoe-latchet,  and  if  I  would  take
anything,'  is  impossible.  35  relieves  the  construction  by  omitting
the  second  DX1.  But  the  parallelistic  arrangement  is  thus
destroyed,  and  the  improbability  of  the  alleged  proverb,  '  Not  a
thread  nor  a  shoe-latchet,'  remains.  Read  jHN'1


-

7  '  Abram  '  =  Ab-raham  =  Ab-jerahmeel  ;  see  REKEM  and  cp
TERAH.

4673


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

doubtful.  The  Vale  of  Siddim,  or  rather  ha<-Siddim,  which  the
traditional  text  (v.  3)  identifies  with  a  piece  of  water  called  '  the
Salt  Sea,'  together  with  the  bitumen-pits  also  referred  to  in  that
text  (?>.  10)  disappears,  when  the  text  has  been  closely  examined
in  the  light  of  results  of  textual  criticism  elsewhere.1  See
Crit.  Bib.

(d)  Gen.  1917-25. '  Zoar,  on  the  SE.  edge  of  the  Dead
Sea,  covered  over  now  by  the  alluvium,  once  lay  in  a
well -watered country  with a  tropical climate. The
Israelite  tradition  is  surprised  that  this  little  bit  of  land
har  escaped  the  ruin  of  Sodom,  and  explains  this  treat
ment  by  the  intercession  of  Lot  who  desired  Zoar  as  a
place  of  refuge. Thus the  legend  of  Zoar  is  a  geo
logical legend. At the same time it contains an
etymological  motive  ; the  city  is  called  So'ar,  because
Lot  said  in  his  prayer,  "It  is  only  mi  far  (something
small)."' So  Gunkel  (Gen. 192),  according  to  whom
the  Zoar  episode (including  the  incident  about Lot's
wife) is a later offshoot  of the  legend. We  accept
Gunkel's  analysis  (see  §  2,  n.  4),  but  cannot  venture  to
accept  his  interpretation  of  the  legend. The  stress  laid
on  -lyxa  in  v. 20  suggests  that  the  real  name  of  the  city
was  •nstp,  and  thus  agrees  with  the  view  that  Sodom  was
neither  N.  nor  S.  of  the  Dead Sea,  but  in  Jerahmeel.
'Zoar' therefore, needs emendation into '  Missur. '2
The  Zoar-episode  has  been  retouched  ;  originally  it  was,
not  a  geological,  but  an  etymological  myth.

But  was  it  only  the  Zoar-episode  that  underwent  manipula
tion?  Textual  criticism  enables  us  with  much  probability  to
answer  this  question.  There  are  several  reasons  for  suspecting
that  the  text  of  v.  24  is  corrupt,  (i)  The  verb  ~^T\  'n  £'•  25,  as
many  critics  have  remarked,  does  not  accord  with  the  description
in  our  text  of  v.  24. 3  (2)  The  reference  to  bitumen-pits  in  14 10
(see  c)  and  to  '  fire  and  brimstone'  in  Ps.  lie  (see  //)  are  due  to
corruption  of  the  text.  Taking  our  passage  in  connection  with
Ps.  116,  we  should  not  improbably  emend  it  thus  : —

'  And  Yahwe  caused  it  to  rain  upon  Selam  and  upon  "Amorah
[and  upon]  Rehoboth  seven  days'*  from  heaven.'

This  is  of  importance  with  regard  to  the  original  form  of  the
legend.  Note  that  in  "'.  25  '  those  cities '  is  equivalent  to
IDDn  *?3 — *'•£•>  S*tDm'  ^Oi  <a'l  Jerahmeel.'  'Sodom'  is  not
the  only  city  which  is  caught  in  the  net  of  its  own  wicked
deeds.  We  cannot  but  expect  a  reference  to  some  other  place
besides  Sodom  and  its  appendage  Gomorrah.  That  in  the
original  story  the  implied  accusative  to  '  caused  to  rain  '  was,
not  'brimstone  and  fire,'  but  'rain,'  is  in  accordance  with  i'.  25,
where  -jan.  ' to  overturn,'  may  be  illustrated  by  Job  12  15,  'he
sends  them  (the  waters)  out,  and  they  overturn  the  earth."
'  From  Yahwe  out  of  heaven  '  (as  the  traditional  text  reads)  has
never  yet  been  adequately  justified.5  Tg.  Jer.  distinguishes
between  the  Word  of  the  Lord  and  the  Lord.  Similarly  the
Christian  Council  of  Sirmium,  '  Pluit  Dei  filius  a  Deo  patre.'

(e)  Gen.  1930. The  traditional  text  is  so  extraordinary
that we quote it in  full. 'And Lot  went  up  out  of
Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the  mountain,  and  his  two  daughters
with  him,  for  he  feared  to  dwell  in  Zoar  ; and  he  dwelt
in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two  daughters. ' Kautzsch-Socin
agree  with  EV,  except  that  they  render  in, '  Gebirge '
(mountain-country); they  also remark  in a  note  that
MT  has  '  in  the  cave  '  (.-nyTa),  '  perhaps  with  reference
to a definite  locality  which  was  connected  with  Lot."
We  are  then  told  (v.  31  f. )  that,  in  order  to  continue  the
family,  the  two  daughters  agreed  to  '  make  their  father

1  The  gloss  on  BHB'rt  pay  'n  "»•  3  is  so  absurd  that  Winckler
even identifies  the nVon  D'  with  lake Huleh in the  N. His
theory is a  monument  of  ingenuity,  but will  not  stand. Q<
rten  surely  comes  from  D'SiXCm1.  and C'lw'H  pcy  from  ri^yS
D'C'O  (CP  a  more  frequent  transformation  of  the  latter  word —
OtfO-l). 10n  nT1N3  rm:O  is  simply  SusnT  vy2  ('  hy  'he  city  of
Jerahmeel ').

2  The presumption  is  that  nys  everywhere  should  be  -pjo  ;
each  alleged  occurrence,  however,  needs  to  be  separately  con
sidered  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

•'  According  to  Gunkel,  the  raining  of  brimstone  from  heaven
is  analogous  to  the  Assyrian  custom  of  strewing  salt  on  the  site
of  a  destroyed  city  (cp  SALT).  But  surely  when  the  rain  of
brimstone  fell,  Sodom  had  not  been  destroyed.  Nor  can  the
custom  referred  to  (which  is  really  a  symbol  of  consecration,  see
Ezek.  43  24,  and  cp  SALT,  §  3)  be  illustrative  of  Yahwe's  raining
brimstone.

4  Read  o'S'  njnK'  for  m,T  nXO  B-K1-

9  Ewald  (G7Y2223)  quotes  this  passage  in  support  of  the
theory  that  Yahwe  was  originally  a  sky-god.  He  compares
Mic.  5 7  [6],  'as  dew  from  Yahwe.'  But  it  is  the  tautology  that
is  startling.

4674


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH


drink  wine,'  and  to  'lie  with  him.'  Gunkel  rightly
points  out  that  the  original  narrators  of  this  story  can
have  seen  nothing  wrong  in  the  transaction  ;  the  circum
stances  which  they  have  described  rendered  law  and
custom  inoperative  (cp  LOT).  But  the  awkwardness  of
the  passage  is  evident.  How  could  Lot  have  been  afraid
to  remain  in  the  city  which  had  been  divinely  granted
him  as  a  refuge?  One  can  understand  his  taking  refuge
in  a  cave  in  the  mountains,  if  he  was  unaware  that  Zoar
had  immunity  from  destruction  ;  but  the  present  form  of
narrative  is  intolerable.  And  whence  was  the  wine
spoken  of  obtained?  Gunkel  proposes  to  assign  v.  joa,
together  with  the  rest  of  the  passage  relative  to  Zoar,
to  a  supplementer.  But  it  is  not  plain  why,  if  the
original  narrative  brought  Lot  safely  to  a  cave  in  the
mountains,  a  supplenicnter  should  have  complicated
matters  by  the  introduction  of  the  '  Zoar-episode.  '  It
would  be  simpler  to  omit  the  cave-episode  as  an  after
thought  (to  account  for  the  names  Moab  and  Ammon).

But  this  is  not  the  true  remedy,  which  is—  to  apply  textual
criticism.  There  is  a  good  parallel  in  i  K.  US  4  1  j,  where  another
strange  story  is  told  about  an  occurrence  '  in  the  cave  '  ;  prob
ably  (PROPHET,  §  7)  mya  there  is  a  corruption  of  a  place-
name,  and  a  beautiful  consistency  is  restored  to  the  legends  of
Elijah  if  we  emend  mya  into  nBli'i  '  Zarephath  '  (both  Klijah
and  Elisha  [see  SHAPHAT]  were  connected  with  southern
Zarephath).  It  is  plausible,  therefore,  to  emend  mya  here,
top,  into  ji«nx>  comparing  Josh.  184,  where  (see  MKAKAH)  the
original  text  probably  had  '  Zarephath  that  belongs  to  the
Misrim.'  To  do  this,  we  must  make  the  not  improbable
assumption  that  the  city  which  in  v.  20  the  traditional  text
calls  lysa.  and  'n  w.  22f->  3°  lyi'i  but  which  the  original  text
must  have  called  lisa  (Missur),  was  more  fully  called  lisa  nB~l!>>
1  Zarephath  of  Missur  '  (cp  Josh.  13  4,  emended  text).  We  shall
have  to  return  to  this  later  (§  10).

The  alternative  is  to  suppose  that  here,  but  not  in  the  other
passages  referred  to,  mya  >s  a  corruption  of  Missur.  The
general  sense  of  the  passage  is  the  same.

(f)  Am.  4  ii  Is.  1  7. These  are  the  two  earliest  of  the
passages  in  which  niDrta  (cp  nrsri,  Gen.  19  25)  occurs  as
a  kind  of  technical  term  for  the  legendary  destruction  of
'Sodom.' In Is.  1?  the  phrase  is  D"i)  n^snOD,  but  we
must,  with  most  critics  since  Ewald, read  cho  'CD  (cp
Dt.  29z2[23] Jer.  49i8). In  Am.  4  n  we  find  a  longer
and  rather  peculiar  phrase, '  like  Elohim's  overturning
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah'  (so  also  Jer.  50  40). This  is
generally  supposed  to  be  due  to  a  consciousness  that  the
Sodom  tradition  was  originally  connected  not  with  the
religion  of  Yahwe,  but  with  Canaanite '  heathenism  '  ;
cp Gen.  1929 [P], 'when Elohim overturned the
cities,'  etc.

The  presumption  is,  however,  that  the  Sodom-tradition  is  not
of  Canaanite  but  of  Jerahmeelite  origin.  In  this  case  it  is  not
safe  to  insist  that  the  story  was  not  originally  Yahwistic,  for  it
seems  probable  that  Yahwe  was  admitted  by  some  of  those  who
dwelt  in  the  Negeb  to  be  the  god  of  the  country.  Some  change
in  our  critical  theory  is  indispensable,  and,  having  regard  to
what  has  been  said  elsewhere,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  sup
pose  that  maynNI  CTDVUX,  wherever  it  occurs  in  the  phrase
referred  to,  is  a  later  insertion,  and  that  the  true  '  technical
phrase'  is  ?HDr1T  TCEnCD.  '  like  the  catastrophe  of  Jerahmeel,'1
with  the  possible  alternative  of  ctO  'C3>  '  like  the  catastrophe  of
Sodom."

(g)  Hos.  118. It  is  not  probable  (i)  that  '  Admah  '
and '  Zeboim  ' should be corrupt in Gen.  1428 and
correct  in  Hos.  118,  and  (2)  that  we  should  not  be  told
to  whom  Yahwe  (in  his  present  mood)  declines  to  yield
up  his  people. There  must  be  an  error  in  the  text  ;
and, with 106  before us  (where '  Asshur  ' means  the
great  N.  Arabian  power,  and  '  Jareb  '  is  a  corruption  of
'Arab  =  Arabia)  we  can  hardly  be  far  wrong  in  restoring
"?W2rrv  for  naiND,  ^Kyatr  for-p'e-N,  and  -p;aN  for  c'so:;:.3
Thus  the  passage  becomes,  How  shall  I  give  thee  up
[to] Jerahmeel  ? how shall I surrender thee [to]
Ishmael  ?  '

(A)  Zeph.  2  9.  This  very  questionable  bit  of  Hebrew-
needs  emendation.  Read  (after  maya,  'as  Gomorrah')

1  DTl^N,  like  jrSy  and  oViy  (see  §  6,  n.  6),  is  one  of  the  current
distortions  of  ^nonT-

2  j  was  taken  to  be  a  fragment  of  s  ;  the  final  o  comes  from
3. The  editor  manipulated  the  corrupt  text  under  the  influence
of  an  exegetical  theory.

4675


noctv  S^arm  ens,  '  Cusham  and  Jerahmeel
(shall  be)  a  desolation  for  ever.'  For  us,  the  principal
result  of  this  is  that  the  'salt  pits'  (which  suggest  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Ucad  Sea)  disappear.1

(A)  Ps.  116.  The  vagueness  and  also  the  excessive
vehemence  of  this  passage  may  well  awaken  suspicion.
Probably  we  should  read  —

The  Ishmaelites  will  give  way,  the  Maacathites,  the  Reho-

bothites  ;
A  blast  of  horror  is  the  portion  of  Cusham.2

The figure is taken  from the simoom  ; there  is no
thought  of  the  judgment  of  the  '  ruined  cities.  '

It  will  be  at  once  noticed  that  three  out  of  the  four
still  remaining  difficulties  in  the  story  of  Sodom  dis-
7  New  theorv  aPPear  through  the  above  criticism  of
^'  the  text.  i.  The  cities  were  really,
according  to  the  earlier  tradition,  'overthrown,'  not,
however,  by  an  earthquake,  but  by  floods  of  water
from  that  upper  ocean  which  formed  a  part  of  the
cosmic  system  of  the  Hebrews.  2.  The  scene  of  the
catastrophe  was,  not  beside  the  Dead  Sea,  but  in  the
land  of  Jerahmeel,  and  we  are  justified  in  inferring
from  Gen.  13  10  that  it  was  the  district  of  Eden,  where
in  primeval  times  the  divine  wonder-land  had  been
visible,  that  suffered.  It  now  becomes  inevitable  to
conjecture  that  the  original  story  of  Sodom,  or  rather
perhaps  Selam,  was  the  Deluge-story,  or  one  of  the
Deluge-stories,  of  the  Jerahmeelites.  It  is  plain  that
such  a  story  is  needed  to  complete  the  cycle  of  racy
Jerahmeelite  tales  of  the  Origines,  and  in  dealing  with
the  Deluge-story  in  Gen.  6-8  we  have  already  found
reason  to  hold  that  an  earlier  form  of  that  story  may
have  represented  the  Deluge  as  overwhelming  the  land
of  the  Arabians  and  the  Jerahmeelites,  and  the  ark  as
settling  on  the  mountains  of  Jerahmeel  (PARADISE,  §  6,
col.  3574,  cp  col.  3573,  n.  3).  The  unexpected  coin
cidences  between  the  Deluge-story  and  the  Sodom-story
confirm  the  view  tentatively  proposed  before  (PARADISE,
I.e.  ).  We  may  take  it,  therefore,  to  be  extremely  prob
able  that  the  Hebrew  as  well  as,  according  to  Jastrow,3
the  Babylonian  narrative  in  its  earliest  form  represented
the  Deluge  as  originally  partial.  Let  us  now  trace  the
parallelisms  between  the  Hebrew  and  Babylonian  Deluge-
story  and  the  narrative  in  Gen.  19  (as  emended).

Deluge-story.  Gen.  19.

j.  The  righteous  man,  'Noah' i.  The righteous man, Lot

(69),  or  rather  Hanok  (see (19  1-8).

NOAH), or, as the great

Babylonian  story  said,  Par-

napistim.

2.  [Anger of the divinity 2.  [Anger  of  the  eluhFm  against
against the  city  of  Surip- the  city  of  Sodom  (19).]
pak.]

3.  The extreme corruptness 3.  The culminating act of
of  society  (6  11-13^).  wickedness  (194-11).

4.  The divine revelation 4.  The divine revelation
(«ii3^)-  £»"./•;  cp  18  aoA

5.  A  long-continued,  destruc- 5. For  seven  days  a  destruc-
tiverain-storm("io-i2  17^7;) live  rain-storm  on  the  cities
on  the  land  of  the  Arabians of  the  whole  of  Jerahmeel
and  Jerahmeelites  (7  4),  or (U'24yC).

(with  thunder  and  light
ning)  on  the  Babylonian
city  of  isurippak.4  The
latter  lasted  for  seven  days.

1  Schwally  (ZA  Tlf^W  i&tf.)  has  already  noticed  the  diffi
culties  of  MT,  but  has  no  adequate  emendations.

2  See  /V.l2) Note that n"1231 nas been corrupted from
TVOrMcp  </).

3  Jastrow,  who  has  partly  traced  the  parallelism  between  the
Sodom-story  and  the  Deluge-story,  writes thus  : '  Moreover,
there  are  traces  in the  Sodom  narrative  of  a  tradition  which
once  gave  a  larger  character  to  it,  involving  the  destruction  of
all  mankind,  much  as  the  destruction  of  Surippak  is  enlarged  by
Babylonian  traditions  into  a  general  annihilation  of  mankind  '
(RRA  507).

4  \Ve  assume  here  that  a  tradition  of  a  storm  which  over
whelmed  Surippak  has  been  fused  with  the  tradition  of  a  far
larger flood  in  the  Deluge-story  in  the  epic  of  Gilgame?  (cp
DELUGE,  §  22  : and  especialjy  Jastrow,  Re/ig.  Bafr.  Ass.  507).
That even  the  former  tradition  is historical,  we  are  far  from
asserting. Nor  do  we  deny  That  the  Deluge-myth  in  its  earliest
form  related  to  all  mankind. See  DELUGE.  §§  18,  22.

4676


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

6.  '  Noah '  and  his  family  de- 6. Lot and his family de


livered(19
7. Lot  warned  to  escape  to  the
mountains [of Jerahmeel]
(ID  17).


livered  (7  13  2j/>)-
7.  The  ark  grounds  on  the
mountains  of  Aram  (so  read)
— i.e.,  Jerahmeel  (84),  or
(Babylonian)  on  the  moun
tain  of  Nisir.

To  these  parallelisms  we  may  add,  though  with  some  reserve,
the  parallelism  between  Hanok  (Knoch),  father  of  Methuselah
(=Methusael  =  Ishmael)  and  grandfather  of  Lamech  (  =  Jerah
meel),  and  Lot,  nephew  or  perhaps  originally  (cp  14  14  ib)
brother  of  Abraham  (  =  Abraham  =  Father  of  Jerahmeel)  and
father  of  Moab  (rather,  Missur?)  and  Ammon  (rather,  Jerah
meel?).  This  parallelism  is  of  importance,  not  for  the  story
itself,  but  for  ascertaining  the  particular  ethnic  origin  of  the
story.  It  is  not  appropriate  that  the  escaped  righteous  man
(who  in  the  earliest  Deluge-myth  was  a  solar  hero)  should  have
r.ny  further  concern  with  this  earth.  If  Hanok  (mythologically)
was  the  father  of  Methuselah  (Ishmael),  and  Lot  the  father  of
.Missur  and  Jerahmeel,  it  must  in  the  original  story  have  been
before  the  Deluge.  And  even  if  Noah  (Naham?)  was  really
the  name  of  the  hero  of  the  Deluge-story  in  chaps.  (5-7,  Naham
is  certainly  a  name  of  the  Negeb  (see  NAHAM,  NAHAMANI).
Altogether,  nothing  can  be  more  probable  than  that  those  who
first  arranged  the  Hebrew  legends  had  their  minds  full  of Jerah-
meelite  associations.  We  can  now  fully  appreciate  the  remark
of  Gunkel  (Gen.  195)  that  since  the  story  of  Sodom  says  nothing
at  all  of  water,  although  the  site  so  strongly  suggested  this,  it  is
plain  that  the  scene  of  the  narrative  must  originally  have  been
elsewhere.  Of  course,  the  present  place  of  the  story  and  much
besides  is  due  to  a  skilful  redactor.

It  is  true,  the  name  of  the  hero  is  different.  But
there  were  presumably  different  forms  of  the  Jerahmeelite
as  well  as  of  the  Babylonian  Flood- story.  Probably
enough,  there  was  another  version  in  which  Abraham
was  the  hero  ;  comparing  Gen.  8  i  ( '  God  remembered
Noah')  with  1929  ('God  remembered  Abraham'),
one  may,  in  fact,  not  unnaturally  expect  that  Abraham,
not  Lot,  should  be  the  chief  personage  of  the  second
story.  The  visit  of  the  eluhirn  to  Abraham  is  an
uneffaced  indication  that  he  originally  was  so.  Cer
tainly,  something  can  still  be  said  for  Lot,  who  may
originally  have  been  greater  than  he  now  appears,  and
have  been  a  worthy  brother  (see  above)  and  rival  of
Abraham.  But  this  is  a  pure  conjecture,  and  one
might  even  infer  from  187-9  that  Abraham  and  Lot
originally  belonged  to  the  class  (well  represented  in
ancient  legends)  of  hostile  brothers,1  and  that  Abraham
corresponds  to  Abel  (cp  Remus)  and  Lot  to  Cain  (cp
Romulus).  The  legend  might  have  taken  this  turn.

It  is  also  true  that  in  chap.  19  there  is  nowhere  any
trace  of  an  underlying  reference  to  the  '  box  '  or  '  chest '
(a  term  specially  characteristic  of  an  inland  country)  in
which  the  survivors  were  preserved,  and  that  in  1928
Abraham  is  said  to  have  seen  '  the  smoke  of  the  land
going  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace.'  But  on  the  first
point  we  may  answer  that  if  only  Lot  and  his  family
were  to  be  saved,  no  ark  was  necessary;  the  '  Slohim  '
would  convey  the  small  party  to  a  place  of  safety.  And
as  for  the  other  point,  we  must,  at  any  rate,  credit  the
last  redactor  with  enough  capacity  to  adjust  a  muti
lated  narrative  to  his  own  requirements.

Stucken  has  offered  another  explanation  of  the  legend
which  now  occupies  us.'-2  According  to  him,  the  Soclom-
8  Stucken's  and-Gomorrah--story  was  originally  a
theory  a  '  dry  Delugc'-stolT— *'•*•-  a  legend  of  the
'  drv '  del'ua-a  ('estruct'on  °f  men  DY  other  means  than  a
°  '  flood  ;  such  a  story  he  finds  in  the  Iranian
legend  of  the  Var  (or  square  enclosure)  constructed  by
Yima  (see  DELUGE,  §  20^),  in  the  Peruvian  and  other
stories  of  a  general  conflagration,  and  in  the  Egyptian
story  of  the  destruction  of  men  by  the  gods. 3  Whether
the  combination  of  stories  which  refer  to  water  with  those
which  make  no  such  reference  is  either  theoretically  or
practically  justified,  may  be  questioned  ;  but  we  may,
at  any  rate,  admit  that  if  the  present  text  of  Gen.  19^4
correctly  represents  the  original  story,  the  singular

1  Stucken,  however  (Astralntythen,  87)  points  out  that  the
distinction  between  friendly  and  hostile  brothers  in  mythology  is
a  fluid  one.

2  Astralmythen,  96.

3  See Naville, TSBA  4 1-19  ; cp  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civ.
ifit,ff.

4677


SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH

Egyptian  story  referred  to  is  the  nearest  parallel  to  it.
Here  the  '  Uivihe  eye '  is  the  executioner  ;  it  takes  the
form  of  the  goddess  Hathor,  and  slays  men  right  and
left  'with  great,  strokes  of  the  knife.'  It  seems  to  us,
however,  (i)  that  it  is  much  more  probable  that  the
Jerahmeelites  had  two  forms  of  a  proper  Deluge-story
than  that  one  of  the  extant  Deluge-stories  was  only  such
in  a  loose  sense  of  the  term,  especially  having  regard  to
the  Babylonian  Hood-stories,  and  (2)  that  the  difficulties
of  Gen.  1924/  call  loudly  for  the  application  of  textual
criticism.

Stucken seems  happier  in his explanation1 of  the
Q TnHtr  1Q  parallelism between Gen.  19  i-n and

30  the  strange  story  in  Judg.  19  ,5-30.  He
thinks  that  both  stories  have  the  same  mythological  ker
nel — viz. ,  the  tradition  of  the  dividing  of  the  body  of  the
primaeval  being  Tiamat  (the  personified  ocean-flood),  with
which  compare  also  a  series  of  myths  of  the  division  of
the  bodies  of  supernatural  beings  (e.g. ,  Osiris).  It  is  in
fact  all  the  more  difficult  to  believe  that  Gen.  19i-n  and
Judg.  1915-30  stand  at  all  early  in  the  process  of
legendary  development,  because  both  the  stories  to
which  these  passages  belong  are  ultimately  of  Jerah
meelite  origin.  This  may  be  assumed  in  the  former
case  (i)  from  the  place  which  the  '  Sodom '-story
occupies  among  legends  that  are  certainly  in  their
origin  Jerahmeelite,  and  (2)  probably  from  the  legend
of  the  origin  of  '  Missur '  and  '  Jerahmeel '  (so  read  for
'  Moab  '  and  '  Ammon  '  in  1937  /)  which  is  attached  to
the  '  Sodom  '-story.  And  it  is  hardly  less  clear  a
deduction  in  the  latter  case  from  the  results  of  textual
criticism.  For  the  story  in  Judg.  19-20  can  be  shown  to
have  referred  originally  not  to  Benjamin  but  to  some
district  of  the  Jerahmeelite  Xegeb.2

So  far  as  the  outward  form  of  the  story  is  concerned,
our  task  is  now  finished. Now  to  resume  and,  if  need

10  R  It  ^e'  suPP'ement-  Originally,  it  seems,
there  was  but  one  visit  of  the  elOhim  ;
it  is  to  Abraham,  not  to  Lot,  that  the  visit  was
vouchsafed.  Abraham  (i.e. ,  in  the  Jerahmeelite  story,  a
personification  of  Jerahmeel)  was  the  one  righteous  man
in  the  land.  He  received  timely  warning  that  those
among  whom  he  sojourned  had  displeased  God,  and  the
elohim  took  him  away  to  be  with  God.  Then  came  a  rain
storm  submerging  all  Jerahmeel.  This  original  story,
however,  received  modifications  and  additions.  Lot  or
Lotan,  the  reputed  son,  not  of  Seir  the  Horite,  but  prob
ably  of  Missur  the  Jerahmeelite,  was  substituted  for  Abra
ham,  and  a  floating  story  of  mythic  origin  (the  myth  spoke
of  violence  done  to  a  supernatural  being)  was  attached  to
the  story  of  Lot  in  a  manipulated  form,  so  as  to  explain
and  justify  the  anger  of  the  elohim.  After  this  a  legend
was  inserted  to  account  for  the  name  Missur  ;  Lot  had
taken  refuge  at  Missur,  by  divine  permission,  because  it
was  but  a  '  little'  city,  and  again  another  legend  was  added
to  record  the  circumstance  that  the  people  of  Missur  and
Jerahmeel  were  descended  from  that  righteous  man,3
who  with  his  two  daughters  alone  remained  (the
removal  of  the  hero  to  the  company  of  the  elohim  had
been  forgotten)  in  the  depopulated  land.  (The  names
were  afterwards  corrupted. )  Finally,  a  corruption  in  the
text  of  1924  suggested  that  the  scene  of  the  story  must
have  been  in  that  '  awful  hollow,'  that  '  bit  of  the  infernal
regions  come  to  the  surface  '  which  was  at  the  southern
(?)  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  And  the  singular  columnar
formations  of  rock-salt  at  Jebel  Usdum  (cp  DEAD  SEA,
§  5)  to  which  a  myth  resembling  that  of  Niobe
(originally  a  Creation  myth  ?)  may  perhaps  already  have

1  Stucken,  op.  cit.,  t)f)ff.

2  There  was  probably  a  confusion  between  ps'33  (Benjamin)
and |0;-J3  =  SncnT-p. mi.V  DrT7  TV}  (Bethlehem -judah)=

^KDrrV  JV3  (Beth-jerahmeel).  The  '  Gibeah  '  of  the  story  was
perhaps  the  Jerahmeelite  Geba  (Gibeah  ?)  mentioned  in  2  S. 5  25
(cp:-'.  22,  and  see  RKPHAIM).  The  '  Bethel '  in  Judg.  20 18  is  the
southern  Bethel,  repeatedly  spoken  of  by  Amos  (see  PROPHETIC
LITERATURE,  §§  10,  35).  Sec  Crit.  Bib.
B  The  genealogists  often  vary  in  particulars  of  relationship.

4678


SODOM,  VINE  OF

become  attached,1  was  appropriately  transferred  to  the
altered  legend,  and  identified  with  Lot's  wife.2

It  may  l>e  hoped  that  to  many  students  it  will  appear

no  slight  boon  to  be  relieved  from  the  supposition  that

_ .. . the peoples with whom the early

Israelites  had  intercourse  were  so  much
suggestions.  Beneath  tnein  jn  morality  as  the
traditional  text  represents.  Misunderstood  mythology
is  the  true  source  of  the  terrible  narratives  in  Gen.
19i-n,  Judg.  19  15-30.  At  the  same  time  no  criticism
can  deprive  us  of  the  beneficially  stern  morality  which
is  infused  into  a  most  unhistorical  narrative.  Apart
from  the  plot  of  the  story  there  are  several  points  of
considerable  interest  for  the  history  of  Israelite  religion.
Thus  (i)  in  19  12-16  it  is  presupposed  that  the  righteous-
ousness  of  the  good  man  delivers  not  only  himself  but  his
whole  house ;  very  different  was  the  conviction  of
Ezekiel  (14 nff.).  (2)  It  is  at  eventide  that  the  visits  of
the  elohim  are"  made,  both  to  Abraham  and  to  Lot.  As
the  light  of  day  wanes,  man  is  more  open  to  religious
impressions;  the  Deity,  too,  loves  to  guard  his  mysteri-
ousness,  and  performs  his  extraordinary  operations  by
night  (cp  32z5[-J4]^,  Ex.  1424).  It  is  not  unnatural  to
ask,  how  it  comes  about  that  elsewhere  Yahwe  is  said  to
'  cover  himself  with  light  as  it  were  with  a  garment '
(1's.  1042),  and  to  think  of  the  influence  of  the  Iranian
religion.  (3)  Unmeaning  repetitions  in  prayer  may  be
useless ;  but  repetitions  which  show  earnestness  are
considered  by  the  narrator  to  be  aids,  not  hindrances.
It  is  a  mistake,  as  Gunkel  remarks,  to  speak  of  Lot's
'  weakness  of  faith.'  (4)  Hut,  if  we  may  treat  Abraham's
converse  with  Yahwe  as  a  part  of  the  narrative  (it  does
in  fact  belong  —  thanks  to  a  supplementer  — to  the
section  which  links  the  Abraham-prelude  to  the  Lot-
story),  we  have  a  riper  fruit  of  religious  thought  in
1823-32.  'Not  for  Lot  alone,  but  for  all  the  righteous
men  in  Sodom,  his  prayer  is  uttered,  and  it  is  based
upon  a  fine  sense  of  justice  :  ' '  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all
the  earth  do  right?"  And  what  is  right?  Not  the
mere  prescription  of  a  legal  code  ;  justice  must  be
softened  by  compassion.  Each  of  the  supposed  ten
righteous  men  of  Sodom  has  links  innumerable  binding
him  to  his  fellow-citizens.  Is  he  to  be  sent  abroad
without  any  of  those  to  whom  nature  or  custom  has
attracted  him  ?  No  ;  a  single  righteous  man  can  at
least  (as  in  the  case  of  Noah)  save  his  family,  and  "  for
ten's  sake  I  will  not  destroy  the  city"'  (AV?f  World,
1245).  It  must  not  be  thought  that  because  mythology
and,  more  widely  regarded,  the  popular  imagination  have
largely  influenced  the  Hebrew  narratives,  they  are
therefore  to  a  trained  eye  devoid  either  of  historical  or
of  religious  interest.

To  the  books  and  articles  cited  under  DEAD  SEA,  add  the
commentaries  of  Dillmann,  Holzinger,  and  especially  Gunkel ;

also  Cheyne,  New  H'orM,  \  230-245  ;  Kraetz-
12. Literature,  schmar,  '/.A  7Vri7  81-92  ; Stucken,  Astral.

inyt/icn,  Part  ii.,  '  Lot '  ('  the  myths  attached
to  the  name  of  Lot  are  the  torso  of  a  primitive  myth  ').

T.  K.  C.

SODOM,  VINE  OF  (D'tD  |S3),  Dt.  32  32.  See
SOIJOM,  col.  4655  n.  2  ;  VINE,  §  2.

SODOMA  (coAoM&)  Kom.  9  29,  RV  SODOM.

SODOMITISH  SEA  (mare  SoJomiticum],  2  Esd.  5  7.
See  DEAD  SEA.

SOJOURNER  (13).  See  STRANGER  AND  SO
JOURN  KR.

SOLDIER  p-nan  J3.  2Ch.  25  13;  CTRATICOTHC,
Mt.  89  etc. ).  See  ARMY,  WAR,  §  4.

1  These  perishable  formations  change  from  year  to  year,  as
Blanckenhorn  remarks  (ZDJ'V  11' 34,  n.  i). The  '  Lot's  Wife'
of  Warren may  have  altered  since  1870. But  others  will  no
doubt  arise. On  the  connections  of  the  story  see  Stucken,  83.
no,  and  especially  231. For  a  late  Arabian  legendary  'Lot's
wife  '  see  Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Kxodus.

2  '  Not  much  greater  variety  is  there  between  the  story  of
Lot's  wife's  transformation  into  a  pillar  of  salt  and  Niobe's  into
a  stone.' So  wrote  the  old  Anglican  theologian,  Dean  Jackson
(H'orks,  1  100).

4679


SOLOMON

SOLOMON  (n'bX*;;  coAOMCON),  son  of  David  by
Bathsheba,  and  his  successor  as  king  of  Israel.

[©  favours  the  form  po^gr.  In  the  best  MSS  aoAojLuoy  and
(raAto/utop  alternate  ;  croAo^.wi'  almost  always  in  NT  ;  in  Acts  7  47,
however,  Ti.  with  NAC  (against  BDKHP)  adopts  a-aAw/Luoy,  but
Treg.  and  WH  <ro\on<ui>.  Cp  Lag.,  Ubers.  53  8696.]

The superficially plausible derivation from Mlom,

Di^p '  peace ' is  retained by  Kittel (Kon. 6),  but  is

•M-  against the analogy of the other names

(critically regarded) in David's family.

Another explanation has lately been proposed with

abundant  learning  and  ingenuity. After  sumtnnri.sing

it, we will pass on to  a  third view. According  to

Winckler,1  the  name  na^r  refers  to  a  divine  name  cSt?

(slm),  which  is  attested  in  the  Phoenician  proper  name

D'ye'JS'p  and  allusively  in  the  title  cVtr~itr  (Is.  96  [5]).

Another  form  of  the  name  of  this  deity  was  Salman  (cp  the
Assyrian  royal  name,  Salman-asaridu,  and  the  SaAa/xai-  of  Greek
inscriptions).  This  god  is  identified  with  ReSeph,  and  was
therefore  a  Canaanite  Apollo.  According  to  Winckler,  the
king  s  true  name  was  Dodiah  (  =  Jedidiah,  2  S.  1225)  ;  the  name
S'lOmfl  or  'Solomon,'  like  'Bath-sheba'  (=' daughter  of  the
Moon-god '),  is  of  mythological  origin,  and  was  given  to  the
king  by  later  writers  in  connection  with  '  the  transference  of  the
legend  of  Semiramis-Bilkis  to  Sheba.'  In  fact,  the  only  com
plete  parallel  to  the  form  Se10mO  comes,  according  to  him,  from
Arabia  (Salama).  Klsewhere  (f'reuss.  J  ahrbb.  104  269 ;  cp
(j/2a86)  Winckler  puts  the  mythological  connection  thus:
'  Formed  from  the  divine  name  .^elem  (Ass.  Salman).  It
corresponds  to  Nebo  whom  it  designates  as  the  god  of  the
winter-half  of  the  year  (selhn  is  the  west  =  Ass.  sulum,  sunset).'

It  would  seem  that  this  acute  critic  somewhat
exaggerates  the  bearings  of  mythology  on  onomatology.
Certainly  the  analogy  of  the  other  names  in  David's
family  (as  explained  by  the  present  writer)  seems  to  be
opposed  to  this  scholar's  explanation.  That  'Jonathan'
is  composed,  as  Winckler  and  most  scholars  suppose,  of
a  divine  name  and  a  verb,  is  due,  as  could  easily  be  shown
at  length,  to  misapprehension.  'Jonathan'  is  only  another
form  of  NETHANIAH  (q.v.)',  it  is  a  modification  of
the  ethnic  name  Nethani  =  Ethani,  'Ethanite.'  That
'  David '  is  a  modification  of  a  divine  name  is  not
impossible  (cp  DOD,  NAMES  WITH),  but  is  opposed  to
the  analogies  of  Dodiah  (if  this  name  is  really  correct)
and  of  Dodi  (MT  Dodo,  Dodai).  It  is  quite  as
possible  that  Dod  (whatever  its  ultimate  origin)  was  an
ethnic,  and  if,  following  analogies,  we  seek  for  an
ethnic  as  the  original  of  nchv,  we  cannot  be  blind  to
the  existence  of  "?xyctr  and  of  ,-rcVc'  (see  §  2).  For  the
pronunciation  naSe'  later  writers  are  responsible.  The
true  text  of  2  S.  J224/.  seems  to  suggest  another
pronunciation,  Shillumo  (or  Shallumo?),  arising  out  of
the  story  of  David's  sin.  See  JEDIDIAH.

It  is  a  long  road  which  leads  to  the  later  conception

of 'Solomon in all his glory.' We are here only

_ . concerned with the strict facts, without

z.  iany j(ieni;sat;on|  \\hich  of  course  does  not  mean

mstory.  ^(  wg  ^ave  nQ  sense  for  p0etry,  and  no
sympathy  with  the  changes  of  popular  feeling.  The
story  of  Solomon's  birth  is  given  in  2  S.  112-1225 — a
composite  narrative  which  has  already  received  con
sideration  (see  BATHSHEHA,  JEDIDIAH).  Certainly
there  is  much  to  learn  from  it  ;  certainly  we  should  wish
to  include  it  in  a  selection  of  fine  Hebrew  narratives.  But
with  unfeigned  regret  we  must  pronounce  it  to  be  in  the
main  unhistorical.  The  name  Bathsheba,  indeed,  and
the  historical  character  of  its  bearer  are,  one  may
venture  to  hold,  even  after  Winckler' s  arguments,  alike
secure.  Just  as  jmN  mp  (Kirjath-arba?)  is  not  'the
city  of  Four'  (the  god  whose  numerical  symbol  was
four),  so  yi&  m  (Bathsheba)  is  not  'the  daughter  of
Seven '  (the  god  whose  numerical  symbol  was  seven —
i.e. ,  the  Moon-god,  cp  SHEBA),  and  consequently
Bathsheba  is  not  a  mere  pseudo-historical  reflection  of
Istar,  the  mythological  daughter  of  the  Moon -god.

1  Wi.  6/2223;  KA  7~(3)  224.  For  the  view  of  another
Assyriologist  see  Sayce,  Hibb.  Lect.  57 ;  Early  History,  425  ;
cp  Simpson,  The  Jonah  Legend,  ii,if.

4680


SOLOMON

We  may,  however,  admit  that  the  story  of  David's
treachery  to  URIAH  (ij.v. )  probably  developed  out  of  a
current  oriental  legendary  germ,  without  of  course
disparaging  the  value  of  the  Bathsheba  story  as  given
in  2  S.  11 2-1225  for  other  than  purely  historical  purposes.
And  we  must  also  claim  the  right  to  extract  a  fragment
of  history  from  2  S.  Il2/  1215^-25,  rightly  read,  and
illustrated  by  the  story  of  Solomon's  accession  in  i  K.  I/I ,
and  by  the  lists  of  David's  sons  in  2  S.  82^  i  Ch.  3i^
The  '  fragment  of  history '  is  that  Solomon  had  another
name,  which  name  is  given  in  our  present  text  as
Jedidiah.1

Passing  next  to  i  K.I/!,  we  find  reason  to  think
with  Winckler  that  Solomon's  opposition  to  the  claim
of  Adonijah  to  succeed  David  was  due  not  to  his  own
and  Bathsheba's  selHsh  ambition,  but  to  the  considera
tion  that  after  the  successive  deaths  of  Amnon  and
Absalom  he,  not  Adonijah,  was  the  legitimate  heir  to
the  throne.  Here,  however,  we  part  from  Winckler.
Bathsheba  is  for  us  no  mythological  figure,  but  the  true
mother  of  Solomon  ;  she  is  in  fact  identical  with  Abigail.2
That  Solomon's  mother  should  bear  two  names  in  the
tradition  is  not  more  surprising  than  that  a  king  who
oppressed  the  Israelites  in  early  times  should  be  called
both  Jabin  (Jamin) — i.e.,  Jerahmeel — and  Sisera — i.e. ,
Asshur — both  Jerahmeel  and  Asshur  being  N.  Arabian
ethnic  names  (see  SHAMGAR  ii.,  §  2).  Bathsheba  is  in
fact  equivalent  to  Bath-Eliam  (2  S.  11 3)  or  Bath-Ammiel
(i  Ch.  35).

The  name  Bathshebarepresents  Abigail  as  an  Ishmaelite  woman
(U3r.Ta  =  iroa'"ra  =  ['?>X1li?2B'"rn)  '•  tne  name  Abigail,  as  a  Jerah-
meelite.  lout  Ishmael  and  Jerahmeel  are  often  used  as  synonyms ;
the  same  woman  could  therefore  be  called  a  daughter  of  Ishmael
and  a.  daughter  of  Jerahmeel.  So  too  noSs"  an^  'he  name  out
of  which  ,TTT  has  probably  been  corrupted — viz.  ^NQnV — are
equivalents.  Salma  describes  its  bearer  as  having  Ishmaelite
or  Salmaean  affinities  (see  §  i,  end),  Jedidiah  as  being
Jerahmeelite  by  extraction.  The  latter  name  too,  appears  to
be  given  to  the  son  of  Abigail  in  the  true  text  of  2  S.  3  3  and
i  Ch.  3  i,  where  the  respective  readings  3x^3  and  SN'JT  are
manifestly  wrong,  and  both  most  probably  presuppose  the
same  original  S,x£~T.

Adonijah's  claim  to  the  throne,  however,  must  have
been  based  upon  some  theory.  If  he  was  not  the
oldest  living  son  of  David,  he  may  yet  have  been  the
oldest  of  those  born  after  David's  accession.3  Probably
David  both  favoured  his  pretensions  and  accepted  him
as  co -regent.  Unfortunately  Adonijah  neglected  to
bring  over  to  his  side  the  so-called  '  Cherethites  and
Pelethites '  (Rehobothites  and  Zarephathites),4  who
formed  the  royal  body-guard,  and  with  the  aid  of  their
leader  Benaiah,  Solomon  compelled  the  old  king  to
reject  Adonijah.

In  i  K.  2 17  (cp  v.  21 )  it  is  stated  that  Adonijah
desired  leave  to  make  Abishag  the  Slumammite  his
wife  (cp  WRS,  Kinship,  83  /.}.  It  is  possible  that
Solomon,  with  the  same  object  as  Adonijah,  actually
took  '  Abishag'  (the  name  comes  from  gy^'B,  like  Bilkis
in  the  Semiramis  legend  from  TraXXa/a's)  into  his  harem,
and  that  Rehoboam  was  the  son  of  Solomon  by  '  Abishag. '
See  SIIUNAMMITK.

Upon  this  theory  Solomon  was  not  one  of  the  sons
born  to  David  at  Jerusalem  (28.014  iCh.  85-8),  and
the  traditional  view  of  his  age  at  his  accession,5  based

1  That  the  text  of  2  S.  12  24^  is  not  in  its  original  form,  is
evident ; a  possible  restoration  will be found elsewhere  (see
JEDIDIAH). The  present  form  of  the  text  seems  to  be  due  to  an
editor  who  thought  Jedidiah  ('  beloved  of  Yah  we  '  ?)  too  good  a
name  for  the  first  child. By  assigning  this  name  to  Solomon  he
unconsciously made a concession to historical facts. For
S.  A.  Cook's  theory,  see  AJSL  16  i56yC  [1900],  and  cp  JEDIDIAH.

2  Abigail  probably  =  Abihail  (see  NABAL),  and  Abihail  appears
ultimately  to  come  from  Jerahmeel.

»  Wi.  Gf  2  245.

4  The  explanation  of  '  Cherethites  and  Pelethites  '  (see  JUDAH,
§  4,  PELETHITES)  here  given,  is  not  that  of  Winckler  ;  but  (like
S.  A.  Cook,  AJSLl&ijj,  n.  61  [April  1900])  this  able  critic
recognises,  quite  independently  of  the  present  writer,  that  this
faithful  warrior-band  came  from  the  Negeb.

0  *PA  (i  K.  2  12),  with  about  twenty  other  MSS  and  some
versions  (Arm.  etc.),  gives  Solomon  only  twelve  years  at  his
accession,  and  Jerome  (cp  132  ad  Vitalem)  asserts  that  the

4681


SOLOMON

on  very  insecure  data,  needs  to  be  revised.  Certainly
the  narrative  in  i  K.  If.  does  not  favour  the  view  th.ft
Solomon  was  a  young  man  (the  rhetorical  language
of  i  K.  3  T/>  i  Ch.  29 i  22  5  cannot  be  regarded  as
decisive)  ;  the  hero  of  the  coup  d'tStat  displays  all  the
adroitness  and  astuteness  of  a  practised  politician.
How  Solomon  treated  his  opponents  is  stated  elsewhere
(ADONIJAH,  ABIATHAR,  JOAB,  SHIMKI)  ;  the  story,
which  has  a  basis  of  fact  (HISTORICAL  LITERATURE,
§  i),  makes  it  difficult  for  a  modern  to  idealise  this
despotic  prince.  It  is  singular  that  '  Nathan  the
prophet '  should  have  assumed  the  prominent  position
which  belongs  rather  to  Benaiah  ;'  but  ampler  justice  is
done  to  the  priest  ZADOK  (q.v. )  for  his  energetic
support  of  the  son  of  '  Bathsheba.'  It  is  probable  that
the  Jerusalem  priesthood  exacted  a  very  full  recompense,
and  that  fresh  favours  conferred  on  their  body  bore
fruit  for  Solomon  in  the  early  idealisation  of  his  conduct
as  a  sovereign.

Was  the  substitution  of  Zadok  for  Abiathar  accom
panied  by  changes  in  the  cultus  at  Jerusalem?2 It  is

3fl.  Buildings.  at  cluesti™  which  baffles  the  critical
student.  I  he  narrators  give  us  much
that  we  could  have  spared,  and  withhold  much  that
would  have  been  of  great  value  to  us.  Their  own  interest
is  largely  absorbed  in  the  buildings  of  Solomon,  especi
ally  in  that  of  the  temple.  That  the  description  in  its
present  form  comes  (as  Kittel  supposes)  from  the  Annals,
seems  hardly  probable ;  as  it  now  stands,  it  may
perhaps  represent  a  later  age,  to  which  the  temple  in
particular  had  become  a  subject  of  learned  but  not
altogether  sober  inquiry.  See  KINGS  [BOOK],  §  6,
PALACE,  TEMPLE  (and  cp  Stade,  Gni^Jf.,  and
ZATll',  1883,  pp.  izgff.}.  It  is  even  to  some  extent
doubtful  whether  the  whole  story  of  the  building  of  a
temple  of  Yahwe  as  well  as  of  a  royal  palace  outside
the  city  of  David  is  not  due  to  misapprehension.  Accord
ing  to  Winckler  (Gl^^^ff.}  the  true  temple  of  Solomon
was  merely  a  renovation  of  the  old  sanctuary  of  David
on  its  original  site — i.e.,  within  the  city  of  David —
though  it  must  apparently  be  admitted  (see  MILLO)
that  this  scholar's  explanation  of  millo  and  consequently
the  form  in  which  he  presents  his  theory  needs  recon
sideration.

There  is,  however,  another  point,  not  less  important,
3b  Hiram  anc'  more  capable  of  solution.  Accord
ing  to  the  tradition  in  its  present  form
(MT  and  (5),  the  timber  for  building  the  temple  was
furnished,  together  with  artificers,  by  Hiram  king  of
Tyre.  The  relation  thus  indicated  between  Israel  and  the
Tyrian  king  is,  if  accurately  reported,  in  the  highest  degree
remarkable.  If,  as  Winckler,  who  follows  MT,  interprets
what  he  thinks  the  historical  truth,  the  king  of  Israel  was
in  vassalage  to  the  king  of  Tyre  (?),  how  is  it  that  after
Solomon's  time  we  hear  nothing  of  attempts  on  the
part  of  Tyre  to  strengthen  its  hold  upon  Israel,  and  on
the  part  of  Israel  to  free  itself  from  Tyrian  supremacy  ?
True,  all  on  a  sudden,  in  the  ninth  century,  we  hear  of
an  Israelitish  king  marrying  a  daughter  of  '  Ethbaal,
king  of  the  Zidonians  '  (i  K..  1631).  This,  however,  is
an  equally  singular  and  an  equally  suspicious  statement,
when  we  consider  that  the  most  influential  power  in  the
politics  of  Israel  and  Judah  (putting  aside  Assyria)  was

'hebraica  veritas'  agrees  with  (5.  Josephus  (Ant.  viii.  7  e)
gives  his  age  as  fourteen ;  he  also  says  that  he  lived  to  94  !  For
other  traditional  statements,  see  Nestle,  7.  A  Til',  1882,  pp.  y?.ff.,
and  Theol.  Stud,  aus  U'iirtf  mberg,  1886,  p.  idof.  ;  Kaufmann,
ZAT1V,  1883,  p.  185;  Gamier,  Rev.  de  theol.  ft  de  fhilos.,
Nov.  1886;  Lagarde,  Mittheil.  1 40,  n.  i.  Stade  (f,\rl\^-j)
says,  not  less  than  twenty  years  old  ;  Kittel  (AV«.  6),  referring
to  i  K.  11  42  142i,  doubtfully  suggests  eighteen.

1  Schwally  (ZAT\V, 1892,  p. 156)  doubts  whether  Nathan
was  really  a  prophet. That  N'33n  ('  the  prophet ')  should  prob
ably be "IHJri, 'the Nadabite,' is pointed out elsewhere
(PROPHET,  §  6).

2  See Winckler  (KA  T(3)  234), who inclines to think that
Zadok  was  introduced  by  the  later  legend  in  the  interests  of  the
monotheistic  idea.

4682


SOLOMON

not Tyre but the N. Arabian Musri. Now it so
happens  that,  as  Wirickler  too,  with  extreme  modera
tion  holds,  iis  (Tyre?)  is  miswritten  for  TIXD  (Missur?)
in Am.  Ig  and Ps.  8?4 (cp  TYKE). What, then, is
there to  hinder us from supposing (if other critical
considerations favour this view) that  the same  error j
has occurred elsewhere? JITS, also, is  undoubtedly [
miswritten  sometimes  for  -nxa  or  pap. How,  then,  do '
we  know  that  'king  of  the  D'JTX'  in i  K.  1631  should i
not  rather  be  'king  of  the c"ixc,'  in  which  case  ^jnrm !
(cp  SyaE'N)  should  of  course  be  ^NyDB"? The  probability j
that  Ahab's matrimonial  connection  was  with Musri,
not  with  Tyre, has been  referred to  under  PROPHET
(§ 7, col. 3862, with n.  i); and  when  we  take  into
consideration  a  fact  which  will  be  referred  to  presently
— viz. that Solomon's principal wife was a Misrite
princess — we  shall  see  that  if  he  went  anywhere  outside
the  land  of  Israel  proper  for  timber,  political  interests
would naturally  impel him to go  to  the N. Arabian
Musri. (We assume provisionally that the wooded
mountain  districts  of  the  Xegeb  were  not  in  Solomon's
possession. ) Nor must we forget that '  Ahiram '
(whence  '  Hiram')  is  one  of  the  most  probable  popular
corruptions  of  'Jerahmeel.'1 Ahiram  or  Hiram  might
indeed  be  the  name  of  a  king  of  Tyre;  but  it  might  also
(cp Aholiab  — Jerahmeel  ?) be that  of  a N. Arabian
artificer.

It  would  not  be  critical  to  urge  against  this  view  of  the  seat
of  Hiram's  kingdom  that  Josephus2  quotes  a  passage  from  the
Tyrian  history  of  Menander  of  Ephesus  and  another  from  that
of  Dios,  in  which  Eipw/xo?,  king  of  Tyre,  son  of  '.\/3<./3aAos,  is
said  to  have  had  intercourse  with  '  Solomon,  king  of  Jerusalem.'
The  date  of  Menander  and  Dios  is  presumably  in  the  second
century  li.c.,  and  though  we  may  credit  them  when  they  tell  us
of  the  succession  of  the  kings  of  Tyre,  and  of  events  not  legend
ary  in  character  which  they  can  only  have  known  from  ancient
authorities  —  i.e.,  from  the  Tyrian  archives  (which  Josephus
positively  asserts  that  Menander  at  least  had  inspected), a  we
cannot  venture  to  trust  them  when  they  touch  upon  matters
closely  related  to  the  then  current  Jewish  history.  Thus  when
Menander  (in  Jos. .-!«/.  viii.  182)  tells  us  that  there  was  a  drought
in  Phoenicia,  which  lasted  for  a  year,  and  was  closed  through
the  potent  supplications  of  'Wtofiakos,  king  of  Tyre,  we  divine
at  once  that  this  is  directed  against  the  Jewish  statement  that
a  long  drought  in  the  land  of  Israel  was  terminated  through
the  intercessions  of  Elijah,4  and  when  E'ipio^.os  is  said  by
Menander  and  Dios  (Jos.  Ant.  viii.  5  3)  to  have  had  a  match  of
riddle-guessing  with  Solomon,  we  can  see  that  this  is  based  on
the  Jewish  story  of  the  riddles  by  which  the  queen  of  Sheba
tested  Solomon  (i  K.  10  i).

We  have  no  extra -biblical  authority  for  doubting
that  if  Solomon  was  indebted  for  building  materials  and
artificers  to  any  foreign  king,  it  was  to  the  king  of
Misrim,  not  to  the  king  of  Tyre.  According  to  the
most  probable  text  of  28.82  12si  David  had  con
quered  both  Missur  and  Jerahmeel  (see  Crit.  Bib. ,  and
cp  SAI:L),  so  that  if  we  hear  of  a  king  of  Missur
in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  we  may  assume  that  he  for  a
time  at  any  rate  owned  the  supremacy  of  the  king  of
Israel.  If  so,  there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the  double
statement  that  Solomon  had  his  own  workmen  in  the
mountains  (i  K.  013^  [27  ff.~\\,  and  that  Hiram  sent
workmen  to  cut  down  wood  at  Solomon's  request.5
Nominally,  the  mountain  country  of  Jerahmeel  (called,
as  we  shall  see,  Gebalon)  was  a  part  of  Solomon's
dominions,  so  that  as  suzerain  he  had  a  right  to  send

1  Kittel  (on i  Ch.  14  i)  prefers  the  form  Huram  ; Schrader
(_KA  7"(2)  170), Hirom. Cp HIRAM, end. 'The view taken
above seems to the present writer the best. Urumilki is
attested  as  a  Phoenician  royal  name  in  an  inscription  of  Sen
nacherib  (AVJ  T(~t  185,  cp  also  ^CIN,  an  ancestor  of  Yehaw-
melek,  C/.Ti.  no.  i),  and  Urumilki  probably  =  Jerahmeel.

2  Ant.  viii.  5  3  (§§  144-149);  c.  Ap.  1  I?/  (§|  112-120).

3  Dios, too, says Josephus,  was trusted for his exactness
(c.  Af>.\.  17  1 1 2).

*  Winckler  (KA  Ti3>  250)  gives  a  different  explanation  of
Menander's  assertion,  which,  however  startling,  might  be  accept
able,  if  it  did  not  presuppose  the  traditional  Hebrew  text  of  the
Book  of  Kings.

6  As  the  text  stands,  Solomon  asks  Hiram  for  help  in  the
hewing  of  timber  (i  K.  5  i-io).  It  is  in  the  hewing  of  stone  that
Solomon's  labourers  are  represented  as  taking  a  prominent  pait.

4683


SOLOMON

workmen  to  do  his  bidding.1  The  forms  of  courtesy,
however,  may  have  required  that  he  should  request  the
vassal-king  to  send  his  own  more  skilled  labourers  to
direct  and  to  aid  those  of  Solomon,  and  in  order  to
prevent  war  from  breaking  out  between  Israel  and
Missur  during  the  long  building  operations'-  at  |eru-
salem,  as  well  as  to  foster  a  more  friendly  feeling  based
upon  mutual  services,  the  Israelitish  king  is  reported
to  have  paid  Hiram  (Jerahmeel)  annually  large  quantities
of  wheat  and  oil.3

We  are  obliged  sometimes,  however  reluctantly,  to
form  historical  conjectures,  and  this  seems  to  be  the
most  conservative  one  which,  on  the  present  subject,
with  due  account  of  textual  criticism,  can  be  made
plausible ;  but  the  fact,  mentioned  at  a  later  point
(§  7),  of  the  ill-feeling  which  Cusham  or  Aram  (  =  Jerah
meel)  bore  to  Israel  leads  us  to  question  its  accuracy.
Only  by  force  and  by  the  transplantation  of  part  of  the
subject  population  (2  S.  1231,  see  SAW)  could  David
keep  his  hold  on  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb.  It  is  prob
able  that  Solomon  found  it  even  more  difficult  than
his  father  to  do  this,  and  from  i  K.  9 11-14  it  would
appear  that  Solomon  was  forced  by  the  king  of  Missur
to  cede  to  him  twenty  cities  in  the  land  of  Jerahmeel,
and  over  and  above  this  to  pay  a  hundred  and  twenty
talents  of  gold.4

The  existence  of  a  grave  historical  problem  cannot,
it  would  seem,  be  denied.  We  have  offered  the  best
solution  of  it  at  our  disposal.  It  only  needs  to  be  added
that  the  misstatement  that  Solomon  procured  timber
and  workmen  from  the  king  of  Tyre  must  have  been
facilitated  by  the  fact  that  the  name  '  Hiram  '  was  actu
ally  borne  by  a  king  of  Tyre,  and  that  it  was  favoured
by  the  observation  of  later  Jews  that  the  mountains  of
the  Negeb  were  not  in  their  time  abundantly  wooded
(the  trees  having  been  cut  down),  whereas  Lebanon
was  still  well  provided  with  timber.  Whether,  as
Winckler  supposes,  part  of  the  Lebanon  was  in  the
possession  of  Solomon,  need  not  here  be  considered.

It  is  important,  however,  to  mention  these  necessary  correc
tions  of  names  in  MT.  (i)  The  mountain  country  where  timber
was  sought  (i  K.  5  6)  was  called,  not  Lebanon,  but  Gebalon  (from
Ar.  jibdl,  cp  GEBAL),  the  people  of  which  are,  in  i  K.  5 18,
called  Gebalites."  The  same  correction  is  plausible  elsewhere,
e.g.,  Is.  148  Zech.  11  i,  etc.  (2)  In  i  K.  9n  13  ^jn  and  Si^j
are  both  popular  corruptions  of  *?NCn"r.  (3)  In  i  K.lOn  f.
2  Ch.  '2  8  [7]  It  10  f.  the  'almuggim'  or  'algummim'  timber  should
rather  be  designated  'Jerahmeel'  timber.  It  came  (2C'h.  2  8  [7])
not  from  Ophir,  but  from  Lebanon — i.e.,  Gebalon.  Cp  ALMUG
TREES  (end),  where  the  theory  mentioned  —  that  almug-wood
came  from  Lebanon  (2  Ch-  -«)—  points  in  the  direction  of  the
critical  view  here  recommended.

Wre  need  not  deny  that  Solomon  was  a  builder,  or
that  he  was  aided  by  (erahmeelite  artificers  (for  which

. _,  we  have partial analogies''  in Bezalel,

4.  Commerce.  b Uri b Hur and  oholiab|  b Ahi.

samach,  in  Ex.31).  One  of  these  (whose  father  was  a
Misrite,  but  his  mother  an  Israelite  of  the  Negeb")  bore
the  same  name  as  that  assigned  to  the  Misrite  king —

1  The  SwatrTevfiara  (?)  which  Solomon  '  opened  '  in  Lebanon
(Gebalon?)  according  to  (B11*  (Swatrrfvovra,  (pi.)  in  i  K.  246^
may,  as  Winckler  thinks,  have  been  mines.  See  Winckler,  Ait.
Unt.  176;  Gf'lzbi,  n.  2.

"  Twenty  years  are  assigned  to  them  in  i  K.  9  10  ;  cp  6  38  7  i.

3  i  K.  5  ii  [25],  where  for  the  second  13  read  n2  (see  COR).

4  The  best  part  of  this  is  due  to  Winckler  (GY2  262  ;  A\-i  7"I3>
237). He  thinks  that  the  original  which  underlies  the  present
text  of  i  K.  9  14  is  nxa  IS  ~\hc^>  (CTn)  nVtrii  where  Q-rn  is  a
gloss  inserted  at  the  wrong  place. The  sense  is,  '  and  he  (viz.
Solomon)  sent  to  the  king  of  Tyre  [Hiram]  120  talents  of  gold,'
i.e.,  Solomon  had to  make  up  for  the  inadequate  cession  of
territory  by  a  large  payment  in  gold. The  king,  however,  with
whom  Solomon  had  to  do  was  not  Tyrian  but  Misrite,  and  the
ceded  territory  not  '  Galilean  '  but  Jerahmeelite.

5  i  K.  5 18 [32] should run ^KCrn*  'JIH SNJ'Cr' ':3  iVoBH
C'733n;  'and  the  Ishmaelites  and  the  Jerahmeelites — the  Gebal-
ites — fashioned them.' Without  the  key  to  the  names  critics
have  been  obliged  to  assume  a  deep  corruption  of  the  text  (cp
GEBAL,  i).

6  All  the  names  here  quoted,  except  the  first,  are  Jerahmeelite.
The  tribes  of  Judah  and Dan  were  both largely  mixed  with
Jerahmeelites.

7  His  father  was  a  Misrite  (nsc  not «ijj),  his  mother  either  a

4684


SOLOMON

viz.  Hiram,  i.e. ,  Jerahmeel  ;  the  Chronicler  (2  Ch.  2 12
[13])  calls  him  Hurani-abi,  but  this  surely  must  be  the
same  name  C?NDrrv='3N  DTin)-  Cp  HIKAM,  2,  and  on
the  place  where  he  did  his  work  (i  K.  746)  see  TEBAH.
Nor  need  we  altogether  reject  the  other  traditions  of  the
intercourse  between  Solomon  and  '  Hiram.'  If  the  view
of  the  historical  facts  underlying  i  K.  9 11-14  adopted
above  be  correct  —  /.  e. ,  if  hostilities  broke  out  between
the  king  of  Missur  and  Solomon,  in  which  Israel
was  worsted  — it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  war
was  occasioned,  not  only  by  the  craving  for  revenge,
but  also  by  a  desire  on  '  Hiram's  '  part  for  commercial
expansion.  Having  no  port  of  his  own,  he  was  glad
to  use  EZION-GEBER  (t/.v.),  at  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of
'Akabah,  which  formed  part  of  Solomon's  dominion.
Hiram  had  indeed  no  mariners  to  send,  but  he  sent  'ser
vants  '  of  his  own — i.e. ,  commissioners  and  merchants
— to  buy  and  sell  at  the  places  where  the  ships  might
touch.  The  chief  object  which  both  kings  longed  for
was  naturally  gold  ;  Ophir,  the  port  of  the  great  Arabian
or  E.  African  gold -land,  was  the  goal  of  these  early
voyagers  (see  GOLD,  IVORY,  OPHIR,  TRADE,  §  49).

The  very  different,  commonly-held,  opinion  that  '  at
Ezion-geber  (which  [Solomon]  retained,  in  spite  of  the
return  to  Edom  of  prince  Hadad)  a  ship  was  built,  similar
to  those  employed  by  the  Phoenicians  in  their  voyages  to
Tarshish  (and  hence  called  Tarshish  ships),  and  manned
in  part  by  experienced  Tyrian  sailors,'  and  that  'from
that  port  it  was  dispatched  at  intervals  of  three  years
to  Ophir,  bringing  back  thence  gold,  silver,  ivory,  valu
able  woods,  and  precious  stones,  as  well  as  curious
animals  such  as  apes  and  peacocks,'1  appears  to  rest
on  an  inaccurately  transmitted  text  and  a  not  sufficiently
thorough-going  historical  criticism.  The  best  form  that
gratitude  to  past  critics  can  take  is  surely  not  to  repeat
temporary  conclusions,  but  to  carry  forward  their  work.
We  venture,  therefore,  to  present  some  of  the  most
pressing  changes  of  view  to  which  we  have  recently
been  led  by  independent  research.

Even  apart  from  the  rendering  of  '2X  (i  K.  9  26,  ©  vaiis)
by  '  ship '  (RV,  '  a  navy  of  ships  '),  which  has  had  the  authority
of  Hitzig  and  Kittel2  (Hist.  '1  189),  and  the  question  as  to  the
history  of  Hadad,  there  is  much  that  is  very  doubtful  in  the
opinion  referred  to.  The  'apes'  and  'peacocks'  are  considered
elsewhere  (see  especially  OI-HIR,  PEACOCKS);  on  the  difficult
question  relative  to  the  mention  of  silver  as  well  as  of  gold  in
i  K.  1022,  see  SILVER,  §2.  'Valuable  woods'  should  rather
be  'a  rare,  fragrant  wood,  analogous  to  the  spices  or  spice-plants
of  the  queen  of  Sheba '  (read  C'?nN — i.e.,  eagle -wood  [see
ALOES),  not  C'fpSx  —  i.e.,  Jerahmeelite  wood).  The  three
passages  bearing  on  Hiram's  participation  in  the  Ophir  ex
peditions  are(rt)  i  K.  9  27,  (b)  10  n,  (c)  1022.  As  for  (a),  the
true  text,  translated,  should  probably  run,  'And  Hiram  sent  his
servants,  Jerahmeelites,  on  the  ships  with  the  servants  of
Solomon.'  nvjN  'C'3N  >s  a  corruption  of  D^Nj'CtS",  and  Q'n  <y-j>
of  G'SKOrlT-  Either  'Jerahmeelites'  or  (better)  '  Ishmaelites '
is  a  gloss  or  variant.  In  (fi)  we  should  read,  '  And  also  the
merchant-ships  .  .  .  brought  from  Ophir  very  much  eagle-wood
and  precious  stones.'  DTn  should  be  irib  (0  and  0  con
founded)  ;  cp  Prov.  31  14.  In  (c)  '  for  the  king  had  at  sea  ships
(galleys)  with  oars3  (aica  '3N) ' ;  to  this  was  added  in  the
earlier  text  "inb  '3N,  '  merchant  ships '  (omit  CJ?,  an  editorial
insertion),  which  is  a  gloss  on  'Q  >jx.  The  phrase  '  Tarshish
ships '  is  a  hopeless  puzzle  until  we  apply  methodical  textual
criticism  to  the  Hebrew  phrase.  See  TARSHISH,  §  7.

That  Solomon,  at  one  period  of  his  life,  had  friendly
relations  with  Musri  is  shown  by  his  marrying  a  daughter

-„  iur;CT^-i  of  Pir'u  king  of  Misrim  (so  beyond  doubt
5a.  Misrite  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,

• • we  should  read  in  I  K.  3 1  9 16  in  place  of  the

very  improbable  MT4). This  was  pointed

Naphtuhite  ('HPIS:,  not  'S?2?)  or  a  Ignite,  in  either  case  a
woman  of  the  Negeb.  See  i  K.  7  14  ;  2  Ch.  2  14,  and  cp
NEPHTOAH.

1  Wade,  OM  Testament  History  (1901),  299.

2  In  //A",  'Kon.,'  87,  and  KGH,  'Jes.,'  298,  however,  Kittel
adopts  the  collective  meaning  '  fleet.'

3  See  TARSHISH,  §  7,  where  trc^'JK,  Is.  8821,  is  compared.

*  It  is  indeed  difficult  to  imagine  a  king  of  Egypt  giving  one
of  his  daughters  to  a  vassal  king  (cp  WJNIM,  As.  u.  Eur.  390)
in  Palestine.

4685


SOLOMON

out  by  the  present  writer,1  and  afterwards  independently
by  Winckler.  To  the  notice  of  the  marriage  in  3  1  it  is
added  in  9  16  that  Pir'u  took  the  field  against  a  certain
city,  slew  its  inhabitants,  and  gave  it  as  a  portion  to
his  daughter,  Solomon's  wife.-  The  place  is  called  in
the  traditional  text  Gezer,  and  its  inhabitants  Canaanites  ;
but  both  Judg.  129  and  Josh.  16  10  lead  us  to  doubt  this,
and  it  is  in  itself  more  probable  that  for  113  (Gezer)  we
should  read  -\^i  (Geshur),  and  for  'jjuan  (the  Canaanite),
as  elsewhere,  'ijpn  (the  Kenizzite)  ;  some  place  in  the
far  SW.  of  Palestine  is  presumably  intended  (see
GESHUR,  2).

Kittel  (cp  Burney,  Hastings,  DB  2862a)  does  well  to  separate
9  16-170.  (as  far  as  -|jj)  from  w.  17^-22  ;  it  has  evidently  been
taken  from  a  context  which  spoke  of  the  marriage.  At  the
same  time  its  present  context  is  full  of  interest,  and  we  must
return  to  it  later  (§  7).

The  Arabian  land  of  SHEBA  (q.v.  ),  too,  was  interested,
as  legend  asserted,  in  Solomon.  Its  queen  is  said  to
5b  Oueen  ^ave  actuauv  come  to  Jerusalem  to  test

f'<?h  \'  Solomon's  wisdom.3  According  to  Kent
*'  (Hist,  of  the  Hebrew  People,  1  179)  the  object
of  her  visit  was  to  bring  about  a  commercial  treaty  with
Solomon.  But  surely  the  form  of  the  legend  is  late.
It  is  Tiglath-pileser  and  Sargon  who  tell  us  of  queens
of  '  mat  Aribi,'  and  '  mat  Aribi  '  (see  KA  7~<2)  414)  is  not
Sheba  ;  indeed,  the  Sabnsan  empire  arose  much  later
than  Solomon.  Probably,  as  Winckler  suggests  (Gf
2267),  the  queen  of  Sheba  is  but  a  reflection  of  the
Misrite  princess  whom  Solomon  married.  How  Solomon
came  to  be  called  the  wise  king,  par  excellence,  is  not
clear.  If  it  meant  originally  that  he  was  as  skilful  in
preserving,  as  his  father  had  been  in  creating,  a  king
dom,  the  epithet  was  greatly  misplaced.  More  prob
ably,  however,  the  title  arose  from  the  close  intercourse
between  Solomon  and  the  N.  Arabian  kings  and  kinglets.
The  Misrites  and  the  Jerahmeelites  were  celebrated  for
their  wise  proverbs  and  apologues.  To  heighten  Solo
mon's  glory,  it  was  stated  by  the  later  legend  that,  just
as  he  was  greater  than  his  neighbours  in  war,  so  he
excelled  them  in  their  own  special  province  of  wisdom
(see  i  K.  59  /.  [43o/.]).  How  far  Babylonian  influences
affected  him  we  are  unable  to  say  positively.  But  the
phenomena  of  the  early  Genesis  stories  as  explained  by
the  present  writer  lead  him  to  think  that  N.  Arabia
transmitted  quite  as  much  as  Babylonia,  though  in
doing  so  it  could  not  avoid  augmenting  a  mass  of  ideas
and  beliefs  ultimately  of  Babylonian  origin.  See  SHAV-
SHA,  also  CREATION,  PARADISE,  and  cp  EAST  [CHIL
DREN  OF],  ETHAN,  HEMAN,  MAHOL.

Legend  also  lays  great  stress  on  Solomon's  just
judgment  —  a  capacity  for  which  was  indeed  one  aspect
ebrew  '  wisdom  '  ;  but  there  is  no


6 Solomo '
'


satisfactory  evidence  for  this,  and  the


highly  oriental  story  in  i  K.  816-28
has  a  striking  parallel  in  a  Buddhist  Jataka.  We  can,
however,  most  probably  assert  that  Solomon  was  highly
despotic  in  his  methods  ;  on  this,  historians  who  differ
widely  on  other  points  are  agreed.4  If  we  are  rightly
informed,  Solomon  treated  both  the  Israelites  and  the
surviving  Canaanites  5  as  only  good  enough  to  labour,
like  the  Egyptian  fellahs  till  recently,  at  the  royal  build
ings  (5  13  /  [27  /],  cp  12i8).  He  is  also  said  to  have
divided  the  country  (  '  all  Ishmael  '  ?)  into  twelve  depart
ments  (to  a  large  extent,  it  would  seem,  independent  of
tribal  divisions),  each  of  which  was  under  a  deputy  or

1  JQR,  July  1889,  pp.  ssg/  Cp  Winckler,  Cl  2  263  ;  KA  T&)
236.

-  Maspero's  expansion  of  this  passage  (MT)  in  Stt-uggle  oj-
the  Nations,  738,  is  unduly  imaginative.

3  Menanderof  Ephesus  (as  we  have  seen)  represents  Solomon
and  Hiram  as  the  rival  sages.

4  Cp  Kittel,  Hist.  2  186  ;  M  'Curdy,  HPM1  155  (§  524).

5  Other passages  to  be  referred  to  presently seem  to show
that  the  N.  Arabian  subject  population  was  specially  employed
in  the  corvee,  though  if  Israelites  had  to  do  forced  labour,  the
surviving  Canaanites  would  of  course  not  be  spared. It  is  not
well  to  attempt  a  too  positive  solution  of  such  problems.

4686


SOLOMON

prefect  (aw,  4;  =  3%!i3,  v.  19),  charged  with  the  duty  of
keeping  up  a  constant  supply  of  court  luxuries,  and  also,
\ve  may  be  sure,  of  collecting  the  taxes,  and  perhaps  too
of  providing  forced  labour. l  In  the  Lebanon  (?  Gebalon )
alone  he  is  said  to  have  had  10,000  labourers  constantly
employed  (5 14  [28]).  The  overseer  of  the  corvee  was
the  hated  Adoniram  (i  K.46  614;  cp  12i8).  No
wonder  that  discontent  became  rife,  especially  in  the
powerful  tribe  of  Ephraim.  How  a  leader  of  the  rebels
was  found  is  told  elsewhere  (see  JEROBOAM,  i).

At  the  same  time  there  are  certain  passages  in  our
composite  narrative  which  may  make  us  hesitate  to
accept  the  darkest  picture  of  Solomon's  despotism.  In
920-22,  which  we  may  hesitate  to  regard  as  merely  a
late  attempt  to  whitewash  Solomon's  character,-  it  is
expressly  said  that  the  corve'e  was  limited  to  non-
Israelites.  And  the  singular  statements  respecting  the
number  of  Solomon's  '  stalls  of  horses  '  (426  [56])  and  of
his  chariots  and  horsemen  (1026),  when  critically  in
spected,  appear  rather  to  be  statements  respecting  the
number  of  his  Cushite,  Jerahmeelite,  and  Zarephathite
servants  (see  Crit.  Bil>.}.  The  narrative  in  i  K.  12  no
doubt  ascribes  the  separation  of  N.  and  S.  to  the  hateful
corve'e  ;  but  the  account  is  too  anecdotal  to  be  strictly
historical,  and  surely  the  forced  service,  so  far  as  it
existed,  pressed  heavily  on  the  S.  as  well  as  on  the  X.

Certainly  Jeroboam  was  an  Ephrathite.  But  there  may  have
been  a.  southern,  as  well  as  a  northern,  Ephrath  ;  Jeroboam's
mother  (see  JEROBOAM,  i)  was  a  Misrite,  and  the  name  of  his
clan  (see  NEHAT)  may  plausibly  be  explained  as  Arabian.  And
as  fur  the  statement  (11  28)  that  Jeroboam  was  placed  'over  the
labour  of  the  house  of  Joseph,'  it  is  possible  that  here  and  in
Am.  06  PQV  (r,Q<)  has  been  miswritten  for  'ce" '•=  "?t<j;CB"  (Ish-
mael).3

We  have  assumed  that  Solomon's  relation  to  Musri
was  not  that  of  supremacy,  but  that  of  dependence.  It
7.  Was  he  lord  s'lould  'be  .frankly  stated,  however
of  the  Negeb?  tha  thcre  «  a  considerable  body  of
evidence  which,  rightly  understood,
points  in  an  opposite  direction,  (i)  There  is  the
passage  already  referred  to  (2  Ch.  82),  where  Hiram
is  represented  as  the  ceder  of  the  twenty  cities.  (2)  In
close  proximity  to  this,  it  is  said  (2  Ch.  83)  that
Solomon  went  to  Hamath-zobah  and  prevailed  against
it.  Now  Hamath-zobah  here,  as  in  2  S.  83,  we  take  to
be  partly  a  corrupted,  partly  a  manipulated  reading  ;
the  true  text  gave  Maacath-zarephath — i.e.,  the  Zare-
pliathite  Maacath.  And  the  strong  cities  which  Solomon
built  (i  K.  9  15  [end],  17-19)  were  probably  called  Hazor,

1  The  brevity  of  the  above  statement  is  justified  by  the  present
state  of  textual  criticism.  The  document  to  which  it  refers
(i  K.  47-78  [5s])  is  admittedly  obscure.  'The  text,' says  Ben-
zinger,  '  is  a  good  deal  corrupted,  and  has  received  interpola
tions.'  In  special  articles  on  the  names  ('see  also  FOWL,  FATTED)
some  of  the  difficulties  are  dealt  with.  The  point  of  view,  how
ever,  in  these  articles  is  not  more  advanced  than  that  of  critical
commentators  in  general.  A  further  application  of  the  key
which  Winckler  (only  half-conscious  of  its  wide-reaching  con
sequences)  put  into  our  hands,  when  he  showed  that  C"1SD
sometimes  stood  for  D'HsS  —  i.e.,  the  X.  Arabian  Musri  — and
that  this  country  exercised  a  persistent  political  influence  on
the  Israelites,  has  result:,  which,  if  correct,  are  of  the  utmost
importance  for  the  early  regal  period  of  the  history  of  Israel.
It  becomes  probable  that  Kind's  remark  (which  was  thoroughly
justified  from  a  conservative  textual  point  of  view)  that  the
table  of  prefects  '  only  concerns  Israel  proper,  inasmuch  as  the
conquered  territories  are  referred  to  (4  21  [51])  in  a  different
style,'  is  the  reverse  of  the  fact.  The  present  writer  holds  that
the  twelve  prefects  were  placed  not  over  'all  Israel'  (as  the
traditional  text  has)  but  over  '  all  Ishmael '  (a  parallel  error  to
that  in  2  S.  24  i  a  ;  see  TAHTIM-HODSHI)—  i.e.,  over  the  Negeb
— that  in  4  22 _/  |5  2  /.}  the  account  of  Solomon's  '  provision  for
one  day  '  has  grown  out  of  a  list  of  the  peoples  or  tribes  of  the
Xegeb,  and  that  in  426  [56]  the  true  text  affirms  that  the
Cushites,  Jerahmeelites,  Ishmaelites,  and  Zarephathites  were
servants  to  Solomon,  i  K.42O  is  the  only  passage  which  dis
tinctly  breaks  the  connection.  See  Crit.  Bib.

_2  This  is  the  view  of  Kittel  and  Benzinger.  The  statements
of  820-22  are  thought  by  them  to  be  refuted  by  a  reference  to
6  13  [27]  11  28  124.  The  text  of  these  passages,  however,  will
not  bear  the  stress  that  is  laid  upon  it.  See  preceding  note
(near  end).

3  On  Am.  6  1-14,  which  appears  to  the  present  writer  to  refer
to  the  Israelites  settled  in  the  Negeb,  see  Crit.  Bib.

4687


SOLOMON

Jerahmeel,  Geshur,  Beth-horon  (in  the  S. ),  Baalath,
Tamar  in  Arabia.1  (3)  There  are  also  the  passages
(426 [56]  1026)  referred  to  above,  which,  when  critically
emended,  appear  to  assert  the  reduction  to  bondage  or
serfdom  of  a  large  portion  of  the  Jerahmeelite  popula
tion.  And  (4)  there  is  a  singular  statement  (10i4/.)
respecting  the  amount  of  gold  which  came  every  year
to  Solomon,  the  close  of  which  should  run  nearly  thus —
'apart  from  the  tribute  (v:y)  of  the  Zarephathites  and
the  Jerahmeelites  (cp  SPICE-MERCHANTS)  and  all  the
kings  of  Arabia. '  2

These  passages,  however,  seem  to  prove  nothing  but
the  strong  determination  of  later  writers  to  idealise  the
reign  of  Solomon.  That  Solomon  was,  for  a  time  at
any  rate,  lord  of  the  Negeb  (with  the  exception  of
'  Hiram's '  twenty  cities)  may  be  admitted.  That  he
had  battles  in  the  Negeb  is  also  true,  and  his  foe  was
no  minor  chieftain  but  the  king  of  Missur  himself,  and
Solomon  was  worsted  in  the  conflict.  The  reference  to
HAUAU3  and  to  KE/.ON4  in  i  K.  1114-25  and  to  Jero
boam's  journey  to  Misrim  in  v.  40,*  confirm  the  view
that  Solomon's  position  in  the  Negeb  was  seriously  and
frequently  threatened.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Rezon  is
said  to  have  'reigned  in  Damascus'  (rather  Cusham),
just  as  Hadad  'reigned  over  Aram'  (i.e.,  Jerahmeel).
Evidently  there  was  a  strong  jealousy  between  Israel
and  the  neighbouring  peoples  of  Jerahmeel  and  Missur.
(Cp  Stade,  Glr/l  303,  who,  however,  adheres  to  MT. )

The  references  to  Solomon's  horses,  as  we  have
seen,  need  to  be  carefully  inspected  ;  they  have  l>een
much  misunderstood.

There is evidence enough that C'CIO
8.  References  (horses),  and  D'Cto  (Cushites),  3DT  (chariot),

to  norses. ancj  l,N=n-,.(Jerahmeel)havean  unfortunate
tendency  to  get  confounded,  and this  con
fusion  has  affected  the  story  of  Solomon.

Still,  we  need  not  doubt  that  Solomon  had,  not
indeed  '  chariot-cities  '  6  (see  MARCABOTH),  but  at  least
horses  and  chariots.  On  the  locus  classicus,  i  K.  lOzSf.,
see  HORSE,  §  i  (5),  MIZRAIM,  §  za,  TRADE,  §  49.
It  is  a  question,  however,  whether  criticism  does  not
make  it  a  plausible  view  that  the  Misrim  from  which
Solomon  derived  horses  and  chariots  was  the  N.
Arabian  rather  than  the  N.  Syrian  referred  to  in  these
articles.  This  at  least  can  with  much  probability  be
stated,  that,  whilst  there  were  nomadic  tribes  in  N.
Arabia  whose  riding  animal  was  specially  the  camel  (see
CAMEL,  §  2),  there  was  also  a  settled  population  skilled
in  the  useful  arts  and  riding  on  horses  (see  Crit.  Bib. ).
Our  information  on  these  points  is  scanty,  but  a  nega
tive  attitude  towards  the  inference  here  stated  is  possible
only  at  the  cost  of  rejecting  critical  facts  which  all  hang
together,  and  throw  a  light  on  many  dark  places  in  the
history  of  Israel.

The  total  result  of  our  study  of  Solomon  is  that  his

1  Implying  emendations  of  the  text ;  see  Crit.  Bib. See  also
TAMAR,  TADMOK,  TRADE,  g  50. The  reader  will  find  the  old
view  and  the  new  in  collision, but this is inevitable. The
problems before us  are  partly  of  a  text-critical,  partly  of  a
historical  character.

2  Cp  TRADE,  §  50,  where  the  corrected  printing  31J?  (cp  Ch.)
is admitted. We must add, however, that very  probably
j'lNn  mns  has  arisen  out  of  C712~l!>,t,  written  at  the  end  as  a
correction  of  n'inn  ',  D'Sim,  as  in  Neh.  3  32,  =  G^NDrtT  >  and  of
this  same  word  nnCC  is  a'so  a  corruption  (c  =  c)-

3  Hadad was probably  an Arammite ('8iv) — i.e.,  a  Jerah
meelite — rather  than  an  Edomite  :  see  Crit.  £t/>.  on  2  S.  S  \i,f.
Winckler  (AVJ7"l:i) 240) independently suggests that 11
was  of  Aram-Zoba,  not  of  Edom. Aram-Zoba,  however,  is
really  Aram-Zarephath,  according  to  the  present  writer's  view
of  the  original  text. See  ZOBA. We  must  not,  howe\er,  con
found  the  spheres  of  action  of  the  two  adventurers,  Hadad  and
Rezon.

*  Rezon  was  a  fugitive  from  his  lord  the  king  of  Zarephath
(=Maacath-Zarephath,  above).

8  See  JQR,  July  1899,  PP.-  55T-556.  As  against  Winckler
(KA  Tfi\  241,  the  present  writer  thinks  that  '  Shishak '  iu  r.  40
is  merely  an  error  for  %[J'}3  (see  PHARAOH,  SHISHAK,  2).

8  Cp,  however,  CHARIOT,  §  5,  CITY  (/),  and  Wi.  GY22io.
4688


SOLOMON

political  importance  has  been  very  much  exaggerated.

.  . Already in i  K.  424  [5-t] we find the

>litical extent of  his kingdom  idealised  as  that

importance.  of  David  had  been_ It  is  not  difficuit  to

account  for  this.  The  geographical  statement  in  424
[04]  arises  simply  from  a  misinterpretation  of  -in:  (ndhdr)
in  v.  21  [5 1],  which  really  means  the  '  nahal  Misrim,'
but  was  supposed  to  mean  the  Euphrates.1  Later
ages  went  farther  in  the  same  course,  and  in  Pss.  45
and  72  (the  latter  of  which,  however,  has  received  a
later  insertion)  his  life  furnishes  the  framework  for
pictures  of  the  Messianic  king.  Against  this  idealisa
tion  the  redactor  of  ECCLESIASTES  (q.v.}  in  his  own
way  protests.

We  now  turn  to  Solomon's  religious  position. Was

he a polytheist? Did he ever, as W. E. Barnes

.,.  (Hastings,  DB-2$iib)  expresses  it,  'patronise

10.  Not  a foreign  worship?' An  affirmative  answer  is

polyuneist.  suggested  by  I  K  n  j.8 It  is  pl.lirii  how.

ever,  from  (S's  text,  as  well  as  from  the  phenomena  of
M  T,  that  the  original  has  been  much  expanded  by
later  hands  from  a  religious  motive.''2  There  was  no
bad  faith  in  this  ;  the  later  writers  simply  recast  history
in  the  light  of  certain  fundamental  principles — those  of
Deuteronomy  (cp  KINGS  [BOOK],  §  6).  And  their
procedure  appears  more  startling  than  it  really  was,
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  ethnic  names  and  the  names
of  the  gods  have  been  accidentally  corrupted.  The
original  statement  probably  was  that  which  underlies
117,  '  Then  did  Solomon  build  a  sanctuary  for  the  god
of  Cusham  and  Jerahmeel ' — i.e.,  for  his  Misrite  wife  ;
this  probably  stood  in  connection  with  the  account  of
Solomon's  marriage  (cp  1631-33).

Various  comments  on  this  were  inserted  in  the  margin,  and
introduced  by  the  redactor  or  redactors  into  the  text.  Lastly,
corruption  transformed  '  the  god  of  Cusham'  into  '  Chemosh  the
god  (abomination)  of  Moab,'  and  'Jerahmeel '  into  '  Milcom  the
god  (abomination)  of  the  b'ne  Ammon.'  In  what  is  now  v.  i,
'  Jerahmeelite,  Misrite,  Rehobothite'  became  '  Moabite,  Am
monite,  Edomi te (from  "Arammite," a  variant  to  "  Jerahmeelite  "),
Zidonian,  and  Hittite,'  and  in  what  is •  now  v.  3,  'princesses
Ishnvielites'  became  'princesses  seven  hundred,'  and  'concu
bines  Ishmaelites'  became  'concubines  three  hundred.'

That  Solomon  had  a  number  of  wives,  both  Israelite
and  non- Israelite,  is  probable  enough,  but  he  did  not
make  altars  for  all  of  them,  nor  did  he  himself  combine
the  worship  of  his  wives'  gods  with  that  of  Yahwe.  He
can  have  had  no  thought  of  denying  the  sole  divinity  of
Yahwe  in  the  land  which  was  Yahwe's  'inheritance.'
It  is  a  distortion  of  the  true  text  when  (5L  represents
Solomon  as  'burning  incense  and  sacrificing'  (edv/^ia
KO.I  Zt)ue)  to  foreign  gods.3  That  this  ambitious  king
had  such  a  chastened  piety  as  we  find  in  i  K.  8  14-61
(cp  Driver,  Intr.^  200  f.}  is  on  all  grounds  inconceiv
able  ;  but  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  according  to
his  lights  he  was  a  faithful  worshipper  of  Yahwe,  so  far
as  this  was  consistent  with  his  despotic  inclinations.

[In  the  apocryphal  Book  of  Wisdom,  again,  the  composition

of  an  Egyptian  Hellenist,  who  from  internal  evidence  is  judged

to  have  lived  somewhat  earlier  than Philo

11.  Later (see WISDOM OK SOLOMON), Solomon is

idealisation, introduced uttering words of admonition,

imbued  with  the  spirit  of  Greek  philosophers,

to  heathen  sovereigns. The  so-called  Psalter  of  Solomon,  on

the  other  hand,  a  collection  of  Pharisee  Psalms  preserved  to  us

only  in  a  Greek  version,  has  nothing  to  do  with  Solomon  or  the

traditional  conception  of  his  person,  and  seems  to  owe  its  name

to  a  transcriber  who  thus  distinguished  these  newer  pieces  from

the  older  '  Psalms  of  David.'4 In  NT  times  Solomon  was  the

current type alike of  magnificence and of  wisdom  (Mt.  (129

Lk.  11  31). But  Jewish  legend  was  not  content  with  this,  and,

starting from a false interpretation of  Eccles.  2s, gave him

sovereignty  over  demons,  to  which  were  added  (by  a  perversion

of  i  K.  4  33),  lordship  over  all  beasts  and  birds,  and  the  power  of

understanding  their  speech. These fables  passed  to  the  Arabs


1  Cp  EGYPT,  BROOK  OF,  and  see  Wi.  G!  1 2^4.

2  See  Benzingerand  Kittel,  and  cp  Driver,  Intr.$\  192.

:t  See,  however,  Btirney  (Hastings'  DB~2fA^a,  notet),  who
favours  (B1-,  and  thinks  that  the  fact  '  has  been  toned  down  by
some  later  hand  into  the  statement  of  MT.'

4  On  the  Aprocryphal  '  Psalms  of  Solomon  '  see  APOCALYPTIC
LITERATURE,  §§  77-85.  Cp  also  APOCRYPHA,  §  14.

4689


SON  OF  GOD

before  the  time  of  Mohammed  (Ndbigha,  1  22),  tound  a  place  in
the  Koran,  and  gave  Solomon  (Suleiman)  a  lasting  fame
throughout  the  Moslem  Kast.  The  story  of  Solomon,  the
hoopoe,  and  the  queen  of  Sheba  in  the  Koran  (Sur.  27)  closely
follows  the  second  Targum  to  Ksth.  1  2,  where  the  Jewish
fables  about  him  may  be  read  at  large.  Solomon  was  supposed
to  owe  his  sovereignty  over  demons  to  the  possession  of  a  seal
on  which  the  'must  great  name  of  God'  was  engraved.  See
Lane,  Arabian  Nights,  Introd.,  n.  21,  and  chap.  1,  n.  15.  —
W.K.S.]

For  a  survey  of  Solomon's  reign  in  connection  with  the  longer
history,  see  ISRAEL,  §§  23-25  ;  on  Solomon's  psalm  (?),  CREA
TION,  §  26,  and  on  two  supposed  daughters  of  Solomon,  see
SALMAH.  T.  K.  C.

SOLOMON'S  PORCH  (H  CTOA  [TOY]  coAo-
MCON[T]OC),  Jn.  10  23  Acts  012.  See  TKMI'LK,  §  30  /

SOLOMON'S SERVANTS, CHILDREN OF (\J3


l?),  a  guild  of  persons  attached  to  the  second
temple,  mentioned  in  Ezra  2  55  58  Neh.7s76o  list
(Yioi  AoyAwN  C&ACOMCON  l'5AL];  K/ra'2s5  Y-
<\3AHceA  [B]  ;  2s8  Y.  &ceAHceAM<\  [B],  Y-  &BAH-
C£\M&  [A]),  with  the  NETHINIM  (q.v.  ),  and  someiimes
(e.g.,  Neh.  82631  1029)  apparently  included  under  thai
term.  Bertheau-  R  yssel  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  this
guild  of  '  servants  of  Solomon  '  grew  out  of  a  small  part
of  the  Canaanitish  bondservants  of  Solomon  (iK.
92o/.  )  which  may  have  been  assigned  to  the  temple.
The  probability  is,  however,  that  the  phrase  has  nothing
to  do  with  Solomon,  but  is  corrupt.  On  Solomon's
corve'e,  see  SOLOMON,  §  6.

Just  as  one  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  so-called  ncthin'iut  are
really  the  Ethanites,  so  the  btne  'abde  SelOmSh  must,  it  would
seem,  be  either  the  bene  'dbtd-salamfi  or  the  btne  'obed-'fddiii.
'Obed-'edom  is  probably  a  corruption  of  'arab-ldom  —  i.e.,
Arabia  of  Kdom,  and  'ObeJ-selotiioli  of  'ariib-salcitnfi  —  i.e.  ,  Arabia
of  the  Salmaeans  (see  SALMAH,  2).  The  Jerahmeelites  and
Kdomites  seem  to  have  been  strongly  mixed  with  pure  Israelites
after  the  exile.  One  of  the  families  of  the  Obed-edom  or
'Arab-edom  guild  (if  we  may  call  it  so)  bears  the  name  '  bene
Hassophereth  '  (or  Sophereth)—  i.e.,  bene  Sarephathlm,  or  Zare-
phathites.  See  SOI'HEKETH.  T.  K.  C.

SOLOMON'S  SONG. See  CANTICLES.

SOLOMON,  WISDOM  OF.  See  WISDOM  OF
SOLOMON.

SOMEIS(cOMeeic[BA]),  i  Esd.934  RV  =  Ezral038
SHIMEI,  16.

SON  OF  GOD

CONTENTS

I. IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  AND  PHILO.

Synonym  of  '  god  '  (§  i).  The  king  (§  5).


Term  for  an  'angel '  (§  2).
Offspring  of  a  god  (§  3).
Figurative  use  (§  4).


The  Messiah  (g  6).

One  raised  from  the  dead  (§  7).

The  Logos  (§  8).


II. IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.

i.  In  Synoptics  (§§  9-22).  Proclamation  by  demons  (§  18).

Principles  of  criticism  (§  10).  Peter's  confession  (§  19).

Genuine  sayings  of  Jesus  (§  n).  High  priest's  adjuration  (§  20).

Jesus's  self-consciousness (§  12).  Centurion's  exclamation  (§  21).

Hymn  to  Father  and  Son(§  13).  Origin  of  title  (§  22).

Son's  limited  knowledge  (j>  14).  ii.  In  lfourth  Gospel  (§  23).

Baptismal  formula  (§  15).  iii. In  /•'/•isf/cs  (§  24).

Allegoryof husbandmen  (§  16).  Historical  significance  of  title
Proclamation by voices etc. (§  25).

(§  ijf.).  Literature  (§  26).

In  the  Semitic  languages  the  individual  is  often
designated  as  a  '  son  '  of  the  species  to  which  he  be
longs,  the  species  being  indicated  by  a  collective  or
plural  noun  (see  SON  OF  MAN,  §§  i,  4-6).

Similarly,  a  member  of  the  genus  '  god  '  seems  to
have  been  designated  as  ben  glohlm  (Aram.,  bar  flcihin}.

_,  This  is suggested by  Gen.  62-4 Ps.  826

1.  Synonym  Dan  32. ^ ear]y as the second

^°  '  century  B.C.  the  bnc  flohim  in  Gen.  62  4
were  understood  in  some  circles  to  be  angels,  and  this
interpretation  is  certainly  nearer  the  truth  than  the
rationalising  exegesis  that  made  the  fathers  of  the
giants  '  sons  of  mighty  men  '  or  '  pious  folk  '  (see  §  2).
But  the  term  can  scarcely  have  conveyed  originally  the
idea  of  '  angels.'  At  the  time  when  the  myth  was  first

4690


SON  OP  GOD


SON  OF  GOD


told  in  Judah,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  doctrine  of
angels  had  yet  developed.  As  '  the  daughters  of  men '
were  simply  •  women,'  so  '  the  sons  of  the  gods'  were
4  gods. '  Such  a  usage  of  the  phrase  must  have  been
deeply  rooted,  since  even  in  the  Hasmona.'an  age  '  sons
of  'Elyon '  was  an  expression  employed  as  a  synonym
of  'gods.'  In  Ps.  826  bni'elydn  is  used  in  the  second
hemistich  as  an  equivalent  of  tldhim  in  the  first.  In
Dan.  3  25  the  celestial  being  seen  in  the  fiery  furnace  is
called  bar  fldhin  (cp  Pesh. ).  This  is  indeed  explained
by  mafakeh,  '  his  angel,'  in  828,  and  so  the  phrase  was
undoubtedly  understood  by  the  author.  But  it  is  not
probable  that  the  Jews  of  the  Maccabasan  period  called
an  angel  bar  tldhin ;  as  good  monotheists  they  no
doubt  said  bar  tldhd.  The  author,  however,  en
deavoured  to  make  the  speeches  of  pagan  kings  and
queens  more  plausible  by  putting  upon  their  lips  such
phrases  as,  in  his  judgment,  they  would  naturally  use.
He  lets  them  speak  of  the  '  wisdom  of  gods  '  (5n)  and
the  'spirit  of  holy  gods'  (4s/.  [8/.]  5n).  As  these
expressions  were  borrowed  from  pagan  phraseology,
bar  tldhin  was  probably  drawn  from  this  same  source.
If  the  polytheistic  neighbours  of  Israel  employed  the
phrase,  they  are  likely  to  have  meant  by  it  not  '  an
angel,'  but  a  '  god.'  Even  in  Job  16  887,  the  'sons  of
the  gods '  are  apparently  conceived  of  as  divine  beings,
subordinate  to  the  Most  High,  but  still  associated  with
the  elements,  stars,  or  nations,  over  which  they  once
reigned  as  independent  rulers  ;  and  the  same  may  be
true  of  Ps.  29  (bne  elfin).

Whilst  originally  these  divine  beings  were  not  '  angels, '
it  is  natural  that  in  course  of  time  they  should  become

- _  identified with the special class of

2  Designation  <messengers, (maftUTm)f In Gcn.
01  an angel. ^ some  Mss  of  ^  (A  ^  ^  ^

read  oi  ayye\oi  TOV  0eov,  and  this  reading  seems  to
have  been  found  by  many  patristic  writers  (cp  also
inalake  in  the  margin  of  Syr. -Hex. ,  and  the  Persian
Vs. ),  though  the  majority  of  MSS  and  daughter-versions
have  the  more  literal  oi  viol  roi~  Ofdv.  Such  a  reference
to  angels  is  assumed  in  many  passages.

So  in  Enoch  62  (oi  ayyeAoi  viol  ovpavov,  Giz.  frg.  and  Eth.)
192  etc.,  Slavonic  En.  Ti8,  Jubilees  5,  Test.  12  Patr.  :  Reuben
5,  Philo,  1262,  ed.  Mangey,  Jos.  Ant.  i.  3i,  §  73,  Jude  6,
2  Pet.  24,  Justin,  Afol.\s,  Clem.  Horn.  813,  Clem.Alex.
Strom.  3528,  Tert.  De  I'irg.  I'el.  7,  Lactantius,  Instit.  215,
Commodianus,  Instruct.  1  3.

In  Ps.  29 1  826,  Targ.  has  H'SN^D  TO  I  in  Job  16,
<I5  reads  oi  &yyf\oi  TOV  t)fov,  and  in  887  0776X0:
fj.ov,  and  Targ.  in  both  places  maldkayyd,  and  in
Dan.  825  [92]  (5  renders  077^X01'  OeoO.  The  trans
lation  'sons  of  the  angels'  (Job  887  Pesh.  b'nai
mala'ke,  En.  71  i)  or  'children  of  the  gods'  (En.  6945
1065)  apparently  presupposes  the  use  of  ilohim  (or
Aram,  tldhin}  as  a  designation  of  angels,  the  'sons'
being  the  individuals  of  this  class.  Whether  Aquila's
rendering,  oi  I'ioi  TtJiiv  6fui>,  reflects  such  an  identification
of  tldhim- Ofoi  with  angels,  or  a  more  correct  appre
hension  of  the  original  meaning,  or  simply  the  convic
tion  that  the  Most  High  can  have  no  sons  (cp  Midr.
Tthillin,  2j),  cannot  easily  be  determined.  The  fact
that  Gen.  624  are  the  only  passages  where  the  Targs.
(Onk.  and  Jon. )  render  b'ne  tldhim  with  b'ne  rabrHbayya
indicates  that  the  common  significance  is  here  forced  to
yield,  for  dogmatic  reasons,  to  a  less  natural  meaning.
The  same  is  true  of  Sym.  oi  viol  TUIV  SvvacrTevovTuv,
Sam.  Targ.  rnast:'  '3D,  and  Saadia  baniil  asrdfi,  '  sons
of  the  mighty,'  'the  rulers'  or  'nobles.'  It  is  also
significant  that  the  term  kfdosim,  which  designates  the
gods  as  objects  of  worship,  was  transferred  to  the
angels  (cp  Joboi  15 15  Zech.  14s  Dan.  4 14  Ps.  8968
Tob.  815);  in  Ecclus.  452,  the  original  seems  to  have
read  D'nVxD  irma'i  (<5  translating  c'nV«  with  ayioi),  and
a  similar  transfer  is  likely  to  have  taken  place  in  the
case  of  the  term  '  watcher. '  If  ©  is  correct,  in  Dt.
328  (apparently  a  late  gloss),  the  SN  '32  seem  to  have
been  limited  in  some  circles  to  the  celestial  representa
tives,  or  patron  angels,  of  the  different  nations.

4691


At  the  basis  of  the  myth  in  Gen.  §iff.  lies  the  idea
of  the  physical  descent  of  some  men  from  divine  beings


3.  Offspring


[cp  NEPHILIM,  §  i]. The  famous  giants
of  old  were  regarded  as  sons  of  gods  and  of


f\f  a crnH  '  lt&txllacla  "-0  DUII wi  guns  anu  u

beautiful  women.  This  explanation  wai
especially  resorted  to  in  the  case  of  great  heroes  of
antiquity  and  of  kings  (sec§  5).  But  clans  and  tribes  also
traced  their  descent  from  divinity  through  their  eponym
heroes.  When  the  Moabites  are  said  to  be  the  sons  and
daughters  of  Chemosh  (Nu.  2129),  the  Hebrew  singer
used  a  phrase  that  is  likely  to  have  been  employed  by
the  Moabites  themselves  to  claim  descent  from  Chemosh,
to  indicate  that  they  were  his  offspring  in  the  world.
Gen.  1930-38  cannot  be  urged  against  this  view.  It
probably  referred  originally  to  the  descent  of  a  pre-
Edomitish  clan  from  its  divinity  Lotan  (see  Lor).
Edom,  Esau,  Ammon,  Gad,  Asher,  and  other gentilicia,
are,  beyond  a  question,  names  of  gods  [cp  TRIBES,  §  3].
Abram  (the  'exalted  father'  of  Hebron),  Isaac  (the
'smiling'  El  of  Beersheba),  Jacob  (the  'pursuing'  El
of  Shechem),  Israel  (the  'fighting'  El  of  Mahanaim),1
Ishmael  (the  '  listening'  El  of  Beer-lahai-roi),  Jerahmeel
i  (the  'pitying'  El  of  Rahama)  and  many  more,  can
I  scarcely  have  been  other  than  divine  figures  originally.
The  sons  of  these  were,  no  doubt,  once  regarded  as
I  physical  descendants  of  gods,  though  the  term  was  later
I  understood  to  designate  them  merely  as  the  offspring  of
eponym  heroes,  or  as  belonging  to  the  tribes  bearing
these  names.  However  foreign  to  the  ideas  of  a  later
time,  the  conception  that  the  Israelites  descended  from
Yahwe  himself  is  likely  to  have  existed  in  earlier  days.
When,  in  extant  literature,  Israel  is  called  'son  of
Yahwe,'  and  the  members  of  the  people  'sons  and
daughters  of  Yahwe,'  this  is  indeed  probably,  in  every
instance,  used  in  a  metaphorical  sense  (see  §  4).  Never
theless,  there  are  indications  that  the  sonship  once  was
taken  more  literally.  Already,  the  connection  between
Yahwe's  fatherhood  and  his  creation  of  Israel  is  signifi
cant.  In  the  Assyrian,  banu  means  '  build,'  '  fashion,'
'  beget '  ;  the  same  term  denotes  creation  and  pro
creation  :  Dt.  328  ('the  rock  that  begat  thee  .  .  .  the
El  that  brought  thee  forth  ' )  shows  how  closely  the  ideas
were  related  in  the  Hebrew  mind.  The  tendency  to
make  the  eponym  heroes  sons  of  gods  and  women,  seen
in  Greece  (cp  Rohde,  Psyche,^  152  ff.  169  ff.]  and  else
where,  was  evidently  at  one  time  operative  in  Israel  as
well.  The  original  paternity  of  Isaac  is  but  thinly
disguised  in  Gen.  ISio^l  21  \  ff.  (cp  that  of  Samson  in
Judg.  13  where  mafak  is  probably  a  later  addition*.  It
is  quite  evident  that  at  sanctuaries  provided  with
masseboth  and  asherim,  kSdesim  and  kfJesoth,  the  simple
folk-religion  cannot  have  left  Yahwe  without  a  consort
and  children.  In  Ezek.  23  Yahwe  marries  two  sisters
and  begets  children  by  them.  This  is  an  allegory.
But  when  even  a  late  prophet  does  not  hesitate  to
introduce  this  conception  as  a  figure  of  speech,  it  may
be  reasonably  supposed  that  an  earlier  time  found  it
only  natural  that  Yahwe,  as  well  as  other  gods,  should
have  children  by  graciously  visiting  women  of  his
choice.  Gen.  6iJ5^  shows  that  gods  might  do  this
without  offending  the  morals  of  the  age.  The  notion
of  a  physical  divine  paternity  is  not  incompatible  with
an  otherwise  highly  developed  moral  sense  (see  §  17).

The  very  fact  that  in  Hebrew  literature  Israel  is
primarily  the  son  of  Yahwe  and  the  individual  Israelite
only  by  virtue  of  his  connection  with
the  people,  indicates  that  the  phrase
was  once  understood  in  a  literal  sense,
since  collective  sonship  is  mediated  through  the  eponym
hero.  Nevertheless,  the  idea  of  physical  descent  has
been  so  strongly  suppressed  that  the  term  is  practically
everywhere  used  figuratively,  to  express  the  love  and

1  As  the  '  Job  stone '  found  by  Schumacher  at  Sheikh  Sa'd  in
Hauran  proves  that  Ramses  II.  penetrated  into  the  E.

iordan  country,  it  is  possible  that  the  Israel  referred  to  in  the
.  Ie(r)neptah  inscription  was  a  tribe  having  for  its  centre
Maharuum.

4692


4.  Figurative
use.


SON  OF  GOD

paternal  care  of  Yahwe  and  the  reverence  and  obedience
of  Israel.

Already  in  Hosea  2  i  the  ethical  significance  often  associated
with  this  metaphor  comes  to  view  when  the  prospect  of  becom
ing  '  sons  of  the  living  God  '  (fine  El  hai)  by  a  moral  reforma
tion  is  held  out  to  the  Israelites.  In  Hosea  11 1  the  text  is
doubtful.  Mt.  reads  'out  of  Kgypt  I  have  called  my  son.'  <B
seems  to  have  found  a  plural  (!«J37i  TO.  -rinva.  avrov).  See
LOVINGKINDNESS.  'His  children'  would  refer  to  the  'sons  of
Israel.'  In  Is.  1  2  30  i,  the  Israelites  are  called  'sons  of  Yahwe.'
That  the  phrase  was  felt  to  be  a  figure  of  speech  is  evident  from
Dt.  1  31  8  5  ('  as  a  man  bears  [chastens]  his  son,  so  Yahwe  ' ;  cp
Ps.  103  13)  ;  but  14  i  asserts  '  Ye  are  the  sons  of  Yahwe,  your
God,'  and  32  6  asks  '  Is  he  not  thy  father,  thy  maker? '  In  Jer.
84  Yahwe  is  said  to  be  a  father;  3  19,  '  How  shall  I  place  thee
among  sons,'  means  '  make  thee  a  son  '  (see  Duhm,  Jereinia,  p.
vi),  consequently  contains  the  idea  of  adoption.  The  promise,
'  I  shall  be  a  father  to  Israel,  and  Ephraim  shall  be  my  first
born '  is  given  in  Jer.  31 9.  Similarly  Ex.  4  22,  'My  son,  my
first-born,  is  Israel.'  In  Is.  63  16,  the  first-born  of  Yahwe  is  em
phasised,  in  contrast  with  the  neglect  of  the  people  by  Abraham
and  Israel ;  the  cult  of  these  heroes  brings  no  relief.  Cp  also
'our  father,'  Is.  048  [7].  Mai.  16  assumes  that  Yahwe  is  con
stantly  represented  by  the  people  as  a  father.  Mai.  '2  10-16  has
suffered  much  corruption  by  intentional  alteration  and  by
accident  [see  Crit.  Bib.].  But  v.  10  clearly  shows  that  Yahwe
is  the  father  of  the  Israelites  and  their  ancestor.  In  v.  n
neither  &  nor  Pesh.  seems  to  have  found  in  the  text  '  and
marries  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god '  (^33  7x),  but  some
phrase  which  could  be  interpreted  '  and  walks  after  (or  '  serves  ')
foreign  gods.'  This  may  be  a  free  rendering  of  ^N  jv^  Vtf  Nil
"IDJi  '  and  enters  the  house  of  a  strange  god,'  but  MT  shows  that
the  idea  of  a  woman  being  the  daughter  of  her  god  was  not
foreign  to  Hebrew  thought  (cp  Nu.  21  29  Wisd.  9  7  12  21  16  10).
In  Ps.  73  15,  '  the  generation  of  thy  children  '  refers  to  the  Jews.
The  fatherhood  of  God  is  finely  expressed  in  the  prayer,  Ecclus.
23  i,  beginning  Kupie,  Trarep,  'Lord,  father.'  In  Ecclus.  4n  the
Hebrew  reads  13  "]xip'  7N1i  'and  God  shall  call  thee  son.'
Here  sonship  has  an  ethical  quality.  That  is  also  the  case  in
Wisd.  2i8,  'if  the  righteous  man  is  God's  son,  he  will  uphold
him '  ;  whilst  in  5  5  the  sons  of  God  probably  are  the  occupants
of  the  celestial  world,  including  angels  and  human  saints  (see
§7);  in  9  7  122i  1(5 10  184,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  God  are
the  Israelites,  and  in  IS  13  the  people  is  said  to  be  recognised
by  the  Egyptians  as  'God's  son.'  In  Judith  94  the  Jews  are
God's  'dear  children.'  In  Esth.  li  14,  they  are  the  '  sons  of  the
only  and  true  God,'  and  in  3  Mace.  Ci  28  they  are  the  sons  of  the
'most  mighty  and  heavenly  living  God.'  Eth.  Enoch  62  n
speaks  of  'his  children  and  his  elect,'  but  the  passage  is  prob
ably  a  Christian  interpolation.  Cp  also  Sib.  Or.  3  702,  '  sons  of
the  great  God";  Ps.  Sol.  730,  'sons  of  their  God';  184,  'as  a
first-born  only-begotten  son';  Ass.  Mos.  1027,  'sons  of  God';
Jubilees  1  15,  '  sons  of  God  ' ;  and  4  Ezra  (3  58,  '  thy  people,  first
born  and  only-begotten.'

It  may  be  inferred  from  such  instances  that  the  desig
nation  of  God  as  father  in  a  figurative  sense  goes  back
at  least  to  the  eighth  century  and  was  common  in  Israel
in  the  last  century  B.C.  ;  that  the  Israelites  felt  them
selves  to  be  sons  and  daughters  of  Yahwe  because  of
their  connection  with  the  holy  Yahwe -worshipping
people ;  and  that  here  and  there  the  thought  of  a
spiritual  sonship  based  on  character  was  reached.

Founders  of  states  and  kings  in  general  were  regarded
in  antiquity  as  sons  of  gods.

Numerous  examples  were  gathered  from  Greek  and  Roman
writers  by  D.  F.  Ilgen  in  1795.  He,  however,  wrongly  sup
posed  that  the  basis  of  what  he  deemed  simply
5.  The  king,  a  figure  of  speech  was  the  relation  of  the  king
as  pupil  to  the  divinity  as  teacher.  In  reality,
the  divine  paternity  was  looked  upon  as  an  important  fact.  In
the  case  of  a  long-reigning  dynasty,  or  one  connected  by
marriage  with  the  preceding  one,  it  was  sufficient  to  assume  a
transmission  of  the  divine  life  from  an  original  impregnation  by
a  god  ;  in  the  case  of  a  usurper  not  connected  by  marriage  with
the  previously  reigning  family,  resort  must  be  had  to  an  im
mediate  divine  fatherhood.  Thus,  the  kings  of  Egypt  were
considered  as  the  sons  of  Re'  by  virtue  of  descent  from  him  ;  but
Alexander  could  be  declared  a  son  of  Ammon  Re'  only  by  a
denial  of  Philip's  paternity,  and  a  revelation  of  his  birth  without
a  human  father  (Trogus  in  Justin,  Hist.  11  n).  Less  promin
ence  was  evidently  given  to  this  conception  in  Assyria ;  but  its
existence  is  proved  by  5  R.  297  where  Asur-bani-pal  says  Asur
Hit  f'anua,  '  Ashur  the  god,  my  begetter.'  The  Ptolemies  as
successors  of  the  Egyptian  kings  accepted  such  titles  as  '  son  of
Re','  'yib«  TOV  'HAt'ov,'  'son  of  Isis  and  Osiris' ;  and  some  of  the
Seleucidae,  as  successors  of  Alexander,  also  received  the  title
0«oO  utos.  The  latter  title  was  frequently  used  by  the  Roman
emperors  as  well  as  divus,  #ed?,  and  eldha.  in  the  East  (see
Dalman,  227,  and  Deissmann,  Bibelstudien,  1  i66J^.).

Even  in  Israel  the  king  was  regarded  as  standing  on
a  higher  level  than  ordinary  men  and  given  the  name
'  son  of  Yahwe. '  His  quasi-divine  character  is  already

l.VJ  4693


SON  OP  GOD

indicated  in  the  fact  that  he  was  anointed.  Originally
the  pouring  out  of  oil  on  his  head  was  a  sacrifice,  an
act  of  worship.  Yahwe's  anointed  was  recognised  as
partaking  of  Yahwe's  sanctity,  as  possessed  of  a  divine
spirit  and  a  higher  intelligence  (i  S.  10g).  It  is  more
likely  to  be  a  reflection  of  a  generally  prevailing  opinion
than  mere  flattery,  when  the  woman  in  28.141720
declares  that  David  is  like  the  gods  in  hearing  what
is  good  and  evil,  and  has  the  wisdom  of  the  gods  to
know  all  that  is  in  the  earth  (mal'dk  is  probably  a  late
interpolation).  How  the  people  before  the  exile  looked
upon  their  kings,  cannot  be  determined  from  the  literary
remains  reflecting  the  often  strongly  anti-royalist  spirit
of  the  prophets.  Is.  96  shows  that  a  poet  in  the  exile
did  not  hesitate  to  predict  for  a  child  born  to  the  royal
family  (possibly  a  son  of  Jehoiachin)  that  he  would  be
called  a  '  mighty  god  '  (el  gibbor}.  2  S.  7  14,  probably
written  after  the  exile,  as  H.  P.  Smith  has  perceived,
and  possibly  in  the  days  of  Zerubbabel,  presents  the
son  of  David  as  the  son  of  Yahwe,  and  significantly
predicts  for  him  that  in  spite  of  this  he  will  be  punished
as  human  beings  are,  though  not  destroyed.  When
kings  again  sat  on  the  throne  of  David  in  the
Hasmonrean  age,  they  naturally  applied  to  themselves
this  promise.  Yahwe's  anointed  king  was  his  son,
born  as  such  on  the  day  of  his  coronation,  whom  the
nations  and  their  rulers  should  obey  (Ps.  2).  Ac
customed  as  men  in  Israel  had  been  to  hear  their
Ptolemaic  or  Seleucid  rulers  referred  to  both  as  '  god '
and  as  '  son  of  god,'  the  two  terms  easily  merged  into  each
other  when  applied,  as  they  were,  to  the  Hasmonoean
kings.  In  Ps.  582  and  826  Pharisaic  hymn-writers
scornfully  designate  these  native  rulers  as  '  gods '
(itlohim)  and  '  sons  of  God  '  (b'ne  'elyon).  There  would
be  no  sting  in  this  sarcasm,  if  they  were  not  actually
designated  as  such.  That  this  was  the  case  is  shown
by  Ps.  457/1  [°/-].  where  a  poet  laureate  of  one  of  these
princes  on  the  occasion  of  a  royal  wedding  apostrophises
the  monarch  as  divine.  In  Ps.  89  26  f. ,  2  S.  7  14  is  applied
to  Alexander  Jannasus  (so  Duhm).  Zech.  128  probably
also  applies  to  the  reigning  family.

On  the  other  hand,  Ex.  216  22g[8]  do  not  prove  that
rulers  were  called  '  gods. '  They  refer  to  household
gods  (Eerdmans),  and  Targ.  and  Pesh.  which  render
'judges'  are  certainly  wrong.  So  far  as  known,  the
king  was  never  regarded  in  Israel  as  literally  the  son
of  Yahwe.  The  underlying  thought  seems  to  have
been  that  the  king  became  a  '  son  '  by  the  infusion  of
his  divine  father's  life  and  intelligence.

In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  king  in  Israel  was  called
a  son  of  God,  it  is  somewhat  strange  that  there  is  so

_,, __ . , little evidence  of its use as  a title

afl> of  the  coming  Messiah. There  is  no

passage in Jewish literature that can be confidently

dated  as  earlier  than  Christianity,  in  which  this  name

is  given  to  the  Messiah.

Enoch  lOSa  is  probably  an  interpolation  (so  Drummond,
Charles,  Dalman).  4  Ezra  728/1  1832  37  52  14  9  are  all  doubt
ful.  The  Aramaic  original  is  lost,  and  the  extant  versions  (Syr.,
Lat.,  Eth.,  Ar.,  Arm.)  have  all  passed  through  Christian  hands,
and  manifestly  suffered  changes  in  these  very  passages  (see
Drummond,  285^).  The  Targ.  to  2  S.  7  14  renders  'like  a
father '  and  '  like  a  son,'  and  the  Targ.  to  Ps.  1  ^  '  thou  art  dear
to  me  as  a  son  ' ;  Ps.  2  is  generally  referred  to  Israel.  In  Origen's
time  the  Jews  looked  forward  to  the  coming  of  God's  Messiah,
but  professed  to  find  no  reference  in  prophecy  to  a  coming  son
of  God  (c.  Celsrun,  149).  Only  rarely  (as  in  b.  Sukka,  152  a
and  Midrash  Tehill.  2  7)  is  a  Messianic  interpretation  of  Ps.  2
found.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  reason  for  this  lies  in
the  reaction,  first  against  Hasmpna^an  pretensions,  and  subse
quently  against  Christian  exegesis.  But  between  the  insistence
upon  Davidic  descent  as  a  rebuke  to  the  illegitimate  line  in  the
Psalter  of  Solomon,  and  the  emphasis  upon  the  human  character
of  the  Messiah  (ar0po>7ro<r  ef  avOptairiay)  by  Trypho  as  a  disavowal
of  the  new  god,  the  great  Messianic  movements  stirred  many
circles  in  Jewry,  besides  the  followers  of  Jesus,  with  eagerness
to  discover  a  reference  to  the  Messiah  in  every  passage  that  lent
itself  to  the  purpose.  It  therefore  remains  possible  that  the
identification  of  the  Messiah  as  the  son  of  God  represents  not
merely  the  blending  of  two  independent  convictions,  but  the
synonymy  of  two  terms.  Dalman  objects  to  bar  elahtl  as  a
Messianic  title,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  customary  to

4604


SON  OF  GOD

mention  the  name  of  God,  as  Mk.  14 61  uibs  TOU  euAoyijroO  indi
cates.  But  Mt.,  who,  according  to  Dalman,  alone  rendered  the
original  idiomatic  malkfitlul  aa-thfmayyA  for  'kingdom  of
God  '  with  /3a<riAeia  -rutr  ovpaviav,  has  in  2063  fibs  ToO  Btov,  and
so  also  Lk.  22  70  ;  and  there  is  no  indication  that  '  sons  of  God  '
was  rendered  otherwise  than  by  t'ni-  einhd.  Nevertheless,
bar  flahil  is  not  likely  to  have  been  very  commonly  used  as  a
designation  of  the  Messiah,  and  there  is  no  absolute  proof  of  its
use  at  any  time.

In  Lk.  2036  those  that  are  accounted  worthy  of
another  world  and  of  being  raised  from  the  dead

_ _.  . , are said to be  equal to angels and

7.  One  raised .  ,

t j.u j  sons  of  God,  because  they  are  sons  cf

from  the  dead.  .,  , .

the  resurrection. According  to  Rom.

1 4  Jesus  was  shown  to  be  a  son  of  God  by  his
resurrection  from  the  dead.  The  idea  that  the  ranks
of  the  heavenly  beings  may  thus  be  increased,  is
older  than  the  thought  of  a  resurrection.

Heroes  that  are  well-pleasing  to  the  gods  maybe  carried  aloft
to  be  with  them  for  ever,  as  Uta-napisti  in  the  Gilgamis  epic,  or
Enoch  and  Elijah  [see  DELUGE,  §  17,  ELIJAH,  ENOCH,  and  cp
ETHAN,  PARAIJISK,  §  3].  Slavonic  Enoch  22  gives  a  fine
description  of  Enoch's  reception  in  heaven,  and  his  celestial
garments.  Into  the  same  company  of  heavenly  beings  men
Could  be  brought  from  the  subterranean  realms  of  Sheol.  when
the  Mazdayasnian  doctrine  of  a  resurrection  hail  become  familiar
in  Israel.  Even  in  circles  where  the  Greek  conception  of
immortality  prevailed,  the  godly  man  was  supposed  to  take  up
his  abode  after  death  among  the  sons  of  God,  and  to  obtain  his
inheritance  among  the  saints  (Wisd.  05).  It  is  the  merit  of
Barton  (/Vino  World,  1899,  pp.  114^)10  have  called  attention
to  this  thought.

Among  the  Jews  accessible  to  Greek  philosophy,  it
was  especially  Philo  who  prepared  the  way  for  the
Christian  doctrine  of  the  son  of  God  by  his  Logos-

_ T, T  speculation. When he called this

e  L,ogos.  Logos ,the pg,.^  soni- .  the  first.

born  son  of  God'  (De  Vit.  Mas.  14  ;  DC  Conf.  Ling.
14  ;  De  Agric.  12),  he  did  not  imply  that  it  was  an
individual,  an  hypostasis,  a  person.  Yet  it  was  in
evitable  that  the  term  '  son  of  God  '  should  suggest  a
mediator  between  God  and  the  world,  a  celestial
personality  more  grandly  conceived  than  any  other
associated  with  the  name,  and  herein  lies  much  of  its
historic  importance  (see  gg  23,  25  ;  and  for  a  description
of  Philo's  Logos  the  careful  studies  of  Jean  ReVille,
Soulier,  Siegfried,  Anathon  Aall,  and  Grill).

The  term  '  son  of  God  '  (i>i6s  Oeov,  vibs  TOU  ffeov,  o  i'i6s

TOV  dfov)  or  'my  (sc. God's)  son'  (i>i6s  ,uoi>)  occurs  in

q qiu tne Synoptic  gospels  27  times,  and the

Synoptics.  ,term  ' the.  so"  '  (6  "[6s)  9  times' !t  wiu
be  convenient  to  record  the  occurrences

in  detail  and  to  classify  them.

i.  '  Son  of  God  '  or  '  my  (God's)  son  ' : — 27  times.

a.  Enumeration.

Mt.  3  17  436  69  1433  16  16  17  5  2t> 63  2740  43  54  = n  times.
Mk.  1 1  ii  3  ii  5  7  97  146i  1639  = 7 ,,

Lk.  132  35  822  38  4  3  9  828  035  2270  = 9 ,,

/'. Analysis.

i. In  three  Gospels  : — 3  times.
Mt.  3 1 7  =  Mk.  1 1 1  =  Lk.  3  22  :  baptism.
Mt.  17s  =  Mk.  97  =  Lk.  935:  transfiguration.
Mt.  2063  =  Mk.  146i  =  Lk.  22  70  :  trial.

ii. In  two  Gospels  :  4  times.
Mt.  27s4  =  Mk.  15 39  (centurion) = once.
Mk.  67  =  Lk.  828  (demon)  = once.

Mt.  43  =  Lk.  43  (temptation))
Mt.46=Lk.  49  „  )  = twlce"

iii. In  one  Gospel :— 10  times.

Mk.  Ii  (superscription),  3  n  (demon)  =  twice.

Mt.  69  (name  of  peacemakers),  14^3  (after
walk  on  the  sea),  Ifi  16  (Peter's  confession),
274o(at  the  cross),  2743  (alleged  quotation)  =  s  times.

Lk.  132  35  (annunciation),  838  (genealogy)  =  3  times.

2. '  The  son  '  (o  mo«)  alone  :  9  times.

a.  Enumeration.
Mt.  1127  (thrice)  24  36  28  19  = 5  times.

Mk.  1^32 = once.

Lk.  1022  (thrice)  = 3  times.

6.  Analysis.
The  three  in  Mt.  11  27  correspond  to  the  three  in

Lk.  1022  (hymn  of  Jesus)  = 6

Mk.  1832  is  equivalent  to  Mt.  2436  (not  even  the

son)  = 2

Mt.  2819  (baptismal  formula)  has  no  parallel = i

4695


SON  OF  GOD

It is not  sufficient,  however,  to  consider  the  texts  in
which  the  title  actually  occurs. Passages  throwing  light

10.  Principles  upon J65115.  concePtion  of  lhe  divine
nf  -_j4.;..j  fatherhood  in  general  and  man's  son-
oi  criticism. ,  .

ship  must  also  be  examined. Parables

in  which  the  term  'son'  might  be  regarded  as  referring
to  Jesus,  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  Whene\er
a  reputed  saying  of  Jesus  is  drawn  into  the  discussion,
it  must  be  tested  in  a  retranslation  into  the  Aramaic
dialect  spoken  by  Jesus ;  and  the  same  applies  to
utterances  concerning  him  by  persons  to  whom  this
Galilean  speech  was  the  vernacular.  The  differences
between  the  accounts  of  the  evangelists  must  be  ob
served.  It  is  not  permissible  to  leave  out  of  sight  the
peculiarities  of  the  evangelists,  or  the  influence  upon
their  minds  of  later  thought  and  a  growing  tradition.
It  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  the  fundamental  distinc
tion  between  the  Greek  words  ascribed  to  Jesus  which
we  possess,  and  the  Aramaic  sentences  he  spoke  which
we  can  only  surmise  ;  between  the  stories  told  for
religious  edification,  and  the  history  often  symbolised
rather  than  described  in  them.  Moreover,  the  condition
of  the  text  must  be  sedulously  watched.

In  a  number  of  passages  whose  substantial  genuine
ness  admits  of  little  doubt  Jesus  is  reported  as  having
used the term 'sons of God,' or an

11.  Ethical equivalent,  of  men  in  such  a  manner  as
significance  to jnip]y a certain moral likeness to

in  genuine God

Sayings  Of  Whilst  in  Mt.So  the  thought  may  con-
JeSUS.  ceivably  be  that  the  peace -makers  will  be
called  sons  of  God  because  they  will  be  deemed
worthy  of  a  share  in  the  resurrection  (Lk.  20  36  and  cp  §  7),  more
probably  the  idea  is  that  when  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be
established  on  earth,  as  it  soon  will  be,  they  will  be  recognised
by  virtue  of  their  spiritual  kinship  to  God  as  his  true  sons.
This  is  manifestly  the  case  in  Mt.  645,  where  sonship  is  based
on  an  impartial  and  forgiving  spirit  like  God's.  Whether  Jesus
said  '  sons  of  your  father  who  is  in  heaven  '  or  '  sons  of  the  Most
High,'  as  in  the  parallel  passage  in  Lk.  1)35.  is  doubtful.  Most
probably  he  said  'sons  of  the  father  who  is  in  heaven.'  This  is
suggested  by  a  comparison  of  Mt.  6  ii  (6  Trarijp  v^tav  6  tv  TOI?
ovpavotf)  with  Lk.  11  13  (6  iraTrjp  6  tf  oi'iparoO,  where,  however,
Sin.  Syr.  seems  to  read  'the  father  that  is  in  heaven').  Mt.
apparently  had  a  preference  for  the  pronominal  additions.  But
whether  N^N  or  p312N  was  originally  used,  it  is  significant  that
Jesus  did  not  limit  the  divine  paternity  and  did  not  exclude  from
sonship  those  who  were  '  themselves  evil.'  The  same  is  strongly
indicated  also  in  the  parables  of  the  lost  son  (Lk.  15  n_^)  and
the  two  sons  (Mt.  21  28^.),  which  teach  that  man  even  when  he
errs  does  not  cease  to  be  the  .son  of  God  and  the  object  of  his
fatherly  affection.  In  Mt.  23syT  Jesus  is  speaking  to  the  crowds
as  well  as  to  his  disciples,  warning  them  not  to  call  men  Rabbi,
Abba,  and  Moreh,  '  for  one  is  your  master,'  '  one  is  your  father,
'one  is  your  teacher,'  the  reference  being  everywhere  to  God
(see  Kohler,  JQ R  13  567^).  On  the  other  hand,  in  Mt.  10  20  ig
and  Lk.  1232  the  disciples  are  addressed,  and  those  to  whom
the  kingdom  will  be  given  are  clearly  distinguished  by  their
character  from  the  rest  of  the  people.  Even  more  manifest  is
this  distinction  in  Mt.  17  2.^ff.  As  kings  on  earth  demand
tribute  not  of  their  sons  but  only  of  strangers,  so  the  heavenly
king  does  not  impose  taxes  en  his  sons.  Those  who  think  of
God  as  taxing  them  for  the  support  of  the  temple-cult  are  in
reality  strangers  to  him  ;  the  relations  of  sons  to  the  heavenly
father  nre  characterised  by  freedom.  In  view  of  such  a  pro
foundly  ethical  conception  of  sonship  and  Jesus'  attitude  in
general,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  in  the  historical  accuracy  of  his
refusal  to  work  a  miracle  for  a  Phoenician  woman  on  the  ground
alleged  (Mt.  15  21-28  Mk.  7  27-30).

The  synoptic  tradition  records  no  utterance  of  Jesus
in  which  he  distinctly  refers  to  himself  as  a  '  son  of  God. '
In  Mt.  2743  it  is  indeed  said  that
mocking  high  priests,  scribes,  and
elders  quoted  him  as  having  said  :  '  I  •
am  a  son  of  God. '  The  only  ground
for  such  an  assertion  would  be  Jesus'  answer  to  the  high
priest's  question  (Mt.  2667).  But  see  §  20  and  SON  OF
MAN,  §  37  (end).  The  taunt  seems  to  have  l>een  made
up  of  phrases  from  Wisdom  2 16-18  (see  Brandt,  209).
Of  more  importance  would  be  the  distinction  between
'  my  father '  and  '  your  father, '  if  this  could  be  traced
back  to  Jesus  himself.

The  Gk.  text  of  Mt.  gives  the  impression  that  Jesus  said  '  my
father'  when  speaking  of  his  own  God  or  to  him,  whilst  he  said
'  your  father  '  when  referring  to  the  God  of  his  disciples  or  the

4696


12.  Jesus'  self-
consciousness
as  a  son  01  uoa.


SON  OF  GOD


SON  OP  GOD


people,  and  that  he  taught  his  disciples  to  say  'our  father,"  but
did  not  use  this  expression  himself.  Already  a  comparison

with  the  synoptic  parallels  in  which  the  possessive  pronouns  are
lacking  tends  to  raise  doubts  as  to  the  integrity  of  the  text.
The  prayer  Jesus  taught  his  disciples  begins  in  Lk.  11  2  with
'  Father '  (n-arep) ;  and  textual  criticism  renders  the  originality
of  the  pronoun  in  many  instances  quite  uncertain.  When,
furthermore,  the  attempt  is  made  to  recover  the  actual  Aramaic
words  used  by  Jesus,  the  fact  comes  to  view  that  in  practically
all  cases  the  original  is  likely  to  have  been  simply  Abba  (N;IN).
Where  the  Gk.  fit.  had  irare'p  IJ-ov  or  6  iranjp  pov,  Evang.  Hicr.
has  simply  Abba-  in  the  extant  passages,  Mt.  1032^  10  16
18101935  2639;  and  the  same  is  true  of  Lk.  249  1022  etc.
If  this  version  is  made  from  the  Greek  without  the  aid  of  an
Aramaic  translation,  only  a  strongly  entrenched  usage  can
account  for  the  suppression  of  the  possessive.  If,  as  seems
probable,  an  earlier  Aramaic  gospel  was  consulted  in  the  trans
lation,  the  testimony  is  doubly  significant.  It  is  confirmed  by
other  remains  of  Palestinian  Aramaic.

Jesus  almost  certainly  said  only  Abba  in  his  own
prayers  as  well  as  in  the  prayer  he  taught,  and  Abba
dl  bashtmayyd,  'the  father  who  is  in  heaven,'  in  re
ferring  to  God.  This  conclusion  is  not  merely  of
negative  value.  Positively,  it  indicates  an  exceedingly
keen  sense  of  the  fatherhood  of  God  creating  a  true
filial  attitude  and  a  gentle  feeling  of  brotherliness  toward
men.  Into  the  innermost  recesses  of  his  spirit  we  can
not  penetrate.  Even  if  our  sources  were  more  fruitful
and  less  heavily  overlaid  by  tradition  than  they  are,
there  would  still  remain  the  unfathomed  depth  of  an
experience  colouring  every  characteristic  thought  and
deed,  the  indefinable  quality  of  a  rich  inner  life,  the
mystery  of  a  great  and  fruitful  genius.  But  we  are  able
to  draw  certain  inferences  from  the  fact  that  the  highest
moral  and  religious  conceptions  of  sonship  ascribed  to
him  find  expression  in  utterances  in  which  he  either
speaks  of  men  in  general  (Mt.  694548),  or  includes
himself  with  others  (Mt.l72s^  Mk.  835).  Whilst  he
may  have  avoided  such  a  statement  as  '  I  am  a  son  of
God,'  because  bar  glahd  might  have  suggested  an  angel,
a  translated  being  like  Elijah,  or  a  king,  it  is  possible,
therefore,  that  the  real  reason  was  his  fear  lest  he  be
misunderstood  as  claiming  for  himself  alone  that  relation
to  the  Father  into  which  his  own  experience  made  him
so  desirous  that  all  men  should  enter.

How  well founded such  apprehensions  would  have

been  maybe  seen  from Mt.  1125^  (Lk.  102i  f.)  24s6

„  (Mk.  1832) 2819 and also from  Mt.

FathJrTnd 2l33'46 <Mk'  121"2 Lk"  2°9-9) 222
Son  (Lk.  14i6). In the first of these

passages  the  gradual  growth  of  a
logion  may  be  observed.  The  text  presented  by  our
MSS  with  minor  variations  between  Mt.  and  Lk.  already
occurs  sporadically  in  the  second  century  (present  tense
Justin,  c.  Tryph.  100,  '  knowledge  of  the  Son  first '  ;
Iren.iv.6x,  Clem.  Recog.l^}.  Older  than  this,  how
ever,  as  modern  critics  generally  recognise,  is  the  text
found  in  Justin,  Apol.\f>-$;  Clem.  Horn.  174  1841320;
Marcosians  in  Iren.  i.  203;  Marcion  in  Tert.  c.  Marc.
227  ;  Iren.  ii.  61  iv.  63  ;  Clem. Alex.  Strom.  718109  etc.,
which  reads,  with  unimportant  variations,  KCU  oi'Scts
Hyvw  TOV  Trarepa  el  [J.r)  6  vibs  KCU  (ovde)  rbv  vibv  (TIS
yiviaffKfi)  ft  (ATI  6  TTO.TTJP  Kol  ofs  (/£)  &i>  b  vlbs  diroKa\v\^rj
(jSoi'Xijrcu  diroKa\i'i\^ai).  The  principal  differences  are
that  eyvw  occurs  in  place  of  -yti/w<r/c«,  that  the  sentence
'  no  one  knew  the  Father  except  the  Son  '  precedes  '  nor
any  one  the  Son  except  the  Father,'  and  that  as  a  con
sequence  it  is  the  son  instead  of  the  father  that  reveals
the  son.  Schmiedel  (Prot.  Alonatshefte,  1900,  p.  if.)
regards  this  as  an  original  utterance  of  Jesus  and  under
stands  the  aorist  to  intimate  that  there  was  a  time  when
Jesus  discovered  that  God  was  a  father,  a  thought  that
until  then  had  not  been  present  to  his  mind.  Accord
ing  to  this  critic,  the  men  who  once  believed  in  the
fatherhood  of  God  were  all  dead,  and  among  Jesus'
contemporaries  no  man  recognised  God  as  a  father.
Having  become  a  '  son '  by  the  discovery,  he  naturally
looked  upon  himself  as  '  the  Son '  as  long  as  he  re
mained  alone  with  his  conviction  that  God  was  a  father.
But  already  Ewald  (JEW,  1855,  p.  160)  pointed  out

4697


that  the  difference  between  eyvu  and  yivdxrKei.  would  not
appear  in  the  Heb.  yada ,  and  Dalman  (233)  rightly
insists  that  in  the  unvocalised  Aramaic  text  the  parti
ciple  yadd  and  perfect  ytdd  could  not  be  distinguished.
This  difficulty  would  indeed  be  obviated  if  a  derivative
of  -i33  is  supposed  to  have  been  used  in  the  original
(Evang.  Hier.  has  -03  in  Mt. )  ;  but  even  so  (aphel
perf. )  this  verb  would  scarcely  have  necessitated  an  aorist
rather  than  a  present  tense.  Klopper  (ZIl'T/i.,  1896,
pp.  501^)  and  Dalman  strongly  urge  the  improbability
of  the  revelation  of  the  son  through  the  son.  Yet  only
the  son's  knowledge  of  the  father  follows  naturally  the
transmission  of  all  knowledge  to  the  son.  The  rather
irrelevant  statement  that  '  no  one  knows  the  son  except
the  father,'  has  the  appearance  of  being  a  gloss  drifting
into  different  places.  If  it  is  removed,  the  connection
is  greatly  improved  :  '  All  things  (that  are  hidden  from
the  wise  and  disclosed  to  babes)  have  been  transmitted
(Evang.  Hicr.  noDnx)  to  me  by  the  Father,  and  no  one
knows  the  Father  except  the  son  and  he  to  whom  the
son  is  willing  to  make  a  revelation.'  It  is  difficult,
however,  to  see  how  even  such  an  utterance  could  have
come  from  the  lips  of  Jesus.  The  alleged  return  of
seventy  disciples  from  a  journey  during  which  they  had
been  engaged  in  exorcising  demons  does  not  furnish  a
natural  occasion  for  such  a  comment  as  this  (see  Bruno
Bauer,  Kritik  der  Ev.-gesch.  [1891]  2s66j^).  That
Jesus  should  have  thought  of  himself  as  possessed  of
all  knowledge  and  regarded  all  other  men  as  ignorant
of  God  is  scarcely  conceivable.  Long  usage  had
rendered  the  term  '  father '  as  a  designation  of  God
quite  familiar  to  the  contemporaries  of  Jesus,  and  piety
had  invested  the  name  with  deep  spiritual  significance
(see  §  4).  But  the  abbreviated  title  '  the  son  '  would
probably  have  been  as  unintelligible  to  the  Jews  of
Jesus'  time  as  it  was  well  understood  by  the  Christians
of  the  second  century.  Ptieiclerer  (Urchristenthum,
445  ff.  509/1 )  recognises  the  influence  of  Pauline  ideas,
and  Brandt  (pp.  561,  576)  considers  Mt.  1125-30  to  be
a  hymn  regularly  constructed  of  material  largely  bor
rowed  from  Ecclus.  51.  Neither  of  these  views  is  per
haps  capable  of  strict  demonstration.  But  the  underlying
conviction  that  this  cannot  be  a  genuine  saying  of  Jesus
is  as  irresistible  as  the  evidence  of  its  gradual  growth  is
conclusive.

In  Mt.  24s6  (Mk.  1832)  the  clause  '  neither  the  Son  '
(ovde  o  vibs)  is  lacking  in  many  MSS,  and  (among  other

.  ~  ,  ancient  witnesses)  in  the  Syr. -Sin.  Most
modern  scholars  reject  it.  Scholten


limited


knowledge (Het  oudste  Evang.  227)  maintained  that
°  '  it  was  also  lacking  in  the  original  Mk.
Dalman  (159)  thinks  that  the  original  text  was  '  not  even
the  angels,'  and  that  'not  even  the  son  but  the  father
only  '  is  a  later  addition.

Schmiedel  (I.e.  20)  also  regards  the  words  in  Mt.  as  spurious,
but  considers  those  in  Mk.  as  genuine  because  they  cannot  have
been  engendered  by  reverence  for  Jesus,  a  motive  that  led  the
editor  of  Mt.  to  omit  them  in  copying  his  source.  It  is  not
apparent  why  the  supposed  original  copyist  should  have  been
more  sensitive  on  this  point  than  the  later  interpolator  of  Mt.
In  the  first  half  of  the  second  century  it  is  not  likely  that  any
Christian  was  offended  by  the  subordination  of  the  Son  or  his
limited  knowledge  (Scholten,  I.e.).  Only  the  rising  estimate  of
Jesus  can  account  for  the  place  of  the  Son  between  the  angels
and  the  Father,  for  the  emphasis  upon  the  fact  that  even  he  did
not  know  the  day  and  the  hour,  and  for  the  use  of  the  abbrevi
ated  title.  Mk.  1832  seems  to  have  been  added  to  the  Apoca
lypse  of  Jesus  to  explain  either  the  absence  of  a  sufficiently
exact  date  or  the  delay  in  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.

The  third  passage  in  which  '  the  Son '  occurs  is  Mt.

28 19. That  the  trinitarian  baptismal  formula  does  not

_ . . .  go  back  to  Jesus  himself  is  evident  and

IB.  Baptismal  recognised  by  all independent  critics.

rmu  a. ^cts  and  ^  j?pjsties  snow  that  other

formulas  were  used  but  not  this  one,  that  the  apostles

did  not  feel  warranted  to  preach  to  the  heathen  without

a  special  revelation, and  that  the  early  church  never

referred to  this commandment. The fact that it is

ascribed to  Jesus  after  his death  is  also significant ;


SON  OF  GOD

Conybeare  (ZNTll',  1901,  pp.  275^  ;  Hibb.  Journ.
1,  1902,  pp.  102  ff.}  has  shown  that  there  was,  as  late
as  in  the  time  of  Eusebius,  an  earlier  text  which  read  :
llopfvOtvrts  fj.a.6'r}Ttv(ja.T€  irdvra.  TO.  tOvi]  fv  rif  6v6/j.a.ri
nov  '  Go  ye  and  make  disciples  of  all  nations  in  my
name,'  and  has  rendered  it  probable  that  the  expanded
form  originated  about  140  A.D.  in  the  Old  Latin  texts
of  Africa,  that  it  thence  crept  into  the  Greek  text  at
Rome,  and  finally  established  itself  in  the  East  during
the  Nicene  epoch  in  time  to  figure  in  all  surviving
Greek  codices.

How  Jesus  understood  his  peculiar  relation  as  a  son

may,  according  to  Dalman  (230),  be  seen  very  clearly

...  -from Mt.  21  33-46 (Mk.  12 1-12 Lk.

t'  Avjleg°ry  01  209-19). He  "regarded  himself  as  the
husbandmen.  be]oved  son or*  as  Gen  2.,2  0  and

Trg.  suggests,  'the  only  begotten  son,'  entitled  to  the
empire  of  the  world,  but  destined  to  be  put  to  death.
On  the  other  hand,  Jiilicher  (Gleichnisreden  Ji-su,
1899,  pp.  385^)  after  a  most  searching  examination
of  these  texts  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  story  of
the  wicked  husbandmen  is  not  a  parable  describing
something  that  might  have  happened  in  real  life,  but
an  allegory,  and  that  it  is  in  no  sense  an  utterance  of
Jesus,  but  the  work  of  early  Christian  theology.  The
justice  of  this  verdict  is  appreciated  when  the  marked
contrast  to  all  genuine  parables,  the  lack  of  verisimili
tude,  the  assumptions  contrary  to  fact,  and  the  charges
based  upon  future  conduct  are  duly  noticed.  In  regard
to  Mt.  22 2,  where  the  king  makes  a  marriage  feast  for
his  son,  Dalman  rightly  calls  attention  to  the  absence
of  the  son  during  the  meal,  and  the  fact  that  in  the
parallel  (Lk.  14i6)  there  is  no  mention  of  the  son.

According  to  Lk.  13235,  the  angel  Gabriel  announced
to  Mary  that  the  child  she  was  to  bear  would  be  called
'  the  Son  of  the  Most  High,'  or  '  the
Son  of  God,'  because  the  Holy  Ghost
would  come  upon  her.  Divine  sonship
is  here  made  dependent  upon  physical
generation.  Jesus  will  be  called  Son
of  God  because  he  is  to  have  no  human  father.  This
mythical  conception  which  was  widely  prevalent  in
antiquity  (see  §§  2,  5)  seems  to  belong  to  a  late  stratum
(cp  Conybeare,  Z.V'f'll',  1902,  pp.  192^)  and  is  of
Gentile-Christian  origin  (cp  Hillmann,  JI'T,  1891,  pp.
231^).  Older  than  it,  is  the  idea  that  the  Son  of  God
was  born  as  such  at  the  baptism.  Between  the  reports
of  the  heavenly  proclamation  on  this  occasion  in  the
synoptics  there  are  important  differences.  Whilst  Mt.
817  reads  '  This  is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well
pleased,'  Mk.  In  and  Lk.  822  have  'Thou  art  my
beloved  son,  in  thee  I  am  well  pleased.'  It  is  possible,
however,  that  Dab  c  ff-* 'I  and  a  large  number  of
patristic  quotations  have  preserved  a  more  original
reading  in  Lk.  822 — viz.,  uios  fj.ov  ei  av'  tyu>  ffrifJ-epov
yeytvvrjKa,  ere,  '  Thou  art  my  son,  to-day  I  have
begotten  thee.'  The  generation  of  the  Son  of  God  is
in  this  case  accomplished  by  the  entrance  of  the  Holy
Ghost  as  a  dove.  This  earlier  myth  seems  to  have
been  supplanted  by  that  of  the  Virgin  birth.  The
announcement  of  the  heavenly  voice  at  the  transfigura
tion  (Mt.  17s  Mk.  9?  Lk.  935)  was  then  transferred  to
the  baptism.  (Cp  Holtzmann,  Die  Synoptiker,^  85.)

The  early  church  was  convinced  that  not  only
heaven  but  also  hell  knew  the  secret  of  Jesus'  divine

18 Prorlama sollsh'P- Demons repeatedly pro-
rociama claimed  him  the  Son  of  God Mk  3ll

tion  by  57  (Lk.  828;  cp  also  Mk.  127);  and
emons.  gatan  himself  used  his  knowledge  of
this  fact  to  lead  him  into  temptation  (Mt.  436  ;  cp  Lk.
439).  To  accept  the  opinion  of  the  evangelists  as  to
the  supernatural  knowledge  and  activity  of  demons  is
no  longer  possible.

It  is  assumed  by  many  critics  that  the  demoniacs  actually
spoke  such  words  as  are  ascribed  to  them,  and  that  they  them
selves,  as  well  as  their  reporters,  were  only  mistaken  in  their
interpretation  of  mental  and  nervous  disorders.  Being  thrown

4609


17.  Procla
mation  by
heavenly
voices.


SON  OF  GOD

into  great  excitement  by  the  extraordinary  impression  of  Jesus'
personality,  these  sufferers  gave  voice  to  their  own  or  the  general
feeling  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah.  But  on  this  theory  it
cannot  be  explained  why  men  excited  to  madness  by  the  political
situation  should  have  avoided  the  one  unmistakable  Messianic
title,  '  Son  of  David,'  and  employed  a  term  that  cannot  be  proved
to  have  been  then  used,  nor  why,  of  all  men,  only  the  demoniacs
should  proclaim  him  as  the  'Son  of  God.'  As  it  is  especially
Mk.  who  emphasizes  this  testimony  of  the  demons,  it  is  natural
to  see  in  it  a  phase  of  his  general  conception  of  Jesus'  life  and
character.  He  had  to  reckon  with  a  strongly  entrenched
tradition  to  the  effect  that  Jesus  had  not  proclaimed  himself  as
the  Messiah.  From  the  premises  of  his  Christian  faith  he  could
only  conclude  that  Jesus  had  then  concealed  his  Messiah-hip
and  the  divine  nature  which  he  associated  with  it.  Such  a  fact
might  be  hidden  from  men,  but  not  from  demons.  They  must
have  known,  in  spite  of  his  disguise,  the  divine  Son  by  whom
they  were  to  be  judged.  It  is  particularly  the  merit  of  Wrede
(f)as  Messiasge/teimniss,  1901,  pp.  737^.)  to  have  called  attention
to  this  aspect  of  the  case.  The  story  of  the  temptation

should  be  considered  from  the  same  point  of  view.  [Cp  TEMP
TATION,  §§4-6.]

As  no  objective  reality  can  be  ascribed  to  these  voices
from  the  world  of  evil  spirits,  it  is  idle  to  inquire  whether
in  their  reported  utterances  '  Son  of  God '  corresponds
to  an  Aramaic  bar  lldhd,  bar  'elyon,  b'reh  d'fldhd,  and
what  meanings  each  of  these  forms  may  have  conveyed.

The  same  conception  that  Jesus'  divine  sonship  can-
19  P  t  '  e  not  ^e  knovvn  by  men  except  by  a  special
-  .  revelation  from  another  world  is  found  in
°n-  Mt.  16 17.  Of  such  a  revelation  there  is
no  hint  in  the  accounts  of  Peter's  confession  at
Cnesarea  Philippi  given  by  Mk.  (827-33)  and  Lk.
(9  18-22).  But  neither  of  these  evangelists  puts  the  title
'  Son  of  God  '  upon  the  lips  of  Peter.  Mk.  has  simply
6  xptcrrjs,  Lk.  6  xPtffl~bs  T°v  Otov',  the  latter  probably
goes  back  to  mfsihd  dt-yahwe,  cp  i  S.  24?  Trg.,  and
Ps.  Sol.  187  xpi<rrfo  Kvpiov,  and  originally  1732,  and
not  to  a  mis  i ha  d' 2 Id/id  not  found  elsewhere.  It  is
more  likely  that  Peter  used  this  longer  form  than  the
shorter  one  in  Mk.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt
either  the  question  or  the  answer  in  the  form  preserved
by  Mk.  and  Lk.  Before  carrying  out  his  plan  of
proclaiming  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  Jerusalem,  Jesus
would  naturally  desire  to  know  the  attitude  of  the
people.  If  Peter's  description  gave  him  some  assurance
that  there  was  no  immediate  danger  in  that  direction,
the  views  as  to  his  personality  cherished  by  his  disciples
seem  to  have  made  him  all  the  more  apprehensive,  and
caused  him  most  earnestly  to  forbid  them  to  make  any
such  statement  concerning  him.

It  has  long  been  recognised  that  Mt.  1(5 17-19  is  a  late  interpo
lation.  It  may  already  reveal  the  pretensions  of  the  Roman
bishop  (Wernle,  Syn.  /''rage,  192),  and  has  been  more  correctly
interpreted  by  Catholic  exegetes  than  by  Protestants  (Bauer,
Kritik,'A6).  But,  apart  from  the  macarism,  the  text  of  Mt.
has  been  interpolated  (cp  Holtzmann,  Syn.&\  257)  by  the  addition
of  the  two  terms  '  son  of  Man  '(see  SON  OF  MAN,  §  39)  and  '  son
of  the  living  God'  (cp  Hosea'Ji,  (P  uioi  <?eou  <Ju>rros).  Van
Manen  (T/i.T,  1894,  p.  184)  is  probably  right  in  thinking  that
'  Son  of  God'  is  not  here  a  designation  of  the  theocratic  king,
but  to  be  taken  in  a  metaphysical  sense.  But  to  the  interpolator
6  xpioros  was  no  longer  a  mere  equivalent  of  '  the  Messiah  '  ;  it
had  no  doubt  already  assumed  the  same  significance  as  the  '  Son
of  God.'

According  to  Mt.  2663  the  high  priest  said  '  I  adjure

thee  by  the  living  God  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be

„. , the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  '  ;  in  Mk.  14  61

20.  Hign he  simply  asks 'Art  thou  the  Christ  the

Son  of  the  Blessed  ?  '  and  in  Lk.  22  67  the
adjuration.  elders  of  the  peop]e  say  .  If  thou  art  the

Christ  tell  us,'  and  only  after  the  reference  to  the  Son
of  Man,  'Art  thou  then  the  Son  of  God?'  v.  70.  It
is  evident  that  according  to  Christian  tradition  Jesus
was  asked  by  the  priests  whether  he  regarded  himself
as  the  Messiah,  and  that  the  particular  form  of  the
question  shaped  itself  freely.  In  Mt.  and  Lk.  Jesus
does  not  commit  himself;  Mt.  2664  reports  only  the
brief  2i>  efiras, '  Thou  sayest  so,'  Lk.  2270  his  reason  for
not  answering  as  well  as  his  rejoinder,  '  You  say  that  I
am.'  On  the  meaning  of  2i>  efiras  see  Thayer,  JBL
1840-49;  Merx,  Die  vier  kan.  Rv.  2384.  These  gospels
represent  a  tradition  according  to  which  Jesus  main
tained  his  incognito  before  the  priests  as  well  as  before

4700


SON  OF  GOD


SON  OF  GOD


Pilate.  The  apparently  earlier  form  of  the  narrative
preserved  in  Lk.  makes  no  mention  of  false  witnesses,
blasphemy,  a  formal  sentence  to  death,  and  personal
indignities,  but  tells  of  two  false  charges  brought  against
Jesus  by  the  priests  before  Pilate — viz.,  his  forbidding  to
give  tribute  to  Caesar  and  his  declaring  that  he  himself
is  the  Christ,  an  anointed  king.  Mk.  has  all  the  addi
tions  of  Mt.  and,  besides,  takes  the  important  step  of
changing  2i>  eiVcty  into  '£701  eifu  '  I  am.'  What  took
place  in  the  pontifical  residence  to  which  Jesus  had  been
carried  was  probably  as  little  known  to  his  disciples  as
to  us.  (See  Brandt,  53  J?. ;  We.  Skissen,  6  [1899]
207;  cp  SIMON  PETER,  §  15.)  At  the  time  when
these  accounts  were  elaborated,  '  Son  of  Man,'
'  Christ,'  and  'Son  of  God'  had  become  synonymous,
and  'Son  of  God'  was  understood  as  'God,'  so
that  the  blasphemy  of  making  oneself  equal  with  God
could  be  conceived  of  as  a  charge  brought  against
Jesus.  The  '  Son  of  God  '  in  Mt.  27  40  is  lacking  in  the
parallel  passage  Mk.  ISzg/. ,  and  the  utterance  is  based
on  Mt.  266i  (Mk.  14s8),  having  no  more  historic  value
than  these  improbable  testimonies.

In  utter  amazement  at  the  miracles  that  accompanied

_ —  , the  death  of  Jesus,  the  centurion  cried

urion  s  ,  Of  a  tmh  t,-iis  js  the  Son  Qf  God  .  (or

exclamation. .  (he  gon  of  a  god.}i Mt  ^ ^  (Mk

1539).  AS  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  great
darkness,  the  earthquake,  the  rending  of  the  veil  in  the
temple,  and  the  rising  of  the  dead  from  their  tombs
actually  occurred  [cp  EARTHQUAKE,  §  2],  the  occasion
for  such  an  exclamation  did  not  exist.  Of  these  miracles
Mk.  mentions  only  the  rending  of  the  veil.  Since  the
centurion  could  not  have  seen  this,  even  if  it  happened,
his  astonishment  is  left  without  a  cause.  If  Mk.  had
thought  that  the  centurion  became  convinced  of  the
divinity  of  Jesus  by  the  fact  that  he  died  somewhat
earlier  than  expected,  uttering  a  loud  cry,  he  would
scarcely  have  introduced  the  statement  as  to  the  veil.
By  his  tendency  to  shorten  the  accounts  that  he  copied,
he  has  here,  as  elsewhere,  rendered  his  own  incongruous.
Both  Mt.  and  Mk.  no  doubt  thought  of  '  Son  of  God  '
in  a  Christian  sense.  While  it  is  quite  doubtful  whether
any  of  the  evangelists  found  the  loud  cry  significant,  it
is  possible  that  a  centurion  accustomed  to  such  sights
saw  in  the  relatively  speedy  release  from  suffering  an
evidence  that  this  political  criminal  was  indeed  a
righteous  man  (Lk.  2847),  though  Lk.  thought  of  the
miracles  as  occasioning  this  judgment.

A  critical  study  of  the  synoptic  material  leads  inevit
ably  to  the  conclusion  that  Jesus  never  called  himself
„„ _ . . - '  the Son of God,' and never was

*<*i?r addressed  by  that  title. That  he  was
title  in  ,  .  , ,

~  proclaimed as such by voices from

Synoptics. ,  ,  , ,,  •

heaven  and  hell  is  a  notion  consonant

with  the  ideas  of  the  time,  but  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to
command  belief  at  present.  But  this  negative  result
raises  a  question  concerning  the  origin  of  the  term  '  Son
of  God. '  Sanclay  regards  it  as  certain  that  it  was  applied
to  Jesus  in  i  Thess.  1 10,  '  23  years  after  the  ascension,'
and  thinks  it  '  easier  and  more  critical '  to  see  in  the
expression  a  continuation  of  Jesus'  own  teaching  than
to  look  for  its  explanation  in  other  directions.  But
apart  from  the  impossibility  of  proving  that  the  epistle
quoted  was  written  '23  years  after  the  ascension,'  by
pointing  to  the  Pauline  literature  Sanday  has  himself
drawn  -the  attention  away  from  the  line  of  direct  trans
mission  of  the  thoughts  and  words  of  Jesus.  It  is  indeed
in  Hellenistic  circles  that  the  title  as  we  find  it  applied
to  Jesus  is  likely  to  have  originated.  There  is  a  possi
bility  (see  §  6)  that  in  some  circles  the  intensified  study
of  '  Messianic  '  prophecies  during  the  first  century  A.  D.
caused  the  term  bar  ttaha  to  be  used  as  a  title  of  the
Messiah.  Wernle  (Anfange  uns.  Rel.  295)  goes  too  far
when  he  asserts  that  no  road  leads  from  the  OT  and
Rabbinism  to  the  doctrine  of  the  deity  of  Christ,  as
Sanday  rightly  maintains.  In  Hasmonaean  psalms

4701


'  gods '  and  '  sons  of  God '  are  still  synonyms  and,  in
language  tinged  with  apocalyptic  imagery,  the  reigning
kings  are  described  both  as  '  gods  '  and  as  '  sons  of  God.'
In  spite  of  practical  monotheism,  the  belief  in  the  exist
ence  of  gods  as  celestial  princes  or  as  demons  continued.
Such  a  phrase  as  '  sons  of  God '  because  sons  of  the  resur
rection  does  not  reflect  a  specifically  Christian  conscious
ness,  but  is  likely  to  go  back  to  '  Rabbinism,'  showing  its
conception  of  the  possibility  of  becoming  a  son  of  God  in
a  metaphysical  sense  through  a  resurrection.  Tendencies
in  the  direction  indicated  can  be  pointed  out,  and  are
natural  enough,  since  the  mental  habits  of  the  Aramaic-
speaking  Jew  cannot  have  been  so  radically  different  fr<  >ni
those  of  the  Greek- speaking  Jew.  Nevertheless  it  should
be  admitted  that  we  possess  no  direct  evidence  of  the  use
of  bar  tldhd  as  a  Messianic  title.  On  the  other  hand,
the  term  wds  deov  was  frequently  met  with  in  the  Grneco-
Roman  world  as  a  title  of  kings  and  a  designation  of
heroes  born  of  divine  fathers  or  translated  to  be  with
the  gods.  The  ideas  associated  with  #e6s  and  wds  6fov
flowed  into  each  other  and  had  a  metaphysical  rather
than  an  ethical  significance.  The  meaning  generally
given  to  the  term  in  the  empire  would  unconsciously
colour  the  thought  of  Hellenistic  Jews  when  they  found
it  employed  in  the  Greek  version  of  their  Scriptures  in
what  they  took  to  be  predictions  of  the  Messiah.  The
titles  vibs  deov,  Ki/pios,  and  2coT?)p  would  certainly  apply
as  well  to  the  coming  king  of  Israel  as  to  the  Roman
Emperor.  So  far  Jewish  thought  might  certainly  have
gone,  though  it  cannot  be  strictly  proved  that  it  went.
It  is  not  necessary  to  go  outside  the  boundaries  of
Jewish  thought,  influenced  by  Greek  speculation,  for  the
ideas  of  an  elevation  into  the  sphere  of  divine  life,
through  resurrection  and  ascension,  the  victory  over
demons  knowing  the  secrets  of  another  world,  and  even
the  birth  of  a  hero  without  a  human  father,  as  Philo
shows.  In  the  present  state  of  NT  criticism  it  is  not
possible  to  date  with  accuracy  the  appearance  of  one  or
another  of  these  ideas  in  Christian  literature  ;  but  it
may.  perhaps,  safely  be  assumed  that  they  had  all
found  expression  by  the  beginning  of  the  second  century.

In  Jn.  'Son  of  God'  (d  wds  TOV  deov)  occurs  ten  times,
23  Use  of  t'tl  ant^  '  l^e  ^°n  f°urteen  times.  As  in

'in  Fourth  t!le  case  °f  the  Synoptists  it  will  be
_,  .  convenient  to  give  the  details.

i.  'Son  of  God':  10  times.

134:  testimony  of  John.  1036:  OT  precedent.

1  50:  Nathanael's  confession. 11  4  :  glorified  through  Lazarus.

3  is  :  belief  in  him.  l\  2-j  :  Martha's  confession.

625  :  dead  hearing  his  voice. 1S>7  :  making  himself  God'sequal.

669:  Peter's  confession.  2031:  purpose  of  book.

Jn  3  16  '  the  only  begotten  son  '  occurs,  and  in  17  n  '  thy  son.'

2. '  The  Son  ' :  14  times.

3  17  35  36  520  21  22  iis  23  26  640  835  36  14  13  17  i.

In  1  18  the  true  reading  seems  to  be  fiovoyfvris  6f6s,  in  9  35  roi-
vCov  TOV  ai'dptunov  ',  in  1  34  the  text  is  uncertain,  Syr.  sin.  cur.
reading  '  the  chosen  one  of  God.'

It  is  important  to  observe  that  6  uios  TOV  0eov  is  used
by  John,  Nathanael,  Peter,  Martha,  and  the  evangelist
himself,  but  rarely  by  Jesus,  whilst  d  t'ioj  is  as  a  rule
employed  by  Jesus  alone.  In  the  ecclesiastical  circles
whose  christology  this  gospel  reflects,  the  longer  form,
usually  in  addition  to  d  xP'""7"6s,  was  evidently  used  in
public  confessions  of  faith,  and  the  shorter  form  had
already  come  into  vogue  in  theological  discussions.
To  this  evangelist  '  the  Son  '  was  a  divine  being  who
had  appeared  in  human  shape.  He  was  '  a  god  '
(0f6s  li),  'an  only-begotten  god'  (fj-ovoyevr/s  debs
1  18)  who  had  assumed  human  nature,  had  become
flesh  (In).  He  was  the  Logos  of  whom  Philo  had
spoken  as  '  the  Son,'  the  medium  of  creation  and
redemption.  It  was  not  blasphemy  for  him  to  claim  a
title  felt  to  be  equivalent  to  'God,'  for  he  had  been
sent  from  heaven,  whilst  in  the  Scriptures  men  who  had
only  received  oracles  from  heaven  were  called  '  gods '
(1033^)  And  he  called  those  happy  whose  faith

4702


SON  OF  GOD


SON  OF  GOD


allowed  them  to  say  '  My  Lord  and  my  God  !  '  without
having  seen  the  evidences  of  his  resurrection  ('20  29).

It  is  no  longer  necessary  to  prove  that  the  words  put  upon  the
lips  of  Jesus  in  this  gospel  cannot  have  been  uttered  by  him.
Even  scholars  generally  distrustful  of  results  that  contravene
ecclesiastical  tradition  are  no  longer  willing  to  maintain  the
position  of  Schleiermacher  and  Neander,  but  freely  admit  '  in
this  collection  of  sayings  an  element  —  possibly  a  somewhat
considerable  element  —  that  represents  not  so  much  what  was
actually  spoken  as  enlargement  and  comment  embodying  the
experience  and  reflection  of  the  growing  church  '  (Sanday).
The  critical  estimate  gained  by  the  investigations  of  Bretsch-
neider,  Strauss,  Bruno  Bauer,  Schwegler,  Baur,  and  Zeller  was
in  the  main  so  sound  that  it  has  been  adopted,  even  after  the
severe  testing  by  Bleek,  Kwald,  and  Reuss,  with  modifications
that  do  not  essentially  affect  it,  not  only  by  Hilgenfeld,  Keim,
Volkmar,  Holtzmann,  Scholten,  Thoma,  1'fleiderer,  and  Albert
Reville,  but  also  by  Schurer,  Jiilicher,  and  substantially  Harnack,
whose  theory  of  authorship  and  interpolations  does  not  render  it
usable  as  a  source  for  the  history  of  Jesus  {Das  Wescn  des
Christenthitms,  p.  13  ET,  p.  igf.).  It  is  significant  that  the
most  recent  investigators,  Jean  Reville,  Kreyenbiihl,  Schmiedel,
and  Grill  agree  in  rejecting  the  Johannme  authorship,  the
authenticity  of  the  speeches,  and  the  various  partition-theories.
That  all  parts  of  the  book  reveal  the  influence  of  the  Philonian
Logos-idea  was  never  so  fully  demonstrated  as  by  Reville  and
Grill  ;  however  mistaken  his  theory  of  author>hip  may  be,
Kreyenbiihl  has  exhibited,  even  more  clearly  than  Baur,  the
gnostic  affinities  of  the  gospel  ;  Schmiedel  has  shown  convinc
ingly  how  essentially  correct  the  interpretation  of  the  external
evidence  by  the  Tubingen  school  was  ;  and  by  setting  Jn.'s
central  idea,  the  incarnation,  against  the  background  of  Oriental
speculation,  Grill  has  not  only  used  the  comparative  method
that  henceforth  must  find  a  wider  application  in  all  biblical
interpretation,  but  also  revealed  the  legitimacy  of  that  process
of  thought  which  led  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  the  Symbolutn
Nico-mon.

24  dR  PP ln  the  ePistolrlI7  literature  of  the  NT  the
a  a  itev. f0jjowmg  facts  are  noticeable.

'Son  of  God'  occurs  in  i  and  2  Jn. . . =13  times
'the  Son'  occurs  in  i  and  2  Jn. . . . = 6 ,,

Neither  occurs  in  —

(a)  Jas.  Jude  i  Pet.  3  Jn.  or  (except  in  an  allusion  to  the
transfiguration)  2  Pet.

(/>)  in  Phil.  Philem.  2  Thess.  i  Tim.  2  Tim.  and  Titus.

In  the  remaining  epistles  the  occurrences  are  :

i.  '  Son  of  God*

Rom.  1  3  4  9  5  10  83  29  32 .....=  7  times

Gal.  1  16  2  28  44  6 ....... =  4 ,,

i  Cor.  192  Cor.  1  19  Eph.  4  13  Col.  1  13  i  Thess.  1  10 =  5 ,,

Heb.  1  5  4  14  (>6  73  1029 ..... =  5 ,,

2. '  the  Son  '
i  Cor.  15  28 . . . . . . =  once

Heb.  1  28  36  58  728  ..... - 5  times

The  conception  in  the  Johannine  epistles  is  the  same  as  in  the
fourth  gospel.  Rom.  1  3  is  especially  important  as  showing

the  idea  of  divine  sonship  based  on  the  resurrection.  Connected
with  this  metaphysical  sense  of  the  term  is  the  conception  that
men  are  not  in  themselves  sons  of  God  but  may  become  such  by
endowment  with  divine  spirit,  86.  In  Gal.  1  16  the  mani

festation  of  the  risen  Son  of  God  is  described  as  an  inner  process.

In  Eph.  and  Col.,  which  show  the  influence  of  the  Logos
speculation,  the  Son  is  the  pre-existent  medium  of  creation  ;  the
phrase  'first-born  of  all  creation,'  Col.  1  15,  should  not  be  inter
preted  so  as  to  exclude  priority  (Sanday),  since  '  he  is  before  all
things,'  as  v.  17  shows.  The  closest  affinity  to  the  fourth

gospel  is  found  in  Heb.,  where  '  the  Son  '  is  an  essentially  divine
being,  subordinate  to  the  Most  High,  but  higher  than  'the
heavenly  man'  of  i  Cor.  lii.  Schenkel  finely  observed  the
embarrassment  the  author  felt  at  the  thought  of  this  being
learning  obedience  or  suffering  '  though  he  was  a  Son.'  The
Alexandrian  exegesis  of  chap.  1  shows  with  what  peculiar
material  the  road  from  the  OT  was  paved.

The  term  does  not  occur  in  Acts,  and  Sanday  rightly
decides  against  TTCUS  0eoB  being  interpreted  as  an
equivalent.  In  Rev.  2i8  the  Christ  is  called  '.Son  of
God.  '  The  strangely  composite  christology  of  this  book
may  be  connected  with  its  composite  authorship  and
the  transmission  of  its  text.

A  careful  examination  of  the  gospels  tends  to  produce

t'ie  conv'cl'on  tnat  Jesus  never  assumed
tjt]e  ,  Son  of  God  .  either  to  Designate

himself  as  the  expected  king  of  Israel  or
to intimnte  thru his  nature  was  unlike
that  of  other  men,  but  that  he  spoke  of  men  in  general


W  t '
25. Histori-

"-ti
Dl  title.


as  '  the  sons  of  God  '  and  of  God  as  their  father,  and
also  used  the  expression  as  a  mark  of  distinction  for
those  whose  character  resembled  God's,  who  by  their
filial  relation  were  freed  from  bondage  to  legal  enact
ments  concerning  the  cult,  whose  spirit  and  conduct
established  peace  in  the  world,  and  who  would  be
accounted  worthy  of  a  share  in  the  resurrection  from  the
dead.  From  a  modern  point  of  view  such  an  attitude
no  doubt  appears  ethically  more  valuable  than  the  loftiest
claim  of  kingship  or  of  godhood.  The  personality  which
historical  criticism  is  able  to  discover  behind  the  gospel
records  is  not  only  more  real  but  more  ideal  than  the
portrait  the  evangelists  produced.  Nevertheless  the
bestowal  upon  Jesus  of  a  title  he  did  not  claim  and
probably  could  not  have  understood  marked  a  step
forward.  When  he  was  lifted  up  from  earth  and  made
a  god,  he  drew  all  men  unto  himself.  For  him  they
abandoned  the  gods  of  their  fathers,  and  out  of  his  ful
ness  they  all  received  some  measure  of  grace  and  truth.
It  may  be  questioned  whether  without  this  deification  it
would  have  become  historically  possible  for  him  to
dispense  his  spiritual  gifts  through  the  ages.  It  was  far
easier  for  men  outside  of  Jewry  to  look  upon  the  bearer
to  them  of  such  treasures  of  life  as  a  god  than  as  a  mere
man  ;  and  even  Hellenistic  Jews  must  translate  his
personality  into  the  supernatural  to  derive  from  it  such
spiritual  benefits  as  their  education  had  prepared  them
to  receive.  There  is  an  element  of  truth  in  Wernle's
keen  observation  that  '  christological  dogma  did  not
arise  through  a  gradual  increase  but,  on  the  contrary,
through  Jewish  and  anti- gnostic  reduction  of  the
popular  faith'  (Anfiitige,  295).  It  was  after  all  the
true  humanity  of  the  Son  of  God  that  bore  off  the
victory  at  Nicaea.  But  it  should  not  be  denied  that
there  had  been  a  gradual  growth  into  that  well-balanced
conception  which,  it  would  seem,  was  best  adapted  to
guard  the  spiritual  interests  involved.  As  the  oecumenic
creeds  were  the  corollaries  of  that  conception  of  '  the
Son  of  God '  who  is  himself  '  God  '  which  conies  distinctly
to  view  in  the  fourth  gospel,  so  this  itself  is  the  product  of
a  long  development  of  thought  in  Israel  as  well  as  in
Greece,  and  among  the  Aryans  of  India  and  Persia.
The  contribution  of  Jesus  himself  to  this  development
was  the  indelible  impression  of  his  personality.  His
own  thought  was  too  grand  in  its  simplicity  for  the
world  to  appreciate.  That  it  means  more  to  be  a  child
of  God  in  the  sense  in  which  Jesus  used  the  term
than  to  be  the  Son  defined  by  the  Nicene  creed,  is  a
truth  still  hidden  from  many  who  are  wise  and  prudent.

The  title  has  been  discussed  with  more  or  less  fulness  in
numerous  commentaries,  OT  and  NT  theologies,  critiques

of  the  gospels,  and  lives  of  Jesus.  Among  the
26.  Literature,  latter  those  of  Strauss,  Neander,  Keim,  Hase,

Schenkel,  Beyschlag,  Weiss,  and  A.  Reville
should  be  mentioned.  The  following  works  deal  with  various
aspects  of  the  question.  Ilgen,  '  De  notione  tituli  filii  dei '  in
Paulus,  MciHorabilien,  7,  1795,  pp.  119-198  ;  Bertholdt,  Christo-
logia  Judceorum,  1811  ;  Colani,  Jesus  Christ  et  les  croyances
messianiques  de  son  temps,  1864  ;  Wittichen,  Die  Idee  Gottcs
als  des  }'atcrs,  1865  ;  Vernes,  Histoire  des  idees  messianiques,
1874  ;  Drummond,  The  Jewish  Messiah,  1877  ;  Schenkel,  article
'  Sohn  Gottes  '  in  Ribellexikon,  1875  ;  Stanton,  The  Jewish  and
the  Christian  Messiah,  1886;  Wendt,  Die  Lehre  Jesit,  1890;
Baldensperger,  Das  Selbstbfiintsstsein  Jesu,  1892  ;  Briggs,
The  Messiah  of  the  Gospels,  1807;  Paul,  I'orste/lungen  Tan
<*\Tessias,  1895  ;  Brandt,  F.vangelische  Geschichte,  1893  ;  Thoma,
Genesis  des  Johannes-Evangeli'unis,  1882;  Pfleiderer,  Vrchris-
tenthniii,  1887  ;  Jean  Reville,  Le  Quatrieme  Evangile,  1901  ;
Kreyenbiihl,  Das  Evangelism  der  H'ahrheit,  1900;  Grill,
Untersttchttngett  iiber  die  Entstehung  d.  vierten  Evangeliitms,
1902  ;  Holtzmann,  Neutestantentliche  Theohgie,  1897  ;  Schmie
del,  Prot.  Monatshefte,  1900,  p.  iff.',  Dalman,  Die  ll'orte  lesii,
1898  ;  Wrede,  Das  Messiasgehei»inis,  1901  :  Rose,  '  Fils  de
1'homme  et  fils  de  dieu '  in  Kevue  biblique,  1900,  pp.  169^;
Schmidt,  Son  of  Man  and  Sen  of  God  in  Modern  Theology  (in
press)  ;  Stevens,  The  Teaching  of  Jesus,  1901.  N.  S.


4703


4704


SON  OF  MAN


SON  OF  MAN


Synonym  of  '  man  '  (§  i).

Special  use  in  Ezekiel  (§  2).

Doubtful  meaning  in  Ta'iinTth,  65  b  (§  3).

Aramaic  usage  (§  4).

Analogies in Assyrian,  Ethiopic,  Arabic

(S  5)-

Dan.  7i3,  Enoch  37-71,  Ezra  8  3^  (§§6-8).
Rev.,  Epistles,  Acts  756  (§§  9-11).
Occurrence  in  Gospels  (§  12).
Renderings  in  Ancient  Versions  (§  13).
Patristic and Mediaeval interpretation

(S  14).

Resort  to  the  Hebrew  (§  15).
Substitute  for  personal  pronoun?  (§  16).
Ideal  man?(§  17).
Coming  man  ?  (S  18).
Current  Messianic  title  ?(§  19).


SON OF MAN

CONTENTS

Expression  of  peculiar  Messianic  con
sciousness?  (§  20).

Emphasis  on  lowliness  and  human  sym
pathy '(§21).

Modified  Messianic  title?  (§  22).

Mystifying  title?  (§  23).

Composite  idea  ?  (§  24).

Prophetic  title?  (§25).

Designation  of  Jesus'  own  ideal,  future
Messiahship,  or  indwelling  genius?  (§  26).

Designation  of 'kingdom  of  heaven?"  (§  27).

Creation  of  Evangelists  ?  (§  28).

Fresh  recourse  to  Aranjaic  (§  29).

Basis  in  generic  use  and  later  transforma
tion  (§  30).

Defence  of  this  theory  (§  31).

Partial  agreement  (§  32).

Objections  by  different  scholars  (§  33).


Schmiedel's  criticism  (§  34).

Value  of  philological  argument  (§  35).

Force  of  Greek  translation  (§  36).

Need  of  literary  criticism  (jj  37).

Genuine  sayings  during Galilean  period


Phrase  not  used  at  Cxsarea  Philippi  (§  39).
Basis  of  predictions  concerning  death  and

resurrection  (§  40).
Synoptic  Apocalypse  (§  41).
Gospel  according  to  Hebrews  (§  42).
Marcion's  Gospel  (§  43).
Use  of  term  by  Gnostics  (§  44).
Use  in  Fourth  Gospel  (§  45).
Effect  on  question  of  Jesus'  Messiahshin

(§  46).

Value  of  different  theories  (§  47).
Bibliography  (§  48).


The  expression  'Son  of  Man'  (beti  dddm)  is  in
Hebrew  literature  a  synonym  of  '  man. '  Apart  from
Ezekiel  and  Daniel  it  seems  to  be  used  exclusively  in
poetic  style.

ben-addm  (C'J.X  |3)  in  Nu.  53  19  Is.  51  12  56  2  Jer.  49  18  33  50  40

6143  Ps.  85  SO  is  1463  Job  16  21  256358,  probably  also  in  the

original  of  Ecclus.  1730  Judith  S  16  Test.  12Patr.

1.  Synonym  Joseph  2  ;  ben  enos(wx  p)  in  Ps.  144  3. The
Of  'man.' meaning  is  rendered  perfectly  clear  by  ?/ (E"K),

ends  (fiJx),  or  gt;ber_  (13.3)  occurring  in  the
parallel  stichoi.  Such  poetic  expressions  may  be  either  sur
vivals  of  forms  once  in  common  use  or  later  creations.  When
cognate  languages  offer  no  analogy,  the  latter  is  more  probable.
In  this  case,  the  strongly  entrenched  Aramaic  usage  (see  §  4)  is
in  favour  of  the  former  explanation.  Collectives  like  C"1N,  BM3N,
"1£2,  |Ni°  are  very  old ;  and  the  designation  of  the  individual  of
the  species  as  C;N"|3  or  t?i3N"J3,  a  man,  1p2"j3,  an  ox,  jNi"3,
a  sheep  or  a  goat,  is  likely  to  belong  to  the  same  early  period.

A  still  simpler  phrase  for  'a  man,'  ahad  hd-addm
(cixn  trix),  occurs  only  in  Judg.  16y,  where  it  seems  to
have  been  preserved  from  an  earlier  form  of  the  story  in
which  Samson  was  not  '  one  of  mankind '  but  a  solar
divinity.  While  is  (wx,  originally  also  a  collective,  cp
VxiE"  wx,  tr.x  '33)  and  issdh  (nc'tf)  apparently  tended  to
displace  ben-dddm  and  bath-dddm  (or  bath  han-ndZim,
Dan.  Hi?)  and  were  supplemented  by  dddm  and  Unos  in
the  sense  of  'man'  'the  human  being,'  der  Mensch
{frequently  found  in  Ecclus.),  the  plurals  bne  dddm  and
bne  is  maintained  themselves  more  strongly  against  the
collectives  both  in  the  sense  of  '  people  '  '  Leute  '  and
in  that  of  '  mankind.'

The  plurals  occur  thus:  C1N  '33  in  Gen.  115  Dt.  328  i  S.
26  19  2  S.  7  12  iK.S3g  Ezeklsi  14  Mic.  56  Joel  1  12  Ps.  11  4
1^29  142  21  it  31  20  33  1 3  80s  453  493  083  57  5  082  62  10  665
89  48  903  1078152131  115  16  145  12  Prov.  8431"  1322  Eccl.  2s
3  10  21  8  n  9  3  12  ;  irx  ':_3  in  Ps.  4  3  49  3  02  10  Lam.  3  33  Ecclus.
10  1 5  8623  387  40  i  ;  DTK,!  n'133,  'the  women  of  the  human
race  '  in  Gen.  62.

In  Ezekiel  the  expression  '  son  of  man  '  occurs  some
ninety  times,  always  as  the  title  by  which  the  prophet  is

2.  Special  use  addresst:d by Yahwfe- The  question
in  Ezekiel natnrally anses> whY I^ekiel re-

presented  Yahwe  as  constantly  employ
ing  this  term  ;  or,  if  its  use  was  not  due  to  conscious
reflection,  but  to  inspiration  in  a  certain  pathological
condition,  why  this  particular  form  of  speech  suggested
itself  with  such  frequency.

Jerome  regarded  the  term  as  expressive  of  the  frailty  of  him
WD  i  was  honoured  with  divine  visions  and  commissions,  and
most  modern  scholars  have  found  in  it  an  intimation  of  weakness
and  insignificance  (Srnend,  Bertholet,  Kraetzschmar,  Toy).

Appel,  however,  deems  this  explanation  inadequate,
examine*  the  title  in  the  light  of  the  various  passages  in  which
it  <>  airs,  and  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  given  to  the
prophet  by  way  of  distinction  to  set  him  off  from  his  fellowmen.

According  to  the  theory  of  Maurice  Vernes  (ffist.  t/es
'i^'t's  mess/anii] ues,  187  [1874])  'son  of  man '  is  synonymous
with  '  prophet.'  Fiebig  thinks  that  it  may  have  been  more

natural  to  use  the  longer  form  in  the  vocative. Already  in  the
interpretation of the phrase in Ezekiel we meet with an

4705


emphatically  low  and  an  emphatically  high  estimate,  a  synthetic
and  an  analytic  judgment,  an  assumption  that  it  is  a  title  of
office  and  an  appeal  to  philology  and  literary  criticism  ;  and  there
is  an  element  of  truth  in  each  contention.  There  can  be  no
question  as  to  the  general  identity  of  '  son  of  man  '  and  '  man.'
It  is  also  quite  evident  that  '  son  of  man  '  cannot  have  been  used
by  man  as  a  title  of  a  prophet.  He  might  be  referred  to  as
ha-hozeh  (ninrt)  'the  seer,'  han-nabf  (x'3:n)  'the  speaker,'
hani-morek  (mion)  'the  oracle  giver,'  //  ha-tlohlm  (ytt
D-n|?X,l),  'the  man  of  God,'  but  not  simply  as  'the  man.'  The
ordinary  designations,  however,  would  not  be  so  suitable  in  the
mouth  of  God  and  angels.  By  them  the  prophet  would  be  either
called  by  name  (Am.  82  Dan.  9  22  lOn/l),  or  addressed  as  a
representative  of  the  human  race.  In  the  latter  case,  the  fact
that  celestial  beings  hold  converse  only  with  their  chosen  ones
would  naturally  make  the  expression  suggestive,  not  merely  of
inferiority  of  race,  but  also  of  special  privilege.  Its  use  would
consequently  express  the  prophet's  self-consciousness  as  well  as
his  humility.  Dan.  817  shows  that  in  some  circles  it  was  thought
proper  for  the  angelus  interlocutor  to  address  the  prophets  as
'  human  being '  (C-JK  p),  when  the  name  was  not  used.

The  employment  of  this  phrase  by  Ezekiel  seems,
then,  to  have  arisen  from  the  double  feeling  of  humility
and  elation  expressed  in  Ps.  8.  Much  of  the  repetition
may  be  due  solely  to  literary  habit,  and  some  instances
to  later  imitation  (see  SCYTHIANS,  §  5).

The  only  apparent  exception  in  Hebrew  seems  to  be
Talmud,  Pal.  Taanith  65  b.

The  passage  contains  the  following  comment  on  Nu.  23  19  by
Abbahu  (about  280  A.D.):  'If  a  man  says  "I  am  a  god,"  he

i T»«,,K4-*',.i ''es  >  (if  lle  says)  "  I  am  a  son  of  man,"  he  will
6.  UOUDtlUl ;„  the  end  regret  it  .  (if  he  says)  ,.  j  ascend  to

meaning  in  heaven,"  he  may  say  it,  but  he  cannot  accom-
Ta  anlth  65b.  P''sn  "•'  If  the  text  's  sound,  the  interpretation
of  Laible,  Bacher,  and  Dalman  is  no  doubt
essentially  correct.  Abbahu,  who  was  often  in  conflict  with
Christians,  unquestionably  refers  to  Jesus.  He  is  not  likely  to
have  had  in  mind  either  Moses  (Schwab)  or  the  tower-builders
(Rabbinic  commentators,  followed  by  Cohen  in  Lietzmann).
Christians  like  Sason,  who  in  their  disputations  with  him  seem
to  have  used  to  some  extent  the  Hebrew  language,  probably
translated  6  nibs  rov  avBptuirov  by  ben  hii-tidtiiit,  as,  in  modern
times,  Delitzsch.  It  is  supposed  that  the  indefinite  [>,-ii  adam
was  suggested  by  Nu.  23  19,  and  that  the  context  was  depended
on  to  indicate  the  reference.  The  real  difficulty,  however,  is  to
understand  why  Abbahu  should  have  regarded  it  as  an  assump
tion  on  the  part  of  Jesus  to  call  himself  'son  of  man,'  such  as
any  man  must  in  the  end  regret.  It  is  not  a  question  of
Messianic  titles  and  prerogatives.  The  Messiah  is  not  a  god,
in  Jewish  theology,  and  does  not  ascend  to  heaven,  nor  is  it
improper  for  him,  or  any  other  man,  to  call  himself  a  son  of
man,  ben  ada»i.  The  original  may  have  read  '  1  am  a  man  and
I  ascend  to  heaven,'  c'OtfS  nSlJ?  '3X1  'JX  DIN  J3,  'lie  words
13.  rnnn?  IBID  being  a  misplaced  gloss.  Abbalui  would,  then,
wittily  allude  to  the  self-designation  of  Jesus  as  a  confession
that  he  was  not  a  god  but  a  man,  while  emphasising  thereby
the  enormity  of  his  claim,  inferred  from  Jn.  1424  and  Acts  1  9.

In  Aramaic  'son  of  man'  is  used  with  great  frequency
as  a  synonym  of  '  man. '

i. Early  inscriptions.— Tor  the  Assyrian  and  Persian  periods

we  are  wholly  dependent  upon inscriptions. These  are  often

. dated and represent a widespread territory :

4.  Aramaic but  they  are  for  the  most  part  very  brief,  and  the
Usage. vocabulary  is  limited. It  is  of  comparatively
small  significance  that  the  term  '  son  of  man  '
does  not  occur  in  them,  since  it  is  very  seldom  that  any  designa
tion  of  man  is  found. But  it  is  important  that  among  the  few
instances  c'3N  occurs  three  times  as  a  plural  or  collective — viz.
C'JX  dpi  '.I'T'N  Dip '  before  gods  and  man '  (Zenjirli,  Panamu
4706


SON  OP  MAN

Stele,  /.  23,  eighth  century),  e'JKl  JH^Kl  'gods  and  men'
(Tcinia,  sixth  century  CAS"  2  no.  1  131.  /.  20),  vn.  i"3N  'seven  men  '
(Kuyunjik,  Oct.  680,  C/S  2  no.  17).

2.  Syriac.  —  Among  the  East  Aramaic  dialects  (Syriac,
Mandate,  Babylonian  Talmudic)  the  expression  is  most  common
in  Syriac.  Even  it"  the  Pesh.  of  OT  is  essentially  a  Jewish
work,  it  cannot,  in  view  of  text  and  canon,  be  earlier  than  the
first  century  A.l).,  and  probably  does  not  antedate  the  oldest
(  Christian  productions  by  more  than  fifty  years.  The  fact  that
'man'  is  rendered  bar  ndsd  in  the  OT  rather  less  frequently
than  the  original  Syraic  literature  would  cause  one  to  expect  is
therefore  likely  to  be  due  to  the  translators  clinging  as  closely  as
possible  to  the  Hebrew  text,  and  not  to  any  change  in  the
common  speech  of  Kdessa.  That  ntisii  originally  was  a  collective
and  virtually  a  plural  is  abundantly  evident  from  the  preponder
ating  usage.  The  fact  that  in  a  translation  from  one  dialect  into
another  the  Bibl.  Aram.  C;3N  I3[s]  of  Dan.  7  13  was  rendered
J'C'JN  133  h%N]  i"  Syriac  1  shows  that  even  the  indefinite  jj-JN
gave  the  impression  of  being  a  collective.  There  are  many  in
stances,  however,  where  the  Syriac  KC-JX  is  used  as  a  singular.
That  bar-ndsd  originally  denoted  the  individual  of  the  species
man  is  perfectly  clear  from  the  collective  meaning  of  Nt'JN  and
tlie  prevalent  usage.  It  is  the  ordinary,  though  not  the  only,
designation  of  man,  the  individual,  and  the  emphatic  ending  N
does  not  prevent  it  from  meaning  '  a  man  '  as  well  as  '  the  men.'
r—X  and  L"3N  "13  are  both  used  for  'one,'  'some  one,'  'any  one,'
'jemand,'  'each.'  In  the  version  made  by  Paul  of  Telia  in  618
/•en  addm  is  rendered  by  b'reh  de-ndsd  in  Nu.  '-'3  19  Ezek.
passim,  Jer.  49  18  fiO^o  etc.  ;  and  by  b'reh  de-bar-ndsd  in  Jer.
51  43,  while  bar-ndsd  is  reserved  for  attain  or  fnfls.  This  does
not  show  that  b  '  reh  de-ndsa,  which  never  occurs  in  Pesh.,  was  a
natural  Syriac  translation  of  ben  dddm,  but  only  that  Paul  of
Telia,  when  he  had  already  used  bar-nasd  for  dddm,  availed
himself  of  the  form  created  as  a  terminus  techniciis  of  Christian
theology  (see  g  13)  for  a  synonym.  That  he  should  do  so  is
neither  more  nor  less  strange  than  that  he  should  employ  the
similar  phrase  b'reh  tie-bar-  ndsd.  The  same  influence  of  the
phrase  constructed  as  a  rendering  of  6  vibs  roO  nrOpoiTrou  is  seen
in  the  NT  where  Pesh.  uses  b'rflt  de-ndsd  even  in  Jn.  537  Heb.
'_'  6  Rev.  Ii3l4  14,  though  the  Greek  has  only  vib?  ai'ftpuiirov.

iii.  Biblical  use,  —  In  Pesh.  the  Heb.  hen  dddm  is  rendered
bar-nasd  everywhere  except  in  Job  35  8.  bar-ndsd  is  the  trans
lation  of  dddm  in  Kx.  13  13  33  20  i  S.  1  ">  29  Is.  44  13  Jer.  -6  10  14
Kzek.  1  3  1026  108  14  '.'820  Mai.  38  i  Ch.  29  i,  of  en.-'sin  Ps.  55  14
1103  1033  104i5  Job  15  14  •_'54  32s.  Hut  more  frequently
'  '  '


..nother  word  is  chosen,  such  as  'ndsd  or  b'nf  'nasii  or  gabrd  for
i-ni>s;  dddm  or  b'nf  ndsd  or  'nasii  for  dddm.  It  is  interesting
to  observe  that  in  Kcclus.  the  Heb.  is  is  rendered  ga/trd,  142_/C
SI  16  3(i  20  2<>  ;  'ndsd,  27  5  ;  b'nf  'nasa,  15  19.  dddm  is  rendered
bar-nasa,  11  2  13  15  41  n  ;  b'nf  ndsd,  15  17  ';  and  XV/H<JAW,  It'n?;
i'nf  attain  is  rendered  b'nf  'ndsd,  1(>  15  40  i.  Similarly  in

the  Aramaic  portions  of  OT.,  endsd  is  rendered  bar-mistl  in
;  >an.  7  8  ;  elsewhere  t-nas  by  '«<F/(])an.  '2  10),  IC'JN  (constr.  plur.  ;
Ezra  4  11),  Xv/-«<i.r  (1  )an.  3io),  'ndsd  (Dan.  5  5  etc.);  and  dndsti
with  /''«/•  ndsd,  Dan.  'J  38  621,  or  'niisd,  Dan.  429  [25].

In  the  N'T  the  KvangeHarium  Hier.  uses  the  indeterminate
bar-nils  exclusively  as  a  rendering  of  drfyxon-os  in  Mt.  89  1!>6
_\lk.  S  ;.,/:  Lk.  7s  i,S  2  Jn.337  5  34  "2223^  1033  11  50  lt>2i  (Jn.
7  23^  is  not  an  exception  as  the  construction  demands  fhe  em
phatic):2  bar-ndsd  only  for  o  oi-flpcuTro?  in  Mt.44  12  55,1,  b
"(>24(i,  b  74  Mk.  l2ja,  />  Jn.  IS  17  29  10  5  ;  fabrd  in  the  sense  of
'husband,'  Mt.  19s  10  (cp  Mt.  1  16  Lk.  236  Jn.  4  J6  //I),  but  also
in  Mt.2t>72  as  a  synonym  of  bar-ndsd  in  '-'<>  74  ;  and  '«<).?  with
the  meaning  '  any  one  '  in  Mt.  10  3  10  end.  The  exact  use  of  the
emphatic  is  all  the  more  remarkable  as  gabrii  so  rarely  occurs,
and  this  rare  occurrence  is  itself  peculiar  in  view  of  the  fact  that
b'reh  de-gabra  is  the  ordinary  rendering  of  6  i/ib?  TOU  dr-
Optoirov.  In  the  Curetonian  Fragments,  bar.'  ndsd  is  used

indiscriminately  for  arOptantx;  and  6  drtfpioTro?  in  Mt.44  121243
15ii<z,/>  1820  106  Lk.  825  Jn.327  634  7  22  23,*,  b  ;  gabra  for  o
tii'tfpujTros  in  Mt.  89  1  235*1,  b  1^3510  Lk.  28447;  ''nds  in  Mt.
1520  for  'one.'  In  the  Sinaitic  MS  bar-ndsd  is  likewise

used  without  discrimination  for  di'SpioTros  and  6  drflpioyros  in  Mt
4  14  12i2(?)4}  Kin*,/-  1820  196  Mk.  S_36/:  lOp  Lk.  IS  2  Jn.
2  23  3  27  5  34  7  22  23^  10  33  ;  gabra  for  o  a.i'6pu>iros,  Mt.  89  12  35
pio35  Mk.  107  Lk.  4  4  ti45  7s  Jn.  11  50  IS  17;  bar-nils.  Jn.
723,  and  '«(//,  Mt.  15  20,  for  'one,  jemand.  In  the  Pesh.

substantially  the  same  condition  prevails,  as  bar-nasd  is  used
for  di-0pcoTTO«  in  Mt.l2i2  106  Mk.S36/  Lk.  025  Jn.  8  27  5^4
7  23^1  1633  10  21,  even  more  frequently  than  for  o  a.i'6punro<;  as  in
Mt.44  12  41  loiirt,/'  1820,  and  gabrd  for  drflpioiros  in  Mt.Sg
Lk.  7  8  Jn.  11  50  as  well  as  for  6  arOpcon-os,  Mt.  12  35  19  5  10  Lk.
4  4  li  45  Jn.  IS  17  29  195,  and  'nds  has  the  sense  of  '  some  one  '  in
Mt.  19  3  Jn.  2  250.  In  Mt.  1(113  oi  di-fyxon-oi  is  rendered  'nasa
by  Pesh.,  Cur.,  and  Sin.,  while  the  /.>'.  Hier.  has  b'nf  'ndsd.
To  show  that  'ndsd  may  be  sing,  and  b'reh  d,'--ndsa  a  gram
matical  possibility,  Dris-er  quotes  Job  7  20  14  19  33  1  6,  Pesh.,  as
'  precise  formal  parallels.'  Such  passages  as  Ex.  31  14  Dt.  S  3
Is.  51  12  Job  256  Eccles.  "28_/T  are  better  examples  of  'ndsd  as

1  Here  and  occasionally  elsewhere  in  thU  article  the  Syriac
lias  been  transliterated  into  Hebrew  for  the  sake  of  simplicity.

2  Lietzmann's  statement  (p.  83)  that  di"#pu>7ro«  TIS  is  rendered
in  NC'313  in  Lk.  5  20  is  not  correct. The  Greek  is  di-flpajn-e,  and
the  Ev.  has  ^™313,  as  the  vocative  is  regularly  indicated  by  the
emphatic. '  .\i-0p<air6<;  TIS  is  rendered  in  C'3"13,  Lk.  5  it.


SON  OF  MAN

sing.,  since  in  the  three  cases  quoted  it  seems  to  be  a  collective
(Job  7  20,  Syr.  'maker  of  the  human  race,'  Heb.  D1NH  1i"U,
'watcher  of  mankind,'  (S  TU>»<  av6ptairu>v  ;  14  19,  '  hope  Tof  the
human  race,'  Heb.  tyijK  nipn  ;  33  16,  'ears  of  men,'  Heb.
C'C'JX,  <p  ai'dpuintar).  The  construction  of  collective  nouns  with


4707


between  them.  While  the  former  are  perfectly  clear  and
idiomatic  expressions,  the  latter  is  artificial,  vague,  and  am
biguous.  It  may  be  translated  either  'son  of  the  human  race,'
or  'son  of  the  human  being.'  But  it  is  no  more  apparent  what
it  means  to  be  'a  son  of  the  human  race,'  in  distinction  from
being  a  mere  member  of  the  human  family  (/<ar-ndsd),  than  why
a  man's  father  should  be  emphatically  described  as  'the  human
being.'  The  form  can  be  explained  by  the  exigencies  of  theo
logical  thought  (cp  g  13),  not  by  the  laws  of  Aramaic  speech.

iv.  Mandate.  —  In  Mandate  KC'KJK  13  occurs,  Ccnza  i.  207  22,
in  the  sense  of  'man.'  Two  plurals  are  found,  KC'IOK  '33  and
NrNJN  n«:a  (formed  as  rtl3N,  NnUHKax)-  The  late  form
K'C'NjnN3i  plur.  Asfar  Malwase,  298,  shows  how  completely  the
first  part  of  the  word  was  lost  to  consciousness.  C"3J,',  'a  man,'
'any  one,  'occurs  only  \nstattisabsoltttus.  Hut  the  most  common
expression  for  'man'  is  m33-  Cp  No.  Kland.  Grain.  127,  148.
v.  Babylonian  and  Talmudic.  —  In  Babylonian  Talmudic
Nsmz  was  likewise  used,  though  not  so  frequently  as  NtONi  for
'  man.'

vi.  Jtida-andialect.  —  Among  the  W.  Aramaic  dialects  (Jud«ean,
Samaritan,  Galihean,  Nabata;an)  this  idiomatic  expression  seems
to  have  been  less  common  in  the  S.  than  in  the  N.  It  does
indeed  occur  as  early  as  165  B.C.  in  Dan.  7  13.  For  here  kf-bar-
ends  (c'jN  13:)  means  Mike  a  human  being.'  Dalman  thinks
that  this  chapter  has  been  translated  from  a  Hebrew  original
which  had  C1X  ]3.  Even  if  that  were  so,  the  translator  would
not  have  chosen  bar-nds  in  preference  to  bar  adam,  exclusively
used  by  Onkelos,  if,  in  the  circles  where  he  moved,  bar-nds  and
bar-ndsd  were  not  more  commonly  used.  For  the  plural  he  uses
bni  iindsd,  Dan.  2  38  621,  or  dndsd,  243  4  i6_/T  2532  7s  ;  cp
Ezra  4  n.  ends  occurs  only  in  the  sense  of  'a  man,'  65  07  12
7  4  14  2  10  3  10.  The  oldest  Targums,  ascribed  to  Onkelos

and  Jonathan,  are  written  in  the  same  Jud;ean  dialect.  As
r:N  13  does  not  occur  at  all  in  Onkelos  —  ben  ddain  being
rendered  bar-dddm  —  and  only  in  Is.  51  12  562  Jer.  4!>i833  0040
5143,  Mic.  56  for  ben  dddm  in  Jonathan,  it  is  possible  that  the
distinctive  word  for  man,  the  individual,  bar-ndsd,  was  not  in
vogue,  gabrd,  'man,  the  male,'  and  dndsd,  'man,  the  race,1
being  employed  also  to  denote  the  member  of  the  human  family.
The  fact  that  NC'3'N  '33  occurs  with  greater  frequency  both  in
Onkelos  and  Jonathan  may  then  show  that  the  plural  survived
longer  than  the  singular  for  the  same  reasons  as  in  Hebrew.
But  the  influence  of  a  more  extensive  cultivation"  of  the  ancient
Hebrew  tongue  in  Jud;ca,  especially  among  those  capable  of
acting  as  interpreters,  should  not  be  overlooked  ;  and  it  is  quite
likely  that  the  common  speech  of  the  people  was  less  affected  by
Hebraisms  than  the  paraphrases  would  suggest.

vii.  Samaritan.  —  In  the  Samaritan  version  of  the  Pentateuch
NL"jl3  is  found  only  in  some  manuscripts  in  Gen.  9  6  and  Nu.  23  19.
Since  it  occurs  quite  frequently  in  Markah  (cp  Fiebig,  17  ff.),  it
is  safe  to  infer  that  here  also  the  influence  of  the  original  upon
the  learned  translators  renders  the  version  less  trustworthy  in
this  respect  as  a  witness  to  Samaritan  usage.

\  iii.  Galiltran  dialect.  —  In  regard  to  the  Galilxan  dialect  we
possess  the  simplest  information.  In  the  freedom  of  spontaneous
utterance  and  repartee  in  the  Palestinian  Talmud  the  peculi
arities  of  popular  speech  have  a  better  chance  of  revealing  them
selves  than  in  the  translations,  and  the  later  Targums  follow  less
closely  the  Hebrew  than  the  earlier.  Hut  even  when  due  weight
is  given  to  this  fact,  the  extraordinary  frequency  of  the  idiom  no
doubt  indicates  a  more  extensive  use  on  the  part  of  the  people
of  Galilee.  Dalman  is  inclined  to  regard  it  as  a  comparatively
late  development  under  the  influence  of  the  Syriac,  and  thinks
that  a  person  in  the  first  century  A.D.  using  so  strange  an  ex
pression  as  bar-ndsd  then  would  not  have  been  understood  as
speaking  of  'man.'  But  Fiebig  has  shown  that,  not  only  did
Hosa'ya,  about  2oovA.n.,  use  K31  KC'313  f°r  'a  great  man'
(Shckalin  56),  but  Sime'on  b.  Yochai,  about  130-160  A.D.  ,  used
T313  for  'man,'  '  der  Mcnsch  '  (Berach.  Is),  and  possibly  also
Sime'on  b.  Gamaliel,  his  con  temporary,  if  a  certain  say  ing  has  been
preserved  more  accurately  in  Talm.  Bab.,  \i'ifdrim  541*,  Me'ila
?ob.  The  indifference  to  the  emphatic  state  points  to  long  usage
even  in  the  first  part  of  the  second  century.  It  is  extremely

difficult  to  believe  that  only  three  generations  earlier  an  expression
that  had  taken  such  deep  roots,  and  is  found  in  the  literary  re
mains  of  all  Aramaic  dialects,  should  not  have  been  widely  used
in  Galilee  as  an  equivalent  of  JJ-JN  or  xt"N  in  the  sing.,  and  it  is
quite  incredible  that  so  natural  and  idiomatic  a  designation  of
the  individual  of  the  human  race  should  not  have  been  under
stood  as  'man,'  but  taken  to  be  an  esoteric  expression.  Mi->  -
potamia  and  N.  Syria  were  old  centres  of  Aramaic  speech,  and
it  is  therefore  natural  that  the  old  term  to  denote  a  member  of
the  human  family  should  have  maintained  itself  most  stri>i
there.  Of  NC'JNl  H13  there  is  apparently  no  trace  in  the

4708


SON  OF  MAN

Galikenn  dialect.  It  does  not  even  occur  in  Christian  testimony
which  may  represent  this  dialect.

ix.  The  Nimrod  lcg?nd  in  Btrfsith  rabba. — It  is  quite  un
necessary  to  resort  to  Babylonian  mythology,  as  Fiebig  is  inclined
todo,  foran  explanation  of  KITH  ^'3DT  NC'313  (.Ker.  r«M<tSSp.  47);
Abraham  no  doubt  intended  to  lead  Nimrod  on  from  the  worship
of  man  to  that  of  God,  as  he  had  from  the  worship  of  the  elements
to  that  of  man  ;  every  man  is  a  bearer  of  the  breath  of  life,  and
no  mysterious  pregnant  sense  is  demanded.

x.  Nabatiean. — Of  the  Nabatican  nothing  is  known  except
through  inscriptions.  In  these  only  e"HN  in  the  sense  of  '  one,'
'some  one,"  'any  one'  occurs.  No  inference  can  be  drawn  con
cerning  the  existence  of  c'313  or  Ne'313-  The  use  of  this  term  in
Aramaic  has  been  treated  with  most  comprehensiveness  by
Fiebig,  with  most  Talmudic  learning  by  Dalman,  and  with  most
insight  by  Wellhausen.  An  essentially  correct  understanding
of  it  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  theory  developed  by  Eerdmans,
Schmidt,  Meyer,  and  Lietzmann  (see  §  30).

In  the  Babylonian  myth  concerning  Adapa  and  the
S.  wind  (Recueil  de  trav.  20 4)  the  hero  is  addressed  as
5.  Analogous ^  amiluti  (^) Hommel  (Exp.  T,
forms  in  y  I9°°'  p'  341)  translates  thls  ex-

Assyrian Pression-  'spring  of  mankind, 'explains

Ethiopic  and  U  as,'.h1  from  whose  seed  the  whole  of
Arabic  mankind  is  sprung,  and  compares  it
with  6  vifa  TOV  avOpuirov.  If  this  trans
lation  were  possible,  the  phrase  would  have  nothing  in
common  with  the  Greek  term  or  its  Aramaic  original.
But  it  clearly  means  '  seed  of  men ' ;  and  as  sent  in
2  R.  8648  is  distinctly  said  to  be  a  synonym  of  maru,
'son,'  sir  amiluti  is  an  exact  equivalent  of  Ntt'JN  13-
Whatever  his  relation  to  Ea,  Aclapa  is  a  mortal  man,
not  a  god,  and  is  to  be  punished  for  his  presumption.
The  idea  that  he  is  the  first  man  is  precluded  by  I6n
1216.  [Cp  PARADISE,  §  12.]

Adapa's  designation  as  mar  Iridit — '  son  [/.£.,  citizen!  of  Iridu'
— (cp  mar  Bati/i,  mar  Barsi/>,  mart  JVY«<J,  marl  mal  Assur)
shows  that,  like  p  and  13,  maru  was  used  to  designate  the
member  of  a  larger  body.  Delitzsch  aptly  compares  mar
timmani  (pi.),  'an  artist';  mar  ikkari,  'a  peasant';  mar
ispari,  'a  weaver,'  with  Heb.  D'H'SM  'J3  ;  marl  nunt  also
means  simply  'fishes,'  and  mar  issuri,  'a  bird.'

The  Ethiopic  Bible  renders  ''son  of  man '  by  ivdlda  sab'e,
ivalda  be'i'sl,  'i-&uala  'cmahcyau  and  ivalila  'cguala  'fmahfyait.
Of  these  terms  ivalda  sab'e  is  probably  the  most  original.  As
ttWVis  a  collective  and  virtual  plural,  iiifilda  sab  '/exactly  corre
sponds  to  N^'JN13  ll'iilda  bc'csl=filius  viri  is  the  equivalent
of  N13J  13,  but,  like  X13J,  bc'csl  is  also  used  for  'man,'  '  tier
Mcnsch.'  Our  ignorance  of  rhe  native  mythology  renders  it
impossible  to  decide  whether  in  'egu,MA  '  emaheyau=proles
matris  n'vi,  the  reference  to  Eve  is  original,  and  the  expression
consequently  of  Jewish  or  Christian  origin,  or  some  other  mother,
human  or  divine,  is  intended.  It  is  often  used  collectively  for
oi  ai'dptuiroi,  oi  viol  riav  avOpiairiav,  NtI'3N  '33-  ll'iildii  'fguiila
'tmdhiydu,  'son  of  the  offspring  of  the  mother  of  the  living,'  is
apparently  a  Christian  term  made  substantially  on  the  same
pattern  and  for  the  same  reason  as  KC'JT31  m3-  It  was  ex
clusively  used  for  6  uibs  TOV  avSpianov  in  the  NT,  and  by
reminiscence  or  interpretation  found  its  way  into  passages  having
only  uibs  avQpunrov  such  as  Jn.  627  Heb.  26  Rev.  1  13  14  14  and
also  Ps.  SO  is  Dan.  7  13  Ezek.  '2  i  and  throughout  the  book,  and
Enoch  37-71  passim  (see  §  7).

In  the  Arabic  version  '  son  of  man  '  is  most  frequently  rendered
ibnu'l  insiini  both  in  OT  and  NT.  Sometimes  ibnu  insani
occurs,  Is.  51  12,  and  in  Ps.  140  3  DIN  p  is  rendered  banibasari.
In  the  NT  ibnu'l  basari  occurs  frequently  (see  §  13).  Basar"
is  a  collective  and  plural,  but  used  for  '  man,'  the  individual,  as
well  as  for  '  man,'  the  race.

Dan.  7 13  is  the  earliest  passage  in  Aramaic  literature
where  the  term  '  son  of  man '  occurs.  One  '  like  a
6  Dan  7  human  being '  (A#ar  £«&f,  pjRiaaJappears
3'  before  the  Ancient  of  Days  and  receives
the  empire  of  the  world.  The  Messianic  interpretation  of
this  passage  meets  us  as  early  as  in  the  first  century  A.D.
in  Enoch  37-71  (see  §  7)  and  4  Ezra  (see  §  8).  The
evangelists  apparently  understood  it  as  referring  to  the
Messiah  (cp  especially  Mt.  2664  Mk.  1462),  and  the
natural  impression  of  the  Greek  gospels  is  that  Jesus
himself  shared  this  view.  It  consequently  prevailed  in
the  church.  Through  the  influence  of 'Aklba,  Joshua  b.
Levi,  and  Shemuel  b.  Nahman,  it  also  gained  the  ascend
ancy  in  the  synagogue.  On  critical  grounds  it  has  been
accepted  by  a  number  of  modern  scholars. x  Its  strength

1  Lengerke,  Ewald,  Knobel,  Hilgenfeld,  Rleek,  S.  Davidson,
Riehm,  Orelli,  Dilhnann,  Behrmann,  Jul.  Boehmer.

4709


SON  OF  MAN

lies  in  the  fact  that  it  recognises  the  presence  in  this
passage  of  a  well-known  concrete  personality.  But  it
utterly  fails  to  explain  how  the  Messiah,  once  introduced,
can  have  dropped  so  completely  out  of  the  author's
thought,  not  only  in  the  explanation  of  the  vision  where
he  is  unceremoniously  ignored,  but  also  in  the  future
deliverance  with  which  Michael  has  much  to  do  but
the  Messiah  nothing.  A  non-Messianic  interpretation
appears  already  in  Enoch  71  (see  §  8),  where  Enoch  is
evidently  understood  as  being  the  'son  of  man'  of  Daniel's
vision.  Ibn  Ezra  interpreted  bar-Unas  as  referring  to
the  people  of  Israel.  In  modern  times  this  view  has
been  maintained  by  many  scholars.1  Yet  a  symbolic
representation  of  '  a  more  humane  regime,'  '  ein  Me»sch-
heitsideal'  savours  more  of  modern  humanitarian  ideas
than  of  the  concrete  conceptions  of  Semitic  antiquity.

The  present  writer  (JBL  19,  1900)  was  led  by  these
difficulties  to  regard  the  manlike  being  as  an  angel,  and
more  particularly  Michael,  the  guardian-angel  of  Israel.
He  pointed  out  that  angels  are  constantly  introduced  as
having  the  appearance  of  men  ;  -  that  the  only  angelic
representative  of  Israel  is  Michael  ('  your  prince,'  canb,
Dan.  102i  12 1);  and  that  his  coming  with  the  clouds
after  the  destruction  of  the  beasts,  in  view  of  4  Ezra  13 1
Apoc.  Elijah  1420  15  i,  may  show  that  the  battle  with
chaos-monsters  had  already  been  transferred  from  Yahwe
to  Michael.  This  view  has  been  accepted  by  Porter
(Hastings,  DB  4260),  who  also  suggests  the  demonic
character  of  the  beasts.  The  objection  that  one  would
expect  the  heathen  nations  to  be  likewise  represented  by
their  angel  princes  is  met  partly  by  the  traditional  form
of  the  appropriated  Marduk  myth,  partly  by  a  lingering
respect  for  these  angelic  dignitaries  who  are  the  former
gods  of  the  nations.  Chaos-monsters  may  be  consumed
by  fire,  but  angels  are  not  slain.  That  the  one  like  a
man  is  neither  the  Messiah  nor  a  mere  symbol  of  Israel
has  independently  been  argued  by  Grill  (Untersuch.  iibcr
die  Entst.  dcs  I'icrtcn  Evaiig.  50  /.  [1902]),  who  also
thinks  of  Michael,  but  is  inclined  to  look  for  a  still  higher
being  whose  name  is  significantly  withheld,  like  that  of
the  numen  of  I'KNTKI.  (</.->. ),  at  the  same  time  a  'most
exalted  personal  intermediary  between  God  and  the
world  and  a  transcendant  prototype  of  the  God-pleasing
humanity  ultimately  to  be  realised  in  the  people  of  the
Most  High.'  The  first  part  of  this  definition  suits
Michael  ;  whether  he  or  any  oilier  angel  was  ever
thought  of  as  the  ideal  Israelite,  is  more  doubtful.

Volter  (7.NT\V,  1902,  p.  173/1  has  also  abandoned
the  hitherto  prevailing  views  and  suggested  that  the
celestial  being  is  none  else  than  the  Mazdayasnian
Hsathra  vairiya,  one  of  the  Amesa  spentas  who  is  a
personification  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  apart
from  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  date  of  the  Avestan  docu
ments,  Daniel's  man-like  being  is  a  representative  not
of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  but  of  Israel.

Another  originally  Aramaic  book  (so  rightly  Schiirer,
LeVi,  We. )  in  which  the  term  '  son  of  man '  occurs
_  !?„,.!,  o-  -i  's  Enoch  37-71.  It  is  known  to  us

7.  Enocn  87-71. i .u i T-  i  •

only  through  an  Ethiopic  translation.
That  a  Greek  version  even  of  this  part  of  the  Enoch
literature  once  existed  may  be  inferred  from  Tertullian
(de  cultu  feminarum,  13);  but  whether  the  Ethiopic
translation  was  made  from  it,  is  uncertain.  According
to  Bruce  (in  Laurence,  Libri  Enoch  Proph.  I 'cm.
sEthiop.  11  [1838])  '  the  Jews  in  Abyssinia  admit
it  into  their  Canon  ;  it  is  not,  however,  the  Book  of
Enoch  received  amongst  the  Rabbins.'  The  first
Ethiopic  version  may  therefore  have  been  made  by  a
Jew  from  the  Aramaic.  This  would  account  for  a

1  Hofmann,  Hitzig,  Wittichen,  Colani,  Kuenen,  Slraton,
Keim,  Vernes,  Smend,  Toy,  Marti,  Meinhold,  Bevan,  Reville,
Dalman,  Schiirer,  Gunkel,  Wellhausen,  Lietzmann,  Charles,
Prince,  Driver,  Curtis,  Hahn.

-  133  rtN-103,  Dan.  815;  DIN '33  TIDIS.  Dan.  10i6;  HN1D3
C1N,  Dan.  10  18  ;  p-nj,  Dan.  3  25;  7,S""n;i  E"Nn,  Dan.  92,  cp
lOsIS  6f.  ;  ofioioi'  v'iov  ai'6pu>irov,  Rev.  14  14  [see  §  9],  '  like  white
men,'  Enoch  87  2.

4710


SON  OF  MAN

numlier  of  Aramaisms  not  so  likely  to  pass  through  the
medium  of  a  Greek  translation.  See  AP<X:ALYP  Tic,  §  30.

That  the  text  has  suffered  numerous  interpolations  is  uni
versally  admitted.  A  series  of  these  were  apparently  taken  from
a  lost  Apocalypse  of  Noah.  Already  Laurence  perceived  some
of  them  ;  Kiistlin  (7V/.  Jalirb.  18^6,  p.  340^)  recognised  those
that  most  certainly  have  this  origin,  .r>4  1-662  00  tlai-t>U35.
Tidemann  (/'//.'/",  1875,  p.  261 J?.)  conjectured  that  41  3-9  43  44
59  were  drawn  from  the  same  source,  and  Charles  has  adopted
this  view.  Kruno  Hauer  (Kritik  d.  Gtsck.  1402  [1841])

first  called  attention  to  the  now  generally  recognised  secondary
character  of  70,  71,  and  suggested  that  the  'Son  of  Man'
passages  were  interpolated.  Hilgenfeld  (Jiiif.  Apoknlyftik,
ifaff.  (1857))  presented  the  only  natural  interpretation  of
<5~4-i3  by  which  the  Noachic  interpolations  are  found  to  be
later  than  79  A.D.,  and  the  most  probable  explanation  of  50  i  Jjf.
which  apparently  makes  the  original  work  later  than  Nero.
His  view  that  the  book  was  essentially  the  work  of  a  Gnostic
Christian  was  accepted  by  many  scholars.  The  objection  that
one  would  expect  more  distinctive  Christian  teaching  was  met
in  part  by  a  reference  to  the  Enochian  masque,  iu  part  by
emphasis  upon  the  important  Christian  ideas  found  in  the
book.  I  irummond,  however,  showed  in  a  convincing  manner,

that  the  Messianic  passages  were  out  of  harmony  both  with
the  title  and  with  the  contents  in  each  figurative  address,  and
that  their  removal  rendered  the  discourses  far  more  intelligible
{The  Jcivish  Messiak,  p.  48  ff.  [18-7]).  This  argument

was  further  elaborated  by  1'Heiderer  (Urchrist.,  312^  [1887]).
A  similar  view  was  independently  presented  by  Mousset  (Jesu
Predigt,  106  [1892]).  Hut  Drummond's  theory  failed  to  explain
how  any  man  could  have  written  chap.  71  either  before  or  after
these  interpolations  were  made,  and  also  why  a  Christian  in
terpolator  should  not  have  used  the  title  walda  'fgtiiild
'euiiilii'yan  exclusively  as  it  is  in  the  NT.  71  1-16  can  be
accounted  for  only  on  the  assumption  that  the  text  preceding  it
somewhere  made  an  allusion  to  a  man  who  has  righteousness,
yet  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  it  possible  to  regard  Enoch
as  the  man  intended.  This  precludes  the  possibility  of  any
passage  containing  the  peculiar  Christian  phrase  '  son  of  the
offspring  of  the  mother  of  the  living  '  (02  7914  03  n  6l>2<sy^  70  i)
having  been  a  part  of  the  text  to  which  71  1-16  was  added.  It
is  among  the  passages  in  which  '  son  of  man '  is  rendered  tuAlda
siifi'e  (40  2jjf.  48  2  00  10)  or  ?c.  fie'Ssi  (02  5  01129  a,  />)  that  such  an
allusion  must  be  sought.  In  OOio  ihe  author  of  the  Noachian  frag
ments  used  frar-misii  or  heit-atiiitn  precisely  as  it  is  used  in  Kzek.

It  is  difficult  to  think  through  chap.  40  in  the  Aramaic  without
obtaining  the  impression  that  the  Ethiopia  is  a  direct  translation
of  the  original.  '  I  saw  one  like  a  man  ; '  '  J  asked  in  regard  to
that  man  ; '  '  he  answered  :  this  is  the  man  who  has  righteous
ness;'  'this  man  whom  thoti  hast  seen  will  arouse  the  kings."
The  use  of  the  demonstrative  (in  KC'pia)  is  evidently  in  good
order.  On  the  theory  of  a  translation  from  the  Greek,  the
present  writer  and  subsequently  Charles  pointed  out  the  use  of
the  demonstrative  for  the  missing  article  in  the  Ethiopic,  per
mitting  the  assumption  that  the  Greek  had  everywhere  simply
6  uibs  ToO  ai'&puinov.  But  Flemming  (in  Lietzmann,  /'//.)/)
has  rightly  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  the  NTw<J/rfrf
'egu'ilti  'ftiiiihfyau  is  never  preceded  by  a  demonstrative.
M'liltia  Siifr't'  is  as  admirable  a  reading  of  l>ar-niisa  in  Wiiff.  as
in  l>0  10.  Even  in  4!S  2,  '  in  that  hour  that  man  was  named  (i.e.,
'called ')  before  (Aramaic  for  '  by ')  the  Lord  of  Spirits,'  the  use
is  natural.  The  scene  in  40  is  reminiscent  of  Dan.  7.  As

Daniel's  manlike  being  was  not  mentioned  by  name,  he  might
be  an  angel  like  Michael,  a  translated  hero  like  Enoch,  a  true
descendant  of  David  snatched  up  to  heaven  and  preserved  for
the  day  of  his  appearance,  or  a  Christianised  pre-existent
Messiah.  The  present  description  no  doubt  suggests  to  us  the
Messiah  ;  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  in  an  earlier  form  of  it
the  man  who  walked  with  God,  revealed  hidden  secrets  and
achieved  victories,  pointed  as  clearly  to  Enoch,  the  vision  being
(rightly  or  wrongly)  ascribed,  like  others  in  the  book,  to  Noah.
That  wiildti  /'t"'i':tf,  if  original,  could  be  used  in  the  same  sense
as  ii'ilMii  siib'e  is  evident  from  71  14  which  refers  back  to  402.
In  025  all  MSS  except  the  oldest  read  7c.  fc'fsith,  'son  of
woman';  in  092Q  the  oldest  manuscript  has  the  same  form.
This  shows  that  Christian  copyists  tam|x.'red  with  the  text  from
theological  motives,  the  dogmatic  interest  being  here  the  same
as  that  which  crowded  b'rtli  df-gabra.  (tfc\yy\  ma)  out  of  use.
These  MSS  themselves  are  probably  Christian  interpolations,
as  is,  undoubtedly,  71  17  (cp  Schmidt,  art.  'Enoch'  in  Jewish
Uncy.  ;  Son  of  Man,  ch.  7  ;  AJT/i.  7).

In  the  original  discourses  the  term  consequently
never  seems  to  have  occurred.  It  is  found  in  one  of
the  Noachic  interpolations  in  the  sense  of  '  man  '  as  a
rendering  of  bar-naXa.  In  4t>2^!,  and  482  which  may
have  belonged  to  the  same  early  stratum  of  insertions,
it  has  no  other  meaning.  At  these  po:nts  Christian
interpolations  appear  to  have  attached  themselves.
Where  in  the  rest  of  the  book  these  are  most  manifest,
the  distinctive  NT  title  is  employed.

In  the  Apocalypse  of  Ezra  13 $/.  the  seer  Ijeholds
one  like  a  man  (quasi  similitudinem  hominis)  coming

47"


SON  OF  MAN

out  of  the  sea  (de  corde marts) with the clouds  of


8.  4  Ezra  133^


heaven, refers to him again  as  that


man  U//V  ti<i»un  and  simply  'the  man'
(h>im,i\,  and  receives  the  interpretation  that  this  is  the
man  through  whom  the  Most  High  will  redeem  creation.
We  do  not  possess  the  original ;  but  the  extant  versions
(Lat. ,  Syr.,  Eth. ,  Arm.)  all  seem  to  come  from  the
lost  Greek  translation.  As  the  author  evidently  has
Dan.  7 13  in  mind,  the  original  probably  had  &en-hids
and  dar-Htild  which  may  have  been  rendered  correctly
dvOpuirot  and  6  dvtipuiros  in  the  Greek.  The  con
nection  shows  that  there  can  be  no  question  of  '  man  '
or  '  the  man '  being  a  title.  Though  the  term
'  Messiah '  is  not  mentioned,  there  can  be  little  doubt
that  the  Messiah  is  intended.  Retouching  by  Christian
hands  may  Ije  observed  in  all  the  versions.  But  the
book,  written  in  the  reign  of  Domitian,  probably
shows  the  most  transcendental  conception  of  the
Messiah  found  in  Jewish  thought.  All  the  more
significant  is  it  that  the  final  judgment  is  not  one  of
his  functions.  In  6 1  the  true  text  is  preserved  by  Lat. ,
Arm.,  'through  a  man'  being  a  Christian  addition  in
Syr.  Eth.  Ar. ,  as  Hilgenfeld  has  shown  (Messias  Jud.
54".  )•

The  Christian  parts  of  the  Apocalypse  of  John  contain
two  passages, 1 13  and 14 14, where  the  phrase  o/xotov

9.  Revelation.  vi6' *>»P?"™  ' like  a son of  man'
occurs. It  is  the  exact  equivalent  of

k?-bar-?nd$  and  the  author  no  doubt  had  in  mind  Dan.
7 13.  In  the  first  place  it  is  unquestionably  the  celestial
glory  of  Jesus  that  is  described  with  colours  largely
borrowed  by  Ezekiel.  As  14 15  introduces  •  another
angel,'  the  impression  is  that  the  manlike  being  of
14 14  is  also  an  angel.  That  this  angel  has  a  crown
upon  his  head  does  not  show  that  he  is  the  Messiah.
The  angel  of  Sardis(Sn),  the  celestial  presbyters  1 4  4  10),
the  angel  represented  as  a  white  horse  (62),  and  the
horse-like  locusts  (9?),  also  wear  crowns,  and  the  angels
are  the  harvesters  in  Ml.  1841.  It  is  of  utmost
importance  that  this  work,  written  substantially  at  the
close  of  the  first  century  (APOCALYPSE,  $  35,  col.  207),
though  with  later  additions,  knows  nothing  alwut  the
title  6  t'ios  TOU  dvffpuTrov.

The  term  6  w6s  TO?  dvOpuirov  is  not  found  in  any  of
the  fourteen  epistles  ascribed  to  Paul  ;  in i  or  a  Pet.,

10  NT  Emstles  r'  a  or  3  Jn-  Jailies  or  Jude.  Its
'  absence  in  this  entire  literature  re
presenting  different  lands,  periods,  and  tendencies  of
thought  can  scarcely  be  accidental.  It  may  not  prove
that  all  the  authors  were  unacquainted  with  the  term.
As  it  is  used  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  the  reason  for  its
non-occurrence  in  i,  2,  3  Jn.  may  be  that  there  was  no
occasion  for  using  it.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Jude  had
found  it  everywhere  in  his  copy  of  Enoch  as  a  Messianic
title,  and  known  of  it  as  the  self-designation  of  Jesus,  he
is  quite  likely  to  have  referred  to  it.  In  Heb.  26,

Ps.  85-7  is  quoted  as  referring  to  Jesus.  The  author
sets  forth  the  inferiority  of  a  revelation  indicated  through
angels,  and  argues  from  the  Psalm  that  the  world  to
come  was  to  be  subject  not  to  angels  but  to  one
who  had  been  made  for  a  little  while  lower  than  the
angels  (<5).  The  same  reference  of  the  passage

to  Jesus  is  seen  in  i  Cor.  lf>27.  Heb.  29  clearly
indicates  the  underlying  question  :  Of  w  horn  does  the
prophet  speak,  of  man  in  general,  or  of  some  particular
man  ?  The  answer  was  found  in  i:  6.  He  spoke  of
one  who  had  been  made  for  a  little  while  (/Spo^i'  n)
lower  than  the  angels  to  be  afterwards  made  ruler  of  all
things.  This  could  only  apply  to  Jesus.  The  author
of  i  Cor.  1545j^  designates  the  Christ  as  6  texaros
'A5dM.  6  5ei  Tepor  dvftpwTros,  6  di'tfpwiros  e£  ovpavov.
Thus  he  evidently  strives  to  express  the  ideal,  supernal
humanity  of  Jesus.  Yet  it  never  seems  to  have  occurred
to  him  to  use  for  this  pin-pose  the  common  synoptic
title,  nor  the  mere  term  6  dvtJpwros,  or  an  equivalent,
without  a  modifying  adjective  or  adverbial  expression.

4713


SON  OP  MAN


SON  OF  MAN


The  most  natural  explanation  is  certainly  that  it  was

One  in  Mk.

and  Lk.  :

not  known  to  him.

22.

Mk.  831

!

922.

As  an  alternative  the  possibility  was  suggested  in  JBL  1636

Nine  in  Mt.

alone  :

that  he  may  have  regarded  it  as  an  inadequate  characterisation

of  that  heavenly  man  who  was  no  longer  to  be  known  according

23-

Mt.  1023

2H.

[1

1928.

to  the  flesh  ;  but  such  disregard  was  deemed  incompatible  with

24.

ii 1^37

29.

11

24  300.

.a  knowledge  on  his  part  of  this  as  the  one  Messianic  title  used

25-

>i 1841

3°-

H

25  31.

by Jesus. Schmiedel (Prot. .Miinatsch. 1898, pp. 260  Jf.,

26.

ii 1*>  '3

31-

it

202.

1901,  pp.  342  ff.)  thinks  that  he  may  have  hesitated  to  present

27-

„ 1628

to  Greek  readers  a  term  which,  unlike  the  Jews,  they  would  not
have  understood  as  a  synonym  of  '  man  '  but  literally  as  '  the

Eight  in  Lk

alone  :

son  of  the  man.' Such considerations do  not seem to have

32.

Lk. 022

36-

1

19  10.

influenced the earliest translators (cp § 36)  ; if they were

,, 12s

37-

„

21  36.

seriously  entertained by  himself, it is  difficult lo  see  how  he

34-

II I"  22

38.

„

22  48.

could  have  allowed  the  objectionable  phrase  to  run  its  course

35-

ii 188

39-

,,

24  7.

wherever  the  evangelical  tradition  went  without  an  explanation.

The  earliest  A

ramaic  translation  of  th

e  G

~)snels.  t

11.  Acts  7  56.


Apart  from  the  gospels,  Acts  7  56  is  the  only  passage
in  NT  where  6  uids  rov  avOpuwov  occurs.  Whether
it  comes  from  the  Author  to  Theophilus
or  represents  a  real  utterance  of  Stephen
[see  STF.PIIKX,  Jj  7],  it  shows  that  there  were  some
Christians  who  did  not  reverently  shrink  from  the  use
of  what  in  the  gospels  is  the  exclusive  self-designation
of  Jesus,  nor  hesitate  to  employ  it  lest  it  be  misunder
stood  by  Greek-speaking  people.  The  author  manifestly
takes  for  granted  that  the  excited  populace  must  recog
nise  in  the  phrase  a  designation  of  Jesus  and  not
merely  a  Messianic  title.  What  is  deemed  blasphemy
is  not  that  he  claims  to  see  the  Messiah  on  the  right
hand  of  God,  for  that  is  his  place,  but  that  he  claims  to
•behold  the  murdered  Jesus  in  the  Messiah's  place.
If  the  statement  is  historical,  Stephen  may  have  said
in  Aramaic:  'I  see  bar-ndsd,'  i.e.,  'a  man,'  or  'the
man,'  intending  to  continue  his  sentence,  or  referring
to  the  righteous  man  with  whose  death  he  had  just
charged  the  people.  But  it  may  be  a  free  imitation  of
Lk.  -2'2 69.

The  term  6  wdy  rov  avOpuirov  occurs  in  the  gospels
12.  Occurrences  «ghty-one  times-
ill  the  Gospels,  f,1--  fou,rtteen,  m.M1;-'  twenty-nve  in

Lk. ,  and  twelve  in  Jn.

The  references  are  as  follows  : — Mt.  8  20 9  6  10  23  11 19  1283240
183741  16i327_/C  1791222  11128  20 18  28  242730^^373944
2631  2'i  2  24^  f>  45  64  ;  Mk.  2  to  28  83138  991231  103345  1826
142ia/>4i62;  Lk.  5  24  6522  734  022264458  1130  1281040
172224  2630  18831  1!)  10  21  27  36  22224869  247  ;  Jn.  1  51  3  \^f.
(527)  0275362  828  935  122334«£  1331.

Mt.  18  ii  (  =  Lk.  19  IQ),  25 13  and  Lk.  9  56*  (  =  Lk.
19  10)  TR  are  rightly  obelised  by  critical  editors.  The
sixty-nine  Synoptic  passages  clearly  do  not  represent  as
many  distinct  utterances.  My  removing  the  most
obvious  parallels,  Holsten  and  Oort  leave  forty-two,
Mangold  and  Driver  forty.  In  any  such  arrangement
there  is  much  exercise  of  subjective  judgment,  since
passages  in  the  different  gospels  that  are  not  absolutely
alike  are  regarded  as  identical,  while  exact  parallels  in
the  same  gospel  may  or  may  not  be  considered  as
duplicates.  As  it  is  of  some  importance  to  know  which
of  these  occur  in  all  three,  in  two,  or  only  in  one  of  the
gospels,  the  following  arrangement  may  be  made  for
convenience'  sake,  involving  no  judgment  as  to  the
number  of  times,  or  separate  occasions,  when  the
evangelists  considered  Jesus  as  having  used  the  ex
pression.  Eight  in  Mt.,  Mk. ,  and  Lk.  :


i.  Mt. 96

. Mk. 2  10

Lk. 524.

2. „ 128

>i

228

„ 65.

3- ,, 1*327

>!

838

,, 9  26.

4. „ 17220

II

»3i

II ^44.

5- ,, 20  !8

1!

1033

II  IS  31.

6. ,, 24  3o£

II

1326

„  2127.

7. „ 20240

II

1421

,, 2222.

8. „ 2664

II

1462

ii  2269.

Five  in  Mt.  and  Mk.  :

9.  Mt.  17  9 Mk.

99

12. Mt.  2624(5

Mk.  Uzii.

to. „ 17  12 „

9  12

13- „ 2045

„ 144i.

ii. ,, 2028 ,,

1045.

Eight  in  Mt.  and

Lk.  :

14.  Mt. 820 Lk

958

18.  Mt.  242?

Lk.  1724.

J5- ,, llig ii

734

19- ,, 2437

„ 1726.

16. „ 1232 ,

12  100

20. ,, 2439

17  30.

17- „ 124o

11  30

21. ,, 2444

,  , 1240.

4713


Syriac,  renders  6  uib?  rov  avOpiawov  by  b'reh  dt-gabnl  (,113
i  o  -D^^^^^-^ „„  xn3:n)  in  Mk.  8  38  Lk.  7  34  and  Jn.  13  31  ;  in
13.  itenaenngs  Lk  H  3oand  jn.  12  23  only /<><?>&  (ma)  is  left;

in  the  Ancient  in  all other  extant  passages  b'reh  i/i'-tntsa
Versions. ds-cOiS'l  ma)  seems  to  have  been  used.1

The  Curetonian  fragments  have  jnajl  ma
in  Lk.  734926  2248,  elsewhere  Nf^xi  ma-  In  the  Kvauge-

liariuin  Hierosolymitanutn  the  phrase  is  rendered  N-QJT  ma
in  Mt.  96  1232  1(5 13  1791222  1928  242730^3739  Lk.  5  24
6  5  22  9  58  11  30  12  4  8  loa  19  10  24  7  Jn.  3  i  •$/.  0  27  53  62  bis,  8  28
1831:  xc'nan  ma  (.b'reh  de-bar-nAsa)  in  Mt.  2430^44  2631
202240  £45  64  Mk.  21083138  931  1033  Lk.  212736  2222  Jn.
151  1223  34  bis.

Only  in  the  Pesh.  is  6  vios  rov  avOpuwov  uniformly
rendered  b'reh  dH-ndsd.  Driver's  statement  (Hastings,
Z>Z?4s82)  that  in  the  Sin.,  Curet. ,  and  I'esh.  the  term  is
always  represented  by  b'reh  dH-ndsd  is  incorrect.  The
occurence  of  b'reh  dt-gabrd  in  Lk.  7  34  (Sin. ,  Cur. ),  Mk.
838  (Sin.,  Ev. )  and  the  identical  Lk.  926  (Cur.),  Lk.
2248  (Cur.)  and  Jn.lSsi  (Sin.,  Ev. )  is  not  without  its
importance.  It  suggests  that  in  the  case  of  some  say
ings  b'reh.  dS-gabrd  had  so  established  itself  in  common
usage  that  even  translators  who,  for  dogmatic  reasons,
preferred  b'rcfi  df-nasd  were  influenced  by  it.  It  is
evident  that  b'reh  dH-bar-ndsd  is  a  creation  of  Christian
theology  designed  to  avoid  misconstruction  of  b'reh
df-gabrd.  Originally  the  latter  was  no  doubt  intended
to  mean  simply  _filius  hominis  ;  but  the  root  idea  (  fill  us
•viri]  could  not  fail  to  be  embarrassing  to  the  dogma
that  Jesus  was  not  the  son  of  a  man.  Its  use  by  Paul
of  Telia  (see  §  4)  shows  that  the  substitute  was  not  un
known  among  the  Christians  of  Mesopotamia.  Cureton
explained  that  his  translator  '  was  not  accurately  ac
quainted  with  the  Greek  language,  and  therefore  trans
lated  .  .  .  filius  viri  not  hominis'  (Remains,  p.  Hi).
Hut  the  Greek  phrase,  which  is  everywhere  the  same,
could  not  have  troubled  him,  and  he  knew  his  own
language.  If,  in  some  places,  he  used  what  he  must
have  regarded  as  a  synonym,  the  reason  is  probably  to
be  looked  for  in  tradition.

It  is  significant  that  b'reh  d?->idsd  never  occurs  in  the
Palestinian  lectionary,  and  that  in  Mt.  and  Lk.  b' rch  df-
gabrd  maintained  itself  everywhere  except  in  Mt.  2-1-26
and  Lk.  21-22.  So  completely  has  the  consciousness  of
the  element  '  son  '  in  Son  of  Man  disappeared  that  '  son
of  the  son  of  man  '  meant  only  '  son  of  man.'  Possibly
the  introduction  of  the  new  phrase  in  the  synoptic
apocalypse  (see  §  41)  and  in  certain  typical  sayings  is
reminiscent  of  an  earlier  Aramaic  version  having  only
bar-ndsd.  The  Edessene  translators  could  not  render
the  Greek  phrase  by  bar-ndsd  since  this  would  have  taken
no  account  of  the  articles.  As  the  idea  was  new,  no  ex
tant  expression  could  be  used,  and  any  term  would  be
open  to  misapprehension.  The  form  apparently  first
chosen,  b ' reh  dl-gabrd,  might  be  understood  as  the  son
of  some  particular  man,  but  gabrd  had  the  advantage  of
being  a  singular.  In  the  end  the  objection  that  it  might
be  taken  to  imply  that  Jesus  had  a  human  father  proved
more  serious,  and  the  phrase  seems  gradually  to  have  been
crowded  out  of  use  until  the  officially  recognised  version
had  no  other  form  than  b'reh  di-nd$d.  '  Son  of  the
human  being,'  might  be  interpreted  'son  of  Mary. '

1  MC'JXI  KT37I  Lk.  22  48,  is  either  a  scribal  error  or  NU'JNT  's  a
later  addition  ;  NC'JNI,  Jn-  6  27,  was  no  doubt  preceded  by  rp3-

4714


SON  OF  MAN

The  earliest  Arabic  version  was  probably  made  from  some
Aramaic  translation.  It  is  not  likely,  however,  that  this  was
the  Peshita,  as  it  would  then  undoubtedly  render  b'rch  de-nasa
everywhere  with  the  same  phrase.  But  in  Alt.  96  16  13  Lk.  9  58
17  24  26  19  10  Jn.  1  51  3  \T,f.  0  27  53  62  8  28  it  uses  the  term  ibntt  'I
frasari,  while  elsewhere  the  rendering  is  ibnu  'I  insdni.  Jiasaru
is  a  collective,  but  is  frequently  used  as  a  sg. ,  and  ibnu  'I  basari
is  not  improbably  a  rendering  of  b'rch  de-gabra.

The  Ethiopia  everywhere  translates  the  Greek  term  •wAliiii
'cguiila  'emiilieyau,  never  expressing  the  article  by  a  demon
strative  zcckA  or  zentu.  With  the  same  uniformity  the
Latin  versions  render  \\.Jtlius  hominis.

On the relation of Marcion and other Gnostics
to  the  Synoptic  title  see  §  43  f. It  cannot  safely  be
14 Patristic mamtained  that  it  was  unknown  to  all
and  mediaeval  of  the  '  aPostolic  fathers.'

intni-n..^.!*;/^ 1  he  most  natural  interpretation  of  Dam.

interpretation.  2  I0  is  that  the  author  afludes  t()  it  when>

having  found  in  an  interpolated  text  of  Ex.  IT  14  a  reference  to
the  son  of  God,  he  declares  that  Jesus  is  prefigured  in  it  'not  as
son  of  man,  but  as  son  of  God.'  The  inference  may  be  drawn
that  about  130  A.D.  the  title  was  known  in  some  circles  and
understood  as  designating  the  human  nature  assumed  by  the
Son  of  God.  In  a  later  addition  to  the  Ignatian  epistle  to  the
Kphesianst&v  the  title  is  found  (TU>  viol  av9punrov),  apparently
interpreted  as  referring  to  Jesus'  descent  from  David.  Justin
(Dial,  100)  explained  the  title  as  referring  to  Jesus'  descent
through  Mary  from  David,  Jacob,  Isaac,  and  Abraham.
Irenanis  (Hacr.  3  19)  understood  it  to  denote  that  Jesus  was  the
son  of  Mary  'quae  et  ipsa  erat  homo,' and  Tertullian  strongly
argued  the  impossibility  of  any  other  interpretation  (adv.  Marc.
4  10).  Origen,  on  the  contrary,  regarded  it  as  unnecessary  to
seek  for  a  particular  human  being,  since  the  expression  simply
meant  '  man  '  and  was  chosen  by  Jesus  from  pedagogic  motives,
as  when  God  is  represented  as  a  man  (Migne,  13  15  37).

Even  in  Greek  the  member  of  a  body  was  sometimes  indicated
by  vios,  as  in  in.  Tr)S  yepovcriai;,  ui.  TTJS  jroAews,  vi.  ToO  Sr/fiov,
vi.  '.\<}>po!>uTie<av  (cp  Deissmann,  Bibelstudien,  1  i6fi),  and  uibs
avOptanov  was  frequently  found  in  parallelism  with  arOpcon-os  in
the  LXX.  So  profound  a  student  of  these  versions  as  Origen
may  therefore  have  rightly  understood  the  idiom.

Theodoret  introduces  the  Hebrew  and  Aramaic  usage
to  account  for  certain  phrases  compounded  with  t'tos  or
6vya.Ti)p  in  ©  ;  he  may  have  applied  the  same  principle
to  this  case.  Chrysostom  certainly  regards  the  term
as  simply  designating  '  man'  in  In.  ;>2j  (Migne,  59223).
That  seems  also  substantially  to  have  been  the  view  of
Augustine  (Contra  Arian.  18).  It  is  possible  that
Cyprian's  comparison  of  Mt.  1232  with  i  S.  225,  and
inference  that  the  church  cannot  forgive  sins  against
God,  indicates  that  he  understood  Ji/ius  hominis  to
designate  '  man  '  in  a  generic  sense  in  some  passages,
as  Lietzmann  has  suggested  (p.  80).  Jerome  was  not
prevented  by  his  knowledge  of  Hebrew  from  identifying
'the  human  being'  as  the  virgin  Mary  (Com.  in  Ps.
85)  ;  and  this  continued  to  be  a  common  interpretation.
Euthymius  Zigabenus  (about  noo  A.D.)  explains  that
avOpuwos  may  mean  yvvr)  as  well  as  dvijp  (Migne,  129293),
and  Alexander  of  Jumege  (d.  1209)  only  regrets  the
difficulty  of  rendering  in  French  a  title  which  is  identical
so  far  as  the  meaning  is  concerned,  but  not  gram
matically,  with  filius  virginis.  In  the  first  German
translation  it  was  indeed  translated  siin  Jer  maid  (Codex
Teplensis  and  three  earliest  editions),  and  the  Romance
version  of  the  Wahlenses  had_/?/A  de  la  vergene.  Xicolaus
de  Lyra  understood  Mt.  128  to  affirm  that  blasphemy
against  Christ's  humanity  is  not  as  unpardonable  as
that  against  his  divinity,  and  Mt.  1613  to  be  a  con
fession  on  his  part  of  the  humble  fact  of  his  humanity
while  his  disciples  understand  it  of  his  divinity  (Biblia
Sacra,  1588,  vol.  ii. ).  A  curious  comment  on  'men'
in  Mt.  1613  is  'homines  sunt  qui  de  filio  hominis
locjuuntur,  Dii  enim  qui  deitatem  intelligunt. '

\Yith  the  renaissance  of  learning,  the  first  attempts  at

a  philological explanation appeared. Ge'ne'brord, a

_ .  noted  Hebraist,  commenting  on Mt.  1232,

\ ii_ declared  that  'son  of  man' meant  simply
to  uiie  • i  -  ^. • ,

_,  ,  j  '  man and, returning to Cyprian  s sug-

W7  gestion,  saw  in  Eli's  words  (i  S.  225)  an
expression  of  the  same  sentiment.  Sins  against  men
may  be  pardoned,  but  not  sins  against  God  {De
S.  Trinitate,  1569).  Flacius  Illyricus  defined  filius

1  Genebrord,  Flaccus,  Beza,  Grotius.
4715


SON  OP  MAN

hominis  as  itnus  qitispiam  homo  (Clavis,  sub  voce
'filius').  Beza  regarded  the  expression  as  a  Hebrew
phrase  for  man,  and  suggested  the  Hebrews'  custom  of
speaking  of  themselves  in  the  third  person,  but  .also  called
attention  to  the  fact  that  in  the  gospels  no  one  except
Jesus  does  so.  It  is  the  merit  of  Grotius  to  have  first
recognised  that  in  Mt.  128  the  conclusion  must  be,
'  Therefore  man  is  lord  also  of  the  sabbath. '

Pointing  to  Mk.  2  28  as  exhibiting  the  more  original  connection
he  conclusively  showed  that  the  argument  would  have  no
cogency  if  the  Son  of  man  were  interpreted  as  the  Messiah,  and
could  not  have  been  understood,  since  at  the  time  Jesus  had
neither  declared  himself  to  be  the  Messiah  nor  been  willing  to
have  his  disciples  proclaim  him  as  such.  In  regard  to  Mt.  1232
he  came  to  the  same  conclusion  as  Genebrord  ;  but  he  refrained
from  attempting  an  explanation  of  any  other  passages  on  the
same  principle  (frit.  Sac.  6  445^).

The  discovery  that  upon  two  occasions  Jesus  spoke,
not  of  himself,  but  of  man  in  general,  when  employing
this  phrase,  naturally  seemed  less  important  than  the

16.  Substitute  conJe,cture  'hat  he  constantly  used  '  the
,  , man, in  the  sense  of  '  this  man, for
nro oun  "> ' the  P61"5011^  pronoun. The  latter  was

maintained  by  Coccejus  (Schol.  in  Mt.
820),  and  found  its  way  into  the  first  life  of  Jesus  by
Hess  (1 160261  269).  Bolten's  criticism  was  important
because  through  it  a  third  passage  (Mt.  96)  was  added  to
the  two  of  Grotius,  and  the  Aramaic  term  bar-ndsa  was
brought  into  the  discussion  (Der  Bericht  d.  Matth.  1792).

He  called  attention  to  the  Syriac  use  of  b'rch  dc-nasa  with  no
more  force  than  that  of  an  indefinite  pronoun,  found  it  strange
that  the  Greek  translator  should  have  failed  to  take  note  of  this
Aramaism,  and  boldly  maintained  that  in  Mt.  2427  Jesus  said.
'  So  will  be  the  appearance  of  some  one,'  meaning  by  '  some  one  '
himself.  In  regard  to  all  passages  except  Mt.  96  12  8  Paulus

returned  to  the  opinion  of  Coccejus  ('hie  homo  pro  ego'),  pointed
out  the  importance  of  Jn.  12  34,  and  suggested  a  later  misap
prehension  under  the  influence  of  Dan.  7  13  (Exeg.  Hdbuch,
1  465  500  Inf.).  Kuinoel  accepted  the  interpretation  given  by
Grotius  of  Alt.  128  and,  in  spite  of  the  well-founded  warning  of
Eichhorn  (Allg.  Bibl.  524  [1794]),  followed  Beza  and  Bolton  in
Mt.  10  23  (Com.  295,  337(1823]).  The  impossibility  of  the  latter
explanation  led  I1  ritzsche,  who  in  general  agreed  with  Paulus,
to  the  view  that  Mt.  1023  and  other  passages  were  later  additions
(Com.  in  IT.  .Matth.  320).  The  theory  which  assumed  that  Jesus
habitually  used  an  indefinite  pronoun  or  a  phrase  like  '  the  man,'
accompanied  by  a  gesture  indicating  himself,  was  too  artificial  to
command  respect,  and  in  the  general  reaction  against  the
rationalistic  school,  the  real  achievements  of  these  earlier  scholars
were  completely  forgotten.

When  Herder  (Chr.  Schriften,  ii.  [1796]  64)  explained
the  term  as  designating  the  ideal  humanity  of  lesus,  he

17.  Ideal  man?  ?ave  f  "ew  foriWht idea  tlwt  k  %vasf

intended  to  teach  the  human  nature  of

the  Christ.  But  in  this  modernisation  the  contrast
with  the  divine  nature  of  the  Christ  was  lost,  and  an
emphatically  high  conception  was  the  result.  Through
Schleiermacher  (Kinl.  479^)  and  Xeander  (L.eben  Jesu,
iT.<)ff.)  this  view  gained  a  wide  recognition.

It  was  adopted  among  others  by  Bohme,  Olshausen,  Lutz,
Reuss,  and  Luthardt,  has  more  recently  been  defended  by  West-
cott  and  Stanton,  and  influenced  Weisse,  Holtzmann,  Beyschlag,
Hase,  Keim,  Mangold,  Usteri,  and  Bruckner.

Hofmann (Schriftbeiveis,  ii.  253) could find in the

phrase  no  allusion  to  an  ideal  of  humanity,  but  regarded

_ .  it  as  substantially  synonymous  with

.  onungman.  .  ^e  ^^  (.Q,,^^'  <;  ^^o/uevos,  con
taining  no  indication  of  character.  Cremer  (  Worter-
buch(^,'&4ibff.}  similarly  saw  in  it  a  reference  to  the
man  promised  in  the  protevangel,  Gen.  815.

Already  Scholten  (Specimen,  1809)  interpreted  the
term  as  a  title  of  the  Messiah,  the  heavenly  king
1O  «  .  destined  to  reign  as  man  over  men.

MeasSc Strauss  ^Leben  Jesu'  463['835]»  expressed

, .., 9 the  opinion  that  the  son  of  man  was  one

of  the  current  Messianic  titles. V.  Colin

(Bibl.  Th.  2i6  [1836])  agreed  with  him. Ewald  (Gesch.

Christ  14  s  ,  202  [1855])  pointed  to  Dan.  and  En.  37-71  .which

he  regarded  as  the  oldest  part  of  the  book,  as  evidence.

Renan  (  Vie  de  Jhus,  131^  [1863])  maintained  that  in

1  Coccejus,  Hess,  Bolt'en,  Paulus,  Fritzsche.
4716


SON  OF  MAN

certain  schools  it  was  a  title  of  the  Messiah  as  judge  of
the  world  and  king  of  the  age  to  come.  Beyschlag
(Christologie,  9  ff.  [1866])  held  that  it  was  a  Messianic
title  in  Dan.  7  13  En.  46  2  ff.  and  all  passages  in  the
gospels,  and  that  (esus  chose  this  particular  title  both
to  express  his  consciousness  of  being  a  man  and  his
knowledge  of  the  fact  that  he  was  the  ideal,  absolute,
and  heavenly  man.  Baldensperger  (Selbstbewusstsein
Jesii^,  ifygff.  [1892])  likewise  affirmed  that  the  phrase
was  used  before  the  time  of  Jesus  as  a  Messianic  title
and  was  adopted  by  him  as  such,  not,  however,  before
the  episode  at  Cassarea  Philippi,  the  earlier  passages
having  been  displaced.

That  Jesus  employed  the  term  to express  his  own

peculiar  Messianic  consciousness  has  been  the  conviction

_,  .of  many  scholars. But  there  has  been

-  i- much  difference  of  opinion as to his

V..  "  . . reason  for  selecting  it,  and  in  regard  to

Messianic hg ori in while  some  investigators

consciousness?  endeavsoured  to  discover  its  meanfng  by

an  analysis  of  all  passages,  and  by  connecting  the  various
predicates  with  the  idea  of  man,  others  discerned  in  it
only  a  designation  of  office  without  immediate  connection
with  the  root  idea,  and  in  the  predicates  saw  synthetic
judgments.  The  majority  of  critics  found  its  origin  in
Dan.  7  13.  Others,  however,  thought  of  Ezek.  ,  Ps.  8  or
En.  46,  while  a  few  regarded  it  as  an  absolutely  new
creation  of  Jesus.  One  source  was  deemed  sufficient  by
some  students  ;  by  others  the  conception  was  looked  upon
as  the  result  of  various  combinations.  As  to  the  motive
for  its  employment,  there  were  those  who  thought  that
it  was  chosen  openly  to  proclaim  a  different  Messianic
title  from  that  suggested  by  such  titles  as  '  Son  of
David'  and  '  SON  OF  GOD'  (q.v.}.  But  many  scholars
urged  that  such  a  public  announcement  was  improb
able  at  least  in  the  earlier  part  of  Jesus'  ministry,  and
that  he  is  more  likely  to  have  used  it  as  a  riddle  to
be  guessed  at,  half  revealing,  half  concealing  his  notion
of  the  Messiah  and  his  own  claims.  The  various
theories  were  largely  dependent  upon  different  interpre
tations  of  passages  in  OT  and  the  Pseudepigrapha,  the
priority  ascribed  to  Mt.  or  Mk.  ,  and  the  tone  of  Mt.
820  compared  with  Mk.  2  10.

In  commenting  on  Mt.  820,  De  Wette  observed  that
to  those  who  did  not  think  of  Dan.  7  13  the  expression
could  only  suggest  '  this man,' whilst
ose  who  had  the  Daniel  passage
in  mjnd  k  would  mean  ,  this  insignifi.

Cant  lllan  W'10' m Sp'te °^  h'S numD'e
condition,  is  destined to  become  that

which  the  prophet  has  indicated.'  In  this  pregnant
utterance  the  thought  of  Paulas  still  shows  its  vitality  ;
but  it  contains  the  germs  of  new  theories.

Wilke  (Urevangelist,  633  [1838])  inferred  from  Mt.  10  13  that
'son  of  man  '  cannot  be  identical  with  the  Messiah. Baxa(ZWTA.


cannot  throw  any  light  on  its  original  meaning.  His  examination
of  the  synoptics  convinced  him  that  the  context  never  favoured
the  idea  of  an  ideal  humanity  and  that  there  was  no  reference  to
Dan.  7  13  ;  and  he  therefore  concluded  that  Jesus  invented  the
term,  at  the  same  time  to  claim  for  himself  a  Messiahship  without
which  he  could  not  attain  to  a  more  universal  recognition  and  a
genuinely  national  work,  and  to  keep  aloof  from  the  vulgar
Messianic  idea  associated  with  the  title  'son  of  God.'  He
would  be,  not  a  king  coming  in  power  and  glory,  but  a  man
deeming  nothing  foreign  to  him  that  belongs  to  the  lot  of  a
human  being,  identifying  himself  with  all  human  conditions,
needs,  and  interests,  in  genuine  human  sympathy,  and  accepting
all  sufferings  and  sacrifices  connected  with  his  work  in  life.
This  has  been  called  an  '  emphatically  low  '  estimate  in  distinc
tion  from  that  of  Herder.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that
it  comes  much  nearer  to  the  old  dogmatic  position  with  its
sharp  contrast  between  the  title  of  Christ's  humiliation  and  that
characteristic  of  his  glory,  as  seen,  e.g.,  in  Meyer  (Coin.  1832,  to
Mt.  8  20),  and  that  it  really  sets  forth  the  human  worth  of  Jesus'
personality  more  clearly  than  any  mere  abstraction  like  '  the
ideal. '  Golani^/A^s  Christ  et  les  croycinces  Messianiqites,

T\ff.  [1864])  held  that  the  expression  was  unknown  before  Jesus
because  it  was  he  who  created  it,  that  by  it  he  designated  him
self  as  the  poor  child  of  Adam,  and  also  as  the  object  of  a  peculiar
divine  love,  that  no  one  called  him  by  this  name  because  it  would

4717


_ ,
21.  hmpnasis

011  lowimess

a


SON  OF  MAN

have  been  little  short  of  an  insult,  and  that  it  disappeared
because  in  the  church  the  divinity  became  more  important  than
the  humanity  of  Jesus.  Strauss  was  also  won  for  the  opinion

of  liaur  and  Colani  ;  and  Schenkel  (liiliel-lexikon,  1872)  pre
sented  a  somewhat  similar  conception  based  on  Ps.  8.

Hilgenfeld,  like  Baur,  regarded  the  term  as  indicating
lowly  external  conditions  and  a  humble  disposition,  but

22.  Modified  f1  tered  a protest  Tagainst  fP^^g  U

„-. . .  from  its  source  m  Dan.,  and  maintained

Messianic  ......

,.,. l>1  its  Messianic significance in  all places,

though  reflecting  the  peculiar  conception
of  Jesus  (ZWTfi.  1863,  p.  327^!}.  Baur  was  led  by
this  presentation  to  assume  a  later  Danielic  significance
for  the  eschatological  discourses  (NTTh.  1864,  p.  82).

Bernhard  Weiss  (Bibl  Th.  NT  ^ff.  [1868])  saw  in  the  ex
pression  neither  a  current  Messianic  title  nor  a  description  of
character,  but  a  term  having  no  intrinsic  significance  in  J)an.,
chosen  by  Jesus  to  avoid  misapprehension  of  his  aims  and  yet
to  announce  himself  as  the  Messiah  promised  in  Dan.  The
statements  made  concerning  the  Son  of  Man  were  consequently
regarded  by  him  as  synthetic  judgments,  in  the  Kantian
phraseology  introduced  in  this  connection  by  Biedermann
(Dogmatik,  226  f.).

Mangold  (Th.  Arb.  d.  rhcin.  PV  1877,  pp.  iff.)  regarded
the  term  as  a  Messianic  title,  chosen  to  emphasise  the  possi
bility  of  suffering  and  death  as  a  man,  and  the  coming  exaltation
as  the  true,  ideal  man.  Usteri  (Th.Z.a.  d.  Sclvwciz,  1886,
pp.  i  ff.)  strongly  urged  that  the  verbal  meaning  of  the  phrase
was  of  no  importance,  as  it  was  solely  a  title  of  office  selected
by  Jesus  in  order  to  allude  to  the  coming  of  the  promised
redemption  to  mankind.  Essentially  this  view  was  held  by
Bruce  (Kingdom  of  God,  172  [1890]),  and  Stevens  (Teaching  of
Jesus,  91  ff.  [1901])  emphasised  the  new  content  which  Jesus  is
likely  to  have  given  to  this  Messianic  designation.

Rejecting  Ewald's  theory  as  to  Enoch  0,6  ff.,  Weisse
looked  upon  the  term  as  an  original  creation  of  Jesus
to  exPress  h's  peculiar  consciousness  ot

bein£  a  human  Son  of  God'  and  there-

fore  having  no  familiar  connotation  to
his  hearers  but  presenting  to  them  a  riddle  (£-'.  Gesch.
132S  [1838]  ;  Ev.-frage.  22  ff.  [1856]).

Weisse  's  philological  explanation  ('  human  son  '  ;  like  »3j<
C'OBTI)  supposed  Hebrew  original  of  OTrarrjp  6  ovpai'tos,  'heavenly
father  ')  naturally  met  with  no  approval,  and  his  confusion  of  the
Synoptic  with  the  Johannine  use  was  wisely  avoided  by  Ritschl.
Sharing,  however,  with  Weisse,  the  view  that  Mk.  is  earlier
than  Mt.  and  presents  in  a  more  trustworthy  manner  the
course  of  Jesus'  life,  Ritschl  was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  Jesus
used  the  term  to  conceal  rather  than  to  reveal  his  Messianic
claims,  as  Mk.  records  two  instances  of  its  use  before  the  im
portant  episode  at  Cassarea  Philippi  (Th.  Jahrb.  1851,  p.  514).

Holtzmann  (ZM'Th.  1865,  pp.  2^2  ff.}  pointed  out
the  determining  influence  of  the  first  occurrence  in  Mt.
(820)  upon  those  who  maintained  the  priority  of  this
gospel,  held  that  in  reality  the  passage  suggests  Messianic
dignity  rather  than  humility,  and  inferred  from  Mk.  2io
the  Messianic  significance  of  the  term  to  the  mind  of  Jesus,
but  considered  this  to  have  been  a  secret  until  the  visit
to  Cassarea.  Keim  thought  that  Jesus  gradually  went
beyond  this  mystifying  title  to  such  designations  as
'the  coming  one,'  'the  bridegroom,'  in  suggesting  his
Messianic  claims  (Gesch.  Jen//,  2376).  Hase  was  of  the
opinion  that  Jesus  chose  this  term  first  to  conceal,  and
then  at  the  proper  time  to  manifest  his  Messiahship  as
the  perfection  of  human  nature  (Gesch.  Jesn,  412).
According  to  "VYendt  (Lehre  Jesit,  441  ff.  [1890]),  the
use  of  this  expression  was  not  so  much  a  riddle,  as  a
problem  provoking  to  thought  and  private  judgment  ;
for  whilst  the  hearers  by  their  transcendental  conception
of  the  Messiah  were  prevented  from  seeing  in  the  Daniel
phrase  '  Son  of  man  '  a  fit  designation  of  so  august  a
being,  Jesus  found  it  most  suitable  to  express  his  convic
tion  that  in  spite  of  human  weakness  and  lowly  con
ditions  he  was  the  Messiah.  In  Mt.  8  20  96  11  19  128  32
and  parallels,  Holsten  (ZVVTh.  1891,  pp.  i  /•}  saw  the
evidence  that  Jesus  used  this  term  concerning  himself
before  the  scene  at  Ccesarea  Philippi,  and  in  Mt.  1613  the
proof  that  he  employed  it  to  designate  himself  as  the
Messiah.

1  Hilgenfeld,  B.  Weiss,  Mangold,  Usteri,  Bruce,  Stevens.

2  Weisse,  Ritschl,  Holtzmann,  Keim,  Hase,  Holsten,  Wendt,
Paul,  Dalman,  Gunkel,  Fiebig.

4718


SON  OF  MAN

It  seemed  to  Holsten  probable  that  Jesus'  Messianic  conscious
ness  grew  out  of  his  experience,  suggesting  to  him  that  the
chosen  one  on  whom  the  unction  of  spirit  rested  was  to  pass
through  two  forms  of  existence,  one  of  humiliation,  another  of
glory,  even  as  the  '  Son  of  man '  in  Dan.  was  brought  from
earth  to  heaven  to  be  clothed  with  power.  So  profound  a
view,  however,  must  have  been  a  mystery  to  the  disciples  until
it  was  revealed  to  them.

According  to  Paul  ( Vorstellungen  urn  Messias,  42
[1895]),  the  mystery  existed  for  Jesus  himself  as  well  as
for  his  hearers,  inasmuch  as  there  was  a  time  in  the
Galil.-van  period  when  he  still  doubtfully  asked  whether
in  reality  he  was  the  Son  of  man  promised  in  Dan.
Dalman  (  Worte  Jesu,  191^  [1898])  clearly  recognised
that  '  the  Son  of  man '  was  not  a  Messianic  title  in  the
time  of  Jesus,  and  that  far-nasa  was  the  phrase  used
by  him  that  has  l>een  translated  6  i>Z6s  roO  dvffpJnrov.
This,  however,  he  regarded  as  unknown  in  Galilsean
Aramaic  at  that  period  in  the  sense  of  '  man. '

It  would  therefore  naturally  point  to  Dan.  7 13,  a  passage
especially  attractive  to  Jesus,  because  it  ascribed  the  establish
ment  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  God  alone.  Dalman  con
sidered  it  improbable  that  Jesus  employed  the  phrase  before  the
episode  at  Caisarea,  some  pericopes  having  been  placed  out  of
their  chronological  order.  After  that  event  his  disciples  regarded
it  as  a  declaration  that  he  was  the  Son  of  man  of  Daniel's  vision  ;
to  the  people  it  was  a  riddle,  the  solution  of  which  Jesus  did  not
give  until  his  appearance  before  the  Sanhedrin,  and  then  at  the
cost  pfihis  life;  to  himself  it  was  a  means  of  realising  and
teaching  that  the  child  of  human  parents,  by  nature  weak,
destined  by  God  to  be  the  ruler  of  the  world,  may  before  his
investiture  with  Messianic  power  be  obliged  to  suffer  and  die.

Accepting  the  view  that  bar-ndsd  was  used  and
meant  simply  'man,'  'the  man,'  Gunkel  (Z.WTh.
1899,  pp.  581^,  Vierte  Buck  Ezra,  347  [1900])
maintained  that  '  the  man '  was  a  secret  title  of  the
Messiah  used  in  Apocalyptic  circles,  and  originating  in
Babylonian  mythology.

Like  Gunkel,  Fiebig  (Dcr  Alenschensohn,  61  ft.  [IQOI])  re
garded  '  the  man '  as  a  familiar  designation  of  the  Messiah  ;  but  as
his  philological  examination  had  led  to  the  conclusion  that  KC'3^2
was  understood  in  Galilee  at  the  time  of  Jesus  as  meaning  also
'  man,'  he  ingeniously  argued  that  the  phrase  was  intentionally
used  in  an  ambiguous  manner,  so  that  the  hearers  might  believe
that  he  (Jesus)  was  speaking  of  man  in  general,  or  of  '  the  man  '
— i.e.,  the  Messiah  as  a  third  person — whilst  in  reality  he  was
speaking  of  himself.

The  conception  of  the  phrase  as  a  mystifying  title
into  which  Jesus  poured  the  contents  of  his  peculiar
„  .,  Messianic  consciousness  was  naturally

..  Pj  favourable  to  the  introduction  of  various
combinations  ;  whilesome  scholars  were
contented  with  a  single  OT  passage  as  the  basis  for
further  development,  others  thought  of  several  different
ideas  blending  into  a  new  conception.

Thus  Weizsacker  conceived  of  a  gradual  revelation  of  Jesus'
Messianic  self-consciousness,  first  on  the  prophetic  side  sug
gested  bv  Ezekiel,  and  then  on  the  royal  side  intimated  by
Dan.  (JDTh.  1859,  p.  736^,  Ev.  Gesck.  426 ff.  [1864]).
Hausrath  found  in  the  term  a  combination  of  the  heavenly
man  in  Dan.,  the  man  that  is  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  in
Ps.  8,  and  the  prophet  in  Ez.  (JVT  Zeitgesch.tp),  1879,  1480).
Wit tichen  introduced,  in  addition,  ihe  Son  of  man  in  Enoch  and
the  Servant  of  Yahwe  in  2  Is.  (Die  Idee  tics  Menschcn,  \yjjf.
[1818];  Nosgen  (Gesch.  Jesu,  i^Jf.  [1891])  saw  in  the  expres
sion  a  combination  of  esoteric  Mtssiahship  suggested  by  Daniel,
and  a  phase  of  existence  through  which  the  Messiah  must  pass
with  its  predetermined  humilialion  and  suffering.  Bartlet
(E.rf>os.  1892,  p.  427 jff~.)  also  united  the  idea  of  the  suffering
servant  with  that  of  an  ideal  representative  of  humanity  and
the  kingdom  of  God.  Schnedermann  (Jesu  I'erkundigung,
2,  1895,  206^)  combined  Danielic  Messiah,  Ezekielic  prophet,
ideal  man,  and  human  suffering.  Charles  (Book  of  Enoch,  yzff.
[1893])  held  that  the  true  interpretation  would  be  found  if  the
conception  in  Enoch  were  taken  for  a  starting-point,  its
enlargement  and  essential  transformation  in  the  usage  of  Jesus
were  noted,  its  subsequent  reconciliation  to  the  conception  of
the  Servant  of  Yahwe  were  observed,  and  the  occasional  re
miniscences  of  Dan.  7  were  perceived.  Stapfer  (Jesus  Christ
pendant  son  tninisterc,  305^  [1897])  combines  in  the  expres
sion  Ezekielic  prophet  and  Danielic  Messiah.  In  the  judgment
of  Sanday  (Hastings,  DB  2622  f.)  the  ideas  of  a  representative
of  the  human  race,  an  ideal  man,  and  a  suffering  servant  of
Yahwe  are  fused  into  the  central  idea  of  Messiahship.  This
position  is  also  endorsed  by  Driver  (ib.  4  582).

1  Weizsacker,  Hausrath,  Wittichen,  Nusgen,  Schnedermann,
Bartlet,  Charles,  Stapfer,  Sanday,  Driver.

4719


24.


SON OP MAN

Whilst  Weizsacker  found  in  the  customary  designa
tion  of  Ezekiel  a  means  employed  by  Jesus  for  suggesting

25.  Prophetic  ^e  Pr°Phetic  character  of  his  Messiah-
title?  P'  ^ernes  held  tnat 'Son  °f  man*

actually  was  a  current  prophetic  title
assumed  by  Jesus  to  indicate  that,  like  John  the  Baptist,
he  was  a  herald  of  the  coming  kingdom,  and  sub
sequently  merged  into  the  Danielic  '  Son  of  man '  by
the  Church  (/i/tfes  mess.  178).  This  view  has  been
carried  out  most  consistently  by  Cary  (The  Synoptic
Gospels,  360  ff.  [1900])  who  maintains  that  by  this
term  Jesus  intended  to  announce  himself  as  a  prophet
sent  to  warn  his  people  of  the  danger  which  threatened
them  if  they  did  not  turn  from  their  evil  ways.

It  was  not  unnatural' that  the  thought  should  arise
that  the  '  Son  of  man,'  of  whom  Jesus  is  represented  as

26.  Designation  having  habitually  spoken  in  the  third

of  Jesus' own PfT',^^ K f  T"\  n°!
ideal future ldentlcal  Wlth-  though  closely  related

Messiahship,  or  \h\own/l™™d^e  se]L

. , 11-  Bruckner  (//'//«.  1886, p.  272)suggested

indwelling that  Jesus  who, in his  judgment,  never

genius  ?  used the term before the episode at

Caesarea, when predicting  the  return  of

the  Son  of  man,  thought  not  of  his  own  personality,  of
the  man  Jesus,  but  rather  of  the  ideals  with  which  he  had
identified  himself.  A.  Reville  (Jesus  de  Nazareth,  2  190 ff.
[1897])  concluded  from  Mk.  2 1028  and  Alt.  25  that  in  the
thought  of  Jesus  the  phrase  designated  something  more  than
an  individual  son,  though  this  individual  be  Jesus  himself,
that  it  was  a  personification  of  a  principle  transcendent  above,
and  immanent  in,  all  the  persons  making  up  the  sum  total
of  humanity,  and  only  applied  to  Jesus  in  so  far  as  he
identified  himself  wilh  this  principle.  According  to  Joh.
Weiss  (Predigt  Jesu,  ^ff.  [1892];  Nachfolge  Christi,  •$•$/.
U875]),  Jesus  used  the  term  to  indicate  his  future  position.
When  he  should  relurn  upon  the  clouds,  he  would  be  the  Son  of
man  referred  to  by  Daniel.  In  the  sayings  concerning  the
death  of  the  Son  of  man,  he  taught  objectively  that  the  coming
Messiah  must  suffer  and  die;  in  Alt.  11  19  1613  Lk.  7  34  the
title  has  been  substituted  for  original  'I';  in  Mk.  2  1028  ihe

Chilological  explanation  resumed  by  Lagarde,  Rahlfs,  and  Well-
ausen  (see  §  29)  should  be  applied  (cp  also  Predigt  Jesuit,
1900,  pp.  :6o  ff.,  201  ff.,  where  the  interpretation  of  some
passages  is  slightly  modified).  In  harmony  with  his  exegesis
of  Dan.  7  13,  Grill  (I.e.,  57  ff.)  comes  to  the  conclusion  that
Jesus  more  or  less  distinctly  conceived  of  himself  as  being
dynamically  identified  with  the  highest  principle  of  revelation,
the  angelic  hypostasis  introduced  by  Daniel,  and  that  the
original  text  read  eyw  in  Mk.  2  10  and  o  dctfpiuTroj  in  Mk.  2  28.

When  the  interpretation  of  Daniel's '  Son  of  man  '

as  a  symbol  of  a  coming  ideal  society  had  won  its  \\ay

to  wide  recognition, the  suggestion

27.  Designation  iay  near  at  hand  that  Jesus  may  have
of  '  kingdom used  it  himself  in  the  same  sense.

Of  heaven  '  ?  Hoekstra maintained  that  Jesus indi

cated  not  himself  by  this  term,  but  the

new  religious  community  to  which  the  kingdom  was  to  be
given  (De  beisaming  dc  ZOOH  des  Alenschen,  1866).  Carpenter
(J-'/rst  Three  Gospels,  1890,  p.  383^)  held  that  Jesus  employed
it  as  an  emblem  of  the  kingdom  of  righteousness,  and  that
his  followers,  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  he  was  the
Messiah,  understood  it  in  a  personal  sense,  and  gave  such  a
colouring  to  his  reported  utterances  as  accorded  with  this
assumption.  Drummond  (JTh.St.  1901)  thinks  thai  Jesus  may
have  regarded  it  as  an  expression  for  the  ideal  people  of  God,
and  for  himself  as  head  of  this  class,  giving  to  it  the  same
primarily  collective,  subsequently  individual,  sense  that  the
Servant  of  Yahwe  has.

Whilst  many  scholars  failed  to  make  any  distinction
between  the  words  actually  uttered  by  Jesus,  and  the
28 C t' sayings  ascribed  to  him  by  the  evan-
'. .,  gelists, and some  were content with

evangelists?1  Beating  passages  of  doubtful  authen
ticity,  others  felt  the  necessity  for  a
more  searching  criticism.  As  a  more  correct  estimate
of  the  Fourth  Gospel  spread,  the  tendency  developed
in  many  circles  to  lean  all  the  more  heavily  on  the
synoptics.  It  is  largely  the  merit  of  Bruno  Bauer  and
Volkmar  to  have  applied  the  same  measure  to  all  the
gospels,  explaining  each  as  a  didactic  work  written  for
a  definite  purpose,  and  naturally  reflecting  the  religious

1  Bruno  Bauer, Volkmar,  Jacobsen,  Pfleiderer, Martineau,
Cone,  Oort,  Van  Manen,  Baljon,  Brandt,  Wrede.

4720


SON  OF  MAN

thought  of  the  author  and  the  men  among  whom  he
lived.  From  this  point  of  view  B.  Bauer  readied  the
conclusion  that  Jesus  never  called  himself  '  Son  of  man  '
(Kritik  d.  ev.  Gesch.  3  [1842]  iff.),  and  Volkmar  \vas
led  to  the  view  that  it  was  an  original  creation  of  Mk.

But  was  really  Mk.  the  originator  of  it  ?  Colnni  (Jesus
Christ,  140  [1864])  had  seen  that  Mk.  186-32  (Mt.  244-38  Lk.
21  8-36)  was  '  a  veritable  Apocalypse  lacking  nothing  essential  to
this  species  of  composition.'  According  to  Jacobsen  this  was
the  door  through  which  the  expression  entered  into  the  gospels,
whilst  it  was  still  absent  in  the  original  form  of  Mk.  (Untcrsuch-
uuffn  fiber  die  s\n.  Etn>,  64,  [1883];  1'rot.  Kirchenzcitung,
1886,  p.  563^).  Pfleiderer  (Urchrist.  366,  387  [1887])  also  in
clined  to  look  upon  the  word  as  of  foreign  Apocalyptic  origin,
not  used  by  Jesus  himself.  Convinced  that  Jesus  did  not  put
forth  any  Messianic  claims,  Martineau  explained  the  occasional
use  of  the  torn  by  Jesus  as  F.  C.  Baur  (§  21)  had  done,  but
ascribed  to  the  Evangelists  the  conception  of  it  as  a  Messianic
title  (Scat  of  Authority,  335  ft.  [1890]).  Orello  Cone  (New
ll'prM,  W2ff.  [1893])  also  looked  upon  the  Apocalyptic  passages
as  the  channel  through  which  '  Son  of  Man '  as  a  Messianic
title  found  its  way  into  the  gospel,  though  he  still  thought  of
Jesus  as  having  used  it  to  denote  that  he  was  '  the  man  who
was  pre-eminently  endowed  from  on  high.'

In  H.  L.  Oort's  dissertation  (De  uitdrukking  o  vi.  T.  d.
in  het  NT,  1893)  the  Messianic  significance  of  the  term
in  the  Greek  NT  was  strongly  maintained  ;  its  origin
was  sought  in  Dan.  and  the  later  Apocalypses,  whence
it  was  taken  by  the  evangelists,  and  no  effort  was  made
to  trace  any  of  the  sayings  back  to  Jesus.  Van  Manen
(TVz.  T,  1893,  p.  544  ;  1894,  p.  177  ft)  discountenanced
in  principle  any  attempt  to  go  behind  the  written
records,  and  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  Dan.  and
Enoch  the  introduction  of  the  term  as  a  Messianic  title
in  the  gospels ;  a  view  also  adopted  by  Baljon  (Griekisch-
Theoiogisch  \Voordenboek,  2960).  Brandt's  position  was
fundamentally  the  same  as  Volkmar' s  ;  but  he  added  the
important  suggestion  that  the  identification  of  Jesus
with  Daniel's  'Son  of  man'  would  be  most  natural,
if  this  Apocalyptic  figure  had  been  recently  introduced
\Evangelische  Gcschiclitc,  562^  [1893]).  It  was  prob
ably  the  Messianic  interpretation,  however,  not  Dan.  7
itself,  as  (following  Lagarde)  Brandt  was  inclined  to
think,  that  was  of  recent  origin.  Thus  a  deep  chasm
was  found  between  the  gospels  and  the  actual  words  of
Jesus,  over  which  no  man  could  pass  with  any  degree  of
assurance.  How  completely  this  exclusive  regard  for
the  Greek  gospels  tended  to  crowd  into  the  background
the  whole  question  concerning  the  Son  of  man,  may  be
seen  in  the  important  discussion  of  the  Messianic  secret
by  \Vrede  (Das  Messiasgeheimnis  [1901]),  in  which  it  is
scarcely  touched  upon,  except  that  he  expresses  a  doubt
whether  a  play  upon  words  can  have  been  intended  in
Lk.  944,  on  the  ground  that  the  solemn  title  'Son  of
Man  '  and  not  '  man  '  is  contrasted  with  '  men."

If  this  in  itself  perfectly  legitimate  literary  criticism
had  the  tendency  of  leading  to  a  wholly  negative  result,

on rw.~.,v. or  at  Dest  a  non  Kquet,  as  regards  the
zy.  rrcsn  c  ^, ^-^ , T  ^,

recourse  to use  y  Jesus> e  was

., .  . least a possibility  that  this result was

ie amaic.  jne  to  a  serjous  ciefect  m  t]ie  method

pursued — viz.,  the  failure  to  examine  the  reported
sayings  in  what  must  have  been  approximately  their
form  in  the  vernacular  of  Jesus,  if  spoken  by  him.
With  the  multiplicity  of  new  and  complicated  problems
claiming  the  attention  of  students  of  early  Christian
literature  and  the  apparent  necessity  for  a  division  of
labour,  it  is  not  strange  that  even  eminent  XT  scholars
should  have  devoted  indefatigable  labours  to  what  at
best  could  be  only  translations  of  the  words  of  Jesus
without  ever  inquiring  what  the  Aramaic  sentences  were
that  he  actually  uttered,  whilst  OT  scholars  to  whom
such  a  question  would  naturally  occur  hesitated  to  enter
a  field  no  longer  familiar  to  them.  The  chief  signifi
cance  of  Lagarde's  and  Wellhausen's  contributions  to
the  problem  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  was  again  approached
from  the  standpoint  of  Semitic  philology.  Positively,
the  gain  was  not  great  at  first.

Uloth  had  only  renewed  the  old  explanation  of  the  ration
alistic  school  (Godgclcerdr.  bijdragcn,  1862,  p.  467^).  Lagarde,

4721


SON  OP  MAN

like  Uloth,  saw  that  Jesus  must  have  used  bar-iiasa  and
thought  his  purpose  was  to  indicate  that  he  was  not  a  Jew,  nor
the  member  of  any  nation,  but  a  man  (Deutsche  Schriften,
226  [1878],  (.n-s.  Abh.  26).  Wellhausen  held  that  bar-nasd
should  have  been  translated  o  ai/0pw7ros,  but  found  it  exceedingly
strange  that  Jesus  should  have  said  '  the  man '  instead  of  '!,'
though  he  rightly  felt  that  it  was  not  more  peculiar  than  the
currently  accepted  view  that  he  said  '  the  Messiah '  instead  of
T  (Isratlitische  ».  jiid.  Gcsckickte^)  312  [1894]).  J.  Weiss,
following  Uahlfs,  wisely  returned  to  Grotius's  exegesis  of
Mk.  2  10  28  ;  but  the  improbability  of  his  eschatological  ex
planation  (see  §  26)  left  the  problem  still  unsolved.

What was  needed was  a search for the Aramaic

original  that  should  at  the  same  time  take  account  of

30 Basis  in tlle  results  °^  uterarv  criticism  secured

e-eneric  use  and  by such scholars as Hmno Bauer-
and  Volkmar,  and  Van  Manen,  as  well  as

by  a  Baur,  a  Ritschl,  and  a  Holsten,  a
lormation. ,  *  , • /- ,

keener analysis of the apocalyptic

sources,  and  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  Gnostic
attitude  to  this  title.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Bruins,
who  acutely  criticised  Oort's  failure  to  consider  the
Aramaic  usage  (  Th.  T,  1894,  p.  646  /. ),  did  not  follow
up  his  own  suggestions.  The  scope  of  De  Christus
naar  de  £v.  (1896)  possibly  prevented  a  discussion.

Kerdmans  first  combined  the  general  position  of  Van
Manen  and  Oort  with  the  assertion  that  in  Mt.  12832
1613  Jesus  used  bar-ndSd  in  the  sense  of  'man.'  He
could  not  find  in  har-ndsd  a  Messianic  title,  nor  think
that  Jesus  regarded  himself  as  the  Messiah.  Yet  he
considered  it  probable  that  on  some  occasions  Jesus
used  the  term  concerning  himself  in  emphatically
declaring  to  those  who  would  see  in  him  something
more  than  a  man,  that  he  was  only  a  man  as  well  as
they.  As  to  the  origin  of  the  Greek  phrase  as  a
Messianic  title,  he  thought  it  possible  that  it  arose
through  the  peculiar  form  of  the  Greek  translation  ;  and
the  absence  of  this  title  everywhere  in  early  Christian
literature  except  where  there  was  evidence  of  acquaint
ance  with  the  gospels,  he  accounted  for  by  assuming
that  it  was  everywhere  a  translation  of  an  Aramaic
original  (Th,  T,  1894,  p.  153^,  1895,  p.  49^).

The  view  that  Jesus  never  called  himself  '  the  Son  of
man,'  indicates  that  he  was  either  the  Messiah,  the
ideal  man,  or  a  mere  man  ;  that,  nevertheless,  the
development  of  this  term  into  a  Messianic  title  was  in
part  due  to  his  having  spoken  upon  some  occasions
concerning  the  rights  and  privileges  of  '  man,'  using  the
word  bar  ndsd  in  such  a  startling  manner  as  to  create,
contrary  to  his  intention,  the  impression  among  later
interpreters  that  he  had  referred  to  himself,  and  that
through  the  Greek  translation  of  the  Synoptic  Apocalypse
it  found  its  way  into  the  gospels,  was  first  expressed  by
the  present  writer  in  a  paper  read  before  the  Society  for
Biblical  Literature  and  Exegesis  in  1895,  and  published
in  JBL\Z>-$jf.  On  independent  grounds  it  was  con
sidered  that  only  four  sayings  containing  the  phrase
placed  before  the  incident  at  Caesarea  can  be  judged
genuine — viz.,  Mt.  820  96  12832.  A  statement  of
universal  validity  to  the  effect  that  '  man  must  pass
away,  but  he  will  rise  again,'  was  supposed  to  have
received  later  colouring  in  what  were  misunderstood  as
predictions  of  Jesus'  death  and  resurrection  after  three
days;  and  it  was  thought  possible  that  in  Mt.  2664
Jesus  spoke  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  referring  to
Daniel's  symbol.

Arnold  Meyer  (Jesu  Muttersprachc,  91  ff-,  14°  ff-  [1896])
briefly  indicated  his  belief  that  in  Mk.  2  10  28  Mt.  1-32  an
original  bar-niisa  meaning  '  man  '  was  used,  that  in  Mt.  820  it
stood  for  '  I, 'and  that  in  Mt.  11  19  it  should  be  translated  'some
one.'  He  deferred  the  discussion  of  the  eschatological  passages
to  a  second  part  of  his  work  which  has  not  yet  appeared.  But
from  later  utterances  (Die  modeme  J<'orsc/iutiz  fiber  die  Gescfi.
des  Christentums,  75  [1898]  and  Th.Lit.Z.  1898,  col.  272)  it
may  be  inferred  that  in  some  places  he  thinks  it  possible  that
the  'coming  of  the  Son  of  man'  actually  spoken  of  by  Jesus
was  identical  with  the  '  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.'  He
also  brought  to  light  the  forgotten  labours  of  Genebrord  and
Bolten,  and  called  fresh  attention  to  the  exegesis  of  Grotius.

Lietzmann  (Der  Menschensohn  [1896])  first  observed
that  there  are  no  traces  of  the  title  outside  of  the

4722


g
B


SON  OF  MAN

Gospels  and  Acts  before  Marcion,  and  surmised  that
it  originated  in  Asia  Minor  between  the  death  of  Paul
and  the  year  90  A.D.  (On  the  latter  point  see  §43.)
In  regard  to  the  use  of  bar-ndsd  by  Jesus,  Lietzmann
reached  independent  conclusions  that  approximated
most  closely  to  those  of  the  present  writer,  from
whom  he  differed  chiefly  in  not  being  able  to  assume  a
basis  in  the  language  of  Jesus  for  the  subsequently
modified  sayings  concerning  his  death  and  resurrection
(see  §  40),  while  he  rejected  Eerdmans'  view  that  Jesus
occasionally  used  it  to  denote  himself.  He  was  also
disinclined  to  accept  Meyer's  contention  that  the
occurrence  of  the  phrase  in  some  of  the  eschatological
passages  should  be  traced  back  to  Jesus,  without
desiring,  however,  to  pass  a  judgment  in  this  matter
beyond  the  general  conclusion  that  Jesus  did  not  call
himself  '  the  Son  of  Man  '  (Th,  Arbeitcii  aits  d.  Rhein.
Pred.  Ver.  [1899]).

The  theory  stated  above  was  accepted  and  defended
by  Wellhausen  (Gesck.W  381  [1897];  Skizzen,  6187  ff.

31.  Defence  of  [,l8"])- He,?)°uftt  il  p[°bable  tha|

this  theory.1 >sus °nce (Mk 10  33-34) expressed

3 apprehensions  as  to  the  outcome  of  his

visit  to  Jerusalem  ;  but,  as  the  exact  wording  cannot  be

ascertained, he deemed it impossible to determine

whether  the  term  bar-ndsd  was  used. As the  source

was  Dan.  7  13,  he  regarded  it  as  possible  that  already  the

Aramaic  term  bar-nd$a  had  come  to  be  understood  in

some  circles  as  a  designation  of  the  Messiah.

Pfleiderer  (AV«>  ll'orld,  444  ff.  [1899])  also  adopted  the  view,
which  was  not  far  from  his  own  earlier  position.  (On  his  in
enious  theory  concerning  Lk.  22  36-38  see  §40.)  Marti  {Das
itch-  Daniel,  53  [1901])  indicated  his  acceptance.  On  the
linguistic  side,  Bevan  came  to  the  defence  against  Dalman
(Critical  Kn<.  1899,  pp.  148^),  and  Noldeke  added  the  weight
of  his  approval  (in  Drummond,  I.e.).

Adopting  Wrede's  position,  Staerk  (Prof.  Monatsh.,
1902,  p.  297^)  sees  in  the  mysterious  name  'Son  of
Man  '  a  creation  of  early  Christian  anti-Jewish  polemics,
having  one  root  in  some  misunderstood  \6yia  such  as
Mk.  2  10  etc.  ,  and  intended  to  veil  the  Messiahship  of
Jesus  during  his  lifetime.  Such  a  conscious  intention
he  finds  in  the  fact  that  men  to  whom  bar-ndsd  in  the
sense  of  '  man  '  must  have  been  familiar  slavishly  trans
lated  it  with  6  iitos  rov  dvOpwrrov.

Holtzmann  (XTTh.,  1897,  pp.  246^)  finds  it  im

possible, in view of the accumulating material and

on p  _*• i Pn'l°l°g'cal difficulties, to pronounce

agreement PeremPtorily  against  this  theory, and  is

inclined  to  accept  it  so  far  as  the pre-

Cassarean  passages  are  concerned,  while  presenting  as

a  still  available  alternative  the  view  of  Moisten. Fries

(Det  fjarde  evangelic  t,  87  ff.  [1898])  reaches  the  con

clusion  that  the  term  was  used by  Jesus  only  on  rare

occasions  to  avoid  the  personal  pronoun,  and  not  in  a

purely Messianic  sense, while through En., where it

only  means 'man,' it  was introduced  as  a  Messianic

title  in  the  Synoptics  (cp  §  28).

It  is  scarcely  probable  that  a  new  investigation  of  pelonl
('3lSS4)  or  'olho  Aii-is  (c^Nn  1H1N)  as  a  substitute  for  Jesus  in
certain  Talmudic  writings  would  throw  any  light  on  our
question,  as  Fries  thinks  ;  Eliezer  no  doubt  said  it?<  in  Yfma.
666.  The  extensive  reading  of  Fiebig  (Der  Menschensohn,
1901),  including  large  parts  of  the  Talmud  not  before  examined
in  regard  to  this  phrase,  corroborated  the  opinions  on  which  the
theory  rested.  Fiebig  recognised  the  essential  accuracy  of  the
observations  made  by  the  present  writer  (p.  59),  and  his  criticism
of  Wellhausen  was_  scarcely  judicious.  When  the  latter  scholar
affirmed  that  the  Aramaeans  had  no  other  word  for  the  individual
of  the  human  species  than  bar-ndsd,  he  evidently  did  not  mean
to  deny  that  words  originally,  having  another  meaning,  such  as
ga/'ni  and  'mifa,  in  course  of  time  came  to  be  used  also  with
that  significance,  as  is  clear  from  SJkitzeH,6  196  n.  (1899).  The
only  word  relevant  to  this  discussion,  however,  is  one  that  could
have  been  translated  6  vibs  rov  avOpianov,  and  the  only  such
word  in  Aramaic  is  bar-naiti,  since  expressions  like  b'reh  de-
gabrd  (10331  ,Ta),  b'reh  <ff-'ndsa(tttywi  .Tn),  and  b'rch  df-bar-
ndsd  (NS'J-QI  ma),  manifestly  originated  as  Christian  transla
tions  of  the  Greek  term  ;  but  bar-ndsa  is  the  only  Aramaic  word
that  denotes  the  individual  of  the  genus  man  and  nothing


Wellhausen,  Pfleiderer,  Marti,  Bevan,  Noldeke,  Staerk.
4723


SON  OF  MAN

else.  As  the  material  considered  by  Fiebig  clearly  indicates,

and  as  this  scholar  himself  unhesitatingly  concludes,  that  Jesus
employed  the  term  bar-mlsii  (xBO-a)and  that  this  was  naturally
understood  by  his  hearers  to  mean  '  man  '  in  general,  his  further
assumption  that  Jesus  meant  by  it  himself  as  the  Messiah
appears  somewhat  hazardous.  If  Jesus  was  willing  to  have  his
hearers  infer  that  he  cherished  such  bold  and  original  ideas  as
that  man  for  whose  sake  the  sabbath  was  made  was  also  lord  of
the  sabbath  and  that  any  man,  not  merely  a  priest  by  virtue  of
his  office,  has  a  right  to  pardon  sin,  why  ascribe  to  himself  as  an
arriere  pcnsce  the  narrower  and  less  logical  conception  that  he
alone  as  the  Messiah  was  lord  of  the  sabbath  and  had  the  right
to  pardon  sin  ?  If  he  at  all  entertained  such  a  thought,  it
cannot  have  appeared  to  him  unimportant,  and  it  is  difficult  to
see  how  he  could  have  been  willing  to  spread  what  in  that
case  would  have  been  a  dangerously  false  impression  by  an
ambiguous  use  of  language.  Oscar  Holtzmann  (Lebtn  Jesu,
\2«_$".  [1901])  accepts  the  proposed  exegesis  of  Mt.  820  Mk.
2  10  28  and  Lk.  9  58,  but  thinks  it  probable  that  Jesus  used  the
expression  on  many  occasions  to  indicate  his  acquiescence  in
man's  general  lot,  and  to  teach  objectively  concerning  the
Messiah  which  he  believes  himself  to  be.

Because  of  its  far-reaching  implications  (see  §  46),  it
was  natural  that  the  explanation  stated  above  should

33.  Objections  "!eet w;l,h "mc,h1  <W°sition- Va»

bv  different Manen  (Lc^  nghtly  Protested  against
vi ' the  tendency  to  assume  a  genuine  utter-

0  ars'  ance  behind  every  saying  attributed  to
Jesus  in  the  synoptics,  and  to  forget  the  peculiar
character  and  manifestly  late  origin  of  these  writings.
But  since  even  within  the  synoptics  it  is  often  possible
to  trace  a  growth  from  a  simpler  form  to  one  unques
tionably  coloured  by  later  thought,  the  investigator
certainly  has  the  right  to  assume  that  this  develop
ment  did  not  begin  in  our  present  gospels.  By  testing
a  certain  word  in  an  approximation  to  the  Aramaic
form  it  must  have  had  if  uttered  by  Jesus,  an  entirely
different  sense  is  not  seldom  suggested  that  may
readily  have  been  obscured  by  a  natural  mistake  in
translation,  or  an  equally  natural  doctrinal  bias.  As
to  Mt.  1613  ff.,  van  Manen  is  probably  in  the
main  right  (see  §  39),  as  well  as  in  upholding  the
Messianic  significance  of  the  Greek  term  everywhere,
and  in  rejecting  the  survival  of  Baur's  position  in
Eerdmans.  On  Hilgenfeld's  argument  based  upon
the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,  see  §  42.  The
fact  that  Dalman  (/.  c. )  could  find  no  other  Aramaic
term  likely  to  have  been  used  by  Jesus  than  bar-ndsa,
and  recognised  the  improbability  of  this  having  been  a
Messianic  title,  is  more  significant  than  his  contention
that  bar-ndsd  in  the  sense  of  '  man '  was  a  Syriac
innovation  and  not  likely  to  have  been  thus  understood
in  Galilee  in  the  time  of  Jesus.

Dalman  may,  indeed,  have  indicated  a  real  tendency  of
Aramaic  speech  in  Syria  ;  but  the  remains  of  its  various  dialects
are  too  scanty  and  late  to  determine  whether  the  development
was  from  an  earlier  bar-ndsa  to  a  less  accurate  use  of  gabrd  or
'mlsd  for  '  man,'  ' der  Jl/ensc/t,'  a  view  favoured  by  the  general
spread  of  Aramaic  from  Mesopotamia  and  N.  Syria  southwards,
or  from  an  earlier  gebar  or  'mis  to  a  later  bar-nas.  But
Bevan's  point  that  the  various  uses  of  '«<?/and  bar-nas  which
appear  concurrently  in  Syriac  are  all  found  in  one  or  another  of
the  Palestinian  dialects  and  that  no  Palestinian  dialect  employs
any  of  these  forms  in  a  sense  unknown  in  Syriac,  is  certainly
well  taken ;  and  Wellhausen  rightly  feels  that  Dan.  7  13  is  itself
decisive  (cp  also  Fiebig,  and  usage  in  £v.  Hier.,  above  §  4,  iii.).

The  authority  of  so  accomplished  a  student  of
Palestinian  Aramaic  as  Dalman  naturally  influenced
other  scholars.  Baldensperger  (  Th.  Rundschau,  1900,
p.  201  ff.}  expressed  his  satisfaction  with  the  final
defeat  of  the  philological  explanation,  and  hinted  at
undue  philosophical  prepossessions.  Rush  Rhees  (JBL
1796)  also  thought  that  the  present  writer  was  hampered
by  the  prejudgment  that  Jesus  cannot  have  made  for
himself  at  the  outset  any  supernatural  claims.  This,
however,  was  not  the  case,  as  the  conviction  that  Jesus
did  not  cherish  a  desire  to  become  even  a  righteous
king,  a  divinely  appointed  ruler  of  Israel  and  the
nations,  was  not  the  starting-point  but  the  rather  un
expected  result  of  a  long  series  of  investigations.
Klopper  (ZlVTh.  1899,  p.  i6i_#)  accepts  the  validity
of  Schmiedel's  arguments  (see  §  34),  and  thinks  that

4724


SON  OF  MAN

Jesus,  already  in  the  Galilaean  period,  claimed  for  him
self  a  peculiar  kind  of  Messiahship  by  the  Danielic  title.
He  deems  it  probable  that  Jesus  looked  upon  his
victory  over  Satan  in  Mt.  4 1  ff.  as  a  realisation  of  the
slaying  of  the  beast  in  Dan.  7  n  26.  It  is  difficult  to  see
what  ethical  content  could  have  been  given  to  a  figure
which  everybody  understood  to  mean  the  establishment  of
the  empire  of  the  Jews  that  could  not  also  have  been
given  to  the  current  Messianic  ideal.  Clemen

(TLZ,  1899,  col.  489)  asks  why  bar-nasd  cannot
have  been  a  Messianic  title  at  the  time  of  Jesus  as  well
as  later.  The  answer  is  that  there  is  no  evidence
whatever  that  bar-nasa  was  ever  used  as  a  Messianic
title.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  Jesus  on  some
occasions  used  it  in  the  sense  it  commonly  and  ex
clusively  has  in  extant  Aramaic  literature.  In  these
instances  it  has  been  wrongly  translated  in  the  Gk.
Gospels  by  a  title  not  yet  drawn  from  Uan.  when  Rev. ,
4  Ezra,  and  the  interpolations  in  En.  37-71  were  written
in  the  reign  of  Domitian. J

The  most  serious  objection  of  Krop  (La  penste  de
/dsas,  1897)  is  derived  from  the  presence  of  the  title  in
predictions  of  Jesus'  death  and  resurrection.  How  was
the  title  brought  from  the  eschatological  series  into  so
different  a  setting?  It  may  be  answered  that  when
once  utterances  concerning  the  Son  of  man  had  been
placed  upon  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  the  expression  conse
quently  understood  as  a  self-designation,  it  may  readily
have  been  substituted  for  '  I,'  as  the  vacillating  tradition
in  many  places  indicates,  and  adopted  in  the  creation  of
new  oracles.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  a  genuine
utterance  of  Jesus  was  misunderstood  and  made  the
foundation  of  these  logia  (see  §  40).

Gunkel's  opposition  (I.e.]  comes  from  his  strong  con
viction  that  '  the  man  '  is  a  mythological  figure.

As  to  the  personality  to  whom  Dan.,  Enoch,  and  4  Ezra
refsr,  he  is  no  doubt  right  in  assuming  an  ultimate  Babylonian
origin.  The  conflict  between  Marduk  and  Tifimat  became
in  Judaism  one  between  Yah  we  and  the  great  chaos-monster.
What  was  first  ascribed  to  Yah  we  himself  was  subsequently
assigned  to  an  angel.  After  the  destruction  of  the  beast,
this  celestial  representative  of  Israel  comes  in  Dan.  7  with
the  clouds  to  receive  the  world -empire.  The  development
of  the  Messianic  idea  (cp  Schmidt,  Son  of  Alan,  chap.  t>)
led  to  a  transfer  of  these  functions  to  the  Messiah.  But
that  the  heavenly  king,  described  like  other  angels  as  having
the  appearance  of  a  man,  was  known  as  'the  man,'  lacks  all
plausibility.  Designations  suggesting  character  or  function—
such  as  'the  chosen  one,'  'the  just  one,'  'the  restorer,'  'the
bridegroom,'  '  the  lamb  ' — are  intelligible  ;  '  the  man  on  the
clouds '  would  point  to  Dan.  7  13,  and  titles  signifying  this,  like
'J3J7  (Trg-  to  i  Ch.  824)  and  '^3313  (Sank.  g66),  were  indeed
formed,  as  Eerdmans  has  shown  ;  but,  neither  in  Babylonian
mythology,  nor  in  Jewish  speculation,  is  it  likely  that  an  im
portant  personage  was  referred  to  merely  as  'the  man,'  'the
human  being.'

An  objection  is  raised  by  Rose  (Rev.  bibl. ,  1900,  pp.
169^ ):  the  close  connection  between  the  kingdom  and
the  Son  of  man  render  it  probable  that  Jesus,  to  whom
the  former  idea  was  of  such  importance,  also  occupied
himself  with  the  latter.  Two  facts,  however,  are  not
sufficiently  considered  in  this  view.  Intense  specula
tions  concerning  the  kingdom  and  the  world  to  come
are  frequently  found  without  any  allusion  to  a
Messiah,  and  this  is  readily  accounted  for  by  the  hope
centring  on  God  himself  as  the  sole  deliverer  of  his
people  and  judge  of  the  world.  When  Drummond
(/.<:.)  appeals  to  the  independent  tradition  of  Jn.  and  to
the  fact  that  '  the  apostles  must  have  known  whether
their  Master  spoke  of  himself  in  the  way  recorded  in  the
gospels  or  not,'  it  is  to  be  said  that  acquaintance  with
the  synoptics  on  the  part  of  the  Fourth  Evangelist  can
scarcely  be  doubted,  that  the  peculiar  use  of  the  term  in
his  gospel  (see  §45)  does  not  point  to  an  independent
tradition,  and  that  the  synoptic  gospels  were  written  too
late  to  reflect,  even  on  points  more  important  than

'  On  the  argument  for  an  earlier  existence  of  the  title  drawn
by  Charles  from  Knoch  37-71  (Hist,  of  Doctr.  of  Future  Life,
2i4/  [1889]),  see  §  7.

151  4725


SON  OP  MAN

this,  what  the  apostles  must  have  known,  as  Drummond
himself  would  no  doubt  admit.  His  weightiest  objec
tion  is  that  the  Church  would  have  preferred  to  invent
some  higher  title.  But  the  impression  left  upon  an
ancient  reader  of  Dan.  7  13  was  not  that  of  a  frail  mortal,
but  rather  that  of  a  resplendent  celestial  being  ;  and
the  title  was  not  invented,  it  grew.  Driver  (I.e. )  recog
nises  that  all  such  considerations  would  have  to  yield,
'  if  it  were  philologically  certain  that  "  the  son  of  man  "
could  not  have  been  an  expression  used  by  our  Lord. '
That  bar-ndsd  should  not  have  been  understood  as
1  man '  in  Galilee  in  the  first  century,  although  it  was  so
used  in  the  second,  does  not  seem  to  him  quite  prob
able.  He  therefore  goes  to  the  opposite  conclusion  that
bar-nasd  =  '  man  '  may  have  been  so  exceedingly  common
that  for  emphasis  Jesus  was  obliged  to  use  the  term
b'reh  di-nasd,  meaning  'the  Son  of  man.'  But  this
Christian  translation  of  d  vibs  rod  dvOpuwov,  intelligible
only  as  a  product  of  dogmatic  necessity,  would  not
have  been  understood  as  '  the  Son  of  man '  but  as  '  the
son  of  the  Man. '  Realising  the  precariousness  even  of
this  assumption,  he  finally  quotes  with  approval
Sanday's  opinion  that  Jesus  may  have  introduced  the
term  upon  some  occasion  when  he  was  addressing  hi
Aramaic-speaking  fellow-men  in — Greek  !  It  is  not  easy
to  believe  that  this  Son  of  man  who  went  forth  to  seek
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost  presented  to  his
Galilrean  fishermen  riddles  concerning  himself  in  a
foreign  tongue.

Even  the  suggestion  of  Jansen  quoted  by  Weiss  (Predigt
fesu,ft)  165)  that  Jesus  used  the  Hebrew  term  ben-ad&m,  though
less  violent,  lacks  all  probability.  It  is  not  apparent  why  he
should  have  translated  bar-nnsa  into  ben-adajn,  which  was  not
a  Messianic  title  and  could  not  possibly  suggest  Dan.  7  13.

The  keenest  criticism  of  the  new  interpretation  has
been  made  by  Schmiedel  (Prot.  Monatsh.,  1898,  pp.

34.  Schmiedel's ^zff' ^ ff'.' ^^  .PP-  333^).
He  is  unquestionably  ngnt  in  laying
criticism

down the principle that '  absolute

credibility  should  be  accorded  to  that  which  cannot
have  been  invented  by  a  tradition  replete  \\ith  venera
tion  for  Jesus  because  contradicting  it,  and  most  clearly
in  instances  where,  among  the  evangelists  themselves,
one  or  another  has  actually  effected  a  transformation
out  of  reverence  for  Jesus. '  Strangely  enough,  this
acute  critic  has  failed  to  perceive  that,  if  the  interpreta
tion  based  on  the  Aramaic  is  admitted,  the  passages  in
question  furnish  most  valuable  illustrations  of  his
principle.  Has  a  man  the  right  to  assure  his  fellow-
man  that  his  sins  are  pardoned  ?  The  Pharisees  assert
that  God  alone  can  pardon  sin.  Jesus  affirms  that  man
has  the  right  to  do  so.  This  thought  was  too  bold  for
the  Church  to  grasp.  She  asked,  '  Who  is  the  man
that  can  pardon  sins?'  and  her  answer  was,  'the
Christ.1  It  was  no  doubt  because  the  translator,
following  the  custom  of  the  Alexandrian  version,
rendered  the  phrase  literally  d  vibs  rov  dvdpunrov  rather
than  in  good  idiomatic  Greek  d  av6pu>Tros  that  the  say
ing  was  preserved  at  all.

It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  the  question  debated  was
originally  connected  with  a  case  of  healing,  and  quite  irrelevant
to  ask  whether  Jesus  thought  that  all  men  could  exercise  healing
power,  nor  is  it  at  all  certain  that  Jesus  would  have  answered
such  a  question  in  the  negative.  Jesus  declares  that  the  sabbath
was  made  for  man's  sake,  therefore  man  is  also  lord  of  the
sabbath,  and  the  added  remarks  show  that  he  regarded  the
whole  cult  as  of  less  importance  than  the  principle  of  love
violated  in  the  charge  made  against  his  disciples.  But  a  view
of  the  sabbath  that  put  it  wholly  into_  the  hands  of  man,  was  too
radical  for  the  Church.  By  the  misleading,  though  probably
unintentional,  turn  given  to  the  expression  in  Greek,  she  gained
the  comforting  assurance  that  the  Christ  was  lord  of  the  sabbath,
and  would,  no  doubt,  lend  his  authority  to  any  change  made  in
his  honour.  The  more  in  harmony  with  the  growing  veneration
for  Jesus  this  thought  is,  the  more  value  must  be  attached  to
the  earlier  and  so  markedly  different  form  revealed  by  a  transla
tion  of  the  saying  back  into  the  original  Aramaic.

In  Mt.  820  Jesus  used  what  sounds  like  a  current  epigram  to
indicate  the  vicissitudes  of  human  life.  He  thought  of  man's
lot,  the  Church  instantly  thought  of  his ;  and  the  greater  the
distance  between  her  meditation  upon  the  humiliation  of  her
heavenly  lord  from  the  general  outlook  upon  human  life  sug-

4726


SON  OF  MAN

gested  by  the  Aramaic  saying,  the  stronger  is  the  presumption
in  favour  of  the  latter.  There  is  pardon,  Jesus  declares,  for
anything  that  is  said  against  a  man,  hut  when  the  Holy  Spirit
that  works  his  mighty  deeds  through  a  man  is  declared  to  be  an
evil  spirit,  how  can  there  he  forgiveness?  While  the  Aramaic
saying  suggests  as  the  thought  of  Jesus,  that  men  should  he
willing  to  forgive  whatever  may  he  said  against  them,  but  that
it  is  an  infinitely  more  serious  matter  to  call  a  manifestly  good
spirit  possessing  a  man,  Beelzebub  ;  the  Church  found  it  far
easier  to  think  that  Jesus  has  given  the  gracious  assurance  that
he  would  pardon  even  blasphemy  against  himself,  though  he
was  the  Messiah,  possibly  because  his  Messianic  glory  was
veiled,  but  that  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Spirit  could  not  be
forgiven.  When  the  prophet's  death  began  to  appear  to  him  as
the  inevitable  result  of  his  career,  he  may  have  comforted  his
disciples  with  another  word  of  universal  application  :  'man
must  pass  away,  but  he  will  rise  again.'  Convinced  by  the
testimony  of  those  who  had  seen  him  in  heavenly  visions  that  he
had  risen  from  the  dead,  the  Church  was  better  prepared  for  the
thought  that  he  had  predicted  his  own  death  and  resurrection
than  that  he  had  in  simple  confidence  bound  up  his  own  destiny
with  that  of  humanity.  In  proportion  as  the  Aramaic  sayings
thus  disclosed  differ  from  the  Greek  Ivgia,  presenting  concep
tions  that  dp  not,  like  the  latter,  ally  themselves  naturally  with
the  developing  ecclesiastical  appreciation  of  Jesus,  they  become
precious  evidences,  both  of  the  historical  character  of  Jesus  and
of  the  peculiar  type  of  his  teaching.

Schrniedel  also  argues  the  probability  of  an  original
Messianic  reference  in  Mk.  228  from  Jesus' attitude  to
the  law.  lie  thinks  that  Jesus  may  have  been  led  to
regard  himself  as  the  Messiah  by  the  practical  question
that  he  as  a  reformer  was  forced  to  meet,  whether  the
validity  of  the  law  might  be  set  aside.  '  The  law  was
intended  to  remain  forever.  If  it  must  be  changed,  an
explicit  authorisation  by  God  was  of  course  necessary.
No  prophet  had  possessed  this.  It  was  on  the  whole
conceivable  only  in  connection  with  the  new  order  of
the  world,  the  coming  of  the  Messianic  age.  Conse
quently,  only  one  could  be  the  divine  messenger  who
would  dare  to  announce  it,  the  Messiah.'  This  in
genious  line  of  reasoning  rests  on  presuppositions  that
are  scarcely  tenable.

Jesus  probably  believed  that  Moses  wrote  the  Pentateuch.
Yet  he  found  in  the  prophetic  rolls  the  most  pointed  criticism  of
the  cult.  Prophets  had  in  the  name  of  Clod  spoken  against
sacrifices,  temples,  sabbaths,  and  other  ordinances  of  the  law.
He  was  manifestly  much  more  influenced  by  the  prophets  than
by  the  law.  Whilst  the  quotion  of  the  validity  of  the  codes
might  seem  one  of  life  and  death  to  a  lawyer,  it  is  altogether
probable  that  other  things  seemed  far  more  important  to  the
carpenter  of  Nazareth.  The  lissenes  did  not  regard  it  as
necessary  to  wait  for  the  Messiah  to  authorise  a  remarkably  free
attitude  toward  the  temple  service.  Galilee  was  notorious  for
what  were  regarded  in  Jerusalem  as  laxer  conceptions.  The
man  of  Nazareth  who  went  forth  from  his  carpenter's  bench,  as
Amos  of  old  from  his  sycamore  trees,  is  not  likely  to  have
scrupled  to  follow  the  example  of  the  prophets  until  he  could
persuade  himself  that  he  was,  or  was  destined  to  become,  the
Messiah  for  whom  some  of  his  countrymen  longed.

In  distinction  from  Eerdmans,  Schmidt,  and  Lietz-
mann,  who  had  looked  upon  the  Greek  translators  as
the  agents  through  whom  the  designation  of  '  man  '
became  a  Messianic  title,  Wellhausen  thought  it  possible
that  already  the  Aramaic  /'ar-i/asd  was  at  one  time
used  with  this  significance.  It  would  indeed  be  interest
ing  to  know  whether  '  Son  of  man  '  was  employed  by
the  Aramaic-speaking  Christians  in  the  first  century,
and  if  so,  what  the  form  was.  Unfortunately,  there  is
no  evidence  on  this  point.

We  do  not  know  what  term  in  the  Hebrew  gospel  Jerome
rendered  _/?//«*  haminis,  nor  the  age  of  the  pericope  in  which  he
found  it.  The  Ei'.  Hier.  may  well  be  somewhat  earlier.  l!ut
its  iwo  terms  b'rch  dc-gabra  and  b'reh  df-bar-ndsa  are  mani
festly  translations  of  6  uibs  rov  dvOpuinov,  and  only  the  absence  of
/i'rt'/i  <fi~-inlsii  is  of  importance  as  it  may  show  that  this  Edessene
theological  term  was  not  used  by  the  Palestinian  Christians.
The  latest  interpolations  in  Enoch  37-71  are  of  doubtful  age  and
provenience  (see  g  7).  As  to  the  fragments  of  a  lost  apocalypse
preserved  in  the  Synoptic  gospels,  there  are  too  many  signs  of
editorial  activity  in  the  first  of  the  evangelists,  or  variants  in
different  copies  of  the  Greek  text  used,  to  permit  a  safe  judg
ment  particularly  on  the  important  point  whether  in  the  Aramaic
original  Mt.  24  30 and  parallels  contained  the  first  mention  of  the
coming  Son  of  man.  It  is  altogether  possible  that  the  usage  in
this  Apocalypse  was  analogous  to  that  in  Enoch  46  and  4  Ezra
13,  the  man  being  first  introduced  and  then  referred  to  with  a
demonstrative  pronoun  that  would  naturally  fall  away  in  the
Greek  when  the  phrase  was  understood  as  a  title.

4727


SON  OP  MAN

If  bar-ndSd  had  ever  developed  into  a  Messianic  title
among  the  Christians  of  Palestine,  there  aid  not  seem
to  be  any  reason  why  they  should  have  substituted  for  the
term  which  they  must  then  have  supposed  Jesus  to  use,
such  a  phrase  as  breh  dH-gabrd.  Schmiedel's  point  that,
if  bar-ndsd  could  convey  to  some  minds  the  idea  that
the  Messiah  was  meant,  there  are  no  grounds,  at  least
so  far  as  the  language  is  concerned,  for  disputing  that
it  may  have  been  so  intended  by  Jesus  and  understood
by  his  immediate  disciples,  appears  to  the  present
writer  to  be  well  taken.  But  it  touches  only  an  ad
mission  by  Wellhausen,  not  necessitated  by  any  un
mistakable  fact.  If  such  a  transformation  had  been
effected  in  Jewish-Christian  circles  before  the  end  of  the
first  century,  we  should  expect  to  find  it  in  Rev.  The
absence  of  the  title  in  this  Christian  apocalypse,  where
there  were  many  natural  occasions  for  using  it,  is  far
more  significant  than  its  non-occurrence  in  the  epistolary
literature  where  some  such  motive  as  Schmiedel  has
imagined  may  have  been  operative.

Until  new  evidence,  or  arguments  not  long  ago
refuted,  shall  be  adduced  in  favour  of  the  assumption
„_  „  ,  -  that  Jesus  spoke  Greek,  it  must  be  taken

,',  ,.,  for  granted  that  he  addressed  his  hearers
.  *.  .  in  the  Galilajan  dialect  of  the  Aramaic.
a  t  When  this  is  acknowledged,  it  follows  of

necessity  that  it  is  the  duty  of  every
scholar  before  pronouncing  upon  the  authenticity  of
any  saying  attributed  to  Jesus  to  consider  whether  it  may
have  been  wrongly  translated.  In  the  performance  of
this  duty  two  difficulties  are  met  with  :  it  is  possible  only
to  approximate  to  the  original,  and  the  literary  material
by  which  the  (Jalilxan  dialect  is  known  apparently
does  not  go  back  farther  than  to  the  second  century
A.I).  On  the  other  hand,  the  translation  in  this  case  is
simplified  by  the  fact  that  6  vibs  rod  avOpwirov  can  only
be  the  rendering  of  a  form  compounded  with  bar  (12),
and  further  facilitated  by  the  circumstance  that  of  terms
that  may  be  considered,  b ' reh  dt-'ndsd,  b'rch  dl-gabrd
and  b' reh  dH-bar-nasd  must  be  eliminated.  While  all
these  are  manifestly  Christian  renderings  of  the  Greek
term,  V reh  di!-ndsd.  was  apparently  not  used  in  Palestine,
b'reh  dt-gabra  cannot  have  been  formed  as  an  allusion
to  Dan.  7 13  and  as  an  original  Aramaic  expression
would  put  the  emphasis  on  Joseph,  and  b'reh  dl-bar-
riclsd  is  ruled  out  by  the  same  considerations.  The
only  available  term,  then,  is  bar-ndsd.

The  examination  in  detail  of  Aramaic  usage  undertaken  dur
ing  the  last  few  years,  valuable  as  it  has  been,  was  not  necessary
to  reach  this  conclusion.  I!ut  bar-niisa  means  simply  'man,'
the  individual  of  the  human  species,  and  is  the  only  Aramaic
form  that  by  its  origin  and  usage  has  solely  this  connotation.
Whilst  the  term  occurs  with  greater  frequency  in  the  literary
remains  of  some  dialects,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  it
was  lacking  in  any  (though  even  this  would  not  be  strange),  and
it  has  the  same  sense  wherever  it  is  found.  In  Galilee  it  appears
to  have  been  used  more  commonly  than  in  Samaria  and  Judaea.
Although,  in  the  absence  of  older  literature,  no  actual  occur
rence  of  the  term  before  the  second  century  A. n.  can  be  quoted,
there  is  no  known  fact  that  even  remotely  indicates  that  it  was
not  employed  and  understood  to  have  the  same  meaning  a  few
generations  earlier.

The  phrase  translated  d  t'iis  TOV  iu>6punrov,  therefore,
naturally  conveyed  the  sense  of  '  man. '  This  is  pre
cisely  the  most  appropriate  meaning  in  the  passages
whose  authenticity  on  other  grounds  is  least  subject  to
doubt.  It  is  quite  possible  that  in  one  or  another  of
these  sayings  the  indeterminate  bar  'nds,  '  a  man,'  was
originally  used,  or  that  the  emphatic  ending  had  already
lost  its  force.  It  would  then  imply  only  a  natural  mis
apprehension,  and  no  violence,  if  such  an  utterance  as
'  A  man  may  pardon  sins '  should  have  been  interpreted,
'  Even  a  man — viz. ,  this  man,'  or  '  Though  I  am  a  man,
I  have  the  right  to  pardon  sins '  ;  and  the  question  as
to  the  authority  involved  may  (so  Wellhausen)  have
assisted  in  giving  the  impression  that  Jesus  referred  to
himself.  But  from  this  understanding  of  the  phrase  to
the  conception  that  Jesus  designated  by  it  his  Messiah-

4728


SON  OP  MAN

ship  the  distance  is  very  great.  A  person  speaking
Aramaic  might  of  course  refer  to  a  third  person  as  '  The
man,'  if  he  had  already  introduced  him.  There  seems
to  be  no  instance  of  this  among  the  recorded  sayings  of
Jesus.  There  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  that  '  the  man  '
was  a  current  Messianic  title,  and  the  natural  impression
upon  a  person  to  whom  Aramaic  was  the  vernacular,
that  a  speaker  employing  the  term  bar-ndsd  referred  to
man  in  general,  any  man,  renders  it  exceedingly  im
probable  that  this  phrase,  without  further  qualification,
can  ever  have  been  used  as  a  designation  of  the
Messiah.  Since,  in  spite  of  this  fact,  6  vi.  T.  a.,  is
sometimes  put  upon  the  lips  of  Jesus  where  the  generic
use  is  out  of  the  question,  the  recourse  to  the  Aramaic
furnishes  a  most  valuable  criterion  of  genuineness.

But if  bar-ndsd meant simply 'man,' why was it

„  ,  translated  o uioj  TOV  avOpwwov,  and  not

tv, r-rCe  t °  &vOpo>wos  ? The  answer  is  to  be  found

6  ] ?• Partly  in  the  Greek  version  of the  OT,

translation.  and  partly  m  {he  development  of  thought

in  Greek-speaking  Christian  circles.

The  Hebrew  ben-dddin  was  by  (5  as  a  rule  rendered  vibs
avSpioirov  (vibs  avdpiairiav  Job  1C  21,  vibs  yijyeroOs  many  MSS
Jer.  40  33),  and  so  also  bar-ends  in  Dan.  7  13  (0  and  (5).  The
plural  b'nc  diidm  is  translated  viol  dv9pu>wu>v,  i  S.  IS  19  2  S.  7  14
Is.  52  1 4  Mic.  56  Prov.  8431  Ps.  57  5  1402,  and  oi  vioi  riav
avOpiairtav,  Joel  1  12  and  frequently  in  Prov.  ;  b'nS  ha-iiddiii  is
translated  oi  viol  dv9pumiav  in  I  K.  8  39,  and  ot  vioi  riav  dvdp(a-x<av
in  Gen.  11  5  2  Ch.  6  30  Ps.  33  13  145  12.  Of  most  import

ance  is  the  usage  in  Ecclus.,  where  the  Hebrew  has  uniformly
b'ni'  Ittl-iidiim  and  this  seems  originally  to  have  been  rendered
everywhere  oi  vioc  TOV  ai'Opiawov  (1  13  238  3  i&f.  21  Sn  83),
oi  vioi  Ttuv  dvdpiamot'  occurring  only  sporadically  in  MSS  as  a
correction  and  uioi.  avdputirov  as  an  alternative  reading  in  3  21
(HP  147  149,  Aid.).  It  is  significant  that  Aquila  also

has  oi  vioi  TOU  di'dpunrov  in  8  1 1  where  his  text  has  been  pre
served.  To  a  Greek  this  could  scarcely  have  conveyed  any
other  idea  than  'the  sons  of  the  man,'  the  man  being  some
particular  person  previously  mentioned.  Aquila,  as  well  as
the  translator  of  Kcclus.,  thought  in  Aramaic,  had  b'ne  'ndsd  in
mind,  and  used  a^pujn-os  as  a  collective  after  the  fashion  of
'ndsd.  In  Dan.  5 21  mibbfne  cndsd  is  simply  rendered

an-b  TU>»  dvOpunriav  (&).  Instead  of  following  this  example  and
rendering  bar-ndsd  by  o  ai'dpia-nos,  the  Christian  translator
adopted  the  more  common  custom  observed  in  the  Greek  version
and  particularly  what  seems  to  have  been  its  most  recent  form
seen  in  Ecclus.

A  Hellenistic  Jew  familiar  with  Aramaic  would,
therefore,  be  quite  likely  to  divine  behind  o  vibs  TOV
avdpunrov  an  original  bar-ndsd,  whilst  a  Greek,  naturally
inquiring  who  the  (Lvdpuwos  was,  would  be  puzzled  by
the  expression.  If  this  conceivably  caused  a  hesitancy
in  some  minds  to  employ  it,  it  certainly  was  to  many
an  additional  reason  for  its  use.  The  air  of  mystery
surrounding  it  made  it  peculiarly  fitting  as  a  secret
intimation  of  Messiahship.  It  is  manifest  that  the
phrase  is  not  a  fresh  translation  of  a  Semitic  original  in
every  place  where  it  occurs.  Possibly  this  is  not  the
case  anywhere.  It  may  have  been  employed  in  oral
teaching  and  in  earlier  writings  before  any  of  our
gospels  were  written,  and  adopted  by  the  evangelists  as
an  already  current  designation.  The  use  of  o  w6?  TOV
avOpuTrov,  not  only  in  passages  where  the  employment
in  the  Greek  Bible  of  a.vQpunro'i  as  if  it  were  a  collective
like  'ndsd  rendered  it  possible  to  see  through  it  a  bar-
ndsd  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  '  man,'  but  also  where  this
would  have  been  impossible,  inevitably  leads  to  the  con
clusion  that  it  may  be  necessary  to  distinguish  between
passages  having  different  claims  to  authenticity.

The  idea  that we possess in the  Synoptic  gospels
accurate transcripts  of  the  words  of  Jesus  is  already
37 N A f  akandoned  when  the  69  occurrences  are
literary0 reduced  to  39-  4°.  or  42  by  eliminating
.... * what  are  deemed  unmistakable  duplicates.
For if the 22  passages (see  § 12)  thus
duplicated  are  examined, a substantial agreement is
indeed  found,  but  not  absolute  identity,  and  the  differ
ences  are  sometimes  such  as  cannot  be  accounted  for
by  a  more  or  less  accurate  rendering  of  an  assumed
Aramaic  original.

4729


SON  OP  MAN

In  the  case  of  the  17  passages  found  only  in  Mt.  or
Lk. ,  some  are  obviously  duplicates  of  sayings  already
recorded  within  these  gospels,  others  have  synoptic
parallels  in  which  the  phrase  does  not  occur,  and  others
still  are  manifestly  later  glosses.  While  a  priori  there
is  no  reason  to  question  the  possibility  of  a  genuine
utterance  having  been  preserved  only  in  one  gospel,  on
examination  the  decidedly  secondary  character  of  all
these  seventeen  instances  becomes  apparent.

Not  only  is  Mt.  10  23  without  a  parallel  in  Lk.  12  i  -if.,  but  the
whole  section  Mt.  1017-25  predicting  the  sufferings  of  the
apostles  reflects  a  time  when  the  missionary  activity  of  the
Church  was  still  confined  to  Israel.  The  allegorical  interpreta
tion  of  the  parable  of  the  tares,  found  only  in  Mt.  13  37-41,  shows
the  strong  feeling  against  Antinomianism  in  the  early  Church
but  also  the  wisdom  with  which  some  of  her  leaders  left  the
punishment  of  heretics  for  the  Messiah  when  he  should  appear.
It  is  generally  recognised  that  the  Evangelist  wrote  this  com
mentary.  On  Mt.  Hi  13,  see  §  39.  In  Mt.  1(328  the  'Son  of
Man'  coming  in  his  kingdom  has  probably  taken  the  place  of
'  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  as  is  suggested  by  Lk. '.)  27,  where  '  the
kingdom  of  God  '  is  used,  and  Mk. ',*  i,  where  it  is  expanded  into
'the  kingdom  of  God  already  come  with  power.'  When  Mt.
1928./T  is  compared  with  Lk.l82g  and  Mk.  1029,  it  is  clearly  seen
that  each  evangelist  has  modified  the  utterance  or  registered  a
peculiar  tradition.  While  Lk.  seems  to  be  nearer  the  original,
the  omission  of  'lands'  is  in  harmony  with  his  general  attitude,
and  'kingdom  of  God'  is  his  synonym  for  the  more  idiomatic
'kingdom  of  heaven. '  Instead  of  'for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom
of  heaven,'  Mk.  has  'for  my  sake  and  for  the  gospel's  sake,'
specifies  the  future  blessings,  and  significantly  adds  '  with  perse
cutions  ';  Mt.  introduces  the  answer  by  v.  28  and  has  'for  my
name's  sake.'  If  'the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man'  in  Mt.

2430^  had  formed  a  part  of  the  original  apocalypse,  it  is  likely
to  have  been  preserved  by  Mk.  and  Lk.  (see  §  41).  The  com
mentators  have  not  yet  discovered  what  the  sign  is.  Was  it  a
flame  of  fire  (2  Thess.  1 8)  or  a  cross?  In  either  case,  this
additional  feature  would  not  be  very  old.  On  Mt.  2031,  see
§  41.  The  statement  of  a  fact  (Mk.  U  if.  Lk.  22  i /)  has  been
changed  into  a  prediction  in  Mt.  262.  Instead  of  for  the  sake
of  the  Son  of  man  '  in  Lk.  t>  22,  Mt.  5  n  has  '  for  my  sake,'  but
even  this  is  a  later  addition.  When  Lk.  12  8  is  compared

with  Mt.  1032  it  is  apparent  that  (cayco  in  the  latter  place  is
more  original  than  the  title,  but  also  that  the  whole  verse  is
secondary.  Lk.  17  20-22  is  not  in  harmony  with  what  follows,
and  Paul,  Wernle,  and  Holtzmann  have  rightly  pointed  out  the
disenchantment  of  the  Church  expressed  in  1722.  Jiilicher

(Gleichnisrciien  Jesu,  2288)  recognises  that  Lk.  IS&fr  is  a  late
addition  similarly  expressing  the  painful  disappointment  as
regards  the  parousia.  The  beautiful  comment,  Lk.  I'.'io.  may
be  this  evangelist's  tribute  to  Jesus,  or  an  interpolation  in  this
place  as  in  Mt.  18  n.  The  exhortation,  Lk.  21 34-36,  is  un
doubtedly,  as  Wernle  (Syn.  Frage,  17)  observes,  the  work  of
Lk.  himself.  Holtzmann  thinks  that  Lk.  2248  is  also  a  creation
of  the  evangelist  and  calls  attention  to  its  rhetorical  character
(//C,(2)  1901,  p.  414).  In  Mt.  21150  the  text  is  scarcely  sound,
and  the  account  of  Judas'  treason  is  of  doubtful  historicity  (see
JUDAS  ISCARIOT,  §§  7,  10).  It  is  possible,  however,  that  Lk.
22  48  goes  back  to  an  Aramaic  original  that  conveyed  the  sense  :
'  Is  it  with  a  kiss  that  thou  betrayest  a.  man  (bo.r-niisa)'*.  '  And
Mt.  2650  may  originally  have  had  as  a  variant  '  Why  dost  thou
betray  (rrapei  for  irapaSiSws)  a  friend  ? '  Two  men  in  dazzling

raiment,  evidently  angels,  remind  the  women  in  Lk.  27  7  that
Jesus  had  predicted  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the  son  of
man.  Addresses  by  angels  do  not  belong  to  history.  How
little  Lk.  cared  for  mere  verbal  accuracy  is  seen  in  the  fact  that
the  quotation  made  by  the  angel  does  not  quite  correspond  to
any  prediction  recorded.

A  study  of  these  passages  shows  with  what  freedom
sayings  of  Jesus  were  certainly  modified  and  apparently
created.

If  words  occurring  only  in  one  gospel  are  naturally
somewhat  more  open  to  suspicion  than  those  found  in
two  or  three,  it  must  be  remembered,  on  the  other
hand,  that  the  presumption  in  favour  of  genuineness
does  not  necessarily  increase  by  duplication,  as  it  may
only  imply  the  copying  of  one  evangelist  by  another  or
the  use  of  a  common  source.  The  reliability  of  any
saying  must  then  ultimately  depend  upon  the  general
trustworthiness  of  the  document  where  it  first  appeared
or  the  current  of  tradition  it  registered.

To  assume,  as  many  scholars  do,  that  the  evangelical  tradition
has  been  preserved  in  its  purity  in  Mk.  is  to  draw  a  very  rash
conclusion  from  the  doubtful  theory  of  Mk.'s  priority.  The
fact  that  no  passage  containing  the  phrase  is  found  in  Mk.  that
is  not  also  found  in  Mt.,  or  Lk.,  or  both,  only  shows  that  Mk.
remained  free  from  some  of  the  later  additions  to  the  other
synoptics.  It  often  happens,  however,  that  it  is  the  text  of
higher  age  and  greater  prestige  that  because  of  its  wider  use  is
most  enriched  in  that  way.  Thus  our  best  Greek  MS  of  Ecclus.

4730


SON  OF  MAN


SON  OF  MAN


has  the  greatest  number  of  interpolations,  while  far  inferior  '  person  and  with  the  secret  name.  Mk.  (1462)  lacks  some  of  the
MSS  are  relatively  free  from  additions  to  the  text  (see  Schmidt,  expressions  in  Mt.  and  Lk.,  hut  departs  widely  from  the  earlier
'  Ecclesiasticus  '  in  Temple  Bible).  tradition  by  making  Jesus  acknowledge  his  Messiahship.  Cp

the  searching  criticism  of  Brandt  (Ev.  Gesch.  53^).
Th(»  t'Vidpnrp  of  Liter  Mmannnna  of  \Tt mnsit  rlfnrlv


The  evidence  of  later  expansions  of  Mt. ,  most  clearly
presented  by  Hilgenfeld,  is  constantly  increasing,  and
new  indications  of  similar  accretions  to  the  original  Lk.
already  suggested  by  Marcion's  gospel,  are  forthcoming.
The  assumption  that  Mk. 's  conception  of  Jesus'  attitude
to  the  Messiahship  was  different  from  that  of  Mt.  and
Lk.  and  more  historical  can  scarcely  maintain  itself
after  Wrede's  criticism.  As  the  prejudice  in  favour  of
Mk. ,  based  on  a  shorter  text  and  a  supposed  correcter
view  of  Jesus'  career,  is  removed,  and  the  different
versions  of  each  saying  are  compared  and  tested  in  their
presumable  Aramaic  form,  an  impartial  survey  of  the
facts  will  show  at  once  how  far  all  the  synoptics  are
from  reflecting  accurately  the  words  of  Jesus  without
losing  touch  altogether  with  the  oldest  tradition,  and  in
what  sense  the  earliest  testimony  as  to  the  succession  of
these  gospels,  representing  the  order  as  Mt. ,  Mk. ,  and
Lk.,  is  to  be  accepted.  It  will  then  be  seen  that  there
are  passages  in  Mt.  and  Lk. ,  not  found  in  Mk.,  that
may  go  back  to  original  sayings  of  Jesus  ;  that  the
only  passage  found  in  Mk.  and  Lk. ,  but  not  in  Mt. ,
cannot  be  regarded  as  authentic  ;  that  there  is  no
genuine  saying  preserved  in  Lk.  that  is  not  also  found
in  Mt.  ;  that  there  are  passages  in  Mk.  as  well  as  in
Mt.  and  Lk.  that  are  clearly  of  very  late  origin  ;  and
that  there  are  passages  in  Mk.  as  well  as  in  Mt.  and
Lk.  in  which  the  phrase  may  go  back  to  an  original
bar-nasa  even  after  the  episode  at  Ca:sarea  Philippi.

Among  the  eight  passages  found  only  in  Mt.  and  Lk.,  Mt.
8  20  (Lk.  9  58),  11  19  (7  34),  and  \'l  yta  (12  io<i)  probably  go  back
to  original  utterances  of  Jesus  (see  §  38);  1240  (11  30)  is  an
interpolation  particularly  clumsy  in  Mt.;  24273739(17242630)
belong  to  the  synoptic  apocalypse  (see  §  41),  and  2944  (12  46)  is
recognised  by  Jiilicher  {I.e.  2142^)  as  a  later  gloss.  Among
the  five  found  in  Mt.  and  Mk.,  Mt.  17  9  (9s)  refers  to  the  vision
on  the  mountain.  In  Jesus'  lifetime,  not  even  his  most  intimate
disciples  had  had  anything  to  relate  concerning  his  luminous
heavenly  body.  Did  this  necessarily  exclude  the  possibility  of
a  vision  of  this  body  before  his  death?  Not  to  the  minds  of  the
evangelists,  since  they  had  accustomed  themselves  to  the
thought  that  Jesus  had  forbidden  all  such  disclosures  concern
ing  himself  before  he  should  rise  from  the  dead.  This  vision
(opa.fj.a.)  is  thus  an  anticipation  of  the  vision  that  spread  the
belief  in  his  resurrection.  The  Elijah  question,  Mt.  17  10-13

(Mk.  911-13),  consequently  had  no  connection  originally  with
what  precedes;  the  text  in  Mk.  is  late  and  confused  (so  also
Wernle,  I.e.,  133),  whilst  that  in  Mt.  is  in  good  order  and  the
conclusion  may  be  a  rendering  of  '  So  must  a  man  (^'312)  suffer
by  them,'  referring  to  John  the  Baptist.  Mt.  2028  (Mk.  1045)
comments  retrospectively  on  the  exemplification  in  the  life  and
death  of  Jesus  of  the  principle  he  has  just  laid  down.  Lk.
22  27-30  is  a  later  and  less  valuable  interpretation  that  curiously
misunderstands  the  thought  that  Jesus  wished  to  convey.  Mt.
26  241^  (Mk.  14  2i/')  occurs  in  an  interpolation  which  breaks  the
connection  between  262ia  and  26  (14  18  and  22)  with  an  account
that  has  been  placed  by  Lk.  at  the  end  (22  21-23)  and  even  there
is  probably  unhistorical.  The  occurrence  of  the  phrase  in  Mt.
2045  (Mk.  1441),  not  found  in  Lk.  where  the  connection  is
better,  is  no  doubt  to  be  explained  by  the  place  Judas  gained
in  Christian  legend  (so  Wellhausen).  (On  Mk.  831  [Lk.  '.'22],
see  §  40.)

Among  the  eight  passages  found  in  all  the  Synoptics,  Mt.96
(Mk.  2  10  Lk.  5  24)  and  Mt.  12  8  (Mk.  2  28  Lk.  »3  5)  probably  go
back  to  original  utterances.  Mt.  It!  27  (Mk.  838  Lk. '.'26)  is
clearly  a  later  addition,  further  transformed  by  Mk.  and  Lk.
Mt.  17  22  (Mk.  11  31  Lk.  9  44)  and  Mt.  20  18  (Mk.  10  33  Lk.  IS  31)
is  a  prediction  of  his  death  (see  §  40).  Mt.  27  30^  (Mk.  1826
Lk.  21  27)  belongs  to  the  Synoptic  apocalypse  (see  §  41).  Mt.
2624^  (Mk.  142i«  Lk.  2222)  belongs  to  the  interpolation  con
sidered  above.  The  absence  of  disciples  witnessing  the  scene,
the  conflict  with  judicial  practice,  the  absurdity  of  the  false
testimony,  the  failure  to  produce  any  statement  that  a  Jewish
court  could  have  construed  into  blasphemy,  and  the  contra
dictions  and  evident  Christian  colouring  render  it  extremely
difficult  to  believe  in  the  historical  character  of  the  trial  before


significant  that  these  two  evangelists  should  have  hesitated  to
put  upon  the  lips  of  Jesus  an  affirmative  answer  even  undtr
oath.  So  strong  was  the  tradition  that  Jesus  did  not  in  his  life


time  claim  to  be  the  Messiah,  so  firm  the  conviction  that  he
guarded  his  secret  to  the  end.  They  felt  justified  only  in
ascribing  to  him  a  covert  reference  to  the  Messiah  in  the  third


473  J


In  view  of  this  indispensable  literary  criticism,  it  is  of  no

small  importance  that  it  is  possible  by  turning  the  Greek

38 Genuine ^f'rt  mto  tne  vernacular  of  Jesus  to  ob-

sayings  during  'ain  soume  Sayi"P  at  °nce  so  different
Galilean  m prevailing  conceptions  of  the

oeriod  early  Church  and  so  bold  and  original
as  to  raise  the  strongest  presumption  in
favour  of  their  genuineness.  Such  are,  in  the  first
place,  Mt.  96  and  12  8  (and  parallels),  found  in  all  the
synoptics.  In  the  former  case  the  question  is  debated
whether  a  man  has  a  right  to  assure  another  man  that
his  sins  are  pardoned.  The  Pharisees  maintain  that
God  alone  can  pardon  sin.  They  probably  regarded
absolution  in  the  name  of  God  as  a  priestly  function.
There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Jews  expected  the  Messiah
to  forgive  sins,  and  no  intimation  that  Jesus  looked
upon  this  as  a  privilege  to  be  exercised  only  by  himself.
On  the  contrary,  he  enjoins  his  disciples  to  use  this
power  (Mt.  18 18).  Such  a  simple  assurance  of  forgive
ness,  flowing  from  a  living  faith  in  a  heavenly  father's
love,  was  to  Jesus  no  sacerdotal  act.  Any  man  had  a
right  to  extend  it.

In  Mt.  ]  28  the  generic  meaning  is  equally  clear.  The
disciples  having  eaten  corn  as  they  passed  through  the
field,  are  accused  of  breaking  the  sabbath.  Jesus
defends  them  by  quoting  the  example  of  David,  who  ate
of  the  shewbread,  which,  according  to  the  law,  he  had  no
right  to  do,  and  gave  his  followers  permission  to  do  so.
The  point  is  not  that  David  and  his  '  greater  son  '  may
take  liberties  with  God's  law  which  would  be  wrong  for
others,  but  clearly  that  so  godly  a  man  as  David
recognised  that  the  sustenance  of  life  was  in  God's  eyes
more  important  than  the  maintenance  of  the  cult.
Lest  this  should  be  misunderstood,  he  adds  another
argument.  The  law  permits  the  priests  to  work  on  the
sabbath,  thus  regarding  the  commanded  cessation  of
labour  as  less  important  than  the  maintenance  of  divine
worship.  The  thought  is  not  that  he  and  his  had
priestly  rights,  for  they  had  none,  and  Jesus  had  no
interest  in  the  sacrificial  cult,  as  the  next  statement
shows.  But  even  from  the  standpoint  of  the  law  there
were  things  more  important  than  the  enjoined  cessation
of  work.  Man  was  not  made  for  the  sabbath,  but  the
sabbath  for  man  ;  therefore  man  is  also  lord  of  the
sabbath.  This  conclusion  alone  is  relevant  to  the
argument.  If  it  were  necessary  to  prove  that  the
Messiah  might  break  the  law  or  authorise  his  disciples
to  do  so,  how  could  so  startling  a  proposition  be
established  by  the  general  consideration  that  the  sabbath
was  made  for  man's  sake  ?  There  is  indeed  no  evidence
that  the  Jews  expected  the  Messiah  to  violate  or  abrogate
the  divinely  given  law.  The  very  suggestion  would
probably  have  produced  a  shock.  If  Jesus  really
desired  to  convince  his  hearers  that  the  Messiah  had  a
right  to  dispense  from  obedience  to  the  law  and  that  he
was  the  Messiah,  he  must  have  understood  that  \\hat
was  needed  for  that  purpose  was  a  reference  to  a  recog
nised  Messianic  passage  ascribing  such  powers  to  the
Messiah  or  a  firmly-rooted  tradition  to  this  effect,  and  a
straightforward  presentation  and  vindication  of  his
claims,  all  the  more  necessary  if  he  did  not  wish  his
Messiahship  to  be  taken  in  a  political  sense.  Were  it
possible  that  the  Aramaic  word  he  used  for  '  Son  of
man '  could  have  been  interpreted  as  a  Messianic  title,
the  impression  left  on  the  Pharisees  would  still  have
been  that  he  had  defended  law-breaking  on  the  ground
that  the  lower,  the  sabbath,  must  yield  to  the  higher,
man,  and  had  made  such  a  sweeping  application  of  a
general  principle,  true  enough  in  certain  circumstances,
as  would  allow  any  man  to  set  aside  any  ordinance  of
God.

'  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  heavens

4732


SON  OF  MAN

have  nests,  but  a  man  has  nowhere  to  lay  his  head '
(Mt.  820)  may  be  a  proverb  quoted  by  Jesus  or  an
epigram  coined  on  the  spot.  In  either  case  the  scribe
no  doubt  saw  the  hint  quickly.  Man's  life  is  full  of
danger  and  uncertainty.  Where  will  he  reside  to
morrow  ?  Nature  cares  for  the  beasts  ;  they  are  not
driven  from  home  and  hearth  for  their  convictions.
The  thought  probably  never  occurred  to  the  scribe  that
this  Galila:an  teacher  had  in  the  same  breath  announced
himself  as  the  Messiah,  and  complained  that  though  he
was  so  great  a  man  he  neither  owned  a  house  nor  had
a  lodging-place.

The  enemies  of  Jesus  charged  him  with  performing
his  cures  by  the  aid  of  Beelzebub.  In  this  he  saw  a
blasphemy,  because  he  felt  that  his  success  in  curing  the
sick  was  due  to  a  divine  spirit  that  possessed  him.  Yet
he  was  careful  to  distinguish  between  an  attack  upon  a
fellow-man  and  a  denunciation  of  the  spirit  operating
through  him.  Therefore  he  says,  '  If  any  one  speaks
against  a  man,  that  may  be  pardoned,  but  he  that
speaks  against  the  Holy  Spirit  can  have  no  pardon '
(Mt.  1232).  No  person  in  the  audience  could  have
understood  him  to  say :  '  You  may  blaspheme  the
Messiah  with  impunity,  but  not  the  Holy  Ghost,'  The
distinction  is  clearly  between  the  divine  spirit  and  the
human  instrumentality.

Wellhausen  prefers  the  reading  in  Mk.  828^  and  assumes
that  a  misunderstanding  arose  through  the  original  reading  in
Lk.  12  10  which,  on  the  basis  of  the  absence  of  \6yov  in  Marcion,
he  translates  into  Aramaic  and  renders  '  all  that  is  said  by  man '
(Xw'^D1?  TCN  'T  *?D).  This  is  an  ingenious  suggestion  ;  but  an
omission  on  the  part  of  Mk.  seems  more  probable  than  such  a
misapprehension.  For,  whether  the  words  were  uttered  by
Jesus  or  not,  they  seem  to  have  originated  in  some  such  reflec
tion  as  we  find  in  i  S.  -  25.

In  Mt.  11 19  Jesus  may  be  rightly  represented  as
having  said  '  John  comes  neither  eating  nor  drinking
and  they  say,  He  has  a  devil  ;  a  man  comes  who  eats
and  drinks  and  they  say,  Behold  a  glutton  and  a  wine-
bibber.'

The  account  in  Mt.  1613-20  of  lesus' question  to  the

disciples giving occasion for Peter's confession has

Th h  manifestly  suffered  by  later  expansions.

, ", , Such  is  the  pontifical  diploma  presented
not  used  at . T>  „  out .u

p  to I  eter  in  i:i'. 17-19. ouch  also  the

sesarea- acjcijtjon  <  tne  gon  Of  tne  i;ving  God '  in

p  1  ippl.  „,  i6  jn  ^  I3  a  seconcj  question  has
been  preserved  in  Syr.  Sin.  Namely,  '  Who  is  this  Son
of  man  ?  '  added  to  the  first,  '  What  do  men  say  con
cerning  me  ?  '  '  This  '  may  perhaps  be  put  to  the
account  of  the  Syriac  translator  (so  Schmiedel).  But
it  is  also  possible  that  '  Who  is  this  man  (bar-ndsa]  ? '
is  a  gloss  already  in  the  Aramaic,  leading  the  later
glossator  to  introduce  by  contrast  the  title  of  Christ's
divinity.  It  is  evident  that  the  interpolator  lived
at  a  period  when  the  supremacy  of  the  Roman  See
was  being  established.  At  that  time  the  term  '  Son  of
man  '  would  be  understood  to  denote  the  human  nature
as  distinct  from  the  divine.  Apart  from  these  additions,
Mt.  seems  to  have  preserved  an  earlier  text  than  Mk.
827  ft.  and  Lk.  9  i8ft  Desirous  to  proclaim  the  coming
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  Jerusalem  also,  Jesus
apparently  hesitated  on  the  ground  that  it  might  be
taken  as  a  political  movement.  Hence,  the  question  as
to  what  men  thought  of  him.  If  the  answer  was
reassuring  so  far  as  the  people  were  concerned,  seeing
that  they  looked  upon  him  as  a  prophet  and  not  as  an
aspirant  to  Messiahship,  he  had  to  reckon  also  with  the
attitude  of  his  own  disciples.  When  Peter,  utterly  mis
understanding  the  question  as  to  their  views,  took  the
occasion  to  express  his  own  hope,  Jesus  was  obliged  to
'  command  the  disciples  that  they  should  not  say  to  any
man  that  he  was  the  Messiah,'  as  it  is  emphatically  put
in  Mt.

According  to  Mk.  831  (Lk.  922)  Jesus  announced  his
death  and  resurrection  after  three  days  immediately
upon  Peter's  confession.  Of  this  Mt.  knows  nothing.

4733


SON  OF  MAN

The first reference to the sufferings of  the Son of
40 Basis  of man  are  found  in  Mt-  ^ "  (Mk-  9i2),

predictions But.  hfreA  il » Probable, <hat the
.  original Aramaic conveyed the sense

death  and 'so  must  a  man  (bar-nds}  suffer  b7

resurrection.  ^".'

that  hespoke  to  them  concerning  John  the

Baptist,'  v.  13.  Later,  this  would  naturally  be  mis
understood  as  a  reference  to  himself.  The  original
form  of  Mt.  2028  (Mk.  10  45)  may  have  been  '  Man  has
not  come  (sc.  into  the  world)  to  be  served,  but  to  serve.'
When  this  was  applied  to  Jesus,  the  dogma  of  the
'  ransom  '  seems  to  have  been  added.

In  Clem.  Horn.  12  29  (ed.  Schwegler)  Peter  quotes  the
following  words  of  Jesus  :  ra  ayafla  eA0eii>  Sti,  /na/capto?  6e  $r)<n,
SC  011  epxerai  •  i/iouuf  Kai  TO.  KO.KO.  avdyiai  t\8flv,  oval  £e  Si'  ov
epxerai.  The  work  in  which  this  is  found  probably  dates  from
the  reign  of  Marcus  Aurelius  (161-180);  cp  Hilgenfeld,  Clem.
Recog.  and  H  out.,  1848,  p.  305^,  ZWTh.,  1869,  p.  353,  Einl.
p.  42.  The  same  saying  is  reported  by  Aphraates :  '  good  is
sure  to  come  and  it  is  well  with  him  through  whom  it  comes  ;
evil  also  must  come,  but  woe  to  him  through  whom  it  comes  '
(5  i,  ed.  Graffin).  Aphraates  used  Tatian's  Diatessaron.  The
generic  sense  of  bar-nasa  in  each  part  of  this  section,  naturally
enough  applied  to  Jesus  and  Judas  in  Mt.  2(5  24  Mk.l44i  I.k.
22  22,  was  consequently  still  preserved  in  the  middle  of  the
second  century.

Of  the  two  passages  found  in  all  the  synoptics,  Mt.
1?22  (Mk.  931  Lk.944)  and  Mt.  20i8  (Mk.  1033  Lk.
1831),  the  latter  furnishes  a  more  natural  situation.
That  Jesus  cannot  have  predicted  in  detail  his  death
and  resurrection  after  three  days  or  on  the  third  day,  is
evident  to  all  critical  students.  But  the  difficulty  of
suppressing  the  political  hopes  of  his  followers  and  the
prejudices  and  opposition  he  was  sure  to  encounter  in
Jerusalem  may  well  have  filled  his  mind  with  forebodings
of  evil.  He  fell  back,  however,  upon  the  conviction
that  the  highest  good,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  would
come,  and  that  it  would  be  well  with  any  man  who
assisted  in  its  coming  and  suffered  for  its  sake.  He  no
doubt  believed  in  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  although
his  idea  seems  to  have  been  nearer  the  Essene  than  the
Pharisaic  conception.  As  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob
had  been  raised  out  of  death  into  an  eternal  life  with
God,  so  he  expected  to  be  raised,  Mt.  22?3ft  (Mk.  12
13  ft  Lk.  202o^i).  This  hope  he  may  have  expressed
by  some  such  word  as  '  man  must  pass  away  but  he
will  rise  again.'  Even  this  would  be  improbable,  if
Prleiderer  were  right  in  assuming  that  Jesus  cherished
no  doubts  as  to  the  outcome  of  his  mission  to  Jerusalem.

Considering  Lk.  22  36  as  a  genuine  saying  of  Jesus,
Pfleiderer  (New  World,  1899,  p.  431^)  concludes
that,  as  he  ordered  his  disciples  to  buy  swords,  probably
to  defend  themselves  against  hired  assassins,  he  cannot
have  gone  to  Jerusalem  with  the  '  purpose  of  dying  there
as  a  sacrifice  for  the  sin  of  the  world,  but  of  contending
and  conquering.'  It  might  be  said  that,  if  he  advised
his  followers  to  arm  themselves,  the  thought  of  danger
and  death  must  have  been  present  with  him.  But  it  is
exceedingly  improbable  that  he  ever  gave  any  such
counsel.  If  he  had  actually  urged  his  followers  to  sell
their  very  garments  in  order  to  purchase  swords,  without
explaining  his  purpose,  he  must  have  contemplated  a
coup  d'tttat  and  there  would  have  been  plenty  of  swords
at  his  disposal,  but  there  would  have  been  a  certain
disingenuousness  in  his  rebuke,  Mt.  2652,  so  thoroughly
in  harmony  with  the  doctrine  of  non-resistance  he  had
preached,  since  he  was  himself  responsible  for  the
presence  of  the  sword  and  the  notion  that  it  would  be
an  urgent  necessity.  The  earlier  tradition  in

Mt.  and  Mk.  knows  nothing  of  such  a  command  given
by  Jesus  ;  but  it  preserved  the  fact  that  one  of  the
disciples  had  drawn  a  sword  and  cut  off  a  man's  ear.
How  was  this  sword  to  be  accounted  for  ?  Jesus  had
ordered  it.  For  what  purpose?  Lk.  2227  gives  the
answer,  '  This  which  is  written  must  be  accomplished
in  me,  "And  he  was  reckoned  with  the  lawless."'
Jesus,  of  course,  did  not  go  to  Jerusalem  in  order  to

4734


SON  OF  MAN

die,  but  to  proclaim  the  good  news  of  the  kingdom.
Nevertheless  he  no  doubt  realised  the  dangers  of  the
situation  and  only  put  his  life  into  jeopardy  because  he
deemed  it  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  work,
sustained  the  while  by  the  hope  that  the  kingdom  of
heaven  would  come  in  the  world  and  to  himself  a  share
in  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.

In  Mt.  24  4-36  'the  Son  of  man'  occurs  five  times;
in  Mk.  185-32  only  once,  and  in  Lk.  21  8-36  twice.

. Mt.  24  30^  (Mk.  13  26  Lk.  21  27),  which  is  alike

41. I  toe in  all  the  synoptics,  has  no  doubt  been  drawn

Synoptic from  the  last  apocalypse. Before  it  Mt.  intro-

Apocalvpse ('uces  l.ne  term  twice  —  viz.,  in  24  27  which  is  also

*" found  in  Lk.  1724  and  in  24  30(1  which  has  no

parallel. The  second  occurrence  in  Lk.  (•_'!  3^)  is  also  without  a

duplicate  ;  while  Mt.  24  37  39  correspond  to  Lk.  17  26  30.

If  the  passage  which  the  three  gospels  have  in  common
was  the  first  in  the  original  apocalypse  that  referred  to
the  Son  of  man,  it  may  well  be  that  it  conveyed  the
meaning,  '  they  shall  see  a  man  coming  on  the  clouds
of  heaven,'  and  he  will,  etc.  If  Mt.  2427  actually  pre
ceded  it,  this  sense  would  not  be  possible  ;  but  there  is
no  certainty  that  the  original  has  been  reproduced
exactly  or  in  order.  Until  further  discoveries  shall  have
been  made,  it  will  remain  most  probable  that  '  the
man  '  was  first  introduced  as  '  a  man,'  as  in  En.  46  and
4  Ezra  13.  This  apocalypse  may  not  originally  have
been  put  upon  the  lips  of  Jesus.  When  its  fragments
once  secured  a  place  in  the  synoptic  gospels,  the  in
fluence  upon  the  conception  of  the  term  '  Son  of  man  '
must  have  been  profound.  If  even  6  I'io?  TOV  avOpuwov
to  persons  familiar  with  Aramaic  might  still  have  con
veyed  the  sense  of  bar-ndsd  (see  §  36),  the  man  coming
with  the  clouds  or  appearing  as  a  lightning  flash  was  too
plainly  the  celestial  being  described  in  Dan.  7  13  to  be
considered  as  referring  to  man  in  general.  A  new
mode  of  thought  was  naturally  given  to  familiar  utter
ances.  It  was  this  heavenly  man  who  had  been  without
a  home  on  earth,  who  had  authority  over  the  sabbath
and  the  right  to  pardon  sins,  who  had  suffered  at  the
hands  of  men  and  predicted  his  advent  in  glory  and
power.  The  title  was  substituted  for  the  personal
pronoun  ;  old  sayings  were  modified,  new  ones  formed.
Where  Jesus  had  spoken  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven
whose  coming  he  expected,  the  Church  spoke  of  the  Son
of  man  for  whose  coming  she  eagerly  looked.  Among
the  new  creations  none  is  grander  than  the  judgment
scene  in  Mt.  25.  Its  chief  significance  lies  not  so  much
in  the  fact  that  the  judge  identifies  himself  with  his
brethren,  or  that  the  nations  are  judged  by  their  treat
ment  of  the  Christians,  as  in  the  fact  that  they  are
judged  exclusively  by  moral  tests  :  men's  eternal  welfare
is  determined  by  their  unconscious  goodness  in  dealing
with  their  humblest  fellow-men.

An  indication  of  the  date  of  the  synoptic  apocalypse  in  its
Christian  form  may  be  found  in  the  circumstance  that  it  follows


.„ p .

,. "  .
accormng  to

WS'


.

written  long  before  the  end  of  the  first  century,  as  it  contains  an
allusion  to  the  murder  of  Zechariah  b.  Harachia  during  the  siege
of  Jerusalem  (cp  Jos.  BJ  iv.  04  [§§  335,  343]).

Jerome  (  Vir.  III.  2)  affirms  that  in  the  Gospel  accord
ing to the Hebrews, which he had translated into
Greek and Latin, the  statement  was
made that Jesus after his resurrec-
tior)|  ,  tQok  bread biessed,  brake,  and
gave it to James the Just, saying,
"my brother, eat thy  bread, for the Son of  man
(filius hominis) has risen  from those that sleep."'
Hilgenfeld  (ZWTh.  , 1899)  thinks that the  Aramaic
phrase  translated  by  Jerome  was  b'reh  dt-'  ndsd.

It  would  be  interesting,  in  all  these  circumstances,  to  know
what  Aramaic  term  Jerome  found  in  his  gospel,  and  of  utmost
importance  if  it  could  be  proved  that  the  copy  he  saw  in  the
library  at  Ca;sarea  was  a  faithful  transcript  of  the  Gospel
written  by  Matthew.  In  its  original  form,  the  Gospel  according
to  the  Hebrews  may  indeed  have  been  of  very  high  age,  and

4735


SON  OF  MAN

have  served  as  a  basis  for  the  first  Greek  gospel.  That  it  was
nameless,  as  Handmann  thinks  (Hcl>.  Ev.,  1888,  p.  115),  is  not
probable.  The  most  natural  supposition  is  that  it  was  ascribed
to  Matthew.  Whether  such  a  tradition  was  correct,  may  be
doubted.  Hut,  like  all  other  gospels,  it  undoubtedly  underwent
many  changes  ;  and  this  particular  pericope,  at  least  in  the  form
represented  by  Jerome,  can  scarcely  have  had  a  place  in  the
first  draft.

As  b'reh  dH-ndfd  apparently  was  not  used  by
Palestinian  Christians,  b'reh  df-gabrd  is  more  probable.
But  it  may  even  be  questioned  w  nether  Jerome  wrote
filius  hominis,  as  Gregory  of  Tours  quotes  the  words  :
1  Surge,  Jacobe,  comede,  quia  jam  a  mortuis  resurrexi '
(Hist.  Franc.  I2i).

It  is  the  merit  of  Lietzmann  to  have  called  attention
to  the  fact  that  outside  of  the  NT  the  phrase  occurs  for
, the first time in Marcion, and was


43.  Marcion's
gospel.


used by different Gnostic schools.


Marcion's  gospel  seems  to  have  had
this  term  in  the  same  places  as  the  canonical  Lk.,
except  that  72935  1130-32  18831-34  were  not  found  in
his  gospel.

From  Marcion's  acquaintance  with  it,  Lietzmann  draws  the
conclusion  that  it  originated  in  Asia  Minor  before  the  year
90  A.D.  It  is  not  apparent  why  this  year  should  have  been
chosen.  Harnack's  conjecture  (Chron.  298^)  is  based  on  an
obscure  and  manifestly  corrupt  passage  in  Clement  of  Alex
andria.  Lipsius  placed  Marcion's  birth  at  least  twenty  years
later,  and  his  arrival  in  Rome  in  143/4  (Zll-'Tli.,  1867,  p.  Tsjf.).
Tertullian's  statement  that  Marcion  was  the  son  of  a  bishop  is
scarcely  more  reliable  than  that  of  Megethius,  that  he  was  him
self  a  bishop  (cp  Meyboom,  Marcion  en  tie  Marcionieten,
34^71).  Hut,  apart  from  this,  there  is  no  e\idence  that  Marcion
as  a  child  was  familiar  with  the  gospel  he  quoted  in  Rome  in
the  time  of  Pius  (cp  also  Hilgenfeld,  Ketzergesch.  329.^).

According  to  Irenreus (Adv. hccr. \.  30i-3l2) the

Gnostics called the  primeval  light, the father  of  all

44 TT f th'nSs>  UptDros  cLvtipuiros  (primus  homo),

.' , and  the  first  thought  (evvoia)  emanating

Gnostic  from  h'm  Aei'repos  dvOpuiros  (secundus
homo),  or  vibs  dvOpunrov  (jiliiis  hominis).
This  vibs  dvOpiavov  was  not,  however,  identical  with
the  Christ  who,  in  their  opinion,  was  the  offspring  of
'  the  first  man  '  and  '  the  second  man  '  with  '  the  holy
spirit,'  while  the  man  Jesus,  son  of  Yaldabaoth  and  the
Virgin  Mary,  was  conceived  of  as  the  earthly  tabernacle
in  which  the  Christ  took  up  his  abode.  Hippolytus
(Philosophumena,  56-n  lOg)  reports  that  the  Naasenes
([rrt:  =  serpent),  or  Phrygian  Ophites,  also  worshipped
the  'man'  (dvOpujros),  and  the  'Son  of  man'  (t>('6s
dvOpunrov)  as  a  unity  of  father  and  son,  the  father
probably  being  designated  as  Adamas  (CIN)-

In  the  Evangeliiun  Maria-,  a  Gnostic  work  earlier  than
Irena:us,  the  highest  being  is  called  II puiT<ifOpi>nros  (cp  K.
Schmidt,  SB  Alt',  1896,  p.  843  f.),  and  in  a  somewhat  later
form  of  this  Gnosis  the  '  Man  of  light,'  Adamas,  occurs  (id.  in
TU  8  297  yxjff.  658)  ;  and  the  perfect  and  true  man  (/tontinem
perfectum  et  veriun)  called  Adamas,  belongs  to  the  circle  of
divine  beings  manifesting  Barbelo,  the  father  and  the  son,  in
the  thought  of  the  Harbelo-Gnostics  (Iren.  1  29).  When  the
'Heavenly  Dialogue,'  quoted  by  Celsus  in  his  'True  Word'
(about  177  A.D.),  declared  that  the  Son  of  Man  (6  vibs  TOV  av-
(tpiutrov)  was  mightier  than  a  god  (Origen,  Contr.  Cfls.  8  15),
this  god  was  no  doubt  Yaldabaoth  whom  his  mother,  Sophia,
had  to  rebuke  by  a  reminder  that  above  him  were  '  the  father  of
all,  the  first  man,  and  the  man,  "  the  son  of  man,"'  according
to  Irenaeus.  Valentinus  also  gave  the  first  place  in  the  pleroma
to  the  irpotav  ai'dpunros  (Clement,  Strom,  ii.  830),  and  Monoimo-,
represented  the  divinity  as  man,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  revealed,
as  '  Son  of  man  '  (see  Grill,  I.e.,  355).

The  evident  kinship  between  the  Ophite  system  and
the  thought  ascribed  to  Simon  of  Gitta,  renders  it  not
improbable  that  the  founder  of  the  movement  already
was  familiar  with  these  designations  for  the  highest
beings.  His  saying  in  regard  to  the  divine  manifesta
tion  as  son  in  Judaea,  as  father  in  Samaria,  and  as  holy
spirit  in  the  other  nations  (Philos.  619)  is  most  readily
understood  in  harmony  with  whatever  else  is  known  of
his  views,  if  it  is  assumed  that  he  asserted  the  divinity
of  man  on  the  basis  of  the  acknowledged  humanity  of
God,  finding  in  Judaism,  Samaritanism,  and  paganism,

4736


SON  OP  MAN

in  Jesus,  himself,  and  Helena,  manifestations  of  that
divinely  human  life  symbolised  by  the  already  extant
figures  of  '  the  man,'  the  '  Son  of  man,'  and  the  feminine
spirit  in  the  pleroma.

That  the  Ophites  existed  before  Christianity,  their
doctrine  being  a  mixture  of  Egyptian  and  Jewish  ideas,
has  been  suggested  by  Baur  (Christliche  Gnosis,  194^
[1835]),  by  Lipsius,  who  preferred  to  think  of  Syrian
rather  than  Egyptian  influences  as  preponderating
(Z\VTh. ,  1863,  p.  7i8/. ),  and  by  Lietzmann,  who
quotes  Philaster,  1 1,  as  showing,  that  they  '  argued  their
heresies  before  the  coming  of  Christ.'  Lietzmann,
however,  is  of  the  opinion  that  '  man  '  as  a  divine  name
can  only  have  originated  as  a  designation  of  the  heavenly
prototype  of  the  Messiah  appearing  on  earth,  called
even  in  early  times  '  the  second  man,'  though  the  term
is  actually  found  only  in  late  Rabbinic  writings,  and
that  the  Christian  Ophites  continued  to  use  these
titles,  naturally  adopting  o  i/ids  rov  avOpuwov  for  o
devrepos  tivOpuwos.  But  Grill  is  probably  right  in
pointing  out  an  Indian  origin  for  this  conception
(/.,-.,  348^).

The  Veclic  Purusha  —  i.e.,  'man' — is  a.  designation  of  the
universe,  the  macrocosm  being  conceived  after  the  analogy  of
the  microcosm.  A  distinction  is  made,  however,  in  Rig  \'cda
10  90  between  Purusha  as  the  absolute  being,  and  Purusha  as
the  firstborn,  and  for  this  derived  primeval  existence  the  term
Nfirayana,  'the  one  like  a  man,'  'the  son  of  man'  is  used
{Mahftna  royanci-  Ufianishad,  n).  Gnostic  speculation  is
altogether  likely  to  have  been  affected  by  this  idea.

It  is  possible,  too,  that  there  was  a  basis  in  the
mythical  lore  of  Syria.  Adam  is  not  improbably  the
name  of  a  Semitic  divinity  [cp  OBED-EDOM].  The
familiar  motive  of  a  father,  a  son,  and  a  mother-goddess
having  issue  by  the  son  (cp  Stucken,  AfI<'AG,  1902,
446 ff.],  reflecting  as  it  does  a  very  primitive  form  of
domestic  life,  is  certainly  of  mythical  origin,  and  not
the  result  of  late  philosophical  speculation.  The  con
ception  of  the  macrocosmic  man  and  the  celestial
protoplast  is  earlier  and  more  widespread  than  the
significant  names  expressing  it  in  Sanscrit  sources,  and
rendered  the  introduction  of  similar  terms  easier.
There  seems  to  be  no  trace  in  Gnostic  thought  of  the
Jewish  idea  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  Christ-idea  has  the
appearance  of  being  a  later  addition  to  a  system  already
completed.  The  Gnostic  '  Son  of  man '  cannot  be
accounted  for  as  growing  out  of  the  conception
presented  in  the  synoptics  ;  rather  is  it  possible  that
the  Greek  phrase,  used  in  rendering  the  generic  bar-
nasd,  lent  itself  to  an  interpretation  akin  to  the  Gnostic
thought,  seeing  in  Jesus  an  incarnation  of  a  celestial
'  Son  of  man. '

Recent  criticism  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  has  had  a
tendency  to  emphasise  again  its  relations  to  Gnosticism.
45  TJ  "  While  the  unhistorical  character  of  the
p  ,,  Gospel,  its  impregnation  with  Alex-
p  .  andrian,  and  particularly  Philonic,
P  '  thought,  and  its  date  toward  the  middle
of  the  second  century,  have  been  rendered  practically
certain  by  the  labours  of  many  scholars,  from  Bret-
schneider  to  Holtzrnann  and  the  ReVilles  (see  JOHN,
SON  OF  ZEBEDEE),  questions  concerning  earlier  and
later  strata  within  the  gospel,  and  the  attitude  of  author
or  redactor  to  Gnostic  thought,  have  assumed  fresh
importance  during  the  last  few  years.  How  profoundly
investigation  on  these  points  may  affect  the  interpretntion
of  the  'Son  of  man'  in  Jn.  is  seen  in  the  works  of
Fries,  Kreyenbiihl,  and  Grill.  Following  the  expansion-
theory  of  Schweizer,  to  some  extent  adopted  by  Bousset
and  Harnack,  in  the  more  radical  form  given  to  it  by
Delff,  rather  than  the  source-theory  of  Weisse,  Freytag,
and  Wendt,  Fries  (Det  fjarde  evangeliet,  1898;
En  koptiske  evangelium,  1900)  has  independently  elabo
rated  a  view  according  to  which  an  earlier  gospel  by
the  presbyter  John  has  been  expanded  by  Cerinthus
with  interpolations,  partly  taken  from  the  Gospel

4737


SON  OF  MAN

according  to  the  Hebrews,  partly  consisting  of  his  own
philosophical  speculations  on  the  basis  of  the  Philonian
logos-doctrine.  This  theory  leads  him  to  consider  1  51
3i3/  6275362  828  and  1331  as  interpolations.  Only
1223  34  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  assign  to  the  original
gospel,  but  regards  these  as  evidence  that  Jesus  himself
occasionally  used  the  term.  Sbderblom  has  indicated
his  general  agreement  with  this  position  (Jcsu  Bergs-
predikan,  40  [1899]).

So  much  is  sacrificed  to  Cerinthus,  that  12  23  34  might  as  well
have  been  added.  For  1223  is  practically  identical  with  1831,
and  the  statement  offending  the  people  in  1234,  that  'the  son  of
man  must  be  lifted  up,'  is  found  not  in  12  32  where  Jesus  says,
'  If  I  am  lifted  up,'  but  in  3  14  which  is  regarded  as  an  inter
polation.  So  far  as  the  '  Son  of  man  '  passages  are  concerned,
they  must  therefore,  even  on  this  view,  be  put  to  the  account  of
a  Gnostic  philosopher,  familiar  with  Philo's  speculation,  since
the  similarity  of  6  27  to  the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews
does  not  extend  to  this  phrase.  The  significant  thing  is  that
the  parts  which  must  be  considered  as  most  characteristic  of  the
gospel  are  thus  given  by  Fries  to  a  Gnostic.  Fries  may  be  right
in  pointing  out  a  probable  use  of  a  Greek  translation  of  the
Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews.  That  the  author  to  whom
we  owe  the  gospel  in  substantially  its  present  form,  barring
some  transpositions  indicated  by  Spitta  and  Bacon,  and  the
appendix,  used  other  sources  than  the  synoptics  is  not  im
probable.  But  the  freedom  with  which  Mt.  2664  has  been
modified  in  1  51,  and  the  passion-sayings  have  been  transformed
into  predictions  of  glorification  in  814  828  1223  and  1834,
suggests  the  extreme  difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  exact
language  and  historical  worth  of  any  such  sources  through  the
chiaroscuro  of  his  thought.

If  Fries  fell  back  upon  the  opinion  of  the  ancient
Alogi  that  Cerinthus  had  had  something  to  do  with  this
gospel,  Kreyenbiihl  (Das  Evangelium  der  Wahrhcit,
1900)  has  maintained  that  the  present  gospel  is  the
work  of  Menander  of  Kapparetrea,  the  disciple  of  Simon,
and  contemporary  of  Ignatius,  in  a  work  equally  marked
by  learning,  critical  acumen,  and  sympathetic  insight.
In  accordance  with  this  view  he  holds  that  '  Son  of
man '  in  Jn.  is  intended  to  be  understood  not  as  an
exclusive  self-designation  of  Jesus,  but  rather  as  a  term
applying  to  'man,'  'any  man,'  jeder  Christenmensch,
Menander  speaking  out  of  his  Christian  consciousness
of  being  a  saviour  sent  by  the  aeons  into  the  world  (I.e.
437  ff-  >  CP  Irenceus,  Adv.  hcsr.  i.  23s).  It  is

difficult  for  the  present  writer  to  believe  that  the  slender
foundation  in  Justin  and  Irenaeus  will  bear  the  weight
of  so  heavy  a  structure.

Menander  may  indeed  have  conceived  of  himself  as  having
come  into  the  world  to  redeem  men  from  ignorance,  and  it  is
barely  possible  that  he  regarded  himself  as  a  manifestation  of
the  celestial  man.  But  the  natural  impression  is  certainly  that
in  Jn.  Jesus  is  represented  as  speaking  solely  of  himself  when
he  uses  the  term  '  Son  of  man ' ;  and  no  recourse  to  the  ver
nacular  of  Jesus  does  here,  as  in  the  case  of  the  synoptics,
suggest  a  different  and  universal  significance.  Particularly
important  is  6  53,  where  it  seems  just  as  impossible  that
Menander  could  have  spoken  of  the  appropriation  of  his  own
flesh  and  blood,  or  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  man  in  general,  as
that  Jesus  should  have  used  such  words.  Here  the  reference  is
evidently  to  the  Eucharist,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  Jesus  whose
body  and  blood  the  Church  regarded  itself  as  appropriating  in
the  sacrament,  and  whose  life-giving  words  the  author  deemed
of  supreme  value.

The  interpretation  of  Jn.  635  from  the  view-point  of
the  author's  symbolical  idealism  by  J.  R^ville  (Le
quatritme  tvangile,  178  ff.  [1901])  is  more  satisfactory
than  the  present  writer's  assumption  of  a  strong  opposi
tion  to  sacramentalism  (JDL,  1892,  p.  20).  It  may  be
justifiable  to  infer  that  in  some  circles,  '  to  eat  the  flesh
and  to  drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  Man '  had
developed  into  a  liturgical  formula,  and  this  would
show  how  little  Christians  hesitated  to  use  this  supposed
self-designation  of  Jesus.  It  is  the  merit  of  Kreyenbiihl
to  have  greatly  strengthened  the  impression  that  this
gospel  contains  a  certain  type  of  Gnostic  thought.  in
view  of  the  fact  that  practically  all  the  OT,  tl
Apocrypha,  and  the  Pseudepigrapha  are  either  anony
mous  or  pseudonymous  writings,  it  is  time  that  the
eager  desire  to  fasten  the  authority  of  the  Fourth  Gospel
upon  some  person  mentioned  in  Early  Christian
Literature  should  be  put  at  rest.  Grill  (I.e.)  rightly

4738


SON  OP  MAN

contents  himself  with  tracing  the  gospel  idea  of  the
incarnation  (that  does  not  go  back  to  Philo)  through
Gnosticism  to  its  source  in  Indian  speculation,  and  he
interprets  the  phrase  as  designating  the  celestial  '  Son
of  man  '  who  has  become  a  '  man. '

Wendt  is  probably  right  in  regarding  avOoiairov  after  vtbs  in
627  as  a  later  addition  QJeu  Jfhtuttiestoatiftlntm,  121  f.  [1000]).
In  3  13  the  words  6  uiv  iv  TW  ovpavw  should  not  be  removed  from
the  text  on  the  ground  of  their  absence  in  HSL,  but  emended
into  o  iav  ef  ovparov,  as  Sin.  Syr.  has  men  si-mayo. ;  and  in  9  35,
not  only  HDS  but  also  Sin.  Syr.  and  Eth.  have  'Son  of  man.'
In  1234  the  'Son  of  man'  is  not  merely  an  equivalent  of  the
Messiah  (so//?/,,  1639).  The  assumption  is  that  Jesus  claims
to  be  the  Messiah  ;  but  the  reference  to  a  removal  from  earth
renders  it  possible  to  doubt  whether  the  mysterious  title  '  Son  of
man  '  does  not  have  a  different  meaning.

When  it  is  recognised  that  o  i/idj  TOU  dvOpuirov  is  the
translation  of  an  Aramaic  bar-naXd,  that  this  term

46  Effect  on  cannoti  on  philological  grounds,  have
Question  'Jeen  used  as  a  self-designation  since  it
of  Jesus'  naturally  conveyed  only  the  idea  of

Messiahship.  '  man  '  in  g««*al,  and .^at  this  generic
use  is  most  suitable  in  all  instances
where  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  a  genuine  utter
ance  is  found,  the  opinion  that  Jesus  regarded  himself
as  the  Messiah  loses  its  strongest  support.  There  are
indeed  passages  in  which  the  underlying  assumption
seems  to  be  that  Jesus  claimed  for  himself  the  Messiah-
ship  without  using  the  name.  Keim  (Jesu  von  A'azara,
2376)  enumerates  as  such  Mt.  9is  11s  13  12s  41  /  1817;
Beer  regards  Mt.  9 15  as  decisive  ('  Enoch  '  in  Kautzsch,
Pseudepigrapha,  232);  Wendt  (I.e.,  178 /.}  instances
Mt.  Il25^  Mk.  Il27 /:  1235^  But  in  Mt.  9i4^
the  justification  of  fasting  by  the  departure  of  the  bride
groom,  and  of  the  non-fasting  in  Jesus'  lifetime  (cp  Mt.
11 18),  by  the  presence  of  the  bridegroom,  is  as  clearly  a
vaticinium  ex  evcntu  (Volkmar)  as  the  words  concern
ing  the  garments  and  the  wineskins  are  unmistakably
genuine  (see  Holtzmann,  Synoptiker,W  55).  In

Mt.  Us  Jesus  is  asked  by  John  the  Baptist,  through  his
disciples,  whether  he  is  the  coming  one.  Jesus  not
only  does  not  answer  the  question,  but  deliberately
turns  the  attention  away  from  himself  to  his  work,
described  in  language  borrowed  from  Is.  29 18/  35 56,
and  culminating  in  the  proclamation  of  good  tidings  to
the  poor.  It  is  the  view  men  have  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven  that  concerns  him  ;  on  this  point  Jesus  con
sidered  John's  conceptions  to  be  as  defective  as  those  of
Moses  and  the  prophets  (Mt.  11 12/).1  The  '  sign  of
Jonah  '  is  the  preaching  of  repentance  to  the  Ninevites  ;
but  Jesus  felt  that  his  proclamation  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven  was  of  more  importance  than  the  announcement
of  judgment  by  the  unwilling  prophet  (Mt.  124i/  ).  If
Mt.  1817  is  genuine,  it  expresses  Jesus'  conviction  that
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  prophesied  of  old,  is  coming,
and  his  congratulation  of  his  disciples  for  discerning  its
advent.  But  this  does  not  harmonise  with  the  lack  of
perception  on  their  part,  of  which  he  elsewhere  has  to
complain.2  The  parable  of  the  vineyard  (Mk.  12i^)
has  been  so  thoroughly  changed,  under  the  hands  of
the  evangelists  (see  Jiilicher,  I.e. ,  ii.  2386  405/1),  that  it
is  quite  impossible  to  ascertain  what  the  original  utter
ance  was  in  1235^

If  Mt.  224i/:  (Mk.  1235^)  is  genuine,  it  is  either
an  academic  question  concerning  the  Scriptural  basis
for  the  current  assumption  that  the  coming  Messiah  is
to  be  a  descendant  of  David,  or  a  serious  Scriptural
vindication  by  Jesus  of  his  claims  to  be  the  Messiah
although  he  is  not  of  Davidic  descent.  His  general
method  of  teaching  renders  it  exceedingly  improbable
that  he  should  have  engaged  in  such  a  discussion  simply

-  confute  Pharisaic  exegesis  without  anything  of  prac
tical  importance  depending  on  the  decision  ;  but  if  he
really  attached  value  to  their  accepting  him  as  the

1  On  Mt.  12  3,  see  §  38.
2  On  Mt.  11  25  Jf.,  see  SON  OF  GOD,  §  13.

4739


SON  OF  MAN

Messiah  without  the  demanded  legitimisation,  his  reti
cence  on  the  essential  point  whether  he  was  the  Messiah
becomes  wholly  incomprehensible.  It  seems  evident
that  this  pericope  is  a  defence  of  Jesus'  Messiahship,
made  by  his  disciples  against  Jewish  attacks  upon  it  on
the  ground  that  he  was  not  a  son  of  David — a  defence
made  at  a  time  when  no  one  had  yet  thought  of
constructing  the  pedigrees  now  found  in  Mt.  and  Lk. ,
both  of  which  are  very  late.  The  critical  estimate  of
these  passages  has  not  been  influenced  by  the  discussion
of  the  term  'Son  of  man,'  and  in  almost  all  instances
has  been  reached  by  scholars  who  believe  on  the  basis
of  this  title  that  Jesus  regarded  himself  as  the  Messiah.
Although  at  first  sight  the  result  of  recent  investiga
tions  may  seem  to  be  wholly  negative  and  to  render
47  Value  of  valueless  the  l°ng  labours  that  have  been
the  different  exPended  uP°n  the  term,  a  closer  ex-
theories  aminat'on  will  show  that  each  new  theory
has  tended  to  bring  to  view  some  aspect
of  the  truth,  and  that  the  hypothesis  that  appears  to
explain  satisfactorily  most  of  the  facts  yields  the  richest
returns  for  our  knowledge  of  the  life  and  teaching  of
Jesus.  When  Jesus  declared  that  man  is  lord  of  the
sabbath  and  has  the  authority  to  pardon  sin,  he  no
doubt  thought  of  man  as  he  ought  to  be  as  a  child  of
the  heavenly  father;  and  thus  there  was  in  his  mind  an
element  of  that  ideal  humanity  which  Herder  emphasised.
That  he  did  not  look  upon  himself  as  the  absolutely
perfect  man  only  enhances  his  moral  greatness.  Other
genuine  utterances  suggest  that  humble  sense  of  fellow
ship  with  man  and  acceptance  of  man's  lot  which  Baur
rightly  felt.  Those  who  explained  the  term  as  a
Messianic  title  were  right  in  so  far  as  the  Greek  gospels
are  concerned.  But  a  correct  feeling  also  led  many
scholars  to  the  opinion  that  Jesus  cannot  have  through
this  term  accepted  as  his  own  the  current  Messianic
ideal.  That  it  served  to  hide  the  secret  of  his  Messiah-
ship  was  also  true  ;  only  it  was  not  Jesus  himself,  but
his  disciples,  who  thus  used  it.  Similarly,  the  term  is
likely  to  have  suggested  to  early  Christians  a  conception
in  which  many  heterogeneous  elements  were  blended.
The  gradual  elimination  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  the
synoptic  apocalypse,  the  manifestly  secondary  passages
containing  the  phrase,  as  the  literary  character  of  the
gospels  became  more  truly  appreciated,  was  of  utmost
importance.  Only  on  the  basis  of  such  careful  criticism
could  the  resort  to  the  vernacular  be  of  any  value.

While  no  process  of  criticism  can  restore  the  ipsissima
Terba  of  Jesus,  an  approximation  may  be  possible.  For
the  work  of  retranslation  knowledge  of  the  linguistic
material  is  necessary,  and  also  philological  insight.
The  attempts  to  explain  the  use  of  the  term  in  passages
that  are  rejected  have  been  of  much  value,  since  they
are  utterances  of  early  Christians  whose  thought,  intrinsi
cally  important,  has  exercised  a  paramount  influence  in
the  world.  In  their  interpretation  it  is  both  legitimate
and  necessary  to  seek  for  light  in  the  mythical  and
legendary  lore  of  the  epoch.  The  more  marked  the
difference  between  the  thoughts  revealed  in  the  Aramaic
translations  of  the  Greek  sayings,  the  more  difficult  is  it
to  explain  them  by  the  conceptions  known  to  prevail
among  the  Greek  gospel-writers  ;  the  more  original  and
valuable  the  obtained  utterances,  the  stronger  is  also
the  presumption  that  they  come  from  a  great  personality
whose  historical  existence  thereby  becomes  assured  and
whose  tremendous  influence  can  be  appreciated.  If  he
ceases  to  be  what  he  so  earnestly  enjoined  upon  his
disciples  not  to  say  that  he  was,  a  king  to  be  ministered
unto,  he  becomes  more  truly  than  ever  what  he  would
be,  a  son  of  man  ministering  to  the  sons  of  men.

The  most  important  literature  before  the  nineteenth  century
is  indicated  in  the  works  of  Scholten,  Appel,  and  A.  Meyer.

The  term  is  discussed  in  every  Life  of
48.  Bibliography.  Jesus,  New  Testament  Theology,  and

Bible  Dictionary.  All  important  contri
butions  in  recent  times  have  been  referred  to  in  the  course  of
this  article.  >j.  S.

4740


SONS  OF  THE  PROPHETS

SONS  OF  THE  PROPHETS. See  PROPHET.

SOOTHSAYER  (Dpj5,  {J WO,  etc..  MANreyOMeNH).
See  DIVINATION,  §  2  [if.  4],  etc.,  and  cp  MAGIC,  §  3.

SOP  (VJ/OOMION),  Jn.  1826^;,  a  fragment  or  morsel ;
cp  ycoMOC.  ©.  in  Judg.  19s  (©AL  KA&CMA  Ruth2i4
[for  D3]).  See  MEALS,  §  10.

SOPATER  (CCGTTATPOC).  a  man  of  BERCEA,  who
accompanied  Paul  (for  part  of  the  way  at  least)  on  his
last  recorded  journey  to  Jerusalem,  Acts  204.  The
addition  llvppov  (son  of  Pyrrhus  RV,  NABD)  is  omitted
by  TR.  The  mention  of  the  father's  name  is
unusual,  although  it  may  possibly  have  been  inserted
to  distinguish  him  from  Sosipater  (Rom.  1621),  with
whom,  however,  he  should  probably  be  identified.  See

SOSIPATER.

SOPHERETHucechHRAG  [B],  Acechop.  [A],  ACOO-
d>epe9  [I-])-  Ezra  2 55  AV,  RV  HASSOPHERETH  [g.v.].

SORCERY,  SORCERER,  SORCERESS.  See  MAGIC,
§3-

SOREK,  THE  VALLEY  OF  (p-llLM  7m  [with  C'],
i.e.,  '  wady  of  the  sorek  vine'  [see  VINE]),  the  place
where  Samson  fell  in  love  with  the  Philistine  woman
Delilah  (Judg.  164 :  £N  AAcoopHX  [B],  erri  Toy
XeiM&ppoy  CcopHX  [A],  .  .  .  -HK  [L]).  It  is  called
by  Jer.  ((AS' 1536,  cp  297  76)  cafarsorec ;  he  places  it  in
the  region  of  Eleutheropolis  near  Saraa — i.e. ,  ZORAH
[</.-'.].  This  points  to  the  mod.  Siirlk,  J  hr.  W.  from
Zorah,  on  the  N.  side  of  the  large  and  fertile  Wddy
Surdr.  Cp,  however,  ZORAH.

SORES  (ctopHC  [A],  -peic  [L],  ecoBHC  [B],  Josh.
15  59,  <5).  See  SEIR,  z.

SORREL  (P~lb'),  Zech.  18  RV,  AV  'speckled.1  See
COLOURS,  §  12.

SOSIPATER  (ctOCITTATpOc).  i.  A  general  under
Judas  the  Maccabee,  who  fought  against  Timotheus  at
Carnion,  2  Mace:  1219-24.

2.  One  of  the  '  kinsmen '  of  Paul  who  unites  with
him  in  saluting  the  Christians  of  Rome,  Rom.  1621.
He  seems,  therefore,  to  have  been  well  known  to  them.
In  the  Pscudo-Dorotheus  he  is  a  bishop  of  Iconium.
He  is  probably  to  be  identified  with  SOPATER  \_q.v. ]
of  Bercea.

SOSTHENES  (coocGeNHc)-  i.  'Ruler  of  the
synagogue'  (dpx<-<rwdywyos,  see  SYNAGOGUE,  §  9)  at
Corinth  when  Paul  was  in  that  city  on  his  second
journey,  the  first  into  Greece  (Acts  18 17).  After  the
failure  of  the  Jews'  concerted  action  against  Paul  before
Gallio  (see  GALLIC,  §  2) — in  which,  perhaps,  Sosthenes
had  taken  a  leading  part — we  are  told  that  '  all '  (irdvres,
so  BXA  and  others),  or  'all  the  Greeks'  (irdvre^  ol
"EXA^es  :  so  DdEHLPM,  etc.),  certainly  not  'all  the
Jews'  (irdvTes  'lovdaiot.  or  iravres  ol  'lovdaioi,  as  some
authorities  have;  see  Ti. ,  Blass,  Hilgenfeld)  laid  hold
on  Sosthenes  and  beat  him  before  the  judgment-seat.

It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose,  as  many  do,  that
Sosthenes  was  the  successor  of  Crispus,  the  '  ruler  of
the  synagogue,'  baptized  by  Paul  at  Corinth  (Acts  188  ;
see  CRISPUS),  nor  yet  to  assume,  with  others,  that  Lk.
is  confusing  the  two  persons.  Both  may  concurrently
have  borne  the  title  of  '  ruler  of  the  synagogue'  (dpxi-
(rvvdyuyos),  and  have  held  the  office  denoted  by  it,  just
as  cases  in  which  there  were  more  than  one  chief  priest
(Apxi(pefa)  can  be  cited  (cp  ANNAS  and  CAIAPHAS).
This  Sosthenes  has  been  identified  by  many  since  Theo-
doret,  but  without  reason,  with  '  the  brother'  mentioned
in  i  Cor.  li  (see  no.  2).

2.  Sosthenes  '  the  brother '  appears  in  i  Cor.  1 1  as
having  a  share  in  the  preparation  of  i  Cor.  To  prove
that  the  part  he  took  was  that  of  amanuensis  merely,
appeal  is  usually  made  to  i  Cor.  1621  ;  but  those  who
argue  thus  overlook  the  fact  that  Tertius,  who  is  sup
posed  to  have  written  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  is  not
mentioned  until  the  end  of  that  epistle,  and  then  ex-


SPAIN

pressly  as  the  apostle's  secretary  (T^orioj  6  ypd\f/as  rrjv
6iriffro\7)v,  Rom.  1622).  Moreover,  no  one  has  ever
thought  of  taking  '  Timothy  the  brother  '  in  2  Cor.  1 1
Col.  1 1  (cp  Phil,  li),  'all  the  brethren  which  are  with
me  [Paul]'  in  Gal.  12,  '  Silvanus  and  Timotheus'  in
i  Thess.  1 1  2  Thess.  1 1  as  having  been  the  apostle's
secretaries  in  attendance.  The  simple  fact  is  that  the
names  belong  to  the  form  usually  adopted  for  the
Pauline  epistle  ;  one  or  more  persons  are  mentioned
besides  the  apostle  as  writing  it,  their  function  being
that  of  attesting  the  truth  set  forth  and  defended  by  the
apostle  (2  Cor.  13,  cp  Dt.  19  15).  From  time  to  time
we  are  reminded  of  their  presence  by  the  use  of  the
plural  (first  person),  but  quite  as  often  the  apostle  uses
the  singular.  '  The  brother '  Sosthenes  is  otherwise
unknown.  He  is  enumerated  among  the  seventy  in
Eusebius  (HE\.  12 1)  and  elsewhere  (see  Lips.  Apok.
Ap.-gesch.  l2oi  203,  8413,  E.  3.  w.  c.  v.  M.

SOSTRATUS  (CGOCTPATOC  [A],  coc.  [V];  the
name  is  also  borne  by  a  priest  of  Aphrodite  in  Paphos  ;
cp  Schiirer,  G/'/l  514  w. ),  governor  of  the  citadel  in
Jerusalem  (err&PXOC  THC  AKpOTToAecoc)  temp.
Antiochus  Epiphanes  (2  Mace.  4  27  [28]  29).  The  post
would,  doubtless,  be  important  (cp  Benz.  HA  47  -,
JERUSALEM,  §  27).

en-apxos,  used  in  ©  for  nrtS  (see  GOVERNOR,  i),  corresponds  to

the  Roman  prrrfuctus.  From  it  is  borrowed  the  Nab.  n^isrii
the  precise  nuance  of  which  is  not  quite  certain  (CfS  2,  nos.
173,  207,  214).

SOTAI  (''DID,  meaning?  coOTAl  [L]).  The  B'ne
Sotai,  a  group  or  family(see  SOLOMON'S  SERVANTS)  in  the  great
post-exilic  list  (see  EZRA  ii.,  §  9) ;  Ezra  2  55  (o-arei  [li],  o-corai  [A])
=  Nell.  7  57  (o-ouret  [BA],  -TIT)  [N*vk!.],  .rtet  [Kc.a  vkl.])=  :  Esd.
5  33  (o-ajTtu  [L],  EVom.  after  ©HA).

SOUL  (^'23,  fYXH  '  common  to  all  the  Sem.
languages  ;  but  Ass.  napisfu  generally  means  '  life,'
more  rarely  '  soul ').  Properly  '  breath  '  ;  but  this  sense
seems  to  have  gone  out  in  Hebrew.  The  usual  sense  is
the  soul  or  individual  life  (so  very  often,  see,  e.g. ,  Ps.
669  Is.  53  12)  as  distinguished  from  the  '  flesh  '  or  '  body  '
(Dt.  1223  Ps.  31 10).  By  a  natural  transition  nfyAesalso
means  'a  living  being,'  especially  in  the  phrase  nfyheS
hayydh  (rrn  PS:),  lit.  'a  living  soul,'  used  of  man  in  J
(Gen.  2?)  and  of  animals  in  P  (Gen.  1 20  2430  9 12  15  f.
all  P  ;  2 19,  redactional  insertion  in  J)  ;  cp  i  Cor.  1645.
For  further  developments,  see  ESCHATOLOGY,  §§  12-19,
and  for  the  connection  of  '  soul '  and  '  heart '  cp  HEART.
None  of  the  three  passages  cited  in  Ges.-Buhl  for  the  sense
'  breath  '  will  stand  examination,  as  has  been  shown  by  Briggs,
'  The  use  of  5-133  in  the  OT  '  [a  critical  and  exhaustive  classifica
tion  of  passages], //>£  l(i  [1897]  17-30.  These  passages  are: —
(a)  Prov.  279.  Here  Briggs  gives  nephcs  the  sense  of  lebilb,
'heart';  but  it  is  better  to  read  rEi)1?  NS1D  nsy  pnCl,  'so  the
sweetness  of  counsel  is  healing  to  the  soul '  (Toy  also  nsj?  pn2l)-
(/')  Job  41 13  where  £'33,  '  breath '(?),  is  ascribed  to  Leviathan.
But  Job  is  a  late  book  ;  a  reversion  to  an  archaic  sense  is  not
probable  here.  So  Briggs,  who  renders  'his  passion,  or  fury,
kindleth  coals.'  The  parallel  expressions,  however,  point  to  the
reading  inSC>:,  'his  breath.'  (c)  Is.  3  20,  e;B3ri  'P3,  RV  'per
fume-boxes  '  (see  PERFUME).  Briggs  proposes  '  boxes  of  desire,'
or  'smelling  boxes.'  Paul  Haupt  (S'ffOT,  '  Isa.'  [Heb.]  82)  has
suspected  a  connection  with  Ass.  pasasu,  '  to  anoint  oneself."
This  suggests  nil'y'S:)  'FI3,  '  boxes  of  ointment '  (Ass.  napsastu,
'ointment ').  But  still  better  would  perhaps  be  fCB'  'PG  (D  and
S  confounded).  T.  K.  C.

SOUTH,  SOUTH  WIND.  See  EARTH,  FOUR
QUARTERS  OF  THE,  and  WINDS.  For  Chambers  of
the  South,  see  STARS,  §  3*  ;  and  for  The  South  as  a
geographical  expression  (iS.  30 14  i  Mace.  565),  see
JUIVEA,  NEGEB,  PALESTINE.

SOW  (yc),  2  Pet.  222  ;  see  SWINE.

SOWER,  SOWING.  See  AGRICULTURE,  §  6.  Cn
the  Parable  of  the  Sower,  see  GOSPELS,  §  19.

SPAIN  (CTTANIA  [ANVTi.WH],  i  Mace.  83  Rom.
152428).  Carthaginian  Spain  became  Roman  at  the
close  of  the  Second  Punic  War  (201  B.C.);  but  the

4742


SPAN

Roman  power  was  not  fully  consolidated  over  the  entire
Iberian  peninsula  until  nearly  two  centuries  later  (by
Marcus  Agrippa  the  friend  and  minister  of  Augustus).
There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  apostle  Paul
ever  carried  out  the  intention  of  visiting  .Spain  ex
pressed  in  Rom.  102428,  and  the  evidence  that  the
country  was  evangelised  by  the  apostle  James  the  Less
(see  JAMES,  §  i)  is  too  late  and  legendary  to  be  of  any
value.  Cp  GE-.JGRAPHY,  §  25  f.  ;  TARSHISH,  §  2.

SPAN  (rnj;  cnie&MH).  See  WEIGHTS  AND
MEASURES.  In  Lam.  2 20,  AV  gives  the  pathetic  phrase
'  children  of  a  span  long  '  for  D'nsa  ^>Sy  ;  RV,  however,
has  '  the  children  that  are  dandled  in  the  hands '  (cp  v.
22).  Budde,  '  Hiitschel-kinder. '

SPARROW.  The  \\ord  sippor,  ~)'lS>',  of  frequent
occurrence  in  OT,  is,  with  only  two  exceptions  (Ps.  84  4  [3]
1028[7],  cTpoySiONlrendered  'bird,'  'fowl'  in  KV.  Nor
does  the  exceptional  translation  '  sparrow '  imply  that
any  particular  species  was  intended.  The  word  probably
meant  any  small  Passerine  bird,  a  group  which  is  un
usually  abundant  in  Palestine.  It  is  interesting  to  note
that  the  common  house-sparrow,  Passer  domestic  us,  is
common  in  Palestine,  but  in  a  smaller  and  brighter
variety  ;  three  other  species  of  Passer  are  also  enumerated.
Canon  Tristram  identifies  the  sparrow  of  Ps.  102  7  as  the
Monticola  cvanm  or  Blue  Thrush,  from  its  habit  of  sitting
solitarily,  or  sometimes  in  pairs,  on  projecting  ledges  or
some  other  conspicuous  perch,  uttering  from  time  to
time  a  plaintive  and  monotonous  song.  The  '  sparrow  '
is  not  included  in  the  list  of  unclean  birds  ;  and  it  seems
probable  that  at  any  rate  in  NT  times  (Mt.  162931  Lk.
126,  ffrpovdiov)  they  were  eaten,  as  is  commonly  the  case
in  Mediterranean  countries  to  this  day.  See  BIRD,
FOWL,  §  i.  A.  E.S.

SPARTA  (CTTARTH  [NV],  -TI&  [A],  iMacc.  14:6;
SPARTANS,  cn&pTi&T&i,  i  Mace.  122/.  142o/.  1623;
AAKeAMMONiOl,  AV  'Lacedemonians,'  RV  '-dajm.,'
2  Mace.  5 9).

'I  he  greatness  of  Sparta  was  long  past  when  she
came  into  connection  with  the  Jewish  people.  The
final  suppression  of  the  liberties  of  Greece  by  the
Romans  was  in  part  due  to  her  obstinate  refusal  to
enter  the  Achajan  League  (149  B.C.).  On  the  destruc
tion  of  Corinth  and  dissolution  of  that  league,  Sparta
gained  a  favourable  position  so  far  as  retaining  her
autonomy  went,  but  a  numljer  of  the  Laconian  towns
dependent  upon  her  were  granted  autonomy  by  the
Romans  (Strabo,  366  ;  Livy,  3429).  Sparta  at  this  period
held  the  rank  of  a  civitas  fvderatci  et  libera  (Str.  365),
being  self-governing  and  not  liable  to  tribute  or  to  the
jurisdiction  of  a  Roman  governor.  Sparta  and  the
Spartans  are  mentioned  together  in  connection  with  a
correspondence  which  passed  between  them  and  the
Jews  in  the  Maccabean  period  (i  Mace.  126).  About
144  li.  c.  Jonathan,  then  leader  of  the  Jews,  wishing  to
make  alliances  to  strengthen  his  position,  sent  Numenius
and  Antipater  with  letters  to  Rome,  Sparta,  and  else
where  (iMacc.  \1\ff.,  cp  DISPERSION,  §  13).  In  his
letter  to  the  Spartans  he  lays  great  stress  on  a  former
letter  from  their  king  Areus  to  the  Jewish  high  priest
Onias,  and  on  the  desirability  of  renewing  the  brother
hood  which  had  then  existed.  The  letter  of  Areus  is
quoted  to  the  effect  that  it  had  been  found  in  writing
that  the  Spartans  and  Jews  were  of  the  same  stock,  that
is  to  say,  of  Abraham,  and  that  therefore  their  interests
were  identical  (1220-23).  Shortly  afterwards  Jonathan
died,  and  the  tidings  of  his  death  caused  great  grief  in
Sparta  (14  16),  but  on  Simon's  assuming  the  priesthood,
the  rulers  (i.e. ,  the  Ephors)  of  the  Spartans  wrote  to  him
wishing  to  renew  the  friendship  which  they  had  con
firmed  with  Judas  and  Jonathan  his  brethren  (14 1?/).
The  name  of  the  Spartan  king  is  given  as  ARius.1

1  Possibly  a  more  correct  form  of  the  name  would  be  apevs  as
in  Gk.  writers,  cp  also  CIA  2  i,  no.  332.

4743


SPEAR

So  RV,  but  AV  AREUS  (i  Mace.  12  20,  aptjs) ;  which  should
also  be  read  in  v.  7  (with  Vg.  and  Jos.  [ap*ios])  for  AV  DAKICS  ;
and  again  in  v.  19,  for  AV  ONIAKES  (oi/ia[a]pi)s  [NV],  -veiap.
[Avid.]),  which  has  arisen  from  the  combination  of  oveiq  ('to
Onias  '),  the  last  word  in  v.  19,  with  apijs  (Arius),  the  first  in  v.  20.

Although  there  were  two  Spartan  kings  named  Arius,
there  is  little  doubt  that  Arius  1.  (309-265  B.C.),  the
successor  of  Cleomenes,  is  the  one  here  referred  to,
and  that  the  high  priest  is  Onias  I.1  It  has  been  sug
gested  with  great  probability  that  this  letter  was  written
in  302  B.C.  when  the  Spartans  may  have  wished  to
hinder  Demetrius  Poliorcetes,  who  was  then  warring
with  Cassander.  That  treaties  may  have  existed  be
tween  Semitic  and  other  peoples  at  that  time  is  shown
by  the  league  between  the  Athenians  and  the  Sidonians
before  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  to  which  refer
ence  is  made  in  CIG,  no.  87  (Schiirer  in  Riehm's  H  \VB
2i536a).

The  authenticity  of  the  letters  in  i  Mace,  has  been
much  disputed.  The  letter  from  Jonathan  to  the
Spartans  (i  Mace.  126^)  scarcely  reads  like  a  diplo
matic  document,  and  betrays  the  religious  spirit  of  a
later  age  ;  though  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  is  im
possible  to  build  too  much  upon  the  wording  since  the
letters  are  translations  of  translations.

There  is  no  reason,  however,  to  doubt  the  fact  of  diplomatic
relations  with  Sparta  having  been  set  on  foot  by  Jonathan.  For
Sparta  was  too  obscure  at  the  time  to  have  suggested  itself  to
a  forger  eager  to  magnify  his  hero  by  inventions  of  the  kind.
Again  the  incident  leads  to  no  result  in  the  sequel  ;  the  reverse
would  have  tended  to  throw  doubt  upon  the  entire  episode.

As  given  both  by  Josephus  and  the  author  of  i  Mace,  the
two  letters  of  the  Spartans  seem  fragmentary  and  wanting  in
definite  suggestion.  They  have  the  air  of  diplomatic  forgeries.
Especially  is  it  noticeable  that  whereas  Jonathan  describes  the
Spartan  overtures  as  a  declaration  of  '  confederacy  and  friend
ship '  (i  Mace.  128)  there  is  no  such  declaration  in  proper
diplomatic  terms  in  the  appended  document.  Yet  the  ability
to  point  to  actual  alliance  in  the  past  would  have  been  the
natural  and  most  powerful  recommendation  of  his  proposals.

A  point  upon  which  too  much  stress  has  been  laid  is
the  relationship  between  the  Spartans  and  Jews.  Areus
mentions  that  it  was  written  down  that  they  were
'  brethren  and  of  the  stock  of  Abraham. '  The  unlucky
JASON  (q.  v. ,  2)  fled  to  the  Lacedemonians  (\a.Kfda.i/j.di>iot)
for  shelter  because  they  were  his  '  near  of  kin'  (5td  ryv
ffvyyfviav,  2  Mace.  5  9),  and  Herod  made  a  favourite  of
a  certain  Spartan  '  on  account  of  his  country '  (Jos.  BJ
i.  26 1).  There  seems  to  be  no  good  ground  for  re
garding  the  '  Sparta  '  of  these  letters  as  a  corruption  of
the  Asiatic  name  Saparda  (see  SEPHARAD)  ;  and  it  is
equally  hazardous  with  Hitzig  (Gesch.  347)  to  identify  it
with  the  Lycian  town  Patara.  It  is  conceivable  that
the  old  historians  connected  the  Pelasgians  with  the
Spartans,  and  derived  the  former  from  Peleg  the  son  of
Eber  ;  but  the  relationship  insisted  on  finds  a  parallel
in  the  case  of  the  people  of  Pergamos,  who,  in  making
an  alliance  with  the  Jews,  pointed  back  to  similar  rela-

! tions  between  their  ancestors  and  Abraham2  (Jos.  Ant.

\  xiv.  1022).  The  old  historians  and  genealogists  were
ever  ready  to  account  for  existing  confederacies  and
alliances  as  resting  on  some  ancient  bond  of  kinship,
and  numerous  analogies  may  be  found  amongst  classical
writers  ;  cp  GENEALOGIES  i. ,  §  3  [3],  col.  1660.

See  H.  J.  E.  Palmer,  de  epistolarum  quas  Spartani  atqttt
Juiiaei  inviccm  sibi  misisse  dicitntitr  veritate,  Darmst.  1828;
Schurer,  1  186  ;  Ew.  Gesch.  4317.  S.  A.  C. — \V.  J.  W.

SPEAR. The  words  are  : —

1.  rnn,  hanith. See  below  (§  2)  and  cp  JAVELIN,  2.

2.  rtSI,  ron:ah. See  below  (§  3).

3.  JITS,  kldon. See  JAVELIN,  i.

1  Cp  ONIAS,  §  3. Not  Onias  II.  and  Areus  II.  (Ew.  Gtsch.
4317),  for they  can hardly  have  been  contemporaneous,  and
moreover  Areus  II.  died  young,  about  257  B.C.  (Paus.  iii.  66);
still  less  can  it  be  Onias  III.  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  4  10). A  certain
Areus  is  mentioned  about  184  B.C.  as  a  prominent  Spartan  (Pol.
22  x  23  4).

2  Cp  a  note  in  Stcph.  Byz.,  s.v.,  lovSaia,  '  derived  airo  toi&uou
SirapTUf  ei/os  en  ©tj/Sls '  i  see  Schurer,  I.e.

4744


SPEAR


SPICE


„ .

° s


4.  |'p,  kiiyin  (2  S.  21  i6f). The  text,  however,  is  doubtful. See
ISHBI-BBNOB.

5.  ^S^,  silsal  (Job  403it  ;  '  fish  spear  '). See  FISH,  §  3,  i.
On  the  '  spearmen  '  of  Ps.  6830  see  CROCODILE. For

the  5e£io\d/3ot  of  Acts  23  23  we  ought  probably  to  read
with  A  d(£io(36\oi  ;  cp  the  eKrjpoXoi  of  Jos.  />'/  ii.  17s,
fftfxvdoviJTai  and  \iOofib\oi  of  iii.  7  18,  and  fftpevdovrJTat
ofiv.  13.  Cp  WAR.

The  spear  was  a  favourite  weapon  of  offence  amongst
ancient  nations,  as  it  has  always  been  amongst  other
peoples  at  an  early  stage  of  development  ;
it  was  easy  to  make  and  could  be  used
with  great  effect.  It  varied  chiefly  in  its
size,  weight,  and  length  ;  this  will  be  seen  from  the
illustrations  in  Erman  (Life  in  Anc.  Eg.},  Wilkinson
(Anc.  Eg.),  and  Maspero  (Struggle  of  the  ATations),
though  too  much  reliance  must  not  be  placed  on  the
representations  of  spears  in  '  works  of  art'  (cp  the  remarks
of  Cecil  Torr,  Ancient  Ships,  8).  It  consisted,  as  a  rule,
of  a  wooden  staff  with  a  sharp  head  of  flint  or  metal.
It  may  be  that  the  early  Israelites,  as  a  writer  in  Kitto
(Bibl.  Cyclop.}  suggests,  like  other  primitive  peoples,
made  use  of  the  horn  of  some  animal,  '  straightened  in
water,  and  sheathed  upon  a  thorn  -  wood  staff.  '  We
know  with  what  effect  animals  themselves  use  these
horns  (Darwin,  The  Descent  of  Man,  501  ff.  [1890]).
'  When  sharpened  this  instrument  would  penetrate  the
hide  of  a  bull,  and,  according  to  Strabo,  even  of  an
elephant  ;  it  was  light,  very  difficult  to  break,'  and
'resisted  the  blow  of  a  battle-axe'  (Kitto).  Later,
brass  (see  COPPER)  or  IRON  (q.v.)  was  used.  Layard
(Nineveh  and  Babylon,  301  [1853])  found  at  Nimrud
the  heads  of  spears,  '  which  being  chiefly  of  iron  fell
to  pieces  almost  as  soon  as  exposed  to  the  air.'  In
Gen.  Louis  Palma  Di  Cesnola's  Cyprus  (1877),  plates
xxxvi.  and  xl.  (after  p.  392),  are  given  gems  from  Curium
in  the  Phoenician  (xxxvi.)  and  the  Greek  (xl.  )  style,  on
which  warriors  are  represented  armed  with  round  shields
(see  SHIELD),  and  spears  which  look  like  sharp-pointed
stakes  ;  cp  the  long  spears  on  the  Sarcophagus  from
Golgoi  (pi.  x.  ,  opposite  p.  no).  On  the  other  hand,
on  the  silver  patera  found  at  Amathus  (pi.  xix.,  opposite
p.  276)  a  regular  spear-head  seems  to  be  represented.

Layard  (Nineveh  and  its  Remains,  2343)  says, 'the
spear  of  the  Assyrian  footman  was  short,  scarcely  exceed-

TVi  h"  ~th  mS  ^e  ne'Sn'  °f  a  nian  i  tnat  of  the
horseman  appears  to  have  been  con
siderably  longer.  .  .  .  The  shaft  was  probably  of  some
strong  wood,  and  did  not  consist  of  a  reed,  like  that  of
the  modern  Arab  lance.'  It  would  seem  to  have  been
a  stout  weapon,  since  warriors  used  it  to  force  stones  out
of  the  wall  of  a  besieged  city  (see  p.  372).  The  Egyptian
soldiers  of  the  eighteenth  Theban  dynasty  carried  '  pikes
about  5  ft.  long,  with  broad  bronze  or  copper  points  '
(Maspero,  Struggle,  213)  ;  the  spear  was  not  so  common.
The  Assyrian  pikemen  of  a  later  date  were  armed  with
equally  heavy  weapons  (ibid.,  627  /.).  The  Hebrew
hanith  (rnn)  seems  to  have  been  a  large  weapon.  It
was  used  by  great  warriors  (2  S.  223,  etc.  )  ;  and  it  is  the
weapon  put  into  the  hands  of  '  giants  '  (2  S.  2821,  etc.  ).
Goliath  is  said  to  have  carried  a  spear  '  like  a  weaver's
beam  (i  S.  17?),  its  head  weighing  600  shekels'  (for  the
idea  of  'giants'  see  ANAKIM).  Saul  is  said  to  have
hurled  his  hanith  at  David  (  i  S.  IQ  <)/.).  From  such
indications  in  the  OT  we  may  suppose  that  the  hanith
had  some  resemblance  to  the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian
pike.

A  lighter,  and  no  doubt  much  older,  weapon  of  the

kind  was  also in use  among  the Egyptians  and the

3 Th /'' h Assyrians,  and  is  still  found  among  the

•'  Bedouins  and  other  primitive  peoples.

This  is  called  in  Arabic  rumh,  and  we  can  hardly  be

wrong  in  identifying  it  with  the  Hebrew  romah  (nch,  see

Nu.  25  7,  etc.  ;  cp  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1221  228  ; Merrill,

East  of  the  Jordan,  482),  which,  however,  was  no  doubt

often  shorter. '  The  beam,  made  of  a  light  reed  of  the

4745


rivers  of  Mesopotamia,  is  nearly  two  of  their  short
horse-lengths  ;  they  charge  them  above  their  heads  '
(Doughty,  1334).  The  Arab  keeps  this  spear  continu
ally  at  his  side.  When  he  prepares  to  encamp  the
sheikh  strikes  his  spear  in  the  ground.  When  the  camp
is  broken  up  '  the  spear  is  the  last  thing  taken  from  the
j  ground'  (Warburton,  The  Crescent  and  the  Cross,
chap.  25).  For  other  spear-like  weapons  ('  dart,'  etc.)
see  WEAPONS,  §  2.  Cp  SIEGE,  WAR.  M.  A.  c.

SPECKLED.  For  (i)  ndkod  OpJ),  Gen.  30  32^,
and  (2)  M<5ttrt'  (yi3X),  Jer.  12  9,  see  COLOURS,  §  12;  and  for  (3)
sdrok  (  P~^'),  Zech.  1  8,  see  ib.,  §  10.

SPELT  is  the  RV  rendering  of  kussfmeth,  npD3
(Ex.  932  Is.  2825  Ezek.  4gt),  for  which  AV  has  twice  '  rie%>
and  once  'fitches.'  See  FITCHES.

[It  is  possible  that  flCDS,  '  spelt,1  occurs  also  in  i  S.  '2  36,  where
it  is  said  that  destitute  priests  will  sue  to  be  put  into  a  priest's
office  DO?  12:11  f]D3  rnijN1:',  i.e.,  according  to  tradition,  'for  a
piece  of  silver  and  a  loaf  of  bread.'  But  the  rendering  'piece'
presupposes  a  connection  of  JN  and  m2,  gcrah  (see  WEIGHTS),
which  is  purely  arbitrary.  Following  Del.  Prol.  149,  BDB  and
Ges.-Bu.  take  'JN  to  be  an  abstract  noun,  meaning  '  payment,'  cp
Ass.  agaru,  '  to  hire.'  But  this  root  does  not  appear  to  be  known
in  Hebrew,  nor  is  an  abstract  noun  probable  in  this  passage.
Probably  the  text  is  corrupt,  and  we  should  read  rCD3  "ICJ71?,
'for  an  omer  of  spelt.'  (5B  Js  without  the  following  words
Cn*?  "13D1  1  ',  possibly  these  were  added  after  the  corruption  of
flDDD  TDy^i  on  account  of  the  concluding  mention  of  'a  morsel
of  bread.'  For  a  bolder  expedient  see  Crit.  Bib.  —  T.  K.  c.]

SPICE  (i.e.  ,  Lat.  species,  OFrench  espice,  hence  fpice  ;
cp  ft,  2  Ch.  1614,  all  species  [of  spices]  :  Vg.  unguentis
meretriciis  [H3T]),  though  now  specifically  employed  to
denote  '  a  class  of  aromatic  vegetable  condiments  used
for  the  seasoning  of  food,  commonly  in  a  pulverised
state,'  was,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  applicable  to  a
much  wider  variety  of  '  species  '  ;  in  AV  it  happens  to
be  applied  (unless,  perhaps  in  Cant.  82,  where  'spiced'
wine  is  alluded  to)  a  never  to  condiments  but  only  to
aromatic  odours.  It  represents  :  —

1.  bifscm, cb'2 (Ex.  3023t), or bo'sem, cb'3 (often),
plur. c-sb'3, 2  Ch.  1614, etc. That this word must
sometimes  at  least  have  a  general  sense  is  shown  by  the
expressions  Dir3-|S3p  (Ex.  8023  ;  see  CINNAMON),  cirn'njp
(ib.,  see  CALAMUS)  and  cir'3^3  rio  (Ezek.  2722). On
the  specific  sense,  see  BALSAM.

2.  sammim, D<ED (Ex.  3034: EV SVVEKT SPICES;

Ex.256  30  7  31  ii  35s  1528  8038  40  27  [only  AV]  Lev.  4  7  \\\  12
Nu.  4  16  2  Ch.  24  [3]  [only  AV]  13  n  ;  EV  SWEET  INCKSSK)  or
ketireth  sammim,  G'SD  rnbp  (Ex.  37  2gt  ;  EV  INCENSE  OF
SWEET  SPICES  and  RV  in  4627  2  Ch.  24[3]).

The  word  sammim  is  a  general  expression  for  fragrant
material  in  the  form  of  powder,  akin  to  Ar.  sum  ma,
'  to  smell,'  as  well  as  samm,  simm,  or  summ,  '  poison,'
and  to  Aram,  samma,  'a  medicament.'  The  exact
history  of  this  group  of  words  is  obscure,  but  probably
the  oldest  form  of  root  is  represented  by  Ar.  samma  =
Aram,  sain;  and  Ar.  samm  and  Heb.  c'CD  may  both
be  loan  words  from  Aramaic  (cp  Frankel,  262).  On
the  other  hand,  the  oldest  meaning  is  perhaps  that  of  the
Hebrew  word  and  of  Ar.  samm,  viz.,  '  fragrance'  ;  the
•  notions  of  poison  (in  Syr.  samma  dhg-maiotd}  and  of
medical  efficacy  may  well  be  derived  from  this.  In  post-
biblical  Hebrew,  and  sometimes  in  Syr.  ,  the  word  was
used  with  a  further  extension  of  meaning  —  viz.,  for
colouring  matter.

The  use  of  the  word  in  OT  is,  as  a  general  term,  for
the  sacred  incense  compounded  of  stacte,  onycha,  gal-
banum  (galbanum  of  sammim},  and  frankincense  (see
INCENSE).

3.  fiMfffh, nt«J  (Gen.  3725; EV Spicery  ; RVme-

1  Compare,  however,  (pAl.  ;  the  latter  text  has  the  curious  ex
pression  aproi'  Kvpiov  (see  Crit.  Bit'.).

-  In  E/ek.  24  10  the  verb  results  from  a  mistranslation,  '  spice
it  well  '  ;  RV  'make  thick  the  broth.'

4746


SPICE-MERCHANTS

gum  tragacanth  or  storax  ;  OvfjLid/j.ara  ;  aromata  ;  Gen.
43  ii  ;  AV  spices,  RV  spicery  ;  6vfji.ia.fjia.,  storax}.  See
STORAX.

4.  rtkah, njri, Cant.  82 (apparently not specific).
See  PERFUME,  PERFUMERS.

5.  dpufMra.,  Mk.  16  1,  etc. See  PERFUME.

6.  dfjLUfjiov,  Rev.  1813  RV. See  AMOMUM. N.  M.

SPICE  -MERCHANTS  (D^rnn,  with  art.  ;  TCON
GMTTOptON).  but  RV  'merchants,'  are  mentioned  in
connection  with  Solomon's  commercial  profits  (iK.  10  15),
if  we  should  not  rather  read  '  Jerahmeelites.  '  See
SOLOMON,  §  7,  and  cp  PERFUMERS.  T.  K.  c.

SPIDEE.  i.  stmdmith,  JVpDl"  ;  Prov.  SOzSf  ;  RV
LIZARD  {g.-v.  ,  7].

2.  'akkdbis,  irasy  (dpdxvq,  aranea).  Under  this
name  the  spider  is  mentioned  in  MT  only  twice  —  viz.  ,
in  Is.  59s,  where  the  devices  of  the  wicked  are  likened
to  a  spider's  web,  and  in  Job  814,  where  the  confid
ence  of  the  godless  is  compared  to  a  'spider's  house.'
There  are  several  other  passages,  however,  in  which,
through  an  easy  textual  error,  the  spider  has  been
supplanted  by  the  moth.  Thus  in  Job  4  19,  '  which  are
crushed  before  the  moth  '  (e>y  •:pi?)  should  rather  be
'which  are  crushed  even  as  the  spider'1  (s'isy  <ah)  ;
Mohammed,  too,  compares  idolaters  to  spiders  (Koran,
Sur.  2940).  In  Hos.  86  the  'calf  of  Samaria'  is  also
probably  compared  to  a  spider's  web,2  and  in  Ps.
39i2[n]  90g  (<5  tis  dpd\vri[i>]  in  both  passages)  the
same  figure  seems  to  be  employed  to  symbolise  the
frailty  of  human  life,  according  to  probable  emenda
tions  of  these  two  corrupt  passages.3  Textual  criticism
also  reinstates  the  spider  in  a  fine  description  of  the  fate
of  the  wicked  (see  MOTH),  where  '  moth  '  should  prob
ably  be  'spider'  (Job  27  18  ||  8  14  ;  but  in  ©  of  27  18
dpdxvn  seems  to  stand  for  naa).  Not  improbably,  too,
'  the  poison  of  asps  '  in  Ps.  1403  should  rather  be  '  the
poison  of  spiders  '  (so  Gratz,  Merx,  after  Tg.  ).  In  Is.  59s
'  spiders  '  and  '  vipers  '  are  parallel,  with  an  allusion  to
a  belief  in  their  poisonousness.  See  Asp.  ©.according
to  Grabe,  followed  by  H  and  P  read  '  spider  '  (dpdxvrf,
but  the  text  [BAQ]  has  rapaxn}  in  Hos.  012,  where  MT
has  '  moth.  '  T.  K.  c.

SPIES  (DVf]P.  \P^>  ragal,  'to  busy  oneself
with  walking  about';  cp  Wl,  'merchant,'  but  MH  fflS'3'li
'calumny,'  and  ^ji,  Ps.  163  'backbite';  Karacr/con-cu,  Gen.  42  9,
etc.,  Josh.  21623  i  8.264  28.  15  10';  and  virtually  C"W  Nu.  146
•caTacricei/<a;ueVcoc,  but  Aq.  Sym.  /caTaaxoTrioc  ;  C'lDX  Nu.  21  1
AV  RV">tr-,  Aq.  Sym.  riav  KO.TO.O-K.,  but  see  ad  fin.).

For  the  Way  of  the  Spies  (cnnxn  TJTI),  Nu.  21  i  AV,  see
below,  §  2,  end,  and  cp  ATHARIM,  KADESH,  §  3.  Cp  -nn,  '  spy
out,'  Nu.  132  \bf.  etc.,  and  11JV,  '  range  [of  spying  ?]'  Job398.
The  equation  Sj1  =  l?3T  (i  above)  finds  an  analogy  in  the  use  of
C"W  as  '  merchants,'  i  K.  10  15  (but  see  MERCHANT,  SOLOMON,
§7).

The  practice  of  obtaining  information  by  means  of
spies  as  a  preliminary  to  warlike  movements  was  well-

known  to  th*  Hebrews'  Jwo  "ota%
cases  are  the  mission  of  twelve  (?)
spies  by  Moses  to  explore  the  region  which  the  Israel
ites  were  about  to  invade,  and  the  mission  of  two  spies
by  Joshua  'to  view  the  land,  namely,  Jericho'  (see
JERICHO,  §  3).  It  is  the  former  episode  which  concerns
us  here.  Our  chief  traditional  authority  for  it  is  in  Nu.
13/  (JEP),  but  it  is  also  related  in  an  allusive  way  in
Dt.  \22J>T.,  where  the  writer  is  presumably  dependent
throughout  on  the  narrative  of  JE  ;  there  is  at  any  rate
no  evidence  that  he  made  use  of  P.  It  may  be  con
venient  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  variations  between

1  'g  and  <js  are  elsewhere,  too,  confounded.

2  C'HtP  '3  should  be  e"32j;  "lip  (Ruben,  Critical  Remarks,
on  Hos,  I.e.)  ;  cp  Vg.  in  aranearum  telas.

3  See  Che.  Psalins,<?)  and  cp  LOCUST,  OWL.

4747


1.  Traditions.


SPIES

the  accounts  which  the  redactor  has  welded  together,  as
well  as  he  could,  in  Nu.  13/.  ;  it  will  not  only  show
the  reader  the  state  of  the  traditional  evidence  for  the
mission  of  the  spies  but  will  illustrate  the  section  on
Nu.  13/  in  NUMBERS  [BOOK],  §  3  ;  cp  also  Driver,
Intr.  (6)  63.

P  JE

13  3,  start from  wilderness  of  1826, start from Kadesh (re-

Paran  (P).  dactional,  but  from  JE).

21,  they  explore  the  land  from  22  f.  they  go  as  far  as  Hebron

the  wilderness  of  Zin to  (I), or the valley of

Rebob,  to  the  district  of  Eshcol  (E).
Hamath  (P).

32,  they  describe  the  land  as  2j/.  '  the  land  is  very  fruitful,

one that '  devours its  but the inhabitants can

inhabitants '  (P).  well defend themselves '

14  6,  Joshua  and  Caleb  oppose 30,  Caleb  stills  the  murmurers

the mutinous Israelites  (I).

(P).

38,  Joshua  and  Caleb  (v.  30,  1424,  Caleb may enter the
Caleb  and  Joshua)  are  ex-  land  (J).

cepted  from  the general
doom  (P).

It  is  usual  to  give  the  preference  to  the  statements  of
J  and  E  (an  analysis  of  JE  cannot  remain  unattempted,
even  though  [cp  NUMBERS,  §  3]  the  result  may  be
incomplete).  It  was  from  Kadesh,  then,  that  Moses
sent  spies  into  Canaan  (cp  328  RD ;  cp  NUMBERS,
§  8),  one  from  each  tribe,  and  the  region  to  be  explored
was  the  Negeb  and  the  mountain-district  (i.e.,  as  most
understand,  that  of  Judah).  The  spies  did  in  fact
reach  Hebron  (in  the  'hill-country'  of  Judah,  Josh.
20;  21  n),  where  they  found  Ahiman,  Sheshai,  and
Talniai.  On  their  return,  they  gave  a  very  favourable
report  of  the  land,  and  supported  this  by  a  huge  cluster
of  grapes  from  Eshcol ;  but  a  further  statement  respect
ing  the  Nephilim,  the  sons  of  Anak,  who  dwelt  at
Hebron,  made  the  people  despond,  and  even  venture  to
express  a  wish  to  choose  another  leader  and  go  back  to
C"i:>5.  Caleb  alone  is  excepted  from  the  doom  which
Yah  we  fails  not  to  pronounce  on  the  rebellious  people.
The  punishment  of  the  guilty  is  thus  expressed  in  Nu.
1433  (assigned  to  J  by  Dillm.).1  'Your  little  ones,
which  ye  said  should  be  a  prey,  will  I  bring  in  ...
But  as  for  you,  your  carcases  shall  fall  in  this  wilder
ness.  And  your  children  shall  be  shepherds  -msa
rut?  c'jmn,  and  shall  bear  (the  consequences  of)  your
infidelity,  until  your  carcases  be  consumed  in  the
wilderness.'

Looking  at  the  differences  tabulated  above  we  shall
see  that  the  first  is  quite  unimportant,  since  the  wilder-

„  _  ...  .  ness  of  Paran  in  the  wider  sense  may
2.  Criticism.  ,

have contained Kadesh-barnea (see

PARAN).  The  third  is  of  some  interest,  because
(Wellh.  Prol.W  37o)  Nu.  13 32  (P)  may  reflect  the
melancholy  feelings  of  post-exilic  Jews,  who  could  only
by  faith  describe  their  country  as  a  delectable  land
(man  px,  Ps.  10624).  The  fourth  and  fifth  are  im
portant  because  they  show  that  one  at  least  of  the  early
narratives  did  not  include  Joshua  among  the  spies.
According  to  E.  Meyer  (who  allows  very  little  of  the
material  in  chap.  13/  to  J),  the  earliest  narrative
stated  that  Caleb  (possibly  with  other  spies)  was  sent
into  the  Negeb — to  Hebron,  and  said  on  his  return  that
the  people  was  strong  and  the  cities  fortified,  Amalek
dwelling  in  the  Negeb,  etc. ,  and  that  giants  too  were
to  be  seen  there.  The  despondency  of  the  Israelites
disappears,  and  with  it  the  divine  sentence  of  forty
years'  wanderings.  According  to  Meyer  the  object
of  the  story  of  the  spies  was  simply  to  account  for  the
settling  of  Caleb  in  Hebron.  '  Caleb  of  course  receives
Hebron  because  he  acted  as  spy,  not  because  he
remained  stedfast. '  E,  however,  looks  at  things  with
a  '  theological '  interest,  and  alters  the  story  for  edifica
tion,  while  P  calculates  from  Josh.  24  29  that  Joshua  too

1  Both  Dillm.  and  We.  deny  that  v.  33  belongs  to  P,  and
hold  that  the  '  forty  years  (,13C'  C'1'31N)  are  a  fixed  point  in
tradition.  We.,  however,  assigns  1430-34  to  a  special  source,
distinct  from  JE.

4748


SPIKENARD

must  have  been  born  in  Egypt,  and  therefore  includes
him  among  the  spies,  and  makes  him,  like  Caleb,  faith
ful  among  the  faithless  ( '  Kritik  der  Berichte,'  etc.,
ZAT\V\  139 /;  [1881]).

One  of  the  most  doubtful  points  in  Meyer's  theory
is  the  definition  of  the  object  of  the  story.  Was  Caleb
really  the  only  spy,  and  the  only  clan-leader  who  had
land  assigned  to  him  in  the  Negeb?  It  is  also  by  no
means  certain  that  the  threat  of  the  forty  years'  wander
ing  formed  part  of  the  original  tradition.  It  is  suggested
elsewhere  (MOSES,  §  n,  end)  that  in  Nu.1433  (as  well  as
in  other  passages)  n:&  D'SniN  "maa  is  most  probably
due  partly  to  corruption,  partly  to  editorial  manipula
tion,  and  that  the  original  text  had  simply  c'any  "msa
'  in  the  desert  of  the  Arabians. '

Possibly,  too,  in  Nu.  13  25  (P)  the  statement  that  the  spies
returned  QT  D'J?31K  f'pD  arose  through  a  misreading  of  e,"\SO
D'Siy  ('  fr°m  tne  Arabian  Cush');l  and  it  is  in  the  highest
degree  probable  that  c«nj>a  'n  Nu.  18  aa  14  2-4  should  be  read
Misrim,  i.e.  the  N.  Arabian  Musri  (see  MIZKAIM,  §  2  />).

Nor  are  these  the  only  names  which  have  to  be  scrutinised.
Important  as  it  is  to  put  a  rational  sense  on  the  traditional
stories  in  their  later  form,  it  can  hardly  be  less  urgent  to  find  out
how  the  stories  originally  ran,  and  what  they  originally  meant.
It  has  been  pointed  out  elsewhere  (NEGEH,  §  7)  that  it  is  the
Negeb  and  the  Negeb  alone  that  is  referred  to  as  the  region  ex
plored  by  the  spies.  pnan  (Hebron)  has  arisen  out  of  ni^m2
(Rehoboth),  and  the  mountain-district  in  1817  is  'mount  Jerah-
meel.'S  Inv.  28  p^y  should  probably  be  p^ysy,  and  we  thus  see
that  v.  29  4  is  partly  a  gloss  on  p^ycy  'J3  (so  read)  in  v.  28  (see
NEFHILIM,  §  3,  i.)-

The  second  apparent  difference  in  the  above  table
still  remains.  Did  the  spies,  according  to  P,  or  at  least
P's  authority,  really  survey  '  the  whole  land  throughout
its  entire  length  from  the  wilderness  of  Zin  (cp  Nu.  21 1
8836)  to  Rehob'  (either  the  place  of  that  name  in  the
territory  of  Asher,  Josh.  1928,  or  Beth-rehob,  near  the
town  of  Dan,  Judg.  18285)?  This  no  doubt  is  the
general  view.  Another  theory,  however,  is  much  more
probable.  If  not  P  himself,  yet  almost  certainly  P's
authority,  meant,  not  any  northern  Rehob,  but  Rehob
or  Rehoboth  in  the  Negeb,  while  nan  (Hamath)  is  in
many  OT  passages  most  probably  a  southern  Hamath,
or  more  strictly  a  southern  Maacath  (see  MAACAH,
end).  This  accords  with  the  view  (see  above)  that  in
Nu.  1823  the  original  text  had,  'And  they  returned
from  spying  out  the  land,  from  Cush  of  Arabia.'

Thus  the  difference  between  JE  and  P  in  the  story
of  the  spies  is  much  less  serious  than  has  been  supposed.
The  only  important  variation  is  the  combination  of  Caleb
with  Joshua — himself  perhaps  originally  a  Jerahmeelite
hero  (cp  JOSHUA).

We  have  no  space  here  to  consider  the  names  of  the  spies  ac
cording  to  P(Xu.  184-15).  It  is  quite  possible  that  all,  or  nearly
all,  the  names  are  characteristically  Negeb  names.  But  this  is
unimportant  compared  with  the  right  comprehension  of  the  rest
of  the  composite  narrative.  Let  it  be  added,  however,  that
Q'inNn"]~n  (Nu.  21  i)  is  not  (as  even  Knobel  supposed)  for  ~-\-\
D"wn  (AV  '  by  the  way  of  the  spies')  but  is  probably  a  corrup
tion  of  G'ncirt  "pi  (cp  Ramathaim-zophim),  unless  we  prefer  to
trace  it  to  C"Cnn  TJ?  (KADESH,  i,  §  3).  In  either  case,  the
name  appears  to  be  an  early  popular  corruption  of  SNDnV'

Winckler's  theory  (GI  2  40 f.)  is  ingenious,  but  cannot  here
be  discussed.  T.  |£t  QI

SPIKENARD  (TV?;  N&pAoc,  Cant.  1 12  4 14;  and
E''"n3.  NApAoi,  Cant.  4 13;  also  NApAoc  TTICTIKH,

1  Notice  the  name Sheshai  (on  which  see  note  2)  in  Num.
1822. If  we  emend  as  above,  the  cv  of  MT  will  have  grown
out  of  a  dittographed  rj». F°r  vp  from {-o  cp  Crit.  Bib. on
Ezek.  76.

2  Note  that  Ahiman  represents Jerahmeel ; Sheshai  comes
from  Cushi  (cp  note  i)  ;  for  Talmai  compare  Telem  and  Talmon
(which  can  be  shown  to  be Negeb  names). '  Z,oan  in  Kgypt '
should  be  '  Zoan  (or  Zoar?)  in  Misrim.'

3  As Dillm.  points out, 'go up into the  Negeb'  probably
comes  from  J,  and '  go  up  into  the  mountains  '  fro"i  1.. But
if  so, is it  not natural  to  take 333 and irtn as practically
synonymous?

4  The  other  ethnics  are  probably  'ram  (Rehoboihite),  'SxVDB"
Ishmaelite),  '-|~N  (Amorite),  <j]p  (Kennizzite).

5  Wade,  Old  Testament  History  (1901),  120.

4749


SPIKENARD

Mk.  143  Jn.  123-f-)-1  i-  The  Hebrew  word,  nerd,  which
is  derived  from  Sanskrit,  has  passed  into  Greek  and
other  European  languages  :  see  the  references  to  nard
in  classical  writers  collected  by  Naber  (Mnemosyne,
1902,  pp.  1-15);  according  to  Lagarde  (Mitt.  225)
Pers.  nal  is  an  equivalent  form.2  A  connection  with
Ar.  rand,  is  very  doubtful  (see  Mordtmann  and  Muller,
Sab.  Denk.  82).  The  Aramaic  and  Arabic  names
sebeltha  and  sunbul  (more  fully  su/tbul  hindi,  '  Indian
spike'),  like  our  own  'spikenard,'  have  reference  to  the
'spike '-like  appearance  of  the  plant  from  which  the
perfume  is  derived.  Accounts  of  the  true  or  Indian
nard,  as  well  as  of  inferior  sorts,  are  given  by  Theo-
phrastus  (De  Odor.  42  j?.),  Dioscorides  (175),  and  Pliny
(HN  1226  /.  182).  Its  botanical  source  in  India
was  investigated  by  Sir  W.  Jones  (As.  Res.  £405-417), 3
and  was  ascertained  independently  by  Wallich  and
Royle  to  be  the  plant  called  Nardostachys  Jatamansi
DC,  of  the  order  I'alcrianacea;.  The  drug  consists  of
the  rhizome  surmounted  by  the  fibrous  remains  of  the
leaves.  It  occurs  throughout  the  alpine  Himalaya  from
Kumaon  to  Sikkim.

The  meaning  of  the  adjective  iriffriK-/!  (Mk.  14s  Jn.
12st  is  very  uncertain.  Five  explanations  have  been
offered:  (i)  that  it  means  'liquid,'  from  irlvu>  ;  (2)
that  it  means  'genuine,'  from  Trums ;  (3)  that  it  means
'  powdered,'  from  TrriWap  ;  (4)  that  it  is  a  local  name;
(5)  that  it  =  TrtcrrciKT; j  ;  (6)  that  it  =  Lat.  spicita.  There
is  difficulty  in  accepting  any  of  these  explanations  ;  and
it  is  possible  that  the  word  may  have  quite  another
origin,  as  Dymock  (Pharmacogr.  Ind.  2 233)  gives  Pisitd.
as  a  Sanskrit  name  for  the  spikenard  plant  (cp  W.
Houghton,  PSBA,  1888,  8144-6.  N.  M. — \v.  T.  T. -D.

ii.  i.  In  /Eschyl.  Prom.  481  (Lob.  prj/u.  i3i)7ri<7T6smeans'drink-
able'  (so  K.  F.  A.  Fritzsche  on  Mark,  following  Casaubon),  but
the  word  is  only  so  used  for  the  sake  of  a  pun  ;  otherwise  TTOTO?
and  Trocrt/xos,  but  never  TTICTTIKOS.  It  is  true  that  iri'orpa  (-Of),
Tria-TTjp  are  found  from  the  same  stem  IR-,  and  that  according
to  Atnenaeus  (689  c)  and  others,  oil  of  nard,  mixed  with  wine,
was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  taken  as  a  beverage  ;  but  in  Mk.  and
Jn.  the  nard  is  used  as  ointment,  so  that,  if  irtortKO?  is  only
added  with  the  meaning  'liquid,'  the  explanation  would  be
superfluous.

Naber  (as  above)  points  out,  on  the  other  hand,  that
Clem. Alex.  (Pad.  28,  §  64,  p.  207  ed.  Potter)  distin
guishes  between  /j.tipa  vypd  and  /j,vpa  tT/pd,  and  Basil
(Horn,  in  Ps.  44 9,  ed.  Gamier,  1  166  /,  also  in  Stephanus,
sub  crra/CTos,  7 650^)  between  two  preparations  of  oint
ment,  the  one  fluid  (pvrov)  called  O-TCKCTT?  (  =  '  dropped,'
stillata,  stillatitia),  and  the  other  thicker  or  more
viscous  (traxvrepoi'),  called  <r/j.vpva.  The  expression  in
Athenagus  also  (225,  p.  46  A  :  €KK\ii>fii>  Set  TO.  traxn
ruv  fj.vpuj>),  he  thinks,  has  reference  to  this.  Naber
therefore  conjectures  that  there  stood  originally  in  Mk.
and  Jn.  a  word  (of  which  no  traces  can  be  met  else
where)  <T7ret<m/c6s  (  =  'capable  of  being  poured,'  'liquid,'
from  <T7reV5w).  By  itacism  it  could  also  have  been
written  airicrTiKos,  in  which  form  its  strangeness  made
it  unintelligible,  and  thus  it  finally  became  corrupted

intO  TTlffTlKOS.

1  Vg.  \issnardisficati  in  Mk.  and  nardi  pistici  (so  usually
Ital.)  in  Jn.

a  Meissner  has  pointed  out  a  Babylonian  plant-name  larder.
This,  according  to  Hommel  (PSBA  '1\  136  [1899]),  the  Baby
lonians  borrowed  from  an  Iranian  form  nard  (neo-Pers.  lal) ;
the  Indians  have  for  nard  the  later  form  nata  and  nala(da).

3  '  A  Brdlunan  of  eminent  learning  gave  me  a  parcel  of  the
same  sort,  and  told  me  that  it  was  used  in  their  sacrifices ;  that,
when  fresh,  it  was  exquisitely  sweet,  and  added  much  to  the
scent  of  rich  essences,  in  which  it  was  a  principal  ingredient ;
that  the  merchants  brought  it  from  the  mountainous  country  to
the  NE.  of  Bengal ;  that  it  was  the  entire  plant,  not  a  part  of
it,  and  received  its  Sanscrit  names  from  its  resemblance  to  locks
of  hair ;  as  it  is  called  Spikenard,  I  suppose,  from  its  resem
blance  to  a  spike,  when  it  is  dried,  and  not  from  the  configura
tion  of  its  flowers,  which  the  Greeks,  probably,  never  examined.
The  Persian  author  describes  the  whole  plant  as  resembling  the
tail  of  an  ermine  ;  and  the  Jatamansi,  which  is  manifestly  the
Spikenard  of  our  druggists,  has  precisely  that  form,  consisting
of  withered  stalks  and  ribs  of  leaves,  cohering  in  a  bundle  of
yellowish  brown  capillary  fibres,  and  constituting  a  spike  about
the  size  of  a  small  finger  '  (op.  cit.,  409  f.).

4750


SPINNING

2.  The  adjective  irioriicos  occurs  with  the  meaning  'convinc
ing' and  also  'having  the  power  of  persuading'  (Plato,  Gorg,
455  A;  Diog.  Laert.  437;  Dion.  Hal.,  ed.  Reiske,  0631;  Theo-
phrast.  in  Aristot.  opera  tnetapli.,  ed.  Sylburg  253,  ed.  Brandis,
309),  though in almost every  instance of  its occurrence the
variant  Treto-rnco?  is  preferred  (Bekker  and  Stallbaum  on  Plato;
Lob on  Soph.  Af. 151); in  later  times  it  means,  when  used  of
persons, 'faithful,' "reliable1 (Liicke on Jn.  12  3, Index to
Ce-lrenus). If,  therefore,  we  adopt  the  translation  'genuine
(Meyer  on  Mk.)— and  such  a  meaning  is  conceivable— we  must
suppose  that  the  word  is  used  rather  freely,  just  as  in  commercial
language,  for  instance,  attributes  which  more  often  apply  only
to  persons  are  not  infrequently  used  of  goods. Pliny  (/fN  xii.
26,  §  43)  mentions  that  in  commerce  nard  was  apt  to  be  adulter
ated  by  admixture  of  pseudonardus,  a  plant  resembling  it.

3.  Lob.,  par.  31,  supports  Scaliger's  derivation  from  Trrunmi',
'  to  pound  '  (K..  F.  A.  Fritzsche  on  Mk.  595),  T  after  TT  being  some
times  dropped  out  for  the  sake  of  euphony  (cp  e.g.,  n<T)e'pi<if,  and
Lat.  pi(ii)so  =  -mlano,  perna  =  TrTe'pnj). But  how,  it  may  be
asked,  could  powdered  nard  be  suitable  for  anointing?

4.  If  it  is  a  local  name  it  has  been  suggested  that  it  stands
either  for  'OmcrriKos  (from  Opis  not  far  from  Babylon)  or  for
*iTTa<ciKo?  (from Psittake  on the Tigris). Still more  _ likely
would  be  Ilio-ra,  an  abbreviation— according  to  the  Scholion  on
/Eschyl.  Pcrs.  2— of  a  Persian  town  IliWipa ;  but  we  cannot
be  sure  that  this  notice  (which  according  to  Stephanus  refers
to  a  Thracian  town)  is  trustworthy.

5.  E.  N.  Bennett  (Class.  Ra>.,  1890,  p.  319)  sees  in  the  word  an
allusion  to  the  Pistacia  Tercbinthus,  the  resin  of  which,  together
with  other  sweet  scents  (e.g.,  /SoAo-jjaoi/,  cp  BALM, INCENSE),
was  mixed  with  the  oil  of  nard. Dioscorides  says  (Mat.  Med.
\  91)  of  the  Tucrra/cr)  ;  yevva.Ta.1.  6e  Kai.  fv  'loi/Sat'a  (cat  ivpiajcai  ey
Kuirpco,  its  resin  is  eino6j)s, Trpoe'x"  Se  iratriav  Ttav  prjni'wi'  (he
describes  nard  in  1  6  /). Bennett,  therefore,  thinks  that  vdp&os
irio-Tdiojs is intended. According to Hdn. ii. 4'28  24, and
Stephanus,  TO.  i/urraKia  would  be  another  form  of  ra  TrioraKia,
the  fruit  of  the  TnoraicJ),  which  Hdn.  (i.  315  16)  derives  from  the
town  *iTT<iia).

6.  Nestle  (ZNTIV,  1902,  pp.  169-171)  explains  TTICTTIICOS  from
the  Latin  name  nardus  spicata  :  the  participle  spicatus  could  be-
--ome  in  vulgar  Latin  spicitus,  just  as/»w/<ati<s  became prolnttts
and  vocatus  vocitus  (Runsch,  Itala  u.  I'u/gata,  p.  296,  cp  283
[1869,  ('-'  1875!,  and,  more  fully,  Collectanea  philologica,  221-223
[\&gi\=ZWT,  1877,  pp.  409-412);  next  spicitus  was  transformed
into  7ri.o-ri.Kos. The  supposition  however  is  not  easy  ;  for  as  late
as  the  second  half  of  the  second  Christian  century  we  find  Galen
taking  the  word  over  into  Greek  in  the  form  crvrtKaTa.

The  '  nardus  spicata  '  of  (Ital.  and)  Vg.  is  intelligible  when  we
remember  that  the  nard-plant— which  indeed  is  called  j/apSd-
crTa^us,  spica  nardi — resembled  in  shape  an  ear  of  corn.

N.  M. — W.  T.  T.  -D. , i.  ; P.  VV.  S.  ,  ii.

SPINNING. See  LINEN,  WEAVING.

SPIRIT  (rVn,  riidh,  fern,  about  seventy-three,  masc.
about  thirty-two  times:  in  <5  TTN6YM&,  ANGMOC,
TTNOH,  CTOMA,  AOfOC,  Cp6erM<N,
vfYXH,  K^pAlA.  0YMOC,  NOYC-

OPTH,  oAYNH,  cppONHCic,  BoH6ei<\,  4>(x>c,  Mepoc).
originally  'wind.'  and  so  the  point  of  the  compass
from  which  the  wind  blows.  In  poetry,  which  no  doubt
represents  ancient  usage,  the  storm  wind  is  the  breath  of
Yahwe's  mouth  or  nostrils  (e.g. ,  Ex.  158  10  Ps.  18  16  [15]).
and  since  the  commotion  of  nature  is  a  sign  of  his  dis
pleasure,  the  riiah  of  Yahwe  becomes  synonymous  with
his  wrath  (Is.  44  59ig  Zech.  68  Job4g  15so).  The  riiah.
or  spirit  of  a  man  is  his  disposition,  his  mental  state  ;
he  may  be  '  depressed  in  spirit,'  '  of  a  proud  spirit,'  '  of
a  patient  spirit'  (Prov.  KiiS/.  Eccles.  78).  It  is  natural
to  compare  the  wind,  invisible  itself  but  visible  in  its
effects,  with  the  mental  disposition  displaying  itself  in
mien  and  action.  Just  in  the  same  way  Aeschylus,
describing  the  changed  mind  of  Agamemnon  says  that
he  '  blew  an  impious  veering  gale  of  mind '  (<ppti>bs
irvtuiv  dvcrcre^rj  rpoiraiav,  Ag.  217).

In  a  very  early  passage,  Gen.  63,  riidh  denotes  the  divine
substance  or  nature,  not  necessarily  immaterial,  but  far
removed  from  the  weakness  of  mortal  flesh.  By  inter
marriage  of  the  '  sons  of  God  '  or  angels  with  women,  a
portion  of  this  divine  spirit  has  passed  to  their  descend
ants,  and  therefore  Yahwe  declares,  '  My  spirit  shall
not  continue  (?)  for  ever  in  man,  since  he  is  only  flesh,'
and  shortens  the  span  of  human  life  to  120  years.1  But
though  the  spirit  or  invisible  power  of  God  was  not
proper  to  man,  it  descended  upon  the  heroes  of  Israel
and  endowed  them  with  superhuman  energy.  It  fell  on
Othniel  (Judg.  3io);  on  Jephthah  (1129);  on  Samson
1  On  this  passage  cp  NEFHILIM,  §  i.
475 1


1.  Meaning.


SPIRIT

(146i9l5i4).  The  phenomenon  has  no  ethical  im
port.  Samson  shows  that  the  spirit  of  Yahwe  has
descended  on  him  by  rending  a  lion  as  if  it  were  a  kid.
Similarly  the  divine  spirit  produces  prophetic  frenzy
(iS.  106  10  192023),  such,  e.g. ,  that  Saul  strips  off  his
clothes  and  lies  a  day  and  a  night  naked.  The  spirit
might  transport  a  prophet  miraculously  <2K.2i6).
Sometimes  Yahwe  sent  a  lying  spirit  on  his  prophets
(i  K.  2222)  or  the  spirit  of  strife  into  a  city  (Judg.
923),  or  a  spirit  of  melancholy  madness  (i  S.  16 14,
etc. ).

Far  higher  is  the  use  of  riidh  in  the  literary  prophets.
To  Isaiah,  Yahwe  (Is.  31s)  is  '  spirit'  because  he  is  the
spiritual  principle  in  the  history  of  the  world  and  as
such  invisible.  Moreover,  the  spirit  of  prophecy  is  an
abiding  gift.  To  ignore  the  prophet's  counsel  is  to  set
at  nought  God's  spirit  which  speaks  through  him
(Is.  30i).  In  the  same  sense  Hosea  had  spoken  (9?)
of  the  prophet  as  '  a  man  of  the  spirit. '  But  before
Ezekiel  references  to  '  the  spirit '  as  in  the  prophets
only  occur  in  Is.  30 1  Hos.  9  7  and  perhaps  Mic.  38.
A  prophet  so  deeply  spiritual  as  Jeremiah  avoids  the
term  '  spirit '  altogether  ;  it  had  been  associated  too
long  with  frenzy  and  marvel.

The  following  are  the  chief  points  in  the  exilic  and

post-exilic conception of spirit. It is an official

charisma,  speaking,  e.g. ,  habitually  in  David

2.  Later (2g  232)  and  fitting  the  Messiah for the
nuances. discharge  Of  his  duties  (Is.  112),  conferring

wisdom  on  judges  and  martial  vigour  on  warriors  ( Is.
286).  It  is  characteristic  of  P  that  he  attributes  it  only
to  Joshua,  who  receives  it  in  increased  measure  by  the
imposition  of  Moses'  hands  (Xu.  27  i8/.  Dt.  34g).  It
is  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  people  as  a  '  new  spirit '
(Ezek.  3626S/),  and  to  be  poured  out  from  on  high  on
land  and  people  (Is.  32 15).  Thefulfilment  of  this  promise
isassumedinPs.  51u  [i3]143io;  cpNeh.  920.  Twice1
it  is  called  the  holy  spirit,  Ps.  51  n  [13]  and  Is.  63 10,
in  which  latter  passage  it  is  personified  (cp  Eph.  430),
and  twice  'the  good  spirit"  (Neh.92o  Ps.  143iol.  It
is  a  cosmic  power,  producing  order  (Gen.  12)  and
fertility  (Is.  32 15).  It  is  the  principle  of  all-pervading
energy  (Is.  34i6)  and  omnipresence  (Ps.  139;).  It  is
the  vous  or  intelligence  of  Yahwe  (Is.  40i3),  not  as  in
earlier  writers  his  essence.  Finally,  in  a  very  late
passage,  it  is  the  breath  of  life  which  God  imparts,  and
which  at  death  returns  to  him  (Eccles.  12?  ;  cp  Job 27s
33 4  34  i4/  Ps.  104  29/).  Cp  FI.ESH.  w.  E.  A.

In  discussing  the  NT  use  of  irvev^a,  the  question
is  complicated  by  the  employment  of  other  words,

_  . especially  of  psyche,  ^i'Xn<  sou^  to  de'

3.  Contrasted  note  {he  mterjor  part  Of  manp  whereas
with  <rap§. ffdf)^  flesh is  the  sing]e  word  to  denole

the  material  part.  As  a  general  thing  both  words  are
used  with  reference  to  the  contrast  between  the  spiritual
and  the  material  part,  and  both  words  are  ennobled  by
this  contrast.  When  Jesus  speaks  of  the  value  of  the  soul
(i/»i>x^  :  Mt.  1626),  and  contrasts  it  with  the  comparative
unimportance  of  the  body  (Mt.  lOaS),  and  Paul  advises
the  delivering  over  of  the  flesh  to  destruction,  in  order
that  the  spirit  (wvev/Ma)  may  be  saved  (i  Cor.  65),  they  are
both  evidently  using  different  words  for  the  same  thing.
And  apart  from  the  Pauline  epistles  and  two  passages
in  the  epistles  of  James  and  Jude  respectively  (Ja.  815
Jude  19),  these  words  are  used  in  the  same  way  to
express  the  contrast  between  the  spiritual  part  of  man
and  material  things,  but  are  not  contrasted  with  each
other.  But  Paul  found  it  necessary  to  express  this
contrast  not  only  in  terms  of  the  spiritual  and  the
material,  but  also  of  the  spiritual  and  the  natural
(i  Cor.  214),  and  for  this  purpose  he  uses  the  elsewhere
synonymous  words,  pneuma  and  psyche.

The  psyche  is  the  vital  or  spiritual  part  of  the  natural

1  [Not  counting  Wisd.  9 17,  cp  722,  where  wisdom  (ir  the
enlarged  sense  natural  to  an  orthodox  but  Hellenised  Jew)  is
traced  to  '  thy  holy  spirit.']

475  2


SPIRIT


SPIRIT


_, _. .


man,  and  the  pneuma  is  the  new  part  brought  into
_  ..  activity  when  the  supernatural  man  begins
his  career  with  the  entrance  of  the  divine
°  '  pneuma.  Paul  does  not  state  this  expressly;
but  it  appears  from  his  introduction  of  the  human  co-
incidently  with  the  divine  pneuma  (cp  Rom.  810  16  with
the  rest  of  the  passage  1-27.  And  see  i  Cor.  617  19,  cp
14-17  with  rest  of  passage).  It  is  evident  from  the  passage
in  i  Cor.  that  pneuma  is  not  to  be  identified  with  >n>us,
the  intelligence,  in  Rom.  723,  where  it  is  used  inter
changeably  with  the  'inner  man,'  which  rebels  against
the  sin  of  the  outer  man.  That  faculty,  the  spirit,  is
the  organ  evidently  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  does  not
appear  in  the  apostle's  account  of  the  situation  until
the  entrance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  removes  the
disability  discussed  in  our  passage,  Rom.  81-9,  cp  ?'.
10  16.  The  faculty  which  ineffectually  rebels  against
sin  in  the  natural  man  is  the  mind.  It  is  very  much
as  if  the  apostle  had  said  that  when  he  sinned  even  in
the  natural  man,  he  knew  better,  and  his  intelligence
rebelled  against  it,  but  ineffectually,  because  the  very
organs  of  action  were  the  seat  of  sin.  Hut  the  inner
man  after  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit,  which  is
freed  from  the  bondage  of  the  flesh.

We  must  not  think,  however,  of  the  human  spirit  as
the  essential  factor  in  the  new  man  according  to  Paul.
The essential factor is the Divine

Sp'rit'  Wh°  cffeCtS  deliverance  for  the
man not  by  creating  or  awakening  a

new  faculty  in  him,  but  by  coining  himself  to  dwell
in  him.  That  is  the  reason  why  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit,
not  the  human  spirit,  that  is  constantly  brought
into  contrast  with  the  flesh  in  Paul.  This  has  led
to  the  statement  that  the  apostle  does  not  speak  of
a  human  spirit.  But  the  use,  while  infrequent,  is
sufficiently  distinct.  The  human  spirit  is  evidently  the
part  in  which,  and  upon  which,  the  Holy  Spirit  works,
and  through  which  it  controls  the  man,  but  which  has
no  office  except  in  connection  with  the  Divine  Spirit.
Without  the  Divine  Spirit  it  is  like  ears  in  a  soundless
world.  The  real  agent  in  substituting  holiness  instead
of  sin  in  man  is  God,  not  man.  What  is  this  Divine
Spirit?  The  answer  is  not  always  the  same.  In  the
earlier  Jewish  literature,  it  is  an  emanation  from  the
One  God  through  which  he  performs  various  offices  —
e.g.  ,  creation  —  but  especially  that  of  inspiring  in  man
the  knowledge  and  skill  needed  for  his  work.  In
general  we  may  say,  that  whenever  God  is  represented
as  a  diffused  presence,  he  is  represented  as  working
through  the  spirit.  And  in  no  pre-  Pauline  writings  is
there  any  indication  that  the  impersonal  use  is  departed
from.  13ut  in  Paul,  and  Jn.  especially,  there  is  the
beginning  of  the  later  doctrine  of  the  Spirit  as  a  distinct
entity,  quasi-personal,  in  God.  He  is  to  God  what  the
spirit  is  in  man  (i  Cor.  2io/  )  ;  but  in  God  this  is  objecti
fied,  represented  as  a  distinct  personality  (Rom.  827
Gal.  85  Jn.  1426  16  13).

There  is  a  distinct  difference,  however,  between  the

Pauline  and  the  Johannine  theology  in  the  doctrine  of

..  ,  the  Spirit. In  both,  he  is  the  principle

6.  .Pauline  ana  of  imnianence  in  Godi  the  one  through

whom  God  dwells  in  men, conveying
usage  con- to  them  the  truth not  in  the  externai

way  by  which  men  communicate  with
each  other,  and  which  has  no  power  of  enforcement  or
persuasion  sufficient  to  beget  in  men  the  spirit  of  holi
ness,  but  internally  and  with  regenerative  power.  And
in  both  especially  he  conveys  to  men  the  grace  of  which


Christ  is  the  author.  But  in  Paul,  he  is  the  principle
not  only  of  immanence,  but  of  incarnation.  In  Jn.  it
is  the  Logos,  the  Word  of  God,  who  is  incarnate  in
Christ.  The  thought  is  borrowed  from  the  Alexandrian
philosophy,  which  represents  God  as  creating  various
natural  products  out  of  the  ideas  of  the  same  in  his
mind.  These  ideas  are  endowed  with  life  and  creative
power,  so  that  God  creates  not  only  out  of  them,  but
through  them.  Besides  these  individual  ideas,  there  is
the  collective  idea  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,  the  Logos,
or  Word,  which  is  also  vested  with  a  life  and  quasi-
personality  of  its  own.  The  incarnation  of  this  in  the
Son  of  God  is  thus  only  the  final  form  of  the  incarnation
which  is  the  generative  idea  of  the  Logos.  The  Spirit,
on  the  other  hand,  is  in  In.  the  principle  of  immanence.
If  we  go  back  to  the  philosophy  from  which  the  Logos
idea  is  derived,  the  Logos  is  the  thought  of  God,
distinctly  a  principle  of  incarnation.  But  the  Pneuma
is  the  Spirit  in  which  the  thought  is  generated,  and  this
is  as  obviously  a  principle  of  immanence.  All  this  is
distinctly  different  from  Paul's  thought.  lie  has  no
Logos  doctrine,  which  is  a  thought  derived  from
Alexandrianism,  and  Paul  is  not  an  Alexandrian.  He
declares  himself  a  zealous  Pharisee,  and  opposed  to  any
attempt  to  translate  religion  into  the  terms  of  philosophy
(Gal.  1  14  i  (.'or.  1 17-31).  But  Pharisaism  and  Alex
andrianism  are  at  opposite  poles  of  thought,  and
Alexandrianism  is  an  attempt  to  philosophise  religion.
And  yet  Pavil  teaches  the  pre-existence  of  Jesus  and  his
sharing  in  the  work  of  creation  (Phil.  2s-n  i  Cor.  86).
What  then  is  the  principle  of  incarnation  in  Christ?
It  cannot  be  God  himself,  as  Paul  distinguishes  between
God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  On  the  other  hand,
whilst  there  is  only  one  passage  which  has  the  ap
pearance  of  distinguishing  Christ  from  the  Spirit  (2
Cor.  1814),  there  are  many  passages  which  seem  to
identify  them.  In  the  first  place,  the  indwelling  of
Christ,  his  mystical  union  with  the  believer,  is  ex
changed  frequently  for  an  indwelling  of  the  Spirit.
Then  the  Spirit  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  Jesus'
divine  Sonship  is  attributed  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  lie  is
the  Son  of  God  on  that  side  of  his  being,  as  he  is  Son
of  David  on  the  side  of  the  flesh  (Rom.  Is/).  And
finally  it  is  distinctly  said  that  the  Lord  is  the  Spirit
(2  Cor.  3i7/).

Now,  it  is  not  as  if  this  was  unexpected.  If  Jesus
was  in  any  way  pre-existent,  and  that  pre-existence
antedated  creation,  and  he  had  a  share  in  creation,
then  he  is  in  some  way  an  incarnation  of  the  Divine.
And  in  the  Jewish  theology  the  only  Divine  principle
remaining,  after  eliminating  God  himself  as  expressly
excluded,  and  the  Alexandrian  Logos  as  ruled  out  by
Paul's  opposition  to  Alexandrianism,  is  the  Spirit  of
God.  In  Paul,  therefore,  the  incarnation  is  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  E.  P.  G.

The  OT  Theologies  of  Schultz  and  Smend,  and  the  NT
Theologies  of  B.  Weiss  and  Holtzmann  ;  Konig,  Offtnbarungs-

begriff  des  AT  187-210; Giesebrecht, Ke-
7.  Literature, rufsbegal<-i<ng der A  Tlichen Propheten,

viff.  ;  H.  Wendt,  Die  Begriffe  Flcisch  u.
Geist  imMblischenSprachgebrcwch  (1878) ;  A.  Westphal,  Chair
et  esprit  (Toulouse,  1885)';  Liidemann,  Die  Antlnopologie  des
Aft.  Paulus  (1872);  Pfleiderer,  Pattlinism  (FT,  2  vols.);
Cremer,  PKE,W  art.  'Geist';  Gunkel,  Die  Wirkungtn  des
heil.  Geistes  (1888),  5-62  ;  J.  Koeberle,  Natur  u.  Geist,  nach
der  Auffassung  des  AT(it)oo)  ;  F.  C.  Porter,  'The  Ve^er  Hara,
a  Study  in  the  Jewish  Doctrine  of  Sin,'  Biblical  and  Semitic
Studies  (New  York,  1901),  where  note  criticism  of  Pfleiderer's
interpretation  of  Paul's  conception  of  spirit  and  flesh.  See  also
SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.

W.  E.  A.,  §  i/  ; E.  P.  G. ,  §§  3-6.


4753


4754


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


Definition  (§  i).

yapicr/xa  :  what?  (§  2).

Delimitation  of  field  (§  3).

Classification  (§  4).

Charisms  other  than  that  of  speech  (§  5).


SPIRITUAL GIFTS

CONTENTS

Speaking  with  tongues  :  what?  (§  8).
Tongues  not  foreign  languages  (§  9).
Acts  -2  1-13  and  Mk.  16  17  (8  10).
Tongues  not  archaic  expressions  (§  u).
Not  figurative  (§  12).


i «  a •!.•
1.  Definition.


'Wisdom'  and  'knowledge';  'exhorting' Tongue,  the  bodily  organ  (8  13).

(8  6).  Tongue  =  tongue-speech  (8  14).

'Prophecy '(8  7).

'  Spiritual  Gifts '  is  a  comprehensive  name  for  all
those  extraordinary  and  often  directly  miraculous  powers

of  which  we  learn,  chiefly  from  r  Cor.

124-n  28-30  Rom.  123-8,  that  they  were
possessed  by  many  Christians  of  the  apostolic  age,  and,
according  to  Paul,  had  their  origin  in  a  specitic  opera
tion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  has  for  its  object  the
profit  of  the  church.

When  in  I  Cor.  126  the  'workings'  (frepyij^iara)  are  assigned
to  God,  or  in  v.  5  the  '  ministrations '  (6ioicoruu)  brought  into
connection  with  Christ,  we  are  not  to  see  in  this  any  real
departure  from  the  regular  attribution  of  the  spiritual  gifts  to
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  phrase  in  v.  5 — 'dis-ersities  of  ministrations
but  the  same  Lord,'  is  simply  another  expression  of  the  purpose  for


Interpretation  of  tongue-speech  (8  15).
Diffusion  and  cessation  of  tongue-speech

and  prophecy  charisms  (8  16).
Popular  view  of  spiritual  charisms  (8  17).
Discerning  of  spirits  (8  18).
Paul's  view  of  spiritual  charisms  (8  19).
Conclusion  (§  20).
Literature  (§  21).


which  the  gifts  are  given — the  common  good  of  the  church  ;  for
he  who  serves  the  church  serves  Christ  who  is  the  Lord  of  the
church,  or,  according  to  another  way  of  putting  it,  who  is  the
soul  of  the  church  which  is  his  body  (1'2  i2_/).  The  phrase  in  v.  6
on  the  other  hand — '  diversities  of  workings  but  the  same  God  ' —
is  appropriate  in  so  far  as  by  the  'workings'  in  question  we  are
to  understand  according  to  r'.  10  '  workings  of  powers,'  or  of
miracles  (evepyTJ/uara  fufa^ieior),  of  which  one  most  readily
thinks  of  God  as  the  author.  They  are  nevertheless  attributed
precisely  in  the  next  verse  (?•.  n)  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  conclusive
proof  that  no  real  distinction  ought  to  be  drawn  here  between
him  and  God  as  the  author  of  these  workings.

The  word  charisma  in  this  connection  is  plainly  used
in  a  narrow  technical  sense, (a)  That  the  thought  of
2 L'te  al t'le  Srace  °f  God  as being  the source
from  which  the  bestowal  of  a  charisma


meaning


comes  is  still  very  vividly  realised  is  shown


i >  i:

*•  °  ^  '  by  Rom.  126:  'having  gifts  (charisms),
differing  according  to  the  grace  that  was  given  to  us '
(tXOVTft  xaP'<rMara  Kara.  r~t]v  xdpiv  TTJV  SoOelcrav  TTHMV
5td<popa).

In  the  only  NT  passage  where  charisma  (\dp<.a-/j.a.)  is  coupled
with  the  adjective  '  spiritual '  (nffVfj.a.TiKov),  the  technical  sense
is,  as  it  happens,  absent  ;  in  Rom.  1  n  it  does  not  mean  any
special  aptitude  possessed  by  Paul,  but  a  gift  (in  the  way  of
instiuction,  encouragement,  consolation,  or  the  like)  which  he
hopes  to  be  able  to  confer  upon  the  Romans  in  the  course  of  his
visit,  even  if  '  spiritual '  (n-i/eufiart/coi')  expresses  the  thought
that  he  himself  in  turn  has  received  it  from  the  Holy  Ghost.
Still  further  removed  from  the  specified  meaning  of  the  word
charisma  as  given  above,  though  again  with  a  passive  applica
tion  (gift  that  is  conferred),  are  the  applications  of  it  which  we
find  in  Rom.  6  23  (eternal  life  the  charisma,  not  of  the  Holy
Ghost  but  of  God),  in  11  29  (the  charismata  of  God  =  the  favours
bestowed  by  God  upon  his  people  Israel  as  enumerated  in
S>4_f.),  in  2  Cor.  1  n  (without  TOU  @foi>  :  the  charisma  of  Paul's
deliverance  from  deadly  danger)  ;  so  also  in  Rom.  5  15^  where
the  justification  of  sinful  man  is  the  charisma  of  God  and  Christ.
The  word  denotes  the  whole  aggregate  of  God's  benevolent
operation  in  the  universe  in  the  single  passage  outside  of  the
NT,  and  the  Church  Fathers  in  which  it  is  known  to  occur
(Thilo,  Legis  allegor.  824  end,  1  103  ed.  Mangey  :  'All  things
in  the  universe,  and  the  universe  itself,  are  the  donation  and
benefaction  and  gift  of  God  '  (cSiopea  Kai  evepyeaia  <cal  xdptoyxa
©eou  TO.  iravTOi  6a°a  ev  KOCTJULOJ  «ai  aurbs  6  ic6<r^io5  eaTiV).

(b)  Very  sharply  distinguished  from  these  uses  is  the
technical  sense  in  which  the  word  is  employed,  whether
in  the  pi.  (Rom.  126  i  Cor.  12431;  and,  with  the
addition  of  'healings'  [ia/j.druv],  1292830),  or  in  the
sing,  with  a  negative  (1  7  :  'so  that  ye  come  behind  in
no  charisma'),  or  in  a  distributive  sense  (i  Pet.  4io:
'  according  as  each  has  received  a  charisma  ' ;  cp  i  Cor.
7 7  :  'each  man  hath  his  own  charisma  from  God').
In  just  the  same  way,  in  the  technical  sense,  the  dis
tributive  singular  of  'grace'  (x^'p's)  stands  in  connection
with  the  plural  '  gifts '  ( d6fw.ra),  in  Eph.  4  j/. :  '  unto  each
one  of  us  was  the  grace  given  according  to  the  measure
of  the  gift  (5w/>e£jl  of  Christ.  Wherefore  he  saith  .  .  .
He  gave  gifts  (56/xora)  unto  men.'  Not  till  we  reach
the  Pastoral  Epistles  do  we  find  the  sing,  charism
(xdpifffia),  used  comprehensively  to  denote  all  the

4755


3.  Delimita
tion  of  field.


aptitudes  which  Timothy,  as  a  bearer  of  ecclesiastical
office,  possesses,  or  ought  to  possess :  '  neglect  not
the  charism  that  is  in  thee '  (i  Tim.  414)  ;  'I  put  thee
in  remembrance  that  thou  stir  up  the  charism  of  God
which  is  in  thee  '  (2  Tim.  16).

(c)  For  us  the  technical  meaning  of  the  word  is  first
met  with  in  Paul.  At  the  same  time,  we  may  at  least
be  certain  that  Paul  did  not  invent  it  when  he  was  com
posing  his  epistles  :  for  he  employs  it  in  his  writings
without  any  explanation,  as  referring  to  a  matter  quite
well  known.  There  remains  a  possibility  that  he  may
have  coined  the  expression,  in  the  course  of  his  observa
tions  of  the  extraordinary  endowments  intended  by  it,
while  engaged  in  his  missionary  labours.  We  may  well
venture  upon  such  a  conjecture,  seeing  that  the  idea  of
grace  (charts)  is  so  specially  prominent  with  Paul.
Yet  the  expression  can  also  have  sprung  into  existence
in  the  Christian  churches  without  the  agency  of  Paul.

No  one  of  the  three  leading  passages  relating  to
spiritual  gifts  in  the  writings  of  Paul,  as  given  above
(§  i),  can  claim  to  be  a  complete
account,  and  it  therefore  remains  un
certain  whether  even  all  three  together
make  mention  of  everything  which  Paul  reckoned  to  this
category.  (a)  Nevertheless  the  attempt  must  be

made,  with  the  help  of  these  three  principal  passages
and  other  subsidiary  ones,  to  form  to  ourselves  some
conception  of  the  range  of  the  phenomenon  in  question.

'  Prophecy '  (vpofarfia.)  is  the  only  charism  that  is  actually
named  in  all  three  passages  ;  but  in  effect  so  also  is  'teaching'
(6t6a<r»caAia),  if  we  permit  ourselves  to  regard  the  '  word  of
wisdom '  (Ao-yos  <ro<£ias),  and  the  '  word  of  knowledge '  (A.
yi'oJcreu)?),  of  i  Cor.  12s  taken  together  as  identical  with  '  teach
ing,' — a  view  which  is  favoured  by  1426  ('teaching'  [5i6o\7J],
co-ordinated  with  '  revelation,  tongue,  interpretation '  [diro-
icaAu^ts,  yAa><7<ra,  epfujpcia]),  whilst  in  146  'knowledge
[yruxris]  also  is  found  co-ordinated  with  '  teaching '  (5t6a\7J)
as  well  as  '  tongues,  revelation,  pn  >phecy  '  (-yAuxrcrai,  airoicaAt/iiis,
7rpo<£»)Teia),  so  that  only  the  '  word  of  wisdom  '  (Aoyos  aortas)
seems  to  be  left  as  synonym  for  'teaching '  (6i6ax>j).  In  both
the  leading  passages  in  i  Cor.  'gifts  of  healings'  (xapicr^ara
iafj.d.Tu>v),  '  powers  '  or  '  miracles  '  (fvrajxctf),  and  '  diversities  of
tongues'  (ye'iTj  y*.u><r<riav),  occur  in  addition  to  the  other  concepts
already  mentioned.  Rom.  has  with  the  first  passage  in  i  Cor.
(12  5)  nothing  but  '  ministry  '  (iiaicoi'ta)  in  common,  but  in  that
first  passage,  as  well  as  in  r  Cor.  16  15,  this  word  seems  to  have
a  more  extended  application  than  in  Rom.  12  7  ;  with  the  second
passage  in  i  Cor.  (1228-30)  Rom.  has  in  substance  but  one  concept
in  common — on  the  assumption,  that  is  to  say,  that  we  may
identify  the  7rpoi<7Tone>'os  ('  he  that  ruleth  ')  with  him  who  has
the  gift  of  '  government '  (icujSe'pnjcris).  Peculiar  to  the  first
passage  in  i  Cor.  (12  4-11)  are  '  faith,  discerning  of  spirits  '(JTUTTIS,
£i<i)cpi(Tis  nt'evnaTuiv),  and  'interpretation  of  tongues'  (ipfuivtia
y\<a<rcr<ai')  ',  to  the  second  (12  28-30)  the  concepts  '  apostle  '  (aTrd-
<7ToAo«),  and  '  helps  '  (dvTiAijjui^ees)  ;  and  to  Rom.  '  admonishing '
(TrapaKoAwi'),  'giving'  (jaeraSiiovs),  and  'showing  mercy'
(cActiy).

(i)  Eph.  4  ii  and  Justin,  Dial.  39,  can  be  adduced
only  as  secondary  authorities,  so  long  as  it  is  with  the
apostolic  age  that  we  are  dealing.

Eph.  (on  its  date  see  col.  3120,  n.  3)  noticeably  enumerates
offices  only,  not  charisms.  Of  these  Paul  had  already  named
the  'apostles,'  'prophets,'  and  'teachers,'  and  also  the  'pastors'
(jroi^ieVes),  if  these  are  to  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  the  'rulers'
(n-poi'<rT<vi€i'oi)  of  Rom.  12  8.  Peculiar  to  Eph.  are  the  '  evange
lists  '  (evayyeAiorai),  on  whom  see  MINISTRY,  8  39  ",  b.  Of
the  gifts  enumerated  by  Paul  Justin  has  only  '  healing  '  (ia<ris)F
and  '  teaching '  (fii&uncoAi'a).  What  he  designates  '  understand
ing  '  (ovpeo-is),  may  safely  be  identified  with  '  wisdom  '  (<7<xti'a),
and  his  '  strength  '  (ICT^VS)  perhaps  with  '  power '  (<5vro/iis),  as
he  attributes  'strength  '  (I<r\vs)  to  Moses  (Piai.  8-).  The  new
elements  in  his  list  are  'counsel'  (/3ouA>j),  'foreknowledge'
(vpoyi'taa-i-;).  which  answers  only  in  a  very  limited  degree  to  the
'  prophecy  '  (n-pcx^r/Tfia)  of  Paul,  and  '  fear  of  God  '  ((£o/3os  €>«ou).
Four  of  his  seven  concepts — '  understanding '  (avvt<ris),  '  counsel '
OSouAij),  '  strength '  (icr^vs),  and  '  fear  of  God '  (<^6j3oc  ©tov) —

4756


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

Justin  has  taken  direct  from  Is.  11  2y?  <E5,  where,  according  to
his  interpretation  (Dial.  87),  are  enumerated  the  seven  powers
of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  were  all  of  them  to  rest  upon  Jesus
from  his  baptism  onwards,  whilst  the  saints  of  the  OT  and
Christians  never  receive  more  than  one  or  a  few  of  them.  In  Is.
we  find,  besides  the  four  words  already  given,  'wisdom'  (oro^t'a),
'knowledge'  (yi'cucris),  and  'piety'  (eu<re'/3ei.a).  It  is  plainly
with  reference  to  knowledge  (ycuxns),  that  Justin  speaks  of
foreknowledge  (irpoyviacri';),  for  he  lays  stress  upon  the  argument
that  in  his  time  'prophetic  charisms '  (Trpo^rjTiKa  \apia fj.ara)
are  still  found  among  Christians,  and  that  thus  the  OT  gift  of
prophecy — by  which  he  understands  merely  prediction  of  future
events — has  passed  over  to  the  followers  of  Christ  (Dial.  82,
begin.).

(c)  It  will  be  noticed that in all the  enumerations
almost  no  reference  whatever  is  made  to  the  virtues  that
are  looked  for in  every  Christian. Even '  ministry '
(diaKovia), 'giving' (/zeraStSoi'cu), 'showing mercy"
(e\eai>),  are  enumerated  only  on  the  assumption  that
they  have  risen to a pitch  that  is not  attainable by
every  Christian. The  extraordinary  character, rising
in  many  cases  to  the  level  of  the  miraculous,  which  has
been  noted  in  §  i  as  the  first  criterion  of  charisms  in
the technical  sense, is  thus preserved. All the less
have  we  any  occasion to lay  stress on  the '  fear  of
God,' which Justin has merely taken  from Isaiah,
or to  extend in an  analogous  way  the  limits  of  our
category  in  the  direction  in  which  this  would  be  per
missible,  if  one  elected  to  pay  heed  only  to  the  second
criterion (see § i) — that they are attributed to the
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit — and,  further,  to  take  it  as
one's  guiding  principle  that  according  to  Paul  the  whole
new  life  of  the  Christian,  with  all  its  virtues,  is  a  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Gal.  5?2f. :  love,  joy,  peace,  etc.).
It  would  therefore  be  a  mistake  to  accept  the  limits  for
our  present  concept,  as  these  are  laid  down  by  Weinel
(below,  §  21 ),  who  in  fact  writes  not  about  the  'gifts,'
but  about  the  operations,  of  the  Spirit. To  these  of
course  belongs  the  ethically  good  state  of  the  will,  treated
of  by  Weinel  (149-161),  with  all  its  effects  ; it  does  not
belong  to  the  order  of  charisms.

(d)  There  is  still  another  element  included  by  Weinel
which  we  for  our  part  must  exclude. The  receiving  of
revelations — apart from the subsequent reporting of
them — or the power to  endure  martyrdom  (or  even
ascetic  privations)  may  be  traced back to the Holy
Spirit, and may  also possess  the  note  of  the  extra
ordinary  in  a  very  high  degree,  yet  they  ought  not  to
be  reckoned  to  the  number  of  the  charisms  because  they
lack  the  third  criterion — that  of  utility  for  the  life  of  the
church.

This  criterion  must  have  had  very  great  importance  in  Paul's
view;  for  not  only  does  he  in  i  Cor.  12 7  142-33  make  it  the
chief  goal  of  his  entire  discussion  of  the  charisms  (although  he
has  been  led  to  the  mention  of  them,  not  by  this  thought  but  by
that  of  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Spirit),  but  also  in  Rom.  126-8  the
same  goal  is  set  before  him,  although  the  occasion  is  in  like
manner  different,  namely,  the  thought  of  the  unity  of  the  church
notwithstanding  the  diversity  of  its  members.  One  is  not  entitled
to  suppose  that  the  profit  of  the  church  is  only  an  application  of
the  charisms  which  Paul  would  like  to  see  made,  not  a  consti
tutive  element  in  the  concept  itself.  So  far  from  that  being  the
case,  this  criterion  is  for  the  apostle  so  important,  that  he  would
refuse  to  reckon  to  the  number  of  charisms  in  the  technical  sense
of  which  we  are  now  speaking,  any  phenomenon  which  yielded
no  advantage  for  the  community  at  large.

(^)  For  this  reason  we  must  hesitate  before  including
in  the  category  in  question  one  manifestation  which
Paul  himself  expressly  designates  by  the  name  of
charisma.  In  i  Cor.  76/.  he  wishes  that  all  were  un
married  as  he  himself  is,  but  does  not  set  this  up  as  a
positive  command,  '  because  each  man  hath  his  own
gift  from  God,  one  after  this  manner  and  another  after
that.'

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  believe  that  Paul  here  intends  to
contrast  a  charisma  of  marriage  with  a  x<ipi<r/xa  e-y/cpareta?  (as,
following  7  9,  we  may  designate  the  other  side  of  the  com
parison)  ;  for  in  this  whole  section  he  regards  marriage,  and  the
intercourse  of  the  sexes  in  marriage,  not  as  a  good  in  itself,  but
only  as  a  preservative  against  evil  (7259).  Rather  must  we
take  as  the  antithesis  to  the  ^apicr/oia  eyKpareias  some  one  or
other  of  the  charisms  enumerated  in  chap.  12.  Paul,  however,
would  hardly  have  arrived  at  such  a  co-ordination  if  for  his  own
personal  calling  the  unmarried  condition  had  not  carried  with  it
a  direct  and  obvious  utility  for  the  churches  under  his  care —


152


4757


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

that,  namely,  of  leaving  him  freer  for  the  preaching  of  the  gospel
and  pecuniarily  less  dependent  on  the  churches,  in  which  freedom
and  independence  he  discerned  a  great  advantage  for  the  exercise
of  his  office,  and  specially  for  the  assertion  and  establishment  of
his  authority  (i  Cor.  7  32^:  9  126  15-18  2  Cor.  11  7-12).  When,
therefore,  he  speaks  of  the  unmarried  condition  as  a  charism,  he
will,  broadly  speaking,  be  thinking  of  himself  and  of  those  in  a
like  position  with  himself.  Otherwise  we  should  have  expected
him  to  class  as  charisms  also  other  forms  of  asceticism,  such  as
abstinence  from  certain  kinds  of  food,  or  voluntary  poverty  ;  but
this  he  never  does.

After  denning  the  field  our  next  task  must  be  a
classification  of  the  charisms  of  so  very  various  kinds.

4.  Classification.  {?>.  U  ™ght  seem  as  if  Paul  himself
had  undertaken  it  when,  m  the  first
of  the  three  leading  passages  (i  Cor.  124-6),  before
going  into  details,  he  sets  up  these  three  great
categories—'  charisms  '  (xaptV/xara),  'ministries'  (5<a-
Koviai),  and  'works'  (£i>epyri/j.a.Ta.).

If,  however,  we  decide  to  take  these  verses  as  setting  forth  a
strict  arrangement,  we  shall  have  to  believe  that  in  the  detailed
enumeration  in  ?T/.  7-11,  where  each  charism  is  traced  back  to
the  Holy  Spirit,  only  the  first  of  the  three  great  categories
has  been  specifically  dealt  with,  since  the  second  and  third  of
these — '  ministries  '  (Stcucoriai),  and  '  works  '  (e«py>j^aTa) — are
brought  into  connection  not  with  the  Holy  Spirit  but  with
Christ,  or  God.  This  again,  however,  would  not  be  in  accord
ance  with  v.  10,  where  '  works '  ['  of  powers  ']  (ei/ep-yTJ/maTa  [5uca-
/ietav}),  are  included  in  this  detailed  list  ;  and  in  Rom.  127  the
'  ministries '  (6ta/coi>i'at)  belong  to  the  charisms  (xapier^ara).
Thus  '  charism,'  '  ministry,'  and  '  work  '  (papier/ma,  Siaxoyia,  and
e«pyrj/na),  are  only  three  different  names  for  all,  or  at  least  many
of  these  gifts,  and  they  are  chosen  with  conscious  reference  to
the  three  modes  of  divine  revelation.  The  most  comprehensive
would  seem  to  be,  according  to  v.  6,  '  work '  (ei/e'p-yrj^a),  (God
worketh  all  things  in  all);  according  to  Rom.  126  'charism'
(xaptoyxa);  in  i  Cor.  1615  'ministry'  (SiaKOvia.)  is  used  also  in
a  very  comprehensive  sense.

(&)  Within  the  detailed  enumeration  made  in  i  Cor.
128-io  a  classification  might  seem  to  be  hinted  at  by
Paul  himself,  when  he  uses  '  other '  (&\\if>)  six  times  and
'  different '  (eTepif)  twice  ;  for  '  different '  (?repos)  may
mean  '  of  another  kind,'  whilst  'other'  (tfXXoj)  signifies
merely  '  not  identical.'

In  that  case,  however,  we  should  have  to  subsume  under  the
fixed  confidence  or  '  faith  '  (iri'oris,  r:  9),  which  is  introduced  by
the  first  '  different '  (erepco),  not  merely  the  gift  of  healing  and
the  power  of  working  miracles  (which  would  be  suitable  enough),
but  also  '  prophecy  '  and  '  discerning  of  spirits '  (which  would  not
suit  at  all).  '  Other  '  and  'different '  are  thus  used  only  for  the
sake  of  variety,  not  with  the  intention  of  expressing  a
difference.

(<:)  Any  attempt  to  find  a  suggested  classification  in
the  omission  of  the  particle  '  and  '  (5^)  in  many  instances
also  breaks  down.

In  v.  10  the  second  and  third  Se  are  put  in  brackets  by  WH.
If  in  these  two  cases  the  particle  is  taken  as  genuine,  then  each
'  other  '  (aAAoj)  is  accompanied  by  St,  and  '  different '  (erepu))  in
both  cases  is  without  it ;  the  classification  would  then  be  the  same
as  under  (i).  If  both  are  deleted,  'discerning  of  spirits'  as  one
principal  division  would  be  separated  from  '  prophecy  '  as  another
principal  division,  although  unquestionably  the  two  are  not  more
widely  separated  than  '  interpretation  of  tongues '  from  '  kiuds
of  tongues'  (1429).  Thus  we  should  have  to  reject  the  first  of
the  two  Sf  and  retain  the  second  (so  Bern.  Weiss.).  For  this,
however,  the  authorities  give  not  the  slightest  warrant,  for  in
both  cases  the  evidence  is  almost  exactly  the  same  for  the  re
tention  and  also,  on  the  other  hand,  the  same  for  the  deletion.

(d]  Thus  all  that  remains  for  us  is  to  attempt  some
sort  of  classification  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  The
points  that  seem  clearest  are  these  :  ( i )  to  the  '  works
of  powers  '  (evfpyr] fjLO.ro,  dwd/u-ewv)  of  i  Cor.  12  1028  be
long  the  'charisms  of  healing'  (xapur/uara  i'a/adrwi')  of
vv.  9  28  which  were  invariably  regarded  as  miraculous,
and  the  '  faith  '  (TTIOTIS)  of  v.  9  since,  in  132,  it  is  spoken
of  as  able  to  remove  mountains.  (2)  To  the  '  ministry  '
(diaKovia)  of  Rom.  12?  belong  certainly  the  '  givings '
(fj.eTadi56i>at)  and  'showing  mercy'  (tXeav)  of  128,
and  the  'helps'  (d.i/rtX'^ut/'eis)  of  i  Cor.  1228.  This,
if  we  take  diaicovla  in  a  narrow  sense.  In  a  wider
sense  of  the  word  there  is  a  '  ministry  of  the  word '
(SiaKovla  TOV  \6yov,  Acts  64),  and  in  the  sense  in  which
the  word  appears  to  be  used  in  i  Cor.  16 13  other  gifts
also  might  easily  be  included  under  it,  as  Stephanas  had
rendered  useful  service  in  the  guidance  of  the  church  at
Corinth  as  well.  Yet  (3)  it  is  better  to  regard  the  govern
ments  '  (Kvj3fpvr]fffis)  of  i  Cor.  1228  as  forming  an  inde-

4758


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

pendent  main  division,  to  which  of  course  the  '  governor'
(Trpourrcijuei'os)  of  Rom.  128  will  belong.  Most  amply
sutxlivided  (4)  is  the  gift  of  the  'word';  'word  of
wisdom'  (Xbyos <ro<t>ias),  'of knowledge'  (\6yos  yvw<rews),
the  first  of  them  (or  both  of  them)='  teaching'  (5t5a-
ffKa\ia.),  or,  if  it  is  the  product  of  the  charism  that  is
thought  of,  =  '  doctrine'  (8idax~n)  ',  see  §  3  a.  Then  there
is  also  the  'admonish'  (irapa.KO\eiv)  of  Rom.  128  ;  but
also  very  specially  '  prophecy  '  (irpo<pT)Tfla.}  together  with
'discerning  of  spirits'  (Std/cpicns  Trvei'/ndrwc)  and  the
1  kinds  of  tongues'  (ytvri  y\uir<Tu>v)  with  '  interpretation
of  tongues'  (epfjujveia  y\u<rff£i>).  An  apostle  (iCor.
12z8)  combines  the  gift  of  the  word  with  that  of  direction
and  of  miracle-working  (2  Cor.  12  12).

The  first  three  classes  call  for  but  little  remark  by  way
of  explanation.  It  has  elsewhere  been  shown  from  the

5.  Charisma f^^es  (see  GOSPELS §  144  : cp  also

^  .  .  below,  § 16) how widespread, clown

apart  from  that  to  the  end  of  the  second  cemury  wfts

)ra'  the  belief  that  many  Christians
possessed  the  power  of  working  miracles,  and  very
specially  that  of  driving  out  evil  spirits.  It  is  specially
important  to  observe  that  the  same  power  is  not  denied
of  those  who  are  not  Christians,  but  only  attributed  in
their  case  to  the  agency  of  demons.  This  goes  to  show
that  some  kernel  of  actual  fact  in  the  alleged  occurrences
is  undeniable.

We  may  seek  to  explain  these  from  natural  causes,  a  method
of  explanation  that  presents  no  particular  difficulty,  least  of  all
in  cases  of  casting-out  of  devils — i.e.,  healings  of  mental  disease,
which,  however,  often  enough  will  have  lieen  only  temporary  in
their  effect.  We  may  further  take  it  that  the  faith  which  saw
miracles  in  those  really  unmiraculous  events  will,  without  dis
crimination,  have  attributed  to  those  who  produced  them  per
formances  also  of  such  a  nature  as  would  really  have  heen
irreconcilable  with  the  laws  of  nature.  The  collection  to  be
found  in  Weinel  (109-127)  shows,  however,  that  the  Christian
writers,  apart  from  quite  summary  accounts,  refer,  with  regard  to
the  first  and  second  centuries,  almost  exclusively  only  to  exorcisms,
and  attribute  miracles  of  the  more  pronounced  sort  to  heathen
sorcerers  and  to  the  gnostics  (who,  in  holy  horror,  are  put  on  the
same  level  with  the  sorcerers).  Exceptions  are  the  legendary
works  in  which  such  magical  arts,  as  practised  by  Simon  Magus,
are  imitated  by  Peter  or  by  Peter  and  Paul  with  a  view  to  out
doing  them  (see  SIMON  PETEK,  §  33/.),  or  apocryphal  Acts  of
Apostles,  partly  of  gnostic  origin,  the  spirit  of  which  is  illus
trated  by  some  examples  in  JOHN,  SON  OF  ZEBEUEE,  §  8yC,
and  in  SIMON  PETER,  §  46.

On  'ministry'  (Siaicovia.),  see  DEACON,  §  3  ;  on  'government'
(icu£<:'pi<)7<7i?)  and  its  development,  see  MINISTRY,  §  9,  and  subse
quent  sections.

The  various  forms  of  the  fourth  class,  on  the  other

hand,  demand  careful  and  detailed  investigation. Let

,  ..„. , , us  begin  with  the '  word  of  wisdom  '

H  (\67oscro0tas)  and  'word  of  knowledge'

,, E?  , , (\o7os yvJxreus)  in i  Cor.  128. It  is

,  1 . 5e  , '  obvious  from  the  first  that  the  two  are

exporting.  yery  closely  reiate(j .  for  ;n  27-i6  •  know'

(yiv&ffKCiv)  figures  as  the  verb  to  which  the  substantive
'wisdom'  (<ro<j>ia)  corresponds.  If,  notwithstanding,
the  two  must  be  regarded  as  characteristically  distinct
in  our  leading  passage,  the  difference  accordingly  is
hardly  to  be  sought  in  their  differing  contents,  but  rather
in  the  way  in  which  the  human  spirit  appropriates  the
same  material  which  is  brought  before  it  by  each.  Now,
according  to  2  Cor.  46  (cp  214),  gnosis  appears  to  be
applied  to  the  knowledge  of  what  is  perceived  in  an
ecstatic  condition  ;  for  Paul  who  had  never  known  Jesus
upon  earth  can  only  have  seen,  in  the  face  of  Christ,  the
splendour  of  God  (56£a  is  nothing  abstract ;  cp  2  Cor.
87  Lk.  2g  Acts  7 ss  i  Tim.  616  Rev.  21 23/1 ),  in  a  vision.
If,  now,  gnosis  appropriates  to  itself  the  impression  thus
received  and  casts  it  into  the  form  of  thought,  it  follows
from  this  manner  of  origination  that  the  mental  product
will  possess  the  character  of  what,  in  the  philosophical
theory  of  knowledge,  is  called  intuition.  It  will  thus
have  the  note  of  immediacy  as  distinguished  from  that
which  has  been  reached  by  the  discursive  method.
For  the  explanation  of  what  is  meant  by  '  wisdom '
(<ro0/a)  no  such  direct  hint  is  given  us  by  Paul.  Apart
from  passages  where  the  word  is  used  in  an  un-

4759


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

favourable  sense,  it  always  indicates  with  him  the
content,  not  the  manner,  of  the  knowledge.  This
circumstance,  however,  cannot  alter  anything  in  the
fact  that  in  our  leading  passage  it  is  parallel  with
gnosis,  and  here,  accordingly,  like  the  other,  must  mean
a  manner  of  knowing.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate
that  the  practical,  as  distinguished  from  the  theoretical,
is  meant.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wisdom  of  the  world,
which  is  the  opposite  of  that  here  intended,  exhibits
pretty  clearly  the  feature  which  would  offer  a  clear
contrast  with  gnosis  as  explained  above  ;  it  results  from
intelligent  consideration  of  things.  A  wisdom  which
figures  as  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  must  naturally  be  the
consequence  of  the  inspiration  of  that  spirit  ;  but
nevertheless  it  can  in  its  style  and  manner  display  the
note  of  discursive  thought  and  reflection  quite  as
clearly  as  gnosis  can  display  that  of  vision  and  intuition.

Holsten  seeks  to  bring  out  the  contrast  in  the  following  way ;
in  Paul  we  have  to  look  more  for  gnosis  in  so  far  as  he  visualised
the  fundamental  conceptions  of  his  entire  doctrine  on  the  basis
of  that  image  of  the  ascended  Jesus  which  he  saw  in  his  vision
near  Damascus  ;  '  wisdom  '  (<ro<f>ia)  we  find  more  in  Apollos.  If
this  is  correct,  the  so-called  pneumatic  interpretation  of  the  OT
which  believes  itself  able  to  arrive  at  the  hidden  sense,  would
rather  fall  to  the  side  of  '  wisdom  '  (<ro<|u'a),  including  the  form  in
which  it  is  employed  by  Paul  in,  for  example,  such  passages  as
i  Cor.  9gyC  104  142I./C  zCpr.8i3-i6  Gal.  421-31.  According
to  the  Epistle  of  Harnabas,  it  is  true  (102  gf.),  it  appears  to  be
called  gnosis.  Yet  here  a  vacillation  of  expression  is  easily
possible.  It  must  be  added,  further,  that  gnosis  in  Paul,  where
it  relates  to  the  region  of  practice  (i  Cor.  817  iof.  and  doubtless
also  2  Cor.  tie),  is  a  much  simpler  notion.  It  is  easily
conceivable  that  the  application  of  the  word  to  this  region  may
have  had  a  different  course  of  development  from  that  which  it
had  when  regarded  as  a  spiritual  gift.

The  'admonish'  (TrapaKa.\f1v)  of  Rom.  128  belongs
entirely  to  the  practical  side.  Primarily  it  means  not  to
comfort  but  to  exhort.  Consolation,  however,  is  not .
excluded  ;  for  the  literal  meaning  is  to  speak  to  a  person.
It  is  presupposed  that  people  are  in  need,  not  so  much
of  instruction  as  of  the  effort  made,  whether  gently  or
more  strenuously,  always  in  a  friendly  and  tactful  manner,
to  bring  them,  by  spoken  word,  to  a  better  disposition
of  will  or  a  better  frame  of  spirit.

We  should  completely  misunderstand  '  prophecy '
should  we  suppose  its  essence  to  lie  in  prediction  of  the
future.  This  is  not  wholly  excluded  ;
but  it  can  have  had  only  a  very  modest
part  as  compared  with  more  important  elements  in  the
idea.  These  elements  are  found  in  i  Cor.  14.

(<z)  According  to  14 3  prophecy  produces  '  edification,"
'comfort,'  and  'consolation';  according  to  v.z^f.  it
can  penetrate  so  deeply  as  to  lay  bare  the  secrets  of  the
hearts  of  strangers  and  constrain  them  to  confess
that  the  spirit  of  God  speaking  in  the  prophet  has  rightly
disclosed  what  was  passing  within  them.  Accordingly,
prophecy  would  seem  to  be  distinguished  from  the  '  word
of  wisdom  '  (\6yos  ffotjtlas)  and  the  '  word  of  knowledge'
(\jyos  yv&vtu's}  in  this,  that  it  is  preaching  of  a  purely
practical  kind,  often  not  unlike  the  addresses  at  a  revival
meeting.  Yet,  according  to  vv.  31  and  19,  the  hearers
also  learn  (fj.o.v9dveiv}  and  are  instructed  (K-arTj^eurtfat)
by  it.  Theoretical  elements,  therefore,  cannot  be
wholly  absent  ;  the  real  distinction  as  compared  with
'wisdom'  (ffotpia)  and  'knowledge'  (yvufftf)  has  not
yet  emerged.

(6)  What  is  more  important  to  observe  is  that,  accord
ing  to  v.  30,  it  is  by  a  '  revelation  '  that  the  prophet  is
led  to  speak.  This  feature  is  in  fact  so  characteristic
that  in  the  enumeration  in  v.  26  we  actually  find  '  revela
tion  '  (d.TroKaXvi/'ij)  where,  alongside  of  '  teaching,  tongue,
and  interpretation  of  tongues'  (Sidaxrj,  •yXuknra,  and
ep/iT/vet'ci  yXuacrCjv )  we  should  have  expected  to  find
'prophecy'  (irpofirjTfia).  In  t- .  6  also,  the  two  pairs
are  clearly  so  distributed  that  the  first  member  of  the
one  ('  revelation  ')  is,  if  not  similar  to,  at  least  analogous
to,  the  first  member  of  the  other  ('prophecy')  just  as
are  the  second  members  of  the  two  pairs  (yvCxri.*  and
dtSax'fi)-  Here  accordingly  is  seen  what  is  the  really
essential  distinction  between  prophecy  on  the  one  hand,

4760


7.  Prophecy.


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

and  wisdom  and  knowledge  on  the  other  ;  it  lies  in  the
suddenness  and  immediacy  of  the  revelation  from  which
prophecy  proceeds.  For  we  must  assume  that  a  prophet
spoke  from  the  basis  of  such  a  revelation  even  in  those
cases  where  he  had  received  it,  not  as  we  find  in  v.  30,
while  the  meeting  was  actually  going  on,  but  some  time
previously — at  home,  let  us  suppose.

(c)  On  the  other  hand,  prophecy  has  to  be  dis
tinguished  equally  clearly  from  the  '  speaking  with
tongues '  with  which  it  stands  in  such  close  parallelism.
Whilst  that  which  is  spoken  in  tongue-speech  remains
unintelligible  until  it  has  been  interpreted,  the  '  prophet '
can  be  understood  by  any  one  (w.  -$f. )  because,  during
the  time  of  his  speaking,  he  is  guided  by  his  '  under
standing'  (coGs  ;  zf.  14).  Therefore,  also,  it  is  said  of
prophecy  (v.  32)  that  '  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are
subject  to  the  prophets,'  whilst  those  who  speak  with
tongues  are  at  the  moment  in  the  ecstatic  condition.

(</)  Taking  all  these  considerations  together,  we  find
that  the  prophecy  spoken  of  by  Paul  is  entirely  similar
to  the  discourse  of  the  OT  prophets.  In  the  OT  also
the  contents  of  prophetic  discourse  are  for  the  most
part  of  a  practical  character,  yet  also  informing  ;  the
origin  is  sought  in  a  sudden  revelation  ;  the  manner  of
speech  of  the  OT  prophets  is  quite  intelligible.  This
holds  good  of  the  prophetic  discourse  so  long  as  it
has  not,  as  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,  or  even  in  Zechariah
or  Joel,  passed  over  into  the  apocalyptic  style,  but  simply
as  we  find  it  in  the  genuine  writings  of  the  older  prophets,
not  as  it  is  described  by  such  authors  as  Philo  and  Justin
for  whom  the  OT  prophets  are  men  who  speak  in  a
completely  ecstatical  condition  and  are  mere  foretellers  of
the  future.  Perhaps  we  might  even  go  a  step  farther

and  conjecture  that  the  manner  in  which  the  '  prophets  '
of  the  apostolic  age  were  conscious  of  receiving  their
revelations  resembled  that  of  the  OT  prophets  who  say,
'  The  Lord  spake  to  me, '  and  that  the  contents  of  such
a  revelation,  as  in  the  OT,  had  reference  for  the  most
part  to  some  concrete  detail.  From  what  has  been  said
it  will  be  seen  that  on  the  whole  the  most  suitable  render
ing  of  '  prophecy  '  will  be  '  inspired  address  '  or  '  inspired
preaching. '  On  the  later  stages  of  Christian

prophecy  see  MINISTRY,  §  38  [also  PROPHETIC
LITERATURE,  §§  30-33];  on  'discerning  of  spirits'
(diaKpiffis  wvev/^dTuv),  see  below,  §  18.

The  discussion  of  the  question  of  speaking  with  tongues
has  been  brought  into  the  state  of  confusion  in  which  we
find  it  by  the  circumstance  that  investi
gators  were  determined  to  take  Acts
2 1-13  as  their  starting-point,  and  to  find
the  truth  of  that  narrative  confirmed  in
all  circumstances,  in  other  words,  sup
ported  by  Paul.  The  student,  however,  who  is  not
prepared  to  give  up  the  genuineness  of  the  principal
Pauline  Epistles  (as  to  which  cp  GALATIANS,  §§  1-9)  is
in  duty  stringently  bound  to  consider  the  account  of
Paul  as  the  primary  one,  and  discuss  it  without  even  a.
side  glance  at  Acts,  and  to  reject  as  unhistorical  every
thing  in  Acts  which  does  not  agree  with  this  account.
Nor  will  it  be  permissible  to  urge  that  Paul's  information
may  have  been  defective  ;  for  he  himself  spoke  with
tongues  more  than  they  all  (i  Cor.  14 18).

(a)  The  speaking  with  tongues  was  unintelligible
(i  Cor.  142  9  ii  16)  and  therefore  of  no  use  to  the  church,
unless  an  interpretation  followed  (vv.  69  17).  Paul  goes
so  far  as  to  say  (v.  22)  that  in  a  mixed  assemblage  of
Christians  and  non-Christians  it  has  any  purpose  at  all
only  for  the  non-Christians — namely,  to  be  to  them  a
sign  which,  in  the  context,  can  only  be  taken  as
meaning  a  mark  of  displeasure.  True,  along  with  this
he  concedes  that  the  speaking  with  tongues  has  a  value
for  the  speaker  himself,  for  his  edification,  namely,
because  it  is  a  speaking  on  behalf  of  God  (w.  2  4  17  28).
From  the  latter  circumstance,  and  particularly  from  v.  2
('no  man  understandeth '),  has  been  drawn  the  con
clusion  that  the  speaking  with  tongues  was  in  quite  low

4761


8.  Speaking
with  tongues

the  pheno
menon  itself.


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

tones.  Against  this,  however,  has  to  be  set  the
comparison  of  tongue-speech  with  musical  instruments
which  give  out  loud  tones,  if  not  individually  distinguish
able,  and  with  a  foreign  language  which  is  heard  but
has  not  been  learned  (vv.  7-11),  as  also  the  statement
that  a  stranger  must  regard  the  tongue-speaker  as  one
out  of  his  mind  (v.  23).

(b]  The  explanation of  the  unintclligibility  of  such
speeches must accordingly be sought in this, that
intelligent  thought  (poOs)  had  no  part  in  their  production
(v.  14). For 'unfruitful'  (dKapiros)  in  this  connection
must mean not  '  receiving  no  fruit '  but  '  yielding  no
fruit.' Now,  the  antithesis to  ('speaking' XaXeti',  or
'praying' Trpofffi'xeffdat, or 'singing' \f,d\\fiv, etc.)
'with  the  understanding'  (T£  vo'i)  in  w.  is/,  is  'with
the  spirit '  (rcjj  Trvet'i/ucrn),  but  in  v.  19  it  is  '  in  a  tongue '
(et>  •yXwcrcr??  XaXeiV). 'To  be  in  the  spirit'  (ei>  wi>fi>jj.a.Ti
elvai),  however,  is  in  Rev.  1 10  4z  1?3  21 10  the  terminus
technicus  for  the  ecstatic  state.

Hence  the  meaning  must  be  that  not  all  tongue-speakers  were
in  a  position  to  be  able  afterwards  to  explain  their  utterances
(pv.  13  28),  and  that  it  is  only  of  the  prophets  that  Paul  says
that  the  spirits  speaking  through  them  are  well  known  to  be
subject  to  the  will  of  the  prophets  and  could  therefore,  when  a
new  speaker  came  forward,  ce  silent  (v.  32)— although  for  his
own  part  Paul  enjoins  silence  (?'.  28)  also  on  the  speakers  with
tongues  (on  occasions  when  no  interpreter  is  present).  How
ecstasy  was  regarded  is  well  described  by  Philo  (1  510^  ed.
Mangey) ;  only,  he  supposes  he  is  describing  the  condition  of
the  OT  prophets  (in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word  so  as  to  include
all  the  OT  saints)  when  he  says  :  '  [he  is]  a  sounding  instrument
of  God,  invisibly  struck  and  played  upon  by  him  .  .  .  The
understanding  that  is  in  us  goes  abroad  when  the  divine  spirit
arrives,  and  returns  home  again  when  the  spirit  departs  ;  for  it  is
not  right  that  mortal  and  immortal  should  dwell  together'
(npyavov  Ofov  itj-nv  T)\OVV.  upovofievov  KCU  TrArjTTOju.ti'Oi'  aopdruis

^.aros  a<t>i£ii',  KO.TO.  6e  rrji'  fj^fravdcnaa-ii'  avroG  TrdAii/  eicroiici^eTat'
<?e/jus  yap  OVK  e<rrt  Ovyrbv  adavdria  crvvoiKricra.i).

(c]  What  the  listeners  actually  heard  Paul  does  not
tell,  because  it  was  perfectly  well  known  to  his  readers.
For  us  this  is  unfortunate,  since  on  this  point,  perhaps
the most important  of  all, we  are thus  thrown back
upon  conjecture,  and  many  are  only  too  readily  inclined
to  support  their  conjectures  by  reference  to  Acts2i-i3-
If, as  we  ought,  we  hold  strictly  by  i  Cor. ,  we  learn
from  14 14-17  to  distinguish  between  a  '  praying'  (wpoa-
€i>x(ff0a-i)  find  a 'singing  of  psalms'  (i/'aXXetp),  whilst
the  'blessing'  (ev\oyeiv),  since  it  occurs  in  a  confirma
tory  clause,  is  doubtless  to  be  identified  with  the  latter
or with both, as also 'giving thanks' (fixapiffTeiv)
with  '  blessing'  (ev\oyflv). But  what  are  we  to  say  as
to the nature of  these prayers, songs  of  praise  (and
thanksgivings)  ? They were  unintelligible, and were
spoken in the  state  of ecstasy  ; from this we must
conclude  that  they  consisted  either  of  quite  disjointed
sounds,  cries,  sighs,  and  the  like,  or,  if  of  actual  words
or  short  sentences,  at  all  events  not  of  connected  ones.
A Christian listener, who naturally  did not, like the
stranger  in  v. 23, regard  the  speaker  as  insane,  must
yet  have  had  the  impression  that  he  was  speaking  in  a
dreamlike  state.

(d]  We  may,  further,  adduce  analogies  from  earlier
and  later  times. Whilst  the  prophets  of  the  best  OT
period  are  clearly  distinguished  from  the  speakers  with
tongues  by  the  complete  intelligibility  of  their  utterances,
the oldest stages of prophecy manifest a strongly
ecstatic  character. Cp  for  example  i  S.  105-12  1920-24.
These  prophets,  capable  of  being  brought  by  music  and
sensory  stimuli,  to  dancing  and  frenzy,  stand  for  their
part  in  turn  quite  on  the  same  plane  with  the  pagan
oracle- givers (fj.dt>Tfis). In this connection we can
appropriately  adduce  the  description of  such persons
(/uai/retj)  in  Plato  (  Tim. ,  71^-72^,  Ion,  534^),  accord
ing to which they need an interpreter ; only, this
interpreter  here  bears the  name  of  prophet. \Yithin
Christianity, Montanistic prophecy shares fully the
ecstatic character of the primitive  Christian tongue-
speech. Of  Montanus,  for  example,  Epiphanius  (Hcer.
484, begin.) has preserved  an  utterance  in  which  he

4762


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

says  in  the  name  of  God  :  '  behold  the  man  is  as  a  lyre
and  I  play  over  him  like  a  plectron  ;  the  man  sleeps  and
I  wake  ;  behold,  it  is  the  Lord  who  takes  away  the  hearts
of  men,  and  gives  to  men  a  [another]  heart  : '  (Idov  6
&v6pd3iros  uirel  Xvpa  Kayii)  e</u7rra/ucu  wcret  w\fiKTpov'  6
dvOpuTros  Koifj.a.T<u  Kayu  ypyyopui.  iSov  Kvpibs  €<TTI.V  6  ^iff-
TO.VUV  Kapdias  avOpunruv  na.i  didovs  Kapdiav  dvdpuirois).
From  recent  times  we  may  cite  the  inspired  persons  of  the
Wetterau  and  elsewhere  (1714-1749)  ;  also  the  second
stage  of  Jansenism  from  1713  onwards,  the  Irvingites,
the  '  preaching  sickness  '  and  '  reading  sickness '  in
Sweden,  1841-1854  (see  RESURRECTION,  §  36  e),  many
cases  of  somnambulism,  also  the  Quakers,  and  especi
ally  and  above  all  the  Camisards  in  the  Cevennes1
(1686-1707)  ;  not,  however,  the  Jumpers  and  Shakers.

(<;)  The  'kinds  of  tongues'  (y^vr)  y\u<rcruv}  of  Paul
points  emphatically  to  a  manifoldness  of  tongue-speech
with  regard  to  which  we  are  hardly  able  to  form  any
concrete  idea.  In  the  '  praying  '  (wpofffi>x.ea6a.i.},  '  sing
ing"  (t/'a'XXetc),  'blessing'  (evXoyfiv),  of  i  Cor.  1414-17
we  have  up  to  the  present  point  become  acquainted
with  two  (or  three)  different  kinds  of  contents  of  tongue-
speech  ;  but  that  by  no  means  exhausts  the  subject.
We  may  perhaps  think  in  addition  of  such  contents  as  :
communication  of  a  vision  received,  threatening  of
judgment,  personal  confession,  and  the  like.  On  the
other  hand  the  expression  'kinds'  (y^vTj)  can  also  be
taken  perhaps  as  intended  to  denote  differences  in  the
form  of  the  speeches  according  as  they  were  composed
of  complete  but  reciprocally  disconnected  sentences,  of
disconnected  words,  or  of  single  sounds  or  syllables  ;
whether  they  betokened  joy  or  sorrow,  delight  or  terror,
and  so  forth.

Proceeding now, on the basis of the preceding
paragraphs,  to  a  consideration  of  what  is  meant  by  the
„,  expression 'speaking  with  tongues,' the

'•  *°nS^es first  thing  to  be  remarked  is  that  in  the
.  ° present  connection  Acts  2 1-13  must  be  set

languages.  asjje  not  provisionally,  but  definitively.
Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  '  tongues '  (y\uaffai)
in  the  case  before  us  must  not  be  translated  '  languages."
(a)  Were  the  case  otherwise  the  expression  '(to  speak)
in  a  tongue'  (y\uxrcrri  [XaXac])  would  be  quite  impos
sible,  although  in  point  of  fact  it  occurs  not  only  in  the
mention  of  a  single  speaker  ( i  Cor.  142413/1  1926/1) —
where  it  might  be  argued  that  each  individual  speaks
only  in  one  language  that  is  foreign  to  him — but  also
in  v.  9  where  more  than  one  speaker  is  in  question.

(/')  Where  unquestionably  the  languages  of  foreign
peoples  are  being  spoken  of  (v.  iof.}  Paul  as  it  happens
precisely  refrains  from  using  'tongues'  (y\u>cr<Tai)  ;  the
word  he  employs  is  'voices'  (tpuvai),  an  unmistakable
proof  that  in  this  connection  'tongues'  (y\u<rcra.i)  is
reserved  for  a  different  concept,  and  with  these  '  voices '
((pwvai)  the  speaking  with  tongues  is  only  compared,
whilst  on  the  other  assumption  the  two  would  be
identical.

(c)  Paul  concedes  that  the  speaking  with  tongues  is
fitted for the private  edification  of  the speaker, and
therefore  recommends  that  this  gift  should  be  exercised
in  solitude  (vv.  41828). Hut that  speaking in  foreign
languages should have this result would be indeed
wonderful.

(d)  The  interpretation of tongue-speech would not
have  any  miraculous character at  all, and therefore
have  no  claim  to  be  considered  a  charism,  if  it  rested
upon  acquaintance  on  the  part  of  the  interpreter  with

1  Cp  Hilgenfeld,  G/ossolalie,  115-136(1850);  Goebel,  Ztschr.
far  hist.  Theol.  1854,  pp.  267-322, 377-438  ;  1855,  pp.  94-160,  327-
425;  Ei>ang.  Kirchen-Ztfr.  1837,  No.  54-56,  61  f.  ;  Hohl,
/!>  uchstiicke  tius  .  .  .  Irving,  1839;  OHphant,  Lift  of  living,
1862;  Job.  Nic.  Kohler,  het  IrringistHi',  1876  (contains  examples
of  tongue-speeches  actually  delivered);  Reich,  St.A'r.  1849,
pp.  193-242;  Fabri,  Die  neusten  Rrweckungen  in  America,
Irland,  etc.  (1860);  Id.,  Die  Erweckungen  auf  deutschein
Rotten,  1861  ;  Delitzsch,  Bibl.  Ptyckologitfll  316-320  =  (2»  364-368
(1861);  Kerner,  Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst,  1829  and  often.

4763


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

the  foreign  language  in  question.  If,  however,  we  are
to  suppose  that  the  interpreter  understands  the  language
in  question  just  as  little  as  the  speaker,  the  interpretation
would  be  a  miracle  of  precisely  the  same  order  as  the
tongue-speech  itself,  and  it  would  be  incomprehensible
how  in  v.  28  Paul  could  have  supposed  the  case  that
before  the  beginning  of  a  tongue-speech  the  speaker
could  know  that  no  interpreter  for  it  was  present  at  the
meeting.  For  the  gift  of  interpretation  on  such  a  pre
supposition  as  that  under  discussion  could  nevertheless
be  quite  suddenly  bestowed  on  someone  immediately
after  the  tongue-speech  had  been  made.

(e)  That  no  one  in  the  meeting,  apart  from  subsequent
interpretation,  understands  tongue-speech  (v.  2)  would
not  hold  good  of  _  those  listeners  who  understood  in  a
natural  way  the  foreign  language,  the  temporary  use  of
which  had  been  bestowed  upon  the  tongue-speaker  in  a
supernatural  way.

(/)  The  antithesis  between  '  (speaking)  with  a  tongue  '
(yXujaarj  [XaXeiV])  could  not  be  'with  the  understanding'
(vdi:  sov.  15)  or  '  by  way  of  revelation,"  '  of  knowledge,'
'  of  prophecy,"  '  of  teaching"  ((v  d.TroKa\v\f/ei,  ev  yvuxrfi,
tv  irpo^reiq.,  fv  8i8axH  '•  so  v.  6),  but  must  run  :  '  to
speak  in  one's  mother's  tongue.'  Of  this  we  find  no
where  the  faintest  trace.

(g)  Finally,  the  main  characteristic  feature  of  tongue-
speech — ecstasy — would  be  completely  inexplicable.
Wherefore  this,  if  the  whole  matter  is  simply  to  speak
in  a  foreign  language  which  one  has  never  learned?
After  all,  ecstasy  is  a  psychological  condition  which
must  have  its  psychological  explanation.  Hut  if  this
kind  of  speaking  can  really  bring  ecstasy  with  it,  why
can  it  alone  do  so  ?  One  might  say  :  the  substance  of
these  speeches  was  so  exceedingly  joyful  that  it  trans
ported  the  speaker  to  an  ecstasy.  Hut  why  not  also
the  substance  of  many  speeches  held  in  one's  mother-
tongue  ?  We  should  therefore  have  to  say  :  on  each
occasion  when  a  communication  was  received  that
cheered  to  ecstasy,  the  speaker  was  endowed  in  a
supernatural  way  with  the  ability  to  speak  in  a  foreign
language.  In  that  case,  however,  the  counter  question,
Why  not  in  his  mother-tongue?  would  be  difficult  to
put  to  silence.

(h)  The  latest  defender  of  the  view  that  foreign
languages  are  intended,  Arthur  Wright  (see  below,
§  21),  does  so  in  fact  quite  differently.

He  points  to  '  the  little  prophets  of  the  Cevennes '  (1686-1701),
children  of  three  years  and  upwards,  who,  according  to  Heath
(Contemp.  Rev.,  Jan.  1886),  preached  sermons  not  only  in  their
mother-tongue,  but  also  in  good  French,  often  for  three-quarters
of  an  hour.  '  There  was  nothing  hysterical  or  wildly  excited
about  their  manner,  only  they  were  insensible  to  pain  and
could  not  be  induced  to  stop.'  The  explanation  given  is  that
they  were  merely  repeating  sermons  which  they  had  previously
heard  delivered  by. grown -up  preachers;  their  memory  was
abnormally  stimulated  by  the  excitement  of  the  persecutions.
In  like  manner,  according  to  Wright,  the  primitive  Christian
tongue-speakers  in  each  case  were  simply  repeating  discourses
which  previously — of  course  without  understanding  them — they
had  heard  with  excited  attention,  especially  in  Jerusalem,  where
at  one  of  the  great  feasts,  for  example,  a  multitude  of  unknown
languages  could  be  heard.  He  lays  stress  upon  the  argument
that  '  they  who  spake  with  tongues  are  never  said  to  have  given
utterance  to  distinctly  Christian  teaching  '  and  goes  on  to  say :
'  Accustomed  to  the  higher  tone  of  St.  Paul  and  his  evangelists
the  Corinthians  found  little  profit  in  these  Rabbinic  exhorta
tions."  He  thus  draws  his  entire  view  as  to  the  contents  of  all
the  tongue-speeches  from  Acts  2  n  ('  speaking  the  mighty  works
of  God  '),  instead  of  the  notorious  overvaluation  of  tongue-speech
in  Corinth  asserts  the  opposite,  and  moreover  seems  seriously
to  believe  that  all  the  Corinthian  Christians,  bond  and  free
alike,  who  spoke  with  tongues  had  previously  at  one  period  or
another  been  in  Jerusalem,  and  there  had  excitement  and
anguish  of  so  enduring  a  character  that  their  memory  could  be
stimulated  with  regard  to  them  in  this  abnormal  way  :  and  this
too  for  discourses  of  which  they  could  not  by  any  means  have
had  the  same  impression  as  the  Camisard  children  just  spoken
of,  that  all  salvation  lay  in  them,  for  they  did  not  turn  to
Judaism  ;  at  least  this  is  not  affirmed  by  Wright.  He  is  equally
silent  as  to  what  it  was  that  brought  on  the  ecstatic  state  at
the  repetition  of  discourses  formerly  heard.  He  speaks  of  trie
whole  as  '  a  miracle,  not  of  power,  but  of  providence ' ;  the
latter  he  sees  in  '  the  choice  of  time,  the  preparation  of
the  speakers  beforehand,  the  selection  of  suitable  words,  the

4764


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

restriction  of  the  gifts  to  particular  persons."  Finally,  he
nevertheless  finds  himself  compelled  to  add  to  his  words
quoted  above,  the  following,  as  an  explanation  of  the
ecstasy :  '  the  exciting  cause  may  finally  have  been  not  merely
mental  tension,  but  the  direct  impulse  of  the  Holy  Ghost.'  The
interpretation  of  the  tongue -speeches  on  the  other  hand  he
accounts  for  by  '  a  knowledge  of  the  language  ' ;  where,  however,
it  is  the  tongue-speaker  who  is  himself  the  interpreter,  this
explanation  will  not  serve  :  for  the  speaker  '  had  no  recollection
of  what  he  had  said.'  In  such  a  case,  then,  'interpretation'
must  mean  '  any  utterance  made  in  the  vernacular  during  the
state  of  ecstasy.1  Wright  has  been  led  to  put  forward  his
hypothesis  'from  a  sense  of  the  very  serious  danger  of  calling
in  question  the  historical  truth  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.'
With  the  purpose  of  obviating  this  danger  he  does  as  great
violence  to  the  language  of  Paul  as  any  of  his  predecessors.

What  is  excluded  by  the  words  of  Paul  is  exactly
what  is  meant  in  Acts  21-13:  the  120  of  1 15  spoke

... . ,  in the languages of the Parthians,

10.  Acts2i-i3  Medes>  etc6

and  Mk.  16i7. ^  ^he  expedients  that  have  been

resorted  to  are  innumerable  :  the  friendly  address  pro
duced  in  the  foreigners  only  a  homelike  feeling  ;  or  they
interpreted  the  disconnected  sounds  of  the  actual  tongue-
speaking  described  in  i  Cor.  in  each  case  as  utterances
of  their  own  language  ;  or  the  120  spoke  a  single
language,  a  new  one  miraculously  intelligible  to  all,
whether  that  of  Paradise  or  the  future  language  of
heaven  ;  or  they  spoke  not  Aramaic  but  Hebrew,  and
in  this  the  foreigners,  who  all  of  them  were  Jews  or
Proselytes,  recognised  the  language  of  worship  to  which
they  were  accustomed  at  home  ;  or  the  120  spoke  only
a  few  languages,  not  wholly  unknown  to  them  but  only
unfamiliar,  such  as  Arabic,  colloquial  Greek,  colloquial
Latin  ;  or  those  who  spoke  were  not  by  any  means
only  the  120  but  all  the  foreigners  who  were  present
with  them.  This  and  all  the  like  is  strictly  excluded
by  the  thrice  repeated  statement  (vv.  6  8  n)  that  every
man  of  the  foreigners  heard  the  120  speaking  in  his
own  mother-tongue.

(^)  The  only  theory  still  left  open  would  seem  to  be
that  of  a  miracle  of  hearing  instead  of  a  miracle  of
speaking.  Yet  neither  does  such  a  supposition  hit  the
meaning  of  the  author  ;  for  according  to  what  he  says
the  foreign  languages  were  not  only  heard  but  also
spoken.  The  words  of  ?'.  4  :  '  they  began  to  speak
with  other  tongues'  (erf'pcus  y\wacra.t.s),  receive  their
interpretation  precisely  in  the  statement  '  we  hear  them
speak  in  our  mother-tongue'  (rats  ^/uerepcus  7\cj<7<rcus,
v.  ii  ;  'each  in  his  mother -speech,'  ^KCKTTOS  rrf  idiq.
SiaXfKTCf},  vv.  6  8).

It  is  possible  to  suppose  a  miracle  of  hearing,  therefore,  only
in  the  sense  of  ascribing  to  the  author  a  confusion  of  such  a
miracle  with  one  of  speech.  Hut  why  should  it  have  been  pre
cisely  a  miracle  of  hearing?  If  it  occurred  in  the  ears  or  rather
in  the  minds  of  the  hearers,  there  is  no  answer  to  the  question
wherefore  it  was  that  the  Holy  Spirit  exercised  his  miraculous
influence  precisely  in  this  quarter,  whilst  it  is  not  only  said  (?/.  4),
but  is  also  appropriate  to  the  situation,  that  it  was  on  the
speakers  that  he  wrought.  According  to  others  the  miracle,  in
becoming  a  miracle  of  hearing,  happened  during  the  transmis
sion  from  the  mouth  of  the  speaker  to  the  ear  of  the  hearer.
The  Holy  Spirit  '  interpreted  the  words  during  their  passage
through  the  air,  so  as  to  present  them  to  the  ears  of  the  numerous
listeners,  to  each  in  his  native  tongue.'  Here  one  can  only  ask
in  increased  surprise  why  it  is  precisely  the  Holy  Ghost  that  is
named  as  the  author  of  a  miracle  which  is  accomplished  in  no
human  being  but  in  a  dead  object.

(c)  Another  question  :  Wherefore  the  '  tongues  as  of
fire'  (yXuavai  uxrel  TTU/JOS  )  in  v.  3?  In  this  view  that
a  miracle  of  hearing  is  intended,  they  are  left  wholly
out  of  account.  Other  interpreters  have,  in  view  of
what  is  said  of  the  tongues,  supposed  that  according  to
Acts  the  miracle  was  one  wrought  on  the  organs  of  speech.

Since  '  tongue  '  in  v.  3  denotes  the  organ  of  speech  this  seemed
to  be  the  case  also  in  v.  4 ;  the  meaning  would  therefore  be :
they  received  in  their  mouths  new  tongues  and  therewith  spoke
a  new  speech.  Here,  however,  not  only  does  one  miss  all
possibility  of  conceiving  the  nature  of  what  happened,  so  that
one  is  compelled  to  describe  the  suggestion  of  it  as  simply
fantastical  ;  the  idea  further  is  not  in  the  least  indicated  by  the
words.  The  '  tongues  as  of  fire  '  of  v.  3  have  nothing  to  do  with
the  '  other  tongues  '  of  v.  4  ;  for  the  tongues  of  fire  do  not  enter
the  mouth  but  rest  upon  the  head.  Such  remains  the  meaning
even  if  the  reading  'rested'  (inaditrfv :  sing.)  is  adopted;  for

4765


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

here  the  subject  can  only  be  '  fire,'  the  only  other  subject  which
is  grammatically  possible,  the  '  sound  '  ('/\os)  of  v.  2  being  ex
cluded  by  the  nature  of  the  case.  Perhaps  the  pi.  (e«aei<r<u<)  is
nevertheless  to  be  read,  as  in  N*D  sah.  cop.  pesh.

(d)  These  tongues  of  fire,  however,  remain  out  of
account  also  in  the  interpretation  that  a  miracle  of
speech  is  intended  in  so  far  as  that  interpretation  lias
been  set  forth  under  (a).  Since,  however,  they  cannot
by  any  means  be  regarded  as  of  subordinate  importance
they  urgently  call  for  some  explanation.  This  has  in
part  been  given  already  (see  MINISTRY,  §  21  c}.  The
event  of  Pentecost  is  there  represented  as  a  parallel  to
the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai.  To  this  parallel  belongs
also  the  loud  noise  from  heaven  with  which  the  scene  is
opened  in  v.  2.  In  virtue  of  this  very  circumstance,
however,  the  narrative  lies  gravely  open  to  the  suspicion
that  it  rests  not  upon  observation  of  fact  but  upon  the
activity  of  the  imagination.

(c)  In  what  is  said  about  the  audience  the  text  has  suffered
greatly.  '  Both  Jews  and  proselytes  '  ('lovSaioi  re  icai  rrpcxny-
AVTOI)  in  v.  ii  is  impossible  as  a  clause  in  the  enumeration  ;  it
has  sense  only  if  taken  as  in  apposition  to  all  the  other  clauses
together,  so  that  what  is  meant  is  :  'and  in  fact  of  every  nation,
born  Jews  and  also  proselytes.'  Thus  it  had  its  place  originally
either  after  '  Arabs  '  ("ApajSes),  or  on  the  margin  as  a  gloss,  but  a
correct  one.  In  order  that  foreigners  should  be  hearing  their
mother-tongue  it  is  not  in  point  of  fact  enough  that  born  Jews
should  be  represented  as  present  from  foreign  countries;  pro
selytes  also  must  be  there,  to  whom  the  foreign  language  was
really  a  mother-tongue  in  the  full  and  proper  sense  of  the  word.

(y~)  Against  this,  however,  there  is  what  we  find  in  z'.  5,  where
all  the  hearers  are  called  '  Jews  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  '  (ei?
'lepoixraAij/A  KaroiKovvrf;  'lovSaloi).  'Jews'  in  fact  is  wanting
in  K  ;  but  even  so  it  is  improbable  that  all  these  strangers  in
Jerusalem  had  their  residence  (xaroiKoOi'Tes)  there  ;  it  would  be
much  easier  to  suppose  that  they  were  there  only  as  visitors  at
the  feast.  The  circumstance  also  that  '  dwelling  '  (KaroiKoiWes)
in  C  pesh.  cop.  comes  before  instead  of  after  'in  Jerusalem,'
and  'Jews  'in  E  before  instead  of  after  'dwelling'  can  be  held
as  indicating  that  both  words  were  originally  a  gloss,  and  in
this  case  a  wrong  one.  If  so  it  would  have  to  be  attributed  to
the  desire  to  produce  harmony  with  ?-.  14  :  '  Jews  and  dwellers
at  Jerusalem  '  (ai/<5pes  'loucSouoi  /cal  ot  KaroiKoOfTe!  'Ifpoi/<raArjfi).
Yet  see  below,  /,  end.

(g)  For  the  same  reason  '  sojourners  '  (oi  eiri8i)uovcre$)  before
'  Romans  '  ('Pojjuaioi)  in  v.  10  is  open  to  the  suspicion  of  bein


g  a

gloss  if  it  means  Roman  citizens  who  were  settled  in  Jerusalem.
Should  it  be  intended,  however,  merely  to  indicate  that  they  were
there  on  a  passing  visit,  the  expression  will  fitly  apply  not  only
to  Romans  but  also  equally  well  to  all  other  nationalities,  and
therefore  would  have  had  its  right  place  before  'Parthians'
(MdpOoi  :  i>.  9).  That  Roman  citizens  who  were  settled  in  Rome
(not  in  the  province)  should  be  intended  is  excluded  by  the
article,  for  this  would  affirm  that  they  had  come  for  the  feast  to
Jerusalem  in  a  body.

(//)  Finally,  'Judaea'  ('lovSaiav)  in  v.  9  between  'Meso
potamia'  and  '  Cappadocia'  is  very  surprising  [cp  GEOGKAPHY,
§  26,  end].  That  Jews  understood  the  speakers  really  did  not
need  to  be  said.  Already  in  Tertullian  and  (once)  in  Augustine
we  read  Armenia  ;  in  Jerome  Syria.  Others  have  conjectured
Idumaea,  India,  Ionia,  Bithynia,  Cilicia,  Lydia,  and  even  the  N.
Syrian  kingdom  of  Yaudi  with  which  we  are  acquainted  from
the  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser  [cp  UZZIAH,  §  7].

(?)  In  other  passages  (1046,  196)  Acts  mentions
tongue-speech  without  the  idea  of  a  speaking  in  foreign
languages  and  without  the  addition  of  'other'  (erepcus)
to  'tongues'  (-yXwcrcrcus),  so  that  there  is  no  reason  for
doubting  that  the  same  thing  is  intended  as  that  which
we  find  in  Paul.  Now,  this  cannot  by  any  means  lead
to  our  finding  ourselves  compelled,  at  the  cost  of  what
ever  violence  to  the  words,  to  find  the  same  view  of  the
matter  also  in  Acts  2  ;  but  it  does  doubtless  tend  to
raise  the  question  whether  perhaps  Acts  2  also  may  not
depend  on  an  underlying  source  which  spoke  of  tongue-
speech  as  fittingly  as  did  those  which  have  been  used  in
1046  196.  The  same  idea  is  suggested  also  by  the
remark  of  Peter  in  1047  tnat  Cornelius  and  his  house
'  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we  '  (cp  11  15,
17).  Further  it  has  long  ago  been  remarked  that  the
reproach  of  drunkenness  in  2  13,  if  the  languages  of
foreign  nations  were  what  was  being  heard,  would  by
no  means  have  been  appropriate,  and  that  the  speech  of
Peter  in  2  14-36  has  no  relation  to  hearers  from  foreign
parts  or  to  any  miracle  of  this  description,  but  explains
the  event  by  the  prophecy  in  Joel  (01-5)  as  to  the  out
pouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  prophetic  speeches,

4766


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


visions,  and  dreams  (2i6-i8).  Of  the  various  attempts
at  separation  of  sources  (see  ACTS,  §  n)  the  simplest
and  therefore  the  most  probable  is  that  which  holds  the
source  to  have  contained  v.  4  (without  'other,'  crlpats)
followed  immediately  by  w.  i=/.  ;  in  fact  the  conjecture
has  been  hazarded  that  431  presents  only  another
account  of  the  same  event.

It  would  also  be  conceivable  that  a  fragment  of  the  source  is
preserved  likewise  in  the  words  '  Jews  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  '
{f\<i  'lepouo-aArj/i  (caTOiicoCi'Tf?  'loviatoi)  in  '2  5.  The  source  in
that  case  will  have  mentioned  not  foreigners  but  only  men  of
Jerusalem  as  witnesses  of  the  occurrence,  and  it  would  justly
become  a  question  whether  the  event  occurred  at  Pentecost  (see
MINISTRY,  8  21  f>  <0-  Yet  by  its  whole  structure  the  sentence
is  fitted  to  describe  a  speech-wonder.  Should  'Jews  dwelling'
then  not  be  a  gloss  (see  above,  /)j  we  should  have  to  suppose
that  the  redactor  had  very  unskilfully  retained  these  words
from  his  source.

(/fc)  The  occasion  for  bringing  in  the  idea  of  the
giving  of  the  law  at  Sinai,  and  thereby  completely  alter
ing  the  character  of  the  narrative,  can  perhaps  be  looked
for  in  the  increasing  importance  which  gradually  had
come  to  be  attached  to  the  event  of  Pentecost  as  marking
the  presumed  moment  of  foundation  of  the  church
(against  this  see  MINISTRY,  §  21,  b,  d).  Yet  subsidiary
circumstances  can  also  have  contributed  to  the  same
result.  One  such  can  be  sought  for  in  the  passage  of
Joel  cited  in  Acts  2  19  in  so  far  as  it  speaks  of  '  wonders
in  the  heavens  above  and  signs  on  the  earth  beneath,'
and  of  'fire,'  even  if  this  be  associated  there  with  '  blood'
and  '  vapour  of  smoke.  '  A  still  more  obvious  sugges
tion  is  that  the  occasion  may  have  been  furnished  by  a
misunderstanding  of  i  Cor.  14  21  for  which  Paul  himself
is  responsible.

In  i  Cor.  14  21  Paul  cites  Is.  28  uf.  as  evidence  of  the  unin-
telligibility  and  uselessness  of  tongue-speeches  without  observing
that  in  Isaiah  in  the  case  of  the  Assyrians  by  whom  God  is
about  to  speak  to  the  people  of  Israel  it  is  not  the  language
spoken  by  them  that  matters  but  only  the  sword  by  which  they
are  to  destroy  Israel.  Paul,  moreover,  contrary  alike  to  MT  and
the  LXX,  makes  of  the  whole  a  divine  utterance,  and  introduces
the  words  '  saith  the  Lord  '  (Ae'-yei  (cv'pios)  at  the  end,  changes  the
preterite  of  the  last  verb  ('they  would  not  hear  ')  into  a  future,
and  adds,  '  not  even  thus  '  (ovS'  OVTUX;).  By  this  means  and  by
the  freely  chosen  composite  verb  '  will  they  give  heed  '  (eicraKov-
O-OVTO.I)  he  has  correctly  reproduced  one  solitary  feature  of  MT
and  the  LXX.  In  the  interests  of  his  parallel  with  tongue-speech
what  he  ought  to  have  taken  from  the  OT  passage  was  :  '  one  will
not  be  able  to  understand  the  men  of  foreign  speech.'  Paul,  how
ever,  actually  says  —  quite  unsuitably  for  the  purpose  he  has  in
hand  —  in  real  if  not  in  verbal  agreement  with  Isaiah  ('  they  would
not  hear  ')  :  'one  will  not  give  heed  to  them.'  Vet  it  is  very  in
telligible  that  a  superficial  reader  could  draw  from  the  entire
citation  in  Paul  nothing  further  than  that  the  speakers  with
tongues  had  spoken  in  the  languages  of  foreign  peoples.

(/)  As  Mk.  169-20  is  entirely  derived  from  the  NT
literature,  including  Acts  (see  RESURRECTION-  NAR
RATIVES,  §  8  b,  c),  there  need  be  no  hesitating  in
interpreting  the  '  they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues  '
(•yXwcrcrcus  \a\T/)ffovffiv  KUivais)  of  ^'.  17  simply  as  meaning
'  they  shall  speak  in  languages'  previously  unknown  to  the
speakers,  '  new'(Katpats)  thus  being  substituted  for  greater
clearness  for  the  '  other'  (erepcus)  of  Acts  2  4.  It  is  quite  im
probable  that  an  independent  tradition  lies  before  us  here.

Interesting  but  not  indispensable  is  the  conjecture  of  Michel-
sen  (fftt  Evangelic  naar  Marcus,  29)  by  which  'new'
is  made  to  disappear.  \VH  has  before  'will  lift  up  serpents'
(o<t>eis  apoOcrii')  in  brackets  the  additional  words  '  and  in  their
hands'  (xai  ev  TCUS  xeptriV).  Out  of  this  'and  in  their'  (icai  ei>
rats)  or  rather  out  of  the  contracted  form  (xdv  reus)  arose  '  new  '
(icaifatt)  and  then  '  hands  '  (x«p<nV)  fell  away.  Instead  of  'in'
(«c)i  Michelsen  further  conjectures  that  the  original  text  read
'  if  (ear),  and  writes  '  lift  '  (apoxrif)  :  '  and  if  they  lift  up  serpents
with  their  hands  '  (KO.V  rais  \ep<r\v  o^eis  apajcru'  /car  8a.vdirifj.6v
Tl  Tu'uxru'  oil  JUT;  avirous  /3A.ai|/T)).

Returning  once  more  to  i  Cor.  14,  the  next  interpreta

tion  of  '  tongues'  (y\u>ffffai.)  that  invites  our  consideration

,_,  ,  is the old Greek one, according to

'  _, *>, . which  are  meant  archaic  expressions  no

' al,°  longer  understood  among  the  people,

881 ' or, strange and unusual locutions

generally, including  new  coinages. On  this  head  see

especially  Bleek  (below,  §  21),  and  Heinrici  in  his  own

commentary  and  in  Meyer's.

(a)  On  this  interpretation,  however,  'kinds  of  tongues'

4767


(ytvi)  y\uff<rwi>)  can  hardly  be  distinguished.  (b)  The

sing.  '  speak  in  a  tongue  '  (yXuxrcrri  \a\dv)  or  '  pray  in
a  tongue'  (yX^jffffrj  Trpocreuxtffticu)  can  in  this  view,  as
Heinrici  himself  says,  mean  no  more  than  the  utterance
of  a  shout  of  praise  or  the  heaving  of  a  sigh.  In  that
case  the  question  arises  as  to  how  a  complete  prayer  of
such  a  kind  as  to  require  an  interpreter  can  be  produced
(  14  14)  and  why  Paul  should  be  indisposed  to  allow  more
than  two  or  three  such  '  speeches  '  (v.  27),  each  of  which
would  occupy  a  minute.  (c)  Even  a  stringing

together  of  such  expressions,  for  which,  according  to
Heinrici,  the  plural  '  speak  with  tongues  '  (-yXuWatj
XaXetc)  is  employed,  can  have  resulted  in  no  speeches  of
such  length  as  to  render  regulations  necessary  for  their
restriction  in  this  respect  ;  on  the  other  hand  Paul  gives
not  the  slightest  hint  at  discourses  in  which  such
'  tongues  '  were  a  characteristic  feature,  but  which  on  the
whole  consisted  of  intelligible  words  and  therefore  could
extend  to  considerable  length.  Heinrici  infers  dis
courses  of  this  kind  only  from  v.  19.  The  statement
here  made,  however,  would  be  quite  ineffective  if  its
meaning  was  :  I  had  rather  deliver  five  discourses  with
my  understanding  than  ten  thousand  discourses  in  which
archaic  expressions  occur.  It  becomes  effective  only  if
the  meaning  is  (as  in  EV)  :  '  I  had  rather  speak  five
words  .  .  .  than  ten  thousand  words'  (d\  Why

the  Spirit  should  have  inspired  precisely  expressions  of
this  sort,  and  how  the  employment  of  them  could  have
served  for  private  edification  (w.  4  i8/.  28)  remains  wholly
obscure.  (f)  For  interpretation  of  this  kind  of

'  speech  '  what  is  needed  is  not  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  but  philological  knowledge.  (/)  But  above

all  we  must  ask,  How  is  to  be  explained  the  ecstasy
that  accompanies  the  use  of  such  out-of-ihe-way  expres
sions?  In  short,  whilst  the  interpretation  of  '  tongues'
as  meaning  speeches  in  foreign  languages  still  allowed
the  supernatural  character  of  the  occurrence  to  remain,
that  which  takes  them  to  mean  mere  rare  expressions  is
simply  a  means  of  eliminating  that  character  along  with
the  ecstasy.  Heinrici  says  (in  Meyer:  i  Cor.(~^  362  =
P)  378)  expressly  that  the  outsiders  alluded  to  in  1423
could  have  taken  the  speakers  with  tongues  to  be  men
possessed,  because  they  confounded  their  condition  with
that  of  the  Pythia  and  others  who  really  spoke  in
ecstasy.

Beyschlag (below, § 21) accepts the speaking in
ecstasy,  and  in  fact  actually  proposes  to  explain  the  ex-

12  Tonsues  I5™55'011  '  5PeakinS  with  tongues  '  by
'  ,  °.  means  of  it,  referring  for  the  expression
not  meta-  (though  not  for  the  thing)  to  Acts  2  3.
p  o  cai.  j_je  hyj^g  tnat  tne  tongues  of  fire  are  an
echo  of  the  fact  that  the  tongues  of  speakers  were
actually  moved  with  fiery  eloquence.  This  figurative
way  of  speaking  about  a  tongue  of  fire  is  the  origin  of
the  name  (yXQtacra).  The  pi.  'tongues'  is  to  be
explained,  he  thinks,  even  in  cases  where  a  single
speaker  is  in  question,  by  the  circumstance  that  such  a
tongue  of  fire  was  regarded  as  having  been  bestowed
anew  on  each  occasion  of  its  exercise.  The  oldest  ex
pression  accordingly  was  (he  thinks)  'to  speak  with
other  (or  new)  tongues'  (ertpais  [or  /tad'ats]  y\ucrffa.is
XaXeu')  ;  the  simpler  '  speak  with  tongues  '  (y\&aaa.is
\a\fiv)  is  merely  an  abbreviation  of  this.  In  abbrevia
tion,  however,  it  has  to  be  replied,  it  is  not  usual  to  drop
precisely  the  most  important  part  of  the  expression  ;  the
correct  abbreviation  must  have  been  '  to  speak  with
other  (or  new)'  (er^pcus  [or  naivcus]  XaXfiV).  The  im
possibility  of  this  whole  view  of  Beyschlag's  is  clearly
exhibited,  however,  in  i  Cor.  14  26.  Along  with  a  psalm,
a  teaching,  a  revelation,  and  interpretation,  a  tongue  of
fire  cannot  fittingly  be  enumerated  as  a  thing  which  one
who  takes  part  in  a  religious  meeting  has  ;  for  in  the
connection  '  has"  (#xei)  nieans  '  has  to  contribute.'  In
more  points  than  one  Beyschlag  nevertheless  comes  very
near  the  truth.

Above  all,  Beyschlag  has  rightly  recognised  that  the

4768


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


13.  The  tongue

as  a  bodily

member.


literal  sense — the  bodily  member  within  the  mouth — is
to  be  taken  as  the  fundamental  mean
ing  of  '  tongue. '

(a)  The  decisive  passage  for  this  is
i  Cor.  14  9.  In  connection  with  v.  ^  f.
the  sense  must  be  :  as  the  sound  of  pipe,  harp,  and
trumpet  cannot  be  rightly  understood  if  they  give  out
no  clear  sound,  so  also  what  is  spoken  by  you  cannot
be  understood  if  you  give  forth  no  clear  speech  with
your  tongue.

This  is  the  exact  logical  course  of  the  comparison  :  to  the
musical  instruments  which  give  forth  either  a  clear  or  an  unclear
sound,  corresponds  as  instrument  of  speech  the  member  in  the
mouth.  If  here  by  'tongue'  were  meant  the  particular  manner
of  speech  that  is  known  as  'speaking  with  tongues,'  the
case  that  an  unintelligible  speech  is  given  could  not  for  a
moment  be  suggested  as  merely  a  possible  case  ;  for  according
to  Paul  this  happens  in  all  circumstances.  Nor,  again,  have
we  here  a  new  example,  parallel  to  that  of  the  musical
instruments,  but  one  drawn  from  what  is  observed  in  ordinary
human  speech.  We  do  not  reach  this  till  we  come  to  v.  10  f.  ',
and  as  the  application  of  that  example  to  the  Corinthian
speakers  with  tongues  is  made  in  v.  12  by  the  expression  'so
also  you  '  (OUTWS  «ai  ijueis),  in  like  manner  we  must  regard  the
same  expression  in  v.  9  as  introducing  an  application  of  the
preceding  illustrations  drawn  from  the  musical  instruments  to
the  same  persons.  '  Tongue '  here  thus  signifies  in  actual  fact
the  tongue  of  the  Corinthian  speakers,  yet  neither  as  producing
the  so-called  tongue-speeches  nor  yet  as  producing  ordinary
human  speech,  but  simply  in  so  far  as  it  is  capable  of  giving
forth  alike  the  (always  unintelligible)  tongue-speech,  and  also  a
kind  of  speech  parallel  to  this,  still  intelligible,  in  the  church
meetings — such  speech  as  prophecy,  for  example.

(b)  Here  then  we  have  the  origin  of  the  expression
1  speak  with  a tongue. ' If  all  discourse  is  effected  by
means  of  the  human  tongue  and  yet  only  this  particular
kind  of  speech  is  named  from  it,  the  idea  can  only  be
this,  that  in  the  case  in  question  the part it plays is
particularly  strong,  or  even,  so  far  as  may  be,  exclusive.
In excellent agreement with this is the use of the
opposite expression '  speak with the understanding '
(T^ vot  \a\elv). In intelligible  speech the '  under
standing  '  (vous)  has  a  part,  indeed  so  prominent  a  part
that  it  alone  calls  for  mention  ; in  the  contrasted  case
it is  not  engaged,  and  thus  it  might  seem  as  if  it  were
the  tongue  alone  that  produced  the  speech.

Needless  to  say,  the  belief  was  that  in  '  speaking  with  tongues  '
the  tongue  was  set  in  motion  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (w.  2, ,15),
just  as  in  intelligible  speech  it  was  set  in  motion  by  the  '  under
standing  '  (I'oDs) ;  but  '  (to  speak)  with  the  spirit '  (irvevfiaTi:
[\a.\eli>])  was  not  an  appropriate  verbal  expression  for  this,
because  it  would  have  applied  equally  well  to  prophecy,
wisdom-speech,  knowledge -speech,  and  so  forth.  It  is  also
quite  fitting  that  the  designation  of  so  characteristic  a  matter
should  be  chosen  with  express  reference  to  the  impression  which
it  produced  upon  the  senses,  and  in  this  case  it  really  appeared
as  if  the  tongue  alone  were  speaking.  True,  that  the  lips,  teeth,
palate,  etc.,  are  also  engaged.  But  a  designation  that  is  to  be
in  daily  use  needs  to  be  short,  and  here  it  was  enough  to  name
the  most  important  organ  ;  and  that  the  tongue  is  in  popular
belief  the  most  important  organ  of  speech  is  evident.

(c)  This explanation nevertheless  leaves  something
still  to  be  desired. The  plural  '  speak  with tongues  '
(yXoxrffcus  \a\flv)  is  accounted  for  by  it  only  in  cases
where  it  is  used  with  reference  to  more  speakers  than
one  (1230  145(7  22  f.  39)  ; and  thus not  in 146 (and
v.  1 8  according  to  WH),  nor  yet  in  v.  s,b  12io,  although
here  the  singular,  used of  the  person  speaking,  has  a
collective  sense. Where  only  one  speaker  is  in  question,
the attempt has been made to explain the plural
(7\oicrcrcus)  as  arising  from  the  idea  that  in  passing  from
one manner of  speech  to  another  the '  tongue '  is in
some  degree  changed  ;  but  such  an  idea  is  much  too
fantastic  to  have  arisen  in  popular  speech,  which  never
theless  we  must  certainly  assume  to  have  been  the  case
with  all  such  expressions  as  this. And  what  of  cases
in which '  tongues ' stands alone, without a verb

{121028 138 1422)?

All  the  conditions  are  satisfied  only  by  one  assumption :
'tongue'  (y\ua-<Ta,  apart  from  149)  must  be  rendered

14  TonsTia—  '  tongue-sPeech'' — *'•*••  speech  which,
.  '  T  in  the  manner  described  in  §  13^,

ongue-speecn.  seems  to  ^e  produced by  the tongue

alone. This is  by  no means  a departure  from  the
4769


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

literal  sense  ;  rather  is  it  simply  an  instance  of  the
same  transition  from  the  instrument  to  its  product  which
is  exemplified  in  ordinary  Greek  when  '  tongue  '  (yXwffcra)
is  used  in  the  sense  of  '  language.  '  It  is  necessary
to  assume  that  this  transition  was  effected  anew  in  the
primitive  Christian  usage  in  a  narrower  sphere,  for  the
reason  that  all  other  explanations  have  been  shown  to
be  unworkable.  If  '  tongue  '  could  mean  the  language
of  a  foreign  nation,  or  an  archaic  individual  expression,
1426  would  at  least  be  intelligible  ;  as  these  meanings
are  un  practicable  we  should  have  to  render  :  '  when  ye
come  together,  each  one  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a  teaching,
hath  a  revelation,  hath  a  (human)  tongue  (in  his  mouth),
hath  an  interpretation  '  —  which  clearly  is  meaningless.
'  Tongue  '  must  necessarily  be  something  of  the  same
order  as  the  other  things  enumerated  ;  and  thus  a
definite  kind  of  discourse  which  is  capable  of  being
delivered  in  a  religious  meeting.

So  also  v.  6  :  '  if  I  come  unto  you  speaking  with  tongues,
what  shall  I  profit  you,  unless  I  speak  to  you  [we  must  supply  :
at  the  same  tune]  either  by  way  of  revelation,  or  of  knowledge,"
and  so  forth.  Similarly  too  13  8  :  '  whether  there  be  prophecies
.  .  .  whether  there  be  tongues  .  .  .  whether  there  be  knowledge,
it  shall  be  done  away.  Indeed,  in  the  plural  '  tongues  '
we  now  recognise  everywhere  the  different  'kinds  of  tongues'


15


In  accordance  with  the  attribution  of  tongue-speech
to  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  interpretation
of  k  also is regarded as a spiritual

gift- (<z)  Ii  is  in  the  first  p]ace  to  be

remarked  that  the  tongue  -  speaker
himself,  as  well  as  another,  can  possess
this  gift.  The  first  is  established  by  14  13,  the  second
by  the  co-ordination  in  l'2io  1426  ;  for  as  not  every  one
is  capable  of  giving  all  the  kinds  of  discourse  there
enumerated,  the  meaning  must  be  :  '  when  ye  come
together  each  one  hath  either  a  psalm  or  a  teaching
.  .  .  or  a  tongue-speech  or  an  interpretation.  '

In  this  sense  then,  we  must  interpret  v.  27  f.  also.  'If  any
man  speaketh  in  a  tongue,  let  it  be  by  two,  or  at  the  most  three
.  .  .  and  let  one  interpret.'  If  this  interpreter  is  one  of  the
tongue-speakers,  who  expounds  his  own  tongue-speech,  then
what  immediately  follows  will  mean  :  '  but  if  he  is  not  an
interpreter  '  (eav  Se  JIT;  $  5tepfxr)r«VTrj?)  ;  and  this  seems  to  be
absolutely  necessary,  since  the  sentence  closes  with  '  Itt  him
keep  silence  '  (criya-no),  whilst  if  all  the  tongue-speakers  whose
speech  had  no  interpreter  at  hand  had  to  keep  silence,  the
expression  ought  to  have  run  :  '  let  them  keep  silence  '  (<nyd-
Tioo-af).  In  that  case,  however,  Paul  would  on  the  one  hand  be
enjoining  that  of  the  two,  or  three,  tongue-speeches  delivered,
one,  or  two,  should  remain  uninterpreted,  which  is  directly
contrary  to  the  principle  laid  down  by  him  in  vv.  2-11  16-19
2zyC  26  —  and  on  the  other  hand  he  would  be  excluding  inter
pretation  by  some  other  person  than  the  speaker,  whilst  yet  such
interpretation  is,  according  to  12  10  14  26,  a  spiritual  gift.  Thus
we  must,  after  all.  suppose  that  Paul,  in  a  somewhat  careless
way,  thought  of  '  the  person  concerned'  as  the  subject  of  the
singular  'keep  silence'  (o-tyaroj)!  and  that  we  ought  to  render
(with  KV)  :  '  if  there  be  no  interpreter.  '  This  too  is  inexactly
said  :  '  let  [only]  one  interpret  '  (et;  6iep^i)i'eveV&>).  What  Paul
had  in  his  mind  perhaps  was  :  '  let  one  at  least  interpret.'  The
continuation  'but  if  there  be  no  interpreter'  fits  this  well.

If  this  view  be  correct,  we  learn  from  the  passage
before  us  that  those  persons  in  the  church  who  were  in  a
position  to  interpret  tongue  -speeches  were  generally
known  and  thus  exercised  this  function  with  some
regularity.  The  possibility  was  not  excluded,  indeed,
that  some  one  on  some  occasion  might  give  an  inter
pretation  who  had  not  previously  done  so.  Clearly,
however,  Paul  is  not  disposed  to  rely  upon  the  un
certain,  and  therefore  he  prescribes  that  if  an  interpre
tation  is  not  assured  (such  doubtless  will  be  the  intention
of  his  words)  the  tongue  -  speech  is  to  be  from  the
outset  suppressed.

(b]  What,  next,  were  the  means  by  which  an
individual  other  than  the  tongue-speaker  became  able
to  understand  the  tongue-speech  ?  If  this  faculty  was
a  purely  supernatural  one,  our  question  has  no  point  ;
but  the  case  was  assuredly  otherwise.  With  what
degree  of  precision  the  interpreter  was  able  to  elucidate

1  Similarly,  '  the  persons  concerned  '  is  to  be  supplied  as  the
subject  of  the  plurals  ya/aetVioo-ai'  (i  Cor.  7  36)  and  napf\dfto<rav
(2  Thess.  3  6)  as  WHmg.  and  Tischendorf  read.

4770


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

the  sense  of  a  tongue -speech  we  cannot  tell.  The
more  one  was  disposed  to  rest  satisfied  with  general
renderings,  the  easier  was  it  to  supply  them.  The  tone
of  the  voice,  the  gestures,  the  recurrence  of  particular
words  or  sounds  certainly  offered  clues.1  Further  help
was  gained  from  observation  of  the  habits  of  the  tongue-
speakers.  We  can  hardly  imagine  otherwise  than  that
their  speeches  readily  assumed  a  stereotyped  character.
If,  however,  at  any  time  a  tongue -speaker  brought
forth  something  unaccustomed,  a  knowledge  of  what
experiences  he  had  recently  been  having  would  certainly
not  be  useless  towards  an  understanding  of  his  speech.

(c)  It  must  be  expressly  noted  that  the  things  enumerated  in
146  alon'.  with  tongue-speech—revelation,  knowledge,  prophesy


ing,  teaching — do  nc.  constitute  the  interpretation  of  tongue-
speech  in  some  such  sense  that  the  meaning  will  he  '  when  I
come  unto  you  speaking  with  tongues  what  shall  I  profit  you  if


the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  interpretation  of  tongue-speech
is  intended  in  v.  15  :  'I  will  pray  with  the  Spirit,  and  I  will
pray  with  the  understanding  also,  that  is  to  say  while  I  repeat
in  intelligible  language  the  substance  of  the  prayer  I  have
originally  uttered  in  ecstasy.  This  view  is  recommended  by  the
fact  that,  immediately  before  (r>.  13),  the  tongue -speaker  is
admonished  to  aim  at  being  able  to  interpret  his  own  tongue-
speeches.

On  the  subject  of  the  diffusion  of  the  tongue-charism

our information  is very defective. (a) We  are not

,  aware that tongue -speech (and the

j  b?^e.atl  anfl  allied  charisms)  had  any  considerable

end  Of wOgTO-  diffusion  within  the  Jewish-Christian

speech and area . bm neither  ,s  tnere  adequate

•prophecy grounci for denying to the Jewish

charisms. Christians all 'aptitude for such

charisms,  or  for  accusing  the  author  of  Acts  of  having

as  a  Paulinist  arbitrarily  introduced  it  into  his  account

of  the  primitive  Christian  world. If  he  had  not  found

them  in  the  sources  on  which  he  drew  for  2 1-13  10  46/1

196,  but  merely  drew  upon  his  imagination,  we  may  be

pretty confident that he would have brought in the

same  elements  at  other  points  as  well. Of  course,  the

mere  fact  that  they  were  present  in  his  sources  does  not

of itself give any  security  that their picture of the

diffusion  of  the  charisms  is  historically  correct.

(t)  In  exact  proportion  to  the  intensity  with  which
the  charism  of  tongue-speech  was  exercised  in  Corinth
in  Paul's  time  does  the  complete  silence  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans  on  the  same  subject  invite  remark.  In
i  Thess.  5  19  ('quench  not  the  spirit')  it  may  perhaps
be  intended,  or  at  least  included.  In  any  case
it  cannot  have  long  survived  its  most  flourishing
period.  The  author  of  Acts  certainly  can  never  have
heard  it  exercised,  otherwise  he  could  not  possibly  have
fallen  into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  it  was  speech
in  the  language  of  foreign  nations,  or  into  the  confusion
of  identifying  with  this  foreign  speech  the  speaking  with
tongues  which  occurred  at  the  conversion  of  Cornelius
(Acts  1046/  111517).  It  is  a  significant  fact  that
Justin  for  his  own  period  (about  155  A.n.)  mentions
only  prophetic  gifts  (trpcxprjTiKa.  xaP'-<TfJLaTa)  but  no
speaking  with  tongues  (Dial.  82,  begin. ).  Irenaeus
(about  185  A.n.),  in  his  detailed  treatment  of  the
charisms  of  which  numberless  instances  happened  every
day  (ff(cr.  ii.  49  3  [  =  324];  also  ap.  Eus.  HE  v.  7  3-5).
speaks  only  of  exorcisms  of  demons,  prophetic  visions
and  utterances,  healings,  and  some  cases  of  raising  of
the  dead.  In  another  place  (v.  61  ;  also  ap.  Eus.
HEv.  7  6)  he  mentions  tongue-speech  also,  but  only  as
something  with  regard  to  which  he  hears  that  it
happens  in  the  case  of  many  brethren  in  the  Church

1  The  most  familiar  example,  by  which  it  has  been  attempted
to  explain  the  process,  is  the  following  :  a  tongue -speaker
babbled  disconnectedly  the  syllables  ah  and  ha;  the  interpreter
believed  himself  to  have  discovered  the  Aramaic  word  ahka.
Possibly  the  matter  often  fell  out  so.  It  must  not,  however,  be
thought  that  precisely  this  word  was  known  only  to  certain
interpreters.  As  Paul  employs  it  in  Rom.  8  15  Gal.  46  it  must
have  been  known  to  Gentile  Christians  generally.

4771


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS

and  without  letting  us  know  whether  by  it  he  under
stands  the  phenomena  met  with  in  i  Cor.  14,  or  what
is  described  in  Acts  2.  Irenneus  says  :

'  We  hear  of  many  brethren  in  the  church  possessing  prophetic
gifts  and  speaking  through  the  Spirit  in  all  kinds  of  tongues  and
bringing  to  light  for  the  general  advantage  the  hidden  things  of
men  and  setting  forth  the  mysteries  of  God  '  (jroAAa)i-  aicoi/o/ue v
a/it  Ai/xiji"  tv  T{)  (KK\ri<Titf  Trpo<t>r)TiKa  ^apiV/otara  e\6vT<uv  <cai
?rai>To6aTreu£  AaAoui'TuJi'  6ta  rov  nvevfjia.TOS  •yAw<r<rais  jcai  rot
<cpi)</na  TOUI>  avdpairtav  fi?  (fxxcepoi'  ayovruiv  erri  TU>  <rvfJL<t>tpovTi  xai
TO.  ftiKTTijpia  TOU  fleou  eK&triyovfj.ei'iai').  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the
making  manifest  of  the  secrets  of  men  of  which  Iren;eus  speaks
immediately  after  mentioning  tongue-speech  is  in  i  Cor.  14  24  f.
attributed  to  the  prophets,  not  to  those  who  speak  with  tongues.
Tertullian  also  does  not  say  that  there  was  speaking  with
tongues  in  his  day ;  all  that  he  does  is  contemptuously  to  call


Marcion  .  .  .  aliquos  prophetas  .  .  .  qui  et  futura  praenuntiarint
et  cordis  occulta  traduxerint  (or  :  produxerint?) ;  edat  aliquem
psalmum,  aliquam  visionem,  aliquam  orationem,  dumtaxat
spiritalem,  in  ecstasi,  id  est,  amentia,  si  qua  linguje  interpretatio
accessit"  (adv.  Marc,  b  8,  end).  Thus  tongue-speech  appears,
not  as  an  independent  thing,  but  merely  in  an  added  sentence
which  with  the  whole  of  its  surroundings  is  clearly  reminiscent
of  i  Cor.  14  zsyC  The  ecstatical  spiritual  utterance,  of  which
Tertullian  speaks,  in  his  time  refers  not  to  '  tongue-speech '
but  to  '  prophecy.

(c)  For  the  ecstatical  form  of  utterance  did  not
disappear  so  quickly  as  did  tongue -speech.  On  the
contrary  it  became  merged  in  the  exercise  of  '  prophecy.'
This  was  favoured  in  the  highest  degree  by  the  cir
cumstance  that  already  the  OT  prophecy  was  conceived
of  as  wholly  ecstatical  (above,  §  8^).  This  form  of
utterance  was  most  strongly  prevalent  in  Montanism.
This  may  be  the  reason  why  stress  is  laid  upon  it  by
Tertullian  ;  but  as  Montanism  altogether  was  nothing
new,  but  only  a  strong  revival  of  a  tendency  which  had
once  before  had  prevalence  within  the  church  although
subsequently  repressed,  so  also  its  view  of  prophecy
was,  even  if  not  exactly  what  might  be  called  the
primitive  Christian  one,  then  at  least  the  post-apostolic-
churchly  one  (Weinel,  78-96).  It  was  only  by  way  of
reaction  against  the  exaggerations  of  this  and  against
the  dangers  for  ecclesiastical  office  which  grew  out  of  it
that  brought  churchmen  at  last  to  the  view  which  finds
expression  in  the  title  of  the  treatise  of  Miltiades  (Eus.
HE\.\li],  'On  the  necessity  of  a  prophet's  not
speaking  in  ecstasy*  (irepl  TOU  /n.rj  dftv  TrpofiriT-rjv  tv
^/ccrrdcret  XaXerv).  As  to  how  it  came  about  that
'  prophecy '  also  in  its  turn  had  to  recede  into  the
background  and  give  place  to  the  ecclesiastical  office,
see  MINISTRY,  §  38.

If,  finally,  we  proceed  to  inquire  into  the  value  which

the  charisms possessed  for primitive  Christianity, we

_ . shall  find  that  judges  differ, (a)  In  the

17.  .Popular  church of  c-orinth  (which  is  almost  the


only  authority  to  which  we  can  refer)  they


view  of  the

charisms.  were  valued  very  highly.  They  were  re
garded,  and  quite  naturally,  as  evidences  of  special  grace
and  favour,  and  were  therefore  zealously  striven  after
(14  iz).  This  zeal,  if  a  right  zeal,  was  manifested  in
prayer  (14 13  does  not  mean  that  he  who  speaks  in
tongue -speech  is  to  pronounce  this  ecstatic  prayer
of  his  with  the  purpose  of  interpreting  it  afterwards :
the  meaning  is  that  when  not  exercising  his  charism  of
tongue-speech  he  is  to  pray  for  the  gift  of  being  able
himself  to  interpret  any  tongue-speeches  he  may  subse
quently  receive).  But  we  shall  hardly  be  doing  the
Corinthians  an  injustice  if  we  suppose  that  many  of  them
sought  to  secure  for  themselves  those  '  gifts '  by  other
means  also — by  imitation,  or  by  artificially  working
themselves  up  into  a  condition  of  excitement,  by  efforts
constantly  repeated.  Vanity,  it  would  seem,  was  not
altogether  without  its  part  in  the  matter  ;  otherwise  the
gift  most  prized  and  coveted  would  hardly  have  been
that  of  tongue-speech,  the  most  conspicuous  indeed  of
them  all,  but  at  the  same  time  the  least  fruitful.  In  the
mouth  of  the  Corinthian  Christians  the  tongue-speaker
alone  was  the  'spiritual'  person  (ircei'/uariKfa  :  1437,
4772


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


and,  in  accordance  with  this,  in  all  probability  12 1
also).

(b)  From  this  we  can  see,  at  the  same  time,  what
it  was  that  properly  speaking  was  regarded  as  the
valuable  element  in  the  charisms.  It  was  the  extra
ordinary,  the  wonderful  or  miraculous,  that  quality  in
them  which  conferred  a  special  importance  on  those  who
possessed  them.  Fundamentally  the  view  taken  does
not  differ  from  that  of  the  Greek  religion.  Man  desires
to  enjoy  the  possession  of  the  godhead,  bestowing  itself
on  him  individually.  The  same  view  dominates  in  the
OT  ;  and  in  Gentile-Christian  circles  also  the  OT  con
ceptions  of  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God  can  have
been  familiar  and  influential.  This  conception  has  a
marked  leaning  towards  the  quaintly,  or  even,  one  might
say,  grotesquely  miraculous.  Thus  it  is  the  Spirit  that
enables  Samson  to  rend  a  lion  or  burst  his  own  fetters,
that  is  able  to  convey  Elijah  from  place  to  place  at
pleasure  (Judg.  146  15 14  i  K.  18 12  2  K.  2i6  ;  cp  in  NT
Acts  8  39).  Whether  the  thing  done  has  a  religious
purpose  comes  but  little  into  the  question.

This  way  of  looking  at  the  charisms  is  precisely  that
which  makes  it  possible  to  attribute  the  same  workings  to
other  spirits  than  the  Holy  Spirit.


18.  Discerning  T


of  spirits.


The  belief  in  the  existence  of  such  spirits
was  at  that  time  exceedingly  prevalent.


Broadly  speaking,  they  do  not  fall  simply  under  the  two
categories  of  good  and  evil,  but  many  of  them  are  re
garded  simply  as  of  a  subordinate  character  and  as
restricted  in  their  insight.  Whether  they  were  called
demons  in  accordance  with  pagan  ideas,  or  angels  in
accordance  with  those  of  the  OT,  was  indifferent  ;  in
either  case  they  were  thought  of  as  quite  personal  and
as  very  active.  Of  such  a  spirit  it  is,  for  example,  pre
supposed  in  2  Thess.  22  that  it  can  produce  the  erroneous
belief  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  immediately  at
hand.

(fr)  That  these  conceptions  are  present  in  i  Cor.  14
also  is  shown  by  the  plural,  '  spirits'  (•jri'ru/j.a.Ta)  which,
for  linguistic  reasons,  cannot  be  taken  to  mean  '  opera
tions  of  the  spirit' — a  meaning,  moreover,  which  in
v.  32  is  excluded  by  the  connection  in  which  the  word
occurs  ( '  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the
prophets').  Thus  to  each  prophet  is  assigned  a  proper
spirit,  conceived  of  personally,  by  which  he  is  inspired
(cp  Rev.  226  :  '  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  ').
Quite  similarly  i  Cor.  14  14  also  :  '  if  I  pray  in  a  tongue,
my  spirit  prayeth. '  Here  it  is  not  the  proper  spirit,  so
to  say,  with  which  a  man  is  born,  that  is  intended  ;  for  this
the  apostle  designates  rather  by  the  word  '  understand
ing'  (j'oOs),  and  distinguishes  in  this  very  verse  from
'  my  spirit.'  From  this  it  follows  that  v.  12  also  is  to  be
understood  quite  literally:  'ye  are  zealous  of  spirits,'
that  is  to  say,  one  of  you  seeks  to  obtain  an  inspiration
from  one  spirit,  another  from  another.

(c)  If  this  were  not  the  meaning,  no  such  thing  as  the
'  discerning  of  spirits '  would  be  possible.  By  the
'  spirits '  here  interpreters  indeed  have  proposed  to
understand  distributions  of  the  one  Holy  Spirit  such  as
in  point  of  fact  were  actually  believed  in  (Xu.  11 25  Rev.
14  3i  4s  56,  Hernias,  Sim.  ix.  182  15i-6  and  often).
Only,  in  this  case  also,  any  '  discerning '  would  be
meaningless.  For,  beyond  question,  any  act  of  '  dis
cerning  '  would  consist  in  judging  as  to  whether  an
utterance  founded  upon  spiritual  suggestion  was  true  or
false,  one  to  be  followed  or  rejected.  i  Cor.  7  40  shows
us  how  easily  it  could  happen  that  conflicting  judgments
were  put  forward  on  the  ground  that  they  were  inspired.
Since  Paul  here  supports  his  judgment  on  the  subject  of
re-marriage  of  widows  with  the  words  :  '  I  think  that  I
also  have  the  Spirit  of  God,'  we  must  conclude  that  in
Corinth  other  persons  on  the  ground  of  suggestion  by
the  Spirit  had  decided  in  the  opposite  sense.  Cp
1437/i  where  the  best  reading  (d'ycoeireu)  is  to  be  pro
nounced  as  an  imperative  (ayvoflre)  :  if  any  man  is
ignorant,  ignore  ye  him.

4773


(rf)  In  all  places  where  it  occurs  the  'discerning  of
spirits'  is  mentioned  directly  after  'prophecy'  (iCor.
12io  1429,  cp  i  Thess.  52i).  In  itself  considered,  it  is  not
easy  to  see  why  mention  should  not  be  made  of  it  in
connection  with  '  word  of  wisdom  '  or  '  word  of  know
ledge. '  Yet  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  it  needed
specially  to  be  called  into  requisition  in  connection  with
'  prophecy,'  if  this  last  gave  definite  directions  as  to  what
ought  to  be  done  in  definite  particular  cases  (§  7</).
From  i  Cor.  1429  we  cannot  infer  that  only  those  who
also  possessed  that  of  '  prophecy '  possessed  the  gift  of
'  discerning'  ;  '  the  others  '  (ol  &\\oi)  can  include  others
also.

(e)  The  recognition  of  a  '  discerning  of  spirits '  in
volves  in  principle  a  complete  abandonment  of  the  belief
in  suggestion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  With  the  utmost
emphasis  Paul  insists  (i  Cor.  124-11  1433)  that  all
charisms  proceed  from  the  Holy  Spirit  or  from  God  ;
but  at  the  same  time  they  can  also  come  from  evil  spirits
and  the  listeners  must  decide  for  themselves  as  to  this,
and  in  fact  decide  again  upon  the  basis  of  inspiration.
Here  the  most  important  point  is  that  it  is  not  Paul  who
introduces  the  '  discerning  of  spirits  '  as  something  new  ;
rather  does  it  exist  in  Corinth  as  a  thing  of  course.  Here
reveals  itself  the  impossibility  of  continuing  to  hold  fast
the  belief  in  divine  inspiration  if  a  free  use  of  it  is  made
in  the  actualities  of  life.

Already  in  the  OT  it  had  been  found  necessary  to  set  up
criteria  for  discriminating  between  false  and  true  prophets.  Hut
that  the  one  class  relate  dreams,  the  others  '  speak  my  word
faithfully'  (Jer.  2328)  was,  naturally,  a  quite  inadequate  dis
tinction.  That  the  true  prophet  must  be  a  prophet  of  evil  (Jer.
28  8)  may  have  been  true  in  Jerusalem  in  Jeremiah's  day;  but
at  other  times,  as,  for  example,  in  those  of  Deutero- Isaiah,  this
maxim  might  have  been  turned  against  the  prophets  now  become
canonical,  and  Jeremiah  in  fact  finds  himself  constrained  to  add,
'  if  a  prophet  prophesies  peace  and  his  word  comes  to  pass,  then
shall  he  be  known  to  be  a  true  prophet '  (289).  The  result  is  set
up  as  a  criterion  quite  expressly  in  Dt.  1820-22,  cp  Ezek.  8833.
Not  only,  however,  does  this  criterion  fail  to  be  available  early
enough ;  in  Dt.  13  2-4  is  contemplated  the  case  in  which  it  may
prove  to  have  been  deceptive,  and  for  discerning  the  true  prophet
the  only  way  left  is  to  ask  whether  he  labours  in  the  service  of
Yahwe  and  (so  Jer.  23  22)  seeks  to  bring  back  the  people  from
the  error  of  their  ways.  [Cp  PROPHET,  §§  23  25.]

Equally  inadequate  is  the  criterion  set  up  in  i  Cor.
123  :  '  no  man  speaking  in  the  Spirit  of  God  saith,  Jesus
is  anathema.'  As  to  the  difficulties  and  inconveniences
experienced  by  the  apostolic  age  from  the  impossibility
of  finding  proper  norms  by  which  prophets  could  be
tested,  see  MINISTRY,  §  38  a,  b.

But  what  did Paul  think  of  the  charisms? (a] On

the  one  side  he  entirely  shares  the  popular  opinion. He

p ., holds  them  all  for  operations  of  the  Holy

,  , , Spirit,  and  is  not  sensible  of  the  contra-

.  diction  which  we  have  discovered  (above,

cnarisms. g  ig  ^  f  ^  jn  hjs  mvn  wordS|  to  the  effect

that  such  operations  can  proceed  from  other  spirits  also,
in  fact  from  evil  ones.  At  the  close  of  the  discussion,
in  order  that  any  remarks  of  his  in  disparagement  of
tongue-speech  may  not  be  misunderstood,  he  says  :
•forbid  not  to  speak  with  tongues'  (i  Cor.  1439).  He
makes  no  effort  to  bring  into  action  a  criterion  for  tongue-
speakers  analogous  to  the  'discerning'  applicable  in  the
case  of  prophets.  That  no  such  criterion  should  have
presented  itself  of  its  own  accord  is  to  be  accounted  for,
on  the  one  hand,  by  the  consideration  that  tongue-
speeches  were  too  unclear  to  admit  of  their  showing
themselves  to  such  disadvantage  as  in  certain  cases
definite  sayings  of  prophets  did,  and,  further,  that  even
in  cases  where  they  threatened  to  do  so  they  could  be
explained  away  ;  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  considera
tion  that  in  the  case  of  a  tongue-speaker,  one  was,  more
than  in  the  case  of  a  prophet,  face  to  face  with  a  seem
ingly  supernatural  communication  which  could  be  re
ceived  only  with  reverence  and  awe.  The  first-mentioned
consideration  would  hardly  have  restrained  Paul  from
setting  up  a  criterion  to  be  applied  to  tongue-speeches  ;
for  his  disposition  towards  them  is  much  the  reverse  of

4774


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


SPONGE


favourable,  and  he  has  every  reason  for  seeking  to  limit
their  undesirable  influence.  The  second  consideration,
however,  did,  in  point  of  fact,  hold  him  l>ack,  especially
as,  according  to  14 18,  he  himself  was  a  speaker  with
tongues  more  than  any  of  the  Corinthians.

(b)  Alongside  of  this  agreement  with  the  popular  view-
there  presents  itself,  however,  in  the  case  of  Paul,  the
great  thought  that  every  Christian  has  the  Holy  Spirit
(Gal.  3 a  5  etc. ),  and  that  the  whole  life  of  the  Christian
is  an  expression  of  the  Spirit's  activities  (i  Cor.  12s  Gal.
5s23_/".  Rom.  5s  84-16). This  thought  could  not  fail,
in  the  case  of  every  manifestation  that  laid  claim  to  the
character  of  a  spiritual  gift,  to  lead  to  the  question  being
asked  as  to  its  spiritual  value,  but  also,  at  the  same  time,
to  lead  to  a  lowering  of  the  estimate  put  upon  gifts  in
which  their  wonderful  character  was  the  most  important
thing, and  to  an  increased  appreciation  of  those  which
consisted  in  an  intensified  exercise  of  the  new  Christian
life  on  its  moral  side. In  the  first  characteristic  of  our
definition  (§  i)  we  have  already  seen  that  the  idea  of
the  charisms  is  by  no  means  uniform. Some  of  them
are  expressly  regarded  as miraculous, in  others it is
very  difficult  to  perceive  anything  wonderful. To  this
latter category belongs '  ministry ' in all its forms  ;
'  government'  also,  and  the  simpler  forms  of  devotional
utterance. It  is  hardly  probable  that  all  these  things
owed  their  designation  as  charisms  to  the  pagan  or  OT
presuppositions  which  had  a  share  in  the  building  up  of
the  conception  '  charism  '  (^dpicr/ua). Since,  then,  this
idea  must  have  come  to  its  maturity  in  the  course of
the  missionary  activity  of  Paul,  under  his  eyes  and  with
his co-operation, it  is  hardly  too bold to  conjecture
that  it  was  through  his  influence  that  these  compara
tively non-miraculous, but, from an  ethical  point  of
view, all the more important, manifestations should
have come to be included in the number of the
charisms.

(c)  To  the  same  order  belongs  also  the  most  important
modification  which  Paul  applied  to  the  idea  of  a  charism
when  he  refused  to  recognise  as  being such  anything
which  had  no  utility  for  the  life  of  the  Christian  com
munity (127, TO <jv[Ji<f>epov, '  profit '  ; 1426, oiKodo/ji.r),
'edification'; see  above, §  3</). By  this miraculous
manifestations  were  by  no  means  excluded  ;  but  it  was
no  longer  their  miraculous  character  that  supplied  the
measure  according  to  which  they  were  to  be  valued. It
was  with  this  principle  as  his  basis  that  Paul  entered
especially  on  his  campaign  against  the  over-valuing  of
tongue-speech. Broadly  speaking, his  great  merit  in
this  field  consists  in  his  having  moralised,  in  accordance
with  truly  Christian  principles, an  idea  that  was  only
half  religious, and  essentially  miraculous, and, so  far
forth,  unfruitful.

We  must  proceed  still  farther  in  the  same  direction  if

we  are  to  arrive  at  an  ultimate  judgment  on  the  historical

significance  of  the  primitive  Christian

20.  Conclusion.  charisms It  is  easily  intenigible  that

the  joy  of  enthusiasm  over  the  possession  of  a  new
redeeming  religion  should  have  expressed  itself  in  an
exuberant  way  which,  according  to  the  ideas  of  that
time,  could  only  be  regarded  as  the  miraculous  opera
tion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Apart  from  the  exceptions
specified  above  (§  17  a)  we  have  no  reason  for  doubting
that  these  manifestations  were  genuine  expressions  of  the
feeling  of  a  strong  religious  life,  not  mere  artificial  imita
tions  derived  from  the  pagan  cults.  On  the  other  hand,
we  know  with  regard  to  Paul  that  his  ecstasies  in  which
he  had  visions  coincided  in  point  of  time  with  the  attacks
of  his  malady  (see  GAI.ATIA,  §  27) ;  we  shall,  therefore,
hardly  err  if  we  bring  into  causal  connection  with  this
malady  the  strong  tendency  to  tongue-speech  also,  which,
in  any  case,  was  intimately  associated  with  the  ecstatic
condition.  The  ecstatical  has  always  something  of  the
unhealthy  about  it.  Thus  it  is  not  difficult  to  explain
why  extensive  circles  in  the  early  church  kept  entirely
free  from  such  manifestations.  The  church  could  get

4775


on  very  well  in  their  absence.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,
equally  intelligible  that,  once  they  had  made  their  appear
ance  they  were  infectious,  tliat  they  brought  the  church
life  into  serious  danger,  and  that  they  led  to  reaction.
Paul  led  this  reaction  on  sound  principles  ;  the  later
church  led  it  increasingly  in  the  interests  of  its  conception
of  church  office  which  was  itself  very  unsound  ;  Paul  by
the  endeavour  to  persuade,  the  later  church  too  often
by  the  exercise  of  force.  The  phenomena  in  question
owe  their  disappearance,  however,  by  no  means  to  this
reaction  merely,  but  quite  as  much  to  their  own  degenera
tion.  This  degeneration  was  in  Inrge  measure  due  to
the  faith  in  their  miraculous  character.  In  this  case
also  it  was  demonstrated  that  miracles  produce  a  favour
able  impression  only  when  seen  from  a  distance  ;  where
they  have  to  lie  fitted  into  the  daily  realities  of  actual
life  they  always  bring  evil  consequences  in  their  train.
This  holds  true  of  the  gift  of  healing  the  sick  also,  and
of  miracle-working  generally.  The  reaction  just  spoken
of  did  not  venture  to  deny  the  miraculous  character  of
the  charisms.  We  for  our  part,  however,  are  constrained
to  do  so,  and  to  account  for  everything  in  the  phenomena
to  which  a  miraculous  character  has  been  attributed  by
the  known  psychological  laws  which  can  be  observed  in
cases  of  great  mental  exaltation,  whether  in  persons
who  deem  themselves  inspired  or  in  persons  who  simply
require  medical  treatment.

The  non-miraculous  charisms  on  the  other  hand,
which,  from  the  outset,  possessed  a  moral  character  were
of  abiding  value.  Without  them  the  church  could  not
have  lived  ;  but  they  have  never  failed  her  and  are
destined  never  to  become  extinct ;  even  should  they
have  ceased  to  be  called  charisms,  it  will  remain  ever
lastingly  true  that  they  come  from  the  Spirit  of  God.

On  the  whole  subject  see  Dav.  Schulz,  Geistesgafrcn,  1836;
Supernatural  Religion  [1877],  8  32i-3Q7  =  popular  edition,  icoz,

pp.  753-800  ;  and  the  commentaries  on  i  Cor.
21.  Literature.  12-14. Works  of  a  more  comprehensive  kind

are: Gunkel, Wirkvngtn  des  hcil.  Cidstes

nach  der  populiircn  A  nschtiuung  der  apost.  Zeit  u.  nach  tier
Lekre  des  J'au/us,  1088;  (2)  unaltered,  1900;  and,  following
Gunkel,  Weinel,  \l'irkungen  ties  (Jeistes  u.  tier  Gei&ter  iin
nackapost.  Zeitalter  bis  auf  Irenactts,  1899;  Beversluis,  De
heilige  gtest  en  zijne  werkingen  volgens  het  .  .  .  A'.  1  ~er/>t»tt/,
Utrecht,  1896.  On  speaking  with  tongues,  see  I'leek,  .St.Kr.,
1829,  pp.  3-79;  1830,  pp.  45-64;  Haur,  Tnb.  Ztsc/i*.  f.  Tlieol.,
1830^,  pp.  75-133  ;  St.Kr.,  1838,  pp.  618-702  :  \Vieseler,  St.hCr.,
1838,  pp.  703-772;  Hilgenfeld,  Glossolahe,  1850;  Rossteuscher,
liabe  der  fifirachen,  1850;  van  Hengel,  Gave  der  tti/en,  1864;
Arthur  Wright,  Some  NT  Problems,  277-302  [1898].

P.  \V.  S.

SPOIL.  The  words  are;  (i)  ^P.  tttil.  Gen.
49a7  (©  Tpofiri),  etc.,  ffKvXov,  irpovofjuf),  8La.pira.yq ;
(2)  13,  bas,  Jer.  15 13,  etc.,  ffKu\ov,  wpovofj-r),  diapirayri ;
also  (3)  nDS:2,  misissdk,  2  K.  21 14  etc.,  nsivs,
mftussah,  Is.  4224f  Kt. ,  wpovofj.7),  5ia.pira.~ft);  (4)  r-ja,
tereph,  Job  29 17  etc.,  &pwayfj.a,  8ia.pira.yri.  On  the
division  of  spoils  cp  TAXATION,  §  i.  See  also
SACRIFICE,  §  8.

SPOKES,  i.  hiKuklm,  D'pp'PI,  i  K.  TasAV  'felloe.'
See  WHEEL,  \b.

a.  hissurlm,  D%-)»in,  i  K.  733  RV  'nave.' See  WHEEL,  ic.

SPONGE  (cTTOrroc).  Mt.  2748=Mk.  1536  =  Jn.
192gf.  Neither  fftrjyyos  nor  <r<j>6yyos  occurs  in  the
LXX.  The  use  of  the  sponge,  however,  was  early
known  (cp,  e.g. ,  II.  18414;  Od.  1m);  see  the  Classical
Dictionaries.

'  Sponge '  is  the  fibrous  skeleton  of  a  marine  animal
— the  living  part  of  which  has  been  removed  by  dry
ing,  washing,  and  bleaching — belonging  to  the  group
Cornacuspongire  of  the  non-calcareous  sponges.  The
most  important  Mediterranean  species  are  Euspongia
otficinalis,  the  Levant  toilet  sponge  ;  and  E.  simocca,
the  Zimocca  sponge,  and  Hippospongia.  eqiiina,  the
horse  -  sponge.  All  these  are  found  at  a  depth  of

4776


SPOON


STAFF


3-100  fathoms  along  the  coasts.  The  sponge  fisheries
of  the  Mediterranean  are  still  the  most  important  in
commerce,  and  the  Syrian  trade  is  considerable.

A.  E.  s.

SPOON  (C|3,  GYICKH). See  ALTAR  ;  §  10  ;  COOK
ING,  §  5,  iii.  ,  INCENSE,  §  7,  and  MEALS,  §  10.

SPOTTED (ttta), Gen.  30  ^  ff. Ezek.  16i6; see
COLOURS,  §  12.

SPRINGS. In  a.  country  where  perennial  streams
are  rare,  and  where  months  of  summer  may  pass  without

_.  , .. ,  . rain,  the  possession  and  preservation  of
1.  Distribution  ahvays been a matter  Qf


and  preserva-  serjous  concern.  Water  means  life,
tion  ol  water.  and  its  va]ue  to  the  people  of  Canaan
is  illustrated  by  manifold  references  and  numerous
beautiful  metaphors  in  the  OT.  For  details  concerning
the  amount  of  rainfall  in  Palestine,  see  RAIN,  §  2,  and
on  the  distribution  of  springs  and  other  sources  of
supply,  see  PALESTINE,  §  13.  Generally  speaking,  it
may  be  affirmed  that  the  most  poorly  watered  districts
are  the  table-land  of  Judaea  on  the  W.  of  Jordan  and
the  heights  of  the  Delkd  on  the  E.1  Some  of  these
tracts,  however,  were  once  better  supplied,  cp  NEGEB,

§x.

Constructions  for  the  preservation  of  water  rank
among  the  oldest  specimens  of  masonry  in  Palestine.
The  simplest  plan  was  to  dig  a  hole,  with  perhaps  a
shaft  of  masonry,  where  springs  were  known  to  exist.
Such  a  pit  (beer,  1x2,  <pptap)  was  often  covered  over
with  a  large  flat  stone,  partly,  no  doubt,  as  a  precaution
against  accident  (Ex.  2133),  and  partly  to  prevent  its
being  easily  discovered.  For  this  latter  purpose  sand
or  earth  might  be  strewn  over  the  cover  (cp  also  2  S.

17  19).

The  water  was  drawn  up  by  a  pitcher  (had,  Gen.
24 16)  or  bucket  (dill,  Is.  40 15,  cp  verb  in  Ex.  2x6,  19),
and  for  the  watering  of  cattle  was  poured  into  a  trough
(rahat,  Gen.  803841  Ex.  2i6,  tiketh.  Gen.  2420  8038).-
When  dry  a  pit  of  this  kind  might  be  used  as  a
prison,  and  as  no  attempt  was  made  to  keep  it  clean
the  accumulation  of  miry  mud  (tit,  Ps.  402  [3],  cp  Jer.
386)  at  the  bottom  added  to  the  discomfort  of  the
prisoner.

The  Heb.  and  Gk.  terms  for  '  Spring '  which  require
mention  are  : ;! —

1.  \iyin  (j-y),  Gen.  167  24  16 i  S.  29 1, etc.  ; AV's
n -m A 'well' m  Gen.  24 13 4922, etc., obscures

, the force and meaning. The '  spring of
ren red  jacob-  (Dt 33 2g)  refers  to  j>s  descendants;

P  °'  cp  the  metaphors  in  Is.  48  i  Ps.  6826  [27].
For  particular  springs,  see  reff.  above  in  §  i.  The
connection  with  \iyin  'eye'  is  doubtful,  nor,  if  the  two
are  identical,  is  it  easy  to  say  which  is  older.  The
'  spring '  can  scarcely  take  its  name  from  the  circular
shape  of  the  orifice  since  this  (as  in  English)  is  called
the  mouth  (Gen.  292/i).  On  the  other  hand,  the  eye
could  easily  be  called  the  fountain  of  the  tears  (as  in
Jer.  9 1  [8  23]  nyoi  11  pa  TJ/).  Perhaps  some  primitive
belief  underlies  the  usage.

2.  mdydn  (rys),  derived  from  the  above,  properly  a
place of springs, cp Ps.  846 [7], Josh. 1815 (AV
'  well '),  etc.

3.  bU'er  (1x2,  cp  above  §  i,  and  see  CONDUITS,  §  i
f  i]) occurs chiefly in the Hexat.  ; for place-names
compounded  with  it,  see  NAMES,  §  101  (b).

1  Full  information  is  given  by  G.  A.  Smith,  HG  77-79. For
the  evidence  of  place-names  indicating  the  presence  of  water  see
NAMES,  §  101.

2  Other  means  of  drawing  up  water  are  the  shadnf'm  Egypt
(Wilkinson,  Anc.  Eg.  1  281),  and  the  water-wheel  in  Babylonia
(Peters,  Nippur,  1  135  141  ; cp  Curtiss,  Prim.  Sent. Ret. 198
[Hamathl). There seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  latter in
Eccles.  126. Cp  AGRICULTURE,  §  5.

3  Cp  also  BROOK,  CONDUITS,  §  i,  POND,  POOL.

4777


4.  mabbud (jflao). Eccles.  126 (AV 'fountain'),
Is.  35?  49  jo. Properly  a place  where  water  bubbles
or  gushes  up,  cp  the  verb  in  Prov.  184  of  a  bubbling
spring,  and  metaphorically,  of  a  gushing  man  in  Prov.
152  28,  etc.

5.  tniikfir  ("lipo),  a  spring  that  has  been  f/Kf  (verb  in  2  K.  19  24
Is.  3725). Mostly  used  in  a  figurative  sense  (Prov.  13  14  10  22
18  4  etc.).

6.  mostl  (NSlD),  properly,  '  place  of  exit  '  (cp  also  above  col.
883,  n.  2),  with  o;a,  2  K.  221 Ps.  107  33,  35  (ate'£oSos),  Is.  37  25
(crurayorytj),  etc.

7.  nAc&  (-pj,  orig.  obscure)  in  Job  38  16,  and  perhaps  also  ib.
28  ii  for  'MD,  see  BDB  ad  lac.

8.  gulloth  (n^jX  Judg-  1  'St  5  see  GOLATH-MAIM. True  mean
ing  unknown,  perhaps  a  Canaanite  word. On  the  supposition
that  the  word  is  corrupt  see  KEILAH.

9- rmC'N>  Dt-  3  J7  RVmg.,  see  AsHDOTH-PlSGAH.

10.  7TT)yr)  (the  usual  word  in  <?5  for  nos.  i_/I,  $_ff.\  Jn.  46  Jas.
3  ii  2  Pet.  227,  etc.

11.  0peap  (lEVs  word  for  no.  3),  Lk.  14s  etc.,  an  artificial  well
as  opposed  to  Kpr/vrj  (cp  POOL,  2).

A  full  supply  of  water,  rivers  on  bare  heights,  wells

in  valleys,  pools  of  water  in  place  of  a  wilderness,  and

_ ,. . springs  instead  of  dry  land  characterise

*iar  the  highest possible happiness to the

andKeiigion.  Hebrew  mind  (Is-41l8  cp  357443  Ps.

1073s).  The  possession  of  water  is  the  one  indis
pensable  acquisition  without  which  the  right  of  pasture
is  useless.  Hence,  as  Robertson  Smith  suggested,
property  in  water  is  more  important  and  probably  older
than  property  in  land  (AW  iQ4/,  cp  CATTLE,  §  5).
The  digging  of  a  well,  accordingly,  was  an  important
function,  and  a  typical  specimen  of  one  of  the  rites  ac
companying  it  has  been  fortunately  preserved  in  Nu.
21  17  f.  (see  BEKR,  col.  515).  Here  the  spring  is
addressed  as  a  living  being,  and  indeed  not  only  is
spring-water  called  'living  water'  (Gen.  26  19  Nu.  19  17
etc.  ),  but  springs  are  regarded  as  endowed  with  life.
They  are  regarded  with  reverence,  credited  with  oracular
powers,  and  frequently  associated  with  sacred  beings.1
On  the  widespread  beliefs  connected  with  springs  and
wells  among  the  Semites  see  IDOLATRY,  §  2,  NATURE-
WORSHIP,  §  4,  Robertson  Smith,  A'i't-)  (reff.  in  Index).
Cp  also  Barton,  Semitic  Origins,  92^  ;  Curtiss,  Prim.
Sent.  Rel.  ,  passim  ;  and  the  Abbe  Bourcais,  '  La  source
divine  et  ge'ne'rale  conception  Chaklt^enne  dans  les
Monuments  figures  des  Collections  a  Paris,'  in  Maspero's
Rcc.  de  Trav.  2X177-193  (1899).  s.  A.  c.

STABLE  (H13),  Ezek.  25s;  elsewhere  'pasture.1
See  CATTLE,  §  5,  INN  (adjin.).

STACHYS  (CT&XYC  [Ti.  WH]).  greeted  by  Paul  as
'  my  beloved  '  (Rom.  169).

He  is  mentioned  in  the  apocryphal  lists  of  the
'seventy,'  and  according  to  pseudo-Dorotheus  was
consecrated  first  bishop  of  Byzantium,  by  the  Apostle
Andrew.  In  the  apocryphal  Ada  Philippi,  a  believer
of  the  name  of  Stachys  is  the  host  of  Philip  in  Hiera-
polis.  The  name  has  been  found  among  the  remains
of  the  imperial  household  (CIL.  68607).  •

STACTE  (>lt33,  nataph,  '  that  which  drops  ';  cp  Job
8627  ;  CT&KTH)  is  mentioned  with  onycha  and  galbanum
as  an  ingredient  in  the  holy  incense  (Ex.  30  34  ;  Ecclus.
24  15,  RV"'e-  '  opobalsamum,1  AV  STORAX).  A
fragrant  resin  is  obviously  intended  ;  but  whether
opobalsamum,  storax,  or  some  other  substance,  is
uncertain.  Jewish  tradition  identified  nataph  with  opo
balsamum  ;  but  against  this  see  BALSAM,  §  4,  and
MYRRH.  Perhaps  gum  tragacanth  is  meant  ;  see
STORAX,  z.

STAFF.  The  words  are  partly  the  same  as  those  in
ROD  (where  see  i,  2,  3,  5).  Nothing  depends  on  ful-

1  This  is  not  confined  merely  to  medicinal  waters  (cp  HAM-
MATH  ;  MEDICINE,  §  2,  col.  3007  and  reff.)  where  supernatural
ideas  might  readily  arise.

4778


STAIRS

ness  of  references.  By  far  the  most  interesting  is  Heb.
11 21,  cp  Gen.  4731,  where  it  is  said  that  Jacob,  after
blessing  Joseph's  sons,  '  worshipped  upon  the  top  ^of
his  staff'  ( irpocreKvvriaev  firi  rb  &Kpov  TTJS  pdpSov  avrov),
implying  nasri  (the  reading  of  @,  Pesh.,  It.)  instead  of
rrapn.  Chabas  justifies  this  reading  by  a  reference  to
an  Egyptian  custom.1  But  it  is  clearly  wrong,  as  the
parallel  passage  i  K.  1 47  shows.  The  '  head  '  of  the
bed  is  no  doubt  a  peculiar  expression  ;  Holzinger
suggests  that  a  '  teraphim  '  may  have  been  placed  at
the  bed's  head.  But  the  true  explanation  is  much
simpler,  rto  should  of  course  be  iny  '  couch  '  ;  cp
•yir  eny  '  the  couch  of  my  bed,'  Ps.  1323,  RVme-  The
other  words  are —

1.  rayefO,  ruyra,  maf'endh,  mi&neth  ( nj]yt>  to  lean),
Ex.  21 19 Is.  366, etc. Used of the pastoral rod
(Unas')  in  Ps.  284  (see  note  in  Che.  Ps.W).

2.  vy,  'es,  of  the  'staff'  of  a  spear  (i  S.  17?  [K-t.  is
wrong],  2  S.  21 19  23 7 i  Ch.  20 5).

3-  iSs,  ptlek,  in  David's  imprecation,  '  let  there  not
fail  from  the  house  of  Joab  one  that  hath  an  issue,  or
that  is  a  leper,  or  that  leaneth  on  a  staff,'  etc.,  2  S.  829.
So  EV  after  ©  (Kparwv  ffKvrdX-rjs  \-rj,  or  -TJV])  and  Tg.
Jon.  (-UK3  p,'pno  ;  so  read,  not  -UN::).  The  rival  render
ing — '  that  holdeth  the  spindle ' — does  not  suit  the
context  nearly  as  well  (cp  H.  P.  Smith,  ad  loc.),  but
has  a  philological  basis  lacking  to  the  first  explanation.
Moved  by  Driver's  learned  note  (TBS  192,  with  n.  i)
Lohr  and  H.  P.  Smith  adopt  'spindle'  for  -]"?£>  (cp
Prov.  31 19,  and  Toy's  note).  There  can  hardly  be  a
clearer  evidence  of  corruption  ;  no  philology  can  save
this  unsuitable  reading.  Read  VJ3O2  'o,  '  one  that  leans
on  (lit.  grasps)  a  staff' — i.e. ,  a  lame  person.  In
Prov.  31 19  the  reading  is  of  course  undisputed  (cp
WEAVING,  §  2).

4.  Bio, mot, Nu.  1823  (a  Pole> for  bearing  a  huge grape-
cluster).

5.  13,  batten  plur.),  Ex.  25  13^  i  K.  8  7/.  (to  bear  the  ark).

6.  |ii\oi'(in  plur.),  Mt.  26  47  Mk.  1443,  coupled  with  'swords'
(Jn.  18  3  speaks  of  onAa). Cp  the  use  of  HBO  and  B3»  (Roo,
i,  2).  T.  K.  C.

STAIRS.  The  rendering  '  stairs  '  in  AV  is  generally
misleading.

1.  In i K.  Ost, no doubt, D'^V,  lulim  (e[i]Ai)CTT)  arajSdtri?  ;
cochlea)  can  be  plausibly  rendered  'winding  stairs'  (EV  ;  see
however,  Stade,  ZA  TIV  3  136^,  and  cp  TE.MI-LE,  §  n,  n.).

2.  In  2  K.  9  13  '  on  the  top  of  the  stairs'  (n'lVl'Sn  DT"1?**)  can
hardly  be the right description of the place where Jehu's
supporters  acclaimed  him  as  king  (see  JEHU).

T..  In  Neh.il  4  it  was  not  on  the  stairs  but  on  the  'scaffold'
(nSj/0,  ma'iileh ;  ai/ajSacris)  prepared  for  the  occasion  that
Jeshua  and  Ban!  stood.  So  AV"ig-  Cp  PULI-IT.

4.  In  Ezek.  43  17  (ni*?>'C,  ma'alstii)  'stairs'  should  be  'steps'
(RV) ;  the  steps  of  the  altar  are  meant.

5.  In Cant. 214 'the secret places (rnmD. madregoth ;
t^o/ucfa rov KpOTei^tcrfiaTOS ; in caverna tnaceriif) of  the
stairs '  forms  a  bad  parallel  to  '  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock.' mmDi
madregah  (in  piur.),  is  again  rendered  '  stairs  '  in  Ezek.  38  20  ;
most  scholars  suppose  'steep,  ladder-like  hills '  (RV  '  steep  places/
(0  (/xipayyes)  to  be  the  true  meaning. The  word,  however,  is
suspicious.

6.  '  Stairs  '  is  right  for  ai>afta0fj.oi  in  Acts  21  40.

T.  K.  C.

STALL  (p3"WJ,  marbek,  etc.),  Am.  64  etc.  See
CATTLE,  §  5.


STANDARD


,  Nu.  152  etc. See  ENSIGNS.


STARS.  To  the  Hebrews,  as  to  other  races,  the
heavenly  bodies  were  a  constant  source  of  interest  and
wonder.  Their  great  number,  comparable  to  the  sand

1  Melanges  fgyptologiquesjft  lot.  'He  then  pronounced
the  ordinary  oath,  "  By  the  life  of  the  Lord  Life-Health-Force,"
striking  his  nose  and  ears,  and  placing  himself  on  the  top  of  the
staff.  The  reference  is  to  the  baton  which  the  magistrate  kept
stretched  out  during  the  ceremony.  By  this  attitude  and  by
these  gestures  the  prisoner  testified  his  submission  towards  the
magistrate.'

4779


STARS

of  the  sea-shore  (Gen.  15s  22i?  264  Jer.  8822),  and
known  only  to  God  (Ps.  14?4),  their  immeasurable
height  above  the  earth  (Job22i2  Ob.  4  Is.  14 13;  cp
Dan.  8ioa),  and  the  brightness  of  their  shining  (Job
25s  31 26  Dan.  123),  formed  subjects  for  comment;
but  it  was  their  movements  that  excited  the  keenest
attention,  and  opened  up  the  widest  field  for  the
imagination.

To  realise  the  Hebrew  conception  of  this  phenomenon,
it  is  necessary  to  make  some  reference  to  their  cosmology.

,  11  it.  j  This  bears  close  resemblance  to  the
1.  Earth  and


Heaven.


'  scheme of the Babylonians (Jensen,


Kosmol.  9 ff.},  and  may  be  thought  to
have  formed  part  of  the  common  property  of  the
primitive  Semitic  family.

The  earth  was  regarded  as  a  flat  surface,  bounded
upon  all  sides  by  the  watery  deep.  Above,  the  heavens
formed  a  hollow  vault,  which,  resting  on  the  waters,
might  be  said  to  describe  a  circle  upon  them  (Job26io
Prov.  827).  This  vault  was  thought  to  be  solid,  and
was  spoken  of  as  a  firmament  (JT,TI,  rdkia ',  something
beaten  or  hammered  out;  Gen.  16  etc.),  or,  in  the
language  of  poetry,  a  tent  spread  out  above  the  earth
(Is.  4022  Ps.  194).  Upon  the  farther  side  of  the
firmament,  called  by  the  Babylonians  kirib  lami,  '  the
inner  part  of  the  heavens, '  there  was  again  water,  '  the
waters  which  are  above  the  firmament'  (Gen.  1  6 /. ).
Indeed,  one  of  the  earliest  of  creative  acts  was  the
placing  of  the  vault  of  the  heavens,  in  order  to  cleave
in  twain  the  watery  deep  (cinn,  tthom,  Bab.  Tidmat],
and  thus  make  possible  the  appearance  of  dry  land
(Gen.  16-8  Prov.  828 /.).  Beneath  the  earth  was  the
realm  of  the  underworld  (^iKc1,  Shtol),  and  the  whole
was  perhaps  conjectured  to  rest  ultimately  upon  the
waters  of  the  deep  (Ps.  242  1366).

Across  the  fixed  vault  of  the  firmament  the  heavenly

bodies  appeared  to  move, seeming, no doubt, to  the

_-.  . Hebrews as to the Babylonians, to

JTOVemef enter  by  a  door  in  the  eastern  quarter

bd^  of  the  heavens  and  to  make  their  exit

)oaies. jn  tjie  ^7 ^  a  sjmjiar  means. Thus,

to  the  poet's  mind,  the  sun  has  his  tent  in  the  heavens,
and  at  his  rising  is  like  a  bridegroom  who  issues  from
his  bridal  chamber  (Ps.  19s/. ).

The  regularity  of  the  movements  of  the  stars  arrested
the  attention.  They  are  governed  by  '  ordinances '
established  by  Yahwe  and  unalterable  (Jer.  31  is/. ),
beyond  the  reach  of  human  understanding  (Job3833).
The  spectacle  of  the  heavenly  host,  led  forth  in  full
tale,  is  a  wonderful  proof  of  Yahwe's  mighty  power
(Is.  4026).  Thus  they  naturally  serve  to  mark  divisions
of  time.  They  are  set  in  the  firmament  '  to  divide  the
day  from  the  night '  and  to  '  be  for  signs,  and  for
seasons,  and  for  days,  and  years'  (Gen.  1 14,  cp  Ps.
104 19).  The  Hebrew  month  (thh,  hddeS ;  rrr,  yerah]
is  a  lunar  month,  and  the  quarter  of  this  period — one
phase  of  the  moon — appears  to  have  determined  the
week  of  seven  days  (see  MONTH,  §§  i,  6  ;  WEEK,  §  i).
Since  this  constancy  in  the  courses  of  sun,  moon,  and
stars  was  so  impressive,  it  is  natural  that  anything
which  appeared  to  be  of  the  nature  of  an  interruption
should,  by  the  unscientific  mind,  be  regarded  as  a
portent  of  catastrophe.  Of  such  a  nature  would  be
eclipses  of  the  sun  or  moon,  meteorites  or  falling  stars,
and  comets.

So  we  find  the  darkening  of  sun  and  moon  and  the  falling  of
stars  associated  with  troublous  times  of  direst  calamity  (Am.  89
Is.  13  10  Ezek.  32?  Joel  2  io3i[34]  =  Acts'2  20  Joel3[4]  15  JobS;  ;
cp  Mt.  2429  Rev.  §i2/.  812).!  Comets,  as  moving  in  orbits
which  baffled  the  calculations  of  the  ancients,  can  be  spoken
of  as  '  wandering  stars,  for  whom  the  blackness  of  darkness  is
reserved  for  ever,'  and  thus  serve  to  depict  the  lot  of  the  repro
bate.

1  An  eclipse  of  the  sun  which  occurred  in  the  year  B.C.
763  is  recorded  in  the  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon.  See  AMOS,
§4-

4780


STARS

To  the  primitive  imagination  that  which  moves  is
regarded  as  possessing  life.  Thus  the  heavenly  bodies
are  pictured  as  living  beings,  and  form  subject  of  folk
lore  and  legend.  Stars,  in  particular,  are  closely
associated  with  angels.

The  phrase  '  the  host  of  heaven  '  generally  denotes  the  stars
(2  K.  17  16  21  3  5  '23  \f.  Dt.  4  19  17  3  Jer.  82  10  13  Zeph.  1  5  ;  cp
Gen.  2  i  Ps.  336  Is.  4026  45  12);  but  in  some  cases,  especially  in
late  writings,  invisible  agencies  are  also  denoted  by  the  same
term  (i  K.  22  19  Is.  344  Neh.  96,  and  perhaps  Dan.  8  10).  Cp
also  Is.  242i  and  the  fine  poetical  statement  in  Job  38  7  (cp
CREATION,  §  21,  e).

Special  stars  or  constellations  mentioned  in  the  Bible
are  as  follow  :  —

(a)  r-y,  'dyis  (Job  38  32)  ;  on  the  versions  and  on  the

supposed  form  vy,  '«•*  (JobQg),  see  AKCTURUS. The

. , , allusion to the '  children  ' of 'dyis

3.  bpecial  stars  ljmits  the  possibjiities  Of  interpretation

or  groups.  tQ  suc^  constellations  as  can  be
pictured  under  the  form  of  a  mother  with  children.
Among  the  ancients  there  appear  to  have  been  two
such  —  Ursa  major,  and  the  Pleiades.

In  favour  of  Ursa  major  is  cited  the  Arabic  title
for  this  constellation.

This  is  na's,  '  the  bier,'  the  four  stars  forming  the  quadrilateral
being  regarded  as  a  bier,  which  is  followed  by  three  mourners,
bandt  na's,  '  the  daughters  of  the  bier.  '

It  is,  however,  quite  impossible  philologically  to
connect  the  Arabic  word  na's  with  the  Hebrew  'dyii;
nor  is  there,  in  the  passage  of  Job  in  which  'dyis
appears,  any  trace  of  the  idea  of  bier  and  bearers  or
mourners.  It  is  the  merit  of  M.  A.  Stern  1  (  '  Die
Sternbilder  in  Hiob  383i/i,'  in  Geiger's  Jiid.  Zeitschr.
8258^)  to  have  been  the  first  among  moderns  to  adopt
the  interpretation  '  Pleiades,'  and  to  have  stated  his  case
with  great  cogency.  Stern  disposes  of  the  claims  of
Ursa  major  by  pointing  out  that  'dyis,  with  the  three
other  constellations  mentioned  in  JobSSsi/".  ,  is  cited
by  the  poet  on  account  of  its  meteorological  import
ance.

This  is  evident  from  the  context.  In  711.  22-30  we  have
mention  of  snow  and  hail,  light  and  east  wind,  thunder-shower
and  lightning,  rain  and  dew,  ice  and  hoar-frost.  Then  follow
the  three  vv.  31-33  with  reference  to  certain  constellations  ;  and
in  immediate  succession,  further  notice  of  meteorological
phenomena  —  clouds  and  the  outpouring  water,  lightning  and
the  bottles  of  heaven.

Thus  the  inference  is  clear  that  the  constellations
mentioned  are  such  as  have  special  significance  as
weather-signs.  Now  Ursa  major,  as  a  circum-  polar
constellation,  never  passes  below  the  horizon  in  the  N.
hemisphere  ;  -  and,  being  therefore  a  conspicuous  object
at  all  seasons,  could  never  be  regarded  as  possessing
any  kind  of  meteorological  importance.  Thus  its
mention  in  such  a  context  would  appear  to  be  quite
misplaced.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Pleiades,  though  but  a  small
group,  possessed  for  the  ancients  great  meteorological
significance.

By  their  rising  at  dawn  the  Greeks  and  Romans  divined  the
approach  of  summer,  whilst  their  setting  at  dawn,  heralded  the
approach  of  the  wet  and  stormy  season  (Hesiod,  Opp.  3837^
S/iyC  619^!;  Virgil,  Gcorg.  \vpff.  \  Ovid,  fas(.55gg^.).  The
expression  '  'dyis  with  her  children  '  bears  close  resemblance  to
the  name  '  hen  with  her  chickens  '  applied  to  this  group  of  stars
among  both  eastern  and  western  peoples  and  actually  em
ployed  in  this  passage  as  a  translation  of  the  Targum  (^y  Nnjll


prain

The  name  'dyis  may  then  be  thought  to  denote,  not
the  group  as  a  whole,  but  the  principal  star,  known  to
astronomers  as  Alcyone.  It  must  be  deemed  uncertain
whether  the  Massoretic  vocalisation  cry  is  correct.  The

1  Stern  is  followed  by  G.  Hoffmann  (ZA  TW  3  107  /)  and  by
Noldeke(##.  Lex.  4370).

2  Cp  Homer,  Oci.  6275,  oil)  5'  ajui/aopo?  ecrri  Aoerpan'  'O./ceai'ou>.
Virg. Georg.  1  246, Arctos Oceani metuentis eequore tingi.
Ovid,  Met.  13  727,  Arcton  a;quoris  expertem.

3  It  is  also  worthy  of  notice  that  R.  Yehuda's  explanation  of
'tis  as xnv,  yiitha (Beriikhoth 58^) is interpreted by later
Talmudists  as  n*?B  3JT>  '  the  tail  of  the  Ram  '  (i.e.,  Pleiades),  or
R7JJH  l^NI,  'the  head  of  the  Bull  '  (i.e.,  Hyades).

4781


STARS

Peshitta  renders  by  'iyyittha,1  which  probably  has
philological  connection  with  the  Hebrew  name,  and
perhaps  upon  this  analogy  we  may  vocalise  v-y,  'Hyuf
(Hoffmann),  or  else,  with  closer  approximation  to  the
Syriac,  try,  'ayyus,  or  w'y,  'iyyuS.

(b)  ^'03  • klsil  (Job  9g  8831 Amos  58)  is  generally
supposed  to  denote  ORION  (q.v.},  the  most  remarkable
of  constellations,  both  on  account  of  the  brilliancy  and
colour  of the  three principal  stars,2  and  the striking
resemblance  of the  figure  to  a  gigantic human form
equipped  with  belt  and  sword. The  position  of  this
group,  a  few  degrees  S.  of  the  Ecliptic,  renders  it  a  very
conspicuous  object  as  viewed  from the  N. temperate
zone,  and  among  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans it  was
much  observed  as  a  sign  of  the  seasons.

Thus  its  heliacal  rising,  southing,  and  setting  are  severally
connected  with  different  agricultural  operations  (Hes.  ('//.
595-^-1  609  ^T,  614^);  but,  especially,  the  time  of  its  setting
marks  the  commencement  of  wet  and  stormy  weather,  when
navigation  becomes  dangerous  (Hes.  Opp.  618 ff.',  Hor.  Kp.  167  ;
Virg.  ,-En.  1535  452).

The  mention  of  the  '  bands  of  Orion'  in  Job  8831  is
perhaps  an  allusion  to  the  three  stars  of  the  belt,  and
refers  to  the  chains  with  which  the  giant — 'dull-witted
obstinate'  giant — (VoD)  was  thought  to  have  been  confined
by  the  Deity.  If  man  can  loose  these  bands — the  poet
seems  to  mean — he  may  then  hope  to  gain  control  over
those  changes  in  the  season  which  the  constellation
marks.  In  JobOg  Amos  58  klsil  appears  to  be  cited
on  account  of  its  great  brilliancy.8

(c)  no'3,  klmdh  (Job  9  9  8831  Amos  58)  is  translated
'  Pleiades '  by  EV  and  many  moderns, in  accordance
with the  rendering  of <@  in both passages  of Job,4
Symm.  and  Vg.  in  Job  8831,  and  Symm.  and  Theodot.
in  Amos. If,  however,  the  grounds  upon  which  'dyis
has  been  identified  with  the  Pleiades  can  be  considered
sufficient,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  look  elsewhere  for
the  constellation  represented  by  kiindh. Stern  presses
the  claims  of  Canis  major  with  its  bright  star  Sirius —
by far the largest of  the  fixed stars  —  known  to the
Greeks  as  TO  &.<jrpov  par  excellence,5

A  constellation  of  so  great  a  meteorological  interest
as  Canis  major  and  possessing  a  star  of  such  brilliancy
as  Sirius,  may  naturally  be  expected  to  find  mention  in
Job  38  ;  and  the  identification  with  kfmdh  is  rendered
plausible  by  the  close  connection  with  k?sil,  just  as  the
Great  Dog  lies  nearly  to  the  S.  of  Orion  and  close  to
his  feet.  A  further  point  is  the  allusion  to  the  '  chains  8
of  Klmdh'  (nc'3  ni-nyp),  which  on  this  interpretation
yields  a  good  sense,  since  Canis  major  is  the  hound  of
Orion.

(d)  The  meaning  of  n'n?c(  Job  38  32;  seeMAZZAROTH),
is  highly  uncertain. By  most  scholars  the  term  is  sup
posed  to  be  identical  with  ni^iD  (see  MAZZALOTH),  the
worship  of  which,  in  conjunction  with  that  of  the  sun,  the

1  The  same  rendering  is  employed  for  WV,  Job  9  9, 7D3,  Job
1627,  S'D3,  Amos  58. The  Talmudic  NriV, yiithd (note  above),

perhaps  represents  the  same  word  with  rejection  of  y.

2  aj3-y  Orionis, named Betelgeuse,  Rigel,  and Bellatrix  : the
first  and  the  second,  of  the  first  magnitude  ;  the  last,  among  the
largest  stars  of  the  second  magnitude.

3  On  the phrase '  their ktsilim  '  (Dri'S'DS) in Is.  13 10  see
ORION.

4  In  (5  Job  9g,  o  TRHWI'  IlAeid6<x  KCU  "Ea-n-epov  icai  '.\pKTOvpov
Kai Ta.fj.fia.  NOTOU, it  is  quite  clear that the order  of  the con
stellations has been changed, nO'3 being brought to the
beginning  and  rendered  IlAeiaSa  as  in  8831,  whilst  c'i1, which
thus  stands  second,  is  translated  *E<r7repoi'  as  jj"y  in  8832. This
change  of  order,  which  seems  to  have  been  overlooked  by  critics,

is substantiated by Pesh. JtcuJ^O Jod>O t"*  ^-* CO»


s  For  the  ap.cients  Sirius  marked  the  time  of  greatest  summer
heat  (Horn.  //.  2227-31,  Hes.  Opp.w,  Sc.  397^;  etc. >,  and  its
connection  with  this  period  is  still  preserved  in  the  popular
expression  '  the  dog  days.'

o  The  rendering  '  sweet  influences '  AV,  RVmg.  can  he  traced
back  to  Sebastian  Munster  (1535  A.U.),  but  appears  to  be  philo-
logically  untenable.

4782


STARS

moon,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven,  was  put  down  by  Josiah
(2  K.  23s)  ;  and  (5  in  both  passages  employs  the  trans
literation  fj-afovpuO ,  whilst  Targ. ,  in  accordance  with
Kings,  uses  in  Job  the  rendering  n'VlO  nee1-  In  Rab
binic  Hebrew  the  mazzdloth  are  the  twelve  zodiacal  signs
(BZrdkhoth  326  ;  Shabbdth  75^),  but  also  the  planets,
regarded  as  stars  of  good  or  ill  fortune  ( Btreshith  rab. ,  §  i  o,
toe,  etc. ).  In  agreement  with  this  latter  signification,
we  have,  according  to  the  restoration  of  de  Vogue1,  the
dedication  cyj  'Jio'?  answering  to  the  Greek  'A.ya&Q
TI'/XT?  in  a  Phoenician  inscription  from  Larnaca  of  about
the  4th  century  B.C.  (C/Slys).  It  is  doubtful,  how
ever,  whether  we  can  safely  argue  back  in  explanation  of
the  earlier  useof  the  expression.  In  Arabic  manzil  denotes
a '  lodging-place '  or '  mansion ' ;  and  the  plural  al-manazil
is  used  of  the  twenty-eight  '  mansions '  of  the  moon.
In  Assyrian,  according  to  Friedr.  Delitzsch  (Ass.  H\VB),
manzasu  denotes  'a  place  of  standing,'  from  the  root
nazazu  'to  stand'  ;  just  as  in  Heb.  cipo,  'place,'  is
derived  from  QV>  Manzazu  occurs  on  the  fifth  table
of  the  Babylonian  Creation  series  (see  CREATION,  §  2)
which  begins  l  '  He  made  the  mansions  (mansazi]  of
the  great  gods.'  Further,  there  is  a  fern,  form  of
manzazu — viz.,  manzaltu  {=.manzaztu},  mazaltu.  tor
this  Uelitzsch  quotes  3  R.  59  35a  :  '  The  gods  in  heaven
in  their  mansions  (man-sal-ti-sii-nit)  set  me.'  Jensen
(Kosinol.  347 f. )  mentions  the  same  facts.  Whilst,
however,  Uelitzsch  identities  these  manzalti  with  the
zodiacal  stations  (Pro/.  54),  Jensen  thinks  that  they
were  perhaps  fifty  in  number,'2  corresponding  to  the
number  of  the  great  gods,  and  represent,  not  merely
the  signs  of  the  /.odiac  (cp  Lockyer,  Dawn  of  Astronomy,
I33jf-  )•  but  ratner  certain  fixed  stars  and  planets,  lists  of
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  inscriptions,  but  of  which  the
identification  appears  to  be  possible  only  in  a  few  cases
(A'usm.  146^). 3  Here,  then,  it  maybe  supposed  that
we  have  the  original  of  mazzdloth  of  2  K.  23s  ;  though,
as  is  plain  from  the  diverse  opinions  noticed  above,  the
precise  reference  of  these  'mansions,'  as  objects  of
worship  borrowed  by  the  people  of  Judah  from  the
Babylonians,  still  remains  uncertain.

With  regard  to  mazzdroth,  Stern  is  undoubtedly
correct  in  stating  that  in  the  words  of  Job  8832  '  Canst
thou  bring  forth  mazzaroth  in  its  season  (inya),'  mazsa-
rolh  in  conjunction  with  '.in  its  time'  (inyn)  denotes  a
plurality  which  can  be  spoken  of  as  a  unity,  and  so  a
group  of  stars  which  form  a  single  constellation.  This
consideration,  which  gains  weight  from  the  connection  of
massdrotAvfith'dyis',  k'stl,  and  klmah,  each  of  which  de
scribes  a  single  special  star-group,  cuts  at  the  root  of  the
identification  of  mazzaroth  in  Job  with  mazzdloth  as  men
tioned  in  2  K.  235,  upon  the  view  which  has  above  been
taken  of  the  latter.  The  special  constellation  represented
by  mazzaroth  can,  however,  in  default  of  evidence,  be
merely  conjectural.  Stern's  view,  that  the  word  de
notes  the  Hyades,  is  not  open  to  objection,  and  is  to
some  extent  supported  by  the  position  of  maxsaroth  after
kunah  and  k*sil  and  before  \iyis,  acccording  to  the  posi
tion  of  constellations  in  the  heavens.  But  that  this  is  the
intention  of  the  order  of  citation  may  l>e  questioned,
since  in  such  a  case  the  more  natural  method  would  be
to  reverse  the  order,  and  to  speak  of  Pleiades,  Hyades,
Orion,  Canis  major,  according  to  the  order  of  rising.
The  Hyades  were  of  meteorological  importance  to  the
ancients,  who  regarded  their  heliacal  rising  as  the
portent  of  wet  weather  (Horn.  //.  18486  ;  Hes.  Opp.  613  ;
Virg.  ^£«.  1  744,  etc.).  Stern,  who  would  identify
mazzaroth  and  massdloth,  attempts  to  connect  mazzdioth
with  the  verb  Vn  (Aissfl)  in  the  sense  'rain-producers' ;

1  See  Jensen,  Kosmol.  288^  ;  Schrader,  COT\  15.

2  The  number  of  the  manzazi  appears to have originally
been  given  in  the  Creation  tablet.

3  Jensen  finds  allusion  to  the  zodiacal  signs  in  the  .Ifasi  stars
of/.  2  of  the  Creation  tablet  above  cited. The  word  misrdta
(not  Htizrdta)  or  ifrata,  which  occurs  in  1  3,  cannot,  with  Sayce
(.Religion  of  Bab.  389),  be  identified  with  Mazzaroth.

4783


STARS

but  this  is  certainly  inferior  to  the  derivation  adopted
above  (see  further  MAZZAKOTH).

(e)  The  expression,  '  the  inner  chambers  of  the  south  '
(Job  991  p'n  'Tin,  hadre  the  man],  is  too  indefinite  to  be
taken  as  a  reference  to  any  special  star  or  group  of
stars,  such  as  the  bright  star  Canopus  or  the  constella
tion  of  the  ship  to  which  it  belongs  (Stern). Probably
Uillmann  is  correct  in  suggesting  that  the  author  of  Job,
as  a  man  of  travel,  would  know  that  in  journeying  to
wards  the  S. more  and  more  stars  and  constellations
appear  in  the  heavens,  and  might  therefore  reasonably
refer  in  such  terms  to  the  stars  of  the  southern  hemi
sphere.

(f)  On  knvan  as  a  representation  of  the  planet  Saturn  (Am.
626),  hi-icl(l)  as  the  planet  Venus,  and  Dioscuri  as  the  constella
tion Gemini  (indirectly  referred  to  in  Acts  28  n),  see  CHIUN,
LUCIFKR,  CASTOR  AND  POLLUX. (There  is  according  to  L'rit.
Hit.,  reason  to  think  that  the  Arabic  name  of  Saturn,  zuhitlu,
underlies  the  Sxin  of  '  K.  11/15. ''  's  held  that  the  '  Hazael '
referred  to  was  probably  a  N.  Arabian,  not  a  Syrian, king.
Adhuc  sub  jiitiice  Us  est.]

It  is  highly  improbable  (cp  CALF,  GOI.DKN)  that  the
Hebrew  tribes  in  Egypt  came  under  the  influence  of  the

4.  Star.wor.Mp.  •**£££?**•?  '

But  such  place-names  as  Beth -shemesh  in  S\V.  Judah,
Har-hercs,  Timnath-heres,  and  Heres  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan
permit  the  inference  that  the  local  Baal  of  theCanaanite,  whose
cults  confronted  the  Israelites  on  their  immigration  into  Canaan,
was  sometimes  connected  with  the  sun.  See,  however,  SUN,
and  on  this  and  other  difficult  points  which  here  suggest  them
selves  for  consideration  see  ASHTOKKTH,  BAAL,  PHOENICIA,  §  it.
On  the  much  disputed  statement  of  Am.  626  see  CHIUN  AND
SICCUTH,  SALMA.

Am.  626  introduces  us  to  the  subject  of  star-worship.
The  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Kings  regards  the  worship
of  'all  the  host  of  heaven' — doubtless  introduced  from
Babylonia — as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  fall  of  the
northern  kingdom  (2  K.  17 16).  In  the  case  of  the
kingdom  of  Judah  we  possess  fuller  information.  Star-
worship  was  here,  apparently,  not  introduced  before
the  time  of  Manasseh  ;  but  of  this  king  it  is  related  that
he  built  altars  to  all  the  host  of  heaven  in  the  two  courts
of  the  house  of  Yahwe  (2  K.  21 5).  Priests  were
appointed  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the  sun,  the  moon  (see
MOON),  the  mazzdloth  (see  above,  §  3  [</]),  and  all  the
host  of  heaven,  and  special  horses  and  chariots  were
dedicated  to  the  worship  of  the  sun,  probably  to  be  em
ployed  in  processions  (2  K.  '284511).  Cp  NATHAN-
MKLECH.  It  was  not  until  the  reformation  in  the  i8th
year  of  Josiah  (B.C.  621)  that  measures  were  taken  to
root  out  this  Babylonian  astral  worship  (2  K.  23),  owing
to  the  influence  of  the  book  of  Deuteronomy  which
contains  special  injunctions  against  the  worship  of  the
sun,  moon,  and  stars  (Dt.  172/1;  cp  419).

Josiah's  efforts,  however,  were  by  no  means  wholly
successful.  The  new  cult  seems  to  have  been  largely
embraced  by  private  individuals,  who  worshipped  the
heavenly  bodies  upon  the  roofs  of  their  houses,  burning
offerings  and  pouring  out  libations  (/.eph.  Is  Jer.  82
19 13).  More  especially  does  the  worship  of  the  QUEEN
OF  HEAVEN  (q.v.) — i.e.,  probably,  Istar  as  a  celestial
goddess — appear  to  have  enjoyed  popularity  among
women2  (Jer.  7i8).  The  reformation  of  Josiah,  which
must  have  been  mainly  concerned  with  public  and
national  religious  abuses,  could  not  eradicate  such
private  cults.  Ezekiel  (writing  in  the  6th  year  of  the
captivity  of  Jehoiachin,  591  B.C.),  pictures  the  worship
of  the  sun  as  carried  on  at  Jerusalem  within  the  Temple-
court  (Ezek.8i6/.  )3  and,  as  Jeremiah  assures  us,  even
after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  the  Jews  still  persisted  in  the
worship  of  other  gods,  and  especially  of  the  queen  of

*  Also  in  37 9,  reading  with  Duhm,  JS'n  for  K13PI,  and  omitting
n  in  Tirn.  For  the  mezarim  of  the  corresponding  clause  (EV
'north  '),  cp  MAZZALOTH,  and  on  this  passage  and  on  8831-38
see  Che.,  JBL  17  io3^f".  [1898).

2  See  Che.  Jer.,  his  Life  and  Times,  198.

3  The  '  holding  of  the  branch  to  the  nose,'  in  worshipping  the
sun  is  commonly  traced  to  a  Persian  origin. See, however,
TAMMUZ.

4784


STARS

heaven  (Jer.  44).  The  reference  in  Job  3126/!  to  the
adoration  of  sun  and  moon  by  kissing  of  the  hand
sufficiently  shows  the  danger  which  still  beset  the  Jews
when  the  poem  of  Job  was  written.

The  only  distinct  reference  to  astrology  in  the  OT
occurs  in  Is.  47 13,  where  the  exilic  writer,  in  predicting


5.  Astrology.


the imminent downfall of Babylon,


advises  her  in  mockery  to  resort  to  her
astrologers,  if  perchance  they  may  save  her  from  the
impending  catastrophe.  Several  peculiar  expressions
are  used  (see  '  Isa.  '  SBOT).  The  phrase  'dividers  of
the  heavens  '  alludes  to  a  division  of  the  sky  for  the
purposes  of  astrology,  and  the  reference  of  '  the  monthly
prognosticators,'  or,  '  those  who  make  known  at  every
new  moon  '  seems  to  be  to  the  official  reports  drawn  up
by  the  Babylonian  astrologers  to  be  sent  in  to  the  king
month  by  month  (see  MAGIC,  §  3  [5]).  Many  such
Assyrian  reports  are  still  extant,  and  one  of  them  gives
us  an  astrological  calendar,  each  month  or  day  of  which
is  noted  as  being  lucky  or  unlucky  for  the  commence
ment  of  a  campaign,  or  for  other  operations.1

The  interest  and  importance  of  astrology  to  the  Baby
lonians  is  well  known.  According  to  the  Chaldean
priest  Berossus  (quoted  by  Pliny,  NH  7s?)  astronomical
observations  had  been  carried  on  by  the  Babylonians
for  490,000  years  before  his  day.  In  the  sixteenth
century  B.C.,  a  great  astrological  work  was  drawn  up
on  seventy  clay  tablets,  and  deposited  in  the  library  of
Sargon  of  Agade  (see  Sayce  in  TSBA  145^).

The  word  D'D2'N,  assafk'nn,  which  (in  its  Aramaic  as  well  as
its  Hebrew  form)  occurs  several  times  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,  is
rendered  '  astrologers  '  by  AV  (RV  '  enchanters  ')  ;  but  this  inter
pretation  is  merely  assumed.  The  word  is  of  Assyrian  origin
(assapu,  asapu,  etc.),  and  means  rather  sorcerer,  charmer
(COT  on  Dan.  24  ;  Del.  Prolc^.  141  ;  cp  Syr.  asopha).

A  late  evidence  of  the  celebrity  of  Babylonian  as
trology  appears  in  the  narrative  of  the  Messiah's  star
in  Mt.  2.  [On  the  star  cp  NATIVITY,  §  18.]  For  what
ever  the  description  dir6  dcaroAcDc  ('from  the  East')
may  mean,  the  title  magi  (fidyot  :  see  ZOROASTRIANISM)
implies  that  the  lore  of  the  wise  men  was  Babylonian.
The  star  which  they  saw  at  its  rising  (ei>  rij  avaroXfj)
was  evidently  such  as  to  be  regarded  as  a  portent  only
by  practised  astrologers.  Herod  and  '  all  Jerusalem  '
appear  not  to  have  noticed  the  phenomenon  until  their
interest  was  aroused  by  the  inquiries  of  the  strangers,
and  then  the  king  had  to  '  inquire  diligently  '  the  time
of  the  star's  appearance.  Thus  the  hypothesis  which
represents  the  star  as  a  comet  or  new  star  of  exceptional
brilliancy  may  be  considered  to  be  excluded.  Kepler
(De  /.  Chr.  servatoris  nostri  vero  anno  natalitio,  1605
A.  D.  )  thought  of  a  close  conjunction  of  the  planets
Jupiter  and  Saturn  in  the  constellation  Pisces,  which
occurred  in  the  year  747  A.U.C.  ,  and  in  this  view  he  has
found  many  followers  (cp  Ideler,  Handb.  d.  Chronol.
2399_^).2  A  similar  conjunction  in  the  year  1463  A.n.
led  the  Portuguese  Rabbi  Abarbanel  (1437-1509)  to
infer  (Comm.  on  Daniel]  that  the  birth  of  the  Messiah
was  shortly  to  be  expected.  J.  H.  Stockwell  (Asfr.
Jour.  Nov.  26,  1892;  quoted  in  Nature,  Dec.  22,  1892)
argues  in  favour  of  a  conjunction  of  Jupiter  and  Venus
which  took  place  in  the  spring  of  6  B.C.

It  should  be  observed  that  the  objection  of  Meyer  (Comm.
ad  loc.),  that  the  hypothesis  of  such  a  conjunction  is  excluded
by  the  singular  acrnjp,  is  quite  alien  to  the  question,  since  the

1  [In  Is.  47  13  W.  Muss-Arnolt  (AJSL  16223  [1900]),  de
veloping  an  idea  of  Zimmern,  would  read  D'Dtt'3  C'lan,  '  those
who  scan  the  heavens,'  D'"3  being  regarded  as  =  baru  the  As
syrian  class  -name  for  the  soothsayers  called  seers.  Another
view,  proposed  in  Crit.  Bit.,  is  to  read  line  2  of  stanza  5  of  the
Song  of  Triumph  thus,


'  Let  the  spell-repeaters  of  Ishmael,  the  diviners  of  Jerahmeel,
deliver  thee,'  supposing  ^33  to  mean  the  capital  of  Jerahmeel  in
X.  Arabia.  T.  K.  C.]

2  See,  on  the  other  hand,  the  damaging  criticism  of  this  view
by  C.  Pritchard  in  Smith's  DS,  '  Star  of  the  Wise  Men  '  ;  also
Metn.  Roy.  As.  Soc.  25.

4785


STEPHANAS

reference  of  'his  star'  would  not  necessarily  refer  to  the  con
junction  taken  as  a  whole,  but  rather  to  one  member  of  the  con
junction,  which,  by  its  peculiar  position,  was  calculated  to  cast
the  nativity  of  the  King  of  the  Jews.

For  star-worship  see  further  NATURE  WOKSHIP,  §  5.  Cp
Campbell  Thomson,  Reports  of'Jie  Afagicians  and  Astrologers
ofNin.  and  Bab.  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  (1900).  c.  K.  b.

STATER.  The  word  cTATHp  means  properly  a
weight,  and  was  used  generally  by  the  Greeks  for  the
unit  of  weight,  corresponding  to  the  eastern  shekel.

There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  current  derivation  of  the  word
from  the  root  <rra-,  to  weigh  ;  the  attempt  to  connect  it  with
Istar  (Jensen,  ZA  14  183,  and  Johns,  Assyr.  Deeds  and  Docu
ments,  2  284),  apart  from  philological  difficulties,  rests  on  the
assumption  that  money  was  originally  coined  in  Nineveh,  and
that  some  early  coin  might  bear  the  head  or  figure  of  the  city
goddess  IStar.

The  word  is  used  in  Mt.  1727  (AV  '  piece  of  money,'
RV  'shekel'),  where  it  means  a  stater  or  four-drachm
piece  of  the  Phoenician  standard.  As  regards  the  actual
coin  intended,  it  must  have  been  a  stater  either  of  Tyre
or  of  Antioch,  since  at  the  time  concerned  these  were
the  only  mints  issuing  coin  of  the  right  standard.
Under  SHEKEL  (§  5)  will  be  found  an  illustration  of
the  silver  didrachm  or  half-stater  of  Tyre  ;  the  figure
given  here  represents  a  silver  stater  of  Antioch.


Stater  of  Antioch.

The  obverse  bears  the  head  of  Augustus  with  the  title
KAI2APO2  2EBA2TOY.  On  the  reverse  is  a  figure  of  the
Fortune  of  the  City  of  Antioch  seated  on  a  rock,  wearing  a
mural  crown,  and  holding  a  palm  branch  ;  at  her  feet  is  the
river-god  Orontes,  in  the  attitude  of  swimming,  half-emerging
from  the  waves.  (This  type  is  a  copy  of  the  famous  group  by
the  sculptor  Eutychides  set  up  soon  after  the  foundation  o(
Antioch.)

The  coin  is  dated  '  in  the  thirtieth  year  of  victory  '—
i.e. ,  of  the  era  of  Actium—  -and  '  in  the  thirteenth  consul
ship  '  of  the  emperor  ;  hence  it  belongs  to  the  year
2-1  B.C.  This  specimen  weighs  229.  5  grs.  troy.  Others
of  other  dates  bear  the  name  of  Antioch  (' A.vTio%fuv
fj.TjTpoir<j\eus).

Staters  or  shekels  are  probably  meant  by  the  word
apyvpia.  used  for  the  '  thirty  pieces  of  silver  '  (Mt.  2615
273s).

That  denarii  (see  PENNY,  §  i)  cannot  be  meant  is  proved  by
the  analogy  of  Kx.  21  32  (thirty  shekels  of  silver  the  price  of  a
servant  gored  by  an  ox)  and  Zech.  11  \?f.  (where  denarii  are  out
of  the  question).  On  the  other  hand,  the  50,000  pieces  of  silver
of  Acts  10  19  (the  value  of  the  magical  books)  may  have  been
denarii,  as  indeed  the  Vulgate  translates  them.  G.  F.  II.

STATUTE  (ph,  ni?n  ;  v/ppn,  'to  engrave,'  and  so
'  a  statute,  fixed  by  being  engraven,  or  inscribed,  on  some  dur
able  surface,'  Dr.  Dt.  62),  Dt.  5  5  Sn.  See  generally  LAW
LITERATURE;  LAW  AND  JUSTICE.

STEEL. For nL"n3, nthoseth; ntpnX nchosah,

see  BRASS  ;  and  for  rTP$,  ptladdth,  Nah.  23  [4Jt, see
IRON,  §  2,  col.  2174.

STEPHANAS  (crecJi&NAC  [Ti.  WH]),  a  member  of
the  Corinthian  church.  His  '  household  '  (cp  the  house
hold  of  C/TCSAR  [q.v.~\},  '  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia,1  had
been  baptized  by  Paul,  and  its  members  had  after
wards  distinguished  themselves  by  the  zeal  with  which
they  had  set  themselves  to  minister  to  the  saints  (i  Cor.
1 16  16is),  the  ministry  intended  being  doubtless  chiefly
that  of  hospitality.  Of  Stephanas  personally,  all  that
we  learn  is  that,  along  with  Fortunatus  and  Achaicus,  he
had  brought  news  to  the  apostle  at  Ephesus  which  had
'refreshed  his  spirit"  (i  Cor.  16i7/i).

4786


STEPHEN
STEPHEN

The  narrative  in  Acts  The  speech  (8  4./).

(§§  *f-  ?)•  Style  of  the  narrative  (§  8).

The  charge  (§  3).  Significance  of  episode  (§  9).

Bibliography  (§  10).

Stephen  (cTe(J><MMOc)  m  the  NT  is  the  name  borne
by  an  early  Christian  agent  in  Jerusalem,  who  was  the
first  to  suffer  for  his  faith.  As  narrated  in  Acts  (61-83,
cp  11  19  222o)  the  pregnant  and  tragic  episode  of  Stephen
falls  into  three  sections  :  (a)  the  prologue  (61-15),  con
taining  an  account  (i.  )  of  Stephen's  appointment  as  one
of  the  Seven,  and  (ii.  )  of  his  subsequent  arrest  ;  (6)  the
speech  (7  1-53)  which  he  is  represented  as  having  delivered
upon  that  occasion  ;  and  (f)  the  epilogue  of  his  murder
and  its  effects  (754-83).  Although  by  common  consent
this  narrative  is  regarded  critically  as  undeniably  histor
ical,  it  requires  to  be  subjected  to  a  close  analysis  before
it  can  be  employed  as  evidence  for  its  period.

The  isolated  character  of  6  1-6  [7]  indicates  that
the  editor  here  has  a  special  source  or  tradition  before

, A t C him. Note the first occurrence of

1.  Acts  0  1-7.  .


.Disciples,'  ^rfrai,  the  solitary  instance
(in  Acts)  of  '  the  Twelve'  (cp  Lk.  81),  the  church  still
meeting  as  one  small  body  (as  against  44  014),  the
conception  of  communal  charity  (cp  COMMUNITY  OK
GOODS,  §  5,  and  O.  Holtzmann,  /.tschr.  fiir  Kirchen-
gesch.  14327-336),  and  the  strange  position  of  the  Seven
(ACTS,  §  10)  who,  though  ostensibly  appointed  to  the
delicate  and  responsible  subordinate  task  of  superintend
ing  charity  and  money-  matters  (see  Field,  Otium
Norvicense,  pars  tertia,  1899,  p.  113),  really  do  as
spiritual  work1  as  the  apostles  (cp  68/.  84/1  218;
Holtzmann,  HCl?  [1901],  52-54).  The  irrelevant
summary  of  67  is  certainly  an  editorial  addition  which,
like  5  14,  interrupts  the  run  of  the  narrative.  For  the
increase  of  the  church  has  nothing  to  do  with  what
immediately  precedes,  and  the  conversion  of  priests  has
no  connection  with  what  follows.  68/.  is  the  original
and  natural  sequel  to  61-6.  61-6  has,  indeed,  a  retro
spective  glance.  It  sums  up  the  primitive  Jerusalem-
period  (18)  of  the  history,  as  67  —  where  otherwise  the
words  '  in  Jerusalem"  (tv  'lepoi'craAiy/u)  would  be  super
fluous  —  is  meant  definitely  to  show  ;  but  its  main  object
is  prospective.  The  editor's  aim  is  to  introduce  two
new  figures  in  Philip  (84-39  '<  see  co'-  3697-8)  and
especially  Stephen  (68-83),  whose  activities  form  the
pivot  of  the  next  stage  in  the  early  church's  history,  as
well  as  to  connect  Antioch  (65  1119-21)  with  the  new
mission  -impulse.  There  may  be  a  dramatic  touch  in
6  i  /.  ,  where  the  preceding  outward  success  of  the  young
church  is  set  beside  the  first  sign  of  inner  friction.  Yet
the  immediate  interest  of  the  historian  is  not  this  juxta
position  or  even  the  office  of  the  Seven  —  a  vague  order,
svho  drop  out  of  sight  at  once  —  but  with  the  man  who
was  their  most  prominent  member,  and  who  found
before  long  that  his  energy  led  to  his  arrest  68-15.

Like  some  or  all,  perhaps,  of  his  fellow  -officials
Stephen  was  probably  a  Hellenist  —  i.e.,  a  Greek-speak
ing  Jew  resident  in  some  Greek  city  (  HELLENISM,  §  2)  —
and  it  is  significant  that  his  opponents  (probably  in
cluding  Paul  himself,  22s)  came  from  his  compatriots

1  The  pragmatism  of  the  editor  is  shown  in  66  where  he
suggests  that  the  apostles'  ratification  was  needed  for  every  new
office  and  departure  (cp  13  1-3)  in  the  church  (even  though  in
this  case  the  recipients  of  their  blessing  were  already  full  of  the
Spirit,  v.  5),  and  that  those  who  afterwards  became  preachers  to
the  Gentiles  were  sanctioned  by  the  heads  of  the  Christian
community.  It  is  certainly  not  Stephen's  efforts  in  charity
organisation  which  involve  him  in  the  controversy  of  <ogf.  On
the  other  hand,  the  incident  of  this  internal  discussion  and  its
satisfactory  treatment  indicates  not  merely  a  certain  liberality  of
spirit  —  however  tardy  —  on  the  part  of  the  Hebraist  majority  but
also  an  absence  of  ecclesiastical  pretension  on  the  part  of  the
apostles,  since  their  action  showed  that  the  church  was  to  be
a  church  indeed  :  '  not  a  mere  horde  of  man  ruled  absolutely
by  the  Apostles,  but  a  true  body  politic,  in  which  different
functions  were  assigned  to  different  members'  (Hort,  Christian
EccUsia,  52).  Both  of  these  ideas  were  probably  present  to  the
editor  of  Acts  (cp  CHURCH,  §  n).  Cp  also  i  Pet.  4  n.

4787


STEPHEN

(see  LIBERTINES,  DISPERSION,  §§  17 /,  22,  CILICIA,
§  3,  PROSELYTE,  §§  3/,  also  the  Lucan  touch  in  Lk.
21 16,  'delivered  up  by  kinsmen'}.  The  circumstances
of  their  origin  rendered  Hellenists  often  somewhat
suspect  in  the  eyes  of  rigid  Palestinian  Jews.  Hence,
by  the  operation  of  a  common  psychological  law,  many
of  them — so  far  from  being  more  liberal  and  open-
minded — cultivated  exceptional  strictness  and  suspicious-
ness  in  the  practice  of  their  religion.  Just  as  the
convert  frequently  outdoes  those  born  in  the  faith  by
his  eager  zeal  to  accentuate  the  difference  Iretween  his
past  and  his  present,  so  Hellenists  were  by  no  means
ipso  facto  emancipated  from  the  particularism  of  the
Jewish  faith.  Their  '  colonial  life '  did  not  naturally
create  an  atmosphere  in  which  '  the  hard  lines  faded
and  the  ideal  depths  were  opened.'1  In  practice  and
theory,  as  the  subsequent  narrative  shows  (cp  929  21  27
223  _/".),  they  often  attached  themselves  to  the  most
pronounced  and  bigoted  habits  of  Judaism  practised  by
the  Pharisees.  And  this  throws  light  at  once  upon  their
antipathy  to  Stephen,  who  perhaps  had  set  himself  to
labour  among  his  former  associates  (Qg/.),  no  less
than  upon  his  own  exceptional  character.  To  their
scrupulous  conscience  he  appeared  a  renegade,  a  dis
credit  to  them  personally  and  a  revolutionary  force
within  the  religious  praxis  of  the  nation.  They  were
the  first  to  detect  and  challenge  this  liberal  preacher,
and  their  antagonism  proves  that  his  wider  outlook  and
unique  grasp  of  the  spirituality  of  religion  were  by  no
means  an  inevitable  product  of  his  training.  As  in  the
case  of  Paul,  so  with  Stephen  :  Hellenism  furnished
merely  the  soil  of  the  religious  growth  (658  10).

The  dual  nature  of  the  narrative  in  68-15,  fluctuating
between  the  riotous  justice  of  a  mob  and  a  trial  before
2  A  t  fi8  -  l'le  Sanhedrin,  is  patent.2  As  almost
5'  all  the  critical  editors  are  agreed,  the
conception  of  a  trial  is  editorial  or  subordinate,  and  the
alternatives  are  to  regard  the  passage  as  a  combination
of  two  sources  or  as  a  single  source  edited  and  modified.
In  the  case  of  a  single  source,  the  alterations  and
additions  (possibly  due  to  a  correct  enough  impression
of  the  speech  and  situation)  are  to  be  found  in  vv.  nf.
(13)  15  (in  whole  or  part)  ;  so  e.g.,  Weiss,  Wendt,  and
Moffatt.  In  the  case  of  two  sources,  it  is  most  tempting
to  agree  with  those  (Spitta,  J.  Weiss,  Hilgenfeld)  who
find  the  second  (inferior)  source  in  12^-15  (12^-14,  Jiingst).
The  isolated  allusion  to  miracles  in  v.  8,  and  the  better
connection  of  v.  9  with  either  5  or  7,  suggest  that  v.  8
is  also  editorial.3  Why  the  Sanhedrin-notion  was  intro
duced,  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  Probably  the  editor  regarded
the  Snnhedrin  as  the  representative  body  of  the  Jews,  just
as  he  concluded  the  apostles  to  stand  for  the  Christian
community,  and  considered  that  here  as  hitherto  any
Jewish  prosecution  must  proceed  from  or  at  least  through
them,  to  be  judicial  and  regular.  Whether  this  idea  was
purely  pragmatic,  or  based  upon  some  independent  oral

1  Martineau  (Seat  of  Authority,  631),  who  goes  on,  however,
to  point  out  that  the  fusion  of  Jewish  and  heathen  thought  in
Hellenistic  culture  could  not  of  itself  have  produced  the  Christian
universalism.  That  reaches  back,  past  Stephen,  to  Jesus  and
'  his  infinite  longing  to  open  the  soul  of  man  to  the  life  in  God,
unhindered  by  the  mediation  of  priest  and  ritual.  Thus  the
fountain  of  catholicity  is  in  no  confluence  of  philosophic,  no
combination  of  external  conditions,  but  in  the  unique  personality
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.'

~  Similarly  in  the  account  given  by  Josephus  (Ant.  -Qcf)  of
James's  murder  some  thirty  years  later  (see  JAMES.  $  3  ;  and
von  Dobschiitz,  Die  Urchristlicken  Gemeinden  (1902),  noyC
i2iyC,  272).  It  is  curious  that  these  two  martyrs,  who  repre
sented  the  opposite  wings  of  early  Christian  sentiment,  should
die — or  be  represented  as  dying — in  somewhat  similar  fashion.

;i  Bacon  drastically  regards  6  n-7  i  (reproducing  Mk.  1455-60),
7  55-56  58^-60  8  i  a  c,  3  (reproducing  Acts  22  ^/.  20  26  10  Lk.
23  ^4  46)  as  editorial  modifications  added  to  bring  the  speech  into
line  with  the  general  Lucan  scheme  ;  whilst  the  reference  to
miracles  in  6s  has  been  substituted  for  the  substance  of  0  29
(unhistorically— cp  Gal.  1  21-24  — transferred  to_  Paul),  and  the
words  '  and  of  them  of  Cilicia  and  Asia  '  (»cac  ntv  on-b  KiAiictas
»cai  'Ao-iat)  in  69  are  an  editorial  (cp  75881)  addition  to  a
source  which  knew  of  only  one  synagogue  (i.e.,  an  Alexandrian
or  North  African  one).

4788


STEPHEN


STEPHEN


tradition  which  alluded  to  an  appearance  of  Stephen
before  the  Sanhedrin,  or  an  inference  from  the  role
undoubtedly  played  by  it  in  the  subsequent  persecution,
we  are  not  able  to  determine.  The  slight  obscurity
resting  on  the  details  shows  that  the  editor's  distance
from  the  period  prevented  him  from  supplementing  in
strictly  accurate  fashion  the  gaps  in  his  source.  For
tunately  the  haze  does  not  blur  the  main  outlines  of
what  happened  :  Stephen's  arrest  was  the  result  of  a
popular  dine ute,  which  restrained  itself  just  long  enough
to  allow  him  to  defend  himself  before  a  suspicious  and
exasperated  audience,  which  numbered — perhaps  un
officially — several  members  of  the  Sanhedrin.

Stephen's  persistent  propaganda  had  created  quite  a
new  situation. The  people  (6  12  cp  247  5  13)  were  now  up

in  arms  against  Christianity,  and  the
3 The  charee

a.  nj. i? charge  was  both  grave  and  religious.
against  Stephen.  Wh£her  gii  ^^  be  ^  as

the  original  source,  the  accusation  was  that  of  rank
blasphemy  against  the  Mosaic  law  and  the  temple-
cultus.  To  rigid  high-churchmen,  like  these  Pharisaic
Hellenists  (cp  APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE,  §§  56,  58),
and  indeed  to  the  people  as  a  whole,  especially  in  the
capital,  where  prejudices  naturally  ran  hot  and  hard,  it
seemed  a  horrid  impiety  to  suggest  that  these  ancestral
privileges  (law  and  cultus)  were  neither  final  nor  abso
lutely  essential  means  of  grace.  Stephen  had  probably
appealed  to  the  authority  of  certain  familiar  sayings  of
Jesus,  analogous  to,  if  not  identical  with,  those  cited  in
Mk.  713-23  132  14s8  (cp  1529  It.)1  Without  suggesting
that  Stephen  spoke  disrespectfully  of  the  law  or  of  the
temple2 — which  would  have  been  untrue  to  the  spirit  of
Jesus  (particularly  when  Lk.  had  expressly  maintained
the  genuinely  Jewish  piety  of  Jesus  and  his  attendance
on  the  temple,  Lk.  222-49),  as  well  as  out  of  keeping
with  the  normal  tone  of  contemporary  Christianity — Lk.
implies  that  Stephen  had  assumed  an  attitude  less  of
antagonism  than  of  comparative  indifference  to  such
national  institutions,  refusing  to  treat  (e.g. )  the  sacrificial
system  as  of  absolute  validity  for  Jews  who  believed  in
a  Messiah  about  to  return  and  establish  a  spiritual  era.
Zealots  are  angered  as  much  by  a  refusal  to  echo  their
beliefs  to  the  letter  as  by  deliberate  opposition  ;  to
ignore  their  tenets  is  as  keen  an  insult  as  to  attack  them  ;
and  it  is  a  fair  inference  from  the  historical  data  to
assume  that  the  negative  and  positive  aspects  of  Stephen's
preaching  were  alike  interpreted  by  the  sterner  fanatics
as  a  danger  and  a  defection.  Their  fierce  attachment

1  Cp  Keim, /.  v.  Naz.  (ET),  1  717^  6226-230. There  can  be
little  doubt  (but  cp  SON  OK  MAN)  that  Jesus  did  actually  antici
pate  a  messianic  triumph  for  himself  which  involved  at  his  return
the  downfall,  not  merely  the  supersession,  of  the  Jewish  temple  ;
and  yet  a  passage  like  Rev.  11  if.  indicates  how  unable  certain
Judaistic  circles  of  primitive  Christianity  were  to  sympathise  with
this  outlook. It  is  true  that,  even  beyond  the  Essenes  (EssENES,
§  5),  there  were  abroad  in  Judaism  movements  of  thought  which
attached  quite  a  subordinate  value  to  the  sacrificial  cultus  and
the  temple itself  (cp Holtzmann, NT  Theol.  1  104  f.  391  /.).
These,  however,  could  hardly  be  verv  influential  in  Jerusalem,
although  the  Alexandrian  culture  of  Stephen  probably  made  him
susceptible  to  such  tendencies  parallel  with  the  teaching  of  Jesus.
He  does  not  notice,  what  a  modern  reader  would  be  impressed
by,  that  the  very  temple  in  question  (6  13)  had  been  erected by
a  man  whose  sympathies  could  not  be  termed — in  any  sense  of
the  term — Jewish  by  conviction  (see  ISRAEL,  §  88). A  rather
ancient  reading  which  adds,  after  '  nation  '  (e#>>os)  in  Lk.  23  2,
'and  destroying  the  law  and the  prophets'  (xai  KaraAuoi'Ta  TOV
vo^ov K.a.1 TOI>S 7rpo</>iJTas) — is  found not only  in some Latin
MSS  but  also  in  Marcion.

2  The  greater  prominence  assigned  to  the  temple  in  Stephen's
oration  is  due  historically  to  the  fact  that  Jesus,  to  whom  he
appealed as his authority,  had — once  at least — spoken more
explicitly  upon  the  cultus  than  upon  the  law,  and  intrinsically
to  the  fact  that  the  one  involved  the  other. Since  the  exile  '  the I
cultus  was  but  a  portion  of  the  law,  to  be  minutely  maintained i
no  doubt,  but  maintained  because  the  law  ordained  it. God's
glory  and  Israel's  were  realised,  not  in  the  temple-worship,  but
in  the  fulfilment  of  the  law  of  which  that  worship  was  but  a
part ' (Montefiore, Hihbert  Lect. 387). Notice  that if  Lk.
omits  Mt.  1"  24-27  he  also  omits  Mt.  12  6. On  the  early  Christian
conception  of  God's  spirituality  and  the  universalism  it  implied,
see  Titius, Die  Tulgiire  Anschauung  von der  Seligkeit  i»t
Urchrist.  %f.  (1900).

153  4789


resented  his  looser  attitude  as  bitterly  as  a  Roman
procurator's  public  insults.  Like  one  of  their  number,
who  afterwards  recanted,  they  were  shrewd  enough  to
anticipate  disastrous  consequences  to  Judaism,  if  such
liberal  ideas  prevailed  (Gal.  1  i-$f. ).

In  its  extant  form  the  speech  put  into  the  mouth  of
Stephen  is,  like  the  other  addresses  of  Acts,  the  com-
4  The  soeech  •  Position  of  an  author  who  possesses
its  nature  '  considerable  historical  insight  into  his
subject  ;  the  diction,  style,  and  general
standpoint  of  the  address  are  sufficient  to  show  its
Lucan  colouring  and  ability  (cp  1816-41,  and  the  fre
quent  analogies  to  Lk.  1-2,  Acts  748  =  1724,  etc.).  In
the  nature  of  the  case,  too,  it  is  impossible  to  think  of
hearers  taking  down  a  verbatim  report,  or  of  the  author
having  access  to  such  archives  of  the  court  as  furnished
later  martyrologists  with  graphic  and  accurate  details
of  a  Christian's  last  defence  and  struggles.  But,  from
the  verisimilitude  of  the  contents  as  a  whole1  and  the
points  which  differentiate  it  alike  from  Petrine  and  from
Pauline  speeches,  it  is  plain  that  the  source  drawn  upon
by  the  editor,  to  say  nothing  of  such  oral  traditions  (from
Paul  and  other  eye-witnesses,  like  Philip)  as  may  have
reached  him,  must  have  sprung  from  the  vivid  memories
of  some  early  Christians,  possibly  Hellenistic  refugees
at  Antioch  or  Csesarea  ;  judged  on  the  principles  of
comparative  historical  criticism,  the  speech  therefore
takes  high  rank  as  substantially  exact.  It  is  not
difficult  to  suppose  that  so  memorable  a  death  —
memorable  for  its  consequences  to  the  early  church,  as
well  as  for  its  intrinsic  details — made  an  exceptionally
deep  impression  upon  contemporaries,2  and  that  this
impression  passed  rapidly  into  some  literary  shape.
Certainly  the  speech,  as  it  stands,  does  not  give  one  the
impression  of  an  unpremeditated  reply,  and  (as  many
scholars  have  noticed)  it  hardly  lies  in  line  with  the
historical  situation  presupposed,  even  when  the  latter  is
critically  analysed.  But  though  the  report  is  probably
inadequate,  it  echoes  an  impromptu  survey  of  history
delivered  from  a  familiar  position.  Elaborate  rather
than  extempore,  yet  with  gaps  for  all  its  elaborateness,
it  is  an  outline  or  authentic  summary,  representing  in
all  likelihood  ideas  often  repeated  by  Stephen  in  his
synagogue-preaching  as  he  encountered  objections  urged
by  people  who,  in  ostentatious  reliance  upon  the
authority  of  Moses,  found  the  rejection  of  Jesus  by  his
nation  an  insuperable  barrier  to  faith  in  him  as  the  true
Messiah,  and  also  cavilled  at  his  attitude  towards  the
ancestral  law  and  temple  of  the  land.  The  speaker
does  not  seize  the  occasion  to  preach  repentance  to  the
audience.  Nor  docs  he  even  attempt  to  clear  himself
specifically  from  the  charges  brought  against  him,  being
sensible  from  the  first  that  the  case  was  hopeless.  His
aim  is  to  say  all  he  has  to  say,3  and  he  manages  to  do
this  by  giving  a  reading  of  history  in  the  light  of
religious  experience — a  light  that  is  intensified  as  the
speech  proceeds,  and  hurriedly  closes  with  a  flash  of
lightning.

In  several  details  of  this  speech,  as  elsewhere,  Acts  illustrates


1  '  In  psychological  truth  it  has  not  its  like  in  all  Acts  '  (Spitta,
117). At  the  same  time  this  long speech, the longest in the
whole  book,  is  evidently  meant  and  (less  evidently)  arranged  by
the  author  to  subserve  the  general  apologetic  motives  of  the
volume. The  writer's  sense of  the  situation  and the  literary
ability  he  displays  here  are  the  kind  of  evidence  which  maki  s
it not irrelevant  to  say  that  Acts  is  '  the  only  one  of  the  N  T
books  which  anyone  would think of  calling  clever'  (W. H.
Simcox,  Early  Church  History,  41).

2  It  is  certain,  however,  that  Stephen  died  under  the  stones.
The  narrative  lends  no  support  to  the  idea  (Wendt)  that  he
recovered  (cp  14  19  f.)  in  time  to  breathe  his  last  among  pious
Christians  who  heard  him  repeat  his  testimony. The  devout
men  who  buried  him  were,  in  all likelihood, respectable  Jews
who  had  little  or  no  sympathy  with  the  fanatical excesses  of
their  fellow-citizens.

3  Consonant with the Lucan idea  of  Lk.  21  13, where the
sense of Mk.  13  Q is altered into that of arrest giving ar.
opportunity  for  witnessing  to  the  gospel.

4790


!


STEPHEN

the midrashic tendency  which had  already  embellished OT

stories  with  rabbinic  modifications  and  en-

5.  MldrasniC largements  (see  CHRONICLES,  §6,  HISTO:<I.

elements. CAL  LITERATURE,  88  nf-)- No  significance

attaches  to  the  apparent  confusion  of  Horeb
and  Sinai  (7  29^,  cp  Ex.  3 1  ;  MIOIAN,  SINAI),  the  use  of  the
round  number  400  in  v.  6  (as  occasionally  in  Josephus),  the
divergence  between  7  29  and  Ex.  '2  14  f.  (cp  Heb.  11  27),  the  loose
version  of  2  S.  7  if.  in  Acts  7  46  and  of  Ex.  1  16  22  in  Acts  7  19,  or
the  alteration  of  'Damascus'  into'  Babylon'  (v.  43).  Other
variations  and  innovations,!  however,  are  more  serious.  Thus
(a)  in  7  2  the  theophany  to  Abraham  is  antedated  (as  by  Philo
and  Josephus),  nor  can  an  interpolation  (Blass,  St.  Kr.  1896,
40oyC)  be  suspected  ;  (/')  Tenth's  initiative  is  ignored  and  his  death
antedated  in  7  4  (as  in  Philo  ;  see  rabbinic  traditions  cited  by
Hamburger  on  this  point) ;  (<:)  Jacob's  family  is  numbered  (?'.  14)
not  after  the  Massoretic  (70  =  Gen.  4627  Ex.  15)  but  after  the
t!3  text  (75  :  known  already  to  Philo)  ;  (</)  Sbechem  is  confused
(?'.  16)  with  Machpelah  in  Hebron,  and  all  the  patriarchs —
instead  of  Joseph  only — buried  at  Shochem  (perhaps  a  Lucan
home-thrust  [see  GOSPELS,  8  109!  at  the  contempt  felt  by  rigid
Jews  for  the  Samaritans;  see  Lk.9$if.  1033  17  \\f.  Acts  18
84/1),  a  curious  divergence  not  only  from  the  OT  narrative  but
even  from  the  tradition  followed  by  Josephus  who  buries  them
all  at  Hebron  (Ant.  ii.  8  2)  ;  (e)  TV.  20-24  are  tinged  with  the
Jewish  legends  (MosES,  8§  2o_/i),  current  also  in  Philo  and
osephus,  upon  Moses-'  beauty,  eloquence  (in  contradiction  to
;x.4ioyl),  wisdom,  and  martial  prowess,  v.  25  (acquitting
Moses  of  rash  violence  and  making  his  chivalrous  interference
the  first  step  in  the  deliverance)  being  reproduced  from  the
tradition  in  Philo,  /'//..  Mas.  1  8/T  and  Jos.  Ant.  ii.  9  2/.  ;  (_/)
the  rabbinic  division  of  the  lawgiver's  life  into  three  periods  of
forty  years  each,  is  followed  in  vv.  23  36  ;  (g)  the  '  Red  Sea  '
(?'.  36)  is  an  Alexandrian  touch  (Wisd.  10  IK  107  i  Mace.  4  2  Heb.
llzg),  taken  evidently  from  Ass.  Jl/osnS  \o  f.  '  nonne  hoc  est
quod  testabatur  nobis  turn  Moyses  in  profetiis,  qui  multa  passus
est  in  /Egypto  et  in  mari  rubro  et  in  eremo  annos  quadraginta'  ;
(/*)  the  association  of  angelic  agency  with  the  law  (7  36  53),
though  free  from  the  depreciatory  spirit  of  Gal.  3  29  Heb.  '2  2,
etc.,  is  like  them  (cp  Everling,  Die  fattl.  Angelologie,  61-65)
due  to  the  rabbinic  development  of  Dt.  33  2  <S  (cp  Jos.  Ant.
xv.  5  3)  ;  and  (  /)  the  citation  from  Amos  in  zn>.  42_/C  reproduces
the  mistranslation  of  an  obscure  and  corrupt  original  (cp  AMOS,
§  13,  CHIUN,  MOLECH,  J  i),  Stephen  arguing — in  opposition  to
the  normal  and  traditional  view — that  while  the  wilderness
period  had  its  divine  means  of  grace  (v.  44),  it  was  yet  a  period
of  idolatry  and  apostasy  punished  by  the  Exile.

Such  phenomena,  though  quite  minor  in  importance,  indicate
a  speaker  or  an  author  who  is  drawing  upon  his  memory  of
popular  religious  tales  and  has  been  trained  in  the  spirit  of
that  Alexandrian  Judaism  which,  for  all  its  reverence,  could  sit
wonderfully  free  to  the  letter  and  even  the  traditions  of  the  OT
records.

In  his  brilliant  and  skilful  address  (72-8  9-16  17-43
44'5°  5I~53)>  Stephen  urges  one  or  two  extremely

„ _  effective  and  apposite  arguments,  which

6.  Contents.

amount  to  a  counter-accusation  against

his  opponents.  In  the  opening  sketch  of  patriarchal
history,  which  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the  senten
tious  and  discursive  style  often  affected  by  Orientals
in  unfolding  some  grave  issue,  the  speaker  is  mainly
concerned  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  covenant  and
promise2  which  culminated  in  the  Mosaic  legislation
and  the  Solomonic  temple.  But  he  manages  indirectly
to  express  his  personal  reverence  for  God  (611,  cp
7 2  55)  and  the  temple  (613,  cp  7?),  as  well  as  the
common  ancestry  of  Jew  and  Christian  alike  (our
father,  7  2,  cp  12,  etc.,  also  Lk.  173).  Then  comes  the
development  of  two  leading  ideas  ;  one  already  sug
gested,  the  other  novel,  yet  both  showing  his  desire  to
justify  himself  by  an  appeal  to  the  original  basis  and
trend  of  OT  revelation,  (a)  Charged  with  depreciating

1  The  use  of  eic;cAT)<ria  (38,  cp  8  i  3)  is  deliberate. The  author
hints  at  the  normal  position  of  the  early  Christians,  who  never
dreamed  of  founding  a  sect  but  of  continuing  and  developing
the  ancient  people  of  God- -to  whom  they  served  themselves  as
lineal  heirs.

2  Cp  Rom.  5)  4  '  Israelites,  whose  is  the  glory  [Acts  7  2]  and
the  covenants  [cp  Acts  7  8]  and  the  giving  of  the  law  [Acts  7  3853],
and  the  [divine]  service  [Acts  7  7]  and  the  promises  '  [Acts  7  5] —
('IcrpaJjAirai, ii/  17  Sofa, icai  at  5iaSrjicai,  icai  17 co/u.o#«cria,  icai
>)  Aarpeiaicai  ai  eTrayyeAiai). The  allusion  to  the  other  prerogative
of  the  '  inheritance '  (^  icArjpoi'o^i'a,  Acts  7  5)  is  too  incidental  to
afford  any  basis  for  a  theory  (Bacon)  which  regards  this  section
in  the  speech  as  an  attempt  to  show  the  Alexandrian  spiritualis
ing of  the territorial '  inheritance '  into  a  non-local worship
(Lk.  1  73-75). 7s  is  answered  by  7  45. Stephen  does  not,  like
the  author  of  K/>.  Barn.,  spiritualise  '  the  inheritance '  by  deny
ing  any  local  material  fulfilment  of  it  ;  he  merely  argues  that,
however  real,  the local and  national  culmination  of  it  in  the
history  of  Israel  was  not  final,  implying  that  its  fulfilment  lay
in  the  far  future  (cp  Heb.  4  \f.  8-n).

4791


STEPHEN

the  temple,  he  argues  (40-43  44-50)  that  neither  law  nor
temple  had  come  until  comparatively  late  in  the
national  history,  the  temple  in  fact  only  in  Solomon's
reign  ;  yet,  previously  to  that,  the  spiritual  revelation  of
God  had  been  carried  on  in  foreign  lands  (for  Abraham,
v.  2,  Moses,  vs.  30  33,  and  Israel,  v.  38).  Even  the
temple  itself,  as  the  prophets  testified,  formed  no
adequate  or  absolute  medium  for  such  a  spiritual
revelation  (the  tacit  inference  being,  of  course,  that  it
could  not  therefore  be  any  blasphemy  or  treachery  to
OT  religion  to  assert,  as  Jesus  had  done,  that  even  the
temple  was  not  indispensable  or  final).1  And  as  for  the
law  of  Moses  (/>),  with  its  divine  vitality  and  power  (to
which,  answering  6  13  /  ,  Stephen  does  ample  justice,
38  53),  not  only  had  it,  like  the  temple,  been  preceded
by  revelations  (e.g.,  of  circumcision),  but  its  founder
had  been  misunderstood  (725  Lk.  2  50),  rejected,  and
thwarted  by  the  very  people  (in  Egypt  24-35,  '"  trie
wilderness  36-39)  to  whom  God  had  sent  him  as  ruler
and  redeemer.  Thankless,  perverse,  and  obtuse  :
such  had  been  their  nature  all  along.  Hence  their
failure  to  welcome  Jesus  with  his  authority  and  creative
power  to  establish  a.  new  and  final  form  of  worship
which  should  correspond  to  the  ideal  of  the  OT.  This
resistance,  so  far  from  being  loyalty  to  religion,  spelt
both  unfaithfulness  and  disaster  to  it,  representing
indeed  a  conservatism  to  the  letter  and  the  form  of
religion  which  the  fresh  and  fuller  current  of  the  spirit
would  leave  stranded.  Moses  predicted 2  that  the
Messiah  would  be  a  second  Moses,  and  Stephen
argues  vehemently  (in  quite  a  characteristic  Lucan
fashion,  cp  Lk.  1629 /.  2427  f.  Acts  2823,  etc.)  that
the  true  observance  of  the  Law  would  lead  its  devotees
to  Jesus  (51-53):  real  loyalty  to  the  Law  and  the
prophets  culminates  in  Christian  faith,  the  line  of  con
tinuity  running  from  the  OT  prophets  to  the  gospel  of
Christ.  Whereas,  he  grimly  suggests,  Jesus  had  been
indeed  a  second  Moses:3  his  rejection,  due  to  the  same
obstinacy  and  rebellious  spirit  (51  f.)  that  Moses  and
his  successors*  (52)  encountered,  is  really  a  proof  of  his
genuine  Messiahship.  In  short,  the  argument  ends  with
a  flashing  retort.  Stephen  hurls  back  the  charge  of
disloyalty  on  his  accusers,  implying,  in  characteristically
Alexandrian  and  yet  also  in  OT  fashion,  that  the  Jewish

1  Stephen's  reference  to  the  Solomonic temple  is curt and
cool,  but  intended  to  depict  its  relative  worth  rather  than  its
utter  incompatibility  with  OT  religion. His  point,  driven  home
by  the  citation  from  Is.  66  \f.,  is  that  God  is  not  bound  to  the
temple  in  Jerusalem,  but  free  to  reveal  himself  in  wider  and  less
external  ways  ;  compared  to  the  spiritual  worship  of  God  given
by  Jesus  (41  48),  even  the  temple service is merely  another
golden calf. It is obvious that, in a book circulated after
70  A.D.,  this  line  of  argument  would  be  specially  apt,  proving
that  the  destruction  of  the  temple  was  no  irreparable  loss  to
religion.

2  v.  37  is  of  cardinal  moment  to  the  argument  of  the  speech  in
its  extant  form,  since  it  destroys the Jewish claim that the
Mosaic  cultus  and  legislation  were  final. The  prophet-Messiah,
as  a  second  Moses,  at  least  equal  to  the  first  in  authority,  must
have  the  right  to  supersede  or  transcend  previous  revelations.
True,  the  Jews  had  rejected  him  whom  Stephen  claimed  as  the
true  Messiah. But  that  was  no  decisive  argument  against  him,
for  they  had  done  the  same  to  the  first  Moses. Thus,  although
v.  37  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  parenthesis  or  editorial  addi
tion  of  Lk.,  even  so  it would only  sharpen  an idea  already
present  in  the  original  and  (like  6  ii)  reflect  a  correct  reading  of
the  primitive  source.

3  So  the  Lucan  addition  (7  10)  '  and  wisdom  '  icai  <ro$ioM  (cp
22)=  Lk.  240  52  (Bacon)? The  idea  dominates  the  Clementine
Recognitions  (e.g. ,  1  35). Cp  Acts  3  i  if.  =  7  35  (Lk.  6  22^). Of
course  the  Messianic  interpretation  of  Dt.  IS  i^f.,  reproduced  in
Acts  737,  is  a  misapplication  of  the  original  sense,  which  refers
not  to  an  individual  but  to  a  succession  or  order  of  prophets  in
Israel.

*  Why  the  prophets  (42-52)?  Because  (WRS,  OTJC,  *94/.)
they  had  vainly  but  vigorously  protested  against  the  formal
tendencies  of  OT  piety  which  with  the  temple  became  crystallised
into  yet  more  ceremonial  worship.  Without  pronouncing  the
establishment  of  the  temple  itself  a  fresh  token  of  the  nation's
sensuous  bias,  the  speaker  plainly  hints  that  the  Levitical  ritual
had  thereby  acquired  a  fatal  prominence  which  tended  to
obliterate  that  spiritual  worship  for  which  the  prophets  stood,
and  to  produce  the  further  effect  of  rendering  the  worshippers
incapable  of  estimating  God's  better  and  spiritual  revelation.

4792


STEPHEN


STEPHEN


rejection  of  Jesus  was  an  integral  part  of  the  sensuous
temper  and  externalism  with  which  they  had  all  along
been  blind  and  dull  to  the  spiritual  significance  of  the
Law  and  the  prophets.1  Circumcision  they  had  had  ;
but  it  had  brought  no  moral  devotion  (8,  58).  Prophets
they  had  had  ;  yet  only  to  disbelieve  and  persecute  (37
42  48  52).  A  spiritual  and  heavenly  law  (\uyia  ftDira,
'  vim  vitalem  habentes,'  Blass)  they  had  received  ;  2  yet
only  to  prove  unfaithful  to  it  (38 f. ,  53)  by  turning  it
into  a  dead  letter.

As  we  possess  only  an  epitome  of  the  speech,  it  is
useless  to  inquire  whether  w.  51-53 3  imply  some
.  ,  „  „  interruption  on  the  part  of  the
'  3'  angry  audience,  now  awakening  to
the  speaker's  drift,  or  whether  some  part  of  the  source
has  been  omitted  by  the  editor  (Schwanbeck).  The
words  are  abrupt  and  final.  This  curt,  stinging  thrust,
which  formed  the  climax  of  the  harangue,  roused  a
heat  of  anger  in  the  audience  which,  at  Stephen's
further  blasphemous  cry  (56),  passed  into  a  scream  of
horror.  Nothing  is  said  about  any  formal  conviction
before  the  Sanhedrin.  The  offender  is  simply  stoned
to  death  outside  the  city — the  regular  method  and  place
of  punishment  for  blasphemy  (Lev.  24 14-16,  cp  Lk.  429).

For  the  Jews  to  put  any  criminal  thus  to  death  upon
their  own  responsibility  was  utterly  illegal  (cp  Jn.  1831)  ;
and  the  difficulty  of  the  story  is  enhanced  by  the
absence  of  any  explicit  evidence  to  show  that  a  year  or
two  after  the  death  of  Jesus  Roman  authority  in  the
capital  was  seriously  relaxed,  or  that  —  as  afterwards
(61,  62  A.  O. )  at  the  murder  of  James  the  brother  of
Jesus — an  interregnum  between  two  procurators  was
taken  advantage  of,  or  that  the  sentence  of  the
Sanhedrin  was  formally  connived  at,  if  not  ratified,
by  the  Roman  officials.  At  the  same  time,  the  broad
unquestionable  fact  that  the  Jews  proceeded  to  persecute
the  Christians  without  hindrance,  whilst  the  Christians
not  merely  fled  from  Jerusalem,  where  the  Roman
power  was  strong,  but  never  had  recourse  to  the  civil
power  as  a  shield  against  their  tormentors,  suggests
that  the  Jewish  authorities  must  have  had  some  sanction
or  other  4  for  their  outburst,  although  the  historian — •
wishing  perhaps  5  to  convey  the  impression  that  such

1  Stephen makes  no attempt  to ex-plain the  cause of  this
obduracy. He  seems  to  regard  it  as  innate. In  Ef>.  Barn.  !)_/T,
where  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  Mosaic  customs is
propounded  as  their  original  sense,  the  failure  of  the  Jews  to
apprehend  this  is  attributed  to  the  influence  of  an evil angel
(eo-d(£i£ei>  aiirous)  and  to  their  lapse into  idolatry. Stephen's
speech,  upon  the  other  hand  (as  Sabatier  rightly  points  out),  is
at  once  the  complement  and  the  development  of  Jesus'  parable
in  Lk.  '2Qgf. As  a  historical retrospect  it  is unduly severe;
but  as  a  word  for  the  immediate  situation  of  the  speaker  it
possessed  a  telling  force. The  thought  of  7  5I./J  is  remarkably
in  line  (cp  O.  Holtzmann,  Lebcn  Jesu, 336)  with Lk.  13  34./T
(cp  11  49),  where  Jesus  speaks  in  the  name  of  God,  who  has
repeatedly  sent  messengers  to  the  Jews,  and  finally  the  Messiah,
only  to  meet  the  same  fate. See  Ep.  Barn.  5  ii '  So  the  Son  of
God  came  in  the  flesh  in  order  that  he  might  sum  up  and  com
plete  the  sins  of  those  who  persecuted  his  prophets  to  the  death.'

2  Stephen  does  not  go  nearly  as  far  as  Ep.  Barn.  (4o-s)  which
flatly  denies  that  the  Jews  possessed  the  real  law  of  God  :  '  ours
it  is,  they  lost  it '  by  the  idolatrous  aberration mentioned  in
Acts  7  39-41. He  distinctly  upholds  the  living  authority  of  the
Law  (in  contrast  to  Paul,  Gal.  821);  only,  whilst Ep. Barn.
14  1-4  denies that the Jews ever got this divine covenant,
Stephen  argues  that  they  got  it  and  failed  to  keep  it  (Acts  7  53).
So  4  Esd.  \\-zgf.  from the Jewish standpoint: 'our fathers
received  the  law  of  life  which  they  kept  not,  which  ye  also  have
transgressed  after  them  ' ;  also  Acts  15  10.

3  Lucan  close  to  original  (48-50), Holtzmann,  Z1VT  (1885),
434-438. McGiffert  finds  in  them  the  theme  of  the  speech,  viz.,
that temple-worship  is  not  enough,  demanding  obedient  and
spiritual  hearts  among  the  worshippers. But  there  is  nothing
distinctively  Christian  in  such  an  attitude.

4  Though  this  finds  no  support  in  the  words  '  I  gave  my  vote,'
Ka-nlveyKa.  i//rj<J>oi>  (~M  10),  which  are  merely  a  rhetorically  vivid
expression  of  agreement  (8  i). Paul  was  not  a  member  of  the
Sanhedrin.

&  Consonant  with  his  usual  tendency  to  emphasise  the  Jews
as  the  real  enemies  of  the  faith  and  to  avoid  blaming  the
Roman  authorities.  The  first  martyrdom  of  Christianity  was
brought  about  by  false  evidence  and  tumultuous  justice  on  the
part  of  the  Jewish  authorities  (as  12  if.,  etc.),  and  betokened  no
collision  of  the  Roman  authorities  with  the  new  faith.

4793


violence  was  illegal — has  failed  to  notice  it.  The  fairest
solution  of  the  critical  problem  is  to  suppose  that
Stephen  perished  in  a  fanatical  riot,  the  account  of
which  ended  with  82.  The  editor,  however,  has  added
not  merely  6n_/". ,  15  but  also  7  58  81^,  3  to  the  original
source,  drawing  in  the  latter  interpolations  upon  a
tradition  which  was  no  doubt  accurate.

The  editorial  hand,  or  a  different  source,  in  at  least
7  58  81^,  3  is  widely  recognised — e.g.  by  Bleek,  Weiss
(adding  7  55  59^  c),  Clemen,  Sorof,  Kriiger  (TLZ,
1885,  299),  Wendt,  Hilgenfeld  (adding  56,  59),
Schmiedel  (ACTS,  §  10),  Moffatt  (Historical  New  Test.,
429,  431,  667-670),  and  Bacon.  Originally  the  source
(58/1)  ran  'they  stoned  Stephen,'  etc.  (i\i.Q ofio\ovv
rbv  "Zretyavov  K.T.\.  )  ;  the  insertion  of  58^  left  '  stoned  '
without  an  object,  and  necessitated  its  repetition
awkwardly  in  59.  Again  8ia  is  obviously  parenthetic,
whilst  8  3  repeats  the  proleptic  8  \b  c  unless  the  latter  be
also  excised  (as  by  Weiss  and  Schmiedel).  It  is  plain
that  Stephen  died,  not  on  the  testimony  of  witnesses
(613  7 58^),  but  on  account  of  his  own  recent  word  and
confession.  The  references  to  Saul,  which  are  quite
authentic,  link  the  source  to  what  follows,  and  it  is
needless  to  dwell  on  the  dramatic  effect 1  of  this  silent
figure  watching  the  opening  struggle  of  a  campaign  in
which  he  himself  was  presently  to  play  so  diverse  and
prominent  a  part.2  A  similar  result  in  general  is
reached  by  those  who  bisect  the  whole  narrative — e.g. ,
Feine  (61-6  12-14  7 2-21  29-34  44-50  57  f.  8icz  3  with  6n  15
722-28  35-43  51-53  54-56  59 /  81^-2),  Jiingst  (69  f.  12014
7i-2i  29-34  44-50  58^-60  8i<5  c,  with  61-6,  76  c-8  ii  15
722-28  35-43  51-58^  81^2-3),  and  Spitta  (61-6  9-12^  72-54
57-58,2  8  ii5-2,  with  67  /  12^-15  7  i  55  /  58/^-60  8ia  3),  or
by  less  radical  investigators  such  as  Blass  (759/>,  a  Lucan
touch)  and  Ramsay  (7  58  81,  Lucan  touches  reproducing
Paul's  agonised  confession  when  Philip  narrated  the
episode,  69-839,  at  Cajsarea).  If  one  is  disinclined  to
follow  those  who  (Spitta,  J.  Weiss,  Hilgenfeld,  etc.)
adhere  to  the  substantial  integrity,  as  to  the  historicity,
of  the  speech,  the  most  tenable  alternative  is  to  consider
that  it  represents  a  single  source  more  or  less  edited
(B.  Weiss,  Wendt,  Holtzmann):  it  is  quite  in  keeping
with  the  author's  practice  in  the  third  gospel  (\Vernk-,
Synoptischt  Frage,  18,  cp  146)  to  deal  more  freely  with
narratives  than  with  discourses  in  the  traditional
materials  which  lay  before  him.

The  chief  linguistic  terms  characteristic  of  (i  1-83  (especially
in  the  speech),  which  do  not  recur  elsewhere  either  in  Acts  or  in
the  rest  of  the  NT  literature,  are: — 'defend,'  taju.vV<o  (7  24);
'murder,'  t<*vai'pe<7is  (8  i)  ;  'resist,'  \iam.-aiwria  (7  51)  ;  '  uncir-

1  The  whole  story  is  full  of  admirable  effects  produced  by  an
author  who  could  write  effectively  as  well  as  piously  ;  e.g.,  the
literary art shown in the sonorous  opening of the speech,
dramatic  touches  like the  glow  of  615,  'they  understood  nat,'
'  and  kept  it  not,'  and  '  he  fill  asleep'  (contrasting  this  death
with  the  three  already  mentioned,  viz., Judas, Ananias,  and
Sapphira),  the  vision  of  759  with  Jesus  standing  (not  'sitting'
as  usual)  to  welcome  his  martyr  (cp  Rev.  56),  the  contrast  of
Stephen's denunciation and his forgiving spirit, and the
oratorical handling  of  the various themes in the harangue.
7  y)f. seems to echo a belief  that the spirits of  the dead
(especially  the  martyrs)  passed  directly  to  God  :  cp  Titius,  45  ;
Schiir.  Hist.  ii.  2  180.

2  See  PAUL,  §  7. Momrnsen  (ZNW,  1001,  85/0,  taking  fv  T<J»
yeVei  fj.ov  (Gal.  1  14)  in  its  local  sense  (  =  birthplace,  cp  Acts4  26
182  24),  considers  that  Paul  directed  his  attack  upon  the  separa
tist  s (including e.g.,  Andronicus  and  Junias?  Rom.  10 7)  in  Tarsus;
which  gives  a  good  sense to  Gal.  1  22,  but  hardly  fits  in  with
Acts  8  3  9  -if. In  a  famous  passage  (Essay  on  '  Secret  Societies,'
Works  [1863]  6  285-2P9)  de Qqincey discusses the uneasiness
and  fascination  stirred  by  such  martyrdoms  in  some  of  the  more
thoughtful  spectators,  and  argues  that  the  radiant  countenance
of Stephen '  bringing down to earth some revelation of a
brightness  in  the  sky,  the  fountains  of  which  were  intercepted
to  Paul,  perplexed  him  ;  haunted  him  sleeping,  troubled  him
when  awake.  .  .  .  Upon  this  we  may  be  sure  that  Paul  brooded
intensely,  and  that  the  noonday  scene  on  the  road  to  Damascus
did  but  quicken  and  ante-date  a  result  which  would  at  any  rate
have  followed  in  the  end.' [Cp  col.  4o8i_/] The  psychological
nexus,  alluded  to  in  this  passage,  is  reflected  in  the  narratives  of
Acts,  and  probably  formed  one  of  the  subordinate  aims  which
the  writer  had  in  view  as  he  fused  the  Stephen-source  and  the
Pauline  tradition  together. See  further  below.

4794


STEPHEN

cumcised,' tair«piTfir)TO?  ("51);  'gnash,'  ^pv\ta  (7  54) :  'come

after,' 6ia6V\onai  (7  45)  ; umpire,'  t<5iica<rr>js

8. Linguistic (7  27  35)  ; '  expose,'  eicOtTOj  (7  19) ;  '  coming,'

features  Of eA*uo-is (752): 'thrust out,' <fw0eui (745

narrative. l'2~39'-^>  'Deyond.'fArAwM'aC^a);  'daily,1

KaOrjfj.epi.i'6<;  (I)  i)  ;  '  ill-usage,'  i icdKuMTis  (7  34);
'  deal  craftily,' tKaTaoro^u'^o^ai  (7  19);  'possession,  t<taT<i<rxe<ri5
(~545)!  'lamentation,'  t«o:reTds  (82);  'ravage,'  Av/uaiVofiai
(S  3) ;  '  redeemer,'  i \vTponrjs  (7  35  ;  cp  Heb.  !•  12  Lk.  1 68  2  38) ;
'  remove,'  t/u.eTotKt'£ii>  (7  4  43)  ;  '  make  a  calf,'  /oiocr^orroieaj  (7  41)  ;
'  neglect,'  jrapatowpe'w  (61);  '  corn,'  tririov  (7  12)  ;  '  stiffnecked,'
t  ricArjpoTpdx'iAos  (7  51) ;  'stir  up,'  <ruyi«i'«*  (612);  'bury,'
(Tayt^fuftt  (8  2)  ;  '  set  at  one,'  truyoAAdcro-io  (7  2'j)  ;  '  slain  beast,'
t  r</>ayiof  (742);  'suborn,'  V7roj3dAAu>  (On);  'sustenance,'
t  (dpTacr/na  (7n);  'buy,'  twveo/xai  (7  16) ;  'appeared,'  ]<a<l>0ri
(  >f  sudden  human  appearance,  7  2'>).  Of  these  31,  no  fewer
tlian  18  (marked  t)  come  from  the  LXX  or  Philp,  a  fact  which
(especially  as  the  citations  are  loose  and  unintentional)  corrobor
ates  the  impression  of  Hellenistic  or  Alexandrian  colour.1
Kven  more  remarkable  is  the  absence  of  such  distinctively
Lucan  traits  as  av  with  optative,  Se  xai,  eyeVeTO  with  infinitive,
iv  T<U  with  infinitive,  na.9'  rinepav,  KO.I  aiiros,  opd/uari,  fa?  (aTras)
n  Aads,  TI«  with  a  noun,  and  TO  or  TO.  before  prepositions.

At  the  same  time,  the  Lucan  phraseology  of  the  passage
shows  that  if  a  written  source  underlies  the  record  it  has  been
worked  over2  by  the  editor:  see  the  following  favourite  or


a$cA$ot  (72);  'look  steadily,'  irevi£ia  (1)15  7  55);  'till,'  d^pi
(7  18)  ;  'and  there  arose,"  iyivtro  Se  (.Si);  '  babe,'  /Spe'^o?  (7  19);
'ministry,1  Siaxovia.  (<J  i  4);  'open,1  Siavoiyia  (7  56) ;  'cut,'
*Sianpiu>  (754);  'scatter  abroad,'  *6ia<rirei'piij  (Si);  'arrange,1
S(.a.Ta<T<ru>  (7  44) ;  'just,'  "iueoios  (Messianic  title, 3  14  7522214);
'seventy,'  *e0SofxrjicorTa  (7  14);  eijui  with  dative  (7544);
flney  &e  (7133);  'expose,1  *«TI'O>?JUII  ("21);  'before,'  evioiriov
(')  5./C,  7  46)  ;  'the  following  [day],'  *TJj  CTTIOUOT;  [r/jue'pa]  (726);
'in  those  days,1  iv  Tais  ^/ae'pais  Taurais  (61);  'send  forth,1
ef<X7rocTT«AAu>  (7  12)  ;  'year,1  CTOS  (7  6  34  42)  ;  'devout,1  *ei>Aa/3»js
(82);  'find  grace,1  eupi'ovcw  x»P"'(~46  Lk.  1  30,  cp  Heb.  4  if/);
'  rejoice,1  evc^paiVio  (741);  'come  upon,'  ei£t<rn)/ii  (•>  12);  'having
kneeled  down,'  fleis  Ta  ydcaTa  (7  60  cp  Lk.  2241);  'named,1
KaAou|uei>os  (758);  'behold,'  /caTavoe'io  (731,  cp  Heb.  3  i  ('24);
'famine,1  Atjudf  (7n);  'after  these  things,1  ^xeTa  ravra  (77);
'summon,'  * /ieraxaAeu)  (7  14);  'month,1  /u.iji'  (7  20);  'young
man,1  *vea.via.t  (758);  vofiifia  =  suppose  (7  25  =  Lk.  244);  now,'
vav  (743452);  'house  of  Israel,'  OIKO?  'ItrpaijA  ("42);  'with
one  accord,1  oij.odu/jin&oi'  ("57);  'sight,1  opajua  (731);  o?  in
attraction  (7  ioyC  45);  'at  the  feet,1  Trapd  TOUS  TrdSas  ("58);
TrArjSos  (62  5  =  community,  Deissm.  jVf«c  Bibelstudien,  59);
'multiply,'  7rAr)0u(/co  (Oi);  '  except,"  n\rjv  (Si);  'full  of  the
[Holy]  Spirit,'  TrArjpr/s  Tri/evn.  [avion]  ((13  5  7  55);  '  avenge,'
*TOI€IC  (KJuci)(rcv  TIIAK  (Lk.  18  7 /C  Acts  7  24);  'betrayer,'  Trpo-
£  irrjs  (752  Lk.  6  16  a  Tim.  84  only);  'show  before,' *7rpoicaTay-
y«'AAio  (752);  'go  before,'  *7rpo7ropeuco  (7  10  Lk.  176);  'unto,'
7.-pds,  of  speech  (73);  'word,'  p>jju.a  (tin);  'host,'  *<jrpaTia
(742  Lk.  213);  'kindred,'  *oT>yyeVeia  (7314  Lk.  lei);  aW
{~35)!  'seize,'  *o-ui'apjrdfu>  ((5i2);  'approve,'  <rvvev&OKe<a  (8  i);
'stop,1  <ruve\<a  ("57);  'deliverance,'  cruTijpi'a  (7  25  Lk.  171);
Te(t>7i2  726  83);  'of  forty  years,'  Veo-o-epaicoi'Tae'TJis  (723,  cp
13  18);  TOW  with  infinitive  (7  19);  TOVTor  =  him  (735,  cp  223
.r>3i);  VTrapYw  (755);  '[the]  Most  High,1  *[6]  ui/dtrros  (748,  cp
Lk.  1  32  Het>.7i);  'voice,1  ffriavrj  with  yi'ypo/mai  ("31);  'keep,'
</>uAdo-o-u)  (753,  CP  Lk.  1128);  'widow,1  ^rjpa  (tii);  'region,1
\iipa  (81);  ws  =  when  (7  23);  Jxrei  (t5 15),  impf.  with  ptc.  (81);
besides  the  proper  names  like  'Libertine,1  *.Yi/3epTii'os ;
'  Chaldscan,'  XaASaio? ;  '  Hellenist,'  'EAAr)i/io~T)J5  ;  and  '  Rephan,'
Pe^di/;  the  phrase  'Son  of  Man'  (7  56=  Lk.  22  69,  almost  only-
use  of  name  outside  gospels),  79  =  617  (Clem.  Rom.  4./C);  the
conception  of  Jesus  as  the  prophet  like  Moses  (7  37,  cp  3  22
and  Lk.  71639  11)29^  24  27),  Acts  7  27  =  Lk.  12  14  ;  axoveiv
with  ptc.  (7  12,  cp  Lk.  423),  Acts  6  10=  Lk.  21  15  Acts  7  22  =
Lk.  24  19 — 'presers-e  alive,1  (jiooyoveio-ftii  (Lk.  1733  Acts  7  19
i  Tim.  613,  only);  'visit,1  e;rioxe'i/'a(r#'U  (7  23,  cp  Lk.  1  78  7i6);
and  one  instance  of  the  Lucan  partiality  for  Is.  40-titj  (Acts  7  47./C;
as  in  Barn.  10  2  with  i)  TI'S  for  KO.L  77-010?  and  ov\i  for  yap).

The  significance  of  this  episode  for  early  Christianity

_ Q. .c , is thus twofold. It formed one of

0.  Significance ,

. j . those  outstanding  crises  when,  as  the

0  epiSO  e.  historian  of  Acts  loved  to  show,  the
fanatical  and  malicious  opposition  of  Judaism  to  the

1  Peculiar  to  Hebrews  and  Lk.-Acts  (including  Acts  6-8  3)  are  :
'goodly,1  ao-Teios  ;  '  star, '  acrTpov  ',  'custom,'  6#os  (except  Jn.
1840);  'bring  in,'  fio-dyeii'-eo-8ai  (except  Jn.  18  16);  'trembling
for  fear,'  epTpo/iOs ;  Red  Sea,  "EpvOpa  fldAacraa ;  'devout,1
tiiAalSrjs  (group) ;  '  he  that  bears  rule,1  rryou'jaei'os  (except  Mt.  26
citation)  ;  'rest,1  KaTarraueif  -tris  ;  'change,1  or  'remove,1  //.era-
TiOeVai  (excepc  Jude  4)  ;  sojourn  -er,  napoixfui  -os (literal  sense):
'  patriarch,' jraTpidpxrjs  ;  han-i  of  God  (except  i  Pet.  56)  ;  'made
with  hands,' v«pO7roir)Tos  of  temple  (except  Mk.  14  58).  See  also
Acts  7  44  =  Heb.  8  2-5.

'J  This  is  perhaps  betrayed  also  in  the  occasional  roughnesses
of  construction — t'.g".,  the  change  of  subject  in  4  ('removed,1
/i«7uKio-ef),  S  ('begat,1  eyeVnjo-ei'),  and  10  (' made,1  (caTt'orr/crei/),
though  We'ss  goes  too  far  in  taking  passages  like  ipc-i6  and
iq^-23«,  26-29,  3^y^i  as  editorial  additions  inserted  in  view  of
Lk.'s  Gentile-Christian  audience.

4795


STEPHEN

new  faith  only  served  to  accelerate  the  extension  of  that
faith  to  the  Gentiles.  But,  further,  it  was  an  epoch  when
persecution  broke  upon  the  Church  in  general  as  well
as  upon  individuals,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  Jewish
authorities  for  the  first  time  (within  a  year  or  so  of  the
Crucifixion — i.e. ,  30-31  A.D.  )l  realised  the  radical  con
sequences  of  the  gospel  as  preached  by  more  outspoken
Christians,  who  could  appeal  honestly  to  the  authority
of  Jesus  himself.  Hitherto  these  distinctive  principles
of  Christianity,  with  their  far-reaching  issues,  had  been
tolerated  mainly  because  they  had  not  been  adequately
expressed.  Hence  the  fitful  and  comparatively  in
effective  attempts  of  the  authorities  to  keep  the  new
movement  in  check,  as  well  as  the  general  popularity
enjoyed  by  the  Nazarenes  in  Jerusalem.  The  twelve
lacked  neither  courage  nor  sincerity.  For  various
reasons,  however,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  shown
anything  of  the  same  insight  into  the  tradition  of
Jesus  which  they  preserved,  as  outsiders  like  Stephen,
Philip,  and  Paul.  Upon  men  like  these  fell  the  brunt
of  the  advance  which  had  to  be  made,  if  Christianity
was  ever  to  be  anything  more  than  a  Jewish  sect.  With
the  spiritual  freedom  and  universal  range  of  the  new
faith,  as  urged  by  Stephen  and  others,  the  twelve
probably  were  in  essential  sympathy  ;  indeed  there  is
every  reason  to  suppose  that  Stephen  carried  the
majority  (yet  cp  2120-22)  of  the  church,  willingly  or
reluctantly,  with  him  in  his  outspoken  statements.  It
is  one  thing,  however,  to  approve  a  course  of  action,
another  and  a  nobler  thing  to  start  it.  All  credit  for
the  more  difficult  step,  with  the  wisdom  and  courage
which  it  involved  at  this  period,  is  due  to  Stephen,
whose  stand  had  a  further  liberating  effect  —  hardly
contemplated  by  himself — of  forcing  the  early  Christians
into  a  consciousness  of  their  real  relation  to  the  orthodox
Judaism,  side  by  side  with  which  most  of  them  had
hitherto  lived  in  peace.  The  break  had  to  come,
although  as  yet  both  sides  had  been  for  different  reasons
slow  to  disturb  the  status  quo.'2'  '  There  is  an  inner
freedom  which  may  grow  side  by  side  with  an  allegiance
fostered  by  birth  and  custom,  prejudice  and  piety.
But  men  first  become  conscious  of  this  freedom  when  a
demand  is  made  that  restricts  it,  or  when  it  is  assailed
on  account  of  some  consequence  already  deduced  from
it  by  the  enemy,  but  not  as  yet  patent  to  the  mind
that  cherishes  it'  (Weizsacker).  Such  an  awakening
came  to  early  Christianity  at  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen.
He  first  expressed  a  latent  antithesis  of  principle,
grasping  the  gospel  of  Jesus  with  a  thoroughness  and
penetration  which  enabled  him  to  formulate  certain
questions,  afterwards  elaborated  differently  yet  along
the  same  line  by  one  who  had  been  an  accomplice  in
his  murder.  This  is  all  the  more  remarkable,  because
the  stimulus  originally  came  not — as  in  later  contro
versies — out  of  practical  exigencies  due  to  the  unlimited
preaching  of  the  gospel,  but  entirely  from  the  inward
fidelity  of  one  man  (who  had  not  belonged  to  the
original  disciples)  to  the  principle  of  religious  freedom
in  the  spirit  and  sayings  of  Jesus.3

The  dependence  of  the  Stephen-narrative  upon  several  of  the
best  authenticated  portions  of  the  Synoptic  tradition  (for  the
Johannine,  see  Wendt's  Lehre  Jestt  [ET],  235/T)  has  been
already  noted  ;*  the  general  similarity  of  several  details  in  the
accounts  of  his  death  and  of  the  trial  of  Jesus  (e.g.,  Lk.  2266  =

1  One  early  tradition,  followed  by  Usuardus,  P^-iavius,  and
other  mediaeval  and  later  scholars,  put  Stephen's  martyrdom  in
the  same  vear  as  the  Ascension.

-  As  the  subsequent  history,  down  to  the  third  century,
shows,  there  was  a  recurring  tendency  to  gravitate  back  into
Judaism  on  the  part  of  certain  Christian  circles  (cp  Harnack's
Dogmengeschichtc,  ET  1  294^).

3  In  its  account  of  the  persecutions  conducted  by  that
'  inimicus  homo' (i.e. ,  Paul),  Clem.  Kecogn.\^af.,  like  Hege-
sippus,  ignores  Stephen  ;  James  is  for  Hegesippus  the  proto-
martyr,  though  in  Eus.  HE  v.  2  5  Stephen  reappears  as  the
model  witness  of  Christ.

•*  It  depends  upon  the  critical  view  taken  of  Jn.  421-24,
'vhether  that  passage  be  regarded  as  a  later  expansion  of  the
idea  suggested  in  Acts  7  48_/C,  or  as  embodying  a  genuine  logion
of  Jesus  (cp  Jn.  2  19-22)  to  the  effect  that  only  spiritual  worship
in  his  name  answered  to  the  true  ideal  of  the  OT  revelation.

4796


STEPS

Acts  6  1 2)  is  not  unnatural  in  a  historian  who  is  concerned  to
describe  how  loyalty  to  the  authority  and  ideas  of  the  great
proto-Martyr  brought  one  of  his  followers  to  a  like  fate.  Such
conformation  was  inevitable,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  determine
how  far  it  was  conscious  and  literary.  It  is  distinctly  curious,
however,  that  false  witnesses  and  an  allusion  to  Jesus'  saying
about  the  temple  should  be  introduced  here  by  an  author  who
deliberately  omits  both  facts  from  his  narrative  of  Jesus'  trial;
and  also  that  the  authentic  saying  on  the  Cross  (Lk.  "23  340:) —
which  does  not  form  part  of  the  original  third  gospel  (see  Hist.
New  Test.  654) — should  be  reflected  in  ActsTbo  (cp  Lk.  6  28,
Acts  3  17  13  27),  just  as  it  was  actually  quoted  by  the  brother  of
Jesus  at  his  martyrdom  (e'Orjice  TO.  yovara.  Ae'yu);>  (cupie  flee  Trdrep
titles  aurois  '  oil  yap  oi5a<rt  ri  7rotov<rii',  cp  §  2),  and  by  the  Lyons
martyrs  (Eus.  HE  v.  2  5).  There  is  one  very  significant  change,
however,  in  Acts  7  59  (  =  Lk.  23  46),  emphasised  by  the  preceding
words  'calling  upon,'  itriKaXov^vov  (so.  'iTjcroOp).  The  similar
parallels  between  Stephen  and  Paul  (613  =  2128  69  =  21212^,
cp  24 1  a)  are  of  no  literary  significance  whatever,  nor  is
Stephen's  speech  a  literary  expansion  of  certain  Pauline  ideas.
For,  whilst  criticism  has  learned  to  do  justice  to  the  powerful
impression  (see  above;  also  R.  H.  Hutton's  Theological  Essays,
3i8yC,  and  Feine,  Das  Gesetzesfreies  Evang.  ties  Paulus,  1899,
pp.  i6f.  88yl)  made  by  Stephen's  religious  consciousness  upon
Paul,  Stephen  cannot  be  described  as  a  forerunner  of  Paul
without  serious  limitations.  In  Stephen  an  original  element
worked  like  a  ferment,  which  differentiated  him  not  simply
from  his  leading  contemporaries,  but  from  the  line  subsequently
followed  by  Paul.  The  very  occurrence  of  similar  ideas — e.g.,  in
Rom.  9-11  (Acts752=iThess.  2i4/:,see  Origen  on  Mt.  1857)—
is  one  of  several  proofs  that  such  ideas  were  widespread  in
certain  circles  of  early  Christianity,  and  the  points  of  difference
are  upon  the  whole  more  tangible  than  the  points  in  common
between  the  two  men.  Paul  was  not  interested  in  the  cultus-
question  at  all ;  Stephen  was.  Yet  Stephen  never  raised  the
question  of  the  Gentiles,1  as  Paul  did  from  the  first.  Nor  did
he,  like  Paul  in  general,  view  the  Law  as  superseded  by  grace  ;
in  Hellenistic  fashion  Stephen  traces  a  spiritual  current  through
Jewish  history,  believing  that  a  proper  interpretation  of  the
Law,  and  obedience  to  the  spirit,  would  have  saved  the  Jews
from  their  ancient  lapses,  even  from  the  culminating  lapse  at
the  crucifixion.  Per  contra,  as  has  been  already  indicated
(§§  3,  6),  Stephen  had  not  advanced  to  the  position  which  in  later
writers  may  be  termed  distinctively  Alexandrian.

The  scanty  and  worthless  legends  upon  Stephen,  collected
by  Tillemont  (Memoires;  Eng.  ed.  1735,  pp.  353-359),  mainly
cluster  round  the  place  and  time  of  his  death,  and  the  finding  of  his
relics.  According  to  one  tradition  of  the  fifth  century,  he  was
buried,  thanks  to  the  friendly  intervention  of  Gamaliel,  at  Kafr
Gamala  in  presence  of  the  lamenting  apostles.  His  festival
seems  to  have  been  held  generally  on  the  26th  of  December,  the
day  following  Christmas  ;  which  occasioned  Augustine's  saying
that  unless  God  had  first  become  man  to  die  for  men,  men  would
never  have  found  courage  to  die  for  God.  Epiphanius  {lifer.
204)  numbers  Stephen  among  the  Seventy,  and  one  curious
tradition  (followed  by  Dante,  Purg.  15)  describes  him  as  a  youth.

In  addition  to  the  critical  editions  of  Acts,  ad  loc.,  the  mono
graphs  on  source-criticism  (ACTS,  §  n),  and  various  biographies
of  Paul, see especially *Baur's Paulus

10.  Bibliography.  (KT), 1  39-62  ; *Zeller's Contents and
Origin  of  Acts  (ET)  1237-2462175-176;

Ewald's  History  of  Israel,  ET  7155-164;  Gfriirer,  Die  heilige
Sage  (1838),  I4o8/;  Renan,  Les  Apotres,  chap.  8 ;  Ranch,
St.Kr.  (1857),  352-368  ;  F.  Nitzsch,  ibid.  (1860),  479-502  ;  *Witz,
JDT  (1875),  588-606  [finding  the  red  thread  of  the  speech  in
748  f.}\  W.  Schmidt,  Bericht  d.  Ap.-gesch.  fiber  Steph.
(1882);  Sabatier,  L'afiotre  Paul  (ET),  39-46;  Pfleiderer,  Das
Urchristenthum  (1887),  559yC;  Feine,  JPT  (1890),  89-108;
Beyschlag,  NTTheol.  (ET),  l-^zj/.;  Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the
Traveller,  372-377  ;  J.  Weiss.  St.Kr.  (1893),  489-501  ;  Absicht,
10-15;  *Kranichfeld,  St.Kr.  (1900),  541-562,  '  Der  Gedanken-
gang  in  der  Rede  des  Steph.';  *B.  W.  Bacon,  Biblical  and
Semitic  Studies  (Vale  Univ.,  U.S.A.,  1902),  211-276,  and
Grieve,  Hastings'  DB  4613-615 ;  Harnack,  die  Mission  und
verbreitung  des  Christentums  (1902),  34-37  ;  and  on  the  apocry
phal  Revelatio  sancti  S.,  P.  v.  Winterfeld  (ZNTIV,  1902,  p.
358).  The  papers  by  K.  Schmidt  (Beivcis  des  Glaubens,  1892,  pp.
69-86);  E.  H.  Plumptre  {Biblical  Studies,  347-375),  and  Niisgen
(Neue  Kirch.  Zeits.  1898.  pp.  661-687)  are  unduly  conservative,
and  the  older  sketches  by  Krause  (1786),  Luger  (1836),  and
Thiersch  (1849)  have  been  largely  superseded  by  more  recent
critical  researches  prompted  here,  as  in  so  many  lines,  by  the
genius  of  Baur.  Adequate  materials  for  historical  study  may
be  found  in  the  monographs  marked  by  an  asterisk,  supple
mented  by  Spitta's  Ap-gesch.  (1891),  96-123,  and  discussions  such
as  those  of  Weizsucker,  Das  Apost.  Zeitalter(KT),  1  62-75,  and
McGififert,  Apostolic  Age  (1897),  76-93.  J.  Mo.

STEPS  (niblp),  2  K.  20  ii  =  Is.  38 8  RVm^ ;  EV  DIAL.

STEWARD.  A  convenient  and  familiar  term  used  for :
'•  n'l'^ytNfc  I'1-  '^e  man  over  the  house";  cp  Gen.  43  19
i  K.  16  9  (see  ARZA).

1  One  proof  that  the  speech  rests  on  a  special  source  ;  for  the
idea  of  universalism  was  thoroughly  Lucan  (cp  Lk.  24  47  Acts
28  25^).  In  7  42  another  comparatively  isolated  feature  occurs,
in  the  reference  of  sin  directly  to  providence  (Titius,  23./C).

4797


STOICS

2-  'D'3  pB*0*p.  Gen.  152,  a  difficult  phrase,  on  which  see
ELIEZER,  i,  and  cp  Dillmann,  Delitzsch,  and  Crit.  Bib.  ad  loc.

3.  J3D,  Is. 22 15  RVmg.  (EV  'treasurer'),  applied  to  SHEBNA
(q.V.).

4.  "ix^D,  Dan.  In  AVmg- ;  see  MELZAR.

5.  nb,  i  Ch.  28  i  RV  'ruler.' See  PRINCE,  3.

6.  otKovd/iiOs,  Gal.  42  RV,  etc. Hence  oi/coi/o/xi'a,  Lk.  162^
EV  'stewardship.'

7.  eTriVpoTros,  Mt.  20s  (of  the  master  of  the  vineyard)  Lk.  83
(cp  CHUZA)  ;  see  PROCURATOR.

8.  apxiTpucAivos,  Jn.  2s. See  MEALS,  §  n.

STEWPAN  (Qn"3),  Lev.  11 35t  RV"*-.  See  COOK
ING,  §  4  ;  cp  POTTERY,  §  4.

STOCKS.  For  punishments  involving  restraint  of
the  person,  see  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,  §  12  (end),  and  cp
CHAINS,  PRISON.

The  word  is  used  to  render  :

1-  msnc;  see  col.  3850(7).

2-  DDJ?>  Prov.  7  22  AV ;  see  ANKLETS,  col.  171,  and  n.  i.

3-  pVi ;  see  COLLAR,  3.

4.  to,  Job  13  27  33  ii  EV  (probably  an  Aramaic  loan-word),1
here  mentioned  specifically  as  an  instrument  for  confining  the  feet.

5.  fuAoc,  Acts  16  24,  lit.  'wood.' On  the  'inner  prison  '  into
which  Paul  and  Silas  were  cast  on  this  occasion,  see  PRISON,
§  i  (end).

STOICS  (cTOiKOl[Ti.],  CTO)lKOi[WH],  Acts  17 18).
The  Stoa  was  founded  at  Athens,  about  300  B.C.,  by
Zeno  ;  and  many  of  its  distinctive  doctrines  were  added
during  the  third  century  by  Cleanthes  and  Chrysippus.
Stoicism  was  brought  to  Rome  by  Pansetius  about  140,
and  many  distinguished  Romans  learnt  its  principles
from  Posidonius  (about  86-46).  It  was  the  leading
philosophical  school  in  the  early  empire  ;  the  chief
writers  are  Seneca  (4-65  A.I).),  Epictetus  (Hor.  circa
100),  and  Marcus  Aurelius  (121-180).  The  Stoic
doctrine  was  divided  into  logic,  physics,  and  ethics.
In  logic  its  most  characteristic  feature  is  the  search  for
a  criterion  of  truth,  and  the  placing  of  this  criterion  in
the  feeling  of  certainty.  In  physics  the  Stoics  returned
to  the  crude  pre-Socratic  views,  and  especially  to  those
of  Heraclitus.  They  were  strict  materialists,  and  con
ceived  God,  or  nature,  to  be  in  essence  a  fiery  process.
In  ethics,  Zeno  formulated  the  end  of  life  as  TO  6/xoXo-
yov/Afvus  ffiv,  'consistency';  but  this  was  expanded
by  Cleanthes  into  'life  consistent  with  nature,'  and  by
Chrysippus  into  '  life  according  to  our  experience  of
what  happens  by  nature. '  Thus  ethics  was  set  on  a
basis  of  theoretical  knowledge — though  the  physical
theory  does  not  furnish  any  very  obvious  ethical  guid
ance.  Virtue  alone  was  good,  vice  alone  bad.  Other
things  were  indifferent — e.g. ,  life  and  pleasure,  death
and  pain.  But  of  these  the  former  were  normally
preferable  to  the  latter — only  normally,  however,  so
that  when  life  was  blighted  suicide  was  laudable.

The  Stoics  were  the  first  to  introduce  into  morals  the  idea  of
law — which  is  law  for  man  because  it  is  the  law  of  the  universe.
In  passing  from  'end'  to  'duty,'  from  'virtue'  to  'conscience,'
they  are  the  forerunners  of  modern  ethics.  But  in  abandoning
the  Greek  standpoint  they  fall  into  rigorism,  and  set  up  in  the
passionless  sage  a  colourless  and  uninviting  ideal.

It  was  entirely  in  a  practical  spirit  that  ethics  was  developed
by  the  Romans.  Seneca  dwells  chiefly  on  the  wickedness  of
man  and  on  the  constant  war  which  must  be  waged  against  sin.
Epictetus'  teaching  is  summed  up  in  his  maxim  ave\ov  KOU
an-e'xov,  and  that  of  Marcus  Aurelius  in  the  words,  '  to  be
sufficient  unto  oneself  by  doing  justly  and  thereby  having  calm.'

Stoicism  owes  something  of  its  character  to  Hera
clitus,  something  to  the  Cynics,  something  to  the
political  indifference  of  the  times.  But  its  preoccupa
tion  with  conduct  it  probably  owes  to  a  Semitic  origin.
Zeno  came  from  Cyprus,  and  was  commonly  called  '  the
Phosnician';  Chrysippus  came  from  Cilicia.  Baby
lonia,  Palestine,  Syria,  Cilicia,  Phrygia,  and  the  Phoe
nician  colonies  were  the  homes  of  the  sect,  of  which
European  Greece  produced  not  a  single  distinguished
member.  Naturally  then  there  are  resemblances  between
Stoicism  and  some  of  the  post-exilic  biblical  writings.
The  author  of  Ecclesiastes  had  probably  a  general
1  Cp  POTTERY,  §  8  (2).
4798


*'.<-  "•  \p /  /•

•ttfhek  (§  10).
ii.  lescm  (§  14).
x. tarsis  (§  17).
Result  (§  20)


STOMACHER

acquaintance  with  Stoic  ideas  (see  ErcLESiASTES,  §§
10,  13).  Some  of  the  apocryphal  writings — 4  Mace,
and  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon — display  rather  more  than
this.  Seneca  has  very  many  sayings  which  recall  the
words  of  Jesus  (especially  in  the  SERMON  ON  THE
MOUNT  [y.f.])  and  of  the  Epistles  (and  above  all  those
ascribed  to  Paul).  Many  of  the  parallelisms  are  more
apparent  than  real  ;  but  the  frequency  and  closeness  of
those  which  remain  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  mere
coincidence,  and  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  influence
was  reciprocal.  Seneca  may  well  have  met  Christians
and  heard  Christian  views  at  Rome.  And  Paul  must
have  known  something  of  Stoicism,  of  which  Tarsus
was  perhaps,  next  to  Athens,  the  headquarters.  Stoicism
would  have  its  attractions  for  a  Pharisee.  Paul  can
quote  the  Stoic  Aratus  ( Acts  17  28),  and  he  has  at  least
two  conceptions  which  owe  something  to  Stoicism — the
world-wide  city  of  God  (iCor.  12i2/.  27  Gal.  828  Eph.
2 19  Col.  3n),  and  the  avrdpKeta  of  the  Christian  (2  Cor.
610  98  ii  Phil.  4  ii  1318).  See  HELLENISM,  §§  6,  10.

w.  n.  R.

STOMACHER p'VHB), Is.  324f. See MANTLE,
§  2  (9).

STONES,  FIGURED,  AND  SACRED. See  IDOL,

§'/•

STONES  (PRECIOUS)

Vague  terms  (§  i).  Hebrew  names  classified  (§4).

Uses  of  stones  (§  2).  Greek  names  (§  5).

Stones  known  (§  3).  H.  Priest's  breastplate  (§§  6-20).

i.  0,1,-m  (S  7).  ii.  //V,/.?/»  (§  8). iii.  bdrtketh  (§  9).

viii.  sebi  (§  i~).  ix. ahliimak  (S  16).

xi.  soham($.  18). xii.  yakalom  (^  12-19).
Covering  of  King  of  Tyre  (§  22).
Foundations  of  New  Jerusalem  (§  23).
Bibliography  (§  24).

In  addition  to  the  more  specific  names  for
precious  stones  to  be  discussed  later  there  occur
thk.  following  more  general  terms  : —

!"n^' |?^>, *£ben yckiirilft, Ai'flos Tifiiot, lapis

fretiosus  gemma, 28.1230 i  K.  10  210  f. i  Ch.  202

292  2Ch.  0  i  gf.  and  freq.  [yckiird/t,

1.  Vagueness l)rob-  °"S- '  heavy '  ; cp  2  Ch.  3  6  ;

of  terms. thci1  <rnre' :  CP  '  s- :!  l];  CP  '•??-"

j'fin,  ' ' abne  hffhes,  Ai'dovt  e/cAeKTOvs,
laf>idcs  desiderabiles,  Is.  54 12  [cp  Pr.  815  811];
jn  J3X,  'el-en  ftfn,  fucrObs  \apirtav  (!),  getnina  gratis-
siina  Prov.  178  ;  C'K^D  '33M,  'al'iie  millutin  [from  nS'S
*  fill  up  '],  At'flovs  ei?  TI\V  y\v<f>rji',  gfinmas  ad  ornandum

gc»iinas,  Ex.  35  27  ;  7)13  '33N,  'abac  puk,  Ai'0ov«  iroi-
(tiAous,  [fafitfes]  diversorum  colorant,  i  Ch.  29  2  :  the
last-named  passage  gives  several  of  these  phrases  to
gether.  See  also  MARBLE,  COLOURS,  and  the  names  of
particular  stones.

It  is  only  with  long  experience,  and  wide
knowledge,  that  the  distinction  between  '  pre
cious,"  'tine,'  and  merely  'ornamental'  stones
becomes  established.  The  majority  of  the
'  precious  stones '  of  the  modern  world  were
unknown  in  Western  Asia,  and  still  more  in
the  Mediterranean,  until  Ptolemaic  and  Roman
times  ;  and  even  then  they  were  regarded  merely
as  rare  varieties  of  the  commoner  stones  which
most  nearly  resembled  them — e.g.,  the  many
varieties  of  sntaragdus  known  to  Pliny,  which,
even  so,  do  not  include  the  modern  'emerald.'

Natural  stones  which  are  in  any  way  re
markable — for  brilliance,  colour,  crystalline  form,
or  any  other  property — are  prized  and
treasured  by  many  primitive  peoples ;
either  simply  for  ornament,  or,  more  commonly,
for  use  as  charms  (for  real  or  imaginary  in
fluences)  ;  as  engraved  seals  (for  their  hardness
and  resistance  to  wear)  ;  or  as  currency  (for
their  rarity,  value  in  exchange,  and  extreme
portability).


4799


STONES  (PRECIOUS)


The first


3.  Stones

actually

known  to

the  ancients.


step  towards  identification  of  ancient
'  precious  stones '  is  to  record  what
stones  are  actually  found  to  have  been
in  use  on  ancient  sites  of  different
ages  and  countries :  as  in  the  table
below.

From  this  it  will  be  seen  (i)  that  universally  the
commoner  have  preceded  the  more  '  precious '  stones  ;
(2)  that  even  quartz  and  its  varieties  (chalcedony,  sard,
agate)  were  not  much  worked,  except  in  Egypt,  until
late  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  time;  (3)  that  really
hard  stones,  such  as  beryl,  are  very  rare  until  the  time
of  Alexander  the  Great ;  and  (4)  that  it  is  only  after
his  time  that  the  wealth  of  the  farther  East  became
available  except  by  accident.  For  this  latter  period,
however,  the  centre  of  the  Hellenistic  jewel  trade  was
in  Alexandria  ;  the  translators  of  the  LXX  were  there
fore  most  favourably  situated  for  the  collection  of
authentic  evidence  as  to  the  names  of  the  stones.

It  is  not  to  be  expected,  therefore,  that  the  biblical  vocabulary
will  be  either  copious  or  precise;  or  that  the  Hebrew  terms,
being  of  (at  lowest)  pre-Alexandrine  date,  will  be  found  to
correspond  accurately  with  those  of  ©  ;  for  the  latter  belong  to
a  period  when  the  influx  of  gems  from  the  far  East  had  recently
depreciated  many  stones  which  thitherto  had  been  relatively
'precious.'  Still  more  is  this  the  case  as  between  the  ancient
versions  and  AV,  the  vocabulary  of  which  represents  a  similar
period  of  acute  transition,  due  mainly  to  the  recent  exploitation
of  the  sea-routes  to  farther  Asia  and  to  America  ;  moreover  AV's
vocabulary  seems  to  be  used  quite  at  random — e.g.  the  persistent
interchange  of 'emerald' and  'carbuncle';  and  the  use  of  '  ruby '
for  'coral.'  RV  is  equally  erratic,  but  without  the  same  excuse.
The  Hebrew  phrases  (e.g. ,  i  Ch.  29  2)  clearly  include
4  Hebrew  a'^  ranks  °^  valuat>le  stones,  from  '  stones
to  be  set '  and  treasured  gems  to  the  '  stones
names.  ,  ,.  .  ,  .  *•

of  divers  colours which  are  coupled  with

'  marbles ' (abne sdyis, &•"& '^x, irdpiov, marmor
STONES  ACTUALLY  KNOWN  TO  ANCIENTS

(marked  with  crosses)


2.  Uses.


Name  and  Colour.


K,-J-
Marble .

Porphyry  and  Felspai
Jasper .


:  and  Marble
and  Felspar.


Beryl  (all  kinds) .
Dioptase  CChalkedon1)


Blue—

Turquoise .
Lapis  lazuli .
Amethyst
Sapphire


IITtitf  a
Ouartz

Chalet


Striped—
Onyxf  .
Sardonyj


Egypt.


X X X  I X


t  Cut  across  the  bands,  not  along  them.
4800


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

Parium),  and  were  used  simply  '  to  garnish  the  house.'
No  hard  and  fast  line,  however,  can  be  drawn  between
these  ornamental  stones,  and  the  '  precious  stones '  in
the  stricter  sense  ;  and  the  word  soham  in  particular,
though  it  occurs  in  the  '  breastplate '  of  the  high  priest,
and  is  used  for  the  engraved  '  onyx-stones '  ( AV )  on
his  shoulders,  seems  also  to  be  used  generically  for  the
whole  category  of  variegated  or  brightly  coloured  stones
(see  §  18,  below).

The  interpretation  of  the  several  names  does  not
take  us  much  further,  except  to  classify  the  qualities
for  which  different  stones  were  prized.  Of  the
descriptive  names  : — (a)  the  majority  refer  simply  to
brilliance  and  must  be  restricted  to  transparent  or
translucent  stones  ;  they  give  no  clue  as  to  colour.

i.  n^3,  bdreketh,  Ex.  28  17,  etc.,  from  \/'  flash  ' ;  see  §  9.

•2.  rnpjjt,  ckddh,  Is.  54  12,  from  \/' kindle'  [cp  CRYSTAL].
©  At'Oos  KpiKTTaAAoti  arises  from  confusion  with  rnj3,  kerah,
'ice';  Aq.  A.  rpviravKruov  gives  the  sense  'kindle  by  rubbing1
— i.e.,  either  'polished'  or  'striking  sparks.'  Compare  Ezek.
281416,  'stones  of  fire'  (e'.V"<33N,  on  which,  however,  cp
CHERUB,  §  2,  n.  2,  with  the  Assyrian  reference).

3.  1313,  kadkod,  Is.  54 12  Ez.  2V  16,  from  \/' strike  fire';
but  perhaps  =  Ar.  'red,'  or  a  place-name.  ©  variable  :  see  §  21
[and  cp  CHALCEDONY,  i].

(&)  Next  come  descriptions  of  colour,  without  refer
ence  to  brilliance,  though  not  therefore  co  be  confined  to
opaque  stones  :  these  names  are  rare  and  doubtful.

1.  n~Ni odem, Ex.  -817, etc., properly 'red'; © vdpSiov
(cp Pens, zerd, '  yellow-red  ') ; but perhaps a place  -  name
'  Edomite  stone ' ;  see  §  7.

2.  13B',  st-ba,  Ex.  28  19,  etc.,  may  perhaps  =  Ar.  'red';  but  is
more  probably  a  loan-word  or  a  place-name  ;  see  below,  §  15.

3.  nniy,  soham, Ex.  28  20,  etc.,  from  \/ '  pale  '  =  Ar.  soham,
or  perhaps  Ar.  mitsahhain  '  striped  garment '  (Ges.),  which  if
established  would  be  decisive  in  favour  of  a  banded  stone :  or
Ass.  sAiiitii,  a  dark  stone  from  Meluhha  in  W.  Babylonia  (Del.
Ifll'B,  s.v.,  and  Schrader,  COTft)  130  [cp,  however,  BERYL,
§  4])  :  or  a  place-name  :  or  corrupt ;  see  ONYX,  and  §  18  below.

(c)  Other  names  describe  qualities  or  uses  other  than
brilliance  or  colour  : —

1.  TO/HN,  ahldmdh,  Ex.  28  19,  etc.,  perhaps  from  \/'  dream,'
which identifies the stone  as the well-known charm against
bad dreams and drunkenness  =  © aju.e'0v<TTOs, the mod.
'amethyst.' [But  see  AMETHYST,  end,  and  Hommel,  AHT
205 /.  283.]

2.  TSD, sapplr, Ex.  28 19, etc. from \/'  engrave ' ; the
'  inscription  stone '  par  excellence  (Tg.  says  the  Tables  of  the
Law  were  made  of  it)  ;  or  perhaps  akin  to  Ass.  supur  '  thumb
nail  '  signature — i.e.,  signet-stone,  see  §  5. It  is  described  as
Mike  the  body  of  heaven,'  Ex.  24  10  ;  and  ©  croijr^eipos  identifies
it  as  lapis  lazuli. See  SAPPHIRE.

3.  "I'Ctt1,  siiinlr,  Ezek.  89,  etc.,  from  \/'  sharp,' 'hard,'  Eg.
asiitcr,  Gg.  cr/uupis,  Germ.  Smirgel,  Eng.  emery,  is  not  strictly
a 'precious  stone," though translated 'diamond'  in Jer.  17 1
AV,  and  'adamant'  in  Ezek.  89  Zech.  7  12  ;  see  ADAMANT.

4.  CTV,  yaluilom,  Ex.  28  18, etc.,  from  \/' strike  hard': cp
perhaps  hallamis  'flint,'  and  Ass.  ehitesu,  a  hard  stone  used
for rings and on chariot wheels (ZD.1TG,  40  728). [To the
references  in  FLINT  (y.7>.)  add  ZDMG±&  570.]

(d)  Others  again  are  clearly  place-names,  denoting
the  source  of  supply  :

1.  kadkod  (see  a,  3,  above)  for  which  ©  has  x°P_X°P  m  Ezek.
27  16. In  Is.  54  12,  Symm.  has  /capxrySoVioi'  ;  cp  Plin.  //.V  37  30
for  the  'Carthaginian  carbuncle,' and  Pesh.  karkednd  for  sfbo
in  Ex.  28  1 9  39  12.

2.  rrSNn, ramoth,  Ezek.  27  16 © pa.fi.iap,  Vg.  scricitm, RV
'coral, "need  not  be  a  stone  at  all. [See  CORAL,  but  cp  also
RUBY.]

3.  sfbo  (see  l>2,  above), Ex.  28  iq  39  12,  may  be  the  i/*e<i>o),
'  Psepho,'  of  Strabo,  822,  Theophr.  34,  an  island  up  the  Nile,
S.  of  Meroe,  celebrated  for  its  gems  ;  but  it  is  perhaps  a  loan
word  ;  see  below,  §  15.

4.  C^C'lFl,  tars'ts,  Ex.  2820,  etc.,  cp  'stone  of  Tarshish,'  Ezek.
lOg,  etc.  ;  see  TARSHISH.

5  and  6.  'adem  ('Kdom,'  see  bt,  above)  and  soham  (see  ^3,
above  ;  sdhlm,  '  Soheim '  in  Yemen)  may  also  be  place-names.

(e)  Finally, several names, which have no clear
significance  in  Hebrew,  are  probably  loan-words: —

i.  Ci.?:',  leshem,  Ex.  23  19,  etc.,  recalls  Eg.  reshetn  (Hommel,
AHT,  283). [For  another  view  see  JACINTH.]
4801


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

2.  ^]2J,  nophek,  Ex.  28  18,  etc.,  has  been  compared  with  Eg.
tn-f-k-t  and  Ass.  lupakku.  The  latter  is  more  probable  ;  see
EMERALD,  and  §  10  below.

3-  '"'^p?'  pitdah,  Ex.  2817,  etc-i  seems  to  be  Ass.  hipindu.
The  Skt.  pita,  'pale-yellow,1  is  unlikely;  see  TOPAZ,  and  §  8
below.

4.  seta  (see  62,  d$,  above), Ex.  28  19  may  be  Ass.  sub-it;
but  perhaps  also  Ar. 'red1; or  the  place-name  'Psepho,'  see
b  and  d  above.

5.  >"IEE^,  yasephfh,  Ex.  28  20,  etc.  seems to be  Ass.  yaspu,
aspu  ;  and  perhaps  also  =  Eg.  h-s-p-d,  see  §  13  below.

These  vague  terms  [see  also  PEARL]  obviously  give
little  information  ;  and  in  no  case  do  we  know  the
colour  of  the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian  equivalents.  If
any  conclusions,  therefore,  are  to  be  drawn  from  them
at  all,  it  must  be  by  means  of  the  renderings  of  (5.

The  Greek  vocabulary  may  be  classified  in  the  same
way  as  the  Hebrew.

(a)  Brilliance  is  denoted  only  by  acSpaf  and  <T/j.apay&os.

"a.v6pa£,  'hot  coal,'  for  nopliek  (§  4,  e  2,  above);  <rfj.dpaySos,

'dazzling,'  for  bdreketh  (§  4,  a\,  above),  and  also  for  sohain

_  (§  4.  ^;3>  above), Ex.  28  9  8627  396  (cp  /uopaye'w,

6.  Greek napavyeia,  and  perhaps  jULap/uaipen/ ; Skt.  Mara-
names, kata is a derivative, like It. esmeralda and

Eng.  emerald;  <rfi.  itself  may  be  a  corruption
of  barcketh  above).

(/>)  Colour  gives  ii<x/ai/0os,  At'Oos  6  Trpdcrifos,  xpv<rcnrpa.cros  and
Xpuox>Ai0os  ;  cp  <rdpSioi>  below  (only  in  NT:  from  the  blue
flower  of  that  name;  the  Ind.  jacut  seems  to  be  a  derivative,
like  Eng.  jacinth).

Trpao-ii'os  (A.  6  ?rp.  for  sSham  [§  4,  ^3,  above],  Gen.  2  12  ;  cp
Xpua-oTrpaeros,  Rev.  21  20),  '  leek  green.'

Xpu<r6Ai#os  (for  tarshlsh  [§  4,  1/4,  above]),  'gold-stone.'

(c)  Other  qualities  give  the  following  : —

aSdjuai/Tii'ck,  'intractable.'  In  class  Gk.  =  ' steel-like.'  For
sdmir  (§  4,  c  3,  above),  Jer.  17  I  ;  cp  orepe'a  ireVpa,  Ez.  89,  and
the  corrupt  6ia  TTO.VTO<;  (a6djiaj'TOs),  Kz.  3  9.

afie'0uc7T<K,  'charm  against  drunkenness';  for  ahldmdh  (§  4,
ci,  above),  the  Greek  superstition  taking  the  place  of  the  Hebrew.

KpucrraAAos,  'ice' — i.e.,  'crystal.'  In  Is.  54  12  a  misreading
of  fnpM  (see  §  4,  a2,  above).  In  Rev.  46  22  i  a  simile  for  clear
water  ;  in  Rev.  21  n  Kpv<rra.\\i^ovri.,  '  turning  into  crystal.'

oi/v£,  'finger-nail'  (for  sohain  [§  4,  £3,  above].  Popularly
supposed,  later,  to  be  descriptive  (Plin.  HNSi  24)  ;  but  probably
a  loan-word,  see  below.

crapSocuf — i.e.,  '  sard-onyx ' ;  Rev.  21  2ot,  but  cp  Vg.  sardonyx
for  so/iam,  fv  ovv\i,  Job  28  16.

((/)  Place-names  are  responsible  for  the  following  : —

axar>)«  (  =  si'bo  [§  4,  62,  d 3,  1-4]),  from  the  river  Achates  in
Sicily.

Aiyiiptov  (  =  lisem  [§  4,  ei,  above]),  from  Liguria  in  N.  Italy.
The  descriptive  talismanic  Avyyoiipior  does  not  occur  in  ©.

crdpSiov  \=  ode  in  [§  4,  b  i,  d*,,  above],  popularly  derived  from
Sarclis  in  Lydia ;  but  probably  originally  a  loan-word;  see
below  (c).

X<iAio)5a)i'  (Rev.  21  igt  only),  from  Chalcedon  in  Bithynia.

Cp  Odpcms,  pOLfKaQ,  and  x°PX°Pt  transliterated,  and  the
Kap\r)S6vi.oi>  of  Symm.  in  Is.  54  12  (  =  Aai/£i><i[$  4,  ^3,  d  i  ]  iWn-is).

(e)  Loan-words,  finally,  are  the  following  : —

^jjpiiAAtoi'  (  =  si>/ia>;i  [§  4,  b  3,  above],  and  [by  error]  yascplteh
[8  4,  £5,  above],  see  below);  Pers.  billaur,  Skt.  vaidfirya,
Prakt.  t't'ltiriya,  Pesh.  b-r-w-l-a.

tacTTrcs  (  =_>'tis<~/>/if'/i),  Heb.  cp  Ass.  aspu.

cra7rf/)€ipos  (  =  sappir  [§  4,  C2,  above]),  Heb.

<rdp6ioi'(  =  'pdem  \\^,b\,d$,  above),  though  actually  obtained
near  Sardis  in  Lydia,  is  probably  from  Pers.  zerd,  'yellow-red.'

TOTrcU/oi'  (=f>itdtlh  [§  4,  ^3,  above],  perh.  Heb.,  cp  Ass.
hipindu ;  but  derived  by  Pliny  (//Arb7s)  from  the  word  'to
seek'  in  the  language  of  the  'cave-dwellers'  of  the  Topaz-island
in  the  Red  Sea.  In  Ps.ll9i27  TOTTOL^IOV  =  TO  TtaC,i.f>v—paz  (IS),
'  refined  gold  '  ;  cp  nag  in  Cant.  5  n  [on  which  see  GOLD,  g  \  f.  ;
TOPAZ,  jj  2,  n.  i  ;  UPHAZ],

6fuf ,  bi'v\iov  (popularly  derived  from  ocuf,  '  finger-nail ')  is
probably  Ass.  unku,  '  ring,'  cp  kttnuku,  '  conical  seal ' ;  cp
Eg.  anak  (Muss-Arnolt,  Sem.  ll'ords,  139).  The  explanation,
Si/v£  =  '  finger-nail,'  occurs  first  in  Pliny,  //Ar3724  (quoting
Sudines),  and  is  supported  by  the  remote  resemblance  of  a  pale
onyx  (the  black  onyx  was  not  worked  till  late  Hellenistic  times)
to  a  finger-nail  with  its  lunula  in  the  flesh  beneath.  But  the
word  is  as  old  as  Ktesias  (about  400  B.C.)  and  may  have  arisen
from  the  Assyrian  custom  of  using  the  impression  of  the  thumb
nail  (supur  ;  see  sapp'ir,  above)  as  the  signature  of  a  clay-tablet  :
6yu£  would  then  mean  '  thumb-nail  stone'  in  the  sense  of '  signet.'

For  the  interpretation  of  this  Greek  vocabulary,  we
have  fortunately  a  good  and  slightly  earlier  authority  in
the  treatise  of  Theophrastus,  Trepi  \i0uv  (about  300
B.C.),  which  sums  up  Greek  knowledge  on  the  subject
just  at  the  moment  when  Alexander's  conquest  had
thrown  open  the  farther  East,  but  before  its  effects  had
become  generally  felt.  For  the  interpretation  of  the

4802


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

additional  terms  added  by  the  Apocalypse,  we  have
again  a  nearly  contemporary  commentary  in  Pliny,  who
represents  the  abundant  materials,  but  mainly  empirical
classification,  of  the  lapidaries  of  the  Early  Roman
Empire.  That  the  vocabulary  of  the  LXX  is  probably
trustworthy,  is  suggested  by  the  general  uniformity  of
its  rendering.  So  uniform,  indeed,  are  these,  that  in
the  four  cases  in  which  serious  discrepancies  occur  (see
under  AGATE,  BERYL,  ONYX,  and  below),  it  is  prob
ably  safe  to  assume  that  it  is  the  Hebrew  text  which  is
at  fault.  The  phrases  in  the  Apocalypse,  also,  display
close  acquaintance  with  current  terminology,  and  supply
more  than  one  striking  confirmation  of  the  conclusions
derived  from  the  comparison  of  MT  and  the  LXX.

We  may,  therefore,  proceed  to  discuss  the  identifica
tions  supplied  by  the  LXX  renderings.  Of  these,  by

„. ,  . , far  the  greater  number  are  contained

'. **> 1 e.a a  in  the  description  of  the  high  priest's

istpiate. breastplatei Ex  2817/1, to be read

with  the  parallel  passage  Ex.  39  \off. and  the  corrupt

variant,  Ez.  2813  (the  'covering  of  the  king  of  Tyre').

It  will  therefore  be  convenient  to  take  these  stones  in

the  order  in  which  they  occur, and  to  append  (§  21  jp.)

those  which  do  not  occur  in  the  breastplate.

Two preliminary considerations should be noted.

(1)  The BREASTPLATE  (q.v.)t when  folded  for use,
measured  a  span  (about  8  in. )  in  each  direction. The
space  available  for  each  stone  with  its  setting  was  there
fore  as  much  as  2  x  z\  in. ;  and  if  the  same  proportion
was observed between stone and setting as was
customary in ancient  jewellery, the  stones themselves
may  have  been  as  large  as  2  x  i^  in. ,  and  cannot  have
been  much  less  than  half  that  size. They  were  there
fore  each  a  good  deal  larger  than  the  average  size  of
the  common  Babylonian  cylinder  or  Egyptian  scarab.
We are  therefore  probably  safe  in  excluding, on the
ground  of  size  alone,  stones  which  are  really  rare  and
'  precious,' even if  these stones themselves could be
shown to have been known. (2) Each stone was
engraved  with  the  name  of  a  tribe,  and  some  of  these
names  are  of  some  length. This  again  postulates  a  large
surface  and  low  hardness. The  private  Jewish  name-
signets  vary  from  i|-ii  in.  in  length,  and  are  of  a  very
moderate  degree  of  hardness  (7  or  less).

i.  'Odem,  ffdpdiov,  sardius,  Ex.  2817  39 10  (cp  F.z.
2813,  and  sanfiits.  Rev.  21 20).  Both  names  signify

7.  Identification  ',red' t(see  above'|§  4,  *',  5*).  ™d

of  stones,  OT : th<:  stone  1S  no  d"uh'  the  modern
,._.  ,  red  or  orange  '  sard, the  commonest

Udem.  ,.

of all engraved stones in ancient

times  (cp  Plin.  //.V37  106).  The  best  of  them  came  in
Greek  times  from  Sardis  and  Babylon,  and  a  fine  deep
red  kind  from  Yemen  (hence  perhaps  [cp  SARDIUS]
'  Edomite  stone,'  from  the  proximate  source  of  supply).
The  material  (translucent  quartz  stained  with  iron)  is
quite  common,  and  merges  in  the  clearer  and  lighter-
tinted  '  carnelian  '  and  '  red  agate. '  As  this  is  probably
denoted  by  sMci  dxdrrjs  (§  15),  it  is  not  impossible  that
'odem  may  originally  have  meant  the  opaque  blood-red
jasper,1  which  is  common  in  early  Egypt,  was  used  in
Babylonia  and  Assyria,  and  also  in  Greece,  and  was
valued  as  a  charm  against  hemorrhage.

ii.  Pitddh,  roirdfrov,  topazius  (Ex.  2817  39 10,  cp  Ez.
28 13  ;  in  Rev.  21  20  roirdfrov  is  exchanged  with  <rapS6vv^,
see  below)  is  identified  with  Ass.  hipindu,  a
'  flashing  stone '  which  recalls  the  '  stones
of  fire'  in  Ez.  281416,  and  the  abne  ekddh  in  Is.  54 12.
The  rendering  Toirdfcov  makes  it  clear  that  the  LXX
understood  by  pifdah,  a  stone  which  was  ( i )  translucent,

(2)  yellow. As  the  modern  '  topaz  '  was  hardly  known  2
before  Greek  times,  and  is  indistinguishable,  except  by

1  So  F.  Petrie,  in  Hastings'  Dfi,  s.v.  '  Precious  Stones'— a  valu
able  and  suggestive  commentary  based  largely  upon  new  material.

2  Brit.  Mus.  C,uide  to  Rab.  and  Ass.  A  ntiq.  (p.  136)  gives  both
'emerald'  and  'topaz'  in  a  list  of  materials  used  for  cylinders;
and  nos.  27  and  39  in  the  Babylonian  Room  are  apparently  of  a
variety  of  base  emerald  or  beryl  ('  mother  of  emerald '). Dr.

4803


8.  Pitdah.  .


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

its  superior  hardness,  from  '  false  topaz,'  or  yellow  rock-
crystal,  it  is  possible  that  the  latter  is  meant.  The
Toirafiov  of  the  Greeks  was  a  translucent,  golden-
coloured  (xpvffoeidts  dTroffTiXpov  foyyos,  Strabo,  770),
or  yellow-green,  stone  (e  virenti  genere,  Plin.  HN
378),  probably  the  modern  'chrysolite,'  or  'peridot'.
This  was  a  noble  variety  of  olivine,  and  consequently
of  the  yellow  '  serpentine  '  (Ar.  'asfar,  'yellow'),  which
was  in  common  use  for  scarabs  and  cylinders  of  all
dates.  It  is  identified  by  Petrie  [and  independently  by
Cheyne  ;  see  GOLD,  §  i  b  ;  Oi'HiR,  §  i  ;  TOPAZ,  §  2]
with  the  original  pit  dak;  the  only  objection  to  this  being
that  hipindu  was  a  '  flashing '  stone.  This  '  chrysolite  '
was  found  in  the  Levant,  and  occasionally  in  consider
able  masses ;  but  the  ancient  supply  came  from  an
island  (roirdfros  vf/ffos)  in  the  Red  Sea,  which  was  the
monopoly  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  (Strabo,  770  ;  Diod.
Sic.  839;  Plin.  HN 37 8  634).  Like  olivine,  'chrysolite'
is  soft  and  easily  engraved — eadem  sola  nobllium  limam
sentit  (Plin.  HN 37 8).

iii.  Bdrdketk,  fffidpaydos,  smaragdus,  Ex.  2817  39 10
(Ez.  2813,  ff/j,dpaydos  ;  but  bdriketh  \smaragdus\  changes

9  Bareketh  places  with  yahfll5m  \.iasPis\  CP  §  I2/
below)  ;  Rev.  21  20  has  fffj.dpa.ydos,  sma
ragdus,  in  the  place  of  bdrtketh,  and  Rev.  4s  has
Ipis  .  .  .  8/j.oios  opdfffi  ffna.pa.yoi.vtjj.  In  Ex.  28g  8627
396,  fffidpaydos  translates  soham  (Vg.  onyx)  where  it  is
used  of  the  high  priest's  shoulder-stones.  Both  bdrtketh
and  ff/j.dpaydos  originally  denote  brilliance  only  ;  e.g. ,
Herod.  244  describes  a  ffrri\r;  (probably  a  columnar
natural  crystal)  fffiapdydov  \i6ov  \dfiir  OVTOS  rds  V<JKTO,S
fj.fya.6os,1  'so  large  as  to  give  light  at  night,'  but  says
nothing  of  the  colour  either  of  the  stone  or  of  the
gleam.  Of  this  same  fffj.dpa.ydos  Theophrastus  (25)
says  that  it  was  of  the  '  Bactrian '  variety,  et  fj.rj  dpa.
\(/evdris  afj.dpa.y5os,  and  he  adds  (24)  other  instances  of
gigantic  specimens  which  came  to  Egypt,  ev  ddipois
Trapa,  TOV  'Ra/ivXuviuv  /3a,ffi\tws,  but  confuses  them  all
with  the  '  copper-emerald '  (dioptcue)  of  Cyprus  and
Chalcedon  (xa.\Krjduv,  Rev.  21 20).  Now,  only  two
brilliant  stones  occur  in  such  columnar  crr^Xai — the
'rock  crystal,'  and  the  'beryl.'  In  favour  of  'rock
crystal '  we  may  quote  ( i )  the  comparison  of  the  rainbow
with  fffj.dpa.ydos  in  Rev.  43;  (2)  the  statement  of  Pliny
(//Ar37  64),  quoted  by  Petrie  (Hastings'  DB),  that  Nero
used  a  fffj.dpa.ydos  to  aid  his  sight — a  statement  to  be
compared  with  the  superstition,  which  survives,  that
better  spectacles  are  made  from  rock  crystal  than  from
glass  ;  (3)  Martial's  association  of  smaragdus  with
adamas  (v.  Hi);  (4)  the  probability  that  hexagonal
beryl  in  its  paler  varieties  was  regarded  as  a  harder  and
greenish  variety  of  'milky  quartz'  ;  (5)  the  certainty
that,  as  early  as  Theophrastus,  a  very  large  number
of  stones,  all  brilliant,  and  of  all  shades  of  green,  from
aquamarine  to  dioptase  (xa.\K7idui>),  were  included
generically  under  fffidpaydos.

In  favour  of  '  beryl,'  on  the  other  hand,  are  the
following  considerations.  (i)  From  Theophrastus
onward  the  fffidpaydos  was  more  or  less  definitely
coloured — Theophrastus,  however,  does  not  say  -what
colour — and  was  believed  to  originate  by  the  action  of
water  upon  green  jasper  (faffirts,  Theophr.  27,  see  §  13).
(2)  Both  the  'beryl'  and  its  deep -green  'emerald'
variety  have  been  universally  believed  to  give  relief  to
the  eyes  ;  but  this  was  through  their  restful  colour,  not
through  their  refractive  powers,  and  'beryls'  in  particular
had  already  given  rise  to  It.  barelle  and  High-Germ.
brille,  before  the  invention  of  spectacle-glasses.  (3)  The

Budge  kindly  supplies  the  further  information  'we  have  no
cylinders  which  may  he  certainly  called  topaz,  but  I  have  seen
several  in  Mesopotamia  among  the  natives ' ;  he  adds  that  nos.
128  and  679  (of  Pehlevi  time)  are  of  'topaz.'  In  PEFQ,  1902,
p.  326,  the  announcement  is  made  that  a  fragment  of 'emerald '
has  been  found  in  a  pre-historic  deposit  at  Gezer ;  but  no
authority  is  given  for  the  mineralogical  determination.

1  So  MSS.  ;  see  Stein  (1881).  Wiedemann  defends  the
conjecture  /meyiAu>$,  '  shining  with  great  brilliancy,'  and  ascribes
the  glow  to  ancient  use  of  a  phosphorescent  paint.

4804


10.  N6phek.


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

kindred  belief  that  '  beryl '  shed  a  light  of  its  own  was
known  to  Theophrastus  (I.e. ,  23),  and  has  survived  in
It.  brillare  (Low  Lat.  berillare*}  and  Eng.  brilliant.
(4)  The  probability  that  ffin.dpa.ydos  could  be  imitated
(\ftfvdrjs  fffj..,  Theophr.  25)  suits  the  prevailing  greenish
tinge  of  ancient  glass  better  than  a  quite  colourless
stone  ;  cp,  moreover,  Rev.  46,  6dXa<rffa  va\it>ri  Ofj,oia
KpvffTd\\({).  (5)  The  collocation  of  /cpuoraXXy  with
(Tfj.apaydii'(f3  in  Rev.  4  w.  6  3  suggests  that  after  all  this
writer  distinguished  '  rock  crystal1  and  '  smaragdus.'

As  to  bartketh,  the  probability  is  (i)  that  originally
it  meant  the  colourless  flashing  'rock  crystal,'  which
was  commonly  used  for  engraving,  in  Egypt  of  all
periods,  in  Mesopotamia  from  the  later  Babylonian
time  onwards,  and  more  rarely  in  prehistoric  Greece  ;
(2)  that  this  meaning  did  not  wholly  die  out  even  after
the  LXX  translation  was  made,  but  survived  in  the
use  of  <r/ndpaydos  in  Rev.  43,  and  in  the  confusion  with
yahaldm  in  MT  of  Ez.  2813  (see  below,  §  19)  ;  (3)  that
the  obvious  likeness  between  the  words,  and  the  current
confusion  between  the  hexagonal  forms  of  '  quartz '
and  pale  '  beryl,'  caused  the  LXX  to  render  bdrtketh  by
ffjudpaySos,  and  provoked  the  substitution  for  yaslphch
of  yahaldm  in  MT,  so  as  to  separate  what  now  were
two  adjacent  green  stones.1

iv.  Nophek,  ai>0pa%,  carbunculus  (Ex.  28 18  39  n);  in
Ez.  28  13  &v6pal;  remains,  but  ndphek  [Vg.  carbuncului\
changes  places  with  sappir  [sapphirus~]  of
§  ii.  In  Ez.  27i6  the  LXX  mistrans
lates,  and  Vg.  has  simply  gemmam  ;  Rev.  21 20  substi
tutes  -^a.\Krj5(>]v].  If  nophek  could  be  identified  with
Egyptian  m-f-k-t(see  EMERALD  [end]),  either  malachite
or  turquoise  would  be  meant  ;  and  this  is  supported  by
the  equivalent  xaX/cijSwi'  (copper-emerald)  of  Rev.  21  20 ;
see  §  23,  below.  But  this  identification  would  ignore  the
uniform  rendering  of  both  the  LXX  and  Vg.  ;  and  as
av6pa£  (carbuncitlus)  is  descriptive  and  appropriate,
whilst  nophek  (probably  a  loan-word)  gives  no  clue,  it
is  better  to  accept  the  identification  of  the  LXX  with  a
translucent  red  stone.  This  latter,  since  the  '  ruby '  of
Ceylon  and  Burma,  and  likewise  the  true  'carbuncle,'
were  unknown  to  Theophrastus  (see  CARBUNCLE),  must
denote  the  large  class  of  red  '  garnets '  ( '  pyrope, '  '  alman-
tline,'  etc. ),  which  are  found  in  abundance  and  of  very
considerable  size,  were  known  in  Egypt  from  prehistoric
times,  were  commonly  used  for  signets  in  Hellenistic
times,  and  are  easily  engraved.  As  to  nophek  itself,  the
alternative  derivation,  from  the  lupakku  of  Am.  Tab.
202 16  [cp  EMERALD,  2],  may  probably  be  accepted.  Of
the  colour  of  this  lupakku  we  have  no  information  ;  but
we  know  that  it  came  as  tribute  to  Egypt  from  Ashkelon
— i.e.,  from  the  NE.  This  fact  is  compatible  with
the  occurrence  of  nophek  among  the  wares  sent  from
Syria  to  Tyre  in  Ez.  27  16.

v. Sappir, (raTrfaipos, sapphirus (Ex.  28 18 39 n);

in Ezek.  2813 crctTr^eipos remains, but sappir [Vg.

_ . sapphirus} changes places with nophek,

11.  tsappir. ^carbuncuius] [§ I0j  . Rev.  21  20 has

ffdwtpeLpa).  The  true  'sapphire'  (blue  corundum)  was
almost  unknown  before  Roman  Imperial  times,  and
when  known  was  included,  from  its  clear  blue  colour,
under  vdKivdos1*  (see  §  23,  below).  The  adamas
Cyprius,  which  occurred  in  the  copper-mines  and  was
known  to  Pliny  for  its  sky-blue  colour,  was  probably
'  azurite. '  2a7T</>eipos,  on  the  other  hand,  is  identi
fied  (Theophr.  37  ;  cp  55,  KVOLVOS  ffKvdjjs,  and  Plin.
HN  37 120  '  optime  apud  Medos'),  with  the  opaque
blue  'lapis  lazuli'  of  Turkestan,  and  the  -uknu  of
Babylonia  and  Assyria,  which  was  known  also  in  Egypt

1  The  '  oriental  emerald  '  (green  corundum)  is  in  any  case  out
of  the  question. It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  known  in  anti
quity,  and Sanscr. inarakata,  apparently  a loan-word from
Gk.,  suggests  that,  when  discovered,  it  was  regarded  merely  as
a  superior  variety  of  oyidpaySos.

2  The  only  indubitable description is that  of  Solinus, see
King,  Nat.  Hist,  of  Free.  Stones,  245  f.  \  the  earliest  specimens
are  noted  in  King,  I.e.  253.

4805


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

and  Greece  from  prehistoric  times,  and  was  frequently
sent  as  a  present  from  Babylon  to  Egypt  in  the  Tell-
el-Amarna  period.  As  its  Hebrew  name  implies,  it  is
easily  engraved,  and  occurs  in  large  enough  masses  to
make  tablets  like  the  'Tables  of  the  Law'  (ace.  to
Targ.  ;  cp  the  temple  dedication  on  lapis  lazuli,  Brit.
Mus.  [Depart.  Assyr.  Antiq.]  No.  91013).  [Cp
SAPPHIRE.]

vi. Yahaldm, faffiris, iaspis (Ex.  27 18 39  u)  ; in

Ezek.  2813  faffiris remains, but  yahaldm  [Vg. iaspis\

12 Yahilom cnan£es  places  with  bdritketh  \smarag-

aTiH  V55^nViSh  l/us^  see  §  9>- It  is  most  improbable

in  MT that  y&stPhih  (§  z?)  could  *'ave  so  far

changed its significance that laairts

should  be  used  by  preference  to  render  yahaldm. [Cp

JASPER,  adfin.\ Either  i'acrTrts,  therefore,  or  yahaldin

must  be  transferred  to the twelfth  place  (§ 19), and

we  have  seen  reason  already  (under  bartketh,  §  9)  to

suppose  that  yasHpheh should be  restored here, and

yahaldm transferred to no. xii. For other reasons

identifying  yahd lorn  with  no.  xii.  see  below,  §  19.

YasSpheh, which is a  loan-word (Ass.  yaspfi  aspu,
Eg. h-s-p-d),  gives  no  clue, save  that  aspfi  was  large


13.  Yasfipheh.


enough, and not too hard, to be


employed  for  the  royal  seal  of  Asur-
bani-pal  (Nabunahid  stele).  That  laairis,  on  the
other  hand,  was  (i)  a  dull  or  opaque  stone,  is  shown
by  the  combination  idairidi  /ecu  (rapdiLp  in  Rev.  43  (see
§  23,  below),  by  the  compound  terms  iaspachates  and
iasponyx  known  to  Pliny  (HN,  xxxvii.  1654  937),  and
by  Martial's  association  of  iaspis  with  sardonychus  (v.
Hi  ix.  602o);  and  (2)  that  it  was  a  green  stone  is
probable  from  association  with  the  ff/jidpaydos  of  the
Cypriote  copper-mines  in  Theophrastus  (27  ;  cp  idcnnSi
KpvffTa\\i£oi>Ti,  'jasper  turning  into  a  clear  ice-like
stone,'  Rev.  21  n)  and  from  its  mediaeval  character  (see
JASPER).  But  (3)  it  had  many  variants  ;  among  them
a  red  (ta,(riris=kadkod  Is.  54 12,  cp  Symm.  Kapx^SovLov,
cp  iaspachates,  above),  a  yellow  (fitlva,  Virg.  s£n.
4261),  and  an  opalescent,  perhaps  actually  the  'opal'
(opalus,  Plin.  HN  37 21  :  \/Skt.  opala,  'stone').  [Cp
JASPER.]  All  this  combines  to  show  that  yasfpheh,
faffTTis,  is  the  modern  'jasper'  (opaque  massive  silica),
and  especially  its  green  variety,  which  is  widely  distri
buted,  often  of  considerable  size,  and  easily  engraved,
being  used  commonly  for  Egyptian  scarabs  of  all  periods,
for  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  cylinders,  and  for  the  seal-
stones  of  prehistoric  Greece  (for  engraved  specimens
from  the  Syrian  coast  [in  Louvre],  see  Ledrain,  Notice
Sommaire  des  Monuments  Phtfniciens,  Nos.  408,  427,
432/1  437).  All  varieties  of  jasper  are  liable  to  occur
together,  and  are  associated,  and  easily  confused,  with
the  green  chalcedony  ('  plasma,'  '  prase'  ;  the  common
'bloodstone'  is  plasma  spotted  with  red  jasper),  with
the  more  opaque  varieties  of  agate,  and  with  the  opal
group,  which  all  have  practically  identical  composition.
The  green  jasper,  being  the  rarest,  was  not  unnaturally
the  most  prized  in  antiquity,  and  gave  its  name  to  the
group.  As  the  Cypriote  passage  (Theophr.  27)  shows,
green  jasper  was  not  clearly  distinguished  from  the
harder  varieties  of  '  malachite  '  and  other  green  copper-
minerals  (see  §  18,  below).

vii. Ltsem, \iytpiov, ligurins (Ex.  28 19 39 12); in
Ezek.  28 13,  (5  has  dpyvpiov  /ecu  -x.pvffiov  /ecu  Ai-y.  ; MT
_  ,  Vg. omit, ending the list with zahab

.  esem.  ^aurum^  jn  the  tenth  place,  see  §  22,
below  (Rev.  2l2o  gives  xpvffoTrpaaos  in  the  correspond
ing  place  :  see  §  23).  L<*sem,  probably  a.  loan-word
(?  Eg.  reshem,  but  cp  JACINTH),  gives  no  clue.
Aiyi'ipiov  was  taken  by  some  to  be  a  place-name,  and
the  stone  seems  to  have  been  confused  with  '  amber,'
from  its  electrical  qualities  (which  are  possessed  by
several  different  gems)  ;  but  Theophr.  28  gives  \iy-
yoi'ipiov  (i.e.  \vyKfa  ovpbv)  with  a  folk-tale  about  its
origin,  and  a  distinction  between  a  clearer  and  a
darker  tinted  variety.  RV  gives  'jacinth'  (with  mg.,

4806


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

•  or,  amber ')  ;  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  jacinth
was  either  found  in  Liguria,  or  was  known  at  all till
Roman  times. Probably  a  clear  yellow  stone  is  meant,
like 'cairngorm'  or 'false  topaz'  (iron-tinted  quartz).
The  rendering  of  Rev.  21  20,  xpturfarpooufi  suggests  a
greenish  yellow  stone,  and  perhaps  serves  to  differentiate
the  adjacent  yellow  \pvcro\i6os  (§  17).

viii.  &&>,  dxanjs,  achates  (Ex.  2819  39  12  :  in  Ezek.
•J-  (?  has  dxdrtjs  :  (5  MT  Vg.  omit  ;  Rev.  21  20  in
he  corresponding  place  has  vJntivOos).
"'  A'^J  may  be  a  loan-word  (Ass.  3ubu)  or
the  place-name  tye^u,  an  island  S.  of  Mcroe,  noted  for
its  gems  (Theophr.  34,  Strabo,  822).  [Cp  CHALCKDONY,
2.]  'Axo/rifs  I  also  a  place-name)  is  definitely  the  'Sicilian
agate.'  Pesh.  karkecind  in  Ex.  28 19  39 12  may  be  a
corruption  of  Ka.pxiioJvi.os  (cp  Sym:n.  on  Is.  54 12,
kadkjj,  and  §  21,  below),  or  of  AalkdJ  itself.  For
( i )  Sicilian  stones  going  eastward  would  probably  travel
via  Carthage,  (2)  similar  'agates'  may  have  been  found
in  N.  Africa,  (3)  a  Carthaginian  'carbuncle'  is  known
to  Pliny,  H.V  379295.  What  particular  variety  of
'agate1  (banded  translucent  silica)  was  exported  from
Sicily  is  not  known  :  but  banded  agates,  particularly
of  the  deeper  red  varieties  l  (approximating  to  sardonyx
and  iiispachates)  were  in  common  use  in  Egypt  through
out  (the  source  here  may  well  have  been  ^«})<ji  on  the
upper  Nile),  in  Greece  from  prehistoric  times  (esp.
common  in  early  Crete),  in  later  Babylonia,  in  Assyria
throughout,  and  on  the  Syrian  coast  (engraved  specimens
in  Louvre,  Ledrain,  I.e.,  Xos.  413,  420,  422,  440,
449  red  ;  409  white).

ix. 'Ahlamdh,  d/j,(Ovo'Tos,  amethyst  us  (Ex.  28 19  39 12  ;

in Ezek.  28 13 ©  has dxdrris  ; MT Vg. omit  ; Rev.

,.,.. , 2l2o,  dfj.(t)i'<TTos). The  folklore  of  the

•  ' Hebrew and Greek names identifies

with  the  modern  'amethyst'  (transparent  purple  quartz),

which  was commonly used, and freely engraved in

Egypt  throughout  (esp. under  XII. dyn. ), in  Greece

from  prehistoric  times, on  the  Syrian  coast  (Ledrain,

I.e.  Nos.  407,  414,  cp  392,  421), and  more  rarely,  in

Babylonia  and  Assyria. [See  also  references  in  §  4  (c),  i.  ]

x.  Tarsis,  XP1'0'1^'^05'  chrysolithus  (Ex.  2820  39 13;
in  Ezek.  28  13  (3  has  xpi'<™^'#°s  here;  and  MT  'Tarshish,'
17  T  VT"  ^'S-  chrysolithus  at  no.  iv. ,  see  §22,
'  below;  in  Ezek.  lOg  Vg.  has  chrysolithus,
but  ©  &v&pa.t  [perhaps  by  identification  with  the
Carthaginian  carbuncle  of  Plin.  H.\,  3725,  see  §  21,
below]  ;  ifi  Dan.  106,  dapaeis,  chrysolithns  ;  in  Cant.
5 14  <5  Oapfffis,  Vg.  hyacinthvs ;  Symm.  has  vdKivOos
here  and  Ezek.  1 16  2813  ;  in  Ezek.  1 16  (5  has  ffapaeis,
Vg.  visio  man's).  Tarsis  is  simply  a  trade-name  and
gives  no  clue.  Xpi'<r6\t#os  is  vaguely  descriptive.  A
stone  may  be  a  '  gold-stone '  in  three  different  ways.

(1)  It may  apparently contain grains  of  gold — e.g.,
'avanturine  quartz,'  and  the  epithet  xpvvoTracrTos  applied
to  'sapphire'  (Theophr.  23,  cp  Plin.  JV.V  3'3ji,  'aurum
in  sapphiro  scintillat,'  3738,  '  aurum  punctis  conlucet').

(2)  It  m.iy  be  golden  yellow  and  opaque — i.?. ,  yellow
jasper  or  yellow  serpentine. The  former  is  adopted  here
by  Petrie  (Hastings,  DB,  s.v. 'Precious  Stones'),  and
both  were  used  commonly  in  Egypt  and  Babylonia  at
all  periods,  and  in  prehistoric  Greece. (3)  It  may  be
golden  yellow  and  transparent. This  would  be  inartistic
in  juxtaposition  with  the  transparent  yellow  !t'sem,\iyi'ptov
(§  14), but  would  agree  better  with the  later  uses  of
chrvsolithus, which seems to represent the modern

•  topaz '  (as  topasius  is  the  modern  '  chrysolite,'  see  §  8,
above), and  was found of  very  large size in Spain
('  Tartessus  '),  Pliny,  H.V  37127. Petrie  notes  that  the
topazius  of  the  ancients  (peridote]  is  actually  a  'noble*
variety  of  yellow  serpentine,  and  so  may  have  taken  its
place  as  the '  stone  of  Tarshish '  in course  of  time  ;
compare the correlation of ftwjrtj and fffidpayoos
(opaque  and  clear  green)  in  Theophrastus,  27.

1  For  the  beating  of  this  on  Rev.  21  20,  vcucifdo;,  see  below,
'

4807


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

The  rendering  Avdpa!-  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  the
Carthaginian  'carbuncle'  (Plin.  //A'  37  25,  see  <j  21,
below),  'Tarshish'  being  taken  for  Carthage;  and
vciKtvdoi  similarly  may  point  to  either  'sapphire'  or
'  zircon  '  as  one  of  the  products  of  an  eastern  '  Tarshish  '
towards  India  (see  TARSHISH).

[For  other  solutions  of  the  problem  of  the  Tarshish-stone  (to
retain  the  traditional  name),  see  TAKSIUSH,  STONE  OP.]

xi.  $jham,  j3r)pi'i\\iov,  on\\hinus ( Ex. 27 20,  onvx,  Ezek.

28  13  ;  in  Ex.39  13  ovv\(.oi'.  onyckinus :  ftijpv\\tov  being  trans-

v  ,  fcrred,  cp  8  19. Josephus,  too  (/?/  v.  5  7)  gives

18.  Soharn. on>£  and  for  ya/talPiu,  pijpvAAioi' ;  but  he  also

makes  srto  and  aklAniiih  change  places,  as  also

sa/>/>":r  and  yaliiilditt  [laairis]. Elsewhere  also,  st'/ta>tt  is  very

variously  rendered  in  (0,  by  crfiopaySof ,  Ex.  28  9  35  27  3'.i  6  (of

the  high  priest's  shoulder-stones);  Atdo?  o  irpao-irot,  Gen.  2  12;

A. crap&iov, Ex.SSg (same context as 396; perhaps for

<Tfna.pdy&ov  miswritten  a-papdpSov,  perhaps  a  variant  for  ovvx^ov,

cp  sardonyx,  Job  28  m, Vg.)  ; bvv£ ,  Job  28  16  ; Ai'So* ow^o*,

i  Ch.  29  2  (with  5  i  troop.—  soham  transliterated). Vg.  has  onyx

or  onychinus  everywhere  ;  except  Job  28  16,  sardonyx,  where

©,  however,  has  6»t>f. [Cp  BERVL,  §  4,  Oxvx.J

Thus  the  versions  everywhere  vary  between  (a]  a  green
stone  (\/0os  6  irpdffivos),  whether  clear  (<rfjidpay8os)  or
cloudy  (/Sr/pi/XXior),1  and  (^)  an  opaque  banded  stone
(6in'£,  sardonyx  ?  ydpSiov),  the  rendering  adopted  in
EV.  Between  these  two  renderings  we  must  decide
according  to  (i)  the  evidence  as  to  soham  itself,  (2)  the
evidence  as  to  yah&lom  (MT  ydlfphfh)  in  xii.  (§  19),
which  likewise  shares  j3r)pv\\iov  and  ovi'Xiov  in  @,  and
has  probably  contributed  to  the  confusion.

i.  The  word  soham  has  no  clear  meaning.  It  may  be
a  loan- word  (a )  from  Ass.  samtu,  the  'dark'  or  'cloudy'
stone,  (b]  from  A  r.  'pale'  (Ges. ),  which  suits  'onyx'
(see  §  19,  below)  or  '  beryl '  (the  commoner  varieties,
and  the  'aquamarine,'  not  the  deep  green  'emerald,'
fffj.dpa.ydos)  almost  equally  well,  (c)  from  Ar.  musahham,
'striped  garment'  (see  §  4^3),  which,  if  it  were
established,  would  be  decisive  in  favour  of  a  banded
stone;  or  it  may  be,  (a)  a  place-name  (cp  Ar.  Soheim
in  Yemen),  which  would  not  be  inconsistent  with  the
indication  in  Gen.  2 12  that  ioham  (Xt'0os  6  irpdaivot)
came  from  HAVILAH  (q.v. ).  It  is  clear,  however  (from
passages  like  Job  28 16  and  iCh.  292,  cp  Ex.  25;  3$9
3627),  either  that  the  word  had  a  wide  generic  sense
(e.g. ,  '  variegated  stones  '),  or  that  some  form  of  Soham-
stone  was  important  enough  to  deserve  separate  mention
apart  from  ordinary  '  stones  to  be  set. '  Moreover,  in
i  Ch.  292  soham  is  coupled  with  abne  puk,  'stones  of
pigment.'  which  is  likewise  generic,  and  here  soham
might  well  mean  'variegated'  or  'striped'  stones.

Now  there  is  one  such  stone,  not  yet  accounted  for  in
our  list  of  identifications.  It  was  common  in  Egypt  in  all
periods,  obtained  from  the  Sinaitic  mine-country,  and
used  throughout,  both  solid  and  as  a  'stone  of  pigment.'
It  was  known  to  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  probably  from
the  copious  Siberian  source.  At  the  same  time  it  is
green  enough  (though  only  rarely  and  partially  trans
lucent)  to  be  compared  with  ff[j.dpaydos  (which  we  have
seen  was  regarded  by  Theophrastus  as  the  '  noble '
offspring  of  the  opaque  green  tao-iris)  and  still  more
with  the  cloudy  'beryl';  and  also  opaque  and  st-
enough  to  be  described  as  a  variety  of  '  onyx.'  This
stone  is  the  'malachite'  (green  copper  carbonate)  with
its  wavy  or  concentric  bands  and  cloudy  (samtu)  patches
of  light,  vivid,  and  dark  green,  and  its  occasional
crystalline  varieties.  It  is  soft  enough,  like  '  lapis
lazuli,'  to  be  easily  engraved,  and  occurs  in  large
enough  pieces  to  serve  as  a  tablet  for  a  six-line  inscrip
tion  like  that  of  the  high  priest's  shoulder-stones.  If
Zoham  (X.  6  Trpaffivos,  par  excellence ;  cp  the  later  (ik.
yuaXax?m,  'marsh-mallow  stone')  be  identified  with
'malachite'  (the  Eg.  m-f-k-t,  according  to  \V.  M.
Miiller)  the  association  of  Soham  with  sappir  in  Job
28 16  (<S  bvvy).  rifj.i<f  KO.L  ffairtpeip(p)  would  find  a  close
parallel  in  the  '  pyramids  of  green  and  blue  stones '

1  Whence  Petrie  (Hastings,  DB.  '  Precious  Stones ')  concludes
in  favour  of  (i)  'green  felspar,'  passing  later  into  (2)  '  beryl ' :
cp  the  argument  in  favour  of  the  latter  t.Z'.  BERYL  (if.::).

4808


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

which  are  quoted  to  illustrate  the  wealth  of  Rameses
III.  (Brugsch,  Gesck.  596).

In  Greek  times,  'malachite,'  owing  to  its  compara
tive  softness,  and  its  profusion  in  Cyprus  and  other
sources  of  copper,  either  ceased  to  be  held  in  regard,
or  was  confused  with  green  jasper  ('iaairi1;}.  Meanwhile,
other  '  striped  stones' — namely  '  onyx,'  '  sardonyx,'  and
'banded  agate' — came  rapidly  into  vogue,  as  soon
as  the  art  of  engraving  through  a  surface-layer  was
perfected  ;  and  consequently  soham  came  to  be  rendered
either  by  words  for  '  green  '  (fBrjptiXXiov,  ff/j.a.pay8os)  or
by  words  for  'banded'  (ovv\i.ov  :  sardonyx).  Conse
quently,  confusion  arose  on  the  one  hand  between
soham.  (onyx)  and  its  neighbour yahalom  (which  includes
the  white-faced  '  onyx ' ;  see  below),  and  on  the  other,
between  soham  (green  malachite)  and  ydsHpheh  (green
jasper),  as  soon  as  yahalom  and  ya&phfk  were  inter
changed  owing  to  the  ambiguity  of  bdrtketh  in  No.  i.
(see  above,  §  9).

2.  For  the  correlative  argument  from  yahalom,  see
next  §.

xii.  Yahalom  (Ex.  2820  39  13,  MT  yd sepheh  ;  Ezek.  2813,
MX  bdreket/i)  =  (i)  fapv^iov,  Ex.  39  13,  Josephus  (  =  Vg.  beryl-

lus,  Ex.  28  20  39  13  ;  berillus,  Ezek.  28  13)  :
19.  Yahalom.  =(2)  i™x'°"  (Ex.  28  13  Ezek.  28  13  cp  §  18  ;

Vg.  has  bery  Hits  throughout).  The  trans
position  of  yahtilinn  has  been  discussed  already  in  §  12,  above,
where  the  LXX  i<x<nris  presumes  an  original  ydsephlh.  For
xii.  the  balance  of  textual  evidence  favours  orvxtov  jn  the
LXX,  just  as  it  favours  /37)puA\ioi'  in  xi.  ;  and  beryllus  in  Vg.
may  result  from  the  same  source  as  that  followed  by  Josephus.

The  word  \ahalom  seems  to  be  connected  with^/cVn,
'strike  hnrd,'  and  (possibly)  with  srsVn,  halldmis,
'flint'  (irlrpa.  crrep^a,  Job  28g,  d^poro/xos,  'abrupt-
edged,'  Ps.  1148);  with  Ass.  elmesu,  Aram,  'almas;
and  with  Greek  'pyrites' — (i.e.,  '  fire-striking  stone ').
[Cp  FLINT,  but  also  DIAMOND].  The  Assyrian
elmesu  was  a  hard  and  probably  colourless  stone
(nowhere  either  'clear'  or  'brilliant')  which  was
used,  with  gold,  to  decorate  chariot-wheels  (cp  the
'stone  of  Tarshish,'  Ezek.  1 16  [RV  'beryl']);  and
also  alone,  for  whole  rings  (Del.  Prol.  85,  H\VB,
s.z:).  What  is  wanted,  therefore,  for  yahalom  is  a
hard  stone,  colourless  or  of  indifferent  colour  ;  of  which
•whole  rings  could  be  made  ;  and  recognisably  akin  to
the  '  fire-striking  stone, '  to  the  hard  stone  for  hammers
and  pounders,  and  to  ordinary  '  flint'  or  '  chert.'  The
alternatives  are  rock-crystal  and  white  chalcedony;
the  one  clear  or  milky,  the  other  milky  or  opaque.
Both  were  fairly  common,  in  association  with  either
quartzite  or  flint ;  but  both  were  rare  in  their  '  nobler '
varieties.  Both  were  used  for  whole  rings,  as  well  as
for  engraved  seal-stones,  in  prehistoric  Greece,  and  in
Egypt  of  all  periods  ;  and  also  commonly  for  later
Babylonian,  and  for  Assyrian  cylinders.

At  this  point  it  should  be  recalled  that  the  etymology
'  finger  nail '  for  6vi>£  (§  5)  cannot  be  traced  back  earlier
than  Pliny — i.e.,  among  Roman  lapidaries,  who  took  over
an  apparently  Greek  word,  and  gave  it  its  Greek  sense,
though  it  is  not  at  all  an  adequate  description  of  the
majority  of  'onyx-stones.'  Meanwhile  the  compound
ffapdovvl;  shows  that  to  denote  a  white-and-m/  '  onyx '
it  was  the  red  which  must  be  specified  ;  the  white
surface  therefore  is  the  essential  character  of  the  generic
'onyx.'  On  the  other  hand,  the  etymology,  6w!-  =
Assyrian  unku,  'ring,'  would  make  6vv£  an  obvious
equivalent  for  a  'ring-stone,'  like  elmesu  or  cognate
words — especially  as  elmesu  was  apparently  colourless,
and  6vv%  meant  a  stone  which  had  a  surface,  at  least,
of  '  white  carnelian  '  or  '  chalcedony. '  It  follows  from
this  identification  that  yahalom  was  liable  to  be  confused
on  the  one  hand  with  bartketh  (in  the  sense  of  'rock-
crystal  ')  ;  on  the  other  (together  with  6vv^)  with  foham
(in  the  sense  of  'striped  stone');  and  yet  again  with
yd  sepheh,  when  later  study  had  once  revealed  the  many
intermediates  (e.g.  Pliny's  iasp-achates,  iasp-onyx  and
sard-achates,  HN,  37  54).

4809


STONES  (PRECIOUS)


Thus the high  -  priestly breastplate, as a whole,
may be conceived as having
the following series of


20.  High  priest's
breastplate.


HIGH  PRIEST'S  BREASTPLATE


iii.

Bardketh

ii.  Fitdah

i.  (5dem

i.  ROCK  CRYSTAL

i. FALSE  TOPAZ

• ?  RED  JASPER

white  :  dear

yellow  :  clear

red  :  opaque

2. G

-•KKN  BERYL

2.  CHRYSOLITE

SARD

green  :  clear.

yellow  :  clear.

red:  dull.

vi.  [Yasfipheh]

v.  Sapplr

iv.  Nophek

GREEN  JASPER

LAPIS  LAZULI

GARNET

green  :  opaque.

blue  ;  opaque.

red  :  dear.

ix.

Ahlamah

viii.  S6bo

vii.  L&em

AMETHYST

RED  AGATE

CAIRNGOKM

purple  :  clear.

red  :  opaque

yellow  :  clear

striped.

?  CHKYSOPRASE

(Rev.)

yellow-green  :  dull.

xii.

[Yahilom]

xi.  Soham

x.  TarsiS

WHITI

;CARNEI.IAN

MALACHITE

i.  YELLOW

or

green  :  opaque

SERPENTINE

CARNELI  AN-  FACED

striped.

yellow  ;  opaque

ONYX

2.  CHRYSOLITE

white  :  opaque.

yellow  :  clear.

or,  in  order  of  colours  :  —

^opaque clear ^

Red

'ODEM NOPHEK striped  SEBO

Yellow

TARS!S PITDAH i  ?  greenish  LESE.M

Green

YAsfei'HEK BAR^KETH* striped  SOHAM

(later)

Blue

SAPPIR AHLAMAH (purple)

White

YAHALOM BAREKETH  *

(originally)

One  stone  remains,  which  does  not  appear  in  the
breastplate,  but  is  mentioned  in  several  other  passages.
21  K  rik'rl  '^  n's  's  kadkod  (AV  '  agate,'  RV  '  ruby  '),
'which  is  rendered  in  Is.  54  12  by  ia<nris,
iaspis,  Symm.  Kapx'nSofiov,  and  in  Ezek.  27  16  by  x°PX°Pi
chodchod.  The  word  kadkod  may  be  from  N'vc  '  strike
fire'  (cp  Ar.  red');  but  the  renderings  X°PX°P  anc^
Kapx^Soviov  suggest  confusion  of  d  and  ;-/  cp  Pesh.
karkednd  for  sebo,  [d^dr?;?]  in  Ex.  28 19  39 12.  The
rendering  KapxnSoviov  suggests  the  '  Carthaginian
carbuncle '  of  Pliny ;  and  if,  as  seems  probable,  a  red
stone  is  intended,  the  'iaffTns  of  Is.  54  12  must  be  inter
preted  as  a  red,  not  a  green  jasper.  See  \\lsfpheh,
§  13  above,  and  cp  AGATE,  RUI;Y.

For  sdmir  ('  emery  ')  which  is  not  a  '  precious  stone,'
and  for  the  descriptive  'ekdah  and  ramoth,  see
above,  §  4.

A  distorted  version  of  the  '  high  priest's  breastplate  '
is  offered  by  the  '  covering  of  the  king  of  Tyre ' J  in

rif  TCine-  of which have already been discussed
„, °,  above. In this passage the LXX

^  repeats its list of Ex.  2817-20, in

the  same  order,  but  inserts  KO.I  dpyi'ipiov  Kal  xPvaLOV
between  laffwis  (vi. )  and  \iyvpLov  (vii.).  This  arose
probably  through  (i)  a  misreading,  Apr-yplON  f°r
Alf"YP|ONi  and  f2)  a  misunderstanding  of  the  last  word
in  the  list  in  MT  (sdhdb  —  \g.  auritm],  which  would
be  facilitated  by  the  double  meanings  of  both  Ai-y.  and
•fjXeKTpov.  On  the  other  hand,  MT  followed  by  Yg.
gives  only  nine  stones,  and  in  a  new  order,  as  follows  : —
Odem,  pitdah,  yahalom  (=the  'first  row,'  (i.)  and  (ii.)
of  Ex.  2817/1,  followed  by  (vi. )  interchanged  with  (iii.),
by  confusion  of  yahalom  and  bartketh}  ;  then  tar'is,
soham,  ydstphch  (  =  the  'fourth  row'  [x. ,  xi. ,  xii.]  of
Ex. )  :  so  that  ydsHpheh  is  brought  into  its  right  place
at  ( vi. )  of  the  present  list  (  =  iacnrt.s  of  ©)  ;  then,  sapplr,
rtdphek,  bdrtketh  (=the  'second  row'  of  Ex.,  but  with
sappir  and  nophek  transposed,  and  bdr<!keth  instead  of
yahalom } ;  then  zdhdb  ( Vg.  aurum ,  '  gold ' )  as  noted  above.

1  [Cp  CHERUB,  §  2,  PARADISE,  §  3,  and  Crit.  Bib.  where
the  text  of  Ezek.  28  12^  is  considered.]

4810


STONES  (PRECIOUS)

These  derangements  are  instructive.  That  they
represent  an  old  text  is  clear  from  Vg.  ;  but  that  the
corruption  is  later  than  ©  is  probable,  firstly  because  (5
follows  Ex.  2813^  (the  variant  dpy.  K.  XP-  being
mainly  explanatory  of  Xi7- ),  secondly,  because  the
derangements  are  all  explicable  on  the  single  sup
position  that  they  are  intended  to  remove  difficulties
which  are  raised  by  the  identifications  propounded  by
the  LXX.

(1)  The  identifications  odem  =  ffdp5iov,  and  ni>phek  =
dv6pa£,  brought  two  red  stones  together. So  long  as
'odem,  which  is  '  red '  in  any  case, meant  red  jasper,  it
was  opaque, and gave  a  certain contrast. 'Sards,'
however, are  often nearly  clear. Hence  a  difficulty,
which  was  removed  by  transposing  nophek  and  sappir ;
the  further  difficulty  thus  created,  that  the  red  nophek  is
brought  next  to  the  red  &bo, axdrrj?, not  being  felt,
because,  as  we  shall  see,  the  '  third  row '  dropped  out
altogether.

(2)  The identification bdrtfketh  =  cr/j.dpa.ydos had
already brought about the  transposition of  ydsfpheh
and  yahcllom,  so  as  to  separate  the  two  green  stones,
and had caused  the  confusion in  the LXX between
6vi'Xtoi> and  jSrjpi'iXXiov  in xi.  and  xii. In MT it  has
had  the  further  result  that  bartketh  in  the  old  sense  of
a  clear  colourless  stone  became  interchanged  with  the
opaque  colourless  yahalom. Moreover  bartketh, if  it
meant <rfj.dpa.ydos, meant '  green '  ; and lacrTru was
'  green,' whereas o~/j.dpaydos was ambiguous, and

yahalom had no special colour. So on all grounds
bardketh  went  down  to  (vi. )  and  vahalom  up  to  (iii).

(3)  Further, to  restore  ydsfpheh  to  its  proper  place
at (vi. ), and perhaps as an alternative method of
separating  oJem  and  nophek,  the  whole  of  the  '  fourth
row '  was  interpolated  between  rows  one  and  two.

(4)  Finally and consequently, the 'third row' fell
out altogether  ; it'st-m, \iyvpiov, being taken for
rj\fKrpov — i.e.  dpyvpiov  Kal  xPvffl-ov — an(J  confused  with
the sahdb (=Vg. aurum), which actually ends the
description  both  in  MT  and  (J5.

Another  distorted  version  of  the  same  list  of  stones  is

supplied  by  the 'Foundations'  of  the  New  Jerusalem,

23 Founda in  Rev-21l9/ Here, as regards the

,  XT order, the problem has been, how to

tions  of  New

_  .  adapt the twelve stones of the breast

plate,  in  their  four  rows-of-three,  to  the
foundations  of  a  '  foursquare '  city.  The  result  is  as
follows  :  —


II. <riJ.dpa.yoos  <ra.p&6i'v£

III. XpV<7oAl$OS  ^YfpV\\LOll


TOTra.fi.ov.
'


Of  these  rows-of-three,  the  first  row  is  the  second
row  of  the  'breastplate,'  given  in  reversed  order,  (vi. ),
(v. ),  (iv. },  with  xaX^5w>'  for  (nophek}  dj<0pa£  at  (iv. ).
The  second  row  is  the  first  row  of  the  '  breastplate,'  also
in  reversed  order  (iii.),  (ii.),  (i.),  with  <ra.p56i>v£  exchanged
for  Toirdfcov  at  (ii. ).  The  third  row  is  the  fourth  row
of  the  '  breastplate  '  in  direct  order  (x.),  (xi. ),  (xii. ),  but
with  Totrdfrov  exchanged  for  aapSovv^  at  (x. ).  The
fourth  row  is  the  third  row  of  the  '  breastplate '  also  in
direct  order  (vii. ),  (viii. ),  (ix. ),  but  with  xPvff^>wPaa'0^  f°r
\iyupiov  at  (vii.)  and  vdKivOos  for  dxdrrjs  at  (viii.).
That  is  to  say,  the  '  Foundations '
are  conceived  as  in  the  diagram

xii.  i  iv.  appended,  and  to  describe  them

the  writer  has  started  from  the
II.'  v.  angle*  between  sides  II.  and  III.
He  has  first  described  II.  and  I.,
vl-  in  correct  sequence  ;  but  when  he
reached  IV.  and  III.,  he  has
recurred  to  the  traditional  order
within  each  of  the  'rows-of-three,'  or  has  perhaps
attempted  to  work  outwards  again  from  his  starting-
point  at  the  angle  between  II.  and  III.

This  account also  adds  several minor  points, (i)

4811


ix. viii. vn.


STOOL

The  confusion  between  (rap5>i'£  and  Toirdfrov  suggests
that  the  authority,  which  is  followed,  read  fii]ptj\\iov  for
tiham  at  no.  xi.  (§  18),  and  6vv£,  or  <rap5bi>v£  for
yahalom  at  no.  xii.  (§  19).  (2)  The  xaXtr^duw  which
takes  the  place  of  &i>6pa%  at  no.  iv.  substitutes  a  green
gem  ( '  dioptase '  or  copper  silicate)  for  the  red  '  garnet ' ;
giving  some  slight  support  to  the  discarded  rendering
m-f-k-t  ('malachite')  for  nophek,  but  confirming  the
view  that  crfj.dpaydos  in  Rev.  does  not  mean  a  green
stone  merely  — for  ^aX/c^wy  was  itself  regarded  as  a
variety  of  cr/AdpaySos.  Hfj-dpaydos  here,  therefore,  may
perhaps  still  be  translated  '  crystal '  as  in  its  primary
meaning.  (3)  The  xPvff°'rrPaffo*  which  takes  the  place
of  \iytipiov  and  is  not  otherwise  found  in  OT  or  NT,
belongs,  like  xaXm^ciw  ar>d  <rap56vv£,  to  a  more
advanced  stage  of  experience,  when  intermediate  tints
were  recognised  ;  it  may  represent  either  a  greenish
'  chrysolith,'  or,  more  probably,  the  opaque  applegreen
'  chrysoprase '  (chalcedony  tinted  with  nickel  oxide),
which  is  intermediate  in  tint  between  a  yellow  serpentine
or  yellow  jasper,  and  the  Xttfos  6  irpdcivos  (cp  yuaXaxms)
of  Gen.  2i2.  The  modern  'prase'  (deepgreenchalcedony)
and  its  variant  the  jasper-spotted  '  bloodstone '  were
used  for  scaraboid  gems  as  early  as  the  sixth  century
B.C.  in  the  Levant  (e.g.  Myres  and  Ohnefalsch-Richter,
Cyprus  Museum  Catalogue,  No.  4581),  but  are  not
clearly  to  be  identified  even  in  Pliny.  (4)  The  vdnivOos,
which  takes  the  place  of  axdrys,  is  similarly  mentioned
in  OT  or  NT  only  here  and  in  Rev.  917,  vaKivOivos  ;
cp  Enoch  71 2  (of  'streams  of  fire').  Pliny  (37.»o)
represents  it  as  a  dull  sort  of  '  amethyst. '  Solinus
describes  what  is  evidently  the  modern  '  sapphire
(blue  corundum)  and  says  that  it  came  from  Ethiopia  ;
probably  he  is  thinking  of  a  port-of-exchange  on  the
Red  Sea,  and  consequently  of  the  true  Indian  gem.
Later,  the  meaning  expanded,  including  many  different-
coloured  varieties  (five  according  to  Epiphanius,  six
according  to  Ben  Mansur  [quoted  at  length  in  King,
Nat.  Hist,  of  Free.  Stories,  250^;]).  But  the  use  of
hvacinthus  in  Vg.  Symm.  to  render  /arsis  in  Cant.  5  14
(where  the  LXX  has  &v6pa£}  as  well  as  by  Symm.  in
Ezek.  1 16  2813  (where  the  LXX  has  the  normal  xpvff°-
Xt#oy)  suggests  that  an  early  use  of  vdmvdos  may  have
been  to  render  the  native  Indian  word  which  appears
in  Arabic  as ydkut — this  denoting  the  modern  'jacinth,'
a  'noble'  variety  of  'zircon'  (zirconium  silicate),  which
is  a  transparent  deep-red  stone.  Now  the  va.KivOos  of
Rev.  21 20  takes  the  place  of  a  dark-red  translucent
stone,  s/6o,  dxdrr)s.  The  epithet  vaiavOivovs  of  Rev.
9 17,  too,  is  coupled  with  irvpivovs  'fire-like'  (cp  Enoch
71 2,  above,  and  the  equation  hvacinthus  =  &vOpa.£  in
Cant.  5 14),  so  that  in  both  cases  'sapphire'  is  out  of
the  question,  whilst  the  sultry  glow  of  the  'jacinth'  is
exactly  what  is  wanted.  Moreover,  both  vdKtvffos  and
dxciTT/s  might  very  well  stand  as  parallel  attempts  to
transliterate  ydkiit,  and  the  displacement  of  the  one  by
the  other  becomes  in  every  way  intelligible.

Other  passages  in  Rev.  dealing  with  '  precious  stones '  have
been  noted  already  above  —  f.f.  laairis,  KputrraAAuJW,  21  ii
(§  13)  ;  Ipis  o^xoios  opatret  o~na.payoivip  4  3  (§  p)  ;  0aAacr<ra  vaAt'iT)
I'l/mia  (cpiKTraAAu;  4 6  (§  9).  The  striking  simile  ojuoios  opdcrct
A<.'0a>  ia.o-rri.Si  Kal  <rapSifa  recalls  the  portrait  statues  of  Roman
Emperors  and  others,  in  which  the  raiment  is  worked  out  in
hard-coloured  stones — a  fashion  introduced  in  the  last  years  of
the  Republic  from  Ptolemaic  Egypt.  J.  L.  M.

C.  W. King,  Natural  Hist,  of  Precious  Stones;  Antique

Gems  (1866)  ;  S.  Men3Lnt,Gly/>tique  Orientate  (i%%i);  N.  Story

Maskelyne,  Catalogue  of  the  ^larlborouglt

24.  Bibliography.  Gems  (Introduction); J. H. Middleton,
Ancient Getns (1891); Flinders Petrie,

'Precious Stones' in Hastings' DB ; Furtwangler, Antike
Gemmen  (1900).

STONING. See  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,  §  12,

STOOL,  in  2  K.  4io,  represents  NDD,  kisse  (Al<j>poc).
on  the  original  meaning  of  which  word  see  THKONE,  i.

On  the  D;33N,  Sbnayim  (RV  '  birthstool '),  of  Ex.  1 16  cp
POTTERY,  §  8,  and  Baentsch's  note,  with  the  references  in
BDB,  s.v.

4812


STORAX

STORAX.  i.  It  is  plausible  to  find  the  storax  (so
RVm£-)  mentioned  in  Gen.  30  37  as  i"!jJIl7,  llbneh,  where
EV  has  POPLAR  (p<\BAoc  CTYP&KINH  ;  Ar.  lubna
=  storax).  In  Hos.  4  13,  however,  the  libneh  is  men
tioned  as  a  shady  tree  ;  this  does  not  suit  the  storax,
which  is  a  mere  bush.  The  shrub  called  storax  by  the
ancients  (Diosc.  1  79  ;  Plin.  HN  12  17  25)  is  the  Styrax
officinalis,  a  showy  shrub  covered  with  a  profusion  of
white  flowers,  found  throughout  Syria  and  Palestine
and  abundantly  in  the  hill  regions  of  Gilead,  Carmel,
Tabor,  Galilee,  etc.,  and  other  places  (FFP  354).

Storax  exuded  a  gum,  which  was  used  for  incense  (and  also  for
medicinal  purposes),  and  at  an  early  period  formed  an  important
article  of  Phoenician  trade.  It  is  to  be  carefully  distinguished
from  the  modern  article,  which  is  the  product  of  the  Liquid-
ainhar  Orientate.  Lagarde  (Mittft.  1  234)  has  suggested  with
great  probability  that  the  name  Storax  is  derived  from  the  Heb.
'TS,  sort  ('  balm  ')  ;  but  whether  the  two  words  denote  the  same
thing  is  doubtful.  See  BAI.M,  §  i.

2.  RVm&-  also  gives  'storax'  in  Gen.  3?25  43n  for
rWD3,  ntkofh  (after  Aq.  ffTVpat;  [in  both],  Sym.  arvpa.^,
and  Vg.  storax  [in  43  n],  which  was  adopted  by
Bochart)  ;  EV,  however,  has  SPICERY,  SPICES  (q.v.  ).
More  probably  (so  RVm£-)  the  gum  intended  is  the
Tragacanth  (Ar.  nakaa,  Syr.  ankath  aild,  cp  Low,  24),
which  is  the  resinous  gum  of  the  Astragalus  gummifer,
of  which  numerous  species  exist  in  Palestine.

Like  Hi  (in  connection  with  which  it  occurs),  tragacanth  was
an  article  of  commerce  imported  to  Egypt  (according  to  Ebers,
Egypten,  292,  the  word  has  been  found  in  Egyptian),  and  also
to  Tyre  (Ezek.  11  17,  see  Co.  ad  loc.).  There  is  no  reference  to
this  product  in  the  nJ13:  n'3  of  2  K.  20  13  Is.  39  2  (EVmg
'house  of  his  spicery  '  ;  so  Aq.  Sym.,  Vg.),  on  which  see
TREASURY.

3.  AV  has  'storax'  for  OTCUCTJJ  in  Ecclus.  24  15;  but  RV  (as
EV  in  I!  Ex.  30  34)  has  STACTE  (g.v.).  The  fragrant  resin  in
tended  may  perhaps  be  the  gum  tragacanth  mentioned  above  (2).

STORE  CITIES,  STORE  HOUSES  (ni3?p»).  Ex.
In  i  K.  9  19,  etc.  See  CITY  (/.  ),  PITHOM,  §  4.

According  to  Winckler  ((7/2  210),  the  phrase  means  '  cities  of
the  governors'  (Ass.  saknu,  plur.  saknutu  ;  Phcen.  133;  cp
FRIEND).

STORK  (ilTpri;  from  "IDH  'pietas'  [see  LOVING-
KINDNESS],  in  allusion  to  the  mutual  affection  of  parents  and
young;  Lev.  11  19  Dt.  14i8[i7]  Job3!»i3l  Ps.  104  17  Jer.  87Zech.
69  ;©  a[cr]<r[e]i6a  [in  Job  and  Jer.],  eVoi//  [in  Zech.],  epwSios  or
ap.  [in  Lev.  and  Ps.],  ireAe/cdy  [in  Dt.]  ;  Vg.  heroiiio  [in  Lev.],
hcrodius  [in  Job  and  Ps.],  onocrotalus  [in  Dt.],  ntilvus  [in  Jer.
and  Zech.]).  One  of  the  unclean  birds.

Both  the  White  (Ciconia  all>a)  and  the  Black  Stork
(C.  nigra]  are  found  in  Palestine.

The  White  Stork  is  a  well-known  visitant  to  Europe,
and  is  occasionally,  though  rarely,  seen  in  Great  Britain  ;
in  Palestine  it  is  usually  met  with  during  the  month  of
April  (Jer.  87),  on  its  way  N.  to  its  breeding-places  from
its  winter  quarters  in  Central  and  S.  Africa.  It  is
regarded  as  a  sacred  bird  and  never  molested,  and  in
return  acts  to  some  extent  as  a  scavenger.  It  frequents
the  haunts  of  man,  and  usually  nests  on  such  prominent
structures  as  chimneys  or  towers,  more  rarely  on  trees.
Many  legends  and  stories  have  grouped  themselves
around  this  bird.

The  Black  Stork  has  a  black  head,  neck,  and  back  ;
it  winters  in  Palestine,  and,  avoiding  the  habitations  of
man,  frequents  the  deserts  and  plains,  especially  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea.  As  a  rule  it  lives  in
small  flocks  and  breeds  on  trees  or  rocks  ;  in  the  summer
it  migrates  northwards.  A.  E.  s.

STORY  WRITER  (0  [eic]  TA  TTPOCTTITTTONTA),

i  Esd.  2  17. See  REHUM,  5.

STRAIT OF  JUDEA  (TOY TTRIONOC  •  •  •  THC
),  Judith  89. See  JUDEA.


1  AVrng.  and  RVmg.  both  recognise  '  stork  '  as  the  right
rendering  of  hiisidah.  The  former  gives,  '  or  the  feathers  of  the
stork  and  ostrich,'  the  latter,  '  But  are  her  pinions  and  feathers
(like)  the  stork's?'  In  the  text  AV,  'or  wings  and  feathers
unto  the  ostrich  '  ;  but  RV  (agreeing  with  Di.),  '  But  are  her
pinions  and  feathers  kindly?'  The  text  is  difficult,  and  most
probably  corrupt  (see  Budde  and  Duhm).

4813


STRANGER  AND  SOJOURNER

STRANGER  AND  SOJOURNER.  This  phrase,
together  with  '  stranger  or  sojourner  '  and  '  sojourner
or  stranger/  's  used  by  AV  to  translate
P's  phrase  3^H1  1.3  ;  RV  more  consistently
has  '  sojourner  '  for  QC'IR  uniformly.  -u,  ger  and
3c*in,  toshdbh  denote  a  resident  alien  or  ^TOIKOS,  a
foreigner  settled  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  under
the  protection  of  a  citizen  or  family,  or  of  the  state  ;  as
distinguished  from  13.)"3,  ben-nekhar,  or  »i33,  nokhri
(fem.  .T-13J),  which  simply  denote  a  foreigner.  -IT,  sdr,
is  a  more  general  term,  including  both  foreigner  and
stranger.  It  is  used  in  Nu.  1640  of  anyone  strange  to
—  i.e.  ,  not  belonging  to  —  the  priestly  clan.  It  is  often
used  of  persons  who  might  also  be  called  nokrl,  Is.  1  7.
The  distinction  between  ger  and  toshabh  will  be  con
sidered  later  (§  n/~.  ).  The  verb  -us,  giir,  is  sometimes
a  denominative  of  ger  in  its  technical  sense  of  resident
alien,  and  sometimes  has  the  more  general  sense  of  abide.
<B  usually  has  7rpo<rrjAvTO«  for  ger,  less  frequently  irdpoiiros  ;
which  latter  is  the  usual  rendering  of  tdsliabh  ;  gfir  is  usually
7rapoi(ce'<o  ;  and  aAAorpios  is  the  usual  rendering  alike  of  nofchrt,
nekhar,  and  zar  ;  zar,  however,  is  often  rendered  by  aAAoyfi-rjs.
The  Vulgate  does  not  clearly  distinguish  these  terms,  but  uses
advena,  colonus,  and  peregrinus,  etc.,  for  ger  and  toshahh;
alienus,  etc.,  for  ni-khdr  and  zar,  and  gives  very  various  render
ings  of  nokhri.

I.  Foreigners,  other  than  gerim  (strictly  so-called),  in
the  land  of  /srae/.—]ud.  11921  27-36  (J:)  make  it  clear
that  Canaanite  clans  maintained  them-


stood  to  the  Israelite  tribes  in  the  ordinary  relations  of
neighbouring  independent  states.  In  conquered  districts
surviving  Canaanites  would  be  reduced  to  slavery.
Wrhere,  however,  they  were  too  numerous,  or  submitted
on  conditions,  they  were  employed  in  forced  labour
(corve'e),  on1?  .  .  .  c^'i,  Jud.  1  28.  Thus  in  Josh.  927,  J K,  the
Gibeonites  are  spoken  of  as  temple-servants.  Probably
the  status  of  such  subject-clans  was  similar  to  that  of
the  gerim ;  but  the  data  do  not  enable  us  to  decide
whether  they  were  formally  reckoned  as  gf-riiii,  or
placed  in  a  distinct  category.  The  deuteronomic  editor
of  Joshua  supposes  that  the  Israelites  exterminated  the
Canaanites  at  the  Conquest,  Josh.  1640  11  20.  Such  a
view  could  not  have  been  held  unless,  long  before  the
exiles,  the  Canaanites  in  Israel  had  disappeared  as  a
distinct  class  and  been  absorbed  in  Israel  and  its  gcrim.
This  absorption  is  also  attested  by  the  inclusion  in  Xeh.
7  7  25  57  60  of  the  Gibeonites,  Solomon's  Servants,  and
the  Nethinim  among  the  Men  of  Israel.1

Many of the slaves owned by Israelites were of
foreign  birth  ; but  the  slaves  became  members  of  the

„ _,  _  family  and  shared  its  sacra,  and  thus  virtu-

o.  oiaves ! 11 i  T I-* T-»I > T

f . '  ally became Israelites. Thus, in Israel,


foreign


the  slave  was  circumcised  (Gen.  \1\if.  P),


kept  the  Sabbath  (Ex.20io  E),  and  the
Passover  (Ex.  1244  P).  See  SLAVERY.

The  examples  of  Moses,  Boaz,  David,  Solomon,  etc.,
and  the  law  as  to  marriage  with  a  female  captive  (Dt.
2110-14),  show  that  Israelites  during  the  monarchy
frequently  married  foreign  wives.  These,  like  the
slaves,  became  Israelites  in  civil  and  religious  status  ;
thus  Ruth,  though  a  widow,  assumes  that,  if  she  remains
in  her  mother-in-law's  family  and  settles  in  her  late
husband's  native  land  '  thy  people  shall  be  my  people,
and  thy  god  my  god  '  (Ruth  1 16).  See  MARRIAGE.

The  trade  of  Israel  was  mostly  in  foreign  hands,  and
trade-routes  passed  through  the  land.  For  the  most

4 m j  part  traders  would  enter  or  pass  through

nomads,
mercenaries.


nomad clans would be occasional


visitors,  especially  in  the  border  lands.
In  ordinary  times  such  caravans  and  clans  could  rely  on

1  Kittel,  Hist,  oflsr.  (ET)  2  187,  points  out  that  the  subjection
of  Israelites  to  the  corvee,  i  K.  12418,  must  have  tended  to
obliterate  any  surviving  distinction  between  Israelites  and
Canaanites.  i  K.  9  21  22  is  by  a  late  editor.  [Cp  SOLOMON,  §6.]


guest.


guarantee  of  security  of  life  lay  in


6.  Clans,
etc.


STRANGER  AND  SOJOURNER

their  own  strength  and  the  general  moral  sentiment  |
without  seeking  any  special  protection.  Dt.  227  f.
gives  us  the  terms  on  which  caravans  might  pass  '
through  a  foreign  country.  They  were  to  keep  to  the
beaten  track  and  pay  for  food  and  water.  Further,  i
the  more  powerful  Israelite  kings  were  anxious  to  foMrr
commerce,  and  no  doubt  did  what  they  could  to  afford
a  general  protection  to  traders.  Facilities  for  foreign
traders  were  sometimes  guaranteed  by  treaties;  e.g.,
the  '  streets  '  or  quarters  which  the  Syrians  had  in
Samaria,  and  the  Israelites  in  Damascus,  i  K.  2034.  Cp
TRADE  AND  COMMKKCK,  §(5  46^!  The  mercenaries  of
the  royal  bodyguard  formed  another  important  class  of
resident  foreigners  (28.818  15i8  20723  i  K.  138  5044
2  K.  114  RV);  cp  CHERETHITES  and  PELETHITKS.  It
is  noteworthy  that  David  addresses  the  mercenary
captain  Ittai  the  Gittite  as  a  nokhri  who  came  but
yesterday  and  might  be  expected  at  once  to  quit  a
service  that  promised  little  advantage  (2  S.  15  19).  On
the  other  hand,  in  Uriah  the  Hittite  we  have  a  foreign
soldier  who  married  a  high-born  Israelite  woman  (2  S.  1  1  ).
II.  Gerim  in  t/ie  technical  sense.  —  The  peculiar  status
of  the  ger  arose  (  i  )  from  the  primitive  sentiment  that  a
_  stranger  was  an  enemy,  an  outlaw  ;  (2)

srary  fmm  tne  aijsence  Of  anv  public  police.


the  blood-bond  between  a  man  and  his  kinsfolk.  He
was  protected  by  the  assurance  that  his  kinsmen  would
avenge  his  murder  upon  the  criminal  and  his  kinsmen.
Thus  the  foreigner,  who  was  far  away  from  his  kin,  was
at  the  mercy  of  any  evil-disposed  persons.  His  only
safety  lay  in  putting  himself  under  Israelite  protection,
by  becoming  the  ger  or  guest  of  an  Israelite  family.
He  then  became  included  in  the  blood-bond,  and  his
hosts  defended  or  avenged  him  as  if  he  were  of  their
own  kin.  As  in  Arabia,  such  protection  was  freely
accorded  even  to  complete  strangers.  Abraham  and
Lot  (Gen.  18  _/".)  press  their  hospitality  on  unknown
travellers.  In  Judg.  19  the  depravity  of  the  men  of
Gibeah  is  shown  by  their  inhospitable  behaviour  ;  and
in  Job  31  32  it  is  a  mark  of  the  righteous  man  that  he
does  not  leave  the ^tV — i.e.,  the  stranger  who  wishes  to
be  received  as  ger — to  lodge  in  the  street.  In  Arabia
(\VRS,  Kin.,  41  ff.}  the  stranger  becomes  n  ger  by
eating  or  drinking  with  his  patron  ;  '  even  the  thief  who
has  surreptitiously  shared  the  evening  draught  of  an
unwitting  host  is  safe.  Nay,  it  is  enough  to  touch  the
tent-ropes,  imploring  protection.'  Further  (259),  'lie
who  journeys  with  you  by  day  and  sleeps  beside  you  at
night  is  also  sacred. '  But  the  hospitality  so  readily
accorded  can  be  enjoyed  unconditionally  only  for  three
or  four  days.  The  ger  who  stays  longer  ceases  to  be  a
guest  and  becomes  a  dependent  (Bertholet,  27).  But,
while  the  relation  lasted,  the  obligation  laid  upon  the
host  to  protect  the  ger  was  stringent  ;  the  stories  of  Lot
and  of  the  Levite  at  Gibeah  show  what  extraordinary
sacrifices  a  host  would  make  to. defend  his  guests.  The
latter  narrative  reminds  us  that,  in  early  times,  an  Israelite
in  a  strange  tribe  was  almost  as  helpless  as  a  foreigner.
Analogy  suggests  that  whole  clans  or  tribes  might  put
themselves  under  the  protection  of  a  more  powerful
people  and  become  \tsgerim.  '  The  several
Jewish  clans  of  Medina  were  compelled  by
their  weakness  to  become  jiran  (gerim}  of
the  Aus  and  Khazraj.  Or  a  group  might  attach  itself
to  its  cousins — i.e. ,  to  a  tribe  with  which  it  reckoned
kindred'  (\VRS  Kin.  42).  Thus  the  Israelites  were
gerim  in  Egypt,  Ex.  22 21;  Bertholet,  50,  considers
that  the  subject  Canaanites  became  a  kind  of  gerim  to
Israel,  and  that  foreign  traders  and  mercenaries  may  be
considered  gerim  of  the  kings  ;  but  the  terms  ger,  giir,
are  not  applied  to  any  of  these  classes.  Both  the
Israelites  and  the  Canaanites  rendered  service  to  their
patrons.  We  might  perhaps  regard  as  bodies  of  gerim  I
the  'mixed  multitude '—Ex.  12  38  JE  :ny,  Nu.  114  JE  ;
nospx — that  went  up  from  Egypt  with  Israel.  Possibly,

4815


STRANGER  AND  SOJOURNER

too,  the  Kenites  might  stand  in  the  same  relationship.
See  MINGLED  PEOPLE,  KENITES.

The  traveller's  necessities  might  be  met  by  a  few  days''
protection  ;  but  foreigners  often  came  into  the  country

7.  Permanent  rTieed;ns,a P0.""11"01'1 "°™e- ^
,  Jacob,  they  might  have  provoked  the

dangerous  hostility  of  powerful  enemies.
In  Arabia,  '  men  are  constantly  being  cut  off  from  their
own  tribe,  generally  for  murder  within  the  kin,  some
times  for  other  offences  against  society,  or  even  for
dissipated  habits.  .  .  .  There  were,  however,  many
other  circumstances  that  might  lead  free  Arabs,  either
individually  or  in  a  body,  to  seek  the  protection  of
another  tribe  and  become  its  jiran'  (Kin.  42).  In
such  cases  ihegcr  became  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period
the  settled  client  of  a  clan,  or  chief,  or  other  individual
head  of  a  family.

Bertholet  maintains  with  great  probability  that  such
gerim  would  often  attach  themselves  to  the  king  ;  and
that  he  would  welcome  them  as  a  means  of  strengthen
ing  his  authority.  He  includes  among  the  royal  gerim
the  mercenaries  and  foreign  traders.  He  further  sup
poses  that  a  foreigner  might  attach  himself  to  a  sanctu
ary  as  ger  of  Yahwe,  and  understands  Ps.  15 1  61 4  as
referring  to  such  cases.  The  Gibeonites  would  be
another  case  in  point.

The  express  references  logtrim  in  Israel,  however, deal
with  the  ger  who  is  a  dependent  member  of  an  ordinary
family  ;  in  Ex.2020,  etc.,  the  ger  is  grouped  with  the
slaves  and  the  cattle.  There  are  constant  exhortations  to
deal  justly  and  generously  with  the  ger  (Ex.  222i,  etc. );
he  is  grouped  with  other  needy  and  helpless  classes,  the
Levites,  orphans,  widows  (Dt.  2611-13  Ps.  946),  and  the
poor  (Lev.  19io).  The  ger  was  at  the  mercy  of  the
individual  or  the  clan  within  whose  gates  he  took  refuge.
They  could  take  advantage  of  his  helplessness  to  accord
protection  only  under  oppressive  and  burdensome  con
ditions.  The  prophets  (Jer.  76  148  22s  Ezek.  22?  29
Zech.  7 10  Mai.  85)  and  the  Law  (Ex.  289  Dt.  24 17  Lev.
1934)  alike  protest  against  such  oppression.  It  appears,
moreover,  from  Dt.  1 16  24  17  27  19,  that  the  ger  was  not
wholly  at  the  mercy  of  his  patrons  ;  disputes  between
them  might  be  referred  to  judges.

The  gerim,  however,  were  not  always  poor  ;  Lev.
2547  contemplates  the  possibility  that  the^'r  may  prosper
and  purchase  impoverished  Israelites  as  slaves.  Shebna,
Hezekiah's  treasurer  ( Is.  22 15),  was  probably  a  foreigner,
and  the  captains  of  foreign  mercenaries  and  other  foreign
courtiers  would  readily  acquire  power  and  wealth.

The  relation  of  Iheger  to  his  patron  was  voluntary
on  both  sides,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  nature  of
the  relationship  to  prevent  its  being  terminated  at  will
by  either  party  ;  but  circumstances — the  need  of  the
ger  and  the  power  of  his  patron — tended  to  make  the
relation  permanent.  In  Arabia  (Kin.  43)  '  sometimes
the  protectors  seem  to  have  claimed  the  right  to  dismiss
their  jiran  at  will  ...  at  other  times  .  .  .  protection
is  constituted  by  a  public  advertisement  and  oath  at  the
sanctuary,  and  holds  good  till  it  is  renounced  at  the
sanctuary. '

The  terms  upon  which  gerim  were  received  were
matter  of  agreement  between  them  and  their  patrons,
and  their  position  was  similar  to  that  of  '  hired
servants,'  Tabs  sakhtr,  with  whom  they  are  classed
(Lev.  25640  Dt.  24i4).  Only,  \he  ger  was  more  helpless
than  the  native  sdkhir,  and  less  able  to  insist  on  favour
able  terms.  Jacob  at  Haran,  Israel  in  Egypt,  rendered
service  for  their  hosts  ;  David  fought  for  Achish — or
pretended  to  do  so.  Micah's  Levite  came  to  Mt.
Ephraim  to  find  someone  with  whom  he  might  live  as
ger  (1?;^,  Idgur],  and  agreed  to  serve  Micah  as  a  priest
for  board  and  lodging,  and  ten  pieces  of  silver  and  a
suit  of  clothes  annually  (Judg.  17).  The  prosperity  of
Jacob  illustrates  the  possibility  of  a.  ger  becoming  rich  ;
and  his  stealthy  flight  shows  that  a  ger  might  find  it
difficult  to  leave  his  patron.

4816


STRANGER  AND  SOJOURNER


STREET


9.  In  Dt.


Naturally — just  as  Jacob  married  Laban's  daughters,
and  Moses  Jethro's — gerim  sometimes  married  Israelite
women — e.g. ,  Uriah  and  Bathsheba.  But  the  case  of
Jacob  and  Arabian  parallels  (Bertholet,  62)  suggest
that  a  ger  who  returned  to  his  native  land  could  not
compel  his  Israelite  wife  to  accompany  him.  The
gerim,  as  a  class,  would  necessarily  be  landless.  More
over,  both  prophets  and  lawgivers  did  their  best  to
keep  family  estates  in  the  family.  Their  efforts,  and
the  sentiments  that  prompted  them,  would  tend  to  ex
clude  even  the  rich  ger  from  acquiring  land.

In  pre-exilic  literature  ger  is  essentially  a  term  de
scribing  civil,  not  religious,  status.  But  civil  status

... involved  religious  consequences. Various
8.  Pre- exilic ,•  •

. , religious observances were matters of

P  '  public  order  and  decency,  and  as  such
would  be  required  {romgirim.  Thus,  in  the  Book  of
the  Covenant,  the  duty  and  privilege  of  the  Sabbath
extend  to  the  gerim  (Ex.  20 10  23I2;1  cp  Amos  85).
Further,  a  foreign  ger  would  naturally  wish  to  worship
Yahwe  as  Lord  of  the  land  of  Israel,  without  necessarily
renouncing  his  allegiance  to  the  god  of  his  native  land
(cp  2  K.  1724-41).  Moreover,  it  is  probable,  though  by
no  means  certain,  that  the  ger  may  sometimes  have
been  included  in  the  sacra  of  his  patrons,  as  a  member
of  the  family.  On  the  other  hand,  Moabite,  Ammonite,
and  Phoenician  communities  at  Jerusalem  maintained
their  native  worship  for  centuries  ( i  K.  11 5  7  2  K.  23 13).
But  in  any  case  the  religious  obligations  and  duties  of
the  ger  are  simply  the  consequences  of  his  civil  status
as  an  inhabitant  of  the  land  of  Yahwe,  a  guest  of  the
people  of  Yahwe  ;  they  are  limited  by  his  non-Israelite
blood.

In  Deuteronomy,  the  ger  seems  expressly  included  in
the  family  sacra  ;  in  169-17  the  ger  is  to  share  in  the
rejoicings  at  the  feasts  of  Weeks  and  Taber
nacles — i.e.,  partake  of  the  flesh  of  sacri
fices,  amongst  other  food.  The  teaching  of  the
prophets  and  Deuteronomy,  which  drew  a  sharp
religious  distinction  between  Israelites  and  foreigners,
naturally  furthered  the  assimilation  of  the  ger  to  the
Israelite — the  only  alternative,  the  entire  exclusion  of
gerim,  was  impossible.  Thus,  in  the  deuteronomistic
passage  Dt.  31 12,  the  ger  is  to  be  exhorted  to  study  and
obey  the  law,  and  in  29 10-13  'he  ger  is  to  enter  into
covenant  with  Yahwe.

The  exile  and  return  further  promoted  the  religious
identification  of  Israel  and  thsgerim;  those  who  shared
,  n  T  ,  these  experiences  with  their  patrons  became
'  united  by  close  ties.  Moreover,  in  the  re-
Stored  community,  ger  lost  its  civil,  and  acquired  a
religious  meaning.  A  subject  community,  under  a
foreign  governor,  hemmed  in  by  settlement  of  foreigners,
was  not  likely  to  include  a  class  of  dependent  foreigners.
The  tendency  was  for  the  Jews  to  unite  with  their
neighbours  to  form  a  heterogeneous  community.  They
were  saved  from  this  fate  by  asserting  an  exclusive
relation  to  Yahwe  and  his  Temple.  Under  such  circum
stances  the  foreigner  who  united  himself  with  Israel
had  to  become  a  worshipper  of  Yahwe,  ger  came  to
mean  proselyte.  Constantly,  especially  in  the  Law  of
Holiness,  laws  are  said  to  apply  equally  to  the  Israelite
and  the  13,  according  to  the  common  formula  kagger
kaezrdh  (Lev.  24 16,  etc.).  The  gerim  must  refrain
from  idolatry  (Lev.  1826  202),  from  blasphemy  against
God  (Lev.24i6),  must  observe  the  Day  of  Atonement
(Lev.  1629-31),  the  Passover  (Ex.  121948  Nu.  914;  but
cp  below ) ,  must  abstain  from  eating  blood  ( Lev.  1 7 10- 1 3 ) ,
and  must  observe  certain  rules  in  offering  sacrifices
(Lev.  178  22 18).  The  religious  status  of  the  ger  is
almost  the  same  as  that  of  the  Israelite — almost,  not
quite.  In  Lev.  2842  it  is  the  native  Israelite,  the
'ezrd/i,  who  is  to  observe  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  in
express  contradiction  to  Dt.  31 12,  which  includes  the

1  The  references  to  the  ger  in  these  verses  are  sometimes
ascribed  to  a  deuteronomic  editor.

4817


ger  ;  but  in  view  of  this,  and  of  the  fact  that  everywhere
e]se'esni/i  is  combined  wither,1  Bertholet  suggests  that
in  Lev.  I.e.  ger  may  have  dropped  out.  Ex.  1248  lavs
down  that  if  the  ger  wishes  to  eat  the  Passover  he  must
be  circumcised.  Probably,  with  circumcision,  the  ger,
or  at  any  rate  his  descendants,  attained  to  the  full  civil
and  religious  standing  of  an  Israelite.  For  in  Dt.  238
we  are  told  that  the  children  of  the  Edomites  and  the
Egyptians  shall  enter  into  the  congregation  of  Yahwe
in  the  third  generation,  and  this  may  be  extended  to
gerim  generally.  It  is  true  that,  in  spite  of  Kzekiel's
direction  that  gerim  should  be  given  land  in  Israel
(47  22/1),  P's  Law  of  the  Jubilee  theoretically  reserves
the  land  for  the  original  Jewish  holders.  Such  a  law,
however,  could  scarcely  have  been  enforced  against
foreigners  in  a  country  under  foreign  rule.  And  gener
ally,  the  tendency  must  have  been  for  ^/'-families  to  be
absorbed  in  the  Jewish  community.  The  main  distinc
tion  between  the  ger  in  P  and  the  later  proselyte  is
that  the  ger  is  still  thought  of  as  coming  to  live  in  a
Jewish  community.  On  the  use  of  ger  as  proselyte,
as  in  2  Ch.  3025,  see  PROSELYTE.

III.  The  distinction  between  ger  and  toshdbh. —
Outside  of  the  Priestly  Code  toshdbh  occurs  only  in  Ps.
11  Ger  and  39  J3  2  .(  =  J  Ch-  29  's)-  In  eight  passages
tr  h'hl  'l  's  e'tner  coupled  with,  or  parallel  to,
ger ;  in  three  others  it  is,  like  ger  else
where,  coupled  with  sdkhir ;  and  in  two  others  it  is
qualified  by  haggdrim,  'that  are  ger s. '  Neither  the
usage,  nor  the  versions  (see  above,  §  i),  suggest  any  clear
distinction  of  the  two  terms,  and  of  the  many  distinctions
drawn,  none  have  met  with  much  acceptance.  Prob
ably  the  passages  in  .which  toshdbh  occurs  represent  an
unsuccessful  attempt  to  substitute  a  new  term  for  the
old  ger.  The  older  gerim  were  now  incorporated  with
Israel,  and  a  new  term — either  ger  qualified  by  an
addition,  or  simply  toshdbh  —  might  have  served  to
distinguish  newcomers  from  the  descendants  of  former
gerim,  and  to  indicate  that  the  status  of  new  foreign
adherents  was  different  from  that  of  the  old  gerim.
The  familiar  term  ger,  however,  persisted.

Lev.  2635,  'And  if  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor,  and
his  hand  fail  with  thee  ;  then  thou  shah  uphold  him  :

19  TPVI^C  as  a  stranSer  [>"'']  and  a  sojourner
"  \tdshdbh\  shall  he  live  with  thee,'  RY,
or  better  '  thou  shall  uphold  him  as  a  ger  and  toshdbh,
and  he  shall  live  with  thee  '  presents  peculiar  difficulties.
Ger  and  toshdbh  are  usually  the  antithesis  of  '  brother.'
The  Hebrew  naturally  implies  that  the  poor  Israelite
would  actually  take  the  position  of  a  ger — i.e.,  fall
from  his  full  Israelite  citizenship  ;  it  might,  perhaps,
be  strained  to  mean  that  he  was  to  receive  the  same
help  and  protection  ;  or  this  meaning  might  be  obtained
by  reading  3  'like'  before  ger  with  ©.  Driver  and
White  (SBOT],  with  Dillmann  and  Siegfried -Stade,
excise  ger  in*  toshdbh.  as  a  gloss.

Literature. — Bertholet,  Die  Striking  der  Israelitcn  mid  der
Judt-n  zu  den  Frctudcn  (to  which  this  article  is  greatly  in
debted);  WRS  Kin.  42  J?.,  142;  Rel.  Setn.  75^;  Hen/.  11 A
339^  '.  Nowack,  //.-/  1  336^.  \v.  H.  B.

STRANGE  WOMAN.  For  (i)  rnrjN,  ah  he, -elk
(Judg.  112),  see  JEPHTHAH  ;  for  (2)  nnp],  nokriyyah  (Pr.  2  16,
etc.),  see  STRANGER,  §  i.

STRANGLED.  AV  'things  strangled,'  RY  'what
is  strangled'  (TTVIKTOV),  Actsl52029  2l25f.  See  COUNCIL  OF
JERUSALEM,  §  n,  FOOD,  §  n,  and  SHAMBLES.

STRAW  (}3n,  Gen.  2425  etc.  ;  cp  {2710,  Is.  25io).
See  AGRICULTURE,  §  8  ;  CATTLE,  §  5  ;  cp  also  BKICK.

STREAM  OF  EGYPT  (Dn>'P  ^PU),  Is-  2'12-  See
EGYPT  [RIVER  OF].

STREET  (3irn),  Gen.  192. See  CITY,  §  2,  c.


STRING

STRING  (^nS),  Judg.  169  RV™s- See  CORD.

STRINGED  INSTRUMENTS  (D'3»),  Ps.  1504  ;  see
Music,  §§  6-10.

STRIPES  (nar?),  Dt.  25 3. See  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,


STRONG  DRINK  p3t?).  Nu.63.  See  WINE  AND
STRONG  DRINK,  §  8.

STRONG  HOLD  0¥?»),  2  Sam.  24  7.  See  FOR
TRESS,  MlLI.O.

STUBBLE,  (i)  L"[5,  kaS ;  K6.A&MH  ;  Ex.  5 12  etc.
(2)  [3B  teben\  so  rendered  in  Job  21 18  ;  elsewhere  '  straw.'  See
AGRICULTURE,  §  8./C;  CATTLE,  §  5.  (3)  xaAa/uii) ;  i  Cor. 812,  cp
i  above.

STUD  (i)  D^Dftin,  hdrammdkim,  Esth.  810  RV.
See  HORSE,  §  i  [5].  (2)  rvnpj,  nfkuddsth,  Cant.  Int.  Graetz
very  plausibly  tmends  to  Q'piy  (see  NECKLACE,  3).

SUA(coy*.[B]),  i  Esd.529  RV  =  Ezra244.  SIA.

SUAH  (n-ID  ;  xoyxteli  [B]-  coye  tALl)-  a  name  in
a  genealogy  of  As  HER  (q.v.,  §4,  ii.),  i  Ch.73°-

SUBA,  RV  SUBAS  (coyBAC  [BA]),  a  group  of
children  of  the  servants  of  Solomon  (see  NETHINIM)  in
the  great  post-exilic  list  (see  EZRA,  ii.  §  9,  §  8  c. ),  one
of  eight  inserted  in  i  Esd.  634  <SBA  (om.  <§L)  after
Pochereth-hazzebaim  ]|  Ezra2s7  =  Neh.  7sg.


SUBAI (cyBAGl [BA]), i Esd.  5  30  =  Ezra  2  46,
SHALMAI.

SUBURBS  (i)  CHJE), migrds, TTeplCTTOplA and

a.<t>u>pi<TfJ.evaL  in  Josh.  ,  7repi<T7ropia  and  TrepiTrdAta  [I,]  in  Ch.  [icara-
(T^eVeio?  or  -aji'ai/TU)!'  i  Ch.  13  2],  trpoa<n[e\i.a.  in  Nu.  [d^optcr/anra,
7'.  3,  (TuyKupoOrTa,  7'.  4,  ojLiopa  or  6/xopom'ra,  F  om  .,7'.  5],

'


ill  Kzek.,  [aypoi]  d^upcayieVoi  in  Lev.  [cp  TYJV  d^iopta'jU.eVrj^  2  S.  8  I,
and  see  METHEG-AMMAH]  ;  Lev.  2034  Nu.  862-5  7  Josh.  21  11-19
21-37  39  /•  Ezek.  45  2  48  17  i  Ch.  040^  [55^]  132,  RVmg.
'  pasture-lands.'  See  CATTLE,  col.  712,  n.  2.

(2)  G'Tnp,  parwarim,  2  K.  23  ii.  RV  'precincts.'  See
PARBAR.

SUCATHITES  (D'rO-11"),  i  Ch.25s  RV,  AV
SUCHATHITES.  See  SOCOH.

SUCCOTH  (JTI3D,  i.e.  'thickets'  or  [see  Gen.  33  17]

'booths';  usually  <roicxu>0  ;  in  Josh.  1827  -da.  [B],  irta\io  [A],
<rix<ofl  [L]  ;  2  Ch.  4  17  <rexw<u0  [B*vid.]  <T(\x^  U*1],  <™xu>0  [L]  ;
oxijcai  in  Gen.  33  17  Ps.  008  1088  [tncrji/uijxaTa  {(}).

i.  A  town  in  Gadite  territory  (Josh.  1827  :  GAD,  §  12
[col.  1587])  in  'the  valley'  (fmek).  It  is  also  mentioned
in  i  K.  746,  2  Ch.  4i7,  in  connection  with  Solomon's
foundries,  which  were  in  '  the  clay  ground  (?)  between
Succoth  and  Zarethan.'  The  description  has  been  held
to  point  to'Ain  es-Sakut,  an  old  site,  close  to  the  Jordan,
but  on  'this'  side,  some  9  m.  S.  of  Beth-shean  (so
Robinson),  which  is  supposed  to  be  referred  to  in  these
words  of  Jerome  (Quaest.  Hebr.  in  Gen.  ),  '  est  autem
usque  hodie  civitas  trans  Jordanem  hoc  vocabulo  in  parte
Scythopoleos.  '  Against  this  view,  however,  see  ADAM.
Merrill  (PEFQ,  1878,  p.  83)  and  Conder  adopt  as  the
site  the  large  Tell  or  mound  now  called  Der  'Alia,  about
i  m.  N.  of  the  Zerka,  discovered  by  Warren  ;  1  the
special  reason  is  that  the  Talmud  identifies  Succoth  with
n^jnrii  Ter'ala  (Neub.  ,  Gifogr.  248),  which  seems  to  be
this  Der  'Alia.  This  is  rejected  by  Moore  as  not  agreeing
with  the  topographical  details  in  Judg.  84-17.  All  this,
however,  is  precarious,  unless  supported  by  a  thorough
textual  criticism.

(i)  As  to  Josh.  1827.  The  text  must  originally  have  belonged
to  a  geographical  survey  of  the  Negeb,  in  which  'the  rest  of  the
kingdom  of  Cushan,  king  of  Heshbon  '  was  assigned  to  the
Gadites.  filDD  is  mentioned  just  before  itj^  (see  ZAPHON),  and
most  probably  is  miswritten  for  n3VO>  '  Maacath  '  (in  Negeb).2


1  See  Trelawney  Saunders,  fntroii.  to  the  Survey  of  IV.  Pal.
088i),  158.

2  'In  the  valley,'  Josh.  1827,  should  be  'in  Maacath.' Cp

4819


SUKKIIMS

(2)  As  to  i  K.  7  46  (and  the  |l).  The  true  text  probably  stated
that  Hiram  the  artificer  cast  the  vessels  in  Maacath-jerahmeel,
between  Maacath  and  Zarephath.  See  TEBAH.

The  other  occurrences  of  the  name  in  MT  are  very
doubtful.  It  has  been  inferred  from  Gen.  8817  (J),
where  Jacob  appears  to  have  crossed  the  Jabbok  before
moving  on  to  Succoth  and  thence  to  Shechem,  that
Succoth  lay  on  the  S.  side  of  the  Jabbok,  near  the  point
where  it  forces  its  way  into  the  Jordan.  This  is  thought
to  agree  with  the  representation  in  Judg.  85,  where
Succoth  is  apparently  the  first  town  reached  by  Gideon
after  crossing  the  Jordan  somewhere  near  Zererah
(Zeredah)  and  Abel-rneholah.  This  may  possibly  have
been  the  notion  of  the  redactor  of  the  narrative  ;  but  it
is  not  what  the  original  story  intended  to  convey.
'  Succoth  '  is  a  corruption  either  of  ns^B,  Salecah  =
irta,  Salhad,  the  border  city  at  the  S.  E.  corner  of  Bashan
(cp  JEGAR-SAHADUTHA),  or,  more  probably,  of  Maa
cath,  a  district  of  the  Negeb.  (Cp,  however,  GIDEON.)

In  Ps.  008  1088  the  '  valley  of  Succoth  '  is  thought  to  be  that
part  of  the  Jordan  valley  which  adjoins  Succoth  (cp  Josh.  13  27)  ;
but  this  unique  and  obscure  phrase  is  improbable.  The  boldest
but  also  perhaps  the  most  critical  conjecture  is  that  the  psalmist
wrote  '  I  will  mete  out  Cusham  and  Maacath  '  (see  Ps.P\).

(P  also  recognises  a  place-name  Succoth  in  i  K.  20  16  (ev
(TOK\(u9  [B],  tv  <TOK\U>  [AL]).  Both  here  and  in  v.  12  probably
we  should  read  cnND^'^Vi  '  on  their  thrones  '  ;  see  Crit.  Bib.

2.  A  station  (n3D)  mentioned  repeatedly  in  the  Exodus
narrative  (Ex.  1237  [<roK\to6a.  BF1,  <ro\w0a  F*,  <rox<u#  L]  1820
crox<»0  [L]  Nu.  33  s/  <rox<o0  [  B*  v.  5)).  See  EXODUS,  i.  §  10,
GOSHEN,  and  PITHOM,  §  2.  Here,  too,  '  Maacath  '  may
originally  have  stood  (subjudice  Us  est).  See  WILDERNESS  OP
WANDERINGS.  T.  K.  C.


SUCCOTH-BENOTH (ITU? JTI3D  ;

NeiGei  [B],  coKvco0BeNi9ei  [A],  -BANeiGA  [L]),  a
Babylonian  idol  introduced  into  Palestine  (2  K.  17  30).
As  some  critics  think,  a  Hebraised  form  of  Sarpanitum,
consort  of  Marduk  (on  the  name  see  Jastrow,  RBA,
121  [Germ.  ed.  115],  449).  So  Rawlinson,  Schrader,
Hommel.  Delitzsch  (Par.  215)  explains  Sakkut-binutu
('supreme  judge  of  the  world'?).  But  surely  if  the
usual  explanation  of  Am.  626  is  correct  we  can  hardly
doubt  that  it  is  a  corruption  of  jra  rii3D,  Saccuth-Kewan
(two  names  of  Saturn  combined  ;  see  CHIUN  AND
SICCUTH).

There  is,  however,  a  better  theory.  It  is  probably  of  the
non-Israelite  Negeb  that  the  original  narrative  spoke  as  the
country  from  which  the  new  colonists  of  the  cities  of  pist?  (see

SHIMRON)  came.  Among  them  were  the  men  of  ^33  —  *'•?-,
Jerahmeel  ;  the  idol  they  made  was  of  r)1D2,  or  rather  rrti'3,
'Cushith,'  a  title  of  the  so-called  'Queen  of  Heaven'  (or,  'of
Jerahmeel  '  ?)  worshipped  by  the  N.  Arabians.  See  Crit.  Bit.
niJ3,  possibly  comes  from  P131  ('3  written  too  soon).  The  men
of  Cuth,  or  rather  Cush,  made  Nergal  —  i.e.,  Jerahmeel  (a  name
for  the  Jerahmeelite  Baal);  those  of  Hamath  (Maacath)  made
Ashima  —  i.e.,  Ishmael  ;  the  Arvites  (Arabians)  made  Nibhaz
and  Tartak  (  =  Terah);  the  Sepharvites  (Zarephathites)  made
Adrammelech  and  Anammelech  (  =  Jerahmeel).  T.  K.  C.

SUD  (coyA  [BAQ];  sitr  [Syr.],  sod),  a  Babylonian
stream  (canal)  near  which  Jewish  exiles  are  said  to  have
been  settled  (Bar.  14).  Cp  BARUCH  [BOOK],  §§  i,  4.
There  must  be  some  error  in  the  text.  Since  Bar.  1  1-
38  probably  had  a  Hebrew  original,  we  may  venture  to
assume  a  confusion  between  i  and  n,  and  read  either
•fla.  Sur,  i.e.,  Sora,  the  seat  of  a  famous  Jewish  academy
(so  first  Bochart),  or  more  probably  -irw,  '  Shihor,1  the
name  of  a  wady  in  the  Negeb,  assuming  that  Si3,  in  the
source  from  which  the  writer  drew  meant  Jerahmeel.
See  SHIHOR.  For  a  less  probable  view,  see  Wetzstein
in  Del.  /«.<3>,  7oi/.  T.  K.  c.

SUD  (coy*  [B]),  i  Esd.  529  AV=Ezra244,  SIA.
SUDIAS (coy^ioy [BA]), i Esd.  5  26=  Ezra  2  4o,

HODAVIAH  4.

SUKKIIMS,  RV  SUKKIIM  (DSS3D  ;  rpcoroAyTAi
[BA]  TRCOr^O^YTA.!  [cp  Swete]  coyxieiM  [L]  :  Tro-
glodytavax.  [Libyes  scilicet]  Trogodytre).  In  2  Ch.  12s

Ps.  008(5,  where  rVPD  DPI'  represents  a  twice  written  rOVO  (see


SUN

the  army  of  SHISHAK  (q.v. )  is  described  as  consisting  of
soldiers  'of  Egypt,  the  Lubim  (i.e.  Libyans),  the
Sukkiim  (n"3o),  and  the  Ethiopians.'  By  Sukkiim,
evidently  an  African  nation  is  meant  ;  and  considering
the  position  between  Libya  and  Ethiopia,  one  under
stands  why  (5  and  Vg.  guess  at  the  Trog(l}odyt<z  (the
1  correctly  wanting  in  B).  This,  however,  is  only  a
guess ;  no  such  name  is  known  in  antiquity.  The
Egyptian  name  for  those  nomadic  tribes  of  Hamitic
blood,  living  between  Egypt  and  the  Red  Sea,  was  And.
This  seems  to  have  about  the  same  meaning  as  the  Greek
name,  viz.,  '  inhabitants  of  rocks,  cliff-dwellers.'1

Gesenius's  explanation,  '  dwellers  in  booths '  (ni2D)  is  philo-
logically  and  practically  impossible.  C.  Niebuhr,  OLZ  869,  has
observed  that  the  name  is  almost  the  same  as  the  D"3B  (tukkiy-
yit'i),  i  K.  1022  2  Ch.  9 21,  the  supposed  'peacocks'  (see
PEACOCK)  brought  to  Solomon,  and  conjectures  that  the  word
really  means  there  '  black  slaves,'  correcting  into  sukkiyyim,  as
above.  As  such  a  word  or  name  remains  unknown,  W.  M.  Miiller
proposes,  2  269,  to  assume  d'ODD,  '  grey-hounds  '  (from  Egyptian
tsiir),  as  the  original  reading  in  the  African  curiosities  brought  to
Solomon,  and  thinks  that  the  chronicler  mistook  this  for  a  name
of  an  African  nation.  Thus  C.  Niebuhr's  observation,  which  is
undoubtedly  correct  as  far  as  the  similarity  of  both  words  in
vocalisation,  is  just  reversed.  Of  course,  the  last  explanation
rests  on  a  somewhat  bold  assumption.  w.  M.  M.

SUN  (tr»l?;,  D^n  ;  on  etym.  see  BDB).  As  to  the
gender  of  the  sun,  Semes  or  the  corresponding  word  is
masculine  in  Heb.  generally,"  Aram,  and  Ass.  In
Arabic  it  is  feminine,  but  the  heathen  Arabs  knew  Sams
as  a  sun-god  (see  further  below).  For  sun-worship  among
the  early  Israelites  there  is  little  positive  evidence,  and  that
little  (one  would  far  rather  think  otherwise)  threatens  to
disappear  as  the  result  of  a  searching  criticism  of  the
place-names  Beth-shemesh,  En-shemesh,  Har-heres,
Kir-heres,  Timnath-heres,  which  it  is  possible  are  com
paratively  late  corruptions  of  Beth-cusham,  En-cusham,
Har-ashhur,  Kir-ashhur,  Timnath-ashhur  (see  Crit.  Bib.
on  i  S.  612  Judg.  1  35,  and  other  related  passages).  The
ordinary  view,  of  course,  is  that  t?DK',  shnes,  and  onn,
/it'res,  in  the  traditional  forms  of  these  names,  prove  that
the  places  to  which  the  names  are  taken  to  have  be
longed  were  centres  of  the  cultus  of  the  sun-god.  We
must  remember,  however,  that  the  solar  character  of  the
Baals  has  not  been  made  out  (BAAL,  §  2/.  ;  NATURE-
WORSHIP,  §  5),  and  (not  to  fall  into  repetitions)  that  it
is  in  S.  Arabia  that  the  worship  of  sun  and  moon  was
1  strikingly  prevalent.'  On  the  other  hand,  Winckler
has  produced  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  (most  of
it,  to  be  sure,  is  unsafe)  from  the  early  narratives,  to
show  that  solar  and  lunar  mythology  is  represented  in
Hebrew  legends,  and  holds  that  the  god  variously
called  Ramman,  Hadad,  and  Yahu  is  not  only  the
storm-god,  but  at  the  same  time  the  god  who,  in  the
spring-tide,  restores  fruitfulness  to  the  earth,  and  one
of  whose  forms  is  the  well-known  Tammuz  (GI  278).
In  Gen.  49 10,  where  Dillmann  supposes  the  moon  to
be  represented  by  Joseph's  mother,  Winckler  holds
that,  since  yiyy  may  be  feminine  (see  Gen.  15 17;  and
cp  Ges.  T&es.,  s.v.  e'er)  and  rrr,  ydredh,  neither  is  nor
can  be  feminine,  the  mother  is  the  true  representative
of  the  sun,  and  we  have  here  a  sign  of  the  influence
of  a  different  form  of  mythology  from  the  pure
Babylonian — viz. ,  the  S.  Arabian,  in  which  the  children
of  the  moon-god  are  'Athtar,  who  is  masculine,  and
Sams,  who  is  feminine.  Winckler  also  (GI  2  70)  thinks
we  may  infer  that  in  the  early  Hebrew  myth  (which
was  also  the  original  Semitic  as  well  as  S.  Arabian
myth)  Sams,  the  sun-deity,  was  the  mother,  'Athtar
the  wife  of  the  moon-god.  Zimmern  (KAT^,  365,

1  [For  a  consideration  of  the  question  whether  2  Ch.  12212
refers  to  Mizraim  or  Mizrim,  and  to  Shishak  or  to  Cushi,  and
how  C"3D  should  be  read,  see  SHISHAK,  §  3,  and  Crit.  Bib.}

2  Masculine  in  Ps.  104  19  ;  feminine  in  Gen.  1617. In  Sam.
Pent,  it  is  sometimes  constructed  with  a  feminine  where  MT
has  a  masculine. Vice  versA,  in  Jer.  15  9  Kt.  has  riN3  where
Kr.  has  N3  (of  the  sun).


SUSANCHITES

369)  gives  a  qualified  support  to  Winckler's  theories,
but  thinks  that  Egyptian  influences  on  Hebrew  cults
may  be  presumed,  in  addition  to  Babylonian.  If  we
throw  back  this  influence  far  enough,  the  possibility  of
this  may  be  granted.  But,  so  far  as  the  biblical  evidence
goes,  it  is  surely  Babylon  (directly  or  indirectly)  rather
than  Egypt  which  is  indicated  as  the  source  of  such
influences.  We  must  also  desiderate  a  much  keener
and  more  methodical  criticism  of  the  Hebrew  texts,
especially  of  names  and  phrases  bearing  on  cults  and
myths,  than  is  yet  habitual  among  biblical  and  archaeo
logical  scholars.  Eor  instance,  is  it  safe  to  build  either
on  the  place-name  Beth-shemesh,  or  on  the  personal
names  SAMSON  and  SHESHBAZZAR  (qq.v.}l  However
this  may  be,  the  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  of
the  '  host  of  heaven  '  in  general  among  the  Israelites  in
the  seventh  and  sixth  centuries  is  not  doubtful  (see
MOON,  NATURE-WORSHIP,  §  5,  STARS,  §  4,  TAMMUZ).

On  the  relation  of  Yahwe  to  the  spring-sun  god  Marduk,  see
CREATION,  §  8,  and  cp  Zimmern  KA  Ti3),  369,  509;  on  other
points,  see  CHARIOT,  §  13,  HORSE,  §  4,  NATHAN  -MELECH.
See  also  ECLIPSE.  For  SUN-DIAL  (Is.  38s)  see  DIAL;  for
SUN-GATE  (Jer.  192  AVms.)  See  POTTERY,  HARSITH,  cp
JERUSALEM,  §  24  ;  for  SUN  IMAGES  see  MASSEBAH,  §  i,  c.

T.  K.  C.

SUPH  (cpD,  THC  epyQp&c  [BAF],  T.  e.  6&A&CCHC
[L]),  the  name  of  a  locality,  from  which,  Dillmann
conjectures,  the  P]-1D~D*  (yam  siiph  ;  EV  RED  SEA
[^.z/.])  took  its  name,  Dt.  1  1  f  (cp  <§).  The  neigh
bouring  names  in  the  traditional  text  are  as  perplexing
as  Suph,  and  there  is  some  reason  to  think  that  L).,  has,
either  by  accident  or  under  the  influence  of  theory,
misread  an  earlier  text  which  lay  before  him.

HID  VlO  nlaV  originally  (cp  ©,  Nu.  21  14,  d(/)A6-)'i<re=  n£31D)nave
been  HSIi'1  ?1D,  and  the  whole  verse  may  have  run,  'These  are
the  words  which  Moses  spoke  to  all  Israel  in  Arabia  of  Jerah-
meel,  in  the  wilderness  [in  Arabia],  opposite  Zarephath,  between
Paran  and  Peleth  and  Libnah  and  Misrim.'  In  Nu.  "i\  14  the
same  name  appears  as  Suphah  (nSID).  See  VAHEB,  and  Crit.
Bib.  T.  K.  C.

SUPPER  (AeiTTNON).  Mk.  621  etc.  See  MEALS.
§  2  (6),  EUCHARIST.

SUR  (ccYPLBa-bNa!a-bc-aA];  T.  [K*];  ACC.  [B*]  ;
Syr.  Sfirya],  one  of  the  coast-towns  of  Palestine  which
submitted  to  Holofernes  (Judith  228).  Fritzsche  too
boldly  corrects  to  '  Dora  '  (Dor).  If,  however,  OCINA  is
Accho,  this  violates  the  geographical  order  of  the  places.
Most  probably  Judith  (like  Tobit  ;  see  THISBK)  was  re
dacted  from  a  narrative  in  which  the  scene  of  the  events
was  mainly  in  the  Negeb.  The  place-names  easily
adapted  themselves  to  this  view.  '  Sidon  and  Tyre,'  as
often,  represents  TIXD,  'Missur,  '  '  Sur  and  Ocina'  (v.  I.
the  Kenites),  np?  lisD,  '  Missur  and  Kenaz.'

T.  K.  C.

SUR,  GATE  OF  (I-ID  1^),  2  K.  116;  cp  2  Ch.
23s.  An  unexplained  riddle  in  a  doubtful  text.  See
Kittel,  and  Crit.  Bib.,  also  JERUSALEM,  §  24.

SURETY  U/31IJ),  Gen.  43  9.  See  LAW  AND
JUSTICE,  §  17,  PLEDGE,  §  3,  and  TRADE  AND  COM
MERCE,  §  82  (e)  i  (4)  ;  cp  EARNEST,  DEPOSIT.

SUSA  (EN  coycoic  [BNA'L/3]),  Esth.  11  3.  See
SHUSHAN.


154


4821


SUSANCHITES,

COYCYN&XAIOI  [B],  coyCAN-  [AL]),  one  of  the  peoples
represented  among  Osnappar's  colonists  (Ezra  4gt).

Delitzsch  (Par.  327;  Catwer  Bib.  Lex.V)  876),  following
Lenormant,  compares  Shushinak,  the  name  of  the  capital  and
of  the  chief  god  of  Susiana  on  the  native  Elamite  inscriptions.
If,  however,  the  present  writer's  theory  that  Ezra-Nehenmah  has
been  recast,  on  the  basis  of  a  mistaken  historical  theory,  by  a
Jewish  editor,  be  accepted,  '  Shushan'  will  (cp  C'D'D  in  Is.  6(5  20)
have  arisen  cut  of  Cushan  (cp  CUSH,  2)  and  '  Susankaye  '  (Ezra  4  9)
out  of  Ctishanfiye  '  Cushanites.'  See  SHUSHAN,  and  on  '  Os-
nappar'  see  Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  C.

1  Perhaps  written  'si;*.
4822


SUSANNA

SUSANNA  (COYCANNA,  i.e. T\\&&,  'lily,' §69).

1.  The  pious  and beautiful  wife  of  Jonkim, in  one of  the
apocryphal  additions  to  Daniel. See  DANIEL  (BOOK),  §  5.

2.  One  of  the  women  who  ministered  to  Jesus  (Lk.  83).

SUSI  OP-ID  ;  coyc[e]i  [BAFL]),  a  Manassite.  father
of  Gacldi,  Nu.  ISnfia]  (col.  2919,  n.  6).

SWADDLE,  SWADDLINGBAND.  The  verb  (Win.
hAtha.1,  in  F'u.  and.Hoph.)  is  found  in  Ezek.  lt)4  ;  the
noun  Mthullah  (H?nn),  in  Job  889,  figuratively  of  the
dark  cloud  enveloping  the  circumambient  ocean.

The  mortal  speaker  in  Wisd.  7  •$/.  says,  '  I  also  when  I  was
born,  drew  in  the  common  air,  and  fell  upon  the  kindred  earth,
uttering,  like  all,  for  my  first  voice,  the  selfsame  wail.  In
swaddling  clothes  was  I  nursed  and  in  [watchful]  cares  (iv  crnap-
ya.voi.';  ai'trpac^rji/  jcat  iv  <t>povri<rtv).'  See  also  Lk.  2  7  12  (ecrirap-
ydfiaa-ev,  etrna.pya.viati.evov).  Cp  ROLLER  ;  FAMILY,  §  10  ;
MKUICINE,  8  i-  In  Lam.  222  the  verb  is  nBB.  t.'l'i>al!i  more
probably  '  dandled  ' :  so  RV.  bee  SPAN.

SWALLOW.  i.  "I'm,  dlror:  Ps.  84 3  [4].  Prov.
23  2  t  ;  rpvytav  in  Ps. ,  urpovOoi  in  Prov.  See  below.

2.  DID, sits, Is.  8814 Jer.S;,! Kt. ; D'D Kr.  ; x**1*""1  >
correctly rendered in RV ; AV wrongly CKANE (q.v., for
explanation  of  error).

Canon  Tristram  considers  that  dfror  is  rightly  inter
preted  swallow  or  martin,  whilst  the  identity  of  sis'2
with  the  swallow  or  swift  has  been  satisfactorily  proved
by  Bochart2i  10  (cp  Lagarde  in  GGN  1888,  p.  6/),
and  receives  interesting  confirmation  from  the  fact  that
Tristram  heard  this  name  given  to  the  swift  (Cypselus
apus,  L)  by  the  present  inhabitants  of  Palestine
(FFP,  82/.).

Although  zoologists  place  the  Hirundinidre  (swallows
and  martins)  some  distance  from  the  Cypselidne  (swifts),
swallows  and  swifts  are  very  frequently  mistaken  for
each  other,  and  it  seems  improbable  that  the  ancient
Jewish  writers  distinguished  between  them.

There  are  three  species  of  swallow,  Hirttndo,  now  found  in
Palestine,  (i)  The  common  swallow,  //.  rustica,  which,  like
its  congener  (2)  //.  ru/ula,  returns  from  its  winter  quarters
towards  the  end  of  March,  whilst  (3)  //.  saz'ignii,  the  oriental
swallow,  winters  in  the  Holy  Land.  Four  species  of  martin
and  three  species  of  swift  are  known  in  Palestine,  one  of  them
being  the  common  swift,  Cypselus  a/>us,  referred  to  above.

The  swifts  fly,  like  the  swallows,  with  great  rapidity,
and  their  return  from  the  S.  in  the  early  spring  is  a
most  striking  event  (Jer.  87).  It  usually  occurs  at  the
beginning  of  April.  '  Clouds  pass  in  long  streams  to
the  north,  but  still  leave  prodigious  numbers  behind. '

They  return  to  their  winter  quarters  in  November.
It  is  thought  that  the  reiterated  complaining  cry  of  the
swift  is  referred  to  by  the  prophet  (Is.  8814)  rather  than
the  more  musical  and  less  frequent  note  of  the  swallow
(see  further  Che.  ad  loc. ).

Both  swifts  and  swallows  frequent  towns  and  villages.  The
swallows  build  their  nests  of  mud  (Ps.  843).  The  swift  usually
builds  its  nest  of  straws,  feathers,  etc.,  cemented  together  by
saliva  ;  it  uses  such  materials  as  it  can  obtain  without  recourse
to  the  ground,  as  with  its  long  wings  and  short  legs  it  experiences
difficulty  in  rising  from  the  earth.

3.  (iwy, 'Agur:  Is.  8814  Jer.  87!),  rendered  in  RV  CRANE
(3-v-\  A.  E.  S. — N.  M.

[It  seems  probable  that  -iuy  should  also  be  substituted
for  MT's  j-i.Ni  in  Job  76.  '  My  days  are  swifter  than
a  crane '  will  be  instinct  with  pathetic  force  to  those  who
remember  travellers'  descriptions  of  the  migration  of  the
crane.  See  Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  c.]

SWANlTlOCOR  tinstmeth.  Lev.  11  i8[rrop4>YPIOON
[BFL]  -PCON'[A]]',  Dt.  14 16  [(e)lBic  BAFL]).

Two  species  of  swan,  Cygnus  musicus  (C.  ferus),  the
Whooper  or  Wild  Swan,  and  C.  olor  (C.  ntansuetus),  have
been  found  in  Palestine  ;  but  they  appear  to  be  comparatively
rare,  and  scholars  do  not  now  defend  AV.

Following © in Dt., Tristram identifies  tinst'meth

1  \e\iS(av  represents  both  Q1D  and  -\\^y  in  Is.,  in  Jer.  xe^l&uv
aypoO  =  Qia  or  p/D- Aq.  iVn-o?  in  Is.  8814;  Sym.  xeA'&«'i'  in
Is.  38  14.  re'TTif  in  Jer.  8  7  ;  Theod.  a  is  in  Is.  38  14.

2  This  form,  which  is  the  Kre  in  Jer.  87,  is  also  supported  by
Th. in  Is.  88 14 and  is  the  name  which  Tristram  heard  (see
above).

4823


SWINE

with  the  sacred  ibis  (Ibis  atthiopica  ;  but  see  HERON).
or  with  the  purple  gallinule  (Porphyrio  c&ruleus)  allied
to  the  moor-hen.  See,  however,  OWL.

The  same  Hebrew  word  is  found  in  Lev.  1130  in  the  list  of
unclean  quadrupeds,  where  AV  has  MOLE  (y.v.,  2),  RV  CHAM
ELEON.  See  LIZAKO,  6.  A.  E.  S.

SWEARING  U'in£;,  Gen.  2l23,  etc.  ;  oMNyeiN,
Mt.  534,  etc.).  See  OATH.

SWEAT,  BLOODY.  Of  the  passage  in  Lk.  22  44
(the  agony  in  the  garden),  '  and  his  sweat  became  as  it
were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  upon  the  ground  '
(KCU  eytvero  b  i5/>ws  aiToD  tixret  Opy/Apci  ai'fiaTos  Kara-
paivovTos  tiri  rr)i>  yrjv),  three  interpretations  are  current  :
(a)  that  a  literal  (and  preternatural1)  exudation  of
blood  is  intended  ;  (6)  that  the  sweat-drops  resembled
blood-drops  in  colour,  size,  abundance,  or  the  like  ;  (c )
that  the  expression  is  to  be  taken  rhetorically,  somewhat
as  the  modern  '  tears  of  blood. '

It  is  to  be  observed  that  w.  ^f.  are  absent  from
many  MSS  (see  the  discussion  in  H/7/264  ff.\  It  is  a
question  whether  they  were  suppressed  by  the  '  orthodox'
(opOodo^oi  d£  cKpeiXavro  rb  pifriiv,  Epiphanius,  Ancorat.
31),  or  whether  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  later  in
sertion,  explicable  perhaps  on  some  such  principle  as
that  suggested  above  in  col.  1808,  middle.  Among  the
most  recent  commentators  Holtzmann  accepts  them  as
genuine,  whilst  B.  Weiss  rejects  them.  There  is  a
recent  discussion  of  the  subject  by  Harnack  (SB A  IV,
1901,  251-255),  who  holds  it  to  be  certain  that  BXA
give  an  intentionally  shortened  text,  and  places  the
excision  perhaps  in  the  beginning  of  the  second  century,
but  perhaps  also  many  decades  later.  His  arguments
are  four  :  ( i )  Every  feature  in  the  disputed  passage
which  can  be  compared  with  certainly  genuine  Lucan
passages  bears  the  Lucan  stamp.  (2)  There  is  no
direct  evidence  that  the  words  were  wanting  in  the
MSS.  before  300,  whilst  Justin,  Tatian,  and  Irenceus
attest  them  for  the  first  half  of  the  second  century.  (3)
In  two  important  points  the  passage  could  not  fail  to
offend  the  orthodox  :  (a)  the  statement  that  an  angel
strengthened  Jesus  :  we  remember  how  earnest  was
the  struggle  in  the  earliest  times  for  the  super-angelic
dignity  of  Jesus  ;  (fi)  the  ayuvia,  with  its  consequences
was  produced  not  by  external  attacks  but  by  a  terrible
inward  struggle  (this  goes  beyond  Heb.  67).  (4)  We
cannot,  it  is  true,  give  a  full  answer  to  the  question
whence  the  fourth  evangelist  drew  his  material ;  but  it
is  clear  that  in  the  narrative  of  the  Passion  and  the
Resurrection  he  had  no  other  source  than  the  Synoptics.
Now  is  it  not  highly  probable,  asks  Harnack,  that
Jn.  1227  f.  is  the  Johannine  transformation  of  Lk.
2243/  ?  Cp  CROSS,  §  5.

SWEET  CANE  (n3f5),  Is.  43  24  Jer.  6  20.  See
REED,  \b.

SWEET  ODOURS,  (i)  DW3.  bttdmim,  z  Ch.
1614,  etc.  See  SPICE,  i;  cp  BALSAM.  2.  C'nirn,  nlhcli'im,
Lev.  2631,  etc.  Cp  SACRIFICE,  §  36.

SWEET  SPICES  (DV3D),  Ex.  3034- See  SPICE,  2.

SWINE  ("fTPI  ;  cp  Ass.  humsiru ; -  yc  \  XOipOC.  Lk.

832/".  15  is/",  etc. ). Apart  from  the  prohibition  of  eating


1.  Biblical
references.


swine's  flesh  (Dt.  148,  cp  Lev.  11?)  there
is probably no pre- exilic reference to


this animal in the OT. The fine
proverb  comparing  a '  fair  woman  without  discretion '

1  According  to  Professor  Macalister  (Hastings,  7^53 310*1) :
'There  are no  modern trustworthy  cases  of  genuine  bloody
sweat ;  and  although  in  some  older  svritings  comparable  instances
are  quoted,  none  of  them  are  properly  authenticated."

2  Ijumsiru  and  piazu  are  two  animals  which  belong  to  the
class  represented  ideographically  by  S-4{f  (i.e.,  swine). They
lived  in  reedy,  marshy  districts. Whether  humsiru is  quite
the  same  as  the  Arabic  hinzlr  is  uncertain  ; but  the  affinity
must  be  great  (Jensen,  ZA  1  309). The  Aramaic  k,'zir,i  is,  like
the Arabic form,  derived  from  Babylonian;  cp ret'.  •
Muss-Arnolt,  s.v. humsiru. 'Narrow-eyed'  (BDB)  is  not  a
satisfactory  explanation.

4824


SWINE

to  'a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout'  (Prov.  11.22)
may  already  presuppose  the  proximity  of  Gentiles  who
kept  swine.  This  is  certainly  the  case  with  the  two
most  familiar  NT  references  to  swine — viz. ,  '  he  sent  him
into  his  fields  to  feed  swine'  (Lk.  15  15),  and  'neither
cast  ye  your  pearls  before  the  swine'  (Mt.  76).  But
we  can  go  deeper  into  the  meaning  than  this.  It  is
difficult  not  to  think  that,  at  any  rate  in  its  present  form,
the  crowning  error  of  the  '  prodigal  son '  consisted  in
his  becoming  paganised1  (an  ever  present  danger  of
Jews  in  the  Roman  period);  'the  swine,'  as  well
as  '  the  dogs '  (note  the  article)  in  Jesus'  warning,
are  Gentiles  of  the  class  described  so  often  in  the  OT
as  '  the  wicked  '  (contrast  Is.  42^).  Such  passages  are
intelligible  only  at  the  period  when  both  Judaism  and
the  young  religion  of  Christ  were  confronted  by  an  alien
religious  system  in  the  very  midst  of  the  sacred  land.
No  more  striking  exhibition  of  this  perpetual  contrast
can  well  be  imagined  than  that  in  the  narrative  of  the
demoniacs  of  Gerasa  (see  GERASA).  This  place  was
(like  Gadara)  in  the  heathen  territory  of  Perasa,  where
a  'herd  of  many  swine'  (Mt.  830  Lk.  832) — we  need
not  lay  stress  on  the  too  definite  detail  in  Mk.  5i32
('  about  two  thousand  ') — was  a  familiar  sight.

It  is  probable  that  the  story  of  the  Gerasene
demoniac  or  demoniacs  has  not  reached  us  in  its
earliest  form,  and  that  the  departure  of  the  '  legion '
of  demons  into  the  half-legion  of  swine  is  a  secondary
element.3  If  so,  we  gain  a  fresh  illustration  of  the
Jewish  way  of  regarding  heathenism  as  a  '  swinish '
error  (see  Weizsiicker's  weighty  remarks,  Apost.  Age,
265).  The  author  of  2  Peter  regards  the  immoral
heresy  of  his  day  as  just  such  another  (2  Pet.  2,22,*
where  EV  'sow,'  8s).

There  are  three  references  to  swine  in  ©  which  are  not  found
in  MT.  Probably,  however,  they  are  due  to  corruption  of  the
text.  See  2  S.  17  8  (where  (§1*  appears  to  insert  ui«  vs  rpa^eia
fv  TreSt'a) ;  but  see  KIo.  ad  Inc.)  and  i  K.20  102238  (where  the
[ai]  i/es  of  BAL  and  BA  respectively  has  evidently  sprung  out  of
icuVes).

The  swine  occupied  a  highly  honourable  place  as  a
sacrificial  animal  in  Asia  Minor,  Greece,  and  Italy,  but
9 A  H was ne't^ler  sacrificed  nor  eaten  by  the

sacre  jews  5  Their  feeling  of  repugnance  was
not  shared  by  the  Assyrians,  who  relished
swine's  flesh  ; 6  though  the  hog,  which  was  only  half-
tamed,  was  not  included  among  their  ordinary  domestic
animals."  In  Egypt  the  pig  was  unpopular,  if  not
tabooed.8  Swine  were  certainly  kept,  but  only  in
certain  localities — e.g. ,  in  the  district  of  el-Kab  (the
city  of  Eileithyia).  Among  the  live  stock  belonging  to
Renni,  whose  tomb  is  at  el-Kab,  300  swine  are
mentioned.  As  Renni  (i3th  dynasty)  was  a  prophet  of
the  goddess  at  el-Kab  (perhaps  to  be  identified  with
Selene;  cp  Herod.  247),  it  is  probable  that  he  had  to
provide  swine  for  sacrifice  ;  for  swine,  as  Herodotus
states,  were  sacrificed  to  Selene  and  Dionysus  (Osiris).
The  drove  of  swine  depicted  in  the  tomb  of  Paheri
(i8th  dynast}')  at  the  same  place  maybe  for  agricultural

1  The  parable  is  even  literally  accurate. That  Jews  were
sometimes  tempted  to  keep  swine  is  proved  for  the  time  of  John
Hyrcanus  by  a  prohibition  quoted  by  Grotius  in  his  comment
on  M  1.832.

2  Keim's  statement  (ft'su  von  Naz.  2  457)  is  correct ; '  the
report  of  Matthew  is  by  far  the  simplest,  the  most  original.'
Cp  Badham,  S.  Rlark's  Indebtedness,  42  f.

3  Nestle  (Philologica  Sacra,  21)  suggests  that  the  story  may
have  arisen  as  a  popular  explanation  of  a  place-name  such  as
Ras  el-hinzir,  'swine's  head'  (or  'promontory'),  or  Tell  abu-1-
hinzlr,  '  hill  of  the  father  of  swine.'

*  In  this  passage  the  reference  to  the  wallowing  of  the  swine
appears  to  have  sprung  from  a  misreading  of  a  well-known
proverb  (Prov.  26 1 1 ).

8  Cp  Frazer,  Pansam'as,  4  137^

8  On  certain  days  it  was  expressly  forbidden  to  eat  it  (Jastrow,
Relig:  Bab.  Ass.  381).  Was  it  sacred  to  Bel  at  Nippur?  See
Peters,  Nippur,  2131.

7  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civ.  560. The  illustration  given  by
Maspero  represents  a  sow  and  her  litter  in  the  reeds  of  the
marshes.

8  Erman,  Egypt,  441.

4825


SWORD

purposes.  Elsewhere  swine  came  to  be  regarded  as
embodiments  of  Set  and  Typhon,  and  were  loathed
accordingly.  To  the  Syrians  and  Phoenicians,  however,
the  swine  was  sacrosanct  and  its  flesh  prohibited  (cp
Lucian,  Dea  Syr.  54).  Antiphanes  states  that  it  was
sacred  to  Aphrodite  or  Astarte  (Athen.  849).

Probably  it  is  from  the  European  boar  (Sus  scrofa}
that  the  domesticated  swine  of  Palestine  is  derived,
though  this  is  still  to  some  extent  a  matter  of  conjecture.
Swine  are  very  uncommon  in  Palestine,  and  there  may
have  been  the  same  scarcity  in  Jewish  territory  in  ancient
times  on  account  of  the  repugnance  of  the  Jews  to  this
animal.  This  repugnance  (which  is  shared  by  Moham
medans)  is  not  to  be  explained  on  mere  sanitary  grounds
(cp  Plut.  De  Is.  et  Osir.  8).  It  is  but  the  reverse  side
of  that  earlier  veneration  for  the  swine  as  sacrosanct,1
which  also  accounts  for  the  original  taboo  upon  swine's
flesh  ;  and  the  legend  of  the  death  of  ADONIS  may  be  a
primitive  (Phoenician)  explanation  of  this  change  of
feeling.  There  is  indeed  some  evidence  among  the
Jews  of  a  survival  of  the  ancient  feeling  in  certain
quarters.  As  Robertson  Smith  has  pointed  out,2  the
strange  statements  in  Is.  604  (cp  6617)  and  663  are
most  easily  explicable  if  the  flesh  of  swine  was  partaken
of  in  secret  sacrificial  meals.

The  correctness  of  this  view  is  by  no  means  bound  up  with
his  view  of  the  date  of  Is.  05_/T,  which  later  criticism  regards  as
belonging  to  the  time  of  Nehemiah,  and  referring  to  certain
unorthodox  rites  practised  by  some  at  least  of  the  Jews  and
by  the  Samaritans,  or  the  N.  Arabians  (Che.),  and  denounced  by
the  adherents  of  a  legal  orthodoxy.  It  has  also  been  made  at
any  rate  plausible  by  Robertson  Smith  that  the  swine,  the  dog,
and  the  mouse  (see  DOG,  MOUSE)  were  the  totems  of  the  Jewish
families  which  took  part  in  the  mysteries  described  in  those
strange  prophecies."*

The  BOAR  in  Hebrew  bears  the  same  name  as  the
swine.  The  Talmud  for  clearness  uses  the  phrase
•an  Yjn  (cp  13,  '  the  open  country,'
3.  References  ^394) ;  a  psalmist  (Ps.  80 13  [14]  crDs
to  Doars.  £BA-j  Cj  j-x?  ART])  once  speaks  of  '  the
boar  from  the  jungle'4  ("ijrc,  EV  'out  of  the  wood').
This  is  in  fact  the  more  descriptive  phrase.  It  is. in  tip
'jungle'  of  the  Jordan,  from  Jericho  to  the  Sea  of
Galilee,  that  the  wild  boar  specially  dwells,  though  he
is  also  to  be  found  in  the  lowlands  of  S.  Philistia  and
Beersheba  and  on  the  slopes  of  Hermon.  '  A  party  of
wild  boars,'  says  Tristram  (AT///?54),  'will  uproot  a
whole  field  in  a  single  night.'  The  Assyrian  storm-god
in  his  fury  is  likened  to  a  wild  boar  (humsint]  ;  not
unnaturally  we  may  interpet  Ps.  80 13  [14]  of  the  havoc
wrought  in  Palestine  by  the  armies  of  Artaxerxes  Ochus.
Similarly  in  4  Esd.  1630  the  CARMANIANS  \_y.v. ]  are
compared  to  'the  wild  boars  of  the  forest'  (in  one  of
the  late  additions  to  4  Esd. )  ;  and  in  Enoch  89  72  the
Samaritans  who  attempted  to  prevent  the  rebuilding  of
the  Jewish  temple  are  symbolised  by  wild  boars.

A.  E.  S. S.  A.  C. — T.  K.  C.

SWORD  (T\n,Mreb;  A\&x<MP&>  pOM({><MA,  5l(j>oc).
In  Ecclus.  46a  po/ji<f>aia  (EV  'sword)'  represents
kldon,  ['ITS.  See  JAVELIN,  i,  5.  In  Job2025,  barak,
pi3,  lit.  'lightning,'  is  poetically  used  for  'sword'  or
'blade'  (cp  Dt.  8241).

1  The  theory  of  the  primitive  sanctity  of  the  swine  is  unassail
able  (cp  FISH,  g§  9  ff.\  Callistratus's  explanation  of  this
sanctity  (Plut.  Syntpos,  4  5)  may  be  absurd ;  but  the  fact
remains.  Cp  Frazer's  important  remark:;  in  his  Pausanias,
4138;  and  see  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  §  8;  FOOD,  §  16,  and
JQK,  1902,  p.  422.

a  Kinship,  307  ff.  ;  RSW  343,  357,  368.  (Other  illustrations
of  the  subject  of  this  article  will  also  be  found  in  RS(*}.)

3  [See  SHAPHAN,  SANBALLAT,  ZEKUBBABEL,  and  especially
Crit.  Bib.,  where  the  evidence  relative  to  the  captivity  of  the
people  of  Judah  and  their  subsequent  relations  to  their  oppressors
is  considered,  and  Is.  664  663  17  are  restored  to  what  the  present
writer  takes  to  be  their  original  form. He  would  gladly  have
come  to  other  results,  as  the  new  considerations  compel  him  to
abandon  the  brilliant  and  plausible  theory  adopted  from  W.^R.
Smith  in  Intr.  Is.  366^.—  T.  K.  c.]

4  On  the  reading  see  HIPPOPOTAMUS.


SWORD

Other  words  doubtfully  or  wrongly  rendered  '  sword  '
are  :

1.  i'-lah,  nVff,  Joel2s;  RV  'weapons'  (EV's  usual  rendering).
'  Dart ' would be better  (n^SS to  send, shoot). So  in Xeh.
4  17  [n],  and  elsewhere,  'weapon'  should  be  'dart' (<S1!NA  /3oAi«).

2.  mckerak, HTDS,  Gen.  49  st. So  AV"»k'-,  RV. The  mean-
ing  is  suitable;  but  the  sense  has  no  philological  justification
(see  Spurrell's  note). See  SHECHEM.

3.  resa.li, nsn,  Ps.  42  10  [i  i]  ;  (E»  KaTaSAatmt  (-6\i<rOai  [«<:•••>]);
AV"i£.,  '  Or,  killing  ' ;  RVmg.,  '  Or,  crushing.' Baethgen  agrees
with  RV,  comparing  62  3  [4]. See  Che.  /V.l2),  We.  SHOT,  on
the  text  of  both  passages.

The  hereb  or  sword  (the  sheath  of  which  was  called
-ij?n,  td\ir,  or  pi,  ndddn)  was  suspended  from  the  girdle
(Gen.  4822  i  s"l7s9  25  13  2  S.  208),  probably  on  the  left
thigh  (cp  Judg.  3i6,  with  Moore's  note),  as  was  also
usual  with  the  Assyrians  (see  Layard,  quoted  below)
and  the  Greeks.  Though  so  frequently  mentioned  in
the  OT,  we  need  not  infer  that  it  was  in  very  common
use  ;  the  sword  cannot  have  been  so  easy  to  make  as
the  arrow  (see  WEAPONS,  §  2)  or  SPEAR.  Nor  must
we  suppose  that  an  instrument  of  the  same  size  and  shape
is  always  intended  by  Mrefi  ;  the  same  word  may  have
denoted  the  most  primitive  form  of  sword,  as  well  as
the  later  knife-like  weapons  (cp  Josh.  5z  and  see  KNIFE,
2),  including  scimitars  and  the  longer  poniards.

Taking  a  wider  survey  of  the  evolution  of  the  sword,
we  notice  that  the  earliest  form  of  this  weapon  was  of
wood  ;  the  antelope's  horn,  merely  sharpened,  which  is
still  used  in  every  part  ot  the  East  where  the  material
can  be  procured,  may  also,  as  a  writer  in  Kitto  suggests
(Bibl.  Cycl.},  have  served  the  same  purpose.  The
Egyptian  soldiers  of  the  first  Theban  Empire  were
armed  in  some  cases  with  wooden  swords  (Maspero,
Daivn  of  Civilisation,  452),  and  swords  of  heavy  wood
are  said  to  be  still  used  in  Nubia  ;  in  Mexico  and
Yucatan  the  wooden  sword  was  provided  with  a  flint
edge,  and  '  the  destructive  powers  of  this  formidable
weapon  are  frequently  dwelt  upon  by  the  early  Spaniards'
(Wilson,  Prehistoric  Man,  1 190).  Later,  bronze  and
iron  were  used.

The  sword,  however,  would  not  appear  to  have  been
a  favourite  weapon  in  ancient  times.  Where  it  is
found,  it  seems  to  be  carried  as  a  rule  as  an  additional
security.  The  Chaldtean  soldiers,  whose  equipment
was  of  the  rudest  kind,  though  they  seem  to  have  used
the  dagger,  did  not  apparently  carry  a  sword  (see
Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civ.  722).  According  to  Erman
(Life  in  Anc.  Kgypt,  516),  the  swords  (hurpu]  imported
into  Egypt  in  the  eighteenth  dynasty  came  from  Syria.
Wilkinson  (Anc.  Egypt,  \-zio f.)  gives  the  following
description  of  the  Egyptian  sword  :

'  The  Egyptian  sword  was  straight  and  short,  from  two-and-
a-half  to  three  feet  in  length,  having  apparently  a  double  edge,
and  tapering  to  a  sharp  point ;  and  Herodotus  compares  the
sword  of  Cilicia  to  that  of  Egypt.  It  was  used  for  cut  and
thrust  ;  but  on  some  occasions  they  held  it  downwards,  and
stabbed  as  with  a  dagger.  The  handle  was  plain,  hollowed  in
the  centre,  and  gradually  increasing  in  thickness  at  either
extremity'  (cp  the  picture  of  the  storming  of  Dapuru,  the
fortress  of  the  Heta,  by  Rameses  II.,  reproduced  above,  col.
1223).

This  is  very  like  the  sword  of  the  bronze  age  as  we
find  it  elsewhere  (cp  the  bronze  swords  given  in  Evans,
The  Ancient  Bronze  of  Great  Britain,  273-300  ;  Wilson,
Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland,  1  352).  Like  other
bronze  swords  it  is  without  cross-piece1  or  handguards  ;
and  like  these,  in  spite  of  what  Wilkinson  says,  it  was
perhaps  '  intended  for  stabbing  and  thrusting  rather
than  for  cutting'  (Lubbock,  Prehistoric  TimesW,  30). 2
The  swords  of  the  Mediterranean  pirates  seem  to  have
been  of  the  same  kind  (Wilkinson,  246  ;  cp  WMM,

1  Cp  the  earlier  broadsword  of  the  ante-Norman  period  ;  see
Kvans,  Ancient  Armour  and  ll'eapons  in  Europe,  \T,\jff.

2  '  The  handles  of  the  bronze  swords  are  very  short,  and  could
not  have  been  held  comfortably  by  hands  as  large  as  ours,  a
characteristic  much  relied  on  by  those  who  attribute  the  intro
duction  of  bronze  into  Europe  to  a  people  of  Asiatic  origin '
(Lubbock,  op.  cit.).

4827


SYCHAR

As.  u.  Eur.  375)  ;  and  we  meet  with  it  again  on  the
silver  patera  found  by  Gen.  di  Cesnola  (Cyprus,
pi.  xix. ,  ppp.  p.  276)  at  Curium.1  For  cutting,  a
curved  sword,  like  a  sickle,  was  often  used.  In  the
nineteenth  dynasty  the  Pharaoh  himself  is  represented
as  fighting.  '  He  even  takes  part  in  the  hand-to-hand
fight,  and  his  dagger  and  sickle-shaped  sword  are  close
at  hand'  (Erman,  Anc.  Egypt,  527). a  The  Assyrians,
whose  martial  equipment  was  remarkable,  used  swords
of  various  kinds  and  sizes.  The  spearman,  besides  his
spear  and  shield,  often  carried  a  short  sword  in  his  belt
(Maspero,  Ancient  Egypt  and  Assyria,  321).  But
Assyrian  soldiers  also  used  long  swords  ;  '  the  swords
were  worn  on  the  left  side,  and  suspended  by  belts
passing  over  the  shoulders,  or  round  the  middle '
(Layard,  Nineveh  and  its  Remains,  2342)  ;  some  of  the
swords  have  quite  a  modern  appearance  (see  Ball,  Light
from  the  East,  199).  That  amongst  the  Israelites  the
sword  was  sometimes  slung  in  the  same  way  seems  to
be  shown  by  such  passages  as  i  S.  17 39  2  S.  208  i  K.
20 1 1.  Both  sword  and  sheath  amongst  the  Egyptians,
and  Assyrians  were  often  highly  ornamented  (see
Wilkinson,  Anc.  Egypt,  1.210,  Layard,  Nineveh  and  its
Remains,  2298  ;  cp  also  the  poniards  found  in  the
coflin  of  'Ah-hotep,  as  shown  in  Maspero,  Egyptian
Archeology,  31 8/. ,  Struggle  of  the  Nations,  97).

Amongst  the  metal  objects  found  by  Bliss  (A  Mound
of  Many  Cities,  105)  were  spear-heads,  lance-points,
and  knives,  but  apparently  no  swords.  On  p.  106,
however,  he  gives  what  he  describes  as  '  a  large  knife,
which  fitted  on  to  a  wooden  handle,  as  a  few  slivers  of
wood  still  clinging  to  the  end  show.'  Perhaps  this  was
rather  a  poniard.  Schliemann  in  his  Mycenaean  explora
tions  (Mycence,  283)  found  swords  the  length  of  which
'  seems  in  a  great  many  cases  to  have  exceeded  three
feet  .  .  .  ;  they  are  in  general  not  broader  than  our
rapiers.'  But,  strange  to  say,  he  found  no  swords  on
the  supposed  site  of  Troy  (see  Ilios,  483).  At  Hissarlik
'  weapons  of  copper  and  bronze  occur  frequently—  lance-
heads,  daggers,  arrow-heads,  knives,  if  we  may  designate
these  as  weapons — but  no  swords '  ( Preface  by  Prof.
Virchow,  xii).  The  reputed  sword  of  Goliath  was
preserved  as  a  sacred  object  in  a  sanctuary  (i  S.  21  8/  >.
There  are  Babylonian  parallels  (see  GOLIATH,  §  3),  and
Lubbock  (Origin  of  Civilisation^,  323)  points  out  that
to  some' peoples  the  sword  itself  has  been  an  object  of
veneration  and  even  of  worship.  M.  A.  c.

SYCAMINE  TREE  (CYKAMINOC,  Lk.  176f)  is,  as
all  agree,  the  mulberry,  that  being  the  invariable
meaning  of  the  Greek  word  (Gels.  1.288^).

Both  the  black  and  the  white  mulberry  (Mortis  nigra  L.  and
M.  alba  L.)  are  at  this  day  commonly  cultivated  in  Palestine.
The  Greek  name  is  probably  derived  from  Heb.  C'Sjpt?,  sikmint,
though  this  denotes  a  different  tree — the  sycomore  or  fig-mul
berry.  The  Mishnic  name  for  the  mulberry  is  n?n-  '  Mulberry
trees'  as  a  rendering  for  C'N33  is  a  mere  guess.  Cp  MUL
BERRY  TREES.  N-  M-

SYCHAR  (cyX^P  fri-  WH]),  mentioned  in  the
account  of  the  conversation  of  Jesus  with  a  Samaritan
woman  (In.  4s).  It  was  a  'city  of  Samaria,'  and  it
was  '  near  the  piece  of  ground  (xwpiov)  which  Jacob
gave  to  his  son  Joseph. '  '  Jacob's  fountain  '  (^77717)  was
there,  by  which  we  are  told  that  Jesus  sat,  '  wearied
with  his  journey.'  From  the  expression  'a  city  .  .  .
called  Sychar'  (cp  11  54,  'a  city  called  Ephraim')  we
may  plausibly  assume  that  the  place  referred  to  was
not  very  well  known.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not
impossible  that  the  redactor  of  the  Gospel  may  have
misread  the  manuscript  which  lay  before  him,  and  that,
not  knowing  any  places  called  Sychar  and  Ephraim ,  he

1  The  weapons  of  Cyprus  were  greatly  prized; 'Alexander
had  a  Cyprus  sword  given  him  by  the  king  of  Citium,  and
praised  for  its  lightness  and  good  quality  '  (p.  10).  _

2  Cp  the  curved  sabre  of  Rammrm(Adad)-Nirari  I.;  Maspero,
Struggle  of  the  Nations,  607  ;  Ball,  Light  from  the  Kas:.
The  Etruscans  also  used  the  curved  sword  ;  Dennis,  The  Cities
and  Cemeteries  of  Etruria,  \  201  2  442.

4828


SYCHAR

may  have  modified  the  phraseology  so  as  to  suit  these
apparently  obscure  places.1  Naturally  there  has  been
much  debate  as  to  this  '  city  called  Sychar,'  otherwise
unmentioned  ;  and  the  theory  which  has  the  first  claim
to  be  considered  is  that  which  identifies  '  Sychar '  with
avxffJ-  (Sychem) — i.e. ,  the  chief  city  of  the  Samaritans,
Shechem.

From the time of Eusebius, no doubt has been

entertained  as  to  the  identity  of  '  Jacob's  fountain.' It

_ , _ is  called  later  in  the  gospel  narrative  a

«?yCu~  well  (<jWap  =  -iK3,  bfcr],  and  this  double

Snecnem.

title  is,  in  fact,  applicable  to  the  vener-
lible  '  Jacob's  Well '  of  our  day,  if  the  various  reports  of
travellers  are  correct.  It  is  no  doubt  rain-water  that
produces  the  softness  claimed  for  the  water  of  '  Jacob's
Well '  ;  but  it  may  nevertheless  also  be  true  that,  as
Conder  says,  the  well  fills  by  infiltration.2  Few  of  the
sacred  sites  in  Palestine  thrill  one  so  much  as  this,  because
of  the  beauty  of  the  narrative  with  which  it  is  connected,
and  because  of  the  unquestioning  and  universal  accept
ance  of  the  early  tradition.  Jacob's  Wrell  is  situated
i^  m.  E.  of  Nablus,  noo  yards  from  the  traditional
tomb  of  Joseph  (Josh.  2432).  It  is  beneath  one  of  the
ruined  arches  of  the  church  which  Jerome,  as  we  shall
see  (§2),  speaks  of,  and  is  reached  by  a  few  rude  steps,
being  some  feet  below  the  surface.  The  situation  is
very  appropriate,  if  the  well  was  designed  for  the  use  of
the  workers  in  the  grain-fields  of  el-Mahna  ;  3  for  it  is  at
the  point  where  the  Vale  of  Nablus  merges  into  the
plain  of  el-Mahna.  The  reputation  of  its  water  for
sanctity  and  for  healthfulness  might  conceivably  have
led  a  woman  to  go  there  from  Shechem  (if  Sychar  =
Shechem)  to  draw  water,  although  the  well  was  '  deep.'
A  doubt  may,  indeed,  arise  as  to  whether  the  city  of
Shechem  could  have  been  described  by  the  narrator  as
'  near  the  piece  of  land  which  Jacob  gave  to  Joseph,'  if
this  piece  of  land  enclosed  the  present  '  Jacob's  Well '
and  'Joseph's  Tomb.'  It  would  seem,  however,  that  a
writer  who  had  the  statement  of  Gen.  8818-20  in  his
mind  would  almost  inevitably  speak  of  the  '  piece  of
land '  as  near  Shechem  ;  for  the  writer  of  that  passage
(we  assume  the  text  to  be  correct)  certainly  suggests
that  Shechem  and  Jacob's  purchased  estate  were  near
together.  If,  therefore,  our  present  '  Jacob's  WTell '  was
already  known  by  that  name  in  the  time  of  the  evangel
ist  (or  the  writer  on  whom  the  evangelist  relies)  there  is
no  difficulty  in  the  statement  that  Sychar  (if  Sychar  =
Shechem)  was  near  Jacob's  possession.  Nor  can  we,
in  accordance  with  the  tenor  of  the  narrative,  venture
to  place  'the  city'  very  near  Jacob's  Well,  for  Jesus'
disciples,  who  had  gone  away  into  the  city  to  buy  food,
returned  (Jn.  48  27)  only  after  Jesus  had  had  a  conversa
tion  with  the  woman,  which  we  cannot  well  suppose  to
have  been  a  short  one.

If  '  Sychar '  were  the  only  somewhat  improbable
place-name  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  it  might  perhaps  be
rash  to  question  the  accuracy  of  the  reading  ;  but
JEnon,  Salim,  Ephraim  all  warn  us  to  caution  in  the
treatment  of  '  Sychar. '  Jerome  long  ago  ascribed  the
reading  to  the  error  of  a  copyist,  nor  has  modern
criticism  disproved  the  possibility  of  his  hypothesis.4
It  is,  however,  in  the  document  used  by  the  redactor
of  our  Gospel,  not  in  the  Gospel  itself,  that  we  may

1  It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  in  Gen.  33  18,  as  the  text
stands,  the  well-known  Shechem  is  described  in  a  way  which
would rather befit an obscure place like '  Sychar ' (on the
assumption  that  '  Sychar  '  is  right).

2  Cp G. A. Smith, HG  374  ; and  papers  on  the  water  of
Jacob's  Well,  PEFQ,  1897,  pp.  67, 149,  196. 'The  source  of
supply  to  the  well  has  not  been  accurately  ascertained,  but  :t  is,
doubtless,  greatly  due  to  percolation  and  rainfall,'  Barclay,  68.

3  Trumbull,  J^EFQ,  1897,  p.  149.

4  '  Transient  Sichem,  non  ut  plerique  errantes  legunt  Sichar,
quae  mine  Neapolis  appellatur'  (Ep. 86). '  Hebraice  Sichem
dicitur,  ut  Johannes  quoque  Evangelista  testatur  ;  licet  vitiose,
ut  Sichar  legatur,  error  inolevit '  (Quiest.  in  Gen.  cap.  48,  no.  22).
'  Sichar  conclusio  sive  ramus. Conrupte  autem  pro  Sichem  .  .  .
ut  Sichar  legeretur,  usus  optinuit '  (OS  66  20).

4829


„,  r°™

'


SYCHAR

suppose  the  corruption  to  have  arisen.  The  text  may
have  become  indistinct,  and  the  redactor  may  have
misread  '  Sychar  '  for  '  Sychem.  '

To  suppose  that  the  narrator,  being  an  allegorist,  deliberately
changed  'Sichem'  into  'Sychar'  in  order  to  suggest  that  the
Samaritan  religion  was  a  '  lie  '  (">££',  stker  ;  cp  Hab.  2  18),  or  that
the  Samaritans  were  '  drunkards  '  (sikkdrim,  cp  Is.  '28  i),  is  rash
in  the  extreme.  The  latter  suggestion  (RelalK'.)  is  absurdly
inappropriate,  for  Is.  28  1  relates  to  the  nobles  of  ancient
Samaria,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  Shechem.  (Cp,  however,
GOSPELS,  §  54  y.)

The  above,  however,  is  not  the  only  solution  of  the

problem of Sychar. By a curious coincidence it

„ , happens (a) that  early  Christian  travellers

',.  •;. . in  Palestine  speak  of  a  Sichar  distinct  from

distinct Sichenii  ^  that  the  Taimud  several  times

speaks of  a Suchar, and (c) that at the
present  day  the  name  'Askar  is  found  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Jacob's  Well.

(a)  As  to  the  early  travellers'  notices,  it  is  almost  enough
to  refer  to  G.  A.  Smith's  compact  and  lucid  summary.
Every  one  who  either  has,  or  desires  to  have,  an  intelligent
delight  in  biblical  geography  knows  this  writer's  Historical
Geography,  and  may  therefore  be  aware  that  the  Bordeaux
Pilgrim  (about  333  A.D.)  speaks  of  a  Sychar,  about  i  R.  m.  from
Shechem.  The  pilgrim  also  says  that  the  monument  of  Joseph
was  at  the  place  called  Sichem,  by  Neapolis  at  the  foot  of  Mt.
Gerizim.  The  abbot  Daniel  (1106-1107)  speaks  of  '  the  hamlet
of  Jacob  called  Sichar.  Jacob's  Well  is  there.  Near  this  place,
not  half  a  verst  away,  is  the  town  of  Samaria  ...  at  present
called  Neapolis.'  Fetellus  (1130)  says,  'A  mile  from  Sichem  is
the  town  of  Sychar  ;  in  it  is  the  fountain  of  Jacob,  which,
however,  is  a  well.'  John  of  Wiirzburg  (1160-1170)  says,
'Sichem  is  to-day  called  Neapolis.  Sichar  is  E.  of  Sichem.'
Quaresmius  (about  1630)  gives  the  report  of  Brocardus  (1283)
that  '  to  the  left(N.)  of  Jacob's  Well'  he  saw  'a  certain  large
city  deserted  and  in  ruins,  believed  to  have  been  that  ancient
Sichem  '  ;  the  natives  told  him  that  they  now  call  the  place
Istar.1

In  addition  to  other  notices  we  may  add  the  Itinerary
of  Jerusalem  (333  A.D.  ),  which  places  Sychar  at  the
distance  of  mille  passus  from  Neapolis,  and  the  follow
ing  testimony  of  Eusebius  (OS  29726)  :  '  Sychar,  before
Neapolis,  near  the  piece  of  ground,  etc.,  where  Christ
according  to  John  discoursed  with  the  Samaritan  woman
by  the  fountain  ;  it  is  shown  to  this  day,  '  to  his  trans
lation  of  which  Jerome  adds  (OS  154  31)  in  lieu  of  the
closing  words,  '  where  now  a  church  has  been  con
structed.  '  2  The  latter  statement,  it  may  be  said  in
passing,  throws  back  considerably  the  date  of  the
belief  in  the  traditional  Jacob's  Well.  It  should  also
be  noticed  that  Eusebius  in  the  same  work  writes  thus
of  Sychem  or  Shechem  :  '  The  place  is  shown  in  the
suburbs  of  Neapolis,  where,  too,  the  Tomb  of  Joseph
is  shown  '  (OS  290  56),  with  which  compare  this  state
ment  of  Eusebius  on  BdXaco?  Si/d/za^  (the  Oak  of
Shechem  =  the  present  hamlet  of  Balata):  '  It  is  shown
in  the  suburbs  of  Neapolis  at  the  Tomb  of  Joseph  '
(OS  23769).  Now  if  the  Tomb  of  Joseph  was  in  the
suburbs  of  Neapolis,  surely  the  Wrell  of  Joseph  must
have  been  there  too.  Both  Tomb  and  Well  were
certainly  placed  in  the  traditional  '  piece  of  land  '
purchased  by  Jacob,  'before  Shechem.'  It  may  be
added  that  there  is  abundant  evidence  in  the  texts  of
early  and  mediaeval  pilgrims  for  identifying  Sychar  and
Sychem  (see  HG-^JJ,,  n.  i).

(/>)  It  was  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Lightfoot  (t  1675)  that  the
Talmud  mentions  a  place  called  Suchar  (")31Di  NI^'C)  or  Sichar
(~O'D!  NIToX  and  a  fountain  of  Suchar  (1310  ]'],')>  and  a  plain
of  En  Suchar  (n^io  ry  nj'pD)-  It  was  fr°m  En  Suchar  (fountain
of  S.)  or  the  plain  of  En  Suchar  that  the  Passover  sheaf  and  the
two  Pentecostal  loaves  were  brought  to  Jerusalem  during  the
war  of  Aristobulus  II.  against  Hyrcanus  II.  (Kal'tl  kamma,
82/>;  MfnaJwth,  64^).  The  other  references  (fiabil  mi-si'  a,  42*
[Pesahim,  31^]  and  830.;  Nidda,  36^;  Jlullin,  i8/>)  relate  to  a
time  when  the  Samaritan  population  hail  no  doubt  given  place


ab


1  HG  36gyC 'Askar  must  be  meant. Cp  a  similar  uncertainty
.oout  the  pronunciation  of  another  Palestinian  name  (LACHISH).

2  Cp  Jerome,  Ep.  86,  'Kt  ex  latere  montis  Garizim  exstructam
ircum  puteum  Jacob  intravit  ecclesiam.' The  church  built  over

ihe  well  was  visited  by  Antoninus  Martyr  near  the  end  of  the
sixth  century,  and  again  in  the  seventh  century  by  Arculphus,
and  in  the  eighth  by  Willibald.  The  ruins  of  the  church  have
doubtless  raised  the  bottom  of  the  well.


4830


SYCHEM

to  a  Jewish.  1  That  at  ihe  time  referred  to  by  the  evangelist  a
Samaritan  population  occupied  Sychar  is  explained  by  the  fact
that  under  Herod  the  Great,  Archelaus,  and  the  Roman  pro
curators,  the  Samaritans  were  able  to  recover  from  the  fearful
blow  dealt  to  them  by  the  vindictive  John  Hyrcanus.

It  is  difficult  not  to  conjecture  that  the  localities
intended  in  the  Talmud  are  the  Sahil  el-' Askar  (Plain  of
el-'Askar)  and  the  'Ain  el-'Askar  (Fountain  of  el-'Askar)
discovered  early  last  century  by  Berggren.  Though
Prof.  G.  A.  Smith  does  not  mention  this  evidence,  it  is
hardly  likely  that  he  rejects  it.

(c)  On  the  slope  of  Mt.  Ebal,  about  if  m.  ENE.
from  Niiblus  and  little  more  than  half  a  mile  N.  from
Jacob's  Well,  is  a  little  hamlet  called  'Askar,  with  rock-
tombs  and  a  fine  spring  called  'Ain  el-'Askar  (or  el-
'Asgar).  The  neighbouring  plain,  too,  bears  the  name
Sahil  el-'Askar.  It  is  tempting  to  think  that  this  is  the
Sychar  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  (cp  Conder,  Tent-work,
175).  Not  only  does  it  at  once  virtually  prove  the  tradi
tional  Jacob's  \Yell  to  be  the  true  one,  but  it  seems  also
to  show  conclusively  that  the  evangelist  had  a  singularly
minute  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  scene  of  his
narrative,  and  this  suggests  in  turn  that  the  narrative
itself  may  be,  at  least,  founded  on  fact.  It  is  true,
there  still  remains  the  difficulty  that  nothing  is  said  of  a
Sychar  distinct  from  Sychem  before  the  fourth  century  ;
that  Eusebius's  language  is  indecisive  ;  and  that  Jerome,
the  most  learned  scholar  of  his  time,  and,  like  Eusebius,
a  resident  in  Palestine,  maintains  that  Sychar  is  a  bad
reading  ;  but  perhaps  the  evidence  of  the  Talmud  and
of  the  native  nomenclature  may  plausibly  be  held  to
counterbalance  this.  Von  Raumer,  Ewald,  Keim,
Furrer,  Lightfoot,  etc. ,  adopt  this  theory.

The  disputants  on  either  side  may  sometimes  have
been  unduly  influenced  by  their  interest  in  the  question,
p  .  .  Did  the  fourth  evangelist  make  great
3.  Conclusion.  mistakes  in  his  geography  ?  The  author
of  Supernatural  Religion,  for  instance  (('-),  2421  [pop.
ed.  531]),  whose  tone  is  not  altogther  dispassionate,
holds  that  the  mention  of  a  city  of  Samaria  called  Sychar
is  one  of  several  geographical  errors  which  show  the  author
not  to  be  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  or  indeed  a  Jew.  There  is
another  point  of  view,  however,  already  briefly  referred
to.  The  Fourth  Gospel,  as  it  now  stands,  may  have
several  errors  in  names  ;  but  these  errors  may  not  be  due
to  the  writer,  whose  work  has  been  edited  and  largely
transformed  by  a  redactor.  It  is  most  unlikely  that  the
city  which  fills  such  a  prominent  place  in  the  narrative
of  Jn.  4  should  be  any  other  than  Shechem.  Sychar  is
most  probably  incorrect,  and  it  is  a  mere  coincidence
that  the  Talmud  contains  the  name  -1313 — i.e.,  probably
Sychar — and  that  the  native  nomenclature  has  preserved
the  name  'Askar.  How  1313,  'Sychar,'  is  to  be  ex
plained,  is  by  no  means  clear  ;  it  can,  of  course,  have
no  connection  with  CD:?,  Shechem.  'Askar,  however,
may  quite  well  have  grown  out  of  Suchar  ;  the  'Ain,  as
G.  A.  Smith  well  remarks,2  may  quite  well  represent  an
original  'Elif.  It  is  one  of  the  many  plays  on  names
discernible  in  the  Arabic  nomenclature,  'Askar  being  a
common  Arabic  word  for  '  soldier,  army. '  Cp  Taylor,
Pirke  AbothW,  170.  T.  K.  c.

SYCHEM  (cyxeM  [Ti.  WH],  Acts7i6;  Sychemite,

6  SUXCM  [BNA],  Judith  5 16  AV,  RV  SHECHEMITE)  AV,  RV
SHECHEM  (q.z'.).

SYCOMORE  (cYKO/v\ope&;  Lk.  194t)  and  SYCO-
MORES  (C'Cp:?,  sikmlm,  i  K.  10  27  i  Ch.  27  28  2  Ch.  1  13  0  27  Is.
0  10  [9]  Am.  Vi4t,  and  nicp»,  MkinMh,  Ps.  7847!).

<P  wrongly  renders  by  trv/cajuu'os  (-T)  in  R  of  Ps.  78  47,  -a  in
Am.),  a  word  which  is  probably  derived  from  sikmlm,  but  denotes
the  mulberry.  Sikindh  (rope1)  and  Aram,  sekma,  on  the  other
hand,  denote  a  quite  different  tree — Ficus  sycomorus,  L. — whose
leaves  to  some  extent  resemble  those  of  the  mulberry,  but  its
fruits  those  of  the  fig.

1  Delitzsch,  'Talmud.  Studien,  8,  Sichem  and  Sychar,'  Zt.f.
Luther.  Theol.  17  [1856]  240  ff.;  cp  Neub.  Gtogr.  lyo/C
a  In  opposition  to  Robinson,  Later  Researches,  133.

4831


SYNAGOGUE

From  the  deep  shade  cast  by  its  spreading  branches  the
sycomore  is  a  favourite  tree  in  Egypt  and  Syria,  being
often  planted  along  roads  and  near  houses.  It  bears  a
sweet,  edible  fruit,  somewhat  like  that  of  the  common  fig,
but  produced  in  racemes  on  the  older  boughs.  The  apex
of  the  fruit  is  sometimes  removed,  or  an  incision  made
in  it,  to  produce  earlier  ripening.  This  is  the  process
denoted  by  the  verb  6dfas  (oSi)  in  Am.  7  14  (cp  FIG,  §  3).
The  sycomore,  as  a  common  and  a  lowland  tree,  is
repeatedly  contrasted  with  the  more  valued  and  majestic
mountain  cedars  (i  K.  1027,  etc.  ).  At  the  present  time,
it  grows  in  Palestine  mainly  on  the  coast  and  in  the
Jordan  valley  (FFP  411).  Cp  AMOS,  §  2,  end*
PROPIIKT,  §  35.

The  P.ritish  'sycamore,'  which  is  a  species  of  maple,  is  of
course  an  entirely  different  tree.  fj.  M.

SYELUS  (HCYHAOC  [B«A],  H  cyNOAoc  [Batb]),
i  Esd.  18  =  2  Ch.  358,  JKHIICI.,  7.


SYENE  (rUID,  Hill?).  Ezek.  29io  threatens  de
struction  to  Egypt  '  from  Migdol  [to]  Syene  (  RV
Seveneh)  and  even  unto  the  border  of  Ethiopia  '  (thus
EVn'K-)  ;  similarly  306  without  the  reference  to  Ethiopia.
Cornill,  following  (5,  sees  the  same  name  in  30  16  :  '  Syene
(reading  po*.  swn,  for  po,  Sin)  shall  have  great  pain,'
||  Thebes  —  that  is  to  say,  even  the  most  remote  cities  of
Egypt  shall  tremble  (in  5  15,  however,  Cornill  keeps  po
Sin  as  Pelusium).  Cp  also  SIN,  SIMM.  S'wench,
or  S'wcneh.  (npip  or  rnip),  is  rendered  in  Ezek.  Zi'rji'ij
(A.  SOTJI/T;  [cp  <5  in  Is.  43s,  see  SEBA],  So^j/r?)  in  ©,
Svene,  Vg.  ,  and  the  context  shows  that  this  is  correct  ;
cp  especially  the  allusion  to  the  Ethiopian  frontier  with
Strabo,  32,  118,  669,  693,  787  ;  Jos.  ///  iv.  10s  ;  Plin.
v.  10  1  1.  The  ancient  Egyptians  wrote  Sum,  Swnw,
Swnt  (no  safe  etymology  of  the  name  is  possible)  ;  cp
Brugsch,  Diet.  Gt<ogr.  666  ;  the  Coptic  form  is  coy&N.
The  Arabs  rendered  this  Uswan(u)  ;  the  modern  ortho
graphy  is  Aswan.  The  Massoretic  punctuation  is,
evidently,  taken  from  the  Greek  form,  which  also  the
English  Bible  has  taken  from  the  Versions.

This  cataract-city  seems  to  have  been  very  old  ;  but
it  was  completely  eclipsed  by  the  capital  of  the  nome,
the  island-city  of  Elephantine  (Egyptian  Yebu),  directly
opposite.  Syene  does  not  seem  to  have  been  more  than
the  landing-stage  for  the  famous  quarries,  from  which
the  ancient  Egyptians  cut  e.g.  most  of  their  obelisks.
The  stone,  however,  they  called  '  stone  of  Elephantine,'
and  the  troops  guarding  the  Nubian  frontier  had  their
headquarters  in  that  island-city.  Herodotus  therefore
does  not  mention  Syene,  not  because  he  had  not  been
there  (Sayce,  Joiirn.  Phil.  14271),  but  because  for  him
it  belonged  to  Elephantine.  The  great  garrison  of
Elephantine,  of  which  he  speaks,  must  have  had  its
quarters  mostly  around  Syene  (not  on  the  island)  to
protect  the  desert  roads  alongside  of  the  cataracts  against
inroads  of  the  nomadic  Ethiopians.  It  is  the  more  re
markable  that  Ezekiel  knows  the  name  of  Syene  and  its
importance  as  a  frontier-fortress.  Under  the  Romans
Syene  came  more  into  prominence,  receiving  a  garrison
of  3  cohorts  (Strabo,  817)  ;  Juvenal  lived  there  in  exile
as  governor  of  the  city.  Elephantine  still  had  the
temples.  Under  the  Arabs  Elephantine  was  deserted,
and  Syene  became  a  very  considerable  town,  being  the
point  of  arrival  for  the  caravans  from  the  Sudan.
Modern  Asuan  (Aswan)  is  a  very  small  town,  owing  to
the  decline  of  the  caravan  trade  ;  its  population,  which
had  fallen  to  6000,  is  said  to  be  now  about  10,000.
The  most  remarkable  antiquities  are  the  tombs  of  the
monarchs  of  Elephantine  (beginning  from  dyn.  6)  on
the  mountain  opposite,  discovered  in  1885,  large  Arab
cemeteries,  and  the  quarries.  W.  M.  M.

SYMEON  (CYMGCON  [Ti.  WH],  Lk.  830  ActslSi
15  14  RV,  AV  SIMEON  (q.v.,  4-6.)

SYNAGOGUE. The term synagogue conveys a
4832


SYNAGOGUE

narrower  and  a  broader  meaning  :  in  the  broader  mean-
„  ing,  iv  synagogue  is  a  local  community  in

its  corporate  capacity  and  as  under  religious
atid  more  or  less  civil  jurisdiction  ;  in  the  narrower,  it  is
the  building  with  its  assemblies  and  services.  Naturally,
the  two  meanings  often  merge  into  one.  The  designa
tion  common  to  both  is  kintseth.

The  Heb.  0032,  and  the  Aram.  NPlilOS,1  are  derived  from  D33
and  ty33  respectively,  '  to  gather ' ;  hence  they  strictly  corre
spond  to  the  Gk.  vvvaytayri,'*  'congregation'  or  'assembly.'
The  narrower  meaning  is  expressed  also  by  rOSn  ITS,  Aram.
Nnp"32  '2,  and  in  Gk.  by  Trpoorei/xij,3  truvayiayiov  (Philo,  2  591
1  675),  npoa-evKnjpiov  (Philo,  2  I6S),  and  cra^areioi'  (Jos.  Ant.
xvi.  0  •£).

At  first,  the  church  also  seems  to  have  been  called
synagogue.4  Ja.  22  is  often  quoted  as  evidence  ;  but  it
may  well  be  questioned  whether  '  assembly  '  (as  eiriavva.-
ydiyrjv,  in  Heb.  10  25)  would  not  meet  all  the  requirements
of  the  passage  (so  v.  Soden,  HC  on  Ja.  2  2).  Of  more
weight  is  the  fact  that  the  Ebionites  called  their  church
'  synagogue  '  ;  that  the  anti-Jewish  Marcionites  inscribed
upon  one  of  their  church-buildings  :  avvayiiiyri  Map/aun'-
KTT^IV  Ku/j.(r]s)  \ej3af3wv  ;  5  and  that  in  patristic  literature
ffvvaywyri  is  occasionally  used  for  the  church.6  That
the  church  abandoned  the  term  in  favour  of  eKK\T)<ria
may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  of  the  separation  of
the  two  faiths  ;  the  two  terms  are  used  interchangeably
in  the  LXX,  and  tKK\-r)<ria.  was  like  and  unlike  enough
to  be  just  the  designation  wanted.  Schiirer  thinks  that
the  word  ccclesia  was  adopted  because  of  its  deeper
ideal  and  spiritual  significance  (see  t?/-V2433,  arjd  cp
ASSEMBLY,  CHURCH).

The  origin  of  the  synagogue  as  an  organised  religious
community  is  bound  up  with  the  general  history  of  Israel

2  Origin after  the  exile  ^°P  GoVERNMKNT'  §§  25-3i)-
° '  When  the  assemblies  first  began,  and  when

buildings  were  first  set  aside  for  this  specific  purpose,
cannot  be  definitely  stated.  It  seems  most  probable
that  the  assemblies  originated  during  the  exile  (cp
\Vellh.  //G*3',  193).  In  strange  environment,  and  in
default  of  a  centre  of  worship,  something  of  this  sort  in
a  limited  form  and  extent  must  be  presupposed  to
account  for  the  religious  zeal  that  emanated  from  the
exiles.  Whether,  on  the  return  to  Palestine,  any  need
was  felt  for  such  assemblies,  the  sanctuary  becoming
now  again  the  centre  of  worship,  may  well  be  ques
tioned.  The  activities  of  Nehemiah  and  Ezra  and  the
introduction  of  the  Law  must  in  time,  and  in  connection
with  the  springing  up  of  Jewish  communities  outside
of  Jerusalem,  have  given  a  new  occasion  for  them  (see
CANON,  §  18).  No  reference  to  the  institution  of  the
synagogue,  however,  is  met  with  in  the  canonical  or
apocryphal  books  of  the  OT  except  Ps.  748,  where
mo'  ade  el  C?K  Hjfo)  is  best  taken  as  meaning  '  sacred
meeting- places,'  and  as  belonging  to  the  Maccabean
period.  (See  Che.  Psalms^,  ad  loc.,  but  cp  PSALMS,  §
28,  v.)  In  NT  times  the  synagogue  is  already  a  well-

1  The  rabbinical  references  will  appear  in  the  course  of  the
article.

2  Jos.  Ant.  xix.  63;  BJ\\.  \±t,f.\\\.  83. In  the  NT  awaytayri
occurs  fifty-six  times  ;  with  the  broader  meaning;  in  twelve  cases :
Mk.  139  II  Mt.  10  17,  Lk.  21  12  Mt.  2:^4  Lk.  841  12  n  Acts6992
22  19  26  it Rev.  2g  89. Of  the  remaining  forty-four  cases  it
means  'assembly'  twice:  Acts  13 42  (not  in  BNA)  Ja.  22;  and
the  synagogue-building  and  its  services  in  the  others  :  Mk.  1  21
123  II  Lk.  4  33,  129  II  Lk.  438,  130  II  Lk.  4  44,  3i  II  Mt.  129,  Lk.  66
62||Mt.  13  54,  Lk.  4 16  12  39  ||  Mt.  236,  Lk.  2046  (doublet  1143)
Mt.  423  (doublet  935)  62  5  Lk.  415  2028  7s  13  :o  Jn.  659  1820
Acts  9  20  185  14  14  i  15.21  17  i  10  17  1847  19  26  19sf.

3  Acts  16 13  16; Philo,  25237^, 7rpo<m/x>) implies the Heb.
n^SJ-rrra,  of  which  it  is  (S's  translation  in  Is.  667  (quoted  in
Mt.  21 13)  ;  but  as  a  designation  of  the  synagogue  it  is  not  found
until  late.

4  Epiphan. Hier.  30 18 : <rvva.y(0yr]v 8e oCroi (caAoveri TTJV
eaurwi/  e/CKArjcriW  ica!  ov\^-  eKK\rjcriav.

5  Le  Has  et  Waddington,  Inscriptions  grecques  et  latines,
t.  3.  n.  2558,  quoted  by  Schiir.  GVI®,  2443.

«  Cp  Harnack,  Zll'T,  1876,  pp.  io4^C ;  Zahn,  Gexch.  NT
Kan.  '2  (1883)  165  ;  Mini.  1  66  f.

4833


SYNAGOGUE

known  institution  with  a  hoary  past  ;  '  Moses  from
generations  of  old  (ex  yevfuv  dpxa'a"/)  nas  in  every  city
those  that  proclaim  him,  being  read  in  the  synagogues
every  Sabbath  '  (Acts  loai).  (For  full  references  in  NT
see  §  i  n.  4  ;  see,  further,  §  8. )

In  considering  the  function  and  organisation  of  the
synagogue,  it  will  greatly  conduce  to  clearness  if  the
3  Function  distinction  between  the  broader  and  the
'  narrower  meaning  of  the  term  is  observed.
The  synagogal  assemblies  and  services
presuppose  the  existence  of  an  organised  Jewish  com
munity  of  which  they  form  an  essential  part.  The  wider
function  is  evident  in  dwovwdyuyos,  '  put  out  of  the
synagogue'  (Jn.  922  1242  162),  which  means  more  than
mere  exclusion  from  the  synagogal  assemblies  —  viz.,
exclusion  from  social  and  religious  intercourse,  that  is,
from  community  life  (cp  EXCOMMUNICATION).  The
wider  function  included  not  only  the  religious  but  also
the  civil  and  municipal  affairs  of  the  community.  The
distinction  between  secular  and  religious  is  foreign  to
Judaism.  Mishnic  legislation  throughout  presupposes
Jewish  control  of  civil  life  (N£ddrhn5$,  AlfgillaS-L)  \
but  this  is  ideal,  and  could  not  actually  prevail  except
in  towns  where  the  Jewish  population  preponderated.
Where  that  was  not  the  case  the  organised  synagogal
community  was  found  by  the  side  of  the  civil.  In  the
former  case,  the  synagogal  officials  were  identical  with
those  of  the  town  ;  in  the  latter  case,  they  only  ruled
more  or  less  the  Jewish  portion  of  it.  Larger  towns  had
more  than  one  synagogal  community.  In  Jerusalem,
for  example,  according  to  Acts  69,  the  Hellenistic  Jews
had  either  two  or  five  separate  organisations,  represent
ing  aggregations  homogeneous  in  nationality  or  condition
(cp  Schiirer,  I.e.  2430  f.  176  ff.}.

Members of the synagogal community (np:2n  '33,

Bfkoroth  5s)  were  subject  to  discipline  and  punishment

-  by  the  synagogal  government. The  local

. governing  body,  within  whose  jurisdiction

it  lay  to  try  disciplinary  cases,  was  called

beth  din, JT  n'3, 'court,' or  (its Gk. equivalent)  san-

kedrin,  j'TirtJp,1  avvtdpiov,  'council'  (Mt.  622  10i7  Mk.

189); also  #011X77  (Jos.  ^?/ii.  14i). It  was composed

of twenty- three members in larger towns; and in

smaller, of  seven members  (cp GOVERNMENT, § 31  ;

and see Schiir.  2 176  ff. ). The members  were  called

'elders' (irpffffivrtpoi, Lk.  7s) or 'rulers' (&pxoi>Tfs,

Mt.  91823 Lk.  841), and the chief  yepovaidpx'n'i (see

Schur.  346/.).

The  chief  methods  of  punishment  were  (a)  scourging,
(6)  excommunication,  and  (r)  death.

(a)  Scourging (n'i3C \MakkotA,  812], Gk.  fia.ari.y6ii}
[Mt.  10i7  2834]  and  Stpw  [Acts  22i9  Mk.  189])  was  in
flicted in the synagogue  building by the synagogue
attendant  (nwrn  jm,  virrjpfT-r)1;,  Makk.,  ibid. ). The  minor
offences  for  which it  was administered are given in
Makkoth  3  i  ff. The  number  of  stripes  was  forty  save
one (Makk:  §10, 2  Cor.  11  24, Jos.  Ant.  iv.  821). The
tribunal competent  to  decide  upon  the  punishment  is
variously  given  as  consisting  of  three  or  twenty-three
members  (Sanhedrfn,  l2).'2

(b]  The  punitive  exclusion  of  unsubmissive  members
of  the  Jewish  community  is  met  with  already  in  Ezra
108  ;  it  was  to  be  the  means  by  which  to  keep  exclusive
Judaism  intact. There  seems  to  have  been  at  first  (so
in  NT  times)  but  one  form  of  excommunication — viz. ,
herem  (cnn),3 'ban,' that  is, absolute exclusion from
the  synagogal  community. Its  origin  and  conception
lie  in  the  OT  (see  BAN). Htrem  and  its  Gk.  equivalent

1  Sanhedrln,  1  s^C  ;  the  two  terms  jmnJD  and  \"\  JV3  are  used
interchangeably  ;  and  j'n  n'3  should  not  be  limited  to  the  lowest
tribunal,  as  is  done  by  Weber,  Jiid.  Theol.  141.

2  Scourging  by  Roman  officials,  referred  to  in  NT  (Mt.  20  19
Jn.  19  i),  is  not  considered  here.

:i  For  the  rabbinical  use  of  cin,  which  does  not  differ  from  OT
usage  (see  BAN),  cp  Jastrow,  Diet.,  s.v.

4834


SYNAGOGUE

dvdOe/JM  mark  an  object  as  '  devoted,'  or  under  the  curse
of  God  and  deserving  death  (cp  Holtzmann,  Neatest.
Zeiteesch.  150).

Herein  meant,  in  fact,  the  penalty  of  death,  and  its  infliction
was  prevented  only  by  lack  of  power.  We  must  take  it  that  the
NT  terms  a<^opt£ctr,  opetji'^cii',  (K/SaAAetp  TO  ovofia.  (Lk.  632).
airoffui'ayuryoc  yt'yecrdai  or  iroieii'  (Jn.023  1*^42  1(5  2),  and
draSejua  or  avaMftanfft?  (Rom.  83  i  Cor.  123  1*122  Gal.  ley.
Mk.  14/i  Acts  23  12  1421),  all  contain  this  meaning.1

(c)  The  tribunal  composed  of  twenty-three  members
was  competent  to  inflict  the  penalty  of  death  (San A.  1  4),
and  it  is  most  probable  that  excommunication  was  pro
nounced  by  it ;  if  so,  '  shall  incur  the  penalty  of  the
judgment'  (tvoxos  fffrat  ry  Kpi<Tfi),  Mt.  622,  refers  to
the  lighter  punishment  of  scourging  ;  '  shall  incur  the
penalty  of  the  council'  (£coxos  &TTCU  TCJ}  ffweSpiy),  to
the  severer  punishment  of  excommunication  or  death.

The  Mishna  mentions  a  second  kind  of  excommunication— -
viz.,  nlddfty,  'FlJ,  '  isolation,"  called  also  by  its  Aram,  equivalent
fammattS,  Nn3C'.  Its  main  purpose  seems  to  have  been  to
guard  the  dignity  and  authority  of  the  rabbinical  teacher;  it
might  be  imposed  for  disobedience  to  a  rabbinic  decision,  for  an
impertinent  remark  to  a  teacher,  or  for  failure  to  greet  him
properly.  It  might  be  imposed  by  a  mere  hint— for  instance,  by
saying,  '  I  have  never  known  thee  ! '  or  '  Some  one  is  calling  thee
outside  !'  The  Gemara  mentions  a  third  kind  of  excommunica
tion — viz.,  nezif>hiih.  rtS'U,  'rebuke.'  It  seems  to  have  been  a

T  ••

severe  reprimand  uttered  by  a  rabbi,  carrying  with  it  in  Palestine
one  day's,  in  Babylonia  a  seven  days',  overhanging  displeasure.
The  «;ViW«y-ban,  according  to  the  Gemara,  extended  over  a
period  of  thirty  days,  and  involved  greater  restraint  as  to  inter
course,  though  not  exclusion  from  the  temple  or  synagogue
service.  But  both  forms  are  later  than  NT  times,  and  they  are
too  mild  to  represent  the  NT  terms  quoted  above.'

Recently  discovered  ruins  of  synagogues  in  Northern
Galilee,  belonging  probably  to  the  second,  some  perhaps
to the first, Christian century, furnish


5.  The

synagogue


scanty,  but  the  safest,  information  regard-


t -,^-  ing  the  architecture  of  ancient  synagogues.

Duilttmg.  NegativelVp  tney  Sho\v  that  the  rabbinic
directions  (  Tos.  Mfg.  422/1)  that  synagogues  should  be
built  on  a  height  of  the  city  and  should  have  the  entrance
on  the  E.  (like  the  temple)  had  not  yet  come  into  force.
The  ruins  do  not  lie  in  the  most  prominent  positions  of
the  towns,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  synagogue  at
Irbid,  whose  entrance  is  K. ,  they  were  built  from  N.  to
S.  with  the  entrance  on  the  S.  On  the  whole,  a  Gneco-
Koman  influence  in  style  is  noticeable.  The  buildings
were  quadrangular  in  form,  divided  into  five  or  three
aisles  by  means  of  four  or  two  rows  of  massive  columns.
The  columns  bore  an  architrave  of  stone,  the  roof  was
of  wood,  and  the  ornamentation,  especially  of  the
cornices,  was  extremely  rich,  and  figures  of  animals  are
frequently  met  with.  The  entrance  was  by  means  of
three  front  portals,  a  larger  for  the  centre  and  two  smaller
for  the  sides  ;  the  lintels  have  carved  on  them  Hebrew
inscriptions  and  sacred  Jewish  symbols.3

Various  parts  of  the  synagogue  building,  outside  of  Palestine,
find  occasional  mention  in  Gk.  inscriptions:  efefipa,  'portico';
rrpoi'aos,  'vestibule';  7repi'/3oAos  TOU  uirai'Spou,  'court.'4  The
synagogue  of  Hammam-Lif,  not  far  from  Carthage,  had  a  mosaic
floor  with  varied  animal  forms  in  its  design  (see  Schiirer,  '2  437,
n.  26).  Kaufmann  has  shown  that  both  painting  and  sculpture
were  in  use  in  decorating  the  synagogues,  even  at  a  later  time,
the  lion  being  a  favourite  symbol  ('  Art  in  the  Synagogue, '  JQR

1  It  seems  most  probable  that  i  Cor.  63-5  and  2  Cor.  2  6-n  do
not  refer  to  a  Jewish  form  of  excommunication  :  see  EXCOM-
MUNMCATION,  §  2,  and  cp  article  'Anathema'  in  PR /T(S|.

2  See  Ta'tinitk'An,  Mffed  KdtanZif.  and  140.  ikb,  'Edilyoth
5  6,  Middfith  2  2. The  full  details  of  procedure  in  excommuni
cation,  as  found  in  Hamburger,  RE,  s.v.  '  Bann,'  and  in  Eder-
sheim,  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus,  2  183  f.,  are  based  upon  a  codi
fication  of  Talmudic  law  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  do  not  illustrate
NT  times.

3  There  are  eleven  of  these  ruins  :  at  Kefr  P,ir'im(two),  Meiron,
Irbid,  Tell Hum,  Kerazeh, Xebratein,  el-Jish  (two),  Umm  el-
'Amed,  and  S'usaf ;  cp  PEh'Q,  1878,  pp.  123  ?.,  PEF.Ment.  1  224-
234  240-243  251-254  396-402  414-417  ;  Baed.  /'<</.  C-i,  pp.  cxv  255-260
333  (1894). It  is  not  impossible  that  the  ruin  at  Tell  Hum  (see
CAPERNAUM,  §  3)  is  that  of  the  synagogue  referred  to  in  Lk.  7  5,
in  which  Jesus  often  taught ;  cp  Wilson  and  Warren,  Recovery
of  Jerusalem  (1871),  342-346.

•*  In  Athribi  (Egypt),  Mantinea,  and  Phocis  respectively;  cp
REJ  17  236/  34  148  l'->  23-,  ^

4835


SYNAGOGUE

8254^  [1897]).  In  a  rabbinic  description  of  the  synagogue  of
Alexandria  we  meet  the  following  terms :  'p^'o;,  /3a<nAi(oj,
basilica  ;  VBD^S'li  Sin-Aij  crroa,  a  double-colonnade  ;  VBDi  <"poo.
colonnade.  1

The  synagogue  of  Philippi  was  outside  the  city  gate
by  a  river  (Acts  1613),  and  a  decree  of  Halicarnassus

6  Site  ^'n  J°S-  '^nt'  X'V'  l^23'  sPeaks  °f  synagogues
'  as  customarily  placed  by  the  sea-side  (on  these
passages  see  PRAYKR,  §  4).  This,  however,  does  not
seem  to  have  been  the  usage  in  Palestine,  nor  is  it  taken
account  of  in  the  ideal  rabbinic  legislation.  Schiirer's
contention  (2444),  as  against  L6w(A/c;M'/,  1884,  PP-

167^),  that  the  ceremonial  ablutions  made  the  water-
site  preferable,  is  overdrawn.  These  ablutions  do  not
require  a  river,  and  though  orthodox  Judaism  now,  more
than  ever,  demands  them,  no  preference  is  shown  for
such  sites,  which  are,  moreover,  opposed  to  the  positive
requirement  to  build  them  on  the  highest  point  of  the
town.  Neither  does  the  position  of  the  discovered  ruins
bear  out  Schurer's  view.  It  would  seem  then  that  in
fort-ign  lands  a  preference  was  shown  for  sites  outside
the  city  (for  obvious  reasons),  and  then  near  the  water
side  ;  whilst  on  native  soil,  or  in  strong  Jewish  environ
ment,  a  central  site  was  chosen.

The  chief  piece  of  furniture  was  the  '  ark  '  (ra'n,  JIIN,
Aram.  Nruan,  N:IIK)  containing  the  scrolls  of  the  Law
.  .  .  and  other  sacred  writings,  which  prob-
.  n  enor.  ^^  stood  by  the  wall  farthest  from  the
entrance.  In  the  centre,  upon  a  raised  platform  (n2'2,
Prjfj.a),  stood  the  lectern  (avaXoytiov,  Heb.  paiSjK  or
pj^jx).  The  rest  of  the  room  contained  wooden  seats
(Veep,  subselliiim ;  ntsSp,  n\ivTT)p}  for  the  congregation
(cp  Jer.  MZgilld,  73^  foot;  Kelim,  167).  The  chief
seats  of  the  synagogue  (TrpwroKaOfSpia)  were  near  the
ark,  facing  the  people,  and  were  occupied  by  those  held
in  highest  honour.  (Mt.  236  Mk.  1239  Lk.  11  43  2046  ;
Tos.  Mfgilld,  421.)  Schiirer  (2451)  takes  it  for  granted
that  the  women  were  seated  separately  in  the  synagogue.
This  is  not  at  all  certain  ;  such  evidence  as  there  is
points  the  other  way.  That  the  Talmud  and  all  the
ancient  sources  should  not  mention  such  an  arrange
ment  is  hardly  accidental,  and  the  facts  gathered  by
Low  (.l/<7 ll'V,  1884,  364^)  show  a  prominent  activity
of  woman  in  the  synagogal  service  ;  to  these  should  be
added  what  Schiirer  himself  mentions  (850),  that  they
could  bear  the  titles  of  honour,  apxiffwdyuyos  and
mater  synagogic,  and  could  sit  in  the  seats  of  honour  in
the  synagogue  (2451).  The  present  writer  has  pointed
out  elsewhere  ('Woman  in  the  Ancient  Hebrew  Cult,'
JBL,  1898,  p.  in  ff.)  that  the  exclusion  of  woman  from
the  cult  was  gradual,  and  came  with  the  progress  in
the  development  of  the  cult  itself.  Relegation  to  the
galleries  of  the  synagogues  was  seemingly  the  last  stage
and  belongs  to  the  Middle  Ages  (cp  Israel  Abrahams,
Jewish  Life  in  the  Middle  Ages,  25  f. ).

The  primary  function  of  the  synagogue  assemblies
was  the  popular  instruction  in  the  law. The  children
were  taught  in  the  '  school '  (-lEEn  n"3  ;

-|en  Kgt*b'  **c'  AV/«*.2io).  "and  the
'  more  technical  training  was  furnished
in  'the  college'  (c*Ti2ri  rra  I  Jer.  Mfgilld,  730")',  but
the  synagogue  assemblies  were  for  the  religious  instruc
tion  of  the  people.  Worship,  in  the  narrower  sense,
was  only  a  secondary  object.  That  this  was  so  in  the
times  of  Jesus  we  learn  from  Josephus  (c.Ap.  2 17;
Ant.  xvi.  24),  from  Philo  (2i68),  who  calls  the  syna
gogues  SiSaaicaXe'ia,'1  '  schools,'  and  from  the  NT,  where
'  to  teach  '  (Si84.ffKeu>)  appears  as  the  chief  function  of
the  synagogue  (cp  Mt.  423  Mk.  1  21  62  Lk.  41531  66
13 10  jn.  659  1820).  But  there  is  evidence  that  at  this
time  the  synagogue  assemblies  stood,  as  it  were,  in  the
medium  stage  of  their  growth.  In  earlier  times  the
synagogue  was  called  '  the  assembly  of  the  common

1  T5s.  Sukka,  4  6  =  Jer.  Sukka,  55",  *.
2  TrpocrfUKTTJpia  TI  fTfpov  e<mv  )j  &t&a<riea\ela..

4836


SYNAGOGUE

people'  (cyn  no:3  ;  Shabbath,  32  a),  and  corresponded
more  nearly  to  the  '  gate'  (iyE*)  as  a  common  meeting-
place.1  The  Targum  translates  'gate'  (-\yv)  in  Am.
5  12  15  beth  kinista  (xnvtt  rva).  But  after  the  destruc
tion  of  Jerusalem,  when  the  synagogue  began  more  and
more  to  take  the  place  of  the  temple,  the  assemblies
took  on  gradually  more  of  the  form  of  worship.  The
name  'assembly  of  the  common  people  '(oyn  no:3)  was
then  seriously  objected  to  (Shab.  32  a),  and  the  sacred-
ness  of  the  synagogue  was  specially  asserted  (Tos.  Mtg.

37)-2

For  conducting the  synagogue service, an  official,
strictly  speaking,  was  not  deemed  necessary  ;  any  com-


9.  Officers.


petent  Israelite  could  officiate. The  free


dom  with  which  Jesus  and  Paul  took
part  in  the  service  illustrates  this  fact.  The  person  who
led  in  the  exercises  was  called  '  representative  of  the
community '  (mas  n^v),  and  if  he  erred  while  perform
ing  his  duty,  some  one  else  present  might  immediately
take  his  place  (Befrdkoth  5  3).  The  same  freedom  still
prevails,  in  theory  at  least,  in  the  present  synagogue
service  ;  but  naturally  those  who  are  especially  qualified
by  experience  and  efficiency  are  preferred.

The  chief  official  of  the  synagogue  as  a  religious
assembly  was  the  dpxi-ffvvdyuyos,  EV  '  ruler  of  the
synagogue'  (Mk.  52235/1  38  Lk.849  13r4  ActslSis
18817;  Heb.  np»n  vtci,  Sofa  7  7  f. ).  The  office  was
not  identical  with  that  of  the  '  elder '  (irp&rfitiTepos)  or
'ruler'  (Apxwv),  nor  with  that  of  the  '  president  of  the
gerousia '  (yepovcna.p\t]^  ;  see  §  6),  though  one  might
serve  in  both  capacities  at  the  same  time.  The  duties
of  the  Archisynagogos  related  to  the  care  and  order  of
the  synagogue  and  its  assemblies  and  the  supervision  of
the  service.

A  second  functionary  was  the  hazzdn  (nn:2n  ftn,  Sofa
7  7 /• ,  Yiimiifi),  the  I/TTT/P^T^S,  AV  'minister,'  RV
'  attendant '  of  Lk.  4  20.  It  was  his  duty  to  present  for
reading,  and  return  to  the  ark  after  the  reading,  the
sacred  scrolls;  he  also  taught  the  children  (Shab.  13),
and  acted  as  the  lictor  in  scourging,  as  the  agent  of  the
synagogue  council  (jn  rva)  ;  cp  §  8.

The  giving  of  alms  was  a  religious  service  in  the  time  of
Christ,  and  was  administered  in  the  synagogue  by  special
officials  called  'administrators'  (D'pnr),  who  had  under  them
'collectors  of  alms'  (npis  'N23),  and  'distributors  of  alms'
('*  'pVlD);  see  Shab.  118^',  and  cp  ALMS,  §  3/

The  rabbinic  requirement  was  that  at  least  ten  men  must  lie
present  for  the  conduct  of  divine  service  (/Meg.  4  3).  Whether
this  was  already  in  force  in  NT  times  is  doubtful ;  but  it  led  in
post-Talmudic  times  to  the  custom  of  providing  by  payment  '  ten
men  of  leisure '  (j'jVc^  rPK'J?,  decent  otiosi),  whose  business  it
was  to  attend  the  service  ;  they  possessed,  however,  no  official
rank.

The  Mishna  (Mfg.  4$)  enumerates  five  principal  parts

of  the  service: (a) the  ShCma'; (f>)  prayer; (c) the

Th reading  of  the  Law  ; (d)  the  reading  of  the

o Prophets,  and  the  benediction  ;  but  to  these
service

must  be  added  (e)  the  translation  and  ex
planation  of  the  Scripture  lesson.  How  much  of  each
of  these  was  already  in  use  in  NT  times  will  appear
in  the  sequel.  On  the  whole,  as  has  been  indicated
above  (§8),  the  synagogue  service  was  much  simpler
before  the  destruction  of  the  temple  ;  that  crisis  in
Judaism  exerted  a  strong  influence  upon  the  develop
ment  of  synagogal  institutions.

(a)  The  Shfima  (yo-j,  'Hear!'),  so  called  from  the
opening  word  of  the  first  passage,  '  Hear,  O  Israel  :

1  Cp  Ps.  127  5,  Ecclus.  6  34  7  14  (where  for  ev  TrAtjOet  7rpe<rj3u-
Tfpiav stood probably in the original text  D'JpT 7'Tp3 ; so
Kau.  Apok.,  ad  loc.)  3S  33  30  10  41 18.

2  At  the  end  of  the  first  century  A.D.  it  was  still  possible  to
class  sitting  in  the  synagogues  with  sleeping  away  the  morning,
drinking  wine  at  noon,  and  playing  with  children,  as  bringing
failure  in  life  ('Abotk 3  14).

3  See  also  TEMPLE,  §§  34^

4837


SYNAGOGUE

Yah  we  our  God,  Yah  we  is  one,"  is  composed  of  three
passages  of  Scripture  (Dt.  64-9  11 13-21  Nu.  1037-41),  two
introductory  benedictions  for  morning  and  evening,  one
closing  benediction  for  the  morning,  and  two  for  the
evening.1

That  the  benedictions  in  their  present  form  are  the  result  of
gradual  additions  was  pointed  out  by  Zunz  (Cottesdicnstl.  Vor~
trdge  d.  Juden  [1832],  369^);  the  same  is  most  probably  true
also  of  the  selection  of  the  Scripture  passages.

The  origin  of  the  reciting  of  the  Sh6ma  (ycy  nx'ip)  is
most  probably  to  be  sought  in  the  endeavour  to  incul
cate  the  sacredness  and  importance  of  the  Law,  for
which  the  selections  are  most  admirably  adapted  in  that
they  not  only  emphasise  these  attributes,  but  also  insist
on  certain  outward  symbolic  signs  as  reminders  of  them
(see  FRINGES,  FRONTLETS).  As  the  phylacteries  and
fringes  are  well  known  in  NT  times  (Mt.  23s;  Jos.
Ant.  iv.  813),  the  origin  of  the  reciting  of  the  Shema'
must  date  back  into  the  pre-Christian  period  as  probably
one  of  the  first  customs  introduced  by  those  who  caught
the  spirit  of  Nehemiah  and  Ezra.  That  the  object  of
the  ceremony  was  accomplished  may  be  seen  from  the
fact  that  the  act  is  regarded  in  the  beginning  of  the
second  century  A.  D.  as  '  receiving  the  yoke  of  the  king
dom  of  God' — i.e.,  the  obligation  to  keep  the  Law  of
Moses  (Bfrdkh.'Zs  ;  see  Dalman,  \\~orte  Jesu,  1  80).
The  conception  of  it  as  a  confession  of  faith  (Schiir.
2459),  or  as  a  substitute  for  the  daily  sacrifices  (Hamb.
J?£2io88),  belongs  to  later  times.2  In  the  NT  the
opening  words  of  the  Shema'  are  quoted  in  Mk.  1229
(cp  Mt.  2237  Lk.  1027),  but  without  any  reference  to
its  liturgical  character.

(6)  That  the  disciples  could  ask  Jesus,  '  Teach  us  to
pray,  even  as  John  taught  his  disciples,'  Lk.  Hi,  would
seem  to  indicate  that  a  fixed  form  of  prayer  was  at  that
time  not  in  vogue  (cp  PRAYER,  §  7).  This  is  made
the  more  probable  by  the  history  of  the  most  ancient
synagogal  prayer,  the  ShZmont  'esre  (rnjry  ruca!)>  l'le
'  eighteen  ' — i.e. ,  petitions  and  benedictions.  There  are
now  two  recensions  of  this  prayer,  a  Babylonian  and  a
Palestinian.3  It  appears  evident  that  in  the  original
form  each  of  the  petitions  consisted  of  two  members  ;
the  Palestinian  recension  has  more  nearly  retained  its
original  form,  and  is  the  shorter  as  well  as  the  older  ;
the  Babylonian  has  received  considerable  additions.
We  have,  therefore,  here  also  to  deal  with  a  piece  of
synagogal  liturgy  which  has  passed  through  various
stages  of  growth.  The  present  writer  is  inclined  to  take
the  hint  of  Dalman  (PXEW,Tio)  and  regard  the  eight
petitions  mentioned  in  Jer.  Yoma,  44  b,  as  pointing  to
an  earlier  form  of  the  Sh6mon6  'esre.  If  the  legislation
regarding  these  eight  petitions  is  not  ideal,  they  fit  into  a
period  prior  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (70  A.n. ).
The  fuller  forms  cannot  be  as  early.  The  arrangement
in  the  present  order  of  sequence  is  ascribed  to  Shimeon
ha-Pekoli  (about  no  A.D. ,  Dfrakh.  286).  Dalman
thinks  it  probable  that,  as  petitions  7  and  10-14  are
later  than  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  form  in
vogue  before  that  event  consisted  of  three  opening
benedictions  (1-3),  six  petitions  (4-6,  8,  9,  15),  and
three  closing  benedictions  (16-18),  and  holds  that  this
prayer,  composed  of  twelve  petitions,  may  be  regarded
as  the  Pharisaic -Judaic  counterpart  of  that  of  Jesus,
composed  of  five  or  seven  petitions  (Mt.  69-13  Lk.
112-4).  An  abbreviated  form  of  the  Palestinian  recen-

1  Translations  of  these  may  be  found  in  Hebr.-Engl.  Prayer
Books.

2  Detailed rubrics, dealing  with the manner  and time of
recitation  and the  persons  who are and who are  not under
obligation to perform it,  are given in Berakhdth\-§. The
authorities  differ  as  to  whether  it  may  be  begun  in  the  morning
when  it  is  light  enough to  distinguish  between  sky-blue  and
white,  or  between  sky-blue  and  leek-green.

3  The  Palestinian  was  recently  discovered  by  S.  Schechter  in
a Oeniza of  Cairo, and published  by  him  in  JQ R 10654-659
(1898). Dalman  has  published both  recensions  (the  probable
later  additions  enclosed  in  brackets)  with  notes  in  his  M'orte
Jesu 1  299^; they  are  also  contained in his  Mesnanischt

Texte.


SYNAGOGUE

sion  (from  Jer.  Blrdkh.  8  a)  is  here  given  for  comparison
with  the  '  Lord's  Prayer.'

'  Grant  us  understanding  ;  graciously  accept  our  repentance  ;
forgive  us,  our  redeemer  ;  heal  our  diseases  ;  bless  our  years  ;
for  thou  gatherest  the  scattered,  and  it  is  thine  to  judge  the
erring  ;  put  thy  hand  upon  the  wicked  ;  and  may  all  who  trust
in  thee  rejoice  in  the  building  of  thy  city,  the  renewal  of  thy
sanctuary,  in  the  Branch  of  David,  thy  servant  (p./.  the  sprout
ing  of  a  horn  for  David);  for  thou  answerest  before  we  call.
Blessed  art  thou,  Lord,  who  hearest  prayer.'  1

Petition  12  of  the  Palestinian  recension  calls  for
special  mention.  The  text  and  its  translation  are  as
follows  :

8  rvpn  »rw  SK  DH^OJ?
n^i'n  rmc  J'ITJ  no^a
i-nd*  JUTS  D'rani  cnsirn
'/3"TO  DJ?I  D"_rn  1250  ins;]
nnx  Tjna


May  the  apostates  have  no  hope  ;

And  the  kingdom  of  arrogance  be  quickly  uprooted  in  our  day;

And  the  Christians  and  heretics  perish  in  a  moment  ;

Let  them  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life,  and  not  be  written

with  the  righteous.
Blessed  art  thou,  Lord,  who  bringest  low  the  arrogant.3

The  third  line  has  settled  it  beyond  question  that
Justin  Martyr  and  the  Church  fathers  were  right  in  their
statements  that  the  Christians  were  mentioned  in  the
daily  synagogal  prayers  (Dial.  c.  Trvph.  93  133  137  ;
and  see  Schiir.  2463).

By  the  end  of  the  second  century  A.H.  it  was  an  established
custom  to  close  the  synagogal  service  with  the  priestly  bene
diction  (D'insn  nil~G),  Nu.  (5  22-215.  As  this  was  originally  a
part  of  the  temple  service,  it  was  probably  not  introduced  into
the  synagogal  liturgy  until  after  the  cessation  of  that  service.
When  priests  were  present,  they  pronounced  the  benediction,
standing  between  the  ark  and  the  congregation  and  facing  the
Litter  (Tos.  Megillii,±-2\)\  raising  the  hands  as  high  as  the
shoulder  (SStd,  7  6),  and  repeating  the  formula  after  the  precentor
word  by  word,  the  congregation  responding  after  each  of  the
three  parts  with  Amen.  In  the  absence  of  priests  the  bene
diction  was  offered  in  prayer,  and  then,  just  before  the  closing
prayer  for  peace,  petition  18  (MSg:  i8«).

(c)  The  Sabbath  lesson  from  the  Law  and  the
Prophets,  and  the  occasional  exposition  or  exhortation
following  upon  them,  were  customary  in  NT  times
(Lk.  4i6/.  Acts  13  15  27  152i  ;  cp  2  Cor.  815;  Jos.  c.Ap.
'2i8;  Philo,263o).  The  lesson  from  the  Law  was
unquestionably  the  oldest,  and  so  the  most  prominent,
part  of  the  synagogue  service.  The  tradition  says  that
'  Moses  instituted  the  reading  of  the  Law  on  the  sab
baths,  feast-days,  new  moons,  and  half  feast-days;
and  that  Ezra  appointed  the  reading  of  the  Law  for
Mondays  and  Thursdays  and  the  Sabbath  afternoons  '
(Jer.  .Wig.  75  a).  Such  early  and  general  origin,  how
ever,  is  out  of  the  question.  That  here  also  there  has
been  a  gradual  development  is  made  probable  by  the
fact  that  the  present  system  of  dividing  the  Pentateuch
into  fifty-four  sections  (onip),  to  be  completed  in  an
annual  cycle,  can  be  traced  back  to  an  earlier  cycle  of
two  years'  duration,  and  that  again  to  one  of  three
years  and  three  years  and  a  half.  The  special  lessons
still  in  use  for  the  sabbaths  of  new  moons,  the  four
sabbaths  before  the  Passover,  and  for  other  festivals
(Afe'gilldSsf.)  give  ground  for  the  supposition  that  the
lessons  originated  in  the  selection  of  appropriate  passages
for  particular  occasions,  and  that  only  out  of  these  grew
the  more  definite  arrangement.4  Since  the  reading  of

1  The  Hebrew  text  may  be  found  in  Dalm.  U-'ortefesu,  1  304.

2  Another fragment of this recension adds, 131;?'  ^  ON
•JTTnS ai)d omits 1. 4. The parts that are bracketed are
regarded  as  later  additions  by  Dalm.  H'orte  fesu,  1  300.

3  The  Babylonian  recension  of  this  petition  omits  Q'-|!f3>  and
for  D'J'O  it  reads  D'yaJSp,  'slanderers.' According  to  Bi'rakh-
cthrtb,  Samuel  the  Small  added  the  petition  against  heretics
to the original eighteen, making thus  really nineteen  ; the
Palestinian  recension  combines  the  petitions  for  the  restoration
of  Jerusalem  and  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  into  one,  and  so
has  only  eighteen  in  all.

•*  Cp  Hamb.  RR'2i26^ff.;  Bitchier,  'The  Reading  of  the
Law  and  the  Prophets  in  a  Triennial  Cycle,  '  JQR  5  420^  (1893),
01^(1894).

4839


SYNEDRIUM

the  Law  svas  binding  upon  all,  every  Israelite,  even
minors,  could  partake  in  the  public  reading  ;  and  on
the  Sabbath  morning  seven,  at  least,  were  called  upon.
Each  person  read  his  own  portion  ;  and  only  in  cases  of
inability  to  read  was  a  public  lector  employed  (Jer.
Mlg.  75  a  ;  Phil.  2282).  The  Mishna  (.l/#.  44)  provides
for  a  benediction  before  and  after  each  person's  reading.
According  to  Sophlrim  13,  both  closed  with  :  '  Blessed
art  thou,  Lord,  who  hast  givn  the  Law.'

(d)  The  selection  of  a  portion  from  the  second  part  of
the  Jewish  canon, 'the  Prophets'  (n'tra;), to  be  read
after  the  lesson  from  the  Law,  marks  a  further  step  in
the  synagogue  ritual. Its  original  aim  may  be  gathered
both  from  the  term  by  which  it  was  called  and  from  the
character  of  the  earliest  selections. The  term  Haphtara
(Tvjsrt; Aram. NrnaSK) is  derived from  pdtar  (IDE),
which,  in  the  Hiphil,  means  '  to  dismiss '  or  '  to  aajourn
a  meeting'  ;  the  Haphtara  was,  therefore,  the  closing
exercise. The  selections  show  that  they  were  meant  to
enforce,  by  an  historical  example  or  by  a  promise,  the
lesson  from  the  Law  on  a  particular  occasion.

The  Haphtara  for  the  first  day  of  the  Passover  was  Jos.  fxjjf. ;
for  the  second  day,  2  K.  23  ;  for  Pentecost  the  lesson  from  the
Law  was,  Dt.  Hi  <)jf.,  the  Haphtara,  Hab.  3,  including  im.  17  ff.\
on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  it  was  in  the  morning  Is.  .17  15  jff.,  in
the  afternoon  Jonah.  Here  again  the  earliest  selections  on
record  (Tos.  Ulg.  4  1-4  ;  Mfg.  31  a)  are  those  for  special  days  ;
and  most  likely  they  served  as  the  nucleus  for  the  present
arrangement.

It  is  most  probable  that  in  XT  times  the  prophetic
portions  were  not  yet  fixed,  but  were  chosen  by  the
reader,  and  that  the  selection  of  Jesus  (Lk.  4i6/)  was
his  own  choice.

(e)  Both  the  lessons  from  the  Law  and  those  from
the  Prophets  were  translated  or  paraphrased  into  the
vernacular  Aramaic  by  an  interpreter  (pnnc)  : in  the
case  of  the  Law,  one  verse  at  a  time  ; in  the  lessons
from  the  Prophets,  three  verses  might  be  taken  at  once
(•Wfg.  44). These  translations  and  paraphrases  (cirw)
were  of  the  nature  of  explanations,  and  led  gradually
to the more extended expositions (chis, B>TI). Of
teaching in the synagogues the NT  contains many
illustrations  (Mt.  423  Mk.  I2i  62). The  preacher  ([&"-)
sat  while  speaking  (Lk.  4 20). The  Scripture  exposition
was  not  a  required  part  of  the  service  ; neither  was  it
the  prerogative  of  an  ordained  class  ;  any  one  able  to
instruct  might  be  invited  to  speak  (Acts  13 15), though
ordinarily it fell to the rabbis of the community
(Bcrdkhotk,  28  a). Cp  JESUS,  §  9.

Much  of  the  literature  has  already  been  mentioned  ;  the  chiet
place  still  belongs  to  Schiirer,  GJl'C*),  2427-463.  Dalman,
'Synagogaler  Gottesdienst,'  /'A'/fl31,  "7-19,
11.  Literature,  has  added  richly  to  both  the  subject  and  the
bibliography,  and  signally  distinguishes  him
self  by  a  severer  caution  in  using  the  Mishnic  material  to  illustrate
the  time  of  Christ.  To  the  literature  given  by  Schiirer  and
Dalman  add  :  Duschak,  Gesch.  u.  Darstellung  d.  jfiii.  Cultiis,
Mannheim,  1866;  Nowack,  Hebr.  Archaeologie,  283  ff.\
Holtzmann,  Neutest.  Zeitgesch.  147  jff.  ;  Dembitz,  Jewish
Services  in  Synagogue  and  Home  (popular),  Philad.  iSoS.

I.'j.  P.

SYNEDRIUM  (trwtSptm),  a  Greek  word  which
means  '  assembly '  and  is  especially  used  of  judicial  or
representative  assemblies,  is  the  name  by  which  (or  by
its  Hebrew  transcription,  pTinjD,  sanhedrin,sanhedrfm)
is  known  that  Jewish  body  which  in  its  origin  was  the
municipal  council  of  Jerusalem,  but  acquired  extended
functions  and  no  small  authority  and  influence  over
the  Jews  at  large  (see  GOVERNMENT,  §§  29^;  ISRAEL,
§§  81  ff.  ;  SYNAGOGUE,  §  4).  In  the  Mishna  it  is  called
'the  sanherlrin,'  'the  great  sanhe-
drln,'  'the  sanhedrln  of  seventy -one


1.  Meaning  and


constitution. r

[members], and '  the  great  court  of

justice'  (beth  din  haggadol}.  The  oldest  testimony
to  the  existence  and  constitution  of  the  synedrium  of
Jerusalem  is  probably  to  be  found  in  2  Ch.  19  S;  the
priests,  Levites,  and  hereditary  heads  of  houses  there
spoken  of  as  sitting  in  Jerusalem  as  a  court  of  appeal
from  the  local  judicatories  do  not  correspond  with

4840


SYNBDRIUM

anything  mentioned  in  the  old  history,  but  may  be
taken  as  representing  an  institution  of  the  Chronicler's
own  time.  And  just  such  an  aristocratic  council
is  what  seems  to  be  meant  by  the  gerusia  or  senate
of  '  elders '  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the
Jews,  both  under  the  Greeks  from  the  time  of  Antiochus
the  Great  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  83)  and  under  the  Hasmonean
high  priests  and  princes.  The  high  priest,  as  the
head  of  the  state,  was  doubtless  also  the  head  of  the
senate,  which,  according  to  Eastern  usage,  exercised
both  judicial  and  administrative  or  political  functions
(cp  i  Mace.  126  142o).  The  exact  measure  of  its
authority  must  have  varied  from  time  to  time,  at  first
with  the  measure  of  autonomy  left  to  the  nation  by
its  foreign  lords,  and  afterwards  with  the  more  or  less
autocratic  power  claimed  by  the  native  sovereigns.

As  has  been  shown  under  ISRAEL  (§  8ijf.),  the
original  aristocratic  constitution  of  the  senate  began
to  be  modified  under  the  later  Hasmoneans  by
the  inevitable  introduction  of  representatives  of  the
rising  party  of  the  Pharisees,  and  this  new  element
gained  strength  under  Herod  the  Great,  the  bitter
enemy  of  the  priestly  aristocracy.1  Finally,  under  the
Roman  procurators,  the  synedrium  was  left  under  the
presidency  of  the  chief  priest  as  the  highest  native
tribunal,  though  without  the  power  of  life  and  death
(Jn.  1831).  The  aristocratic  element  now  again  pre
ponderated,  as  appears  from  Josephus  and  from  the
NT,  in  which  'chief  priests'  and  'rulers'  are  synonymous
expressions.  But  with  these  there  sat  also  '  scribes '  or
trained  legal  doctors  of  the  Pharisees,  and  other  notables,
who  are  called  simply  '  elders  '  (Mk.  15 1).  The  Jewish
tradition  which  regards  the  synedrium  as  entirely
composed  of  rabbis  sitting  under  the  presidency  and
vice-presidency  of  a  pair  of  chief  doctors,  the  ndsi  and
db  beth  din?  is  quite  false  as  regards  the  true  synedrium.
It  was  after  the  fall  of  the  state  that  a  merely  rabbinical
bi'th  din  sat  at  Jabneh  and  afterwards  at  Tiberias,  and
gave  legal  responses  to  those  who  chose  to  admit  a
judicature  not  recognised  by  the  civil  power.  Gradually
this  illegal  court  usurped  such  authority  that  it  even
ventured  to  pronounce  capital  ^sentences,  — acting,
however,  with  so  much  secrecy  as  to  allow  the  Roman
authorities  to  close  their  eyes  to  its  proceedings  (Origen,
Ep.  ad  Afr. ,  §  14).  That  this  was  possible  will  appear
less  surprising  if  we  remember  that  in  like  manner  the
synedrium  of  Jerusalem  was  able  to  extend  an  authority
not  sanctioned  by  Roman  law  over  Jews  beyond  Judaea
—e.g.,  in  Damascus  (Acts92  22s).

The  council-chamber  (0ov\r>)  where  the  synedrium
usually  sat  was  between  the  Xystus  and  the  temple,
probably  on  the  temple-hill,  but  hardly,  as  the  Mishna
states,  within  the  inner  court.  W.  K.  S.

The  term  '  Sanhedrin '  does  not  occur  in  EV  ;  but
the  Greek  ffvv48ptov  is  found  in  a  number  of  passages

2.  TO  owtfpiov  in  NT  Where EV  haS 'the  counciL'

in  NT  some  cases  it  denotes  an  ordinary

Jewish  tribunal  (Mt.  10 17); in  others

it  seems  to  be  used  of  the  supreme  Jewish  Council,  the

Sanhedrin  (Mk.  14ss  Acts52i). In  this  latter  sense  the

writers  are  commonly  understood  to  have  employed  the

word  in  the  narratives  of  the  trials  of  Jesus. It  may

be  doubted, however,  whether  we  have  before  us  the

original  text.

In  Mk.  1455  (=Mt.  2(*>  sg)  the  writer,  after  relating  that  Jesus
was  led  away  to  the  high  priest,  adds  :  '  Now  the  chief  priests
and  the  whole  council  (o\oi>  TO  mve8pi.ov)  sought  witness  against
Jesus  to  put  him  to  death.'  In  Mk.  15  i  again  it  is  said,  'And
straightway  in  the  morning  the  chief  priests  with  the  elders
and  scribes,  and  the  whole  council  (n\ov  TO  ovvt&piov),  held  a
consultation  ' ;  but  the  parallel  passage,  Mt.  27  i,  has  simply  '  all
the  chief  priests  and  the  elders  of  the  people  took  counsel.'  In
the  narrative  in  Lk.  the  word  is  introduced  very  awkwardly.

1  The  name synedrium  first appears under Hyrcanus II.
(Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  84).

2  Ndsi  properly  means  the  sovereign,  and  fib  beth  din the
president^  of  the tribunal. The false traditional  application
is  post-Mishnic.

4841


SYNEDRIUM

In  Lk.  '22  66  it  is  said,  '  And  as  soon  as  it  was  day  the  assembly
of  the  elders  of  the  people  was  gathered  together,  both  chief
priests  and  scribes  ;  and  they  led  him  away  into  their  council,
saying,  If  thou  art  the  Christ,  tell  us'  («ai  aryyayov  [?'./.
airriyayov]  O.VTOV  ei?  TO  truvi&piov  eavriav  [v.l  OUITU>I<|,  Ae'yoi/Tes,
K.  T.  A.).  Here  the  abruptness  with  which  the  Aeyorre?  and
following  words  come  in,  together  with  the  use  of  irvve&piov  for
the  place  of  assembly  as  well  as  for  the  Council  itself  (for  which
the  evidence  usually  brought  forward  from  other  sources  is  not
very  strong),  arouses  suspicion,  eis  TO  <rvve8pioi>  looks  very  like
an  insertion,  and  Kai  air/iyayov  (or  av^yayov)  O.VTOV  an  alteration
of  KO.I  eir-qpwTiav  avrov.

It  has  been  found  that  whereas  TO  <rvveSpi.oi>  occurs  in  Mk.
15  i  it  does  not  appear  in  the  parallel  passage,  Mt.  27  i.  If,
in  addition  to  this,  the  word  is  a  late  insertion  in  Lk.  2266,  it
is  a  question  whether  in  an  earlier  stage  of  the  narratives' TO
truveSpiov  was  present  in  any  of  the  passages.

When  this  article  was  already  in  print,  an  important  work,
by  Dr.  Adolf  Biichler,  Das  Sytiedrion  in  Jerusalem,  appeared
(1902).  He  thinks  that  the  'scribes'  in  Mk.  1434  are  clearly  an
addition,  and  that  in  all  the  passages  op^tepets  means  (not' the
'chief  priests '  but)  the  Temple  authorities,  by  whom  (and  not
by  the  Synedrium)  Jesus  was  seized  (see  p.  200).

In any case the narratives of the trial are not

3.  Jewish  trial?  Sat;sfa1Ct0r^ ^hen examined from a

critical  and  scientific  '  standpoint.

'  The  meeting  in  the  palace  of  the  high  priest  which  condemned
our  Lord  was  exceptional.  The  proceedings  also  on  this
occasion  were  highly  irregular,  if  measured  by  the  rules  of
procedure  which,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  were  laid  down
to  secure  order  and  a  fair  trial  for  the  accused '  (\VRS,  EBP)
228i2^).  Cp  SON  OF  MAN,  §  37,  end.

It  has  been  pointed  out  by  Brandt  (Die  Evan*.
Gesch.  p.  67)  and  Edersheim  (Life  and  Times  of  Jesus,
2553)  that  the  whole  proceedings  of  the  Sanhedrin,  if
they  were  such  as  they  are  represented  to  have  been,
contradict  all  that  we  know  about  the  Jewish  method
of  trial  from  other  sources,  even  when  we  admit  an  ideal
element  in  the  Rabbinic  notices.2  The  Jews,  no  less
than  the  Romans,  have  at  all  times  shown  great
reverence  for  the  law  (see  Hamburger,  Real-Ency-
clopddie  2 1151).  If,  as  Renan  (Life  of  /fs/ts,  p.  252)
supposes,  Jesus  was  condemned  not  so  much  by  Tiberius
or  Pilate  as  by  the  old  Jewish  party  and  the  Mosaic
law,  it  is  remarkable  that  'Paul'  in  dealing  with  this
very  law  is  silent  on  the  subject  (cp  Brandt,  p.  56).

But  it  is  still  possible  to  hold  that  Jesus  was  con
demned  at  an  informal  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrin
(Edersheim),  or  by  a  smaller  Court  of  Justice  (Graetz,
Hist,  of  the  Jews,  2163).  Edersheim  (2557)  thinks  there
can  be  no  question  that  Jesus  was  condemned  and  done
to  death  by  the  whole  body  of  Sanhedrists,  if  not  by
the  Sanhedrin,  '  in  the  sense  of  expressing  what  was
the  judgment  and  purpose  of  all  the  Supreme  Council
and  leaders  of  Israel,  with  only  very  few  exceptions.'
It  is  difficult,  however,  to  think  that  the  Romans  would
pay  much  attention  to  an  informal  Council.  The  high
priest's  task  was  simply,  Edersheim  thinks,  'to  formulate
a  charge  which  would  tell  before  the  Roman  Pro
curator'  ;  but  the  charge  he  selects,  that  of  blasphemv,
however  serious  its  estimation  among  the  Jews,  could
hardly  influence  a  Roman  (cp  Keim,  p.  83).  The
charge  of  claiming  to  be  the  Messiah  (Keim)  might
have  had  more  weight  ;  but  Keim  admits  that  the
refusal  of  Jesus  to  explain  what  he  meant  by  the  claim
is  'surprising'  (p.  89).  It  is  more  reasonable  to
suppose  that  the  charge  (whatever  it  was)  was  formu
lated  by  a  mere  clique  of  Jews  who  in  no  way  repre
sented  the  nation,3  and  that  the  condemnation  and
crucifixion  were  brought  about  by  the  hirelings  of  such
a  clique.4  It  is  true  that  Josephus  (Ant.  xviii.  83)  is

1  We  are  thinking  of  '  Science  '  as  defined  by  Huxley  (Essays)
and  Herbert  Spencer  (Education),  and  are  not  unmindful  of
what  Tolstoy  (Modern  Science',  cp  his  recently  published  [1902]
M'liat  is  Religion  .')  has  said  on  the  subject.

2  '  All  Jewish  order  and  law  would  have  been  grossly  infringed
in  almost  every  particular  if  this  had  been  a  formal  meeting  of
the  Sanhedrin'  (Kdersheim,  I.e.). On  Jewish  'law'  cp  Pascal,
Thoughts  on  Religion,  chap.  8,  towards  end.

3  This seems to be the view  of  Jost, Gesch. d.  Judcnth.
1  402-409  (as  cited  in  Edersheim,  Life,  1  553,  n.  2). He  describes
it  as  'a  private  murder  (Privat-Mord)  committed  by  burning
enemies,  not  the  sentence  of  a  regularly  constituted  Sanhedrin,
etc.'

4  The  Jewish  punishment  was  hy  stoning  (cp the case of

4842


SYNEDRIUM

supposed  to  assert  that  Jesus  was  condemned  '  at  the
suggestion  of  the  principal  men  among  us '  ;  but  it  has
been  contended  that  this  passage  is  an  interpolation
(De  Quincey,  Collected  Works,  7 127  [1897]),  and  in
any  case  the  statement  would  not  prove  much.

The  trial  before  Pilate,  as  it  is  represented  in  the
Gospels,  seems  to  have  been  no  less  irregular,  and  the

_j  .  .  judge's  conduct  can  only  be  accounted

4.  Koman  trial.  for  by  makmg  him  quite  an  exception

to  the  general  rule,1  a  man  of  all  men  the  most  perverse
and  inconsistent  (see  Keim,  683^  ;  Farrar,  Life  of
Christ,  chap.  60  ).2  Pilate,  however,  it  would  seem,
was  not  such  an  exceptional  character.  See  PILATE.
When,  therefore,  he  condemned  Jesus  to  suffer  crucifixion
he  must  surely  have  done  so  on  other  grounds,  and  the
proceedings  must  have  been  different  from  those
recorded  by  the  synoptists.  The  charge  would  have
to  be  a  political  one  (cp  Tac.  Ann.  1544).  It  may
have  been,  as  Lk.  23  2  suggests,  only  with  more  circum
stantial  evidence  arising  out  of  misconstruction  of
'  sayings,'  that  of  '  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  Caesar '
(cp'  Mt.  1724-27  22i7-22  =  Mk.  12  i4-i7=Lk.  2022-26.
where  the  words  of  Jesus,  as  reported,  are  ambiguous).
With  this  charge  Pilate  would  have  been  competent  to
deal,  as  Roman  Procurator,  more  perhaps  than  with
any  other.3

Keim  has  made  a  serious  and  important  attempt  to  give  a

reasonable  account  of  the  trials  of  Jesus  on  the  basis  (mainly)  of

the  synoptic  narratives. His  work  is  the  more

5.  Origin  Of  valuable  as  it  takes  note  of  the  investigations

Narratives. °f  so  many  other  critics. Hut  the  variety  of

views  to  which  he  refers,  and  his  own  failure

to present a satisfactory picture, show the insurmountable

difficulties  of  his  task.4 It  seems  better,  therefore,  to  admit  that

it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  gather  from  the  NT  really

reliable  details  of  the  trial  that  resulted  in  the  crucifixion  of

Jesus  (cp  Brandt,  p.  67). 5 In trying to  transmit  a  complete

life  of  Jesus  the  biographers  may  have  done  Jesus  himself,  the

Jews,  and  the  Romans  some  injustice. They  can  hardly  have

had  more  than  rumours  about  the  trial  to  draw  upon  ;6  but  they

also  seem  to  have  made  free  use  of  the  OT  7  and  of  the  Messianic

interpretations.8 There are perhaps also indications in the

narratives  that  they,  or  their  redactors,  borrowed  features  from

Stephen).  At  a  moment  of  great  excitement,  and  on  such  an
occasion,  would  the  cry  of  condemnation  that  would  burst  from
the  lips  of  Jews  be  'Crucify  him!"?  Edersheim,  in  spite  of
his  view  mentioned  above,  confesses  '  that  such  a  cry  should
have  been  raised,  and  raised  by  Jews,  and  before  the  Roman,
and  against  Jews,  are  in  themselves  almost  inconceivable  facts,
to  which  the  history  of  these  eighteen  centuries  has  made
terrible  echo  '  (2  577).

1  '  It  was  their  appreciation  of  law,  their  respect  for  law,  their
study  of  law,  far  more  than  anything  else,  which  gave  its  great
ness  to  the  character  of  the  Roman  people.  Even  in  the  most
degraded  ages  of  their  history,  and  with  the  worst  individual
types  of  men,  this  is  the  one  bright  spot  which  relieves  the
gloom  '  (Lightfoot,  Pilate  [a  sermon]).

-  Cp  Pearson,  An  Exposition  of  the  Creed,  art.  iv. Jeremy
Taylor  {Life  of  Christ,  Works  2613)  says,  '  Not  only  against  the
divine  laws, but  against the Roman too, he condemned an
innocent person, upon objections notoriously malicious ; he
adjudged  him  to  a  death  which  was  only  due  to  public  thieves
and  homicides  (crimes  with  which  he  was  not  charged),  upon  a
pretence  of  blasphemy, of  which  he stood accused, but not
convicted,  and  for  which  by  the  Jewish  law  he  should  have  been
stoned if  found guilty. And this he did put into present
execution,  against  the  Tiberian  law,  which  about  twelve  years
before decreed in favour of condemned persons that, after
sentence,  execution  should  be  deferred  ten  days.'

3  See  Pearson,  art.  iv.  p.  284  (1866).

*  He  is  obliged  to  admit  that  the  actors  in  this  drama  acted
in  quite  an  extraordinary  and  exceptional  manner. Cp  Renan's
account.

5  The  end  therefore  is  as  uncertain  as  the  beginning.  See
MARY,  NATIVITV,  RESURRECTION.  These  matters  should  not
be  made  of  vital  importance.  '  About  the  birth  of  Jesus  I  know
nothing,'  says  Tolstoy  (Faith}',  'nor  do  I  need  to  know.'  Cp
Brandt's  eloquent  conclusion  to  his  work,  Die  Evang.  Gesch.
p.  577 ;  see  also  Leo  Tolstoy,  What  is  Religion  ?,  Herbert
Spencer,  thirst  Principles,  chap.  v.

8  Cp  Brandt,  Die  Evang.  Gesch.  p.  81.  The  'Pauline'
Epistles  has'e  no  details  to  give  us,  though  the  authors  know
that  Jesus  was  crucified  (Rom.  66  i  Cor.  1  13  23  22  2  Cor.  184
Gal.  2  20  Si  5  74  614)  by  '  the  rulers  of  this  world  '  (i  Cor.  2  8).
Cp  Drescher,  Das  Lebcnjesu  bei  Paulus,  pp.  17,  39.

7  Cp Pearson,  art. iv. ; also Strauss, Leben  Jesu, R. W.
Mackay,  The  Tubingen  School  and  its  Antecedents  (1863),  pp.
146^

8  For  these  see  Aug.  Wunsche,  Die  Leiden  des  Mcssias(\fyo).

4843


SYRACUSE

the  ceremonies  connected  with  festivals  kindred  to  the  Satur
nalia  ; !  or  it  may  even  be  that  in  collecting  materials  for  an  ex
panded  life  of  Jesus  the  editors  seemed  to  find  in  the  ceremonies
that  were  performed  at  the  sacrifice  of  the  corn-  and  wine-gods
information  regarding  the  Master  whosufferedasomewhat  similar
fate. 2  The  narratives  in  their  present  form  seem  also  to  indicate
that  at  the  time  the  Life  was  re-edited,  the  gap  between  Jews
and  Christians  had  become  wider,  and  the  effort  to  win  converts
among  the  Gentiles  keener.

Of  the  older  literature  of  the  subject  it  is  enough  to  cite

Selden,  De  Synedriis. The  most  important  critical  discussion

is  that  of  Kuenen  in  the  Vcrslagen,  etc.,  of

6.  Literature, the  Amsterdam  Academy, 1866,  p. 131  icq.

A good summary is given by Schiirer,

Geschichte  dcsjiidischen  I  W£«(2),  §  23,  3. See  also  Hamburger,

Real- Encyclopiidie, s.v.  ; Ginsburg, 'Sanhedrin' in Kiito's

Bibl.  Cyclop.,  and  the  works  on  the  Life  of  Jesus;  and  for  an

apocryphal  account  of  the  trial,  E.  v.  Dobschiitz,  '  Der  Process

Jesu  nach  den  Acta  Pilati,'  in  ZNTW,  1902,  p.  ZgJ/".

W.  R.  S. ,  §  i  ; M.  A.  C. ,  §§  2-5.


SYNTYCHE  (CYNTYXH [Ti.  WH]),  Phil.  4a.

EUODIA.


See


SYNZYGUS  (cyNzyre  tTi-  WHD  in  Phil-  43>  though
rendered  '  [true]  yokefellow '  in  EV,  is,  though  not  met
with  elsewhere  as  such,  almost  certainly  to  be  regarded
as  a  proper  name  (2i/cfirye  [WHme-]).  Various  un
successful  attempts  have  been  made  to  guess  who  is
meant,  the  Pauline  authorship  of  the  epistle  being
assumed.  Clement  of  Alexandria  thought  that  the
apostle's  own  wife  was  intended  ;  Chrysostom,  the
husband  or  brother  of  Kuodia  or  of  Syntyche  ;  Light-
foot,  Epaphroditus  ;  others,  Timothy,  Silas ;  Ellicott
and  De  Wette,  the  chief  bishop  at  Philippi  ;  Wieseler,
even  Christ  himself,  '  val  introducing  a  prayer. '  Judg
ing  from  the  context,  we  can  only  say  some  one  who
was  worthy  of  that  designation  and  thus  could  be  ad
dressed  in  the  words  yvr/yif  Zwffye, '  genuine  Synzygus'
— i.e.,  '  Synzygus  who  art  rightly  so  named  '  (Vincent).
In  fact,  2w£Vyoj  means,  as  contrasted  with  eYepojY^os
(cp  erepo^vyeif,  '  to  yoke  incongruously,'  in  2  Cor.  614),
one  who  has  the  power  of  bringing  together  what
belongs  together.  The  name  is  a  symbolical  one,  the
use  of  which  in  this  passage  cannot  be  explained  as
coming  from  Paul,  who  is  represented  as  writing  to  the
church  'with  the  bishops  and  deacons'  (li).  The
force  of  the  name  does  not  become  clear  until  we
suppose  it  to  come  from  an  unknown  author  writing
to  the  Philippians  in  the  character  of  Paul.  In  ad
dressing  a  certain  circle  he  introduces  the  name  with
the  purpose  of  showing  in  what  manner  men  of  high
ecclesiastical  position  ought  to  act  with  regard  to
brethren  from  a  distance  visiting  their  church.  Cp
Lipsius,  //6'i21,  1892;  Vincent,  Comm.  1897;  and
PHILIPPIANS,  §  37!  w.  c.  v.  M.

SYRACUSE  (CYP&KOYC&C,  Ti.  WH),  a  city  on  the
SE.  coast  of  Sicily,  famous  in  Greek  and  Roman  history,
is  mentioned  in  the  journey-narrative  of  Acts  (2812)  as
having  been  for  three  days  a  halting-place  of  Paul  on
his  way  from  Melita  to  Rome.  Cicero  often  speaks  of
Syracuse  as  a  particularly  splendid  and  beautiful  city,
and  still  in  his  own  day  the  seat  of  art  and  culture
(  Tusc.  566,  De  .Vat.  Dear.  38i,  De  Rep.  l2i),  and  in  his
speech  against  Verres  (52-54)  gives  an  elaborate  descrip
tion  of  its  four  quarters  (Achradina,  Neapolis,  Tyche,
the  Island),  or  rather  the  four  cities  which  composed  it.
We  hear  nothing  of  importance  about  Syracuse  during
the  period  of  the  Empire.  It  had  local  self-government
— its  own  senate  and  its  own  magistrates — like  most  of
the  Greek  cities.  Caligula  restored  its  decayed  walls
and  some  of  its  famous  temples  (Suet.  Caius,  21).
Tacitus,  in  a  passing  mention  of  it  (Ann.  1849)'  sa.vs
that  permission  was  granted  to  the  Syracusans  under
Nero  to  exceed  the  prescribed  number  of  gladiators  in
their  shows.

1  See Frazer, Golden Bought. 2  [  =  Fortnightly Ki-'if.t',
Oct. -Nov.  iQool ;  Grant  All»n,  Evol.  of  the  Idea  of  God.

2  Cp Edward Clodd,  Pioneers  of  Evolution.  Part  II,  §  it
middle.

4844


SYRIA,  MESOPOTAMIA,  ASSYRIA,


Cyprus K0itrus

o - .-S  lua


A  L  A  s '  ",„„<<

lYamaaj, Via I


s'°°,N,(Siduna,Zituna),Sidur

EPT AH,  Sariptu, Sa'rafen
Nah


. , le/rjez^r £ ~r: rroK*--*^ : "C -

|Amkaruna,VlAr>°f' T^WSff^ ^^""(J.HABBOTH-AMMON


ZA??,(Azzati).Hazitu,GAazza/^  ^EBR'"''
°


A  3«°


34


D


E  Longitude  East 38 of  Greenwich F


CoLA.Billcrbeckdel.


For  Index  to  names  (A-Kar)  see  back  of  Map.


ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BlBUCA  1908,


IA,  ASSYRIA,  AND BABYLONIA.


'akho-Dagh

B  a  h[d  i  „  a  /.


bfs.Gaigames, £°1'™"

CHEMISW  ''*

iur-utir'pETHon  "ARAN
Mutkmi  *


Xrkana* , .'Skenigeh^ ^  "kalhft" >^

,kana?f ...rw/Mrban  .  | \ ^__jU-^\— ^


"Harbir/Dur-Sarrukln)


.Uerdi,  Werd'i •pu.ra.ttU.E

Swat) "*—  "^ "


-4,. — f^Bagnao
/'  Uh,Upi

•' .«KtH-rfcM.  ..t/i'.s-H'MO-'


Nar M  ar  rati


•s-


Explanation.

Modern  local  names  thus:- _ el-Kuds

Modern  European ,, _ Aleppo

Classical  „ SBZ./.VOS

Biblical  II  JERUSALEM

jebel  Haman!ye Assyrian:  towns  ,, - ~...Dimaski

Meslfaha  „ countries,  districts  etc -.ORARTU,  Etius

peoples — .-- <H  at  t  i)


Jlmarna -letter  town  names „.. (Timasgi)

^^-  Paths, /foods Ma"i  ftoads

Adumu Railways


Basra


Projected  Railways


O IO


Natural  Scale.  1:5,500,000.

English  Mile*
50  100  150


200


Ireemvich


Kilometres
oio 50 100  '50


H


44


Walker  &  Cockerel!


MAP  OF  SYRIA, MESOPOTAMIA, ASSYRIA, AND  BABYLONIA.

INDEX  OF  SOME  NAMES  (A-Kar)

Parentheses  indicating  articles  that  refer  to  the  place-names  are  in  certain  cases  added  to  non-biblical  names
having  ny  biblical  equivalent. The  alphabetical  arrangement  usually  ignores  Arabic  prefixes.


J.  'Abdul  'Aziz,  62  (MESO

Arba-ilu,  12  (ASSYRIA,  §  5)

Bisutun,  Js

Famagusta,  Cs

tell  el-Hesi,  D5

POTAMIA,  88  3,  9)

Arbai,  £5,  FS

Boht.in  Su,  H2

W.  Faregh,  A6,  85,  6

tell  el-Hidr,  £3

Abu-Habbah, I4 (BABY

Tell  'Arban,  C.2  (MESOPO

Bosra, £4 (TRACHONITIS,

Feishkhabur,  Ha

Hierapolis,  £2

LONIA,  8§  3,  '4)

TAMIA,  8  15)

13)

Franktin,  Di

Hikubta,  B6

Abu  -  Shahrem, Js (BABY

Arbela,  12  (ASSYRIA,  8  s)

Rostra,  £4

Funduk,  H2

Hilakku.Ci,  2,  Di(CiLiciA,

LONIA,  8  3)

Ardebil,  Ki

Rubastus,  RS

"82)

Abu  Sir,  BS

Arghanamaden,  Fi

Rubian  I.,  J6

Gabala DS

Hilleh, 14 (BABYLONIA,

Achita,  Ha

Arghand,  Fi

Bunubu,  85

'  88  3,  M)

Adalia,  Ba
Aclana,  D2

Arhuliti,  £4
Ariarathia,  Ei

Burarj-tchai,  Ca
Busiris,  B5

Gambulu, Js  (AsuR-BANi-

e1-HCtraan,UisG3

el-'Adem,  Is  (ASSYRIA,  §  4)

Aribi,  £5,  FS

Bussora,  Js

PAL,  8  6)

Hit,  H4  (MESOPOTAMIA)

Adiaman,  ¥2

el-'Arish,  Cs

vja  UIKU ^i,  '^T*

Hoi  wan,  Js

Bit-Adini,  Fa
Adumu,  FS

Arka,  'Arkfi,  DS
'Arka,  Js

Calycadnus, Ca (CiLiciA,

§,\

Gargames,  r  2
Gebal,  DS

Horns,  ES  (HETHLON)
Hubuskia,  H2

Afiun,  Bi

Armada,  DS

1  }
Carchemish,  £2

Germanicia,  Ea

bahret-Huleh,  04

'Afrin,  £2

Armel,  t>4

CelaMicE,  Bi

errus,  js, 3

Huleilan,  ^4

Agamtanu,  Js
Aher,  Ji
Ras  el-'Ain, Ga  (MESOPO

Armenian  Taurus,  Gi,  Hi
Aroer,  DS
Arpad,  Ea

Choremabad,  K4
Cilician  Gates,  Da
Cilician  Taurus,  Ca

tel  Gharkana,  G2
(ihazza,  DS
el-GhOr,  DS

Kit  Humn,  04
Hurin,  Is
Huzro,  Gi

TAMIA,  8  5)
'Aintab,  £2
'Akaba,  D6

Arpadda,  £2
Arrapha,  HS,  Is
Arsania,  Fi,  Gi

Cirtesium, GS (MESOPO
TAMIA,  88  3.  4)
Con.stantina,  G2

wiidy  el-Ghorra,  GS,  4
Giaur-Dagh,  £2

lalman  Mts.,  Is
larimuta,  BS,  Cs

G.  'of  'Akaba,  D6  (Exoous,

Arza-Atis,  Ha

Ctesiphon,  14

Gilead,  04

tell  Ibrahim,  14

84)

Arzen,  Gi

Iconium,  Ca

'Akabet  esh-Sham,  D6
'Akarkuf, 14 (BABEL,

Arzuhina,  Is
Arzwapert,  Hi

Daiani,  Gi,  Hi
Dai.:,  H2

Gis-uh/Js

Gizoilbunda,  12,  J2

Ilgun,  Bi
Imeri-5u,  £4

TOWER,  8  7)

Akbar,  1  4
Ak-Dagh,  Ei
Ak-Dagh,  Aa
JL  el-Akhma,  Ea

Asduda,  DS
Tell  'Ashik,  H3
Askaluna,  Cs
Askuza,  1  1,  2
Asshur,  HS

Bit  Dakuri,  H4,  14
Damanhur,  BS
Daphnae,  BS
tell  Dcfenne,  BS
Demesek,  Gi

Giik-su,  Ea
Giik-su,  C~2
jebel  Gorftb,  £4
Great  Eastern  Sea,  J6
Great  Western  Sea,  63,  4,

Irbid,  D4
Irkata,  DS
Isaura,  Ca
Isfiz,  Ga
Isin,  Is

'Akir,  DS

A5ur,  H2,  3

Der  ez-Zor,  GS

Iskaluna,  Cs

Ak'ku,  D4
Akmatana,  Js

nahr  el-'Asi,  £3
Asunak,  Js KS

ed-Der,  F3
Derucl,  Js

Gubhi(-a),  D3
Gulambar,  Is

Iskenderun,  £2
Isma'ilTyeh,  KS

Akserai,  Di
Akshehr,  Bi
Aku,  D4
Akzibi,  D4
Alaja,  C2
Alashgerd,  Hi

Asur,  HS
Asur-utir,  £2
Jebel 'Ataka, C6 (BAAL-

Athribis,  65

Derwishiyeh,  KS
Deschi-i-Kava,  Js
Diarbekr,  G2  (ASSYRIA,  §  6)
Dihan,  D5
Diyala,  Is,  4  (ASSYRIA,  §  4)
Dikl'U G2 H"3 ]z

W.  Gumar,  £4
Guran-kala,  Is
Gurgum.  Ea
Guzan,  G2  (MESOPOTAMIA,
§4)

Isma'iliyeh,  Cs
Isparta,  Ba
Isridshe,  F3
Issos,  £2  (CILICIA,  §  i)

Alasia,  Cs  (CYPRUS,  §  i)

nahr  el-'Auja,  04

Dilima'n,  li

Izerlu,  Ha

Albistan,  Ei
Aleppo,  £2  (BEREA,  2)
Alexandria, AS (EGYPT,

Aurowman  D,  Js

Ayash,  D2
Azaz,  E?.

Dimaska,  £4
Dimaski,  £4
Diner,  Bi

Habur,  Fa
Habur,  GS
e"l-Hadr,  H3  (MESO

Jeble,  D3

T  ff~i  t f\t

8  72)
Alma  Daqh,  E2
Alot,  12

'Azizieh,  Ei
Azzati,  Cs

Divrigu,  Fi

Dizful,  K4

POTAMIA,  §  4)
Hadrach,  £3  (ASSYRIA,  §  32)
Haifa,  D4

jei.it,  i_>4
Jelu  Dagh,  H2,  la
Jerabis, ¥2  (CARCHEMISH,

Altun-Kopri,  Is
Amadieh,  H2

Ba'albek  £4  (LEBANON,  8  6)

Duplias,  J4
Nar  Duplias,  J4,  5

Halamb,  Ea
Halbun,  £4

§0
Jerawe,  FS

Amanus,  £2

Babil,  1  4

JJur,  I  Hi  n,  _L>4  ^rHCENICiA,

Haleb,  Ea

tell  Jezer,  DS

Amara,  Js

Babil-ilu,  I4

21\  h

tell  Halebeyeh,  FS

jeziret  ibn  'Omar,  Ha

Amata(-i),  £3
Ambanda,  KS

Amedi,  Ga

Babylon,  1  4
Badiyet  esh-Sham,  £3,  FS
Bafu,  Cs

Dfir-ilu,  14
Dur-Kurigalzu,  14

Halibu,  £2

Halman,  Js
Halman,  £2

Jibbah,  14
Jihan,  Ea
Jindaris,  Ea

Amkaruna,  Dj
Amki,  04

Baghdad, 14 (BABEL,
TOWER)

(ASSYRIA,  8  28)
Dur-Sarrukin,  Js

Halpi,  £2
Halule,  I4

el-Jof,  £5  (ISHMAEL)
Jokha,  I5

Amma,  £3

Bagistana,  Js

Dur  Yakin,  Js

Bit  Halupi,  GS

Juanro,  Js

'Amman,  DS

Bahdinan,  H2

Halvs,  Di  (CAPPADOCIA)

Judr  Dagh,  Ha

Bit  Amman,  DS,  £4

Baksaieh,  J4

Ecbatana,  J2

Hamadan.Ks  (TRADE,  §  58)

Julamerk,  Ha

Ammana,  £4

Ba'kuba,  1  4

Ecbatana  II.,  KS

jebel  Hamamlye,  FS

Julfa,  1  1

Amrit,  DS

Bali'h,  ¥2

Edessa,  F2  (ARAMAIC,  8  ")

Hamat,  ES(HITTITES,  8  n)

jebel  el-'Amiir,  £3

N.  Balikh,  Fa

Tell  Edi,  Is

Hamata,  ES

el-Kaf,  £5

Arnurru,  £2,  3

Barsip,  14

Egerdir,  Ba

Hamath,  £3  (TRADE,  §  39)

Kaidu,  14,  Js

'Ana,  GS

til  Basher,  £2

Egregli,  Da

Hammana,  £2

Kaisa,  D3

'Anfib,  DS

Bash-kala,  Hi

Egun,  Fi

jebel  Hamrin,  HS

Kaisariye,  Di

C.  Anamur,  Ca

ras  el-Basit,  DS

Ekrek,  Fi

Hangmatanu,  KS

Kaisariyeh,  1)4

Anat,  GS

Basra,  JS(RAP.YLONIA,  §  14)

Ekrek,  Ei

Hani,  Gi

tell  Kaiyara,  HS

Anatha,  GS

Batrun,  DS  (GKBAL)

Elam, Js,  4  (BABYLONIA,

flanigalbat,  Fi

Kala-esh-Shush,  K4

Anavarza,  Da

Bavian H2 (BABYLONIA,

822)

Harabu,  £3

Kala-i-Risa,  K4

Andia,  Ii

858)

Elath,  D6

flaran,  F2

Kaldu,  I4,  J5

Angora,  Ci

Bedran,  14

Eleusa,  D2

Harhar,  Js

Kalhi,  H2  (PHCENICIA,  i  7)

J. Ansarlyeh, ES

Beitin,  DS

Elim  Dagh,  Ha

Haridi,  FS

Kammanu,  Di,  2,  Ei

(PHOENICIA,  8  4  12)

Belad-russ,  I4

Elli,  J3

Haridi,  GS

Kandil,  I2

Anti-Taurus,  Di,  2,  Ex

Jebel  Beni-Manser,  Js

Elmalu,  AP>2

Harran,  Harran,  Fa

Karadja-Dagh,  Ga  (MESO

Anzal,  Ii

Beruna, 04, (PHCENICIA,

Elvencl  Kuh,  KS

Hassan-Dagh,  Di

POTAMIA,  8  3)

Anzan,  Is,  J4

848)

Enzite,  Fi

Hatarika,  £3

Karadja-Dagh,  Ha,  3

Apamea,  £3

Berutu, 04, (PHCENICIA,

Epiphania,  £3

Haiti,  Ci,  Di,  Ei,  2,  3

Karalla,  Ji

Aphek,  D4

848)

Erbil,  1  2

(HlTTITES)

Karaman,  Ca

Apku,  04

Biaina,  Hi

tel-Erfad,  £2

jebel  Hauran,  E4(HAURAN)

Kara-su,  Fi

Apri,  Ea

Bindidi,  BS

Eridu,  Is  (BABYLONIA,  §  3)

Wady  Hauran,  64

Kara-su,  Ea

Wady  el-'Arab,  B6,  C6

BingiJl  Dagh,  Gi

Erzeroum,  Gi

Haurani,  £4

Kare-tepe,  J4

Wady  el-'Araba,  DS

Bire-jik, EFa (CARCHE-

Erzinghian,  Fi

Hawizeh,  Js

Karkar,  £3

Arantu,  D2

MISH,  8  2)

Esclfid,  DS

Hazazi,  Ea

Karkisiya,  GS  (MESO-

'Ar'Sra,  I>3

B-.rs NimruU, I4 (CABV-

Eski-SeUndje,  Ci

H.i.'i'.u.  Cs  .

' POTAMIA,  §  3)

Ararat,  Ii

LONIA,  8  3)

Etius,  1  1

Heliopolis,  65

Karpanit,  85

Araru,  DS

Bismiyeh,  Is

Euphrates,  Fi,  Hi,  3

Hermil,  £3

Karthadast,  Cs

Aras,  Ji

mound  Bisri,  Ea

Ezrak,  E4

N.  Hesani,  Ga

Raryaten,  £3

For  continuation  see  back  of  other  half  of  Map.


INDEX  TO  SOME NAMES  IN MAP (Kas-Z)— continued  from  first  half  of  Map


Kasiar  Mts  ,  Gz

Ma'an,  DS  (TRADE,  §  14)

Oheimir,  I4

Serdescht,  la

jebel  Tektek,  F2

nahr  el-Kasimrye,  04

Madai,  Js

Olba,  Ca

Seripul,  13

Tela,  G2

Kaski,  Ei,  F!

Madaktu,  K4

On,  AS

Sert,  Ga

Telloh,  Js  (BABYLONIA,  8

Kasr-i-Shirin,  13

Madaktu,  J4

Orontes,  D2  (ASSYRIA,  §  31)

Sesong,  Ea

T'U -I r  T ' *

Ihemail,  H4

Kassu,  J4

Kal'at  Madruk,  H4

Shach,  H2

Tibne,  D4

Katna,  £3

Magan,  Is,  6,  J6

Padan,  Is

Shatra,  Js

Tigranocerta,  Gx

nahr  el-Keblr,  T>3

Magarisi,  G2

Pajas,  Ea

Shatt,  Ga

Tigris,  HS,  62,  Js

nahr  el-Kelb,  D4

Magdali,  04

Palmyra, £3  (ARAMAIC, §

Shatt el-Hai, 14, J4, 5

jebel  et-Tlh,  C6,  D6

el-Kerak,  DS

Mahalatta,  DS

4)

(BABYLONIA,  §  3)

Til,  Ga

Kerbela,  H4

Mahidesht,  Js

Palu,  Gi

Sheddadiyeh,  GS

Til  Barsip,  EFa

Kercha,  J4

Maisa,  DS

Pappa,  Cs

Shehr,  Ei

Til-Ermen,  Gz

Kerkuk,  I3

Maisere,  FS

Parsua,  la

Kal'at  Sherkat,  HS

Timasgi,  £4

Kezin,  Fi

Makida,  04

Pascha  Dagh,  Ci

(ASSYRIA,  §  5)

Tochmu-su,  Ei

Khabiir,  GS  (MESO

Malatia,  Fi  (ARARAT,  §  2)

Patak,  J4

Shetata,  H4

tell  TOkan,  £3

POTAMIA,  §  3)

Mambij,  £2

Patin,  £3

Shirisan,  J4

et-Tor,'Ga

Khabur,  G2

Mamishan,  Is

Patnotz,  Hi

Shokh,  Hi

Tripolis,  DS

tell  el-Khalidiye,  £4
Khalfati,  E2

Man,  H2
Mandjur,  14

Pelveri,  £2
Pendj-Ali  Dagh,  J3

Jisr-esh-Shugr,  £3
Side-kan,  la

Trush,  £2
Tsamanti-su,  Di,  a

el-Khalil,  DS

Manjuluk,  Ei

Pethor,  F2

Siduna,  £(4

bahr  Tabariyeh,  04

Khanikin,  13

Mansfiriyeh,  Is

Petra,  DS

Sifeire,  H4

diret  et-Tulul,  £4

riis  el-Khanzir,  Da

Mar'',  I5

Physcus,  Is

Sifwe,  14

Tul  Garimmi,  Ei

Kharpiit,  Fi

Maraga,  J2

Pilistu,  DS  (CANAAN,  §  17)

Sillua,  Cs

Tulul  es-Safa,  E4

Khaualis,  14

Marand,  Ii

Pitru,  Fa  (ARAM,  §  3)

Simesi,  la

Tumme,  la

Khoi,  1  1

Mar'ash,  £2

Pukudu,  J4

Simirra,  DS,  £3

Tun,  Da

Khoi-Sanjak, 12

Marhamitabad,  J2

Purattu,  GS

Simirra,  DS

Turnad,  Is

Khorsabad  Ha  (ASSYRIA,  §

Mardin, G2 (MESOPO

Pursak,  Bi

Simyra, L>3 (PHCENICIA,

Turuspa,  Hi

5)

TAMIA,  §  6)

Pushti-Kuh,  J4

.§.4/)

f  usha,  Ga

Khukh,  G2

Mariru,  Ga

Puseru,  B5

Sinjar,  62

TuSpa,  Hi

Kidri,  F4

Markasi,  £2

J. Sinjar, GH2 (ASSYRIA,

tuz  Cholly,  Ci

Kidsi,  £3

Nfir  Marrati,  Js

Queit,  J6

.§§  4,  16)

Tuz  Khurmati,  Ij

Kifri,  1  3

Martu,  D4,  £3

Sinna,  Js

Tyana,  Da

Kilissi-hissar,  D2

Marum,  D4

Sipan-D,  Hi

Killiz,  £2

Mt.  Masis,  Ii

l\adanu,  13

Sippar, 14 (BABYLONIA,

Ubi,  £4

Kin,  JS
Kinahhi  1)4,  5  (CANAAN)

Masjed,  £3
Mazaka,  Di

Rahaba,  (j»s
Rakka,  FS  (MESOPOTAMIA,
ft'  A

§S  3,  54)
Sirki,  GS

Uerdi,  G3
Uh,  I4

Kipina,  FS
Kirhi,  C,2
Kirfi-Gol,  B2
Kirmanshali,  Js
Kirruri  12,  (ASSYRIA,  §  31)
Kis, I4  (BABYLONIA,  §§  3,

Mazgerd,  Fi
Media,  J2,  3,  KS
Melasgerd,  Hi
Melit,  Fi
Meluhha,  D6,  £6
Menderes,  A2

8  4)  .
Rapihi,  Cs
Rapiku,  FS
Rapiku,  H4
Rasappa,  ¥3
er-Reda,  GS
tell  Refah,  DS

Sir'la,  04
Sir-pur-la,  Js  (BABYLONIA,

§§  3,  48)
Sis,  Da
Sivas,  Ei
Sizu,  Da

Uknu,  J4
Ula,  K5
Umildis,  Ha
Unki,  £2
Upi',  I4
Ur,  I5

47)
Kisil  Robat,  Is
Kisil-Usen,  J3
Kisil-Usen,  K2
Kitin,  Cs
Kitrusi,  Cs
Kizil  Irmak,  Ci,  Di
KHs,  £2
tell Kokab, 62  (MESOPO-

Mendili,  14
Kala-i-Merivan,  Js
Mersina,  Da
Meshhed-Hosein,  HI4
Meskaka,  FS
Meskene,  F2
Metiks,  Hi
Mianeh,  ]2
Midiat,  C-2

Rehoboth,'  DS
Resafa,  F3
Revanduz,  la
Rizan,  la
er-Roda,  GS
Ruad,  DS  (ARVAD)
er-Ruhbe,  £4
er-Ruhebeh,  DS
Rum-ka.liX £2

Sjun,  Gi
Skeniyeh,  62
Soloi,  Da
wady  Suab,  £3,  GS
Subari,  F2
Subiti,  £4
Subnat,  G2  (ASSYRIA,  §  27)
Sufan-dere,  G2
Suhi,  GS

Urartu,  Gi,  Hi,  Ii
Urdu,  £3
Urfa,  F2
L.  Urmia,  Ii
Uruk,  I5
Ushak,  Ai
Ushnuk,  la
Utium,  Ha,  la
Ulluba,  G!

_TAMIA,  §  3)

Misir,  BS

Suhme,  Gi

Urgub,  Di

Konia,  C2
Koweit, 16

jebel  Misina,  FS
Misri,  £5

Sade,  £3

Suk  esb-Shuyukh, Is

S]' ' - - T

Usu,  D4

tell  Ksub,  F3
Kue,  D2  (CiLiciA,  §2)
Kufar,  I4
Kuh-i-Galla,  J4
Kuiiuli,  D2

Missis,  D2
Mitnnni,  Fa
Mitanni, £2, F2, G2, H2
(MESOPOTAMIA)
Moks,  Hi

tell  es-Safieh,  DS
es-Safiyeh,  DS
Sagura,  Ea
Sahend,  J2
Sahna,  Js

uleimamya,  13
Sultan-  Dagh,  Hi
tell  es-Sultan,  £3
Sumra,  DS
Sumur,  DS

Van,  L.  Van,  Hr
Vastan,  Hi
Veranshehr,  Ei
Veranshehr,  Fa

Kummuh, F2  (ASSYRIA,  §

'  28)

Mosul,  H2  (NINEVEH)
Kal'at  el-Mudik,  £3

Sajur,  £2  (CARCHEMISH,  §
2)

Supri,  Ga
Sura,  GS

Warka,  I5

Kunalua,  E2
Kundi,  1)2

el-Muhammereh,  KS
Mukayyar,  Is

Saktchegozii,  Ea
Salamiyeh,  £3

Surappi,  J4
Suri,  £2,  F2,  G2,  H2

Werdi,  GS
White  Mt.,  Ja

Kurkh,  C.2

Murad  Su,  Gi

Sam'al,  £2  (MESOPOTAMIA)

Surlya,  £3

Kurna,  Js

Mush,  Gi

Samerina,  64  (SAMARIA)

Surru,  D4

Yabrud,  E4

Kutaia,  Ai

Muski,  Ci

Samosata, Fa (CAPPA-

Susa,  K4

Yfijuz,  D4

Kut  Dahr,  Js

Muski,  Ei  (ASSYRIA,  §  28)

DOCIA)

Susan,  K4  (CYRUS,  §  i)

Bit-Yakin,  Js

Kut  el-Amara,  14
Kut  et-Tamul,  J4
Kutu,  Hi,  1  1  (BABYLONIA,
§69)

Musri,  £2  (Mi/RAiM,  g  20)
Nah'al  Musri,  DS(MIZRAIM)
Musur,  BS
Mutkini,  Fa

Samsat,  Fa
Samuna,  I4
Sangur,  DS
Sangur,  £3

Susun,  K4
Sustinka,  K4
Suti,  £3,  F3,  64

Yalo,  DS
Yamutbal,  J4
Yapu,  D4
Yarpuz,  £i

Kutu,  14

Saniru,  04

Suverek,  Fa

Yarpuz,  £2

Kybistra,  D2

Nairi, Gi, Hi, 2, 12

Sanu,  BS

Yatbur,  J4

Kyrrhos,  £2

(ARARAT,  §  2)

Sapi-Bel,  J4,  5

Tabal,  Di,  Ei  (ASUR-BANI-

Ya'udi,  £2

lower  sea  of  Nairi,  12

Sarafend,  04

PAL,  §  4)

Labnana,  £3
Ladikiyeh,  DS
Lagas, Js (BABYLONIA, §

o)

upper  sea  of  Nairi,  Hi
Nakhetshewan,  Ii
Kal'at  en-Nakhl,  C6
Nal-Mts.,  Gi,  Hi

Sariptu,  D4
Saris,  Ei
Sarus,  D2  (CiLiciA,  §  i)
Sasa,  J4

Tabite/Ha
Tabriz,  Ji
tell  Tabus,  FS
Tadmor,  £3

Upper  Zab,  Zaba-elu,  Ha
Zaban,  Is
Zaba-Supala,  12,  3
Gates,  of  Zagras,  Js

Laid,  F3
Laliar,  £2

Namri,  13,  ]^
Nasibin, Nasibina, Ga

es-Sauar,  63
Saur,  Ga

et-Taflleh,  D5
fakht-i-Shirin,  Js

Zakho,  Ha
Zakho-Dagh,  Ha

Lamlun,  Is

(MESflPOTAM'lA,  §  4)

Sautch-Bulaq,  la

Takht-i-Suleiman,  Ja

Zakruti,  J2

Laodicea,  DS
Laranda,  C2

Nath,  BS
Nedjef,  I4

Savalan,  Ji
Schaho-Dagh,  Js

Tang-i-Girra,  Js
Tantfirah,  D4

Zakruti,  Js
Zamua,  1  3

Larnaka,  Cs

Niffer,  14  (BABYLONIA,  §  3)

Blr  es-Seba',  DS

Tarsos,  Da

Zengan,  K2

Larsa,  Is  (BABYLONIA,  §  3)
Lebanon,  DS

Nigde,  D2
Nimme,  Gi

Seboa-Tsherib,  J4
Segirme-Dagh,  13

Tarsus,  Da '.
wady  Tartar,  HS

Zenjirli,  Ea
Zerghul,  Js

Lebneh.  Es

Nimriid,  H2

Seikan,  Da

Tartus,  DS

L.  Zeriber,  Js

jebel  Libnan,  D4

N:nirud-PaSh,  Hi
Nimrud-Dagh,  Fi

Seir,  J.  Sb«>-ah,  DS
Kal'at  Sejar,  £3

tarzi,  D2
Tauk,  I3

Zimarra,  £>3

Lower  Zab, HS  (ASSYRIA,
§  4)

Nina,  Nineveh,  Ninua,  Ha
Nippur, 14 (BABYLONIA,

Selefklye,  Ca
Seleucia,  14

Taurus,  Ei,  2  PAPPADOCIA)
L.  Tatta,  Ci

Zimrin,  DS
Zirzir-tepev  I4

Lullu,  Is

§3)

Seleukia,  Ca

Taza  Khurma  i,  Is

Zituna,  D4

Nisin,  Is

Selinus,  Ca

Tchehil-Tche  me-Kuh,  Js

Zobeir,  Js

Maab,  DS,  £5

Ni.ssa Js,  4
Nuhasse,  £3

Senkereh,  Is  (BABYLONIA,
§3)

Tcheluk,  G2
Tekrlt,  H3

Zohab,  {3
Zorbatiyeh,  J4

SYRIA


SYRIA


Name,  etc.  (§§  1-3).
Greater  Syria  (§  ^f.).
Fauna  (§  $l>).
Lesser  Syria  (§  6).
History  :  introductory

8-10).
Babylonia  (§  nf.).


Haiti,  Egypt,  Assyria  (§§  13-15).
Aramaeans  (§  16).
Tiglath-pileser  I.  (§  17).
Syria  left  to  itself  (§  18).
Later  Assyrian Empire  (§§  19-

23)-
Later  times  (§§  24-27).


Literature  on  Geography  (§  7).

'  Syria ' is unknown to Hebrew, but possibly
identical  with  Bab.  Suri,  a.  N. Euphratean  district  of

1  Name uncertam  boundaries. We  find  Syria  first

in  Herodotus  (2 12,  etc.).  In  Homer's  list
(//.  2783)  only  "Api/j.01  (Aramaeans)  appear.  <§  em
ployed  2vpia  to  translate  ARAM  (q.v. )  in  its  divers
applications  (e.g. ,  2vpia  Aa/j.affKov,  2  S.  8  5  ;  MecroTro-
ra/uias  'Zvpia,  Gen.  25 20),  and  EV  followed.  Herodotus
(76s),  misled  (?)  by  the  resemblance  of  'Awi/piot
and  Svpioi,  stated  that  these  were  'barbarian'  and
Greek  forms  of  a  single  ethnic.  In  consequence  he
used  '  Syria '  and  '  Syrians '  even  more  widely  than
OT  used  '  Aram ' ;  and  his  vagueness  reappears  in
Xenophon  (Anab.  i.  44)  and  in  one  passage  of  Strabo
(16737).

Strabo,  followed  by  Pliny  and  Ptolemy,  in  stricter  use
(see  §  i,  end)  confined  Syria  to  the  geographical  area

2  Greater bounded N- by Taurus, S. by the
'  Syria Arabian Desert, W. by the Mediter
ranean, and NE. by Euphrates. The

SE.  limit  was  formed  by  the  vague  frontier  of  the
'  Syrian  '  desert,  known  in  antiquity  as  the  '  Arabian. '
Both  ancient  'Arabia  Deserta '  (  =  N.  Hamad)  and
'Arabia  Petraea'  (i.e.  the  Arabia  of  Petra  —  S.  Hamad)
would  be  included  now  by  most  geographers  in  Syria  ;
whilst  Arabia  would  be  restricted  to  the  ancient  '  Felix,' l
i.e.,  all  peninsular  Arabia  S.  of  and  including  the
Nefud  or  desert  belt  between  the  heads  of  the  Red  Sea
and  the  Persian  Gulf.  In  the  Roman  provincial  arrange
ment  '  Arabia  '  =  Petrasa  and  Deserta.  Roman  '  Syria  '
(at  first  one  province  and  under  Hadrian  three)  ended
S.  with  Palestine,  and  E.  with  the  limit  of  the  Hamad
Steppe.  So  also  Byzantine  Syria  split  into  seven
districts.  Moslem  geographers  had  some  doubt  whether
to  reckon  the  Hamad  to  Syria  or  to  Arabia.  Mukadassi
(early  loth  cent.  A.  D. )  protested  against  the  extension  of
Syria  or  esh-Sham  (i.e. ,  the  '  left-hand  '  land,  relative  to
one  facing  E.  in  Mekka)  into  the  E.  desert ;  and  the
later  geographers  (e.g.,  Edrlsi  and  Abulfeda)  mostly
agreed  with  him  in  drawing  the  limit  of  Arabia  obliquely
NE.  from  'Akaba  to  Rakka  on  Euphrates,  thus  detach
ing  the  Hamad  from  Syria.  For  the  purposes  of  the
present  article  we  shall  follow  them,  and  confine  Syria
to  the  area  contained  by  N.  lat.  38°  and  31°,  by  the
Mediterranean  sea,  and  by  an  imaginary  line  drawn
roughly  parallel  to  its  coast  and  on  an  average  150  m.
inland.

There seems  also to  have been a special use of
'Syria,'  which  still  prevails,  restricting  the  term  to  that

3  Lesser  Part °f the w'cler area which  lies N. of
Svria Patestine,  but  excluding  the  Lebanon  littoral

(Phoenicia).  This  territory  was  regarded
as  peculiarly  Aramaean,  and  when  the  large  Roman
province  Syria  was  divided,  it  retained  its  name  without
qualification.  It  had  at  most  periods  a  distinct  history,
having  been  successively  the  peculiar  seat  of  the  '  Hittite'
dominion,  of  the  Aramaean  confederate  power,  and  of
the  Seleucid  monarchy,  at  a  time  when  Palestine  and
Phoenicia  were  Egyptian.  Only  the  inclusion  of  the
whole  of  wider  Syria  in  a  great  nlien  empire,  such  as
the  Egyptian  or  Assyrian,  ever  made  the  history  of  all
parts  identical.

1  The  vulgar  restriction  of  '  Arabia  Felix  '  to  the  SW.  of  the
peninsula  (Yemen  and  Hadramaut)  is  due  to  a  mediaeval  error,
repeated and confirmed by D'Anville. Strabo, Pliny, and |
Ptolemy  alike  apply  the  term  Felix  to  all  peninsular  Arabia.

4845


SYRIA

Syria  has  strong  natural  boundaries  :  high  mountains
N.  (average  summits  8500  ft. ),  sea  W. ,  and  deserts  S.

4.  Boundaries  a"d  E"  : but  there  are  weak  P°ints-
Of  Greater whose influence is shown in Syrian
Syria  history. The  deserts  S.  and  E.  being

of  the  steppe  character  form  very
indeterminate  social  limits.  Supporting  nomad  popula
tions,  which  are  constantly  being  reinforced  horn  foci  in
the  Arabian  oases,  and  forced  outwards  by  the  inability
of  the  desert  to  maintain  their  increase,  these  steppe-
deserts  do  not  divide  nearly  as  sharply  as  the  N.  moun
tains,  which  retain  barrier  populations  of  peculiar
character.  Settled  folk  do  not  migrate  into  deserts,  but
desert  folk  constantly  migrate  into  settled  lands.
Throughout  the  S.  and  E.  border  of  Syria,  therefore,
'  Arabisation '  has  always  gone  on  ;  and  especially  in
Palestine,  even  W.  of  the  Ghor,  many  features  of
nomadic  life  appear  intrusively  in  the  settled  society.
The  history  of  the  Aramaean  Semites  has  never  been
wholly  distinct  from  that  of  the  Arabian.

NE.  and  NW.  are  easy  passes.  Euphrates,  fordable
in  an  ordinary  summer  at  various  points  below  the
Taurus  gorges,  has  not  served  strongly  to  differentiate
N.  Mesopotamia  from  N.  Syria.  These  regions  are  of
very  similar  character,  and  the  eastward  roads  pass
readily  from  one  to  the  other.  On  the  other  hand  the
Amanus  mountains,  though  rising  to  6000  ft. ,  have
many  low  and  not  difficult  passes,  notably  those
traversing  the  depression  which  divides  the  two  main
constituents  of  the  system,  the  Elma  and  the  Giaur
chains,  and  will  shortly  be  traversed  by  a  railway.
The  strong  boundary  lies  much  farther  W. ,  where  the
main  Taurus  runs  obliquely  down  to  the  sea  in  the
'  Rugged  '  Cilicia  ( Tracheia}.  Eastern  influence,  there
fore,  which  entered  Syria  from  NE.  passed  readily  out
of  it  to  NW.  and  caused  the  civilisation  of  Tarsus  to  be
more  Mesopotamian  than  that  of  Jerusalem.  '  Plain  '
Cilicia  may  more  fitly  be  reckoned  to  Syria  than  to  Asia
Minor,  as  indeed  was  apparently  the  view  of  Herodotus,
who  included  Commagene  in  Cilicia  (cp  CILICIA,  §  2).
The  influence  of  Mesopotamia  is,  therefore,  as  marked
in  N.  Syria  as  that  of  Arabia  in  S.  Syria.

The  area within  these  limits has  always  presented
a  certain  social  homogeneity ; but  its  great  excess  of
5 General lenSlh  over  breadth  has  militated  against
geography Political  unit-v'  and  Siven  to  its  internal
geographical  barriers  a  separative  power
which  their  own  character  would  hardly  confer. The
main  internal  barrier  is  a  mountainous  region  extending
to almost an equal distance N. and S. of  lat.  34°.
Here  the  land  slopes  up  from  N. and S.  to  a  sill  of
3000  ft.  elevation  (Ccclesyria}.  On  either  flank

E.  and  W.  of  the  plateau  so  formed  rise  longitudinal
calcareous  ranges.  That  on  the  E.  (Antilibanus —
].  esh-Sharki)  is  a  five-fold  system,  radiating  N.  from
a  lofty  nucleus  on  SE.  of  the  plateau  (].  esh-Sheikh,
Herman,  8600  ft. ).  The  average  elevation  of  the  other
principal  summits  is  about  8000  ft.  and  of  the  valleys
between  the  radii  5000  ft.  The  main  drainage  of  the
E.  slopes  flows  SE.  into  a  lacustrine  pan,  about  30  m.
in  diameter,  where  it  is  absorbed  by  irrigation,  or  goes
to  form  marshy  inundations,  united  or  divided  according
to  the  season.  Of  these  the  principal  are  Bahr  ei-
'Ateiba  N. ,  fed  by  the  Barada  (Abana)  and  'Bahr
Kibliyeh  S. ,  fed  by  the  A'waj  (Pharphar).  E.

of  this  oasis  stretches  a  very  barren  steppe  falling  away
to  Euphrates.  N.  of  it  the  swell  of  the  central  plateau
is  continued  NE.  from  the  spurs  of  Antilibanus  by  a
barren  ridge  which  runs  to  Euphrates  and  beyond.  W.
there  is  easy  approach  from  the  central  sill  of  the  plateau
by  a  pass  (4200  ft. )  which  leads  between  Hermon  and
the  spring  of  the  radii  of  the  Antilibanus  system  to  the
upper  valley  of  the  Barada.  SW.  there  is  also  an  easy,
though  at  first  barren  road  to  the  low  country  S.  of  the
central  plateau  (  =  Palestine).  This  oa sis  of  Da mascus,
therefore,  placed  almost  on  the  axis  of  partition

4846


SYRIA


SYRIA


between  N.  and  S.  Syria,  and  communicating  readily
with  both  these  regions  and  with  the  elevated  frontier
district,  is  marked  by  nature  for  the  locality  of  the
capital  city  of  an  independent  and  undivided  Syria.
Were  it  not  for  its  oasis  character,  Damascus  would
have  played  the  part  of  capital  more  often.  The

W.  range  of  the  central  plateau  (J.  el-Gharbi  or
Libnan  =  Lebanon]  is  a  single  chain  of  Jurassic  lime
stone  with  basaltic  intrusions,  very  steeply  inclined  and
without  passes  under  6000  ft.  The  highest  summit
reaches  10,200  ft.  (see  LEBANON,  §  6).  This  walls
off  from  the  rest  of  Syria  a  narrow  maritime  strip,
stretching  from  N.  el-Kebir  (Eleutheros)  on  the  N.  to
Carmel  on  the  S.  ,  much  interrupted  by  spurs  of  Lebanon,
very  fertile,  thanks  to  the  heavy  precipitation  on  the
western  slope,  and  supplied  with  many  harbours,
good  in  the  days  of  small  sailing  craft.  Communica
tion  being  difficult  both  with  the  interior  (except  by
artificial  ways  made  at  great  cost,  such  as  the  French
mountain  railway  opened  from  Beyrout  via  Zahleh  to
Damascus  in  1896),  and  within  the  littoral  strip  itself,
the  inhabitants  of  this  region  have  not  shared  in  the
main  currents  of  Syrian  life,  but  have  been  attracted
towards  navigation  (see  PHOENICIA,  §  9).  The  dis
tinctive  character  of  their  small  territory  was  recognised
by  its  constitution  under  Hadrian  as  a  separate  province
(Syria  Phuenice).  The  main  floor  of  the  central

Syrian  plateau  falls  gradually  N.  and  S.  from  a  scarcely
perceptible  sill  just  N.  of  Ba'albek,  which  is  the  main
water-parting  of  Syria.  It  is  an  ancient  lake-bed  and
the  most  important  part  of  the  mod.  '  Lebanon  '  district,
administered  since  1861  as  a  province  independent  of
the  vilayet  of  Syria.  Along  this  deep  and  easy  upland
valley  of  el-Buka  (anc.  Coelesyria),  and  between  the
flanking  ranges,  flow  to  N.  the  head-waters  of  the  'Asl
(Axios  or  Orontes)  :  to  S.  those  of  the  Litanl  (Leontes),
called  in  its  lower  course  el-Kasimlyeh,  which  force
their  way  W.  between  the  S.  butt  of  Lebanon
and  its  continuation,  the  massif  of  Galilee,  to  the
sea  ;  and  those  of  the  Wady  et-Teim,  which,  after
receiving  the  drainage  of  the  S.  butt  of  Hermon,  be
comes  Nahr  el-Kebir  (Jordan),  and  flows  down  into
the  rift  of  the  Gh5r  and  to  the  Dead  Sea  (see  JORDAN,
§  3lF-)>  where  it  is  dissipated  by  evaporation  at  1300  ft.
V  below  sea-level.  The  Beka'  and  the  central  plateau
in  general  terminate  S.  in  a  steep  and  rugged
hill-system,  rising  to  3860  ft.  in  J.  Jarmak.  This,
which  is  the  N.  beginning  of  Galilee,  renders  access
from  the  S.  difficult,  and  diverts  the  natural  trunk  road
eastward  of  the  E.  flanking  range  and  to  Damascus,
whence  it  either  gains  the  Buka  through  the  Baracla
pass  (see  above),  or  it  continues  N.  under  the  E.  flank
of  Antilibanus,  to  debouch  in  the  'Asl  valley  lower
down  (near  Hums),  or  it  crosses  the  steppe  N.  or
XE.  to  Euphrates.  S.  Syria  is  all  that  lies  S.

of  the  central  plateau  and  the  oasis  of  Damascus,  from
the  sea  to  the  Euphratean  watershed  and  the  edge  of
the  steppe-desert,  which  is  here  fringed  in  great  part  by
lava-fields.  All  this  district  formed  the  Syria  Palestina
of  Hadrian's  provincial  arrangement.  It  is  divided
longitudinally  by  the  deep  rift  in  which  Jordan  flows  ;
and  its  eastern  half,  being  thus  in  great  measure  detached
from  the  western,  and  from  all  maritime  influences,  is
especially  open  to  influences  of  Arabia.  W.  Palestine
merges  insensibly  in  the  desert  on  the  S.  For
farther  geographical  details  concerning  S.  Syria  see
PALESTINE,  §  ztf.  D.  G.  H.

It has been pointed out under PALESTINE (col.
3542/:)  that, owing  to  the geographical position of


5b Fauna


'anc^'  l^e  fauna>  though  in  the  main


Palcearctic  in  character,  was  modified  by
the  intrusion  of  certain  forms  from  the  Oriental  region
towards  the  E.  and  from  the  Ethiopian  region  towards
the  S.  Syria,  lying  to  the  N.  of  Palestine,  is  equally
with  it  subject  to  invasion  from  the  E.  ,  but  is  naturally
much  less  exposed  to  intruders  from  the  S.  ,  which,
4847


indeed,  in  Palestine,  chiefly  affect  the  hollow  cleft  which
contain  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.

The  fauna  of  Syria,  like  that  of  Palestine,  is  to  a
great  extent  a  steppe-,  desert-,  and  rock-fauna,  but  it
differs  considerably  from  that  of  southern  or  even  central
Palestine  in  the  character  of  its  mammals.  As  might
be  expected,  there  are  many  animals  with  a.  northern
provenance  found  in  Syria  which  do  not  penetrate  as  far
S.  as  southern  Palestine,  whilst  the  latter  area  harbours
many  forms  which  extend  into  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai,
Egypt,  and  Nubia,  but  which  do  not  reach  into  Syria.
Nehring1  has  recently  pointed  out  that  a  line  which
leaves  the  coast  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kartha,  skirts
the  southern  limits  of  the  Carmel  group  of  hills,  and
then  turns  NE.  to  strike  the  Sea  of  Galilee  a  little  W.
of  the  exit  of  the  Jordan,  corresponds  with  the  lower
limit  of  the  distribution  of  several  of  the  more  con
spicuous  Syrian  mammals.  Nehring's  line,  although
it  includes  a  considerable  portion  of  Galilee,  may  be
taken  as  the  boundary  of  Syria  considered  from  a  zoo
logical  standpoint.  It  does  not  of  course  correspond
with  any  historical  limit ;  but  animals  are  seldom  found
to  respect  political  deliminations.

N.  of  this  line  we  find  the  Syrian  variety  of  the  bear,  Ursus
isabellinus,  which  frequents  the  heights  of  Lebanon,  Hermon,
and  is  met  with  in  Bashan  and  Gilead.  The  badger,  Meles
taxus,  like  the  bear,  seems  to  reach  its  southernmost  limits  in
the  wooded  and  hilly  districts  just  mentioned.  The  pole-cat,
ATustela  piitorius,  and  the  ermine,  M.  erininea,  are  found  on
the  slopes  of  Hermon,  Lebanon,  and  Tabor,  but  do  not  pass
Nehring's  line.  Their  congener,  M.  foina,  the  beech-marten,
however,  spreads  through  Palestine.  The  otter,  Lutra  vulgaris,
is  also  not  uncommon  on  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  The
striped  hyaena,  llycena.  striata,  a  nocturnal  animal,  the  hunting-
leopard,  Cynuelurus  jubatus,  are  amongst  the  commoner  car-
nivora,  whilst  ]<~elis  chaus,  the  jungle-cat,  is  found  in  Syria  in
a  special  variety.  The  roe-deer,  Capreolus  cafirtfa,  reaches  its
southernmost  limit  on  the  slopes  of  Mt.  Carmel  ;  neither  it  nor
the  fallow-deer  passes  the  above-mentioned  line.  The  Syrian
wild-ass,  Equus  hetnippus,  is  another  conspicuous  form  which
very  rarely  enters  Palestine.  The  wild-boar,  Sus  scrq/ii,  is
more  widely  distributed.  It  frequents  not  only  wooded  and
marshy  localities,  but  even  the  desert,  where  it  lives  on  roots.
The  gazelle,  Gazella.  dorcas,  extends  southward  from  Lebanon,
as  does  the  Syrian  hare,  Lepus  syriacus.  Of  the  enormous
family  Rodentia,  which  supplies  so  large  a  proportion  of  the
mammals  in  this  part  of  the  world,  the  Alpine-vole,  .Vficrotus
nivalis,  and  the  water-vole,  M.  amphibius,  are  common  in
Syria  but  do  not  pass  Nehring's  line.  On  the  other  hand,
several  species  of  ground-vole  extend  far  beyond  it,  as  do  three
common  species  of  dormice,  Myoxus  glis,  the  squirrel-tailed
dormouse,  ill.  nitela,  the  garden  dormouse,  and  M.  dryas.  The
Syrian  squirrel,  Scittrus  syriacus,  is  peculiarly  Syrian,  and
the  pouched-marmoset  or  souslik,  Spennophilus  xanthopryin-
nus,  is  not  encountered  S.  of  Gilead.  The  gerbille,  Gerbillus
tteniurus,  is  also  peculiar  to  Syria.  According  to  Nehring,  the
Psammomys  myosurits  mentioned  under  PALESTINE  (§  14  if)  is
more  correctly  referred  to  the  genus  Nesokia,_  and  thus  repre
sents  one  of  the  intrusive  elements  from  the  Oriental  region.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  that  Syria  has  several
mammals  peculiar  to  itself,  and  a  number  which  reach
their  southernmost  point  in  or  about  Mt.  Carmel.  The
fauna  of  this  region  is  further  characterised  by  the
absence  of  many  creatures  we  are  accustomed  to
associate  with  the  Bible-lands.  Conspicuous  amongst
these  are  :  the  coney,  which  recent  research  seems  to
confine  to  southern  Palestine ;  the  genus  Acomys,  a.
hedgehog-like  mouse  with  spiny  fur  ;  the  fascinating
little  jerboas,  and  several  other  rodents  ;  and  the  Syrian
ibex  or  beden.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  the
mammalian  fauna  of  Syria  (including  a  large  part  of
Galilee)  differs  considerably  from  that  of  S.  Palestine,
and  that  probably  there  are  few  spots  on  the  world  of
so  restricted  an  area  in  which  the  mammals  at  one
extremity  differ  so  much  from  those  at  the  other  as  they
do  in  the  little  country  of  Palestine.  A.  E.  s.

N.  Syria  is  all  that  land  which  lies  N.  of  the  central

plateau, and E. of  Lebanon  ;  but politically it has

T  _ . .  always tended to  include  not  only

:  t>yna.  the  plateau  itseif  (there  being  no  such

barrier  to  the  N.  as  the  mountains  of  Galilee  form  to  the

1  Globus,  81,  1902,  p.  309.  See  also  WMM,  OLZ,  1902,
P-  394-

4848


SYRIA

S. ),  but  also  the  oasis  of  Damascus,  between  which  and
Palestine  intervenes  a  barren  tract.  It  comprises  the
NE.  steppe  as  far  as  Euphrates,  and  all  the  N.  land  up
to  Taurus.  Since  this  region  is  most  strictly  '  Syria '
and  is  not  treated  elsewhere,  a  more  particular  descrip
tion  is  subjoined.

(a)  The' 'A si1  basin. — The  Buka'  valley,  after  a  course
of  about  100  m. ,  opens  out  in  lat.  34°  40'.  The
mountains  on  either  hand  fall  to  grassy  downs,  and  the
river  'As!  leaves  the  rocky  gorge  in  which  it  has  fallen
over  2000  ft.  and  expands  at  a  level  of  about  1600  ft.
into  a  lake  of  30  m.  area,  formed  in  part  by  an  artificial
dam  of  ancient  construction.  At  the  head  of  this  stood
the  ancient  Kadesh  ;  at  the  foot  now  stands  Hums
(anc.  Rmesa) — to  hold  the  pass  between  the  plateau
valley  and  the  lower  Orontes  lands,  the  heart  of  Syria
proper  (Seleucis).  At  the  same  point  come  in  natural
roads  (i)  from  Tripoli  (Tarabulus)  on  the  W.  coast,
round  the  N.  butt  of  Lebanon  by  way  of  the  valley  of
the  N.  el-Kebir,  (2)  from  Tadrnor  and  Damascus  round
N.  of  Antilibanus.  Railways  will,  not  improbably,
be  laid  shortly  over  both  these  roads,  and  Hums  will
regain  its  old  importance.  The  'Asl  flows  on  through
a  widening  valley  for  about  25  m.  to  the  rich  marshy
district  of  Hamat  (  Hamath-Epiphaneia),  to  the  E.  of  which
point  the  steppe  grows  more  down-like  and  habitable  as
far  as  the  Euphrates,  while  to  the  W.  rises  a  broad,  low,
and  fertile  range  (J.  Nusgriyeh)  which  on  the  W.  leaves
considerable  littoral  strips  here  and  there  of  its  own  crea
tion  between  itself  and  the  sea.  The  most  important
of  these  contains  the  town  el-Ladakiyeb  (Laodicea).  The
range  ends  N.  in  the  abrupt  mass  of  J.  el-Akra'  (Casius),
5750  ft.,  which  falls  direct  to  the  sea  and  closes  the
littoral.  A  road  over  J.  Nuseriye  meets,  at  Hamat,  the
direct  Aleppo  road,  which  continues  the  easiest  route
from  Euphrates.

Leaving  Hamat,  the  'Asi  bends  somewhat  W.  of  N.
and  flows  through  rich  pastures  (el-Ghab)  bounded  on  the
E.  by  a  triple  system  of  basaltic  hills  (J.  el-A'la)  with  fertile
intervals,  which  contain  numerous  remains  of  ancient
inhabitation.  It  passes  successively  the  sites  of  Larissa
(Sejar)  and  Apamea  (Kal'at  el-Mudik),  and  after  a
course  of  50  m.  from  Hamat,  is  turned  sharply  W.  by
a  rocky  obstruction  (Jisr  el-Hadld)  and  hugs  the  N.
butt  of  J.  Nuseriye.  To  the  N.  in  the  line  of  its  former
course  now  opens  out  a  wide  plain  (el-'Amk),  partly  filled
by  a  marshy  lake  (Bahr-el-Abyad,  or  Ak-Deniz)  into
which  it  once  flowed,  and  where  it  once  met  important
tributaries,  the  Afrin  and  the  Kara  Su.  These  now-
feed  the  lake  which  discharges  into  the  'Asl  by  the
channel,  Xahr  el-Kowsit.  The  Afrin  flows  down  a
broad  valley  (anc.  Cyrrhestica)  from  the  NE. ,  which  pro
longs  the  plain  far  up  towards  Euphrates  and  carries
a  trunk  road  thitherward,  which  crosses  a  low  water-
parting  E.  of  'Ain  Tab  and  strikes  the  great  river  at
Eire  jik,  or  following  the  valley  of  the  Sajur  at  Carchemish
a  few  miles  S.  The  proposed  Baghdad  railway  will
ascend  the  Afrin  valley  after  descending  that  of  Kara  Su.
The  Kara  Su  conies  from  the  N.  bringing  the  eastward
drainage  of  S.  Amanus.  A  natural  road  leads  up  its
valley  to  its  source  on  the  marshy  sill  of  Zinjirli
(1650  ft.),  and  there  forks  (i)  W.  through  the  lowest
Amanus  passes  to  Cilicia  and  Asia  Minor,  and  (2)  NE.
into  the  valley  of  Mar'ash  and  ancient  Commagene.
Ancient  remains  of  a  palatial  Assyrian  fortress  of  an
importance  suitable  to  its  strategic  position  have  been
explored  at  Zinjirli  by  Dr.  Von  Luschan  (FORTRESS,  §  5).
From  the  'Amk  plain  a  direct  road  also  leads  due  E.  to
Aleppo  and  the  Euphrates  near  Rakka  (Thapsacus).  The
deep  and  fertile  region  in  which  all  these  waters  and  roads
meet  is  the  natural  centre  of  N.  Syria,  and  accordingly  the
locality  in  which  its  greatest  r:ty  of  antiquity,  Antioch,

1  'Asi  in  Arab.  =  ' rebel,'  and  the  title  is  variously  explained
by  the  turbulence,  the  inaccessibility,  or  the  anti-Meccan  direc
tion  of  this  stream.  But  it  is  undoubtedly  derived  originally
from  the  same  ancient  native  name  which  the  Greeks  wrote
Ajcios.

4849


SYRIA

was  situated  (see  ANTIOCH,  §  i ).  The  modern  Antakieh
lies  near  the  point  at  which  the  'Asi,  having  at  last
rounded  the  butt  of  J.  Nuseriye,  is  about  to  plunge
SW.  into  a  gorge  worn  down  between  that  range  and
the  S.  masses  of  Amanus.  Through  this  it  falls  about
150  ft.  in  10  m.  to  the  sea  in  a  series  of  unnavigable
rapids.  On  the  small  deltaic  fan  N.  of  its  mouth  stands
Suediah  (anc.  Seleucia  of  Pieria)  which  was  the  port  of
Antioch.  But  the  unsheltered  character  of  the  port  and
the  difficulties  of  the  road  in  this  gorge  have  caused  N.
Syrian  trade  to  seek  the  more  distant  Alexandretta
(Iskanderun),  which  lies  NE.  of  the  plain  of  Antioch  and
behind  the  S.  extension  of  Amanus,  here  crossed  by  the
low  col  of  Beilan  (2230  ft. ),  about  to  be  pierced  by  the
Aleppo  railway.  The  whole  course  of  the  'Asi  is  about
170  m.

(f>)  Commagene. —To  the  N.  of  the  'Asi  basin  a  small
district  intervenes  before  Taurus  closes  Syria.  It  is
bounded  S.  by  the  heights  in  which  the  Afrin  and  Kara
Su  rise.  These  heights  start  from  Euphrates  near  the
mouth  of  the  Sajur,  and  run  NW.  to  'Ain  Tab  ;  thence
they  bend  sharply  to  the  SW. ,  rise  in  Kurd  Dagh  to  4500
ft. ,  and  are  linked  to  Amanus  by  the  Zinjirli  sill.  The
hollow  N.  of  them  is  divided  into  two  basins  by  a  low
swell  running  N.  from  Kurd  Dagh  to  Taurus.  The  \Y.
basin  drains  W.  by  the  Ak  Su  through  a  rift  in  Amanus
to  the  Cilician  Jihun  (Pyramus),  and  is  the  territory  of
Mar'ash  (Germaniceia) :  it  communicates,  as  we  have
seen,  with  the  rest  of  Syria  readily  by  way  of  Zinjirli.
The  E.  basin  drains  to  the  Euphrates,  looks  eastward,  and
communicates  less  readily  with  the  lands  to  the  S.  This
is  the  ancient  Commagene  proper  (Assyr.  Kummuh},  of
which  Samosata  (Sumeisat)  was  capital.  Two  important
crossings  of  Euphrates,  at  Samosata  and  Zeugma
(Eire  jik),  placed  it  in  communication  with  N.  Meso
potamia  and  especially  Edessa  (Urfa).

(c]  The  Euphratean  plains. — To  E.  of  the 'Asl  basin
lies  the  lean  steppe -like  plateau  described  above  as
sloping  E.  to  Euphrates.  It  is  one  in  formation  with
the  Arabian  desert  which  limits  Palestine  on  the  E. ,  but
more  fertile  by  reason  of  higher  latitude  and  greater
precipitation.  It  must  be  reckoned  therefore  to  habit
able  Syria.  It  is  limited  on  the  S.  by  the  ridge  already
mentioned,  which  runs  NE.  to  Euphrates  from  Anti
libanus,  and  along  whose  S.  foot  lies  a  chain  of  oases,
marking  a  natural  route  from  Damascus  to  the  E.  Of
these  the  chief  are  Karietcin  (Xesala)  and  Tadmor
(Palmvra},  both  just  on  the  verge  of  Arabia.  The
rolling  downs  to  the  N.  of  this  chain  once  contained  a
large  number  of  villages,  dependent  on  wells,  whose
ruins  have  been  explored  by  De  Vogue1,  Burton,  Drake,
Ostrup  and  others.  This  region  is  now  deserted
owing  to  its  '  nomadisation '  by  the  migrant  Anazeh
Bedouins,  who  have  been  pressing  N.  from  central
Arabia  since  the  thirteenth  century.  In  the  latitude  of
J.  A' la,  whose  E.  slopes  fall  insensibly  into  it,  the
plateau  is  still  steppe-like  ;  but  immediately  N.  of  this
point  occur  a  series  of  pans,  whose  northern  limit  is  the
ridge  which  bounds  Commagene  on  the  S.  These  pans
receive  water  draining  S.  from  that  ridge,  and  are  all
of  more  or  less  saline  character.  Of  the  two  principal
basins,  that  on  the  E.  receives  a  watercourse  (N.  el-
Dahab),  which  rises  just  S.  of  Membij  (Hierapolis]  and
ends  in  the  great  sebakha  (salt-pan)  of  jabul.  That  on
the  W.  is  more  fertile  and  better  supplied  with  fresh
springs.  It  receives  the  Kovvaik,  which  rises  near
'Ain  Tab,  and  ends  in  a  tract  of  permanent  saline  inunda
tion  (Mat)  near  Kennisrin.  Fine  pasturage  surrounds  it,
and  its  lower  lands  are  arable.  This  is  the  ancient  dis
trict  Chalybonitis,  which  now  supports  Aleppo  (Haleb  ;
anc.  Chalybon-Bcrcea},  a  town  of  65,000  inhabitants  and
the  successor  of  Antioch.  Through  it  lie  the  directest
route  from  Asia  Minor  to  Baghdad,  or  Babylonia,  which
crosses  the  Euphrates  at  Rakka  ( Tkapsacus),  and  the
easiest  road  from  S.  Syria  to  the  same  point  or  to  the
more  northern  crossing  at  Eire  jik  (Zeugma],

4850


SYRIA


SYRIA


For  S.  Syria  see  under  PALESTINE  and  PHOENICIA. For  N.

Syria  see  1'urckhardt, Travels  in  Syria  (1822);  Porter,  Five

Years  in  Damascus  (1855)  ; Burton  and

7.  Bibliography.  Drake,  Unexplored  Syria  (1872);  Ains-
worth,  Narrative  of  the  Euphrates  Ex
pedition  (1888)  ;  Humann  and  Puchstein,  Reisen  in  Nordsyrien,
etc.  (1890);  and  a  recent  account  of  part  of  the  E.  steppe  by  H.  C.
Butler,  in  the  American  Journal  of  Archtrology,  series  2,  4
(1900);  cp  also  Oppenheim,  I'otn  A/ittelmeer  zum  Persischen
G0(f(iyx),  and  Blunt,  ttedouins  of  the  Euphrates  (1879).  The
summary  by  Reclus,  Geogr.  Univ.  (Asie  Anterieure)  is  very
good  (1884);  and  for  more  recent  statistics,  as  well  as  local
detail,  see  Cuinet,  Syrie,  Liban  et  Palestine  (1896).

D.  G.  H.


II.  HISTORY

The  region  which  we  designate  as  Syria  has  never
constituted  a  political  unity  ;  of  itself  a  proof  that  it  is
not, like  Egypt  or  the  Euphrates-country,


followed, at least down to  that of  the  first dynasty
_ , of Babylon, the ascendancy in Syria is


periods.


already  held  by  that  Semitic  wave  of  immi-


8.  Idea  of


a single land held together by  common


9.  Relations.


byria.  COIKiitjons  of  living.  There  is  no  river  to
furnish  a  natural  channel  of  inter-communication  and
bond  of  union.  For  the  same  reason,  there  has  never
been  any  such  separate  entity  as  a  Syrian  civilisation  ;
in  this  respect  also,  precisely  as  in  things  political,  the
various  districts  gravitated  towards  the  countries  of  the
neighbouring  great  civilisations.  If  Syria  as  an  idea
has  maintained  its  existence  for  millennia,  it  is  possible
to  see  in  this  also  a  proof  of  the  tenacity  of  the  ancient
Babylonian  conception  of  the  world.  For  it  is  to  the
ancient  geographical  division  associated  with  that  con
ception  that  the  idea  of  Syria  owed  its  origin,  and  its
revival  upon  the  fall  of  Assyria,  after  the  Assyrian
ascendancy  had  well-nigh  sent  it  to  oblivion.

Suri-Syria  is  closed  in  by  the  two  civilisation-areas  of
Babylonia  and  Asia  Minor,  and  thus  its  development
was  determined  by  them.  Being  separ
ated  from  the  Egyptian  area  by  Pales
tine,  it  was  not  so  directly  influenced  from  that  side.

The  movements  of  nations,  the  immigrations,  to
which  it  is  exposed  are,  mainly,  those  from  the  S.
(Arabia)  and  those  from  the  N. ,  by  way  of  Armenia
and  Asia  Minor.  The  first  are  those  of  the  Semites  ;
the  second,  those  of  the  peoples  whom  we  are  accus
tomed  to  call  Hittite  because  they  stand  to  Asia  Minor,
the  seat  of  the  Haiti  or  Heta,  in  a  relation  analogous  to
that  of  the  Semitic  immigrants  to  Babylonia.  The
natural  consequence  is  that  the  population  of  Syria  is  in
the  main  a  mixture  of  both  racial  elements,  and  that  in
the  course  of  the  millennia  and  centuries  representatives
now  of  the  one,  now  of  the  other,  give  the  prevailing
character  to  the  whole.

For  any  knowledge  of  the  conditions  in detail we

must turn, for  the  remoter antiquity  exclusively, for

„  .  later  times  chiefly,  to  the  accounts  we

10.  HO  3 possess  of  the  neighbouring  peoples —

mtormation.  primarily  of  the  Assyrian- Babylonian,
and  then  also  of  the  Egyptian  conquerors.  The  soil  of
the  country  itself  has  as  yet  yielded  but  few  documents.
Of  these,  for  the  older  time,  the  monuments  excavated
at  Zenjirli-Sam'al  are  of  primary  importance.  The
many  monuments  bearing  Hittite  inscriptions,  which
the  soil  of  Syria,  both  in  the  narrower  sense  of  that
geographical  expression  (Hamath,  Aleppo,  Mar'as,  Car-
chemish)  and  in  the  wider  (the  eastern  borderlands  of
Asia  Minor),  has  yielded,  still  remain  undeciphered.

The  oldest  Babylonian  period  shows  Syria  standing

in the same  relation to Babylonia  as afterwards to

-, . Assyria. Sargon  of  Agade  and  Naram-

T>  u  i  7  Sin  must  have  directed  their  armies
a  y  1  '  thither  precisely  as  was  afterwards  done
by  Tiglath-pileser  I.,  Shalmaneser  II.,  and  the  later
Assyrian  kings.  That  Sargon  went  forth  to  Amurru
( Palestine)  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Omina,  and
'  Sargon  subjugated  and  settled  all  Syria '  is  said  of
that  monarch  exactly  as  Shalmaneser  II.  and  others
might  have  had  it  said  of  them.

In the time of Naram-Sin and the period that

4851


gration  which  we  regard  as  the  second  and
call  the  Canaanite.  At  that  time,  accordingly,  Syria
must,  like  Babylonia  itself,  have  received  a  considerable
influx  of  population  of  this  race  and  language.  The
next  Semitic  wave  consists  of  the  Aramreans,  whose
lordship  in  Syria  does  not  emerge  until  comparatively
late.  Until  that  event,  accordingly,  that  is  to  say,
during  the  second  millennium  B.C.,  and  even  later,
'Canaanite'  dialects — i.e. ,  languages  like  Hebrew  and
Phoenician — must  have  been  spoken  in  Syria.  Even  as
late  as  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  we  can  learn  from  the
inscriptions  of  Zenjirli-Sam'al  that  the  influence  of  the
Aramaic  had  still  to  struggle  with  the  older  Canaanite
dialects.  A  fragment  of  an  inscription  of  Hasan  Bcyli,
not  far  from  Zenjirli,  and  inscriptions  of  Zenjirli  dating
from  the  ninth  century  (of  Kalammu  bar  [!]  Haja)
show,  indeed,  that  by  that  time  the  Semitic  language
of  ordinary  intercourse  must  already  have  become
Aramaic,  but  at  the  same  time  exhibit  purely  Canaan
ite  forms  of  speech,  closely  corresponding  to  Phoenician.

In  the  middle  of  the  second  millennium  we  find  a
Hittite  people,  the  Mitani,  masters  of  Mesopotamia
_„  „....,  and  N.  Syria  (Hanigalbat  =  Melitene).
'  Though  they  are  "the  first  people  of  this
_  , .  race  which  we  have  as  yet  been  able  to
^P  '  discover  on  Syrian  soil,  we  must  not
therefore  conclude  that  they  were  the  first  to  force  their
way  thither.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems  as  if  we  were
able  to  trace,  in  the  Amarna  despatches,  the  existence
of  an  older  Hittite  layer  of  population  even  in  Palestine
(such  names  as  Sura-sar  are  unquestionably  '  Hittite').
Both  phenomena  alike  are  to  be  interpreted  as  conse
quences  of  a  larger  Hittite  migration  into  or  conquest
of  Syria,  advancing  from  N.  to  S. ,  in  other  words,  in
the  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  Semitic  immigration.

To  the  same  period  belong  also  the  Egyptian  con
quests  of  the  eighteenth  and  the  nineteenth  dynasty.
How  far  the  Egyptian  lordship  over  Syria  was  in  point  of
fact  extended  by  these,  hardly  admits  of  ascertainment  ;
but  the  princes  to  the  X.  of  Aleppo,  we  may  be  sure,
will  hardly  have  accepted  the  Egyptian  suzerainty  for
any  longer  period  than  that  during  which  the  Pharaoh
was  in  a  position  at  any  time  to  despatch  an  army
against  them.  Thus  in  N.  Syria  relations  will  have
prevailed  towards  Egypt,  similar  to  those  which  under
Sargon  and  Sennacherib  prevailed  towards  the  adjacent
border  countries  of  Asia  Minor  (Tabal,  Hilak).

In  the  Amarna  letters  in  the  fourteenth  century,  we
find  three  powers  keeping  an  eye  upon  Syria  and
Palestine  :  Babylonia  (under  the  lordship  of  the  Kass-
ites),  the  Mitani,  and  the  state  of  the  Haiti  or  Heta  in
Asia  Minor.  Of  these  the  Haiti  would  seem  to  have
been  at  that  time  the  most  dangerous  to  the  influence
of  Egypt.  Again  and  again  mention  is  made  of  the
advance  of  princes  of  Heta  inlo  ihe  Beka'.

In  Ihe  ihirleenlh-lwelflh  cenlury  Egypt  is  powerless,
until  under  Ramses  II.  it  again  takes  up  a  somewhat
more  vigorous  foreign  policy.  During  this  interval
Syria  was  naturally  at  the  mercy  of  the  olher  great
powers,  and  il  is  in  agreemenl  with  the  piclure  pre
sented  in  the  Amarna  letters  that  Ramses  in  the
twelfth  century  comes  into  conflict  with  the  Heta  in
northern  Palestine  and  Ccelesyria.  In  the  interval  the
movement  which  we  find  already  in  existence  in  the
fourteenth  century  must  have  been  completed,  and
Syria  have  fallen  in  the  main  under  the  power  of  the
Hittite  state.  The  fourteenth-thirteenth  century  would
thus  be  the  time  which  witnessed  a  Hittite  predominance
in  Syria  and  saw  Syria  drawn  politically  into  closer
connection  with  the  Hittite  empire.  All  the  great
Syrian  cities  from  the  N.  to  the  S.  were  at  this  period
governed  by  viceroys  or  vassal  princes  of  the  Hittite
sovereign  ;  from  Commagene  to  the  valley  of  the

4852


I. EGYPTIAN MONUMENTS.


II. AMARNA LETTERS.


>f Khete


f  *  •

™ ^V"— c  j^jTi.tf.iu«n.\i

Sakema g ^


/^

"51 ^T
ASHKELOf**'?^- i»-

Gasat  *


Map  of

SYRIA

after  the

EGYPTIAN  MONUMENTS

of  the
i5th.-i3th.  century  B.C.

Scale  of  Miles

O 10 20 30 do JO


Long-.  E.  36 of  Greenwich


Walker  &Cockerell;


Col.  A.  Billcrbeck  del.


Walker  &  Cockerell  sc.


ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BIBLICA  1903.


ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BIBLICA  1903.


MAPS  OF  SYRIA


INDEX  TO  NAMES


I. EGYPTIAN

MONUMENTS

II. AMARNA LETTERS continued

Accho,  B6

Marnus,  82

Armada,  84

Jotapata,  B6

Adum(a),  Ay,  8

Mediterranean,  A4,  5

Arwad, 84 (PHOENICIA,

'Aka,  B6  (PTOLEMAIS,  §  i)

§  4  12)

Kara  Su,  Cz  (SYRIA,  §  6)

Ama(u)r(a),  L~4

Naharin,  Cz,  3

N. el-'Asi, Ba, €3

J.  Karmel,  B6  (CARMEL)

Arad,  67

Nazana  ?  85

(LEBANON,  §  6)

Katna?  C'4

Aranti,  Cz,  3,  4

'Askalan,  A7  (ASHKELON)

Nahr el-Kebir, 64

Arasa,  A3

Ono,  A6

Alkaluna,  A7

(LEBANON,  §  6)

A(ra)siy,  A  3

Orontes, Cz, 3, 4

Aniki,  85

N.  el-Kebir,  83,  C3

Aratat,  64

(LEBANON,  §  6)

Amma?  64,  C4

Kedesh,  04

'Arka, 84 (PHIENICIA,

Otara'a,  C6

Amurru,  65,  Cz,  3,  4

Nahr el  -  Kelb, 65

§4.o)

Ayaluna?  67

(PHCENICIA,  §  5)

Arvad, 64 (PHCENICIA,

Purasati, etc., A6, B6

Azzati,  A7

el-Khalil,  87

§  4  12)

(PHILISTINK)

Kid-si,  L'4

Ashkelon.  Ay

Ba'albek, €5 (LEBANON,

Kinahhi,  A6,  7

Askaruni,  Ay
As(s)er(u),  85,  6
Astirat(u),  C6

Raman(a)n,  84,  5
Rameses II., Egyptian
frontier  of,  85,  (.'5

§6)
Batrfm,  84  (GEBAL)
Beirut, 85 (PHOENICIA,

§| Q \

Kinsi  ?  C4
Kubli,  84  (GEBAL  i.)
el-Kuds,  67

Kapeh,  Ay

48)

Bvblos, 84 (PHOENICIA,
§4  9)

Raphia, Ay (EC;VTT,
J5  66  ii)

Biruna, 85 (PHCENICIA,
§  48)

Lachish,  A7
el-Ladikij-ye,  63

D(o)ra,  A6

Relnu  (Upper),  85,  6,  7,

c$

BimtU, 85 (PHtKNICIA,

§48)

Lakis,  A7'
Lakisi,  Ay

Edrei,  C6

Reznu? (Upper), 65, 6,

7 C<;

Bvblos, 64 (PHCENICIA,
'§4  9)

Laodicnea,  83,  €4
Lapana?  €4

Egyptian frontier of

/  »  ^  o

Lebanon,  64,  5,  €4

Rameses  II.,  65,  05

Sa'ar(a),  B8

Cilician  Taurus,  Ai
Cyprus, A3 (TRADE AND

Lebneh,  C4
Lejjun,  B6

Gasar(a),  Ay

Sakema,  B6

COMMERCE,  §  18)

Bahr  Lut,  67

Gasat -\"7

Samar(a),  84

Gaza,  Ay
Gezer,  Ay

Sardun(a).  B6
Sar(u),  85

Damascus,  C-5
Dead  Sea,  By

Magidda,  B6
Makida,  B6

Hamat(u),  B6
Hamat(u),  C4  (HAMATH)
Hermon,  Mt.  ,  85
Huditi,  By

Sauko,  Ay
Sety  I.,  Monument  of,  C6
Shurahan,  Ay
Sharuhen,  Ay
Shaua?  Mt.  ,  85

Dimask,  C5
Dimaska,  C5
Dunip?  €5

tell  Erfad,  Cz  (ARPAD)

Mar'ash,  Ci  (SYRIA,  §  23)
Martu,  85,  Cz,  3,  4
Megiddo,  B6
tell  Nebi  Mindu,  €4
Misri,  A  8

esh-Sheikh  Sad,  C6

Gari,  B8

Kal'at  el-Mudik,  €3

Joppa,  A6
Jordan,  B6,  7

Siilon,  85
Sidun(a),  85
Sinsara,  C3

Gath,  Ay
Gaza,  A  7

Nuhassi,  Cz

Gazara,  A7

Kades,  C$

Gazri,  Ay

Orontes,  62,  €3  (LEBANON,

Kadm(a),  B6,  y

Timask,  €5  (DAMASCUS)

Gennesaret,  B6

§6)

Kana'an(a), the, AS, 6,

Tyre,  85

Gezer,  Ay

B3.  4-  5

Ghazza,  Ay

Raphia,  A7  (EGYPT,  §66  a)

Kharu,  Ay,  B6

Ung,  Cz

Gidsi,  C~4

tell  Refah,  A7

Khete,  Land  of,  Ai,  Bi

Gimti,  Ay

Khor,  Ay,  B6

W'n-tree  ?,  banks  of  the,

Ginti,  Ay

tell  es-Safieh,  A7

Khor,'  '  Great  Sea  of,  A3,

Ca

Gok-su,  Bi

Saida,  85

4.  5

Gubli,  64  (GEBAL  i.  )

Samaria,  86

Kode  (?),  B3,  4,  5

Y(a)pu,  A6

Sebastiye,  B6

Kupni,  84  (PHOENICIA,  §  3

Yar(a)dun(a),  B6,  y

Harabu,  Cz

Seihun,  Bi

note,  §  4  9)

Y(a)srael,  B6  (ISRAEL,  §  7  ;

fell  el-Hasi,  Ay

Sidon,  85

col.  1242,  n.  3  ;  4692,  n.  i)

Haiti,  Ci,  2,  3,  4  (SYRIA,

Sidunu,  85

Lebanon,  84,  5

§§  13  and  15)

Sumur,  64

Leontes,  85  (ACHSHAPH)

Zahi,  83,  4,  5

jebel Hauran, C6

Sur,  85

Zakkari,  A6  (PHILISTINES,

(BASH  AN,  §  3)

Surru,  85

Mannus,  62

§3)

Hebron,  By

Hermon,  85

Bahr  Tabariye,  B6

Hinatuni, 86 (HAN-

Tabor,  B6

NATHON)

Tarsus,  Az

Hinianabi  ?  Ay  (ANAB)

Taurus,  Ci

Horns,  €4  (HETHLON)

Timasgi,  C$

II. AMARNA  LETTERS

Bahret el  -  Huleh, 85

j.  et-Tor,  B6

(JORDAN, §  4)

Tyre,'BS

Accho,  B6

Amurru, 85, Cz, 3, 4

Adana,  62

(AMORITES,  SYRIA,  §  21)

Irkata, BC-4 (PHCENICIA,

Ubi,  C5

Adumu,  B8

'Anab,  Ay  (ATHACH)

§4io)

Urusalim,  67

N.  'Afrin,  Cz  (SYRIA,  §  6)

Jebel el-Ansariye, €3, 4

Usu,  65

'Akka,  B6  (PTOLEMAIS)

(PHCEMCIA,  §  4  12)

Jebeil,  84  (GEBAL  i.  )

Aku,  B6

Antioch,  Cz

Jefat,  B6

Yafa,  A6  (PALESTINE,  §  8)

Alasia, A3 (TRADE AND

Apamea,  €3

Jerusalem,  By

Yapu,  A6  (JOPPA,  §  i)

COMMERCE,  §  26)

'Ar'ara,  ABy  (AROER  3)

Jezer,  A  7

Yarpuz,  Ci

Aleppo,  C.2

Araru,  ABy

Jihan,  Bi,  2

Alexandretta, Cz (SYRIA,

'Arka, BC4 (PHCENICIA,

jiphtah-el?  B6

Zenjirli,  Ci  (ARAMAIC,  §  2)

§6)

§  4  10) Jordan,  86,  7

Zituna,  65

SYRIA

Orontes,  in  Malatia,  Mar  'as,  Aleppo,  Hamath,  and
Kadesh  on  the  Orontes  the  sovereignty  of  the  Hittites
was  established.  From  this  period,  we  may  be  sure,
CAKCHKMISH  on  the  Euphrates  also  was  reckoned  a
Hittite  city.  It  must  have  been  the  principal  seat  of
the  Hittite  rule  in  central  Syria,  for  with  the  Assyrians
later  it  passed  as  the  capital  of  Syria,  in  so  far  as  it
was  Hittite,  and  they  called  its  king  also,  without
qualifying  phrase,  the  Hittite  (Haiti)  king.

The  advance  of  the  Halli  southwards  over  Cilicia
must  have  occurred  in  connection  with  these  move
ments.  For  if  their  power  had  its  seat  in  Asia  Minor
and  on  the  Halys,  they  would  have  needed  first  to
overthrow  the  Mitani  power  in  Hanigalbal,  if  they  had
wished  to  force  their  way  through  Melitene  and  Com-
magene.  Struggles  with  this  power  were  not  wanting  ;
the  Amarna  letters  tell  of  a  victory  of  Dusratta  of
Mitani  over  the  Hittite  king,  but  the  overthrow  of  the
Mitani  was  accomplished  by  Assyria.

The  Mitani  and  their  successors,  accordingly,  held
northern  Syria,  whilst  the  advance  proper  of  the  Hittites
upon  Cilicia  (the  Kue  of  the  Assyrian  inscriptions)
appears  to  have  been  made  through  the  'Cilician  Gates'
and  through  Cilicia  and  over  Amanus.

At  the  same  time  we  can  learn  also  from  the  Amarna
letters  that  Assyria  under  Asur-uballil  is  beginning  to
anS™>  to  iis  °^lord,  the


14.  Appearance
*r


ing  of  Babylon,  and  to  arouse  his


-  .  ,

oi  Assyria.  jeaiOUSy  as  wen  as  that  of  the  king
of  the  Mitani.  Soon  afterwards,  under  Ramman
(Adad)-nirari  I.  and  Shalmaneser  I.,  Assyria  broke  the
power  of  the  Mitani,  and  thus  subdued  Mesopotamia,
settling  it  in  part  with  Assyrian  colonists,  as  well  as  ex
tending  also  westwards  of  the  Euphrates.  Shalmaneser
I.  took  possession  of  the  lands  to  the  N.  of  the  Taurus
and  subjugated  Kumani  as  well  as  Musri  —  i.e.,  Cappa-
docia,  at  least  between  Taurus  and  Anti-taurus.  In
other  words,  he  took  possession  of  the  whole  area  of
the  Mitani  empire  and  brought  that  power  to  an  end.

In  doing  so,  Assyria  at  the  same  time  stepped  into
the  place  that  the  Mitani  had  occupied  over  against  the
Hatti,  and  this  new  acquaintance  thrust  itself  in  almost
like  a  wedge  between  the  original  land  of  the  Hatti  and
their  new  acquisitions.  The  territory  of  the  Hatti
would  in  the  event  of  any  fresh  advances  of  Assyria
through  Cilicia  down  to  the  sea  be  torn  in  two.  The
necessary  consequence  would  then  have  been  that  the
Assyrians  would  be  compelled,  as  were  the  Mitani  kings
in  the  Amarna  period,  to  go  to  war  with  the  kings  of
the  Hatti,  in  which  all  Syria  from  Commagene  south
ward  would  have  been  involved.

The  Hatti,  however,  were  apparently  spared  this
struggle  by  the  sudden  collapse  of  the  Assyrian  power

_.,,., at  the  death  of  Tukulti-Xinib  I.,  and  by
, his  efforts  to  secure  his  position  in  Baby
lonia before pressing westward. This


Egyptian.


happened  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and


in  this  way  the  Hatti  were  enabled  to  develop  and
establish  themselves  in  Syria  undisturbed  by  the  new
and  dangerous  enemy.

The  advance  of  Egypt  under  Rameses  did  not
curtail  this  Hittite  territory,  for  in  spite  of  all  alleged
triumphs  over  the  '  miserable  Hela '  Rameses  acknow
ledged  their  lordship  over  Syria,  the  mutually-recog
nised  frontier  having  been  possibly  the  Nahr  el-Kelb
near  Beirut,  if  not  some  river  still  more  to  the  S.

By  the  peace  concluded  between  the  two  powers,
expressed  in  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  between
Ramses  and  Hetasar — an  alliance  rendered  famous  by
the  preservation  of  the  terms  of  the  treaty1 — was  effected
a  definition  of  political  rights  in  Syria  of  great  import
ance  ;  the  Pharaoh  renounced  his  rights  in  Syria  in
favour  of  the  Hittite  king,  and  thus  the  country  which
hitherto  had  been  in  theory  Egyptian  now  became
Hittite.

1  See  WMM  MV1 1902,  no.  5  (H(_e)-ta-si-ra\
155  4853


SYRIA

This  Iheory  was  taken  advantage  of  and  zealously
pressed  by  Assyria.  If  in  the  sequel  Syria  figures  with
the  Assyrians  as  '  Hatli  land,'  ihey  employ  this  designa
tion  because  they  come  forward  as  lawful  heirs  to  the
Hittile  claims.

The  same  period  which  witnessed  the  subjugation  of
the  Haiti  saw  also  the  gradual  pressing  forward  of  the

16  Aramaeans Aramasans  into  syria- Already  in  the

'  Amarna  letters  we  find  mention  of  the
ahlamu,  by  which  expression  we  are  to  understand  Ihe
Aramaic  bedouins.  Ramman  (Adad)- nirari  I.  and
Shalmaneser  I.  foughl  wilh  Aramaeans  mainly  on
Mesopolamian  territory,  and  similarly  also,  about  uoo,
Tiglath-pileser  I.  speaks  of  struggles  with  Aramaean
ahlamti  who  had  forced  their  way  across  the  Euphrates
into  Mesopotamia.

The  reign  of  Tiglath-pileser  I.  brought  with  it  a
renewed  advance  on  the  part  of  Assyria  along  the  paths

17  T" 1  th vvmch had already been trodden by
'.. ° - Shalmaneser I. Pressing across the

Euphrates  through  Melitene  to  Kumani
and  Musri,  Tiglath-pileser  became  master  in  the  first
instance  of  the  former  territory  of  the  Mitani  which
belonged  lo  him  as  lord  of  Mesopolamia.  This  was
nol  possible  wilhout  a  previous  clearing  out  of  other
invaders.  For  now  also  the  '  Hittile '  Iribes  of  Ihe  N.
were  seeking  lo  make  Iheir  way  inlo  Mesopolamia  and
Syria,  a  counter-current  to  ihe  Aramaean  immigration.
Tiglath-pileser  names  the  peoples  of  the  Kunimuh —
who  thus,  perhaps,  at  thai  time,  gave  their  name  to  the
country — of  the  Muski,  and  Kaska,  as  having  been
repelled  by  him  from  Mesopotamia.  The  people  in
queslion  are  racially  of  ihe  same  kindred  as  Ihe  ihen
maslers  of  Asia  Minor  and  ihe  Hillite  empire.  This
empire  was,  of  course,  slill  more  profoundly  affecled  by
ihis  same  movemenl  of  populalion,  and  in  ihe  reign  of
Sargon  II.  in  the  eighth  century,  it  reappears  still
under  the  name  of  Muski.

These  peoples  thus,  from  the  presenl  period  onward,
constituted  the  population  of  ihe  borderlands  of  Asia
Minor  and  of  Asia  Minor  ilself.  The  Halli  empire
also,  accordingly,  was  Ihe  scene  of  new  displacements
of  populalion.  From  a  slatement  of  Tiglath-pileser  we
learn,  loo,  lhal  ihe  collision  with  the  Haiti  empire
which  had  not  yet  occurred  under  Shalmaneser  I.,  was
no  longer  delayed.  The  Hittite  king — this  is  our  only
reminder  of  the  existence  of  a  Hillile  power  al  all  at
this  period — was  defeated  by  Tiglath-pileser,  and  the
way  to  N.  Phoenicia  was  once  more  open,  and  with  it
access  to  a  port  on  the  Mediterranean.

Tiglalh-pileser  I.  pressed  on  as  far  as  to  Arvad,  the
most  northern  city  of  Phoenicia,  and  so  found  himself
on  territory  which  had  formerly  been  recognised  by
Rameses  as  Hitlile,  and  al  ihe  same  lime  he  had  cut
off  ihe  Hiltile  possessions  in  Syria  from  ihe  mother
country  farther  N.  He  tells  us  how  (in  Arvad)  he
received  gifts  from  Ihe  '  king  of  Egypt ' — amongst  them
a  crocodile,  apes,  and  the  like.  This  means  nolhing
eilher  more  or  less  lhan  lhal  the  then  Pharaoh — his
name  is  not  recorded — recognised  him  as  conqueror  of
the  Hatti  and  as  heir  of  the  rights  which  had  been
ceded  to  these  by  Rameses  II.  Assyria  thus  had
become  the  rightful  successor  of  Egypt  in  Syria.

Even  Tiglath-pileser  I.  advanced  by  the  most
northerly  roule  to  N.  Phoenicia.  Though  recognised
by  Egypt  he  had  nol  yel  gained  ihe  recognilion  of  Ihe
Halli  nor,  above  all,  lhal  of  ihe  broken -up  Syrian
vassal  -  states  or  provinces  themselves.  We  do  not
yet  know  whal  was  ihe  altitude  of  these  stales  —
Carchemish,  Aleppo,  and  ihose  further  to  the  S.  That
mailers  would  nol  have  been  sellled  wilhoul  an  appeal
to  arms  may  be  taken  for  granted  ;  but  they  do  not
seem  to  have  come  as  far  as  thai,  for  once  more,  as  pre
viously  at  the  death  of  Tukulti-Ninib  I.,  the  Assyrian
power  speedily  collapsed.

In  this  way  Syria  was  rid  at  one  and  the  same  time

4854


SYRIA


SYRIA


of  both  its  lords,  for  the  Hittite  power  also  must  at  that
„ . . ,. period have  been  severely  shaken  by

t  f  itaalf  the  irruPtions  of  lhe  Muski  and  others,
and  so  precluded  from  effective  inter
vention  in  the  affairs  of  Syria.  Syria,  therefore,  exactly
as  Palestine,  was  in  the  eleventh  and  tenth  centuries
virtually  left  to  itself  and  at  liberty  to  follow  its  own
political  development  independently  of  the  great  powers  :
as  such  at  this  date  come  into  account  not  only  Egypt
and  Assyria  but  also  Babylonia.  In  Palestine  and
Phoenicia  arose  the  kingdoms  of  David  and  of  Hiram,
in  Syria  a  nutnl>er  of  states  with  populations  essentially
of  one  and  the  same  character,  a  mixture  of  Hittite  and
Aramaean.  Needless  to  say,  under  these  conditions
the  Aramrean  immigration  went  on  with  much  less
impediment  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  a  strong
and  great  power  had  held  sway.  We  have  evidence
for  this  Aramaean  advance  in  occasional  statements
made  by  later  Assyrian  kings  regarding  the  time  in
question.  Thus  Shalmaneser  II.  bears  witness  that
under  the  Assyrian  king  Asur-irbi  the  Aramaeans  had
taken  possession  of  Pitru  (see  PETHOR)  on  the  Sagur.

This  movement  will  have  been  in  the  tenth  century,
for  from  the  second  half  of  that  century  onwards  we  are
»•  .  again  able  to  follow  the  course  of  the

19.  ASur-nasir-  Assyrian  kings  (from  Tiglath-pileser  1 1.
onwards).  In  the  ninth  century  Asur-
nasir-pal  begins  anew  to  expand.  He  begins  by
subjugating  the  Aramrean  states  which  had  in  the
meantime  sprung  up  in  Mesopotamia  (the  most  im
portant  of  them  was  Bit  -  Adini  which  had  its  centre
about  Harran),  and  next  *  he  proceeds  to  cross  the
Euphrates.  It  is  nevertheless  worthy  of  remark  that
he  did  not  follow  quite  the  same  route  as  had  been
taken  by  his  two  predecessors  Shalmaneser  I.  and
Tiglath-pileser  1.  Whilst  they  took  possession  of  the
territory  which  had  belonged  to  the  Mitani  and  from
this  base  were  thus  able,  after  the  conquest  of  the  Haiti,
to  make  their  way  to  the  sea,  Asur-nasir-pal  advanced
direct  through  Syria  proper.  He  already  possessed  legal
claims  to  the  '  Haiti  land' — for  as  such  Syria  is  now  con
stantly  represented  by  the  Assyrians,  whilst  the  Haiti  land
proper  on  the  Halys  is  henceforward  known  as  Muski.
The  development  which  had  gone  on  in  the  interval
appears  from  what  Asur-nasir-pal  tells  us.  In  the  N.
it  was  Kummuh,  on  both  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  that
was  always  most  fully  exposed  to  the  Assyrian  influence,
and  it  acknowledged  the  Assyrian  sovereignty  im
mediately  upon  the  subjugation  of  the  Aramoean  states
of  Mesopotamia.  The  region  to  the  S.  of  Kummuh
embraced  in  ASur-nasir- pal's  time  the  state  of  Car-
chemish,  now  called  the  capital  of  Hatliland  (see  above,
§  13).  Its  king  submitted  in  like  manner  without
a  struggle,  thus  recognising  the  claims  of  Assyria.
Westward  of  this  had  grown  up  a  state  which  included
the  northern  portion  of  Syria  proper  (substantially
Cyrrhestica)  from  the  borders  of  Carchemish — let  us
say  the  Sagur — southwards  to  the  mountains  of  the
Nosairi  ;  its  southern  and  eastern  neighbour  here  may
have  been  Hamath,  of  which  Asur-nasir-pal  for  very
good  reasons  says  nothing.  The  new  state  was  that  of
Patin  (see  PAUDAN-ARAM),  which  had  Liburna  or
Lubarna  for  its  king,  and  Kunalua  or  Kinalia  as  its
capital.  Liburna  did  not  submit  until  his  capital  had
been  besieged.  In  the  southern  Nosairi  range,  that  is
in  the  mountains  of  North  Phoenicia,  Asur-nasir-pal
founded  an  Assyrian  colony  in  Aribua.2  Of  any
further  steps  he  took  Asur-nasir-pal  tells  us  nothing  ;
but  the  state  of  affairs  under  his  successor  shows  us
what  occurred  in  the  immediately  following  years  in  this
Aramrean  state  in  the  'Arnk.

Shalmaneser  II. proceeded  immedi-itely  in  the  first

1  From  the  order  of  the  ar,n;ds  it  is  possible  to  doubt  whether
this  happened  in  876  or  in  868  H.c.  The  latter  date  is  probably
to  be  preferred.

-  l^al'at  el-ArVia'in,  ESE.  from  el-Ludakiyeh?  see  Sanda  in
MVAG,  1902,  78.

485S


years  of  his  reign  to  strengthen  his  hold  on  the  territory

OA  01,^1,.,.  „..  TT  which  Asur-nasir-pal  had  sub-
20.  Shalmaneser  II.  .  .  ,  .  •

jugated in Mesopotamia and

Syria.  Kummuh,  BH-Adini,  and  Carchemish  had  to
submit,  or  were  overthrown.  In  place  of  the  single  state
of  Patin,  however,  Shalmaneser  set  up  in  the  same  area
several  smaller  states.  Liburna  had  thus  to  share  his
dominion  with  the  various  princes  of  the  districts  of  his
former  territory— perhaps  in  virtue  of  an  arrangement
of  Asur-nasir-pal's  on  the  principle  of  divide  et  impera,
Shalmaneser  mentions  by  name  Mutallu  of  Gurgum,
Hani  or  Hayan  bar  Gabar  of  Sam'al,  Sapalulme,  and
afterwards  Kalparunda1  of  Patin  in  853.  Thus,  on  this
first  campaign  which  carried  him  to  the  Amanus,
Shalmaneser  kept  himself  practically  within  the  limits
of  Patin,  which  had  recognised  the  Assyrian  overlordship.
Some  years  later  (in  854)  he  already  names  along  with
this  the  people  or  tribe  of  Gusi  (or  Agusi),  which  had  its
seat  near  Arpad  under  its  prince  Arame,  and  (in  the  X. )
Lalli  of  Melitene.

The  same  expedition  was  destined  to  bring  the  whole
of  Syria  or  Hattiland  under  the  Assyrian  sway,  and  the
course  of  it  explains  why  formerly  Asur-nasir-pal  had
advanced  by  the  'Amk-roule.  For  the  territory  of
Hamath,  and  that  immediately  adjoining  it  on  the  S. ,
were  at  that  time  the  seat  of  a  greater  power  which
possessed  the  ascendancy  over  Central  Syria.  Here  in
the  tenth-ninth  century  DAMASCUS  (q.v. )  had  developed
into  a  principal  state.  Shalmaneser  II.  reckons  up  the
'  allies'  of  Benhadad  (Bir-'idri) — i.e.,  vassal  states  which
had  to  render  military  service — in  854  B.C.  and  follow
ing  years  thus  :  Hamath,  Kue,  Musri,  North  Phoenicia,
the  'Arabians,'  Ammon.

The  humiliation  of  Damascus  was  the  task  which
henceforward  confronted  Syria.  Shalmaneser  grappled
with  it  in  vain.  Even  in  842  when  Hazael  was  besieged
in  Damascus  it  was  found  impossible  to  force  him  to  sub
mit.  On  the  other  hand,  from  that  year  we  hear  no  more
of  any  '  allies."  Assyrian  politics  had  drawn  them  all
over  to  the  Assyrian  side.  The  question  of  adherence  to
Damascus  or  to  Assyria  is  at  this  period  the  decisive  one
for  every  prince  in  Haiti-land,  and  it  is  accordingly  the
one  oPsupreme  importance  for  Israel  also  (see  JEHU).

Towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser  (832)
a  revolt  broke  out  in  Patin  ;  but  it  was  quelled

21  Tatorkintra  (Shalmaneser,  O*.  147/0-  The
msB>  troubles  connected  wilh  the  change
of  government  and  the  reign  of  Samsi-Ramman  (Adad)
IV.  left  Syria,  in  particular  Damascus,  in  much  freedom.
Ramman  (Adad)-nirari  III.  was  the  firsl  lo  get  energetic
ally  to  work  again.  Mari'  of  Damascus  made  sub
mission  to  him,  and  thus  all  Haiti-land  acknowledged
Assyrian  suzerainty.  At  the  same  time  '  Amurri '  also,
down  to  its  most  southerly  extremity  Edom,  was
subjugated,  and  thus  Assyria  now  went  beyond  the
limits  of  the  claims  which  could  be  inferred  merely  from
the  acknowledgment  made  by  the  Pharaoh  under
Tiglath-pileser  I.2  Henceforward,  accordingly,  Amurm
also  is  included  in  the  expression  '  Haiti-land.'  We
are  unable  to  say  how  far  circumstances  of  the  Amarna
period  were  held  to  justify  the  claims  made  (cp  §  13).

Next  follows  a  period  of  decline  of  the  Assyrian
power,  bringing  along  with  it  greater  freedom  for  Syria
and  Palestine.  Mention  is  made  of  risings  in  Damascus
(773)  and  more  particularly  in  Hadrak  (Hatarikka)
(772,  765,  755).  The  latter  must  thus  at  that  period
have  been  a  town  of  importance  in  Syria.  Probably
Aramoean  princes  sought  to  establish  a  kingdom  there

The  powerlessness  of  Assyria  had  as  one  of  its  results
that  the  northern  part  of  Syria  came  under  the  influence
of  the  Urarti,  which  at  that  time  was  strongly  asserting

1  /.«>.,  the  name  -1-133  of  the  Aramaic  inscription  in  CIS,
2  no.  75;  see  Sachau  in  ZA,  (14^2.  The  names  are  partly
Aramaic,  partly  Hittite,  and  thus  show  the  mixed  character  of
the  population.  v

-  Meanwhile  Sosenk  had  again  asserted  the  Egyptian  claims
to  Palestine.

4856


SYRIA


SYRIA


itself.  This  is  true  specially  of  the  states  of  a  pre
vailingly  '  Hittite  '  character,  —  Kunimuh,  Melitene,
Carchetnish.  By  conflict  with  the  'Hatli' — i.e.,  the
Haiti  properly  so  called,  who  are  now  designated  as
Muski  by  the  Assyrians — the  kings  of  Urartu  had
doubtless  acquired  like  claims  with  those  of  Assyria.
Under  the  changed  conditions  in  Assyria,  we  see  it  now
already  designing  to  extend  its  influence  also  over
Middle  Syria.  Sometimes  the  kings  of  Urartu  take  the
title  of  '  king  of  Suri,'  with  the  old- Babylonian  meaning
(cp  §  8),  and  in  opposition  to  their  adversaries  the  kings
of  Assyria.

In  Middle  Syria  Arpad  was  in  the  hands  of  Mati-el
prince  of  Agusi  (§  20),  and  his  subjugation,  as  well  as

_.  .  , .  the  expulsion  of  the  Urartu  king  Sarduris
22  ligiatn-  from  Syria>  was  thus  Tiglath.pileser  Ui's
pile  er  ill.  first  ta^k  The  rejgn  of  [his  nionarcn  w,th

its  rapid  increase  of  the  Assyrian  power,  brought  about
in  the  end  the  subjugation  of  Syria  and  Palestine,  and
the  prosperity  of  the  Assyrian  empire  proper  under  the
dynasty  of  Sargon.  '  Haiti-land,"  in  the  extended  sense
which  includes  Amurru  and  thus  reaches  to  the  Nahal
Musri,  comes  under  the  sway  of  Assyria  as  a  province  or
vassal-state.

After  the  subjugation  of  Arpad  and  Urartu,  the  'Amk
was  again  overthrown  in  738.  Here  Azriya'u  of  Ya'udi
sought  to  make  a  stand.  His  capital  Kulanl  (see
CALNO)  became  the  chief  city  of  an  Assyrian  province  ;
the  other  districts  of  what  had  formerly  been  Patin
(Sam'al,  Gurgum)  relained  in  Ihe  meantime  their  o\vn
princes.  In  Sam'al  Tiglath-pileser  mentions  Panammu
whom  we  know  from  the  inscriptions  of  his  son  Bir-sur
in  Zenjlrli.  The  king's  next  effort  was  directed  against
Damascus,  which  fell  under  Rason  in  732  B.C.,  and
became  an  Assyrian  province.

By  avoiding  collision,  Hamath  seems  to  have  main
tained  a  government  of  its  own  from  the  time  of  Shal-
maneser  II.  It  is  not  mentioned  again  after  it  had  given
up  the  '  alliance '  with  Benhadad  lo  submit  to  Ihe
Assyrians  (§  20).  By  the  formation  of  the  province  of
Kulani  in  738  it  had  sustained  a  greal  loss  of  lerritory.
The  whole  of  the  North  Phoenician  district  which  had  be
longed  to  it  was — as  belonging  to  Patin  (cp  end  of  §  19),
and  therefore  rebellious — annexed  by  Tiglath-pileser  as
~  TT  an  Assyrian  'province  Simirra.'  After

.  argon  .  tne  ^  Of  Samaria  in  722  B.C.  an  atlempl
was  made  in  conjunction  by  Samaria,  Damascus,  and  this
'province  Simirra'  to  cast  off  Assyrian  sovereignty.
Eni'il,  the  king,  doubtless,  of  the  old  ruling  house,  had
been  set  aside,  and  a  certain  Ilu-bi'di,  'a  peasanl,"  called
to  the  throne.  The  previous  peasant  condition  of  the
new  king  shows  that  here  there  was  a  question  of
internal  revolution  which  connected  itself  with  similar
movements  in  the  adjoining  countries  and  was  somewhat
belated.  In  Israel  some  fifteen  or  twenty  years  earlier
Amos  had  in  like  manner  spoken  out  in  favour  of  a
popular  movement.  The  result  naturally  was  that
Hamath  too  lost  its  independence  (720  B.C. ).

The  same  fate  overtook  Carchemish  under  its  last
king  Pisiris  in  717.  He  had  vainly  sought  support
from  Mita  of  Muski  (i.e. ,  Midas  of  Phrygia1),  the  ruler
of  the  old  Haiti-land.  Thus  the  whole  of  Middle  Syria
down  to  the  borders  of  Judah  had  come  under  the
provincial  administration  of  Assyria.

In  the 'Amk  Sam'al  had  also  in  the  meanwhile  losl  ils
independence,  doubtless  at  the  time  of  Ihe  rising  of
Hamalh.  The  same  fate  befel  Kumani  (Kammanu)
and  Melitene  in  712,  Gurgum  with  its  capilal  Markas
(Mar'as)  in  711,  Kummuh  in  708,  so  that  North  Syria
also  was  now  once  more  under  Assyrian  administration.

Under  Sennacherib  Assyria  made  no  progress  ;  on
_.  y  ,  the  contrary,  in  Palestine  repeated  efforts
were  made,  simultaneouslv  wilh  a  like  effort


kings.


on ihe  parl of  Babylonia  in  Ihe  rear, lo


shake  off  the  Assyrian  yoke. This  applies, however,
i  Wi.  AOF,  1 136.

4857


only  to  the  self-ruling  counlries — Sidon-Tyre  under  Luli,
and  Judah  under  Hezekiah  ;  ihe  Assyrian  provinces
remained  tranquil — perhaps  because  they  felt  themselves
at  all  events  beller  off  under  Ihe  Assyrian  adminislra-
lion  lhan  Ihey  had  been  under  rulers  of  iheir  own.

Under  Esarhaddon  and  Asur-bani-pal,  in  like  manner,
more  of  Ihe  Syrian  lerrilory  changed  hands  ;  broadly,
the  condilions  which  had  been  eslablished  under  Sargon
conlinued,  wilh  Ihe  single  exceplion  lhal  Ihe  territory
of  Tyre  and  Sidon  (not  the  city  of  Tyre),  also  had
become  Assyrian.

On  the  fall  of  Assyria,  Necho  made  the  attempl  again
to  establish  the  old  righls  of  Ihe  Pharaohs  over  Halti-

OE T>.I.~I,», „ land. He  advanced to Carchemish
25.  Babylonian ,

sunremacv where he was defeated by Nebu-
J' chadrezzar.1 At  this  period  he  must

like  Nebuchadrezzar  have  had  his  headquarters  in  the
Beka .  Riblah  seems  then  to  have  played  an  important
part.  The  district  of  Hamath  to  which  it  belonged
was  very  favourably  situated  for  such  purposes.

By  Ihe  victories  of  Nebuchadrezzar  Haiti-land  or
tbir  ndri  (imn  isj?) — for  il  is  now  again  occasionally
designated  by  its  old  name — came  under  the  power  of
Babylonia,  and  Ihere  il  remained.  The  rebellions  of
Judah  which  evenlually  led  lo  Ihe  abolilion  of  lhal
kingdom,  mel  wilh  no  supporl  elsewhere  in  Syria.
During  Ihe  whole  of  Ihis  period  Ihe  capilals  of  Ihe
former  states  of  Syria  figure  as  the  adminislrative
centres  of  an  equivalenl  number  of  Assyrian  (afterwards
Babylonian)  provinces.

The  same  posilion  of  affairs  is  still  indicated  by
Nabuna'id  in  his  third  year  (553),  when  this  ruler
once  more  summons  the  kings  '  of  Gaza  and  the  Middle
Sea,  beyond  the  Euphrates '  lo  lake  Iheir  parl  in  Ihe
rebuilding  of  the  temple  in  Harran.  At  that  time,
therefore,  '  Hatli-land '  in  Ihe  widesl  sense  of  Ihe  word
was  slill  acknowledging  the  Babylonian  supremacy.
Fourleen  years  laler  the  new  king  of  Babylon  was
Cyrus  the  Persian.

Under  Cyrus  and  Cambyses  the  government  of  the
country  seems  in  Ihe  firsl  inslance  lo  have  been  carried

oc -p  on unchanged  ; ihus Ihe provinces re-

zo.  A  ersian.  ,  , .,  1*1

mained  under  their  penas  and  saknus  as

before.  The  internal  revolution  within  ihe  Persian
empire  and  Ihe  rearrangemenl  of  ihe  adminislralion
under  Darius  nexl  broughl  aboul  Ihe  division  of  ihe
empire  inlo  salrapies.  As  a  resull  of  this  the  'Abar
Nahara  (x"in3 12y),  as  it  was  now  officially  called  in
Aramaic  (ebir  ndri  still  in  Ihe  Cuneiform  inscriptions),
became  a  separate  salrapy.  Ils  firsl  salrap  was  Uslani
(see  TATNAI),  who  was  also  al  ihe  same  lime  salrap
of  Babylonia  and  Ihus  received  Ihe  whole  Chaldnean
kingdom  as  his  salrapy.  Al  a  later  date  the  iwo
salrapies  were  separated.  The  Mace
donian  Conquest  broughl  aboul,  in  Ihe
kingdom  of  ihe  Seleucidns,  a  fresh  revival  of  Ihe  kingdom
of  Babylon.  Very  soon,  however,  Ihe  capilal  was
Iransferred  lo  Syria  (Anlioch).  Through  Ihe  Roman
and  ihe  Parthian  ascendency  Syria  was  severed  from
Babylon  ;  ils  civilisation,  through  closer  conlacl  wilh
lhat  of  the  West,  received  new  impulses,  whilst  the
Babylonian  came  lo  ruin  under  Ihe  Parlhian  influence.
The  same  slale  of  things  persisted  under  the  Sasanian
rule  in  Babylon,  and  the  Byzanline  in  Syria.  The  iwo
were  again  united  by  Ihe  Mohammedan  conquest  which
once  more  brought  togelher  ihe  whole  of  ihe  easl  inlo
one  common  area  of  civilisalion.  Even  Ihen,  however,
the  contrast  was  marked.  The  seat  of  the  caliphate  is
at  firsl  in  Syria  ;  nol,  however,  in  the  Christian  Antioch
bul  on  Ihe  borders  of  Arabia,  in  Damascus,  where
formerly  Benhadad  had  soughl  lo  found  an  empire.  On
Ihe  olher  hand  'Ali  found  himself  compelled  to  transfer
his  seat  from  the  native  land  of  Islam  to  the  other  region
of  Eastern  civilisation,  to  Babylon  (Irak).  By  his

1  Nabuchodonossor  in  Antilibanus  and  in  Wady  Brissa  (W.
from  Ba'albek).

4858


27.  Later.


SYRIA  MAACHAH


TABEEL


overthrow  Syria  triumphed  in  the  first  instance,  and
continued  for  a  century  to  be  the  seat  of  the  caliphate
under  the  Ommayyads.  Then  the  East  obtained  the
upper  hand  once  more,  and  the  Abbasids  took  up  their
residence  in  old  Babylonia,  in  Baghdad.  The  Orient
had  its  last  period  of  prosperity,  which  came  to  an  end
in  the  overthrow  of  Baghdad  by  the  Mongols,  by  which
time  Syria  as  well  as  Mesopotamia  had  already  for  long
displayed  the  old  tendency  to  break  up  into  detached
kingdoms  or  sultanates.

D.  G.  H. ,  §§  1-5  a,  6,  7  ;  A.  E.  s. ,  §  5^ ;  H.  w. ,  §§  8-27.

SYRIA -MAACHAH,  RV  ARAM-MAACAH  (i  Ch.
196).  See  ARAM,  §  5,  and  SYRIA,  §  i,  MAACAH.

SYRIAN  LANGUAGE  (2  K.  1826  Is.  36  n  ;  also
Ezra  4  7  Dan.  24).  See  ARAMAIC.

SYROPHCENICIAN  (Mk.726).  See  SYRIA,  §  5,
and  compare  GOSPELS,  col.  1842  n.  2.

SYRTIS,  AV  QUICKSANDS  (H  cypTic,  Acts2717
Ti.,  WH).  The  Great  and  the  Little  Syrtis  (Si'</ms
ufyd\T]  KO.I  fUKpa.,  Ptol.  43)  were  the  eastern  and  the
western  recess  respectively  of  the  great  bay  or  indentation
in  the  coast  of  northern  Africa  between  Tunis  and  Tripoli.
The  Great  Syrtis,  the  eastern  recess  (the  modern  Gulf
of  Siitra),  extended  from  the  promontory  called  Boreum
on  the  E.  to  that  of  Cephalns  on  the  W.  (Str.  835/1 ).
The  Little  Syrtis,  the  western  recess  (now  the  Gulf  of
Gabes),  was  included  within  the  promontories  Zeitha
and  Brachodes  (Str.  834;  Scyl.  48).

If  a  vessel  became  involved  in  them  escape  was  regarded  as
almost  hopeless  (Str.  836,  cnrdvioi'  &'  elrai  TO  a-ta^ofifvov  <ncd<£os);
consequently,  ships  kept  far  out  to  sea  in  passing  between  the
cistern  and  the  western  Mediterranean  (ifiii/.,  StoirfptroppiaOevTOV
napd-rr\ovv  TTOIOVVTHI  tf>v\aTTOfifi'Oi  JUT)  f^-rretroiev  els  Toi/s  KoAn-ovs
vir'  avefiiav  d<j>v\aKTOi.  \r)<f>6e I'Tes).  Polybius  (1  39)  records  how
the  consuls  Gnaeus  Servilius  and  Gains  Sempronius  were  caught
unawares  in  the  Little  Syrtis  (253  B.C.),  and  had  to  jettison
their  stores  in  order  to  get  oflf(cp  Apoll.  Rhod.  41235,  SOp-riv
od'  ovxeri.  I'OOTOS  OTTicrcriu  |  i/rjucri  Tre'Aet,  ore  TOV  ye  /Stoiaro  /coXn-ov
(KeV0ai).

The danger was attributed not so much to the


shallowness  of  the  water  and  the  treacherous  bottom,  as
to  the  sudden  and  unaccountable  action  of  the  tides  and
consequent  variations  in  the  position  of  the  banks
( Pomp.  Mela,  1 7  ;  import uosus  atque  atrox  et  ob  vadorum
frequentium  brevia,  magisque  etiam  ob  alternos  mot  us
pelagl  affluentis  ac  refluentis  infestus.  Cp  Str.  836  ;
Apoll.  Rhod.  I.e. ).  It  was  from  this  action  of  the  tides
that  the  name  Syrtis  was  derived  (Sallust,  B.  Jug.  78  :
nomen  ex  re  inditum  .  .  .  Syrtes  ab  tractu  nominates.
From  the  Greek  (njpfiv,  'to  draw').  Nevertheless,
masters  with  local  experience  found  little  difficulty  in
running  along  the  coast  (Str.  836).  It  is  probable  that
the  dangers  of  the  two  bays  were  exaggerated  in  the
minds  of  those  unfamiliar  with  the  coast ;  exaggerated
accounts  were  also  given  of  the  inhospitable  character
of  the  mainland,  which  was  represented  as  a  desert  of
sand  full  of  dangers  (Diod.  Sic.  2042;  Sallust,  op.  cit.
79  ;  Verg.  Aen.  441,  '  inhospita  Syrtis').  As  a  matter
of  fact  the  coast  of  the  Syrtes  in  ancient  times  was
fringed  with  small  towns  (Str.  834/1),  and  the  territory
was  rich  (Pol.  322).

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  easy  to  understand  the
fear  on  the  part  of  the  crew  of  the  Alexandrian  grain-
ship  of  finding  themselves  on  a  lee-shore — and  that,  the
shore  of  the  dreaded  Syrtes.  From  the  probable
direction  of  the  wind  (EXE.  ;  see  Smith,  I'oyage  and
Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul,  no/.),  which  can  be  inferred
from  the  bearings  of  the  island  of  Clauda  with  reference
to  the  region  of  the  Syrtis,  it  is  probable  that  the  Great
Syrtis  was  the  immediate  object  of  alarm,  for  a  ship
scudding  before  the  wind  (tirid&vTes  (<f>fp6/n,e0a,  v.  15)
must  inevitably  have  found  herself  entangled  in  that
bay  ultimately.  It  was  to  check  this  course,  and
to  lay  the  ship  upon  the  starboard  tack,  that  the
operations  described  in  v.  17  (xoAdcrai'Tes  TO  ffKevos,
wrongly  in  AV,  ' strake  sail'  ;  RV,  'lowered  the  gear.'
See  Smith,  op.  cit.  no/!  ;  Rams.  St.  Paul  the
Traveller,  329)  were  undertaken  ;  with  the  result  of
throwing  the  ship  ultimately  upon  the  coast  of  Malta.

w.  j.  \v.


T


TAANACH  CS|3j;ri  or  TpTltfl  Josh.  21  25,  JANAX  [B]>
6&AN&X  [AL1  :  Ekypt-  Ta'n&a,  Tdanak  [WMM,  As.
u.  Kur.  170]),  a  royal  city  of  the  Canaanites  (Josh.  122i,

6&N&X  [A]-  ZAKAX  [R]-  6AANAX  LL])-  in  the  territory  of
Issachar,  but  assigned  to  Manasseh.

So,  in  Judg.  1  27  (6a.vaK  [B],  fK0a.i'aa.S  [AL])  5  19  (Oavaax  [B],
devvax  [AL])  Josh.  17  11-21  (ravax  [A],  0a[a]i>ax  [L],  B  om.)  I  K.
4  12  (n-oAajuax  [B],  0aa»ax  [A],  <u0a/u  [L])  I  Ch.  7  29  (0aA.i7j  [B],
0aa,-aX  [AL]).

Schubert  (Morgenland^^-ida,},  followed  by  Robinson
(B/?3is6),  found  it  in  the  modern  Taannuk,  now  a
mean  hamlet  on  the  S.  side  of  a  small  hill  with  a
summit  of  table-land,  where  Dr.  Sellin  is  now  excavat
ing.  It  lies  on  the  south-western  border  of  the  plain
of  Esdraelon,  4  m.  S.  of  Megiddo,  in  connection  with
which  it  is  mentioned  in  the  triumphal  '  Song  of  Deborah  '
(Judg.  619).  It  is  a  question,  however,  whether  in  all
the  biblical  passages  the  redactor  has  not,  through  a
geographical  misapprehension,  substituted  the  northern
city  Taanach  for  a  city  in  the  Negeb  called  probably
Beth-anak  (Che.).  See  Crit.  Bib.


TAANATH-SHILOH  (HX"  rUNH).  a  landmark  on
the  frontier  of  Ephraim  situated  eastward  of  Micmethath
(Josh.  166t,  GHNIACA  KAI  ceXAHC<\[B],  THNAGCHAOJ
[A],  6HNA0AC  [L]).  If  'Taanath  '  has  the  right  vowels,
we  may  identify  with  the  mod.  Tana  or  'A  in  Tana,  N.
from  Yanfin,  a  ruined  site  with  remains  of  large  cisterns.
The  form  given  in  <&,  however,  favours  a  different
pointing  —  'y  rnxn,  'fig-tree  of  Shiloh'  (NAMES,  §  103);
cp  e-nva.[ff],  OS»'  261x6.  T.  K.  c.

4859


TABBAOTH(mi?2D,  §  71;  '[signet]  rings,'  but  see

TABBATH  ;  T&B&609  [BXL]  ;  cp  HOTHAM),  the  family  name
of  a  company  of  (post-exilic)  Nethinim:  Ezra  2^3  (raBiaO  [B],
Ta/30aa)0  [A])  Neh.  7  46  (yo/SawS  [B],  raft3.  [A])=i  Esd.  629

Tabaoth  (rap^e  [A]).

TABBATH  (D3t3,  with  the  retention  of  the  old  fern,
ending,  §  78  ;  T&B&G  [BL],  r*--  [Al>-  mentioned  only
in  the  account  of  the  defeat  of  the  Midianites  by  Gideon,
where  it  is  probably  a  corruption  of  JOTBAH  [q.v.~\
(Judg.  7  22).  See  GIDEON,  col.  1720,  n.  4,  and  note
that  this  name,  disguised  as  Tabbaoth,  which  comes
from  the  Negeb,  is  borne  by  a  family  of  Nethinim  or
Ethanites  (?).  See  TABBAOTH,  SOLOMON'S  SERVANTS.

T.  K.  c.

TABEEL,  AV  Tabeal  (^31$,  in  Is-  pausal  form
7N3U  [see  Ko. ,  Lehrgeb.  2537],  '  God  is  good,'  or  [\Vi.
Alt.  Unt.  74]  '  God  is  wise,'  cp  Tab-rimmon  ;  TABenA
[BKAQFL]).

i.  Ben-Tabeel  (RV  'the  son  of  Tabeel,'  AV  '.  .  .
Tabeal ')  is  the  only  name  given  by  Isaiah  to  the  person
put  forward  by  Re/.in  and  Pekah  as  a  substitute  for  Ahaz
on  the  throne  of  Judah  (Is.  76).  ©  regards  the  name  as
a  compound,  the  second  part  of  which  is  S)<,  '  God. '  The
points,  however,  imply  the  pronunciation  Tabeal — i.e. ,
•  good-for-nothing'  (c'p  Nold.  ZD.UG  8833°  [1879]) ;  a
jeu  d' esprit  in  the  old  Jewish  manner.  \Vinckler  ( Alttest.
f  'nt.  74)  and  Guthe(  ISRAEL,  §  32)  take '  the  son  of  Tabeel '
(as  is  usually  read)  to  be  Rezin  (Rezon).  Most  scholars
suppose  that  an  Aramaean  or  Syrian  is  meant,  but  not

4860


TABBRAH

Rezin  himself,  who  is  surely  the  chief  speaker  in  Is.  7  5/1
Marti,  however,  suggests  that  the  name  of  the  father  of
Rezin's  nominee  may  have  been  T6be'el  or  Tobi'el,  so
that  he  would  have  been  a  Judahite  (but  see  TOBIAH)  ;
he  declines,  however,  to  speak  positively.  If,  however,
the  view  referred  to  elsewhere  (  RKZIN.TIGLATH-PILESER)
be  correct,  and  the  invaders  of  Judah  were  Rezin  (Rezon),
king  of  Aram,  and  Pir'am(?),  king  of  Ishmael,  it  becomes
at  once  probable  that  the  title  of  the  pretender's  father
was  Ben-Tiibal,  TUBAL  (q.v. )  being  an  ethnic  name  of
the  N.  Arabian  border-land.  According  to  this  view,
the  invasion  was  from  the  S. ,  and  the  news  brought  to
Ahaz  may  have  oeen  '  Aram  has  encamped  against
Ephron  '  ;  Ephron  (p-ay),  corrupted  in  Is.  (I.e. )  into
'  Ephraim  '  (D"ISN),  was  the  name  of  a  town  of  Jerahmeel
which  became  Judahite,  according  to  2  Ch.  13 19,  under
king  Abijah  ;  it  may  also  have  been  Judahite  under  Ahaz,
and  if  so  have  been  on  the  frontier  of  Judahite  territory
towards  the  S.  There  are  parallels  enough  in  corrupt
passages  elsewhere  to  warrant  our  reading  in  Is.  76,
1  Let  us  go  up  against  Jerusalem  .  .  .  and  let  us  appoint
a  king  in  the  midst  of  it,  namely,  the  son  of  Tubal  (the
Tubalite).'

2.  A  Persian  official  in  Samaria,  Ezra  4  7,  who  in
i  Esd.  2i6  is  called  Tabellius  (ra/3eX\ios  [BAL]).  It
is  very  possible  to  read  the  name  '^aw,  '  Tubalite'  (i.e.,
a  man  of  the  N.  Arabian  Tubal).  This  is  connected
with  a  critical  theory  on  the  original  narratives  in  Ezra,
for  which  see  Crit.  Bib.  It  involves  holding  Shobal
(Gen.  8620,  etc.)  to  be  the  original  of  Bishlam,  and
perhaps  Ramathi  (i  Ch.  27  27)  of  Mithredath  in  the  same
passage,  the  present  readings  being  due  to  a  later  editor.

T.  K.  C.

TABERAH  (rrw:iPl,' burning'  of  RVme-;  e/v\nypic-
MOC  [BAFL]),  a  locality  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran
(presumably  near  Kibroth-hattaavah),  which  is  said  to
have  derived  its  name  from  the  'burning'  which  took
place  there  (Nu.  11  3  Dt.  9  22!).  See  KiBROTH-HAT-
TAAVAH,  WANDERINGS,  §§  7,  10.

TABERNACLE


Traditional  view  (§  i).
Description  in  P(§  2).
The  tabernacle:  its  walls  (§  3).
Its  coverings  (§  4).
Curtains  (§  5).
Court  (g  6).
Furniture  (§  7).
Significance  of  tabernacle  in
P  (S  8).


Symbolism  (§  9).

Unhistorical  character  of  re
cord  (§  10).

Impossible  in  the  wilderness
(8  11).

Sacred  tent  in  E  (§  12).

Tabernacle  non-existent  in
historical  times  (§  13).

Literature  (§  14).

According  to  the  traditional  view,  which  goes  as  far
back  as  to  P,  and  even  to  the  period  of  the  exile,  the
_  ,.,.  .  temple  in  Jerusalem  had  its  prototype
1.  iraclitioi  ai  -m  the  portable  sanctuary— the  taber
nacle —  set  up  in  the  wilderness  by
Moses.  In  accordance  with  directions  received  on
Mount  Sinai  (Ex.  1$ \  ff. ,  P)  he  constructed  for  Yahwe
and  the  ark  a  sumptuous  tent  which  accompanied  the
Israelites  as  their  only  sanctuary  during  their  forty
years'  wandering  in  the  wilderness.  Though  never
anything  but  a  'tent,'  a  provisional  and  temporary
house  of  God,  designed  for  the  journey  from  Sinai  to
Palestine,  it  continued  long  after  the  settlement  in
Canaan  to  be  Israel's  sole  legitimate  sanctuary — set
up,  now  here  now  there,  in  various  parts  of  Palestine
until  at  last  Solomon  built  his  temple,  to  which  the
ark  of  Yahwe  was  finally  transferred.

The  most  usual  designation  for  this  tabernacle  in  P  is
'ohelmo?d(-\]j\'£j  "rnx  ;  e.g. ,  Ex.  272i  2843  294  i°/  -  etc.  ;
see  ASSEMBLY,  z;  col.  346).  According  to  Ex.  2942/i
Nu.  17i9[4]  this  expression  denotes  the  tabernacle  as
the  place  where  Yahwe  meets  with  Moses  and  the  people
and  communicates  to  Moses  from  the  kapporeth  (see
MERCY  SEAT)  between  the  cherubim  his  messages
to  the  children  of  Israel.  On  this  view  the  usual  inter
pretation  of  the  expression  as  meaning  '  tabernacle  of

4861


TABERNACLE

the  assembly '  or  '  tabernacle  of  the  congregation '
(Bahr,  1136/1,  Ewald,  168)  is  incorrect;  moreover  in
point  of  fact  the  sanctuaries  of  the  Semites  never  were,
primarily,  places  of  meeting  for  the  community  ;  they
were  places  where  the  deity  dwelt  and  revealed  himself
(see  TEMPLE,  §  i).  So  also  the  tabernacle  (see  below,
§8).

The  tabernacle  is  expressly  spoken  of  (Lev.  17  4  [cp  1631  mg.
'tabernacle'],  Nu.  16  9  19  13  81203047  Josh.  22  19)  as  tuts/can
Yhwh  (ni.T  |3E>p)— a  phrase  which  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  true,
is  also  used  to  designate  the  holy  of  holies,  the  dwelling  place
proper  of  the  deity  as  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  structure
(Ex.  20  i  6/.  35  ii  36  i3/:  39 33 /.  40  if)f.  Nu.  3  25  ;  cp  also  Ex.
39  32  40  2  6  29).  Another  name  for  the  tabernacle  is  'fi/iel
ha-edftth(!\-\yr\  SrtN  J  Nu.  9  15  \lz2/.  [7/J  182),  or  miskan

haediitk(T\-\yn  JSPO;  Ex.  38  21  Nu.  1  50  53  10  n),  'tabernacle'
or  '  dwelling  place  '  of  the  '  testimony '  or  '  witness '  (cp
ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT,  §  3).  This  after  the  analogy  of  'a/,tl
mo'edis  taken  by  Riehm  and  others  as  meaning  'the  dwelling-
place  where  God  bears  witness  to  himself  and  to  his  will,'  in
other  words  as  equivalent  to  'tent  of  revelation.'  It  seems
more  probable,  however,  that  here  as  in  the  expression  '  ark
of  the  '  edfitk  '  (Ex.  25  22  2633)  the  word  'eduth  means  the  two
tables  of  the  law,  and  the  whole  expression  the  tent  in  which
the  two  tables  are  deposited  (cp  <B  er/crjiT)  TOV  ^aprvpiov,  Vg.
tabernacuhun  tcstiinonii  orfa-deris ;  cp  also  Ex.  31  18  34  29).!

The  details  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  furniture  have
been  preserved  to  us  in  two-fold  form — once  in  the  form
_  ...  of  a  divine  instruction  to  Moses  in
.  _P  which  all  the  measurements  and  speci
fications  to  the  smallest  detail  are
given  (Ex.  25io-27ig),  and  again  in  that  of  a  narrative
relating  how  this  instruction  was  carried  out,  when
practically  everything  is  repeated  ( Ex.  36  8-  38  31 ).  These
two  sections  belong  to  different  strata  of  P.

The  whole  description  leaves  at  first  sight  such  an
impression  of  painstaking  precision  that  the  reader
might  be  tempted  forthwith  to  take  for  granted  its
historical  truth.  As  soon,  however,  as  he  begins  to
examine  more  closely,  and  on  the  basis  of  this  descrip
tion  proceeds  to  attempt  to  form  for  himself  a  definite
picture  of  what  the  tabernacle  was,  he  finds  that  in
spite  of  the  multitude  of  data  supplied,  or  rather  pre
cisely  because  of  their  multitude,  it  is  impossible  to
arrive  at  any  clearness  on  the  subject.  As  Wellhausen
very  truly  remarks  (Prol.W,  353,  cp  ET  348)  :  'without
repeating  the  descriptions  of  the  tabernacle  in  Ex.  25^
word  for  word,  it  is  difficult  to  give  an  idea  how  circum
stantial  it  is  ;  we  must  go  to  the  source  to  satisfy  our
selves  what  the  "  narrator  "  can  do  in  this  line.  One
would  imagine  that  he  was  giving  specifications  to
measurers  for  estimates  or  that  he  was  writing  for
weavers  and  cabinetmakers  ;  but  they  could  not  proceed
upon  his  information,  for.  the  incredibly  matter-of-fact
statements  are  fancy  all  the  same. '

The  tabernacle  consists  of  two  parts  :  (i)  the
'dwelling-place'  (miskdtt],  and  (2)  the  enclosing  court

3 The (fWfr)-

, . ' .  i. The 'dwelling-place' is  spoken  of

a  ernac  e .  j ^ narrative  as  a  '  tent '  or  tabernacle

luS  W£LllS

'  (  ohel).  On  closer  examination,  however,
this  accords  very  imperfectly  with  the  detailed  descrip
tion.2  For  the  so-called  'tent'  forms  an  oblong  with
upright  walls  made  of  thick  '  boards'  (EV,  gnp.  keres,

1  [Other  words  rendered  '  tabernacle  '  in  EV,  but  only  in  the
more  general  sense  of  that  word,  are  :  rtap,  sukkah,  see  TABER
NACLES,  FEAST  or  ;  TJQ,  sok,  Ps.  76  2  (RVmg.  '  covert '),  or
yiy,  sok,  Lam.  26  (RV'mg  'booth  or  hedge');  ni3p,  sikkuth,
Am.  526,  AV  ;  RV  'Siccuth,'  see  CHIUN  ;  O-KTJIT),  Mt.  174  etc.  ;
o-Krji/os,  2Cor.5i4;  trKrjvia^a,  Acts  7  46  2  Pet.  1  13.  See  TENT.]

'2  It  is  clear  that  the  writer  is  at  great  pains  to  make  it  appear
that  the  structure  is  a  tent.  Only  in  this  way  can  we  explain
the  surprising  circumstance  that  in  both  cases — both  when  the
instructions  are  being  given  and  when  the  construction  is  being
described — he  begins  with  the  roof.  Plainly  he  feels  that  the
walls,  etc.,  as  he  is  about  to  describe  them,  do  not  give  the
impression  of  a  tent.  Therefore  he  gives  to  the  curtains — the
roof — the  place  of  chief  importance,  which  of  course  they  would
have  in  the  case  of  a  tent,  and  treats  all  else,  the  walls,  etc.— as
secondary  and  merely  as  necessary  accessories  for  the  curtains
just  as  tent-poles  are.

4862


TABERNACLE

(5  <77-i''\oi,  Philo  and  Josephus  Ktoves).  These  boards
are  each  10  cubits1  high  (thus  quite  rightly  designated
in  the  Greek :  '  pillars  '  or  '  posts  ' ),  the  wall  itself  some
what  more,  as  the  'feet'  (see  below)  of  the  boards
have  to  be  added  in.  In  all  there  are  48  boards,  20
on  the  N.  and  20  on  the  S.  side  (the  structure  facing
eastward)  and  8  forming  the  western  (rear)  wall.  The
front  has  no  such  wall  ;  it  is  closed  merely  by  curtains.

The  boards  themselves  are  (as  Ex.  26  \b/.  expressly
states)  each  i£  cubits  broad.  From  this,  their  arrange
ment  and  the  thickness  of  each  can  be  easily  calculated.

The  long  side  of  the  oblong  (interior  measurement)  as  is  im
plied  in  Ex.  20  i-,ff-,  is  to  be  30 cubits,  and  that  of  the  rear  wall
(thus  interior  measurement  also)  is  zocubits.  This  last  measure
ment  indeed  is  not  expressly  given,  but  it  is  clearly  implied  by
the  whole  context  ;  the  holy  of  holies  at  the  west  end  of  the
structure  is  conceived  of  as  a  cube  of  10  cubits,  just  as  that  of
the  temple  of  Solomon  is  a.  cube  of  20.  This  being  so,  the
boards  of  the  rear  wall  were  so  placed  as  to  make  it  the  exterior
wall  which  covered  the  breadth  of  both  the  longitudinal  walls.
The  eight  board$  of  the  rear  wall  together  made  a  breadth  of
8xii  =  i2  cubits;  as  the  interior  measurement  was  only  10
cubits  there  remained  a  difference  on  each  side  of  i  cubit  which
could  only  have  served  to  cover  the  ends  of  the  side  walls.
These,  therefore  and  the  rear  wall  also  were  i  cubit  thick  (so
Bahr,  Ewald,  Kamphausen,  and  others).

Holzinger,2  it  is  true,  supposes  that  these  dimensions  (10
cubits  and  30  cubits)  are  meant  to  be  taken  not  as  interior  but
as  exterior  measurements.  In  support  of  this  he  points  to  the
measurement  of  the  curtain  of  goats'  hair  which  is  calculated
for  a  framework  of  10X10X30  cubits.  This  argument  holds
good,  however,  only  if  we  ignore  Ex.  20  12  (Holzinger  eliminates
it  as  a  gloss)  and  double  the  curtain  for  4  cubits  in  front  while  at
the  rear  it  comes  down  to  the  ground  (4+30+10=44  cubits).
The  passage  just  referred  to,  on  the  other  hand,  clearly  reckons
it  cubits  as  hanging  down  at  the  rear  and  2  cubits  in  front  as
doubled  ;  thus  leaving  31  cubits  to  be  accounted  for  (viz  30
cubits  as  length  of  the  exterior  and  i  cubit  as  thickness  of  rear
wall).  In  Ex.  2022,  it  is  true,  the  two  corner  boards  of  the  rear
wall  are  distinguished  from  the  others  ;  and  from  this  the
inference  has  been  drawn  that  they  were  of  slenderer  proportions
and  thus  the  boards  altogether  thinner  than  has  been  calculated
above  (so,  for  example,  already  Josephus,  who  gives  their
thickness  as  half  a  cubit).  The  motive  for  this  is  manifest  ;  a
structure  formed  of  boards  2  ft.  7  in.  broad  and  20.67  '"•  thick  can
no  longer  in  fairness  be  called  a  tent ;  beams  of  such  a  size  are
no  longer  mere  supports  for  a  curtain  roof;  they  are  substantial
walls,  and  it  is  also  hard  to  say  where  in  the  wilderness  trees
capable  of  yielding  such  massive  timber  are  to  be  found.  Hence
the  pains  taken  in  the  apologetic  interest  to  reduce  the  beams.
Thus,  for  example,  Knobel  cites  Ezek. '-'76  where  the  same
expression  kcres  is  used  for  panelling  (EV,  RVmff-  '  deck  '),
thus  plainly  indicating  thin  boards,  not  thick  beams.  _  As
already  observed,  however,  the  writer's  manifest  object  is  to
make  the  structure  appear  as  a  tent,  and  therefore  he  may  very
well  have  deliberately  chosen  this  word  even  although  (or
rather  because)  it  elsewhere  means  only  'plank.'  Kei!  maintains
that  the  interpreter  has  no  reason  for  magnifying  mere  planks
into  colossal  beams  such  as  can  neither  be  obtained  from  the
acacia  tree  nor  be  transported  on  wheels  in  the  wilderness.
Nevertheless  there  is  no  getting  past  the  fact  that  in  Ex.
20  \;,Jjf.  it  is  expressly  stated  of  all  the  boards  that  they  were
alike.  The  text  of  Ex.  20  22^,  however,  is  hopelessly  Corrupt
and  unintelligible.  The  numerous  attempts  at  explanation  that
have  been  made  at  various  times  cannot  be  discussed  here  ;
some  of  them  are  in  the  highest  degree  artificial,  as  for  example
that  of  Riehm(//7/'#,f.Z'.  'Stiftshiitte,'  p.  1578  £).  Cp,  further,
Dillmann  and  Holzinger,  ad  loc.  ;  also  Kiggenbach,  23  ff.,
Keil,  R$f.  [Starting  from  Stade's  study  of  the  construction  of
Solomon's  layers  (i  K.  7  nff.)  in  /.A  TIT,  IQOI,  pp.  145^  where
n'T!'  ai)d  C'21":?  are  shown  to  have  had  the  technical  sense  of
'  stays'  and  '  cross-rails'  respectively,  Prof.  Kennedy  holds  that
the  ^'^^  of  P — which  is  found  elsewhere  only  in  Ezek.  276  in
the  sense  of  '  panel" — is  'a  frame  of  wood,  such  as  builders  in
all  countries  have  employed  in  the  construction  of  light  walls.'
He  renders  7'z>.  15  ff.  thus,  taking  the  parenthesis  last:  'And
thou  shall  make  the  frames  for  the  dwelling  of  acacia  wood,
standing  up,  two  uprights  for  each  frame,  joined  to  each  other
by  cross-rails — ten  cubits  the  height  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the
breadth  of  the  single  frame.'  The  third  dimension  is  not  given,
because  a  frame  has,  strictly  speaking,  no  thickness.]

Further,  all  the  boards  are  uniformly  furnished  each
with  two  niT,  ytidoth  (EV  'tenons'),  which  are  con
nected  with  one  another  by  a  slip  of  wood  (Ex.  26  i6/! ).
Josephus  understands  by  the  expression  'pivots'  (arpb-
<j>iyyfs)  at  the  foot  of  each  board,  and  this  is  not

1  [It  is  assumed  throughout  this  article  that  the  longer  cubit
of  20^67  in.  is  meant ;  see  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES,  §  i.]

2  So  also  A.  R.  S.  Kennedy,  'Tabernacle,'  in  Hastings'  DB
466i  a.

4863


TABERNACLE

improbably  correct.  For  according  to  Ex.  2619  two
bases  (c'riK,  addnlm,  EV  'sockets,'  paveis)  are  pro
vided  in  each  case  for  the  two  pivots.  They  are  of
silver,  and  each  weighs  a  talent  (95  Ibs. )  ;  Ex.  8827. 1
Interpreters  differ  widely  as  to  the  purpose  and  the
form  of  these  sockets.  The  most  natural  view  seems  to
be  that  of  Josephus,  according  to  which  the  tenons  and
sockets  were  placed  at  the  lower  edge  of  the  boards  in
such  a  way  that  the  function  of  the  tenons  was  to  con
nect  the  boards  with  the  sockets.  For  throughout  the
whole  description  no  word  is  said  as  to  the  manner  in
which  the  boards  were  set  up  on  or,  as  it  may  be,
fastened  into  the  ground.  As  to  this,  some  interpreters
think  of  the  sockets  as  having  been  wedge-shaped  and
as  being  driven  into  the  ground,  the  boards  then  being
fitted  into  them  by  means  of  the  tenons.  Against  such
an  explanation,  however,  must  be  urged  the  light  weight
cf  the  silver  ;  95  Ibs.  of  that  metal  (if  the  text  be  correct)
are  not  enough  for  a  wedge  large  enough  to  carry  a
pillar  having  a  cross  section  of  30  x  20  in.  and  weighing
something  like  half  a  ton.  Moreover  the  use  of  silver
for  any  such  purpose  at  all  would  be  very  odd  ;  silver
and  gold  after  all  are  best  applied  for  the  decoration  of
a  structure  and  are  not  usually  buried  under  ground.
Other  interpreters  accordingly  take  the  meaning  to  be
that  OoRyddoth  (tenons),  were  designed  for  driving  into
the  ground  and  that  the  addnlm  were  merely  quite
shallow  projecting  bases  of  the  boards  through  which  the
pivots  passed.  But  not  even  thus  is  the  object  of  fixing
the  boards  in  position  attained,  for  simple  pivots  would
have  been  insufficient,  and  the  boards  would  have  had
to  be  driven  into  the  ground  (see  below).  Thus  we  are
shut  up  to  the  view  that  the  addnlm  were  quite  shallow
bases  of  the  boards  serving  more  for  ornament  than  for
stability.  By  the  pivots  in  that  case  these  bases  were
attached  to  the  boards.  It  will  be  enough  merely  to
mention  here  the  quite  different  explanation  of  Kiehm
(HWB,  s.v.  'Stiftshiitte,'  1578 /)  according  to  which
each  board  consisted  of  two  pieces  which  were  held
together  by  the  tenons  at  the  sides  and  by  the  feet
below.

These  boards  were  attached  to  one  another  by  cross
bars  (EV  'bars';  trrr-ia,  bfrihlm}.  Each  board  had
on  its  outer  side  golden  '  rings  '  (EV  ;  nii'|a,  tabbaoth}?
through  which  were  passed  strong  bars  of  acacia  wood.
To  be  precise,  there  were  five  such  bars  on  each  side
(Ex.  36  y.ff.}.  The  middle  bar,  half-way  up  the  boards,3
ran  all  the  way  along  and  thus  was  in  the  case  of  the
rear  wall  12  cubits  long,  and  in  the  case  of  each  of  the
other  two  walls  30  cubits,  or,  let  us  say,  31  cubits,  since
doubtless  we  may  safely  assume  that  the  boards  of  the
rear  wall  which  covered  the  ends  of  the  longer  walls,
and  thus  the  rear  wall  as  a  whole,  were  connected  with
the  longer  walls  by  these  crossbars.  From  the  state
ment  about  the  middle  bar  that  it  went  right  along  we
must  conclude  that  this  was  not  the  case  with  the  others.
These,  accordingly,  were  shorter  and  we  shall  be  justi
fied  perhaps  in  supposing  that  each  bar  joined  together
only  one  half  of  the  total  number  of  boards,  and  thus
that  each  individual  board  had  only  three  rings  and
bars.  The  position  of  the  bars  as  given  in  the  figure  in
Riehm  (HWB  1579)  is  derived  from  the  consideration
that  the  narrator  plainly  has  it  in  his  mind  that  five  bars
could  be  at  once  distinguished  by  simple  inspection,
which  would  not  so  readily  be  the  case  if  the  upper  and

1  [This  passage,  however,  belongs  to  a  very  late  addition  to
P  based  on  the  census  in  Numbers.]

2  It  is  not  indeed  expressly  said  in  the  text  that  the  bars  were
upon  the  outer  side  ;  but  this  is  the  most  natural  and  likely
supposition. Ewald,  however,  amongst  others,  thinks  of  the
rings  and  bars  as  on  the  inner  side.

3  Riggenbach  and  others  take  Ex.  26  28  as  meaning  that  the
middle  bar  went  through  the  interior  of  the  boards  themselves
and  not  through  rings,  but  such  a  construction  can  hardly  be
put  upon  the  expression  C'BH^n  ~in3,  apart  from  the  improb
ability  of  the  whole  idea.

4864


TABERNACLE

lower  bars  had  each  run  at  a  uniform  level  and  each
contiguous  with  the  other.1

Finally,  the  boards  and  bars  are,  according  to  Ex.
2629,^,  overlaid  with  gold,  that  is  to  say,  with  thin
gold  plate  so  that  the  inner  and  outer  surface  of  the
structure  was  golden.'-'

These  walls  formed  a  framework  for  the  coverings —

the  roof, which, as already observed, was regarded

_, by the narrator as the main thing, the

' . essential  part  of  the  structure,  as  indeed  it

coverings.  %vouj,j  )je  jn  ^e  Cflse  Of  an  actual  tent. It

has  four  coverings,  laid  successively  the  one  upon  the
other.

(i)  The  innermost  was  of  costly  linen.  It  is  de
scribed  (Ex.  26  iff. )  as  the  work  of  the  cunning  workman
(ma'iise/i  fio&b],  of  fine-twined  linen  (sfX  ;  see  LINEN,  7)
violet  purple  and  red  purple  (ttkeleth  and  argdmdn  ;  see
COLOURS,  §  15,  PURPLE)  and  scarlet  (told'ath  fdnt;
see  COLOURS,  §  14,  SCARLET).  Cherubim  were  woven
into  it.  How  the  colours  were  applied  we  are  not
more  precisely  informed.  We  can  imagine  either  a
patterned  textile  in  four  colours  with  inwoven  cherubim
or  a  white  texture  with  cherubim  inwoven  in  three
colours.  The  latter  appears  the  more  likely  supposition.
The  curtain  of  the  enclosing  wall  of  the  court  was  also
white  (see  below).  The  whole  covering  was  made  up
of  ten  separate  'curtains  '  (EV  ;  yfn'oth} ;  each  of  these
strips  was  28  cubits  long  and  4  cubits  broad,  and  five
of  them  were  joined  side  by  side  to  form  one  large
covering.  No  particulars  are  given  as  to  the  mode  of
their  attachment.  The  two  large  coverings  thus  com
posed,  28  cubits  long  and  20  cubits  wide,  had  each  of
them  along  one  of  the  longer  sides  fifty  '  loops'  (EV  ;
liildcth)  of  violet  purple  so  placed  that  each  of  the  loops
was  opposite  a  loop  on  the  other  curtain.  In  these  loops
were  inserted  fifty  golden  '  clasps  '  ( RV,  AV  '  laches  '  ;
D'pip,  ktrdsfm),  by  means  of  which  Ihe  Iwo  large  cover
ings  were  held  together. 3  The  whole  of  the  great  cover
ing  thus  made  up,  28  cubits  by  40,  was  then  laid  over
the  wooden  framework.  On  the  outer  side  of  each  of  the
two  longer  walls  it  thus  hung  down  to  a  distance  of  8
cubits  (the  whole  breadth  of  the  structure,  including  the
thickness  of  Ihe  walls,  being,  as  we  have  seen,  12
cubits).  To  the  rear,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were
9  cubits  to  spare,  as  of  course  Ihe  covering  was  not
allowed  to  overhang  in  front.  In  this  position  of  the
covering,  the  joining  of  its  two  great  sections,  with  its
loops  and  clasps,  ran  exactly  along  Ihe  top  of  the  hang
ing  curtain  which,  20  cubits  from  the  front,  separated
the  holy  place  from  the  holy  of  holies.  This  arrange
ment  was  certainly  designed.  Nothing  is  anywhere
said  as  to  any  special  attachment  of  this  great  covering
to  the  walls  ;  nor  indeed  was  any  such  attachment
required,  its  own  weight  combined  with  thai  of  the  two
others  superimposed  upon  it  being  amply  sufficient  to
keep  it  in  position.  This  inner  covering  constitules  the
miskan  properly  so-called,  the  wooden  walls  being
regarded  merely  as  supports  for  it  ;  and  we  find  it
accordingly  in  one  place  (Ex.  2613)  expressly  so  called.

a.  Kurz,  Keil,  Bahr,  and  others  (including  Holzinger),  take  it
that  this  covering  hung  down  on  the  inner  side  of  the  structure,
covering  the  wall  as  with  a  hanging  of  tapestry.  The  reason
primarily  alleged  for  this  opinion — that  otherwise  the  cheruhs
between  the  wall  and  the  hair-covering  would  not  have  been
shown — disappears  on  the  assumption  we  propose  to  make  that
the  hair -covering  was  drawn  out  (see  below).  Two  other
reasons,  adduced  by  Holzinger,  carry  more  weight,  (i.)  In  the

'  The  circumstance  that  the  middle  bar  ran  right  along  and
thus  must  have  been  31  cubits  in  length  naturally  caused  diffi
culty  from  very  early  times,  and  Josephus  accordingly  represents
it  as  having  been  made  up  of  several  lengths  of  5  cubits  apiece,
which  were  screwed  together.

2  Perhaps  we  ought  with  Holzinger  to  regard  v.  29  as  being
in  the  main  a  gloss  ;  in  Nu.  4  careful  packing  of  the  gold-plated
objects  is  enjoined,  and  this  would  certainly  not  be  easy  in  the
case  of  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle. Vet  an  oversight  such  as
this,  on  the  part  of  the  narrator,  is  not  difficult  to  imagine.

3  Schick's  supposition,  that  one  curtain  had  loops  and  clasps,
is  contrary  to  the  language  of  the  text.

486S


first  place  he  urges  that  the  fine  linen  fabric  would  have  taken
damage  if  stretched  over  the  wooden  wall  in  contact  with  the
rough  covering  of  goats'  hair,  would  have  been  torn  by  the
nails,  and  so  forth.  As  against  this,  however,  it  has  to  be
pointed  put  that  the  whole  structure  is  a  creation  of  the
imagination,  and  that  in  any  case  the  author  has  not  thought
out  the  details  with  such  practicality  and  minuteness  as
criticism  of  this  kind  would  imply,  (ii.)  Holzinger's  other  reason
is  that,  in  Nu.4s,  when  the  tabernacle  is  being  removed  it  is
represented  that  the  byssus  covering  can  be  applied  as  a  cover
ing  for  the  ark  without  more  ado ;  this  certainly  could  be  done
most  easily  if  it  hung  wholly  within.  The  fact,  however,  that
in  striking  an  actual  tent  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  take
down  the  tent  covering,  is  of  course  one  that  does  not  need
to  be  particularly  emphasised  ;  and  the  implied  oversight  of
the  narrator  thus  becomes  intelligible,  b.  On  the  other  side  there
are  preponderating  considerations  against  the  theory  that  the
covering  hung  within,  (i.)  In  the  first  place,  had  it  done  so,  this
would  have  rendered  necessary  special  arrangements  for  the
attachment  of  the  covering  to  the  upper  edge  of  the  wooden
walls,  but  of  any  such,  no  mention  is  anywhere  made,  (ii.)
Further,  in  the  case  supposed,  the  covering  would  have  hung
down  9  cubits  on  each  of  the  side  walls,  and  as  many  as  10  on
the  hinder  wall,  thus  resting  on  the  ground — an  inequality  which,
in  combination  with  the  great  protruding  cornerpieces,  would
have  greatly  disfigured  the  Holy  of  Holies,  (iii.)  Finally,  in
Ex.26i2y^  it  is  expressly  said  that  the  tent-covering  proper
which  lay  above  this  covering  overlapped  it  in  all  directions  ;  but
this  is  meaningless  unless  the  inner  covering  also  hung  down
the  outside  of  the  wooden  walls.  This  last  passage,  it  is  true,
is  regarded  by  Holzinger  as  a  gloss  ;  it  shows,  however,  in  any
case  at  least  that  from  a  very  early  date  this  linen  covering  was
thought  of  as  an  external  hanging.  Nor  is  it  by  any  means
necessary  to  treat  the  verses  as  a  gloss.  For  on  any  construction
it  is  impossible  to  give  precision  and  accuracy  to  the  descrip
tion  (see  below).  For  all  which  reasons  the  majority  of  modern
interpreters  (Dillmann,  Riehm,  Nowack,  Kennedy,  and  others)
adopt  the  view  that  the  covering  was  an  external  one.  On
this  view,  let  it  be  added,  the  general  effect  was  not  impaired
by  the  inequality  of  the  hanging  on  the  side  walls  (8  cubits),
as  compared  with  the  hinder  wall  (9  cubits),  nor  yet  by  the
corner  folds  coming  down  to  the  ground  with  2  cubits  to  spare.

(2)  Above  this  inner  covering  came,  as  a  second
'roof,'  a  real  tent  covering  (Ex.  267^)  like  those  in
ordinary  use,  made  of  black  or  brown  goats'  hnir,1  a
material  that  quickly  felts  in  rain  and  allows  no  moisture
to  pass  through.  This  covering  is  also  spoken  of,
absolutely,  as  'the  tent.'"  Like  Ihe  other,  it  also,
naturally,  is  made  up  of  separate  strips  ;  of  which  there
are  eleven,  each  of  them  30  cubits  by  4.  Of  these
eleven,  five  and  six  respectively  are  fastened  together  so
as  to  form  two  larger  coverings.  Uniformly  with  the
linen  covering  both  parts  of  the  goats'  hair  covering
have  each  on  the  longer  side  fifty  loops  exactly  opposite
one  another  and  are  fastened  together  by  clasps  ;  only
here  the  clasps  are  made  of  copper — a  less  noble  metal.
The  material  and  colour  of  the  loops  are  not  specified.
It  will  be  observed  that  if  a  covering  of  these  dimensions
were  lo  be  laid  over  the  linen  covering,  it  would  overlap
il  all  round  by  a  cubit,  and  this  is  expressly  stated
in  Ex.  2613.  On  the  hinder  wall,  on  the  other  hand,
the  overlapping  part  was  2  cubits  longer  than  the  linen
covering.  For  the  hair  covering  was  so  adjusted  that
of  the  elevenlh  (extra)  breadth  of  4  cubits  only  the  half
hung  over  the  back  of  the  tabernacle  (Ex.  2612),  that  is
to  say,  overlapped  the  linen  covering.-  The  extra
portion  over  the  entrance  in  front,  2  cubits  in  width,
was  not  allowed  to  overhang  but  was  turned  back  so
that  in  this  way  the  first  strip  to  the  front  was  folded
along  the  medial  line  and  lay  double.  According  to
Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  64)  there  was  thus  made  a  sort  of
gable  and  portal.  A  simpler  explanation  perhaps  will
be  thai  of  Riehm  and  others,  thai  the  weight  of  the
doubled  front  strip  was  intended  to  prevent  the  wind

1  Rahr  thinks  that  this  covering  was  entirely  white. The
text,  however,  does  not  say  so,  nor  is  the  thing  likely  in  itself.
Ordinary  tent-coverings  are  black  or  dark-brown,  often  having
white  stripes  also  (Cant.  1  5).

2  Holzinger  (ad  lac.)  it  is  true,  holds  this  reckoning  which
brings  out  an  excess  to  be  a  mistake,  and  considers  '20  12  to  be  a
gloss. The  mistake  arises  according to him put of  a  false
notion  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  linen  covering  was  placed
(see  above). [Kennedy  (op.  cit.)  follows  Holzinger  in  regarding
v.  12 as  a  mistaken gloss, but holds that  the  whole of  the
eleventh  curtain  hung  doubled  over  the  edge  of  the  roof  in  front,
for  which  he  claims  the  support  of  a  Jewish  treatise  of  the
third  century.]

4866


TABERNACLE


TABERNACLE


from  catching  it  too  easily.  Behind  and  at  the  sides
the  covering  was  protected  against  this  by  the  fastening
with  tent  pins  (see  below).  The  effect  of  the  arrange
ment  was  that  the  joinings  of  the  linen  and  of  the  goats'  -
hair  coverings  did  not  coincide  ;  and  this  is  evidently
quite  right.  In  like  manner  the  places  at  which  the
separate  strips  were  fastened  together  by  the  loops  and
clasps  were  not  coincident  as  Ba'hr,  and  recently
Holzinger  and  Kennedy,  erroneously  have  held.  In
point  of  fact,  since  in  the  case  of  the  goats'-hair  covering
the  larger  portion  (of  six  strips)  was  put  in  front,  the
joining  came  to  be  over  the  holy  of  holies,  2  cubits
farther  back  than  the  joining  of  the  linen  covering
which  as  we  have  seen  was  exactly  over  the  veil  between
the  holy  place  and  the  holy  of  holies.

To  this  tent  covering  pertain  the  'pins'  (EV;
vfthedoth)  and  'cords'  (EV  ;  methdrim]  of  which  re
curring  mention  is  made  (Ex.  27  19  35  18  882031  39  40).
The  pins,  unlike  the  ordinary  wooden  tent  peg,  are  of
brass  (8831).  From  the  mention  of  these  pins  and
cords  we  must  infer,  although  this  is  not  expressly
stated,  that  the  hair-covering  did  not,  like  the  under-
covering,  hang  down  over  the  outer  walls,  but,  as
would  be  the  case  with  a  regular  tent,  was  fastened  by
means  of  ropes  to  the  pins  driven  into  the  ground  and
thus  spread  out  slantingly.  Hence  also  it  must  in  all
directions  have  been  longer  than  the  linen  covering.
By  this  supposition  we  also  get  over  the  other  difficulty,
otherwise  hard  to  meet,  that  at  the  rear  this  covering
hung  down  n  cubits  (2  cubits  more  than  the  linen
covering)  and  thus,  since  the  wall  was  only  10  cubits
high,  would  have  had  one  whole  cubit  upon  the  ground
unless  thus  drawn  out.1

(3)  Above  this  tent  covering  were  placed  —  obviously  for  a
protection  from  the  weather  —  two  additional  coverings  ;  one  of
rams'  skins  dyed  red  (C'^N  rnj?  '"I5:3'?)>  a"d  over  'his  another  of
porpoise  skins  (C'w'nn  rhy  ncoD  ;  but  see  BADGERS  SKINS).
As  to  the  dimensions  of  these  two  coverings  no  details  are
given  (see  below,  note  i).  Riehm  (ffli'B)  and  others  have
supposed  that  they  served  the  purpose  only  of  a  roofing,  and
were  not  so  large  as  the  coverings  properly  so-called.  This,
however,  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  expression  '  covering  '
(neon)  nor  yet  from  the  '  above  '  (n^V^C)  of  Ex.  40  19  Nu.  4  2=  ;
and  all  further  conjectures  based  upon  this,  such  as  that  the
roof  ran  to  a  point  or  to  a  ridge,  and  the  like,  are  wholly
without  solid  foundation  (see  §  10  end).

In  front  the  structure  was  closed  in,  as  has  already
been  said,  not  by  a  wall  of  wood  and  a  door,  but  only


, .
5.  The  curtains.  .


bv a curtain (AV 'han


RV
.  screen .  ^.  ?  ifi>

etc.),  which  like  the  inner  covering  was  a  textile  fabric
woven  in  four  colours  :  white  spun  linen,  violet  purple,
red  purple,  and  scarlet.  This  curtain  formed  a  single
piece  10  cubits  square,  and  was  held  up  by  five  pillars
of  acacia  wood.  Whether  the  pillars  were  placed
between  the  first  boards  of  the  longer  walls,  or  so  that
the  two  outermost  were  attached  to  the  outer  corners  of
these  walls  is  not  stated.  The  pillars  have  copper
bases  and  according  to  Ex.  26  are  overlaid  with  gold  ;
according  to  8637,  indeed,  only  the  capitals  were  so.
How  the  curtain  was  fastened  to  these  pillars  is  not
explained.  Besides  the  golden  pegs  or  '  hooks  '  (so
EV  ;  -wdwim,  Ex.2637),  rings  (EV  'fillets';  hasuklm,
Ex.  27  10)  are  also  mentioned.  By  these  some  inter
preters  (Ewald,  Dillmann)  understand  rings  which
formed  a  sort  of  garland  under  the  capitals  and  thus
served  for  ornament.  Others  (e.g.  Riehm)  explain  them
as  rods  which  connected  the  hooks  and  on  which  the
curtain  was  hung.  At  all  events  the  ii<dwiin  are  not

1  Holzinger  (ad  loc.)  will  have  it  that  the  cords  and  pins
belonged  to  the  upper  coverings.  In  that  case  we  should  have
to  think  of  these  as  having  been  very  large.  The  circumstance,
however,  that  the  hair-covering  is  actually  called  the  tent  ('okcl  ;
sec  above)  permits  the  inference  that  just  as  in  its  material  it
resembled  an  ordinary  tent,  so  also  in  its  use  it  is  thought  of  as
such  —  that  is  to  say  was  spread  like  an  ordinary  tent.  [Kennedy,
on  the  other  hand,  finds  the  'cords'  mentioned  only  in  the
latest  strata  of  P,  and  thinks  the  hair-covering  was  pinned  to
the  ground  all  round  after  the  manner  of  the  Ka'ba  at  Mecca.]

4867


nails  with  which  the  curtain  was  nailed  up — had  this
been  so  they  would  have  to  be  pulled  out  every  time
the  tabernacle  was  moved — but  hooks  to  which  the
curtain  was  fastened  somehow,  with  rings  or  otherwise.

From  this  outer  curtain  the  inner,  by  which  the
structure  is  divided  into  two  parts,  is  distinguished  only
by  its  greater  elaboration  ;  the  materials  are  the  same,
but,  over  and  above,  it  is  adorned  with  cherubim,  the
work  of  the  skilled  workman.  The  four  pillars  by
which  this  inner  curtain  is  supported,  are  of  acacia  wood
completely  overlaid  with  gold,  and  have  silver  bases,  in
this  respect  differing  from  the  pillars  of  the  outer
apartment,  which  have  bases  of  brass  only,  and  only  the
capitals  overlaid  with  gold.  This  inner  curtain  has  its
place  directly  underneath  the  row  of  clasps  which  fasten
the  two  portions  of  the  linen  covering  together,  and
thus  is  10  cubits  distant  from  the  hinder  wall.  It
divides  the  entire  space  into  two  apartments,  the  outer
and  larger  being  20  cubits  long  and  the  inner  only  half
as  much,  having  thus  the  form  of  a  cube  of  10  cubits.

Nothing  is  said  as  to  how  this  curtain  is  hung  upon  the
golden  nails.  The  curtain  bears  the  designation  of  pdroketli
(ninB,  Ex.  2631,  AV  'vail,'  RV  'veil1)  or  paroketh  hammdsdk
OlDSn  nriS;  Ex.  35  12  8834  402i  Xu.  4$,  AV  'the  vail  of  the
covering,"  RV  'the  veil  of  the  screen').  The  meaning  of  the
word  (©  KaTaireTa<7/oia,  Vg.  velum)  is  uncertain.  It  is  generally
explained  as  'parting,'  'separation.'  More  probably  it  is  an
original  terminus  technicus  used  in  connection  with  worship,
and  denotes  the  boundary  of  the  cella  of  a  sanctuary  (see  below,
and  cp  Ges.-Bu.  and  BDB,  s.v.  -ng,  ii.  also  Dillmann,  ad  loc.  \
\VRS,Journ.  Phil.  13  283  ;  Halevy,  Mel.  187).

The.  outer  and  larger  apartment  was  '  the  Holy '
(hakkodes,  Ex.2633,  EV  'the  holy  place'),  the  inner
'the  Holy  of  Holies'  (kodeS  hakkSddsim,  Ex.2633,  EV
'the  most  holy').  The  latter  could  be  ertered  only
once  in  the  year  on  the  great  day  of  atonement,  and
that  by  the  high  priest  alone  (Lev.  16 iff.}  ',  the  former
was  accessible  to  the  priests  only,  in  the  discharge  of
their  sacred  duties.

The  sanctuary  was  surrounded  by  an  enclosed  court
too  cubits  long  and  50  broad  (Ex.  27g-i9  8810-20).
The  enclosure  was  by  means  of  curtains
(EV  'hangings,  ktld'im)  of  white  spun
linen  (EV  '  fine  twined  linen,'  sesmohdr).  This  curtain-
wall  which  was  5  cubits  high  was  supported  by  pillars
of  wood  ;  whether  of  acacia  is  not  stated,  but  this  is
probably  meant.  The  total  compass  of  the  enclosing
wall  was  ( 1 00+  100  +  50  +  50=  )3oocubits.  The  number
of  pillars  is  given  as  20  for  each  of  the  longer  sides  and
10  for  each  of  the  shorter.  The  view  of  the  author
plainly  is  that  there  were  sixty  pillars  in  all  at  a  uniform
distance  from  each  other  of  5  cubits.

The  number  given  for  the  pillars  on  each  side  is  obviously
inexact  if  the  total  number  is  to  be  taken  as  60.  If  we  take  the
statement  quite  literally  and  reckon  all  the  pillars  on  each  side,
then  on  the  given  data  we  get  a  total  of  fifty-six  pillars  only,  for
of  course  each  corner  pillar  is  counted  twice — once  as  part  of  the
longer  side  and  again  as  part  of  the  shorter.  It  is  in  this  way
that  Lund,  Bahr,  Winer  and  others  view  the  matter.  It  is  not
very  probable,  however ;  for  in  that  case  the  distances  of  the
pillars  from  one  another  on  the  shorter  sides  (-^'  cubits)  would
not  be  the  same  as  those  on  the  longer  (VV  cubits).  For  this
reason  other  interpreters  prefer  to  think  that  the  describer  in
giving  his  figures  for  each  side  did  not  count  the  last  pillar  in
each  row  (so  Keil,  Dillmann,  Riehm,  Nowack  and  others).
This  doubtless  would  be  in  itself  quite  possible  if  it  did  not  so
happen  that  we  are  able  to  reckon  exactly  with  regard  to  one
side — the  eastern  with  the  entrance — that  it  actually  had  only
ten  pillars,  neither  more  nor  fewer.  For  this  side  had  in  the
middle  four  pillars  which  carried  the  curtain  of  the  door,  and  if
we  are  to  assume  symmetry  at  all  in  the  structure,  the  door
must  have  been  in  the  middle,  and  thus  to  right  and  left  there
must  have  been  an  equal  number  of  pillars— namely  three,  as  is
expressly  stated  in  Ex. 27  14  f.  Thus  we  shall  doubtless  t
justified  in  assuming  that  the  author  has  allowed  himself  to  be
guided  simply  by  his  scheme  according  to  which  the  proportion
of 2:1  is  applied  to  the  whole  structure  without  caring  very
minutely  about  details.

Each  pillar  has  a  base  of  bronze  and  a  capital  overlaid
with  silver.  The  diminution  in  the  value  of  the
materials  in  proportion  to  the  distance  from  the  Holy  of
Holies  is  noteworthy.  The  curtains  are  fastened  in
their  places  by  means  of  silver  nails  which  here  also.


G.  The  court.


TABERNACLE

doubtless  served  as  hooks  for  hanging  (38 17  27  17).  In
the  same  connection  mention  is  made  also  of  silver
hasuklm ).

The  meaning  of  the  word  C'fWn  is  disputed.  Many  under
stand  by  it  silver  bars,  or  bars  of  wood  overlaid  with  silver,
which  reached  from  one  pillar  capital  to  another  and  rested
upon  silver  nails,  and  to  them  the  curtains  were  attached  either
directly  or  by  means  of  rings  (so  Lund,  Keil,  Riehm,  Knobel,
and  others).  According  to  Ex.  8817  ig,  however,  the  hasnkini
seem  to  have  been  integral  parts  of  the  pillars  themselves,  and
the  expression  mfhussdkim  ktseph  (rjD3  D'f3B:np  ;  Ex.  27  17  38 17,
EV,  '  filleted  with  silver,'  can  hardly  mean  '  fastened  with  silver
crossbars.'  Other  interpreters  therefore  (such  as  Ewald,  Dill-
mann,  Kautzsch,  Nowack,  Kennedy)  understand  by  the
expression  'rings  '  or  fillets  which  surrounded  the  pillars  above,
probably  at  the  base  of  the  capitals  (©  i/<aAt'Ses,  explained  by
Hesychius  as  ai//i6es  riav  cnv\u>v  ;  Tg.  !5'?3<3,  a  lacing  or  garland).

The  E.  front  differed  from  the  other  sides  (Ex.
27  i3/.).  From  each  corner  only  15  cubits  were  pro
vided  with  an  enclosing  curtain,  in  each  case  having
three  pillars.  The  middle  space  of  twenty  cubits  was
left  open  for  the  entrance  and  had  a  special  curtain  of
violet  purple  and  red  purple,  scarlet  and  white  linen  in
embroidered  work  (and  thus  exactly  like  the  curtain  at
the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle  itself)  which  was  attached
to  four  pillars.1

In  connection  with  this  enclosure  of  the  court  of  the
tabernacle,  finally,  are  mentioned  also  tent-pins  of
brass  and  cords  (Ex.  27 19  35i8  302031  8940,  etc.).
Here  also  we  see  accordingly  that  the  bases  of  the  pillars
are  not  designed  for  fixing  them  into  the  ground  but
that  the  pillars  are  kept  in  position  by  pegs  and  ropes
which  of  course  are  applied  on  both  sides.  On  another
view  (Riehm,  Nowack,  and  others),  these  ropes  and
pegs  held  the  curtain  itself  taut  and  therefore  close  to
the  ground.

As  for  the  position  of  the  structure,  the  miskdn,
within  the  court  we  learn  that  the  orientation  of  the
whole  was  eastward.  As  the  altar  of  burnt  offering
stood  to  the  E.  of  the  tabernacle  and  thus  the  most
characteristic  acts  of  worship,  the  sacrifices,  were  per
formed  here  whilst  the  space  behind  the  tabernacle  to
the  W.  was  set  apart  for  no  special  purpose,  we  must
suppose  that  the  structure  was  not  in  the  middle  but
stood  more  to  the  W.  On  this  point  we  may  take  it
that  Philo  (l'it.  Mos.  87)  hit  upon  the  right  con
jecture  when  he  supposed  that  the  front  of  the  taber
nacle  was  50  cubits  from  the  enclosing  wall  facing  it,
thus  giving  a  free  space  of  50  cubits  s>quare  before  the
tabernacle.

According  to  P  the  portable  sanctuary  possessed
already  in  the  times  before  the  settlement  in  Palestine
_,  the  following  sacred  vessels  : —

furniture ^  In  the  Holy  of  Holies  stood  the  ark

'  of  the  covenant  (nnyn  ['TIN,  'dron  ha  'edutJi)  with
the  mercy  seat  (rni23,  kappSrctli)  and  the  cherubim.  See  ARK,
MERCY  SEAT,  CHERUB.

(z)  'The  Holy  place'  contained  the  table  of  shewbread,
the  golden  candlestick  and  the  altar  of  incense.  The  table  of
shewbread  according  to  Ex.  2635  stood  on  the  N.  side,  and  to  it
belonged  various  golden  dishes  (EV  'chargers,'  kU'dr&tft,  Nu.
7  13^)  and  bowls  (EV  '  spoons,'  kappsth,  Ex.  2629  Nu.  7  14^),
pots  or  cups  (AV  'covers,  RV  'flagons,'  kcsdth)  for  the
wine,  and  libation  '  bowls '  (so  EV)  for  the  wine  offerings
(mfnakki'yyoth,  Ex.  25  t^ff.  37  iq^TO.  For  further  details  as  to
the  table,  see  ALTAR,  §  9,  col.  126.  Opposite  the  table,  on  the
S.  side  of  the  sanctuary,  stood  the  seven-branched  golden
candlestick  (EV  'candlestick of  pure  gold,"  ttienorath  hazzd ' a b
tiilior,  Ex.  2031  2  Ch.  13  n,  or  liamiiicnorah  IiattfiiSrah  [EV

1  Here  also,  as  in  what  is  said  as  to  the  total  number  of
pi'.lars  (see  above),  one  observes  that  the  author  has  not
counted,  or  let  us  say  drawn  his  plan,  with  exactness.  He  has
simply  assumed  a  regular  interval  of  5  cubits  between  the
pillars,  thus  giving  20  cubits  for  4,  15  cubits  for  3.  But  this
does  not  work  out :  the  end  pillar  is  forgotten.  The  whole  side
requires  eleven  pillars  whfn  such  an  interval  is  assumed  ;  for
the  door  five  ought  to  have  been  reckoned  or  at  any  rate  for
each  side  of  it  to  right  and  left  four  pillars.  If  we  are  to
calculate  with  precision  from  the  data  he  supplies,  we  shall  have
to  reckon  the  distance  from  pillar  to  pillar  of  the  doorway  as
^°  =  6;j  cubits  and  that  between  the  pillars  at  each  side  of  the
doorway  as  5  cubits.  [Cp  Kennedy,  Hastings'  .5 Z)  4  657  b.]

4869


TABERNACLE

'the  pure  candlestick'],  Ex.  31 8  8837  Lev.  244  ;  see  CANDLE
STICK).  As  vessels  pertaining  to  the  candlestick  are  mentioned
the  snuffers  (EV  '  snuffdishes,'  melkaliayhti)  and  little  pans
(EV  'censers';  nia.htf>th),on  which,  according  to  some  interpreters
(Dillmann,  Knobel,  and  others),  lay  the  snuffers  ;  according  to
others  (Nowack,  etc.)  snuff  dishes  are  meant  (cp  Ex.  'Xt^iff.
37  17  ff.~).  On  the  form  of  the  candlestick,  see  CANDLESTICK  ;
on  the  custom  of  burning  a  light  in  the  sanctuary,  cp  LAMP,  and
see  TEMPLE,  §  17.  Between  the  shewbread  table  and  the  candle
stick,  facing  the  entrance  and  pretty  far  back,  near  the  curtain
shutting  off  the  Holy  of  Holies  stood  the  altar  of  incense  (Ex.
30  i^  [EV  'an  altar  to  burn  incense  upon'],  mizbah  miktar
kcti'reth,  m.k.  hassatnnriin.  Lev.  4  7  [EV  'the  altar  of  sweet
incense  '],  or  tnisbali  hazzaluib,  Ex. 8938  [EV  'the  golden  altar  ']),
with  regard  to  which,  and  its  absence  from  the  older  strata  of
P,  see  ALTAR,  §  9.

(3)  In  the  court  stood  'the  altar'  K.O.-T  i^o^v
(naisn,  hammizbcah,  Ex.  27 1  30  18  40  7,  etc.),  '  the  altar  of
burnt  offering'  (inizbah  Itd'olah,  Ex.3028  31  9,  etc.)  or  'the
brazen  altar'  (iiiizbah.  nfhfseth,  Ex.  8830  8939X011  which  see
ALTAR,  §  9  a  ;  TEMPLE,  §  18  ;  and  cp  below,  §  10).  To  the  altar
of  burnt  offering  belonged  a  multitude  of  accessories  :  ash  pans
(AV  'pans,'  RV  'pots,'  strdtli),  'shovels'  (EV,ya'im)  for
clearing  the  altar,  bowls  (EV  '  basons,'  tnizrakotli)  for  sprinkling
the  blood,  forks  (EV  'fleshhooks,'  mizlagftfi)  for  the  sacrificial
flesh,  various  sorts  of  'firepans'  (itia/iist/i).  The  vessels,  like
the  altar  itself,  were  all  of  brass  (Ex'.  21  i  ff.  38  i  Jf.),  as  also
was  the  other  main  object  in  the  court,  the  laver,  used  by  the
priests  for  washing  their  hands  and  feet ;  see  SEA,  BRAZEN.

As  already  mentioned  above  and  as  set  forth  fully
under  TEMPLE  (§  i  /. ),  the  tabernacle,  like  all  the  sanctu-

8.  Significance  aries  of  !he  Semites'  has  in  the  first
of  tabernacle  mstance  the  meaning  not  of  a  meetmg-
•  p  place  for  the  community  or  congrega

tion,  but  of  a  dwelling-place  of  the
deity.  It  is  the  place  where  Yahwe  dwells  in  the  midst
of  his  people  (Ex.  258  2945/.  Lev.  1?4  Nu.  169,  etc.).
When  the  tent  is  finished  the  cloud  of  Yahwe  over
shadows  it  and  the  glory  (-i^g,  kabod]  of  Yahwe  fills  it ;
by  day  Yahwe's  pillar  of  cloud  and  by  night  his  pillar  of
fire  overhangs  it  (Ex.  4637^).  Thenceforward  it  is
invariably  from  the  holy  of  holies  that  Yahwe  speaks
to  Moses.  More  precisely,  the  kappdreth  (see  MERCY
SEAT)  of  the  ark,  beneath  the  cherubim,  is  the  place
where  Yahwe  establishes  his  abode.  It  is  from  here
that  Moses  hears  the  voice  of  Yahwe  (Xu.  7  89).

As  Yahwe's  dwelling-place  the  tabernacle  naturally
becomes  also  the  place  where  he  is  worshipped,  for  the
deity  is  worshipped  in  the  place  where  he  is  (see
TEMPLE  ;  cp  Ex.  2?42  Lev.  1  35)  ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,
for  P  the  tabernacle  is  the  only  legitimate  place  of
worship.  This  follows  inevitably  from  his  standpoint
throughout  ;  for  him  it  is  a  self-evident  proposition
that  sacrifice  can  be  offered  and  Yahwe  approached
only  at  the  place  where  Yahwe  has  his  abode.  So
much  so  that  it  is  not  found  necessary  in  P  expressly  to
say  so  ;  the  centralisation  of  the  worship  is  for  him
simply  taken  for  granted.

Nor  is  the  tabernacle  in  P  the  centre  of  the  worship
merely ;  it  lies  also  at  the  foundation  of  the  entire
theocracy  as  the  indispensable  basis  without  which  all
else  would  simply  hang  in  the  air.  The  instructions
regarding  it  constitute  the  main  contents  of  the  divine
revelation  at  Sinai.  Until  it  has  come  into  existence
the  whole  organisation  of  the  rest  of  the  divine  common
wealth  must  remain  in  abeyance.  In  this  respect  there
is  an  element  of  truth  in  the  symbolical  interpreta
tion  of  many  writers  (such  as  Keil),  that  the  tabernacle
symbolises  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  the  centie  of
the  theocracy  where  the  calling  of  Israel  to  be  the
people  of  God  is  realised.  Its  importance  in  this
respect — as  centre  of  the  entire  theocracy — finds  its
visible  expression  in  the  fact  that  in  P  the  position
assigned  to  it  is  exactly  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  and
of  the  people.  The  order  of  encampment  detailed  in
Nu.  2  starts  from  the  tabernacle,  immediately  around
which  are  placed  the  Levites  as  a  sort  of  bodyguard  ;
then  to  the  E.  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Issachar,  Zebulun
pitch  their  camp  ;  to  the  S.  Reuben,  Simeon,  Gad  ;  to
the  W.  Ephraim,  Manasseh,  Benjamin  ;  to  the  N.,  Dan,

4870


TABERNACLE


TABERNACLE


Asher, Naphtali. This too gives  the  order  on the
march. CpCAMi',  §  2.

In  this  attribute  as  Yah  wo' s  dwelling-place  the  whole

arrangement  of  the  tabernacle  rinds  a  ready  exphina-

c . .. tion  in  so  far  as  this  is  not  to  be  found

y  '  simply  in  its  character  as  a  portable

sanctuary.

The  innermost  chamber  is  the  dwelling-plare  proper  of  the
deity,  the  holiest  part  of  the  entire  structure.  Next  come  the
holy  place  and  the  outer  court  in  descending  degrees  of  holiness,
answering  to  the  degrees  of  holiness  attaching  to  high  [viest,
priests,  and  laity  in  Israel,  and  to  their  respective  rights  of  access
to  Yahwe.  The  holy  of  holies  can  be  entered  by  the  high
priest  alone,  and  that  only  once  a  year  ;  the  holy  place  is  for  the
priesthood  and  the  court  for  the  people.  This  gradation  of
holiness  finds  expression  also,  as  already  said,  in  the  material
equipment:  in  the  holy  of  holies  everything  is  of  gold;  nought
save  the  bases  of  the  boards  resting  on  the  ground — though  here
an  exception  cannot  well  be  justified — and  the  bases  of  the
pillars  which  support  the  dividing  veil  and  which  perhaps
stand  rather  in  the  holy  place  than  in  the  holy  of  holies,  is  of
stiver.  In  the  holy  place  only  the  furniture,  and  particularly
those  pieces  which  stand  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  holy
of  holies — table  of  shewbread,  altar  of  incense,  candlestick — are
provided  with  '  fine  gold ' ;  elsewhere  it  is  simply  ordinary  gold
that  is  used.  The  exterior  pillars  of  the  entrance-curtain,  which
doubtless  are  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  court,  have  but
brazen  bases.  Similarly  in  the  court  itself  we  find  brass  only,  save
for  the  silver  used  in  the  nails  and  capitals  of  the  pillars.  In
like  manner  the  clasps  of  the  goat-hair  covering  are  of  brass,
whilst  those  of  the  inner  covering  are  of  gold.  The  interior
covering  which  covers  also  the  holy  of  holies,  and  the  vail  of  the
holy  of  holies  are  the  workmanship  of  cunning  workmen  out  of
the  four  costly  materials  enumerated,  with  figured  cherubim  ;  the
curtain  at  the  door  of  the  holy  place  is  without  cherubim  and  the
curtains  of  t'le  court  are  simply  of  white  linen.

With  these  simple  ideas,  however,  which  find  expression  in
the  equipment  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  manner  just  indicated,
the  whole  symbolism  of  the  structure  is  by  no  means  exhausted.
A  symbolical  interpretation  of  the  tabernacle  that  reaches
much  further  is  of  ancient  date.  We  find  it  already  in  Josephus
(Ant.  iii.  7  7)  and  Philo  (De  vit.  Mi's.  3  147^?".),  who  interpret
the  tabernacle  as  an  image  of  the  universe  ;  the  holy  of  holies
inaccessible  to  men  is  for  them  a  figure  of  heaven,  the  holy  place
and  the  court  represent  the  ocean,  the  four  materials  out  of  which
the  coverings  and  curtains  were  woven  denote  the  four  elements,
the  table  of  shewbread  with  its  twelve  loaves  is  the  year  with
its  twelve  months,  and  so  forth.  And  from  their  time  onwards
symbolical  interpretation  of  this  kind  has  persisted  from  century
to  century  down  to  our  own  time.  In  the  Christian  church  the
typological  view  made  its  appearance  very  soon  ;  cp  Justin
Martyr,  Cohort,  ad  gent.  29;  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  562  Jf.;
Origen,  Horn.  9  in  Kxod.  ;  Theod.  Mops,  ad  Hebr.  9 1  ;
Athanasius,  '  Oral,  in  assumt.  Christi,'  op.  2s,  col.  1686;
'i  heodoret,  Quirst.  60  in  Kxod.  ',  Jerome,  ep.  64919  jff.  ad
Fabiolam.  In  modern  times  Hahr,  Friedrich,  Hengstenberg,
Keil,  Kurtz,  Riehm  have  exercised  great  acumen  upon  the
symbolical  interpretation  of  the  tabernacle  and  in  particular
upon  the  symbolism  of  the  numbers  and  dimensions  (the
number  4  signifying  the  cosmos,  10  completeness  and  perfection),
as  also  upon  the  significance  of  the  colours  of  the  coverings,  and
so  forth.  All  such  interpretations,  however,  are  wanting  in  any
solid  basis  in  the  OT ;  nowhere  does  the  author  hint  even  in
the  remotest  way  that  behind  these  externalities  he  is  searching
for  deeper  thoughts.  It  is  hardly  worth  while  therefore  to
discuss  the  various  attempted  interpretations  in  any  detail.

Can  we  now  regard  the  structure  thus  described  in

P  as  historical  ? Very  great  difficulties  confront  us  in

_T ,  . , . the  endeavour to  do so, quite apart

1  U£msti°n~  from the fact that the description
cal  character  occurs only in p the  latest source

)rd'  of  the  Pentateuch.  They  have  long
been  urged — by  Voltaire  for  example — and  may  be
summed  up  under  the  following  four  heads: — (i)  the
imaginative  character  of  the  account  itself;  (2)  the
physical  impossibility  of  such  a  structure  in  the  wilder
ness  ;  (3)  the  inconsistency  with  the  older  Pentateuch
sources  ;  (4)  the  want  of  evidence  for  any  such  tabernacle
during  historical  times.

( i )  The  description  itself  from  the  outset  presents
great  difficulties,  and  raises  in  the  mind  of  the  reader
the  question  whether  any  such  structure  can  ever
have  really  existed.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out
how  in  stating  the  number  of  the  pillars  of  the  court  the
narrator  is  plainly  not  describing  something  of  which  he
has  any  clear  picture  in  his  mind's  eye,  not  calculating
and  planning  with  practical  preciseness,  but  only  filling
in  figures  according  to  a  scheme  of  his  own.  Yet
another  point  has  also  been  noted  already — that  the

4871


fabric  bears  indeed  the  name  of  '  tent '  and  the  author
takes  great  trouble  to  produce  in  the  reader's  mind
the  impression  that  the  sanctuary  was  such  in  reality,
but  in  this  effort  has  succeeded  (and  could  have  suc
ceeded)  but  ill.  Beams  some  21  inches  thick  and  2  ft.
6  in.  wide  cannot  be  fastened  together  so  as  to  form  a
massive  wall  by  means  of  mere  tent  pins,  and  they  are
purposeless  if  they  are  intended  merely  as  supports
for  a  light  textile  fabric.  It  is  perfectly  evident  that
the  model  for  this  structure  was  not  supplied  by  a
bedouin  tent,  a  dwelling  place  made  of  (goats')  hair,  of
which  the  essential  part,  the  roof,  is  spread  upon  three
rows  of  poles,  usually  three  in  each  row,  5  or  6  ft.  high
and  closed  behind  by  a  similar  fabric  of  hair  (see  TENT).
On  the  contrary,  the  model  was  quite  clearly  a  solid
house  rendered  portable  only  by  the  expedient  of
breaking  up  the  walls  into  separate  beams.  In  this
respect  the  whole  structure  becomes  a  huge  anachronism
when  regarded  as  the  workmanship  of  nomad  hordes.

This  becomes  specially  prominent  in  the  description
of  the  altar.  In  view  of  the  ancient  practice  of  building
altars  of  stone  (Ex.  2024^"! )  one  reasonably  asks  how
the  narrator  could  have  arrived  at  an  altar  of  brass,
and  then  one  remembers  that  the  temple  of  Solomon
also  had  such  an  altar.  That  this  latter  was  the  real
model  for  the  altar  of  the  tabernacle  becomes  still  clearer
from  another  point  of  view.  The  altar  of  the  tabernacle
is  of  acacia  wood  plated  with  brass,  a  construction  which
in  itself  considered  must  be  characterised  as  utterly
senseless  if  the  explanation  were  not  so  manifest  ;  the
altar  of  Solomon  must  remain  as  it  is,  a  brazen  altar  :
but  it  must  be  made  portable.

A  further  detail  may  be  singled  out  in  this  connection  :  the
whole  fabric  is  internally  pitch  dark.  The  walls  have  no
windows  nor  openings  of  any  kind  ;  the  roof  in  like  manner  is
unpierced.  This  may  serve  well  enough  in  the  holy  of  holies  ;
the  Holy  of  Holies  in  the  temple  was  also  quite  dark  (see
TEMPLE,  §  7);  but  in  the  holy  place  it  is  impossible;  there
the  priests  had  their  priestly  duties  to  discharge — arrange  the
shewbread,  offer  incense,  and  the  like.  And  it  will  not  do  to
call  attention  to  the  seven-branched  golden  candlestick  (see
CANDLESTICK,  §  i).

Finally,  there  is  the  fundamental  question  :  Is  a
structure  of  this  kind  capable  of  standing  at  all  ?  Simply
as  a  technical  question  of  architecture  (see  Schick,  as
below,  §  14)  this  must  be  pronounced  utterly  impossible.
Nor  is  the  reason  difficult  to  perceive.  The  weight  of
the  heavy  coverings  and  above  all  the  pressure  brought
to  bear  by  the  spreading  of  the  tent-covering  by  means
of  cords  and  pegs,  must  necessarily  tend  to  make  the
walls  lean  inwards.  No  opposing  pressure  is  anywhere
present.  Even  if  we  suppose  that  the  bars  connected
the  side  walls  with  the  rear  wall,  only  the  boards  of
the  side  walls  that  were  nearest  the  rear  wall  were  thus
supported  ;  but  in  any  case  it  was  impossible  that  weak
bars  should  support  the  entire  wall,  30  cubits  long,
formed  as  it  was  of  heavy  beams.  For  this  reason,  and
in  order  to  relieve  the  walls  of  the  weight  of  the  cover
ings,  Schick  finds  it  to  be  absolutely  indispensable  to
provide  the  tabernacle  with  a  sloping  roof.  This  he
obtains  by  changing  the  middle  bar  into  a  ridge-pole,
following  the  English  architectural  authority  Fergusson,
who  first  propounded  this  theory  in  the  article  '  Temple'
in  Smith's  DB  (1863).  Such  a  construction,  however,
flatly  contradicts  the  clear  tenor  of  the  text.  The  text
knows  nothing  of  such  a  sloping  or  pointed  roof — which,
furthermore,  would  be  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  idea
of  a  bedouin  tent.

(2)  Over  and  above  the  inherent  impossibility  of  any
such  structure,  account  must  be  taken  of  the  incidental
... impossibility  of  constructing  and  trans-
16  porting  such  a  fabric  in  the  wilderness.
The  contrast  between  this  sumptuous
fabric — made  of  the  costliest  materials
of  the  best  workmanship  in  wood  and  in  metals  which
the  East  could  command — and  the  soil  on  which  it  is
raised,  the  bare  wilderness  ; the  contrast  too  between
this  tabernacle  and  the  people  amongst  whom  it  stands —
4872


in  the
wilderness.


TABERNACLE

primitive  uncivilised  nomads- — is  too  great  not  to  have
excited  doubts  from  a  very  early  date  as  to  the  authen
ticity  of  the  account.  They  were  raised  by  Voltaire,
and  Colenso  and  Nowack  (see  below,  §  14)  have
elaborately  shown  the  impossibilities  involved.  First
of  all  comes  the  difficulty  as  to  the  materials.  According
to  Ex.3827  no  fewer  than  29  talents  730  shekels  of
gold,  100  talents  1775  shekels  of  silver  and  70  talents
1400  shekels  of  copper  are  employed.  To  see  what
these  figures  mean,  let  the  reader  turn  to  the  articles
WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES,  SHEKEL.  The  amounts  in
themselves  are  not  very  ^reat  when  compared  with  those
which  were  applied  in  the  great  Babylonian  sanctuaries  ;
but  for  wilderness  nomads,  poor  to  beggary  as  regards
gold  and  silver,  they  are  impossible.  It  is  indeed  re
plied  to  this  that  the  gold  is  simply  the  gold  which  had
been  obtained  from  the  Egyptians  ;  but  such  an  answer
becomes  impossible  in  the  case  of  the  timber.  Where
on  Sinai  the  cypresses  grew  from  which  beams  over
17  it.  long,  2  ft.  7  in.  wide,  and  20  in.  thick  could  be
obtained  no  one  has  yet  been  able  to  say.1  The  working
of  the  timber,  moreover,  presupposes  a  knowledge  of
arts  which  nomads  do  not  possess  ;  that  Israel  did  not  in
point  of  fact  possess  this  knowledge  is  clearly  shown  by
the  fact  that  even  a  Solomon  had  to  go  to  Phoenicia
for  his  temple  and  workmen.  A  word  may  be  added
as  to  the  difficulties  of  transport.  Four  waggons  with
six  oxen  apiece  are  assigned  to  the  Merarites  for  this,
while  each  of  the  48  beams  weighs  more  than  10  cwt.

(3)  Decisive  on  the  question,  finally,  ought  to  be  the
observation,  that  the  older  sources  of  the  Pentateuch,
i  •>  TV>  A  J  and  ^'  know  nothing  of  a  tabernacle

tent  in  E of  this sort' Not  only  is there  no
mention  of  this  central  sanctuary,  but

E  in  point  of  fact  has  a  quite  different  sacred  tent  which
completely  excludes  any  possibility  of  the  tabernacle
of  P.  The  tabernacle  of  E  is  a  tent  which  Moses
pitched  outside  the  camp  (Ex.  887^)  and  where
Yahwe  was  wont  to  reveal  himself  to  him  in  the  pillar
of  cloud  which  descended  for  the  purpose  and  stood  at
the  door  (Xu.  11.25  12s  14io);  it  is  on  this  account
called  'ohel  mocd,  '  the  tent  of  tryst. '  No  description
of  it  is  given,  nor  is  its  origin  spoken  of  ;  but  part  of  the
old  narrative  has  obviously  been  lost  before  Ex.  33 7,
in  which  what  is  now  lacking  was  probably  explained.
It  appears,  however,  that  it  was  very  different  from  the
tabernacle  described  by  the  priestly  narrator.  It  was
not  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  but  stood  some  distance
outside  it,  and  it  was  not  the  seat  of  an  elaborate
organisation  of  priests  and  guarded  by  a  host  of  Levites,
but  had  a  single  minister  and  custodian — viz. ,  Joshua,
who  was  not  a  Levite  at  all  but  Moses'  attendant
(Ex.  33n).

The  existence  of  such  a  simple  tent-sanctuary  pre
sents  none  of  the  difficulties  that  beset  the  priestly
narrative.  Portable  shrines  were  familiar  to  Semitic
antiquity,  and  tents  as  sanctuaries  were  known  to  the
Israelites  in  much  later  times  at  the  high  places  and  in
connection  with  irregular  worships2  (see  TENT).  Such
idolatrous  tabernacles  were  probably  relics  of  the  usages
of  the  nomadic  Semites,  and  it  is  only  natural  that
Israel  in  its  wanderings  should  have  had  the  like.  And
it  is  noteworthy  that  the  portable  chapels  of  the  heathen
Semites  were  mainly  used  for  divination  (cp  Jo  urn.  of
Phil.,  18283  /!),  just  as  the  Mosaic  tabernacle  is
described  by  the  Elohist,  not  as  a  place  of  sacrifice
(such  as  the  tabernacle  of  the  Priestly  Code  is)  but  as  a
place  of  oracle.

The  heathen  shrines  of  this  sort  contained  portable  idols  or

1  [Kennedy's  novel  theory  (see  above,  §  3),  that  the  so-called
'  boards '  were  in  reality  light  open  frames,  would,  of  course,
meet  this  difficulty  if  it  stood  alone.]

2  Ezek.  1(5 16, '  thou  didst  take  of  thy  garments  and  madest
for  thyself  sewn  high places' — i.e., shrines  of  curtains sewn
together  ;  cp  Hos.  9  6  and  Syriac  pcrakka,  Assyrian parakku,  a.
small  chapel  or  shrine,  from  the  same  root  as  Hebrew  pdroketh,
the  vail  of  the  Holy  of  Holies.

4873


TABERNACLE

baetylia  (see  Selden,  J)e  Diis  Syris,  le) ;  but  what  the  Mosaic
tabernacle  contained  is  not  expressly  stated.  The  ordinary,  and
at  tirst  sight  the  easiest,  assumption  is  that  the  ark  stood  in  it.
Hut  neither  in  Deuteronomy  nor  before  it,  are  the  ark  and  the
tabernacle_  ever  mentioned  together,  and  of  the  two  old
narrators  it  is  not  clear  that  the  Yahwist  ever  mentions  the
tabernacle  or  the  Elohist  the  ark.  The  relation  between  the
two  calls  for  further  investigation,  especially  as  the  ark  retains
its  importance  after  the  occupation  of  Canaan,  whilst  the  '  tent
of  tryst'  is  not  mentioned  after  the  time  of  Moses,  who,  accord,
ing  to  the  Elohist  (Ex.  12),  enjoyed  at  it  a  privilege  of  direct
access  to  the  Deity  not  accorded  to  later  prophets  (cp  also  AKK
OF  COVENANT).

(4)  Lastly, the whole historical tradition from the
period  immediately  following  the  settlement  down to
13 The  taber-  the  date  of  the  building  of  Solomon's
nacle  non "  temPle  has  no  knowlege  of  any  taber-
existent  in nade' ]  rue>  aPol°g'sts  like  Keil  have
historical succeeded in writing to their own
times  satisfaction  itscomplete  history  through

out  the  period  of  the  judges  and  the
first  kings  :  at  one  time  it  was  at  Shiloh,  at  another  at
Nob,  finally  at  Gibeon,  whence  it  was  removed  to  the
temple.  The  Chronicler  has  indeed  much  to  tell  about
it,  proceeding  as  he  does  en  the — to  him  self-evident —
assumption  that  in  every  case  where  the  older  books
made  mention  of  sacrifice  at  all  this  must  have  been  at
the  tabernacle  (iCh.  1639  2129  2  Ch.  1  3  55).  The
older  historical  books,  however  (\\ith  exceptions  to  be
mentioned  immediately),  know  nothing  of  it.  i  K.
3  i./;,  in  explicit  contradiction  of  2  Ch.  13,  states  that
Solomon  sacrificed  on  the  great  high  place  of  Gibeon
and  excuses  this  proceeding,  which  from  the  redactor's
point  of  view  of  course  seemed  illegal,  on  the  ground
that  the  temple  was  not  yet  in  existence.  Hut  no
temple  was  required  for  the  purpose  if  the  tabernacle
was  then  at  Gibeon.  The  sanctuary  at  Shiloh,  on  the
other  hand,  was  not  a  tent  at  all  but  a  solid  house
EV  'temple  of  the  Lord,'  (mrr  ^>rn,  hckal  Yaliu<e,
i  S.  lg  83),  with  mtstisoth  (AV  '  door  posts,'  RV  '  side
posts')  and  dtlathoth  (EV  'doors');  cp  especially  Jer.
*i  it  ff.  Moreover,  the  ark  is  spoken  of  in  i  S.  4-6  in
such  a  manner  as  shows  that  there  was  no  fixed  place
where  it  was  kept,  and  thus  no  Tabernacle.  After  it
has  been  recovered  from  the  Philistines,  for  example,
it  does  not  come  to  its  proper  house  but  fiist  to  Beth-
shemesh  and  next  to  Kirjath-jearim,  to  the  house  of  a
private  individual,  where  it  remains  for  years.  Thence
it  is  fetched  by  David,  who,  however,  after  the  disaster
to  Uzzah  brings  it  into  the  house  of  one  of  his  generals,
and  that  too  a  gentile,  Obed-edom  of  Gath  (2  S.  7).
Not  till  later  does  he  transfer  it  to  his  own  city,  where
he  sets  up  a  tent  for  its  reception  plainly  in  remembrance
of  the  fact  that  the  ark  had  formerly  also  been  so
housed.  This  tent  was  in  time  removed  by  Solomon
to  the  temple  (i  K.  84),  for  if  these  verses  are  old  and
belong  to  the  context  it  is  only  this  tent  that  can  be
understood  by  the  'ohel  mold  (more  probably,  however,
the  statement  is  of  a  later  date  ;  see  Benzinger  ad  loc. ).
Thus  the  only  remaining  passage  will  be  i  S.  222,  a
passage  which  is  already  open  to  critical  doubt  owing
to  its  absence  from  ©.  From  all  that  has  been  urged
we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  tabernacle  of  P  is
simply  the  temple  of  Solomon  carried  back  into  the
older  time  by  priestly  fancy  and  modified  accordingly.
It  was  not  the  temple  that  was  built  on  the  model  of
the  tabernacle  ;  it  was  the  tabernacle  that  took  its  shape,
character,  and  importance  for  worship  and  the  theocracy
from  the  temple.

Josephus,  Ant.  36-8 ;  Philo,  De  rvV,  Mas.  8145^:  The
older  literature  will  be  found  more  or  less  fully  registered  in

such  works  as  those  of  Biihr  or  Riggenbach.
14.  Literature.  Of  later  works  we  mention  the  following  :

Bahr,  Symbolik  dcs  Mas.  A'u//usft),  1  97^  ;
Friedrich,  Symbolik  tier  A/os.  Stifts!ifitte(iZ^i);  W.  Neumann,
Die  Stiftshiitte,  1861  ;  Ch.  J.  Riggenbach,  Die  Mosaische
Stiftshiitte  (1887)  :  Popper,  Der  bil'l.  Bericht  Tiber  die  Stifis-
Aatte(i862);  articles  by  Winer  in  Rll'B  2529:  Diestel  in  BL
5405^  ;  Leyrer  m^PREN,  I5g2j/r.  ;  Riggenbach  in  PREP)
14712^;  Riehm  in  HWB;  Fergusson,  art.  'Temple'  in

4874


TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF

Smith's  r>S:  \\'c\tc\nf'rTrff-iirgrrK'fn:tf*-/fjricf>*;  Kurtzin5Y.  I
AV.,  1844,  pp.  3>5,."^  :  Kamphausen,  iVW.  1858,  pp.  97^..  1859,  '
pp.  iio/P.  ;  Fries,  «*:</.  tS^o,  pp.  io;_/)T,  Kiggenl>ach,  ifni.,  iSo.i,
pu.  ,5OtJi^  :  Kn.cclhan.lt  mZL  /,  iS63,pp.  409^  ;  also  the.  IrcA**-
e)t*ftts  of  lahn  t.3  ix>{?'.\  De  Wctte-Rahiecr,  26$  /£  :  Ewald,
l8'  16*  /£,  tf;  /*.  l4'  387  p.,  4 »  ^  ;  Saalschflu,  lysff.  ;  Keil,
<*  S/^.  F. T  1  os  /#". :  Schol/.  1  j.?J^  ;  Haneberg,  «6i  jp. ;  Schcgg,
406  £;  Beniingcr.  //^  .ws^,  and  Nowack,  //A  2  53/7:  ;  Schick,
SftYtsAiifts  a.  /  fmftl.  i SgS  :  A.  R.  S.  Kennedy,  art.  '  Tabernacle '
in  Hasting'  /'/>.  On  the  question  of  the  historicity  of  the
accounts  of  the  tabernacle  cp  especially  IV  \Vetto.  Btitr.
\  25*  ffi,  3  259  j#C :  Vater,  Ct»ntM.  3  t>s8  f.  ;  Von  Bohlen.  GfHtsis,
\\i  (f. :  George,  fitiitctf  f-'fttf,  41  f. ;  Vatke,  FiM.  TVtW.  *n/.\
Noldeke,  Btitr.  j.  AV///*,  i2o/£  :  Graf,  /V  ttmtlo  SUmaui,
1855.  ami  /V*  C.VA-*.  /?.*.  ./.  .4  T,  :S66,  75^  ;  Kuencn,  (,W.r-
,f:i-*st.  275  /T :  Reuss,  L'kisttir*  saiutt  ft  /a  /««/,  340;  Well-
h.uisen,  A»W,W,  40.//:  ET  38^  J.  H.

TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF. The  Israelitic  cycle
of  festivals  came  to  .1  close,  in  autumn,  with  the  feast \
... .of  Tabernacles. In  the  old  legislation '

dh ^  A  ( I'-*-  34  22  23 16>  it  is  called  *<:$  Aa'.isff* I

&raC  '  ( I'2??  ^  • ' tne  *"oast  °^  '"S^1  hering,'  and
is  to  be  celebrated.  '  at  the  turn  of  the  year '  ( nt'pa
njy-T^  The  very  name  shows  quite  clearly  that  the
festival  in  its  essential  meaning  is  agricultural,  ;\  harvest
feast  ;  it  is  the  autumn  thanksgiving  which  no  doubt  has
reference  primarily  to  the  fruit  harvest  and  the  vintage,
but  from  the  outset  was  regarded  as  the  great  thanks
giving  for  the  whole  produce  of  the  year.

Hence  the  general  expressions  '  when  thou  gatherest  in  the
produce  of  thy  field'  (Ex.  23 16,  ^fTi?  5t%^>?"n?  l???^
'  when  thou  gatherest  in  from  thy  threshing-floor  and  from  thy
press '  (IVut.  16  13,  '5??:?'  1^~?  '•r???)-

Like  the  other  harvest feasts,  it is intimately  con
nected  with  the  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  and |
was  celebrated  for  the  first  time  there  by  the  Israelites, j
who  in  all  prolvibility  took  it  over  from  the  Canaanites.
It  is  with  regard  to  the  autumn  festival  specially  that
our  information  as  to  its  having  been  a  Canaanite  festival ',
is  explicit ;  of  the  people  of  Shechem  we  are  told  that
they  went  out  into  the  field,  gathered  their  vineyards,
trode  the  grapes,  and  held  festival  and  went  into  the '
house  of  their  god  and  did  eat  and  drink  (Judg.  9  27].
Cp  also  FEASTS,  §  4.

As  the  closing  harvest  thanksgiving,  and  probably  the I
oldest  of  the  three  feasts  of  harvest  (see  PASSOVKR.  §  4  ;

Th  t  ^KNrK(-"OST- §  ^- the autumn festival ,

• ' _f  mi°Sr  excels  both  the  other  great  annual  festivals
important  of  > f ^ IsraeUttfS in  im_

the  yearly

festivals.  P^1''^"^-  In  the  law  of  JK.  it  is  true,  all
three  ;ire  already  found  on  the  same  plane
as  equally  necessary  and  equally  important ;  for  all  of  .
them  attendance  at  the  sanctuary  is  enjoined  (Ex.3423
23  iM.  Yet  how  great  was  the  special  importance  as
signed  in  practice  to  the  autumn  festival  as  compared
with  the  others  appears  at  once  in  its  very  designation
as  '.'*<•  feast'  (jrn.  AfAJg)  or  '  the  feast  of  Yah  we'
(.Tn1  jrt,  hag  \\ikivt)  KO.T'  ($ox$v  (i  K.  Sa  1232  Judg.
21 19  ;  and  even  as  late  as  Lev.  283941  Ezek.  45  25  Neh.
814^.  Even  in  Zechariah  (14i6  f.\  it  is  to  the
feast  of  tabernacles  that  the  remnant  of  the  heathen  go
up  year  by  year  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  the  King,
Yohwe  Sebaoth.  In  these  circumstances  it  cannot  be  i
regarded  as  merely  accidental  that  the  feast  of  taber
nacles  and  the  feast  of  tabernacles  alone  is  more  than
once  mentioned  in  the  historical  books  when  dealing
with  the  more  ancient  period,  and  its  celebration  thus
attested  from  the  earliest  period  after  the  settlement  in
Canaan.  At  Shiloh.  for  example,  the  maidens  celebrate
it  by  going  forth  to  dance  in  the  orchards  and  vineyards
(Judg.  21 16). '  So  also  we  learn  from  the  story  of
Samuel  that  in  wide  circles  it  was  customary  year  by
year  at  the  '  revolution  of  the  days '  ( c'C'ri  niEpns.  i  S.

1  The  narratives  in  Judg.  19-21  are  certainly  in  their  present
form  late  Midrash.  Yet  there  need  not  he  on  that  account  any
doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of  this  statement  or  of  manv  other
touches  preserved  in  them  See  DANCE,  $  6,  and  cp  further,
Budde,  WAe.


TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF

lao;  cp  the  same  expression  in  Kx.  34  22)  to  go  In
pilgrimage  with  the  whole  family  to  the  sanctuary  at
Shiloh,  and  there  to  sacrifice  to  Yahwe  and  hold  a  joyous
sacrificial  meal  tiS.  lj_#).  The  high  importance
attached  to  the  festival  is  shown  also  in  the  fact  that
Solomon  dedicates  his  temple  at  the  same  date  ( i  K.
8265,  cp  a  Ch.  1%  ff.\  on  the  passage  cp  also  Itelow,
§  3).  Answering  to  the  yearly  observance  of  this  feast
at  Jerusalem,  Jeroboam,  according  to  a  thoroughly
tm-tworthy  statement  in  i  K.  lUja1  (cp  Ik-n/inger,
aJ  loc. )  instituted  a  similar  solemnity  in  the  northern
kingdom  ;  here  the  only  error  of  the  author  is  in  sup
posing  (from  his  Deuteronomistic  point  of  view)  that
:  v  '!  i-  loroboam's  time  such  a  (east  \\  as  observed  only  at
the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  and  not  also  at  the  sanctuaries
of  the  northern  kingdom.  Pilgrimages  of  the  same
sort  as  those  to  Shiloh  were  in  use  also  in  other  parts
of  the  country  to  the  various  famous  sanctuaries.  The
passages  just  cited  show  also  at  the  same  time  that  this
autumn  festival  from  the  very  beginning  was  celebrated
in  common  by  wide  circles  of  participants.  This  does
not  seem  to  have  been  the  case  in  the  olden  time  with
the  two  other  harvest  feasts  ;  if  observed  at  all,  it  was
enough  that  they  should  be  observed  in  quite  small
local  circles;  at  least  the  complete  silence  of  the  histori
cal  books  on  the  subject  would  be  most  easily  ex
plained  in  this  way.  The  special  importance  of  the
feast  of  tabernacles  continues  to  show  itself  in  the
Deuteronomic  legislation.  In  contrast  to  what  is  re
quired  at  the  two  other  A,!ggftn,  it  is  enjoined  that  all
the  days  of  this  festival  are  to  lie  observed  at  the  central
sanctuary  in  Jerusalem  (Dt.  1C  15  ;  cp  ;•.  7).

In  the  older  legislation  no  more  precise  details  than
those  already  indicated  are  given  as  to  how  and  where
f.  . . . the feast  ought to  be  observed. Else-
3.  Uriginai h ,pEASTS § 10\  jt  ,s  Sn0wn  that

monnAv* f\f

the  olden  time  hail  no  thought  at  all  of
fixing  the  three  harvest  festivals  to  any
definite  day.  This  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  case.
The  great  autumn  thanksgiving  was  held  as  soon  as
the  corn-harvest,  vintage,  and  ingathering  were  finished.
This  happened,  of  course,  in  the  various  districts,  and
in  different  years,  at  different  dates.  In  the  hill-country
around  Jerusalem  the  feast  was  held  of  old  in  the  eighth
month.  The  completion  of  the  temple  was  in  the  month
of  Bui.  the  eighth  month,  and  its  dedication  was  at  the
time  of  the  autumn  festival  \i  K.  rj  ;S  ;  cp  82^.'-  It  is
evidently  in  order  to  bring  it  into  accordance  with  the
Jerusalem  date  of  the  feast  on  the  fifteenth  of  the  month
that  the  autumn  festival  at  Bethel  was  fixed  for  the  same
day  by  Jeroboam  ( i  K.  1232).

For  the  observance  of  the  festival  the  offering  of  gifts
from  the  fruits  that  had  lieen  gathered  and  of  animal
sacrifices  accompanied  by  a  sacrificial  meal  were  matters
of  course  (cp  i  S.  13  jf.  j.  In  the  olden  time  the  gifts
and  offerings  were  left  to  the  freewill  of  the  worshipper
according  as  his  heart  impelled  him  to  show  his  thanks
to  Yahwe  ^cp  TAXATION.  §  8}.  So  also  it  is  matter  of
course  that  the  feast  was  observed  as  a  joyous  occasion.


manner  of
celebration.


1  [See  also  SHECHEM,  and  cp  Crft.  £:'/•.]

2  In  the  present  text  of  i  K.  8  2  it is'  indeed  said  that  the
dedication  was  'at  the  feast  in  the  month  Cthfinim,  which  is  the
seventh  month.' To  reconcile  this  date  with  i  K.  6  38,  according
to  which  the  temple  was  finished  in  the  eighth  month,  it  would
be  necessarv  to  suppose  that  after  its  completion  the  dedkatjon
of  the  temple  was  put  off  till  the  seventh  month  of  the  following
year — that  is  to  say,  for  eleven  months. This  is  in  the  highest
degree  unlikely. Since,  moreover, we learn from i  K..  12  32
that  at  that  period  the  festival  was  observed  at  Jerusalem  in
the  eighth  month,  we  must  suppose  the  original  text  of  i  K.  S  2
to  have  read  merely  'at  the  feast.' The  name  of  the  month
Kthanim  is  a  later  insertion  easilv  explained  by  the  consideration
that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  fixeti  tradition  was  that  the  temple
had  been  dedicated  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  and.  on  the  other
hand,  that  this  feast,  at  a  later  date,  but  before  that  of  1  Deutero
nomy  (§  4\  had  been  assigned  to  this  month. The  explanation
of  the  name  of  the  month — 'which  is  the  seventh  month' — is
the  addition  of  a  still  later  hand,  as  i*  st-.  --.lion  :  it
is  also  wanting  in  ®BL  [£A  ha<  a  curious  reading  avrin  o  nqv
c/S&opiHcmrrot  (/36opof  ]. Cp  further,  Benringer,  aJ  Ix.

4876


TABERNACLES, FEAST  OP

Compare  what  we  read  of  the  feast  of  the  Sheclieniites  (Judg.
9  27)  or  of  the  dances  of  the  maidens  (cp  DANCK,  f  6)  at  the
feast  of  Shiloh  (Judg.  '21  19^).

When,  then,  in  Dt.  the  feast  is  for  the  first  time
designated  (in  our  present  texts)  as  the  '  feast  of
tabernacles'  (Dt.  16  13  ;  see  below,  §  4)  and  the  priestly
law  (Lev.  2842)  expressly  enjoins  living  in  booths  as
part  of  the  ritual  of  its  celebration,  or  when  the  Law  of
Holiness  (I>ev.  2840)  orders  the  participants  to  take
'the  fruit  of  goodly  trees,  branches  of  palm  trees,'  and
the  like,  we  may  be  perfectly  certain  that  these  are  not
newly  invented  innovations,  but  that  very  ancient  custom
lay  at  the  foundation  of  the  practices  thus  prescribed.
The  living  in  booths  and  the  name  '  feast  of  tabernacles '
or  '  booths '  are  connected  with  the  simple  fact  that  at
the  time  of  the  olive  and  grape  harvest  it  was  usual  to
spend  days  and  nights  in  booths  of  this  kind — a  practice
which  still  holds  its  ground  in  those  parts  (see  Robinson,
BR  2717  ;  cp  Is.  1  8).1  If  these  booths  at  a  later  date
found  a  recognised  place  in  the  official  ritual  of  the  feast,
this  shows  that,  properly  speaking,  all  these  days  of
harvesting  during  which  people  lived  in  the  open  under
booths  were  regarded  as  constituting  a  festal  time,  which
was  brought  to  a  close  in,  let  us  say,  the  pilgrimage  to  the
sanctuary.  With  this  also  we  may  connect  the  precept  in
Dt.  (see  below)  to  observe  the  feast  for  seven  whole  days
at  the  sanctuary.  The  other  injunction,  referred  toabove,
to  furnish  oneself  with  fruits  of  goodly  trees,  branches  of
palm  trees,  and  so  forth  (if  the  reference  be  not  simply  to
the  branches  needed  for  making  the  booths  ;  see  below)
•we  may  perhaps  connect  with  what  we  read  of  the
festal  dances  in  Judg.  21 19 /.  It  would  be  natural  for
those  who  took  part  in  these  to  adorn  themselves  with
sprigs  and  garlands.

In  its  festal  legislation  Dt.  (1613-15).  as  already
remarked,  designates  the  autumn  festival  by  the  name
m  of  hag  has-sukkuth  (niSDn  art),  'feast  of  taber
nacles  '  or  '  booths  ' — a  designation  which,
although  not  employed  either  in  H  or  in  P  (see
below,  §§  5,  ()),  it  continued  to  retain.2  As  has
already  fjeen  said,  it  was  not  to  any  change  in  the
significance  of  the  festival  or  to  any  new  ritual  that  this
new  designation  was  due  ;  if  Dt.  had  intended  to
introduce  something  that  was  new  when  it  spoke  of  the
celebration  under  booths,  this  piece  of  ritual  would
have  been  expressly  prescribed.  On  the  contrary,  Dt.
simply  assumes  both  name  and  thing  to  be  already
familiar  ;  thus  the  name  also  was  already  in  use  before
the  time  of  Dt.  The  duration  of  the  feast  is  fixed  at
seven  days,  and  in  fact  all  the  seven  have  to  be  observed
at  the  sanctuary  in  Jerusalem  (see  above,  §  3).  The
joyous  character  of  the  feast  is  also  thoroughly  preserved
in  Dt.,  as  well  as  the  idea  of  its  being  a  harvest  feast ;  and,
in  full  agreement  with  the  general  spirit  of  solicitude
shown  in  the  Deuteronomic  law  for  the  welfare  of  the
poor  and  the  like,  it  is  expressly  enjoined  that  the  bond
man  and  the  widow  are  all  to  take  joyful  part  in  the
celebration  (1614).

1  For evidence  of the ancient practice of spending the
festival  under  booths  we  cannot  with  confidence  appeal  to  Hos.
12 10  [9]. The  expression  there  made  use  of — jjrs,  moid,  instead
of  in,  hag — is  quite  unusual. Still  less  suitable,  it  is  true,  is
the  interpretation  which  (so  Wellhausen)  refers  it  to  the  passover
feast. In  no  other  place  do  we  read  anything  of  a  dwelling  in
tents  during  that  feast. In  the  prophetic  threatening  '  I  will
yet  again  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tents,  as  in  the  days  of  the
(iJTC)  solemn  feast '  no  reference  to  any  joyous  festival,  merely
a  reference  to  the  wandering  in  the  wilderness  is  required  by
the  connection. Hence  Kautzsch's  rendering  '  as  in  the  day  of
the  assembly  [at Horeb]'  seems  the  best. If  the  prophet  is
really  intending  the  feast  of  tabernacles in this allusion,  we
shall then have  our  first  distinct  trace  of  an  assumed  parallel
and  connection  between  this  'dwelling  in  booths'  at  the  feast
of  tabernacles  and  the  dwelling  in  tents  in  the  wilderness  at  the
exodus  from  Egypt. Cp  further,  Wellhausen  and Nowack,
ati  loc.

2  In  the  NT  and  in  Josephus  it  is  accordingly  spoken  of  as
oxrji'OTnryMi,  in  ®  as  eoprij  axrjviav,  in  Vg.  as  scenopagia,  and  in
Philo  (2  297)  as  aici\va.i.

4877


TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF

It  is  shown  elsewhere  <FKASTS,  §  10)  how  the  cen
tralisation  of  the  cultus  in  Dt.,  even  without  any
express  intention  on  the  part  of  the  lawgiver,  inevit
ably  altered  the  character  of  the  feasts.  It  became
necessary  that  they  should  Ix;  observed  at  one  common
definitely  fixed  date,  they  lost  their  intimate  connection
with  the  life  of  the  husbandman,  and  the  tendency  to
change  them  into  historical  celebrations  was  greatly
strengthened  by  this  circumstance.  No  express  refer
ence  to  any  historical  event  in  connection  with  the
feast  of  tabernacles  is  met  with  as  yet  in  Dt.  The
bringing  of  the  first-fruits  at  all  is  connected  only  in
a  quite  general  way  with  the  historical  fact  that  it  is
Yahwe  who  has  delivered  his  people  from  the  land  of
Egypt  and  given  them  the  land  of  (,'anaan  to  possess.
As  thanks  for  the  gift  of  the  land  the  Israelite  brings
the  first-fruits  of  its  produce  as  a  gift  to  Yahwe  (Dt.
2rji-n).  The  bringing  of  the  first-fruits  enjoined  in  Dt.
in  conjunction  with  a  liturgical  formula  of  thanksgiving
is  not  indeed  in  the  law  itself  (Dt.  26i-n)  expressly
connected  with  any  definite  time.  It  is,  however,
exceedingly  natural  to  assume  that  the  author  of  the
injunction  thought  of  it  as  to  be  carried  out  on  the  feast  of
tabernacles,  for  it  deals  with  the  offering  of  the  first-
fruits  of  the  wine  and  oil-harvest  as  well  as  with  the
first-fruits  of  corn,  and  contemplates  this  as  being  done
at  Jerusalem.  For  this  the  feast  of  tabernacles  was  the
convenient  opportunity,  unless  one  is  to  read  the  precept
as  implying  a  special  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  for  the
purpose.  In  this  connection  a  quite  general  reference
to  the  Exodus  is  implied  for  the  feast  of  tabernacles.
Lastly,  in  Dt.  it  is  further  laid  down  that  every  seventh
year,  the  year  of  release,  'this  law' — i.e.,  the  Deutero-
nomic  law — shall  be  read  before  all  Israel  at  the  feast
of  tabernacles  (Dt.  31  v>/.  )•

Kzekiel  is  the  first  to  give  to  this  feast — designated

'  the  feast'  or  '  the  feast  of  Yahwe' — a  definite  date  ; it

_ . is  to  begin  on  the  ifth  day  of  the  seventh

H  TT  month'  and  to  last  for  seven  da>'s  <K*ek.
and  H.  4525j.  He  orders  for  it  the  same  offer
ings  as  for  the  passover  ;  every  day  seven  bullocks
and  seven  rams  as  a  burnt-offering,  a  he-goat  as  a  sin-
offering,  an  ephah  for  every  bullock  and  every  ram,  with
a  hin  of  oil  to  each  ephah  as  a  meal-offering.  The

Law  of  Holiness  (I^ev.  23  39-41)  in  its  present  form  has  no
precept  as  to  the  offering.  The  date  in  v.  39  is  hardly
original.1  On  the  other  hand  it  is  here  prescribed  that
the  Israelites  on  the  first  day  of  the  feast  are  to  take  to
them  the  fruit  of  goodly  trees  (-nn  \y  '-s  ;  cp  under
Ai'i'i.E,  §  2  [3]),  branches  of  palm  trees  and  boughs  of
thick  trees  a  and  willows  of  the  brook,  and  rejoice  before
Yahwe  seven  days.  That  the  palm  branches  and  the
I  boughs  are  to  be  used  for  making  booths  is  nowhere
I  said.  It  is  equally  possible  to  suppose  that  they  were
carried  by  the  participants  in  their  hands  (cp  above,
§  3).  Such  a  custom  is  attested  at  any  rate  for  the
later  post -exilic  period  (2  Mace.  106  /.  ;  Jos.  Ant.
iii.  104,  §  245-  xiii.  13s,  §  372).  What  could  be  the
application  of  '  fruit  of  goodly  trees  '  in  the  construction
of  booths  is  not  easy  to  see,  and  it  is  more  natural  to
suppose  that  the  fruit  formed  part  of  the  thyrsus  which
each  participant  carried  in  his  hand  (cp  below,

§7).

The  laws  of  P  concerning  the  autumn  festival  are

1  How  much  of Lev. 2839 belongs to the original law
of holiness is 'very  questionable. As in  what follows this
verse mention is always made of  only seven feast days,
v.  30/,  which  speaks  of  an  eighth  day,  may  be  presumed to
be  a  later  addition  (see  below, |  6). The  same  holds  good
of  the  time  determination  in  v.  30*.  _  The  other  festivals  also
are  not  yet  assigned  to  a  fixed  day  in  H. On this  question
see  further  the various  introductions,  especially  the  tables  in
Holzinger.

2  ni3y  'fy 's explained by tradition as meaning 'myrtle.'
Occurring  as  it  does  between  '  palms'  and  '  willows,'  the_expres-
sion  would  certainly  seem  intended  to  denote  some  definite  kind
of  tree.

4878


TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OP

found  in  Lev.  2833-36  42  /.  Nu.  29  12-38. The  name  of
_ p the  festival  is  there  the  same  as  in  Dt.  :  feast
' of  tabernacles  or booths,  hag  has-sukkoth
n  :n  : Lev.  2334). The  preference  of  P  for  this


designation  is  not  a  mere  accident  ;  it  is  intended  to
denote,  not  a  part  of  the  ritual  merely,  but  the  meaning
of  the  entire  festival  ;  it  conveys,  not  only  that  during
the  festival  it  is  necessary  to  live  in  booths,  but  also
that  the  festival  commemorates  the  booths  in  which
Israel  lived  at  the  exodus  from  Kgypt.  It  is  exactly  to
this  that  the  peculiar  usage  of  the  feast  is  intended  to
point  (Lev.  2342/1  ).  The  change  of  meaning,  designed
to  give  the  feast  a  place  in  the  history  of  redemption,
has  thus  been  fully  accomplished  ;  there  is  now  no
longer  present  any  trace  of  a  reference  to  husbandry  —
a  reference  which,  indeed,  is  absent  also  from  the  Law
of  Holiness.  As  with  all  festivals  in  P,  so  also  in  the
case  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  the  chief  emphasis  is
laid  upon  the  public  sacrifices  which  are  offered  with
lavish  abundance,  no  longer  as  in  Dt.  upon  the  volun
tary  gifts  of  individuals  and  the  sacrificial  meal  arising
from  these.  The  public  sacrifices  consist,  over  and
above  the  regular  daily  burnt-offering  with  the  customary
meal  and  drink-offerings,  of  a  sin-offering  of  a  he-goat  to
be  offered  on  each  of  the  seven  days  of  the  feast,  with
in  addition  a  daily  burnt  -  offering  of  two  rams  and
fourteen  lambs,  and  on  the  first  day  thirteen  bullocks
besides,  on  the  second  day  twelve  bullocks,  and  each
succeeding  day  a  bullock  the  less  —  -thus,  on  the  seventh
day  seven  bullocks,  two  rams,  fourteen  lambs.  In
each  case  there  are,  of  course,  the  appropriate  meal-
offerings  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil  —  three-tenths  for
every  bullock  and  two-tenths  for  each  of  the  two  rams.
As  compared  with  the  offerings  prescribed  for  the  other
principal  feasts,  those  here  enjoined  are  enhanced  to  an
extraordinary  degree  —  in  some  instances  being  more
than  doubled.  Thus  down  even  to  so  late  a  date  as
that  of  P  we  can  clearly  trace  the  continued  operation
of  that  pre-eminent  importance  which  attached  to  this
feast  above  all  the  rest  in  the  oldest  times.

There  is  yet  one  other  point  in  which  P  goes  beyond
Ezekiel  and  H  ;  to  the  traditional  seven  days  of  the
feast  it  adds  yet  an  eighth  as  a  closing  festival,  *&sdreth
(rray).  As  compared  with  the  other  seven  days,  this
has  an  independent  character  of  its  own  ;  it  does  not
simply  continue  the  sacrifices  of  the  preceding  days,  but
there  are  offered  a  he-goat  as  sin-offering,  a  bullock,  a
ram  and  seven  lambs  as  a  burnt-offering  —  in  each  case
with  the  appropriate  meal  and  drink-offerings,  of  course
in  addition  to  the  regular  daily  burnt-offering.  This
day,  however,  as  can  readily  be  understood,  is  always
reckoned  as  part  of  the  main  festival  itself,  and  in  later
times  it  was  customary  to  speak  of  an  eight-days'  feast
(2  Mace.  106  ;  Jos.  Ant.  iii.  104,  §  245)-  This  eighth
day,  like  the  first,  is  celebrated  by  a  great  assembly  and
by  abstinence  from  every  kind  of  work  ;  for  the  inter
vening  six  days  this  is  not  demanded.

In  post-exilic  times,  just  as  in  pre-exilic,  it  is  pre
cisely  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles  that  we  most  often
hear  ;  it  always  continued  to  be  one  of  the
most  important  festivals.  Of  the  exiles
after  their  return  we  forthwith  read  that  when  the
seventh  month  came  round  they  did  not  neglect  the
feast  of  tabernacles.  And,  as  matter  of  fact,  after  the
introduction  of  the  law  in  444  B.  c.  ,  the  feast  was
regularly  observed  in  strict  conformity  with  the  legal
prescriptions.  This  is  expressly  emphasised  in  Neh.
814^  It  is,  however,  very  noticeable  that  here  the
legal  innovation  is  the  revival  of  a  custom  which  had
passed  out  of  use  :  not,  as  might  be  expected,  the
sacrifices,  but  the  dwelling  in  booths.  From  this  no
other  conclusion  is  possible  than  that  this  dwelling
in  booths  was  practised  in  the  older  time,  not  as  a
festal  rite,  but  as  a  harvest  custom.  After  Dt.  had
transferred  the  observance  of  the  feast  to  Jerusalem,  the
practice  had  gone  out  of  date  ;  what  had  formerly  been

4879


1  Later.


TABERNACLES, FEAST  OF

quite  natural  had  now  in  the  capital  no  meaning.
When,  however,  the  custom  was  brought  into  con
nection  with  history  and  judged  to  be  a  reminiscence
of  the  tents  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  it  received  a  new
meaning  which  gave  it  fresh  significance  as  a  part  of  the
ceremonial  of  the  feast  and  recalled  it  to  new  life.  From
the  account  in  Nehemiah  (816)  we  learn  further  that  in
Jerusalem  the  booths  were  set  upon  the  house  roofs,  in
the  house  courts,  in  the  courts  of  the  temple  (this  last,
of  course,  only  for  priests  and  Levites)  and  in  the  broad
places  of  the  city  gates.  Olive  branches,  branches  of
wild  olives,  myrtle  branches,  palm  branches,  and
branches  of  thick  trees  (rray  ]'y,  see  above,  §  5,  n.  2)
were  employed  for  the  purpose.  The  public  reading  of
the  book  of  the  law,  as  required  by  Dt.  (see  above,  §  4),
was  also  a  feature  of  the  festival.  The  Chronicler's

account  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles  at  the  dedication  of
the  temple  (2  Ch.  l%ff.}  is  evidence  of  the  observance  of
the  festival  in  accordance  with  P  in  the  Chronicler's  own
time  in  so  far  as  the  seven  days'  feast  of  i  K.  865  is
altered  into  a  feast  of  eight  days.  Finally,  we  read

in  the  Maccabean  period  of  the  celebration  of  a  feast
resembling  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  immediately  after  the
purification  of  the  temple  (2  Mace.  106^).  This
feast  also  lasts  eight  days  ;  the  participants  carry  in
their  hands  '  wands  wreathed  with  leaves,  and  fair
boughs,  and  palms  also.'

The  custom  here  referred  to  (perhaps  already  an  old  one  ;  see
above,  §  5)  continued  in  use  during  the  later  period.  The  order
of  the  feast  is  prescribed  down  to  the  minutest  details  in  the
Talmudic  tractate  entitled  Sukka  (cp  MVKTLE).  There  the
branches,  etc.,  are  not  only  used  for  making  booths,  but  are  also-
carried  in  the  hands  as  the  celebrants  go  to  join  in  the  worship.
The  '  fruit  of  goodly  trees'  ("nn  \"J  "IS)  was  interpreted  to  mean
the  etlirog  (-i'l~'rJN))  apple  of  paradise,  or  Adam's  apple,  the
'is  'aboth  (ITU^  J'y)  the  myrtle.  Accordingly,  a  palm  branch
still  in  its  '  sceptre-like  '  condition,  that  is,  not  yet  expanded  (the
so-called  Inlab,  31?!1?)  was  fastened  up  along  with  a  myrtle  and
willow  in  such  a  manner  that  the  myrtle  was  on  the  right  and
the  willow  on  the  left  of  the  palm.  This  festal  thyrsus  (also
called  Iftlfib)  was  held  in  the  right  hand  whilst  the  left  carried
an  etlirog,  and  thus  equipped  the  celebrants  went  in  procession
with  hosannas  and  waving  of  thyrsi  round  the  altar  of  burnt-
offering,  each  day  once,  but  on  the  seventh  day  seven  times,  to
commemorate  the  seven  days'  encompassing  of  the  walls  of
Jericho.  Josephus  calls  the  thyrsus  (Ant.  iii.  104,  §  245)
eipetriuJir) — which  means  properly  the  harvest  wreath  of  olive
or  laurel  wound  round  with  wool  and  decorated  with  fruit
which  the  Athenian  singing  boys  carried  about  at  the  autumn
feast  of  Pyanepsia.  Another  Greek  designation  employed
is  Ovp<roi  (thyrsi;  2  Mace.  10  7;  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  13  5,  §  372),
properly  the  Bacchic  wand  wreathed  in  ivy  and  vine-leaves  with
a  fir-cone  at  the  top  which  was  carried  by  the  worshippers  at
the  feast  of  Dionysus.  It  is  doubtless  this  whole  custom  that
Plutarch  has  in  his  mind  when  he  represents  the  Jewish  feast  of
tabernacles  as  being  a  Dionysiac  festival  (Sy»if>.  46  :  rrjs  /neyiVrT)?
»cai  TeAeioTanjs  eoprrjs  Trapa  'lovSai'ois  6  Katpds  e<m  «cai  6  TpOTTO?
AtOfi;<riaj  Trpo<7>J/ccoi>  .  .  .  CCTTI  £e  KO\  /cpaTTjpo*/>opia  TIS  foprji  Kat
6vp<To<l>opia.  Trap'  aiiTOis,  fv  j5  Bvpcrow;  l^oi-res  eis  TO  tepbf
tio'ia.o'iv).

Another  peculiar  custom,  with  regard  to  the  meaning'
and  origin  of  which  there  is  still  great  uncertainty  (cp
NATURE -WORSHIP,  §  4),  was  in  connection  with  the
daily  drink-offering  which  \vas  offered  during  the  seven
days  of  the  feast.  For  this  the  water  was  taken  from
Siloam.  A  priest  drew  it  in  a  golden  pitcher  of  a
capacity  of  three  logs,  and  brought  it  amid  trumpet-
blasts  through  the  Water  Gate  into  the  outer  court
of  the  temple.  There  other  priests  received  it  from
him  with  the  words  (Is.  12s) :  'Ye  will  draw  water
with  joy  from  the  founts  of  salvation,'  in  which  words
priests  and  people  alike  joined.  The  water  was  then
mixed  with  wine,  and,  while  the  priests  blew  on  the
trumpets  and  the  Levites  chanted  psalms,  was  poured
into  a  silver  basin  standing  at  the  south-western  corner
of  the  altar,  from  which  it  flowed  by  a  pipe  into  a
subterranean  channel  and  thence  to  the  Kidron.  We
may,  perhaps,  bring  this  practice  into  connection  with
the  ancient  custom  of  drawing  water  and  pouring  it  out
(cp  i  S.  76)  which  may  possibly  have  been  used  and
retained  precisely  at  the  feast.  Tradition  has  it  that

4880


TABITHA


TABOR


abundant  rain  for  the  new  seed-time  and  a  fruitful  year
are  symbolised  in  the  act.  In  all  probability  the  words
of  Jn.  7 '37  f.  are  to  be  read  in  this  connection.1  Yet

one  other  characteristic  of  the  feast  remains  to  be  men
tioned  :  the  festal  joy  on  the  night  between  the  first  and
the  second  day.  In  the  court  of  the  women  four-
branched  golden  candlesticks  were  erected  and  lighted
up.  With  music,  psalms,  and  trumpets,  a  torch  dance
was  then  performed  by  the  most  prominent  priests  and
laymen.  The  offering  of  the  festal  sacrifices  was
accompanied,  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  great  feasts,
by  trumpet-blowing  by  the  priests,  as  also  by  the  singing
of  the  great  hallel— i.e.,  Pss.  113-118  (see  HALLEL)  ;
when  the  Hosanna  was  reached  in  Ps.  11825  the  lulabs
were  shaken.

Outside  of  Palestine  the  Jews  observed  the  festival  in  like
manner  in  booths.  As  the  determination  of  the  month's  com
mencement  and  of  the  whole  calendar  connected  with  it  depended
on  actual  observation  of  the  new  moon,  and  thus  was  uncertain
(see  NEW  MOON),  it  was  customary  for  the  Jews  outside  of
Palestine  to  observe  the  first  and  eighth  days  of  the  feast  twice
over  on  consecutive  days,  so  as  to  make  sure  of  observing  the
common  national  feast  quite  simultaneously  with  their  brethren
in  Palestine.

After  the  destruction  of  the  second  temple  arose  the  custom  of
adding  yet  a  ninth  day — the  23rd  of  Tishri — to  the  festival,
celebrated  as  the  feast  of  'the  joy  of  the  law'  (minn  DHlpi:').
On  the  Sabbath  preceding  this  day  the  reading  of  the  law  as
divided  into  52  parashiyyoth  or  lessons  in  the  synagogue  service
came  to  an  end  ;  on  the  following  sabbath  the  reading  was  re
commenced.  Cp  Vitringa,  De  Syn.  Vet.,  1696,  p.  1003.

See  the  literature  cited  under  FEASTS  ;  also  the  articles  in
Riehm,  Ilerzog-Plitt,  Smith,  etc.  I.  B.

TABITHA  (TAB[e]ie<\  [Ti.  WH]),2  Acts9364°t.
See  DORCAS  ;  cp  GAZELLE.

TABLE. The  words  are  : —

1.  jn^c',  sulhan,  Tpdirega,  mensa. See  MEALS,  §  3«;  ALTAR,
§  10 ;  and  cp  SACRIFICE,  §  34^.

2.  33^,  iiiesa.li,  ai'd/cAnns  (-ijcns  [CD,  accubitus,  is  taken  by
EV  in  Cant.  1  12  in  the  sense  of  'table' ;  cp  MEALS,  §  3«,  and
n. 2  ; also  §  3  />,  n.  2  ; but see  also  BDB,  and  Bu.  ad  loc.t
Haupt,  JBL  21  (1902)  pt.  i,  p.  54.

3-  mS>  lfftih,  n-Aaf  (31  times)  TruftW  (thrice),  tabula,  buxus.
Chiefly  of  the  '  tables'  of  the  law  Ex.  24  12,  etc.,  but  also  of  the
tables  or  tablets  on  which  the  prophets  wrote  their  prophecies
(Is.  308  Hab.  2  2),  and  of  tables  for  writing  generally.  Cp
WRITING.

4.  Tpa7re<X  Mt.  15  27  i  Cor.  10  21  Heb.  9  2,  etc.  ;  see  above,  i.

5.  TrAcif ,  2  Cor.  3  3  Heb.  9  4  ;  see  above,  3.

6.  KAiVr)  in  Mk.  "4  [Ti.  WH  om.]  is  rendered  'table'  in  AV ;
RVom- RV'ng- '  many  ancient authorities add  and  couches.'
See  above,  2,  and  cp  MEALS,  §  3/7  and  n.  2.

7.  7rii>a.Kt&i.ov,  Lk.  163,  AV  'table,'  RV  'tablet';  dimin.  from
TriVaf ,  and  so  a  small  tablet  (for  writing).

TABLE  LAND  pi^p)  2  Ch.  26 10  RVmg-,  EV
'plain(s).'  See  JUD.-KA,  PLAIN.

TABLET.  i.  nO-13,  kumds,  Ex.  3522  Nu.  31 507.
RV  ARMLET.  See  NECKLACE,  §  4.

2.  Ji ''•':,  gillayon,  Is.  8  i,  RV  see  DRESS,  §  i  [2],  ROLL,  2.

3.  E*B:n  '33, bate  (?)  han-ncphes,  Is.  3  20. See  PERFUME
BOXES.

TABOR  O'UFI  ;  0d,Bcop  [BXARTL],  pMOBcop  [13]

6^4)0)9  [A]  Josh.  1022,  TO  ITA.BYPION  [BA]  Hos.  5i

1 Physical  Jen  46  [®  26]  l8  ; AT*BYRiON  Polyb.

character V-  706>  Cp iepON ^IOC ATABYP'OY at
cnaracTier Agrigentum  and  in  the  isle of  Rhodes

id.  ix.  2?7  ;  TO  iT&BypiON  opoc  Jos.  ;
ITABYPION  Euseb.  OS  268go  and  e&Bcop,  ib.  261  27;
Itabynum,  Thabor,  Jerome),  the  hill  now  called  Jebel

1  The  words  are  spoken  on  the  '  great '  day  of  the  feast — •
^  ea-\dn)  r)fitpa  r;  /ieydAr)  Tijs  copTrjs.  By  this  probably  is  meant
the  seventh  day,  on  which  procession  was  made  seven  times
round  the  altar,  which  on  this  day  was  decorated  with  branches
of  willow.  This  day  is  in  fact  called  by  the  rabbins  the  '  great '
Hosanna  day—  Nin  nrny'SJ'l  n  CV,  or  also  the  'willow 'day —
H3X'  CV.  The  eighth  day,  the  'ascreth,  is  not  strictly  speaking
to  be  reckoned  to  the  feast  of  tabernacles  ;  the  special  sacrifices
and  f'-stal  observances  terminate  on  the  seventh  day  (see  above).
This  day,  therefore,  cannot  be  regarded  as  that  intended  in  Jn.
1  37-

-  Cp  To3ta0»)  (Wadd.  21 55)  and  ra/Siaffy,  cited  by  Dussaud  and
Macler,  Voy.  Arch.  158  (Paris,  1901).

4881


et-Tur.  Its  dome-like  shape  as  seen  from  the  S.  or
SW.  ('mira  rotunditate,'  Jer.  OS  15623),  and  its
apparent  isolation,  make  it  a  striking  feature  in  the
landscape  of  SE.  Galilee.  Hence  it  ranks  with  Carmul
among  conspicuous  heights  :  e.g.  ,  in  Jer.  46  18,  and  the
Midrash,  Ber.  R.,  §  99,  'Tabor  came  from  Beth-elim  and
Carmel  from  Aspamya  to  attend  the  law  -giving  at
Sinai.'  A  psalmist  even  implies  that  what  Hermon  is
on  the  E.  of  Jordan  Tabor  is  on  the  W.  ,  Ps.  89  13  (but
cp  the  commentators).  It  rises  from  the  level  of  the
Great  Plain  to  a  height  of  1843  ft.  (1312  ft.  from  the
base)  ;  the  summit  is  an  extensive  platform,  3000  ft.
from  E.  to  W.  ,  1300  ft.  at  its  greatest  breadth,  a
peculiarity  which  did  much  to  determine  the  associations
which  have  gathered  round  the  mountain.1  Though
from  some  aspects  Tabor  appears  to  stand  alone,  in
reality  it  is  a  spur  of  the  Naxareth  group  of  heights,
and  is  linked  to  them  on  its  N.  side.  Its  slopes,  like
the  W.  slopes  of  Carmel,  are  covered  with  vegetation
and  stunted  trees,  oak,  ilex,  terebinth,  beech,  carob,
olive,  etc.  ,  which  afford  cover  to  an  unusual  number  of
animals.  From  the  top  opens  out  a  superb  panorama,
often,  however,  veiled  with  mists  in  the  spring-time.
1'he  situation  of  the  mountain,  its  imposing  and
prominent  outline,  explain  at  once  the  part  which  it  has
played  in  history.  In  all  ages  Tabor  has  been  famous
either  for  its  sanctuary  or  for  its  stronghold.  Com
manding  the  NE.  quarter  of  the  Great  Plain  and  one  of
the  main  outlets  down  to  the  Jordan,  the  W.  esh-Sherar,
it  has  considerable  strategic  value,  whilst  to  the  instinct
of  early  religion  it  would  seem  to  have  been  designed  by
nature  for  a  holy  place.

The  boundaries  of  Issachar,  Zebulun,  and  Naphtali
meet  upon  Tabor  ;  Josh.  1922  (Issachar),  12  CHISI.OTH-
0 0  TABOK  —  i.e. 'flanks  of  Tabor1  (Zebu-

and  strong  M-S^NOTH-TABOK-^  -Peaks(?)
h  Irl  of  Tabor' (Xaphtali), i  Ch.  662  [77]

(Zebulun;  <5»  0axx«<?).  In  the  first
and  the  last  of  these  passages  Tabor  is  the  name
of  a  town  on  or  near  the  mountain.  Long  before
the  Israelite  occupation  Tabor  was  a  holy  place  ;
it  naturally  became  the  common  sanctuary  of  the  three
tribes  whose  portions  met  there.  So  we  may  infer
from  Dt.  8819,  'they  (i.e.,  Zebulun  and  Issachar)  call
peoples  to  the  mountain.'  Though  Tabor  is  not
expressly  named,  as  it  is  the  mountain  in  which  both
these  tribes  had  an  interest  the  allusion  would  be  clear
to  early  readers.  The  passage  seems  to  refer  to  some
kind  of  religious  fair  or  gathering  at  the  sanctuary
of  Tabor  to  which  the  neighbourhood  was  invited  for
worship  and  barter  (Stade,  Gl'I  liyi;  Driver,  Deut.
409  ;  see  also  Herder,  Geist  d.  Hebr.  Poesie,  iS°ff-
ed.  Suphan).  In  the  days  of  Deborah  and  Barak  these
tribes  had  suffered  most  from  the  hostility  of  the
Canaanites  ;  accordingly  upon  Tabor,  as  the  common
rallying  -point,  Barak  gathered  his  men  for  a  descent
upon  the  enemy  in  the  plain  below  (Judg.  46  12  14).
Perhaps  there  was  another  reason  for  the  muster  on
Tabor  besides  the  obvious  advantages  of  the  position  ;
the  holy  war,  as  von  Gall  suggests,  would  probably
begin  with  a  sacrifice  at  the  tribal  sanctuary  (Aitisr.
Kultstdttcn,  i24/.  ;  cp  i  S.  13g  12  Mi.  3s,  etc.  ).  From
one  account  it  appears  that  the  battle  was  fought  at  'the
foot  of  the  mountain  (Judg.  4  14  f.  )  :  the  Song,  however,
does  not  mention  Tabor,  and  places  the  battle  farther
off,  by  Taanach,  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Kishon
(5  18-20).  By  this  victory  Tabor  was  secured  to  Israel  ;
and,  as  a  stronghold  commanding  one  of  the  main
caravan  routes  across  the  Plain,  it  must  have  proved  an
invaluable  possession  during  the  times  of  conflict  and
slow  consolidation  which  followed  (Judg.  7  1  22  i  S.
29  1  31  1).  Of  its  fortunes  in  the  days  when


1  In  Talm.  B.  the  extent  of  Tabor  is  given  as  4  parsa,  Bab.
Bathr  73/<  (Zt-l'iihiin  113^  reads  40  parsa)  ;  the  figures  of  Jos.,
BJ\v.  ]  (height  30  stadia,  the  TreSsW  on  the  summit  26  stadia),
are  of  course  absurd,

4882


TABOR


TABOR


Assyrian  and  Egyptian  armies  passed  within  sight  of  it  '
we  know  nothing  (15.823  [9i]  2  K.  2829  Zech.  12n).
The  sanctuary  continued  to  serve  the  district.  By
Hosea's  time  it  had  become  associated  with  the  idolatrous
form  of  Yahwe-worship  which  was  characteristic  of  the
N.  kingdom  ;  hence  it  incurred  the  prophet's  denuncia
tion  ;  its  priesthood,  like  that  of  Mizpah,  the  other
typical  'high  place,'  is  'a  net  spread  out'  to  catch
deluded  worshippers  (Hos.  5i).  Nevertheless  the
sacred  character  of  the  mountain  was  not  forfeited  ;  in
the  course  of  time  no  doubt  it  influenced  the  Christian
tradition  (§  5)  ;  it  never  quite  lost  its  hold  upon  Jewish
memory.  In  a  late  Midrash  we  find  the  opinion  that
'  the  Temple  itself  might  well  have  been  built  in  the
portion  of  Issachar,'  had  it  not  been  otherwise  ordered
( Yalkut  on  Dt.  33 19  -Dc-i?1  ^  pSra  nua1?  »ua  nrran  rrp)-

The  Tabor  of  Judg.  818  can  hardly  be  the  mountain  ;

it  is  too  far  from  the  seats  of  Gideon's  clan  ;  the  scene

_ , „ of  the  murder  was  the  neighbourhood  of

HI  I'm Shechem  rather  than  the  Plain  of  Jezreel

'  B>  1U3>  (but  cp  GIDEON,  §  2). It  is  simplest  to

suppose  that there  was another  Tabor  near Ophrah

(Budde,  Ri.  Sa.  114  ;  but  see  also  Moore,  Judges,  228).

The 'terebinth  [RV  'oak']  of  Tabor' (i  S.  10 3; ©L

TTJS  Spuds  rtjs  tK\(KTT}s)  is  probably  to  be  placed,  as  the

context  seems  to  require,  in  Benjamin,  between  Rachel's

Cjrave, on the N. border of  Benjamin, and Gibeah

(von Gall, I.e.  88  f. ). Ewald's  emendation  n-rmjiSx

(  =  ni33  pkv  Gen.  358)  is  scarcely  necessary  ;  there  must

have  been more  than one such  sacred tree in later

Jewish  history. See,  further,  RACIIKL'S  SKPULCIIKK.

In  later  Jewish  history  Tabor  was  the  scene  of  three
memorable  engagements.

The  first  occurred  in  the  struggle  between  Antiochus  III.  the

Great  (223-187  B.C.)  and  Ptolemy  IV. Philopator  (222-205  1!-c-)

for  the  possession  of  Palestine  (Polyb.  v.  70). After

4. Jewish the  surrender  of  Philoteria  (S.  of  Lake  of  Galilee)

history.  anL'  Scythopolis,  about  218  B.C.,  Antiochus  marched
into  the  hill-country  and  appeared  before  Ata-
byrium, '  which  is  situated  upon  a  rounded  hill  (e?ri  Ao</>ou  /nao-Toei-
SoGs),  more  than  15  stadia  in  ascent,'  and  captured  the  place  by
a  stratagem.  Polybius  calls  Atabyrium  a  n-oAts  standing  on
the  top  of  the  hill,  and  the  account  of  its  capture  agrees  with
such  a  position.

In  B.C.  53  the  proconsul  A.  Gabinius,  general  of  Pompey,
fought  Alexander,  son  of  Aristobulus,  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain  (Trepi  TO  'Irafivptov  opos),  and  10,000  Jews  fell  in
battle  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  63).

The  third  episode  is  recorded  in  fuller  detail.  As  governor  of
Galilee  Josephus  fortified  Tabor  against  Vespasian  in  67  A.D.
Under  pressure  he  built  a  wall  round  the  summit  in  forty  days,
and  supplied  the  fort  with  water  from  below,  for  the  inhabitants
(CTTOIKOI)  had  been  dependent  upon  rain.  Vespasian  sent
Placidus  with  600  horsemen  to  attack  the  Jews  by  enticing  them
down  to  the  plain  ;  they  were  unwise  enough  to  leave  their
strong  position  in  the  hope  of  overwhelming  the  cavalry ;  it
became  impossible  to  retreat,  and  they  were  completely  defeated.
Want  of  water  compelled  those  who  were  left  in  the  fort  (oi
( 7n\wpiot)  to  surrender  the  mountain  to  Placidus  (Jos.  BJ  iv.  1  8
ii.  206,  /  'ita.  37).  Remains  of  Josephus'  wall  were  discovered
in  1898.

Since  the  third  century  Tabor  has  been  revered  by

Christian  tradition  as  the  scene  of  the  Transfiguration.

_. _  The  Gospels  themselves  do  not  give  a.

« M "'  name to the 'hi§h mountain1 (fipoj
Hguration. ^X6j/) . but it was more ]ikely

Hermon  than  Tabor  (see  HERMON,  §  i,  MOUNTAIN).
The  Transfiguration  is  dated  six  (Lk. ,  eight)  days  after
the  confession  of  Peter  at  Ctesarea  Philippi  =  Banias  at
the  foot  of  Hermon.  Nothing  is  said  of  a  journey  in
the  interval ;  the  return  to  Galilee  is  placed  after  the
Transfiguration  (Mk.  930).  Moreover,  in  Jesus'  time,
Tabor  was  hardly  a  place  to  which  he  could  lead  the
three  apostles  '  apart  by  themselves  '  (/car'  ISiav  /JLOVOVS  :
Mk.  92) — KO.T'  Idlav  obviously  refers  to  the  apostles,
not  to  the  isolation  of  Tabor.  The  passages  from
Polybius  and  Josephus  quoted  above  imply  that  the
summit  was  inhabited  and  partially  fortified.

Pere  Barnabe,  who  has  written  lately  in  support  of  the
tradition,  argues  that  there  never  was,  and  never  could  have
been,  a  town  upon  the  summit  because  of  the  absence  of  water
and  cultivable  land  sufficient  to  support  a  population  (Le  Mont

4883


Thal>ort  Paris,  1900).  But  the  difficulty  was  overcome  in  other
situations  of  a  similar  character  ;  many  remains  of  cisterns  have
been  discovered  on  the  summit  ;  and  monasteries  have  managed
to  live  there.  The  passage  in  the  Gospel  according  to  the
Hebmvs  quoted  by  Origen  (Comment,  in  Joan.  t.  26 ;  Migne,
PG  14  col.  132),  where  Jesus  is  made  to  say,  '  Even  now  has  my
mother,  the  Holy  Spirit,  seized  me  by  one  of  my  hairs  and
borne  me  to  the  great  mountain  Tabor,'  can  hardly  be  said  to
support  the  Christian  tradition  ;  but  it  may  have  helped  to  give
rise  to  it.  The  context  of  the  quotation  is  lost,  so  that  we
cannot  tell  what  event  is  alluded  to ;  not  improbably  it  was  the
temptation.  Cp  TEMPTATION,  §  14,  and  see  Moulton,  liibl.  and
Sent.  Studies,  Yale  Univ.,  1901,  p.  161,  with  the  references.
At  any  rate  Origen  himself  accepted  the  tradition  (Comment,  in
Ps.  88  13  [89  12] ;  PG  12  1548),  '  Tabor  is  the  mountain  of  Galilee
where  Christ  was  transfigured."  In  the  fourth  century  it  is  held
by  Eusebius,  who  speaks  of  Hermon  along  with  Tabor  as
'  mountains  upon  which  the  wonderful  transfigurations  and
frequent  sojourns  of  our  Saviour  took  place '  (Comment,  in  Ps.
8813  [89  12];  PG  281092);  by  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  'Moses  .  .  .
and  Elias  .  .  .  were  present  with  him  when  he  was  transfigured  on
Mt.  Tabor '  (Catecli.  12  16  ;  PG  33  744)  ;  by  Jerome,  '  Itabyrium
et  tabernacula  Salvatoris,'  '  .  .  .  inontem  Thabor  in  quo  trans-
figuratus  est  Dominus '  (Epf>.  46  and  108  ;  PL  22491  ;  ib.  889).
Before  the  end  of  the  fourth  century,  the  tradition  was  widely
current  in  the  E.,  and  pilgrims,  such  as  Paula  (Jerome,  Ef>.  40)
and  Sylvia  of  Aquitaine,  began  to  venerate  the  spot.  It  is
generally  believed  that  the  Empress  Helena  founded  a  basilica
on  Tabor  about  326  A.D.  ;  whether  any  remains  of  it  can  still  be
traced  may  be  doubted.  The  church  with  three  apses,  excavated
in  recent  years  (plan  given  by  Barnabe  I.e.  136),  is  considered
to  show  characteristics  of  fourth-,  or  fifth-century  work  (de  Vogfl^,
F.glises  de  T.  Sainte,  1860,  352^);  in  570  the  three  chapels
were  seen  by  Antoninus  of  Plaisance,  and  in  670  by  Arculf,  bishop
of  Eichstadt,  the  earliest  travellers  who  refer  to  them  ;  their
narratives  are  published  by  the  Societe  dc  fOrient  latin  (1  94
and  185).  The  only  dissentient  voice  in  the  early  period  is  that
of  the  Bordeaux  Pilgrim  (333  A.D.),  who  places  the  Transfigura
tion  on  the  Mt.  of  Olives  (Itinerarium  [8th  cent.],  Soc.  de
1'Or.  lat.  1  18) ;  otherwise,  down  to  the  time  of  the  Crusades  the
Christian  tradition  is  unanimous  and  constantly  repeated.  It
finds  a  place  in  the  services  of  the  Greek  Church  for  Aug.  6th —
e.g. ,  'EifiOacrcv  i\  iq/iie'pa  TTJS  fvdeov  ei>ij>po<ruiiris'  avenTiv  els  rb
opos  TO  &afiiop  6  Aeo-7TOTr)s  rrjs  OtoTrjTOS  auTOU  a7ra<7Tpai//ai  -njv
<opaioTr)Ta  ('JlpoAoyioi'  TO  f-eya,  Venice,  1876,  348);  but  in  the
Western  service-books  it  does  not  seem  to  occur.1

In  the  history  of  the  Frank  kingdom  Tabor  maintained
its  associations  with  religious  devotion  and  hard  right
ing.  In  1099  Tancred  occupied  the
mountain  with  European  troops,  and
when  he  withdrew  he  endowed  the  church
and  entrusted  it  to  the  care  of  Benedictine  monks,  who
restored  the  ancient  basilica  and  built  a  monastery.
Not  long  after,  in  1113,  the  Turks  under  Malduk
fought  a  battle  with  Baldwin  I.  on  the  plain  below ;
the  Crusaders  were  severely  beaten,  and  the  monks
massacred.  But  fresh  monks  soon  took  their  place ;  the
abbey  received  new  donations  ;  the  dignity  of  archbishop
was  conferred  upon  its  Abbot  Pons  and  his  successors
by  a  bull  of  Eugenius  III.  (1145).  Then  came  the
advance  of  Saladin  in  1183;  his  troops  ravaged  the
Greek  convent;  and  in  1187,  after  the  disaster  at  the
Horns  of  Hattin,  the  holy  place  of  Tabor  was  reduced
to  ruins  and  abandoned  by  its  Benedictines.

Early  in  the  thirteenth  century,  Melik  el-'Adil,  in  order  to
attack  the  headquarters  of  the  Franks  at  Acre,  fortified  Tabor,
using  part  of  the  ruined  church  for  his  towers.  The  fortifications
were  completed  in  1213  by  his  son,  Melik  el-Mu'auam  ;  several
inscriptions  commemorating  the  work  have  been  found  recently
among  the  debris  (Barnabi,  I.e.  15,  100).  It  was  this  fortifica
tion  of  Tabor  that  occasioned  the  Fifth  Crusade.  In  1217
Andrew  II.,  king  of  Hungary,  and  other  Princes  advanced
against  Tabor  with  a  great  host,  and  besieged  the  fort  seventeen
days ;  the  first  assault  was  boldly  delivered  and  as  boldly  re
pulsed  ;  delays  and  divisions  in  the  Christian  camp  helped  to
make  the  second  attack  fruitless,  and  the  Crusaders  were  forced
to  retreat.  See  the  vivid  narrative  of  Vincentius  Bellovacensis,
Soc.  de  1'  Or.  lat.  strie  hist.,  898  ;  Kugler,  Gesch.  d.  Kreuzzuge,
312/^1  Michaud,  Hist,  of  Crusades,  Ivvfcjff.  The  fortress
was  afterwards  dismantled  by  Melik  el-'Adil  in  the  hope  of
restoring  peace  ;  and,  in  the  years  which  followed,  the  church

1  In  the  fourteenth  century  the  dogma  of  the  Uncreated
Light  of  Mt.  Tabor  was  promoted  by  Gregory  Palamas,  Arch
bishop  of  Thessalonica  (about  1349).  He  asserted  that  one  light
of  Tabor  was  visible  and  comprehensible,  the  other  invisible
and  incomprehensible;  see  Migne,  PG\W^^^,ff'.  Gregory
became  a  patron  of  the  curious  sect  of  the  6/mi>aA6i/Jvxoi,  drawn
from  the  monks  of  Mt.  Athos,  who  devoted  themselves  to  the
contemplation  of  the  uncreated  light  of  Tabor;  Migne,  ib.  col.
8997^  Nilles,  Kalendarium  manuale,  Innsbruck,  1896,  s.v.
Aug.  6.

4884


6.  The
Crusaders.


TABOR,  PLAIN  OF

was  rebuilt  and  served  by  monks  from  Hungary  (1229) ;  for  a
short  time  it  passed  into  the  possession  of  the  Hospitallers  of  St.
John.  Hut  Tabor  was  not  left  in  peace  for  long.  In  1263
Liibars,  the  Mameluke  Sultan  of  Egypt,  in  the  course  of  his
campaign  against  Damascus,  finally  burnt  and  devastated  the
church,  and  the  holy-place  of  Tabor  was  left  a  heap  of  ruins  for
600  years.  Franciscans  from  Nazareth  conducted  pilgrims  to
the  summit  from  time  to  time,  and  celebrated,  as  well  as  they
could,  the  Feast  of  the  Transfiguration  on  6th  Aug.  and  the
second  Sunday  in  Lent.  Not  until  1858  did  the  Franciscans  begin
to  undertake  the  care  and  excavation  of  the  ruins  ;  Greek  monks
followed  soon  after ;  and  in  1873  was  built  the  modest  Latin
convent  which,  with  the  Greek  monastery  close  by,  guards  the
ancient  sanctuary.  Napoleon's  Syrian  campaign  brings  Tabor
into  general  history  for  the  last  time  ;  in  1799  the  French  troops
under  Kleber,  afterwards  reinforced  by  Napoleon  himself,
encountered  the  vast  army  of  Jezzar,  and  the  battle  of  Alt.
Tabor  ended  in  the  complete  discomfiture  of  the  Turks ;  see
Lanfrey,  Hist,  lie  Napoleon  if,  1  399^

The  derivation  of  the  name  Tabor  is  unknown. In
spite  of  its  triliteral  form,  Winckler  considers  that  the
...  name has survived, like 'Jordan,' from

pre-Canaanite  times,  and  therefore  is  not
Semitic  in  origin.  For  a  Semitic  derivation  he  suggests
the  Eth.  dabr  '  mountain,'  with  d  for  t  under  influence
of  the  liquid  (AOF  1423).  This  interchange  of  dentals
is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the  name  of  the  village  at  the
NW.  foot  of  Tabor,  Debiiriyeh  =  DABERATH  (q.i'.},
possibly  a  formation  from  -non  ;  the  Arab,  form  has
preserved  the  long  vowel  in  the  second  syllable.  One  is
tempted  to  conjecture  that  the  primitive  form  of  Tan
was  -ini  (cp  v:n  Josh.  11 21  1826  Judg.  In).

Older  etymologies  have  a  certain  interest ;  e.g.  Syr. -Hex.  mg.
ad  ®a3(op  Josh.  19  22  gives  f$r)0iap,  and  explains  btth  'or  '  house
of  light':  Jerome  OS  31 2  496  'veniens  lumen,  veniat  lux'

(TIN  Nun  •)•

Among  the  Arabs  Tabor  has  long  been  known  as
Jebel  et-Tur — i.e.,  'the  mountain' — a  name  given  also
to  Gerizim,  Olivet,  and  Sinai.  Sometimes  the  Arabs
call  it  Jebel  Xur,  'of  the  light,'  in  allusion  to  the
Transfiguration,  for  the  Christian  tradition  is  accepted
by  Moslems;  GueYin,  Galile'e,  \i^ff.  We  should
expect  Tabor  to  be  mentioned  in  Egyptian  documents  ;
but  this  is  probably  not  the  case.  The  '  Dapura '
in  the  country  of  'Amaura,'  so  called  to  distinguish  it
from  another  Dapura,  among  the  towns  conquered  by
Rameses  II.  (temple  of  Karnak),  is  to  be  looked  for
on  the  Orontes  in  N.  Syria  ;  the  Depuru  mentioned
next  to  Kadesh  in  the  papyrus  Anastasi  I.  (224,
Chabas,  1\>y.  d'nn  Egyptien  en  Syrie,  pp.  197,  313),
if  not  the  same  place,  belongs  to  the  same  region.  The
situation  of  Tapru  in  the  Bulak  Papyrus  is  not  specified.
The  equivalent  of  these  names  would  probably  be  iiaa,
'  hill,'  rather  than  -nan-  See  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  220  ff.
The  name  of  the  mountain  has  not  been  found  in
Assyrian  records.

In  addition  to  the  authorities  referred  to  above  may  be  men
tioned  the  following :  Survey  of  ll/r.  Pal.  1  388^  ;  Robinson,

BRP),  2  351  ff.  ;  GASm.,  HG  394^  ;  Buhl,
8.  Literature.  Pal.  §  68.  Pere  Barnabe  gives  a  full  and

valuable  collection  of  material  (the  point  of
view  is  uncritical,  and  the  references  are  not  always  to  be
trusted).  For  a  recent  Roman  Catholic  work  which  rejects  the
traditional  site  of  the  transfiguration,  see  Abbe  le  Camus,
Notre  voy.  aux  Pays  I'ibl.  (Paris,  1895),  1  82^  G.  A.  C.

TABOR, PLAIN  OF,  or  rather  (so  RV), OAK  OF

TABOR  (inn  p?K,  THC  Apyoc  GABujp  [BA],  T.  A.
THC  eKAeKTHC  [L  ;  see  below];  quorum  Thabor),  a
locality  between  the  city  where  Samuel  and  Saul  met
and  '  Gibeah  of  God  '  (see  GIBEAH,  §  2  [3]),  i  S.  10  sf.
It  has  been  supposed  by  Ewald  (Hist.  821)  and  Thenius
(without  ancient  authority)  to  be  identical  with  the
'  palm  tree  of  Deborah  between  Ramah  and  Bethel  in
mount  Ephraim  '  (Judg.  4  5).  This  is  certainly  plausible.
On  the  other  hand  the  descriptions  of  the  sites  of  the
two  trees  cannot  be  said  to  agree.  The  city  referred  to
in  i  S.  96^  is  not  said  to  be  Ramah,  and  '  Bethel  in
mount  of  Ephraim '  and  '  Gibeah  of  God '  cannot  be
identified.  It  is  much  more  likely  that  the  '  oak'  (or
rather,  '  sacred  tree  ')  referred  to  in  i  S.  10 3  was  uncon
nected  with  any  biblical  story  except  that  of  Saul,  and

15G  488^


TAHATH

that  Tabor  is  a  corruption  of  some  other  name,  possibly
Bahurim  (onm)  :  cp  <5L's  rendering  (TT?S  tK\fKTTJs),
which  presupposes  -nn3.  See  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE.

T.  K.  C.

TABRET.  i.  f|H  tdph,  i  S.  10  5  ;  AV  has  a  slight
preference  for  '  timbrel  '  ;  RV  has  '  tabret  '  in  Gen.  31  27  Is.
5  12  2483032  Jer.  314  Ezek.  i!8i3,  but  'timbrel1  in  Ex.  15  20
Judg.  11  34  i  S.  10  5  IS  6  2  S.  0  5  i  Ch.  13s  Job  21  12  Ps.  81  3  [2]
149  3  150  4.  See  Music,  §  3.
2.  nsh,  tfyheth,  Job  IT  6.  See  TOFHETH.


TABRIMON,  RV  Tab-rimmon  (pETQp,  §  44,  as  if
'  Rimmon  is  good,'  or  '  wise,'  but  see  RIMMON  ii.  §  2),
father  of  BEN-HADAD  (i  K.  15i8:  -r&BepeMA  [B],

T&BeNp&HMA  [A],  TABepeMM&N  [L]). CpTABEEL.

TACHE  (D'O^p)  Ex.266,  etc.  RV  'clasp.'  See
TABERNACLE,  §4(1).

TACHMONITE  (tfOSPin)  2  S.238,  RV  TAHCHE-
MONITE.

TADMOR  (Ibin  ;  GeA/vxop  [AL],  9oeA/v\op
[Bb],  SoeiAoMHceN  THN  GoeAo/wop  [B*  cum  signo
perversre  lect.],  Palmira  m  [Vg.  ])  'in  the  wilderness,'
a  name  given  (z  Ch.  84t)  to  a  city  built  by  Solomon
by  the  Chronicler.  This  late  historian  doubtless  had  in
view  the  great  city  in  the  Syrian  desert  between  Damascus
and  the  Euphrates  (iimn,  "cin  of  the  Nabataean  inscr.  )
known  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as  Palmyra  (see
WRS,  s.v.  'Palmyra'  ED(^},^  the  mod.  Tadmur,
vulgarly  Tudmir.2  This  appears  from  his  bringing  it
into  connection  with  Hamath  and  the  N.  He  is,  how
ever,  simply  misquoting  i  K.  9i8,  where  the  RV  is
certainly  right  in  following  the  Kt.  (nan,  i.e.,  Tamar,
not  as  some  have  supposed  Tammor)  in  preference  to
the  harmonistic  Kre  '  Tadmor  '  ("ibnn)  adopted  by  AV
following  the  versions.  For  the  context  here  clearly
shows  that  not  Palmyra,  but  some  place  in  the  S.  of
Judah  is  meant  (see  TAMAR),  and  we  have  no  reason
to  think  that  the  boundaries  of  Israel  ever  extended  so
far  N.  The  name  Tadmor  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the
OT,  nor  even  in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  nor  can
Palmyra  be  traced  in  history  till  just  before  the  Christian
era,  42-41  B.C.  (Appian,  BC  5  9).  At  that  date,
however,  Palmyra  was  a  place  of  some  importance  (cp
ARABIA,  §  3),  and  it  may  very  well  have  come  into
existence  some  centuries  earlier  —  long  enough  for  the
real  story  of  its  founding  to  be  quite  unknown  in  Israel
in  the  time  of  the  Chronicler.  F.  B.

TAHAN,  TAHANITES  (fnR  'OnR),  Xu.  2635.  See
below,  TAHATH.

TAHAPANES  (DPUSriFl)  Jer.  2i6,  RV  TAHPAXHES.
TAHASH  (trnPl)  Gen.  22  24,  AV  THAHASH.
TAHATH  (nnpl),  an  Ephraimite  name  originating  in

the  Negeb,  see  SHUTHELAH  (i  Ch.  "20  bis  voofi(  =  cm'!  [B
only  once],  Oaa.8,  vofj.ee  [A],  da.a.0  [  L  twice]).  The  name  occurs
again  in  v.  25  under  the  form  TAHAN  (jnn,  daev  [B],  -an  [L]
KOL.  [A—  i.e.,  «<xl  0.]),  and  similarly  in  Nu.  2635  [P]  (LXX  r'.  39
•rnvax),  cp  the  family  of  the  Tahanites  (ifr.  '}npn,  6  rai'a^[e]i
[BAFL]).  In  the  priestly  genealogies  in  i  Ch.  t>  which  are
intended  to  supply  the  great  singers  with  a  Levitical  ancestry,
Tahath  is  twice  mentioned  among  the  ancestors  of  Samuel  and
Heman  (i  Ch.  0  24  [9]  37  [22],  KaaB  [B,  but  0.  T.  37],  6.  [AL]),
and  it  is  only  reasonable  to  identify  Tahath  or  Tahan  (  =
Nahath?)  with  TOHU  [q.v.],  which  is  also  an  Ephraimite  name
(cp  EPHRAIM,  §  12).

TAHATH  (Finn,  note  the  '  priestly  '  name  TAHATH
above),  a  stage  in  the  wandering  in  the  wilderness  ;
Nu.  3326/  (K<\TA<\9  [BAL],  KATOAAG  [I'll-  The

1  For the earliest exact modern account of Palmyra  (by
Halifax,  1691),  see  PEFQ  Oct.  1890,  pp.  273^ See  also  Post,
'  Second  Journey  to  Palmyra,'  PEFQ,  1892-93  ;  Bernoville,  Z>/.r

jours  en  Palmyrhie  (1868).

2  On  the  connection  between  the  names  tadinur  and  TroA/nvpa
see Lag. (Ubers. 125,  note),  who  approves  the  conjecture  of
Schultens  (  I  'ita  Salad  ina  ;  see  the  Geog.  Index  under  '  Tadmora,'
where  the  form  tatttnir  is  cited),  that  the  original  was  tatmur,
with  the  meaning  'abounding  in  palms.'


TAHCHEMONITE  -

name  stands  between  Makheloth  and  Terah,  both  of
which  are  possibly  corruptions  of  '  Jerahmeel  '  (Che.).
See  WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OF.


TAHCHEMONITE, AV Tachmonite  ('psnn, o

XANA.NAIOC [BA], yiOC 6eK6MANei [L]), 2  S.  238.

Probably  niiswritten,  owing  to  the  repetition  of  n  from
the  preceding  word,  for  '333,1  (note  6  xa.v.  in  HA)  —  i.e.,
'333n,  'the.  .  .  -ite'  (so  Marcj.  ).  This  is  in  accordance
with  the  other  descriptions  of  David's  other  heroes.  But
1333  can  hardly  be  correct.  Besides,  'jssn  is  preceded
(according  to  the  emendation  suggested  under  JASHO-
BEAM)  by  rra  ;  'jaan-rra  is  analogous  to  'anWrrra.  o
and  i  being  sometimes  confounded,  it  is  plausible  to
correct  into  'p-isrnra  —  i.e.,  a  man  of  Beth-cerem  (see
BETH-HACCERKM)  ;  i  and  a  were  transposed.  Cp
Carmi,  the  name  of  a  son  of  Zabdi,  Josh.  7  1,  and
note  that  in  i  Ch.  27  2  Jashobeam  is  called  a  son  of
Zabdiel  ;  also  that  in  I  Ch.  4  1  Perez  and  Carmi  are
brothers,  and  that  in  i  Ch.  27  3  Jashobeam  is  said  to
have  belonged  to  the  b'ne  Perez.  T.  K.  C.

TAHPANHES  (DHIISnn,  Jer.  437,  etc.)  or  Tehaph-
nehes  (DnJBnPI,  Ezek.  30i8);  Jer.  2i6  Kcthib  DJDHn
(EV  Tahapa'nes),  Judith  1  9  AV  TAPHNES,  RV  TAH
PANHES,  a  city  of  north-eastern  Egypt.  Ezek.  30  closes
the  long  enumeration  of  Egyptian  cities  threatened  by
destruction,  with  Aven-  Heliopolis  and  Pi-beseth-
Bubastus,  v.  17,  and  Tahpanhes,  v.  18,  all  three  belonging
to  the  Eastern  Delta.  The  long  verse,  devoted  to
Tahpanhes,  where  '  the  yokes  (better,  as  (5,  'sceptres'  ;
see  Cornill)  of  Egypt'  shall  be  broken,  and  '  the  pride
of  her  power  shall  cease  in  her  '  shows  the  wealth  and
importance  of  the  place,  as  does  the  allusion  to  '  her
daughters'  —  i.e.,  surrounding  towns  (Jer.  487  f.}.
Jeremiah,  with  many  fugitives,  fleeing  from  Palestine  to
Egypt,  comes  to  Tahpanhes  and  settles  there.  This
points  again  to  the  place  being  near  the  entrance  from
Palestine  into  Egypt  —  i.e.,  in  the  NE.  In  v.  9  the
words  '  the  entry  of  Pharaoh's  house  in  Tahpanhes  '
seem  to  indicate  that  the  place  had  a  royal  palace  which,
even  if  used  only  on  occasional  visits  of  the  king,  would
indicate  an  important  city.  In  44  i  46  14  Tahpanhes
(which,  however,  is  wanting  in  the  good  MSS  of  (5  in
4614),  Migdol,  and  Noph  are  the  three  most  important
settlements  of  Jewish  fugitives  in  N.  Egypt,  as  distin
guished  from  Pathros  in  the  S.  In  Jer.  2  16,  the  Egyp
tians  are  called  'children  of  Noph  (Memphis)  and
Tahpanhes.'  Judith  1  9,  enumerating  Taphnas  and
Ramesse  and  the  whole  land  of  Goshen  (Gesem),  as
far  as  Tanis  and  Memphis,  etc.  ,  seems  to  be  following
those  Jewish  settlements.

(5  transcribes  the  name  as  Ta^fas  (indeclinable)  in
]er.  and  Judith  ;  in  E/ek.  ©u  has  TCK^CU  ;  Vg.  not
Taf>hn<r,  as  is  usually  quoted,  but  Taphnis  (indeclinable  :
the  same  form  occurs  as  accusative  in  Jer.  43  7).  It  has
always  been  concluded  from  these  transcriptions  that  the
reference  is  to  a  place  which  Herodotus,  assimilating  its
name  to  the  Greek  word  for  '  laurels,'  calls  \a.<pvan.
According  to  him  (230)  Psammetik  I.  established  a
great  camp  of  soldiers  '  in  Daphnre  near  Pelusium  '  (  et>
^Ad(pvr](Ti  ryffi  lIeXoi'<rq7<n)'  which  the  Persians  still
maintained.  In  2  154,  he  reports  that  Sesostris,  return
ing  from  his  conquests,  rested  there.  The  //.  Anton.
places  Dafno  16  R.  in.  inland  from  Pelusium  ;  Steph.
Byz.  also  mentions  Aa^vrj.1  Already  Wilkinson  (Modern
Eg.  and  Thebes,  1447)  identified  this  place  with  the
modern  Tel(l)  Defenneh  (about  2=;  English  miles  in  a
straight  line  SW.  of  the  ruins  of  Pelusium),  which  was
excavated  by  Flinders  Petrie  in  1886  (see  Petrie,
Tanis,  2).  Petrie  found  traces  of  earlier  buildings  of
the  Ramesside  period,  a  great  camp,  fortified,  accord
ing  to  the  foundation  records,  by  Psammetichus  I.,
maintained  under  Necho  and  Amasis,  and  evidently

1  The  form  lajfyvas  in  the  Coptic  version,  of  course,  proves
nothing,  being  taken  mechanically  from  the  Septuagint.

4887


TAHTIM-HODSHI,  LAND  OF

abandoned  afterwards,  the  palace  or  citadel  having  been
destroyed  by  fire.  Many  finds  of  arms,  pottery,  etc.,
showed  that  the  garrison  had  consisted  chiefly  of  Greek
mercenaries.  The  position  of  this  fortress,  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile  close  to  the  old
caravan-road  to  Syria,  explains  its  great  importance  and
agrees  excellently  with  that  of  the  biblical  Tahpanhes  as
key  to  Egypt  (cp  Jer.  43?)  ;  the  expression  in  Jer.  2i6
would  be  explained  by  the  strong  garrison.  Such  a  place
would  also  be  best  adapted  for  a  Jewish  colony  which,
evidently,  subsisted  chiefly  on  trading.  Wilkinson's
identification  may,  therefore,  be  considered  as  .very
probable.1  The  Egyptian  name  of  the  city  has,  how
ever,  not  yet  been  found,  which  is  not  surprising,  if  we
consider  that  the  city  received  its  importance  only  under
Psammetichus  I.  Such  Egyptian  etymologies  as  have
been  attempted  so  far  are  too  improbable  to  be  discussed
here.

[On  the  theory  that  the  reference  in  all  the  passages  which
mention  'Tahpanhes'  is  to  N.  Arabia  (cp  PROI-HET,  §§  26  f.  40),
'Tahpanhes,'  like  the  other  traditional  names,  disappears  from
the  text.  For  the  underlying  words  see  Crit.  Bib.  on  Jer.  2  16
Ezek.  SOj?/]  \v.  M.  M.


TAHPENES  (D^nn  ;2  in  i  K.  11  20^  defectively  ;
96K  [or  x]£M[e]lNA  [BAL]  ;  Vg.  Taphnes  ;  i  K.  11  ,9/
[twice]),  the  wife  of  Pharaoh,  whose  sister  was  given
to  Hadad,  the  Edomite,  to  wife.  The  name  has  a  very
Egyptian  appearance,  although  no  certain  etymology
could  be  given,  except  that  the  initial  /  would  be  the
Egyptian  article.  The  present  vowel-points  seem  to
follow  the  analogy  of  the  city  TAHPANHES  (q.v.  }.  See,
however,  HADAD,  according  to  which  article  we  should
not  expect  an  Egyptian  name  for  a  queen  of  Musri  in
N.  Arabia  which  seems  to  be  meant  here  instead  of
Egypt.  The  possibility  remains  open,  at  any  rate,  that
at  a  later  time,  when  the  king  of  Musri  in  question  had
become  a  Pharaoh  in  the  text,  and  the  whole  narrative
was  referred  to  Egypt,  an  Egyptian  name  was  worked
into  the  story.  It  would  be  futile  to  try  to  reconstruct
the  various  short  Egyptian  words  which  could  be  found
in  the  name,  especially  as  ©  differs  somewhat  from  the
Hebrew.  [On  the  Heb.  text  cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Jer.
4615.].  \v.  M.  M.

TAHREA  (innn  ;  e&p&[A]  [AL],  OARAX  [BK]),  a

descendant  of  Meribbaal  ; i  Ch.  941.

TAHTIM-HODSHI,  LAND  OF  (THH  D'finPI  pN,

THN 0ABAC60N H 6CTIN NAAACAI [B], fHN  66A60N

T Qtato  «f AAACAI  [A],  |-HN  XeTTieiM  KAAHC  [L];

~  &Larf  OI Pesh. om. vers.  ; terrain inferiorem

em'  Hodshi  [Vg.]),  a  district  mentioned  be

tween Gilead and Dan-jaan in the account of  ^the

movements  of  Joab  in  taking  the  census  of  the  people

of Israel 'from Dan even to Beersheba,' 28.  246.

That  '  Tahtim-hodshi  '  is  corrupt,  is  too  obvious  to  be

questioned. Several remedies  have  been  offered, but

not  quite  satisfactorily,  o\\ing  to  the  want  of  a  thorough

textual  criticism  of  the  whole  narrative  of  the  census

(w.  1-9)  in  the  light  of  parallel  passages  of  geographical

description.

i.  Ewald  (Hist.  3  162,  n.  3)  thought  that  for
'  Hodshi  (?)'  we  should  read  '  Hermon  '  (pcnn).  Gratz
changed,  in  addition,  '  Tahtim  (?)'  into  '  tahath  '  (nnn);
cp  Josh.  Us,  where  Wellhausen,  Buhl,  Bennett  (SBOT,

1  No  significance,  however,  should  be  attached  to  the  fact
that  the  Arabs  called  a  part  of  the  ruins '  the  castle of  the
Jew's daughter' (kasr  bint  cl-Yehudi), which has induced
Petrie even to  find  the  alleged '  brick-kiln  '  of  Jer.  43  9  (see
BRICK-KILN). It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  Erman  (in  his
review,  Berliner  Philolofische Wochenschrift, 1890, p. 959)
has  warned  us  against  laying  stress  on  the  similarity  of  the
names  Defenneh  (?)  and Daphnje. The  best  Arabic form i-
Tel(T)  Defeineh  or  Defineh  (others  give  the  plural  Dtjru)—i.t.,
'  treasure-hill,'  evidently  from  finds  made  here  by  Arabs,  not
from  an  old  name  of  the  locality.

2  E.g:,  Lagarde  once  tried  to  find  in  Tahpenes  the  goddess
Sohme(t),  worshipped  especially  at  Memphis. A ta-St>fiinf(t)
'  the one belonging  to S.' would, however, require quite a
number  of  violent  emendations


TALENT

'Joshua'),  and  Steuernagel  (but  not  Di. ),  read  'the
Hittites  (-nnn)  under  Mt.  Hermon. '  But  in  this  case
we  require  to  prefix  'nnn,  thus  producing  '  the  land  of
the  Hittites  under  Hermon.'  H.  P.  Smith  prefers  'the
land  of  the  Hittites  to  Hermon.'  But  are  not  Hermon
and  Dan  somewhat  too  near  together  ?

2.  Wellhausen  (TBS  217),  following  Hitzig  (for  'nn)
and  partly  Thenius  (for  'in),  reads  ncnp  D'pinri,  '  (to  the
land  of)  the  Hittites towards Kadesh. ' This  is  con
firmed by  <5L  (see  above),  and  is  adopted  by  Steuer
nagel, Driver, Buhl (SBOT}. But is not Kadesh
on  the  Orontes  too  far  N.  ? Wellhausen  has  to  suppose
that the  boundary  line  is  traced  to  Kadesh,  and  that
it  then comes  back  (SW. )  to  Dan. And  had David
really  conquered  the  northern  Kadesh,  and  even  com
pletely  incorporated it into the territory of Israel?
Cp  Buhl,  Pal.  69.

3.  Klostermann (ad loc.} and Guthe (Gesch. 94)
would read rich/1?  »?MHi '  (to the land of) Naphtali
towards  Kedesh'  ; cp  Dt.  34  if.  (where,  in  the  descrip
tion  of  the  prospect  from  Mt.  Nebo,  Naphtali  is  intro
duced  after  'the  land  of  Gilead  as  far  as  Dan"),  and
2  K.  152g, where  Kedesh  is  mentioned  with  Ijon  (the
name  which, according  to  Klostermann, lurks  in  the
second  part  of  DAN-JAAN  [g.v.])  and  Gilead,  as  repre
senting  together  the  far  N.  of  the  land  of  Israel. This
is  plausible,  but  involves  a  somewhat  bold  emendation
of  D'nnn.

A  more  secure  solution  of  the  problem  can,  as  has

been  said above, only  be  reached  in  the  course  of  a

_ pr0£rrega  radical  correction  of  the  text. (On  Dt.

nossible 34 1/". ,  one  of  the  passages  referred  to  by
Klostermann,  see  NEBO,  MOUNT.)

According  to  the  present  writer's  emended  text  of
28.  81  f.  (in  a  section  which  Budde,  quite  independ
ently,  places  very  near  28.  24 1-9,  which  it  precedes),
David  had  recently  conquered  the  parts  of  N.  Arabia
nearest  to  the  land  of  Judah,  viz.,  Missur  and  Jerah-
meel  (the  region  from  which  the  Israelites  appear  to
have  corne).  That  David  treated  his  new  subjects
with  the  cruelty  asserted  in  the  MT  of  2  S.  82,  may  be
confidently  denied  (see  Crit.  Bib.}.

A  study  of  the  ways  of  the  scribes  suggests  that  the  true  text  of
that  passage  (omitting  a  number  of  corrupt  tlittograms  of  ^JtDm*)

is,  'ui  TUfs  -nm  c'n£ra-rtN  c'2:n  D'WtDrm  TIXD  ~'i,  '  and  he

smote  Missur  and  the  Jerahmeelites,  and  subdued  the  Zarephath-
ites,  and  Missur  became*  etc.

What  David  did  next  is  shown  us  in  2  S.  24 1-9.

The  thought  came  to  him,  '  Go,  number  Missur  and  Jerah-
meel '  (?'.  i),  or,  as  David  puts  it  in  his  command  to  Joab,  '  Go
to  and  fro  throughout  all  Zarephath-missur,  from  Dan  ('?  Misran)
even  to  Beer-sheba,l  and  number  ye  the  people '  (z'.  2).  Verses
5-7  describe  Joab's  proceedings.

'And  they  passed  through  Judah,  arid  began  from  Aroer-
jerahmeel,  the  city  that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  valley  of  [Jerah-
meel]  Jizreel,  and  they  came  to  Jerahmeel,'-  and  to  the  land  of
the  Rchobothites  to  Kadesh,  and  they  turned  rour.d  to  the  city
of  Misran.  And  they  came  to  Missur  (or,  to  the  fortress  of
Missur),  and  to  all  the  cities  of  the  Horites  (Jerahmeelites)  and
the  Kenites ;  and  they  came  out  to  the  Negeb  of  Judah,  to
Beer-sheba.'  According  to  1'.  g  (originally),  Joab  gave  the
number  of  the  men  of  Missur  as  8000,  and  of  the  men  of  Jerah
meel  as  5000.

Thus  '  Tahtim-hodshi '  becomes  '  the  Rehobothites
to  Kadesh.'  The  Rehobothite  warriors  in  David's
bodyguard  are  known  to  us  in  the  present  text  as
'  Cherethites. '  See  RKHOBOTH.  T.  K.  C.

TALENT  (-133,  Ex.  25 39,  etc. ;  T&AANTON,  Mt.  25 24,
etc.).  See  SHEKEL,  and  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


1  We  now  see  the  original  signification  of  the  literary  expres
sion  'from Dan  even  to Beersheba.' There was  a  southern
Dan. Possibly,  however, '  from  Dan '  (pS)  may  be an early
scribe's  error  (psse),  and  the  original  coiner  of  the  phrase  wrote
'  from  Misran (jnsao). In  either  case  the  extent  of  the  Negeb
is  thus  defined. In  the  lapse  of  time  this  was  forgotten.

2  Rabbah  of  the  bne  Jerahmeel,  miscalled  in  the  text  of  2  S.
1226,  etc.,  '  Rabbah  of  the  bne  Ammon.1


TAMAB

TALITHA  CUMI  (TAAi9A  [Ti.,  -£|.  \VH]  KOYM),
two  Aramaic  words  in  Mk.  641  (see  JAIRUS),  correctly
interpreted  by  TO  Kopdaiov  (aol  X£yw)  gyeipe  :  '  little
maid  (I  say  unto  thee)  arise!'  The  most  im
portant  variants  are  (i)  ra.fii.Ta.,  etc.  (with  b  for  /),  and
KOV/M  (see  Ti.  ).  Ta/3ira,  if  not  purely  an  error,
suggests  TABITHA  [q.v.~\;  icovfu  is  of  purely  gram
matical  interest  ;  see  Dalman's  useful  note,  Gram.  d.
Jud.-Palast.  Aram.  266,  n.  i.  Talitha,  properly
'young  one,'  used  very  frequently  of  lambs  (in  Aramaic
more  especially  of  the  gazelle),  would  be  represented  in
Aram,  either  by  talylthd  or  (cp  Dalm.  op.  clt.  118,  n.  6)
tilltha.

TALMAI  ("p'pFl,  cp  Nab.  ID^H,  and  the  Lihyan
Talmi  [DHM  Ep.  Denk.  5],  also  GoAOMAlOC  [see
BARTHOLOMEW];  cp  Wi.  (7/240,  n.  i  ;  9oA/v\i,  -ei.
6&A&M€l)-  But  the  correctness  of  the  reading  'Talmai'
(with  n)  has  been  questioned  J  (see  TALMON,  TELEM).

1.  One  of  the  sons  of  ANAK  [q.v.]  at  Hebron  (Nu.  1822  [23],
fleAajuetr [BA], Oa. [L],  -ei  [F]  ; Josh.  15  14  : SoaAjiiei  [B],  rbv
0aAjU.cu  [AL]  ;  Judg.  1  10,  floA/nei  [L],  -rbv  -V  [B],  T.  Sa^ei  [A]).

2.  A  king  of  Geshur  b.  A.MMIHUK  (i.e.,  probably  Jerahmeel
[Che.])  whose  daughter  (Maacah)  was  one  of  David's  wives,  and
mother  of  Absalom. (28.83: flo/u/mei  [B]  ; 1837: 9oA^.aiAt)ju.
[B],  0oAoMCu  [A]  ;  i  Ch.  3  2  :  floajuou  [B],  0oA/uei  [A],  0oA0jou  [L]).

TALMON  (|i»ta,  reAMOON  [BA]  C-  [L]),  a  family
of  doorkeepers  or  (reading  DHB'tJ  [Che.])  Asshurites  in  the  temple.

Ezra  2  42  Neh.  7  45  (rt\aiuav  [BN],  ToAjuwi/  [A]),  cp  i  Ch.  9  17
(ra/ajLtai/  or  -/a  [B,  see  Swete],  reAfiai/  [A],  -lav  [L])  ;  Neh.  11  19
(reAct/ueii/)  ;  and  12  25  (om.  BX*A,  roA/uuoi/  [Nc-a  mg'  sup-],  TeA^iwo
[L]).  In  i  Esd.  528  TOLMAN  (RV,  not  in  B,  TO\^O.V  [A]).  The
clan  to  which  Talmon  and  another  doorkeeper  TELEM  (07B)
belonged  was  an  important  one.  See  TELEM,  and  cp  SHALLUM
(8,  n).

TALSAS  (CAA9AC  [B]),  i  Esd.  9  22  AV  =  Ezra  10  22
ELASAH,  i.

TAMAH  (npPl),  Neh.  7  55  AV=Ezra2S3,  TEMAH.


TAMAR  PEP), '  date-palm  '), a  place  on  the SE.
border of Judah, mentioned by  Ezekiel (47  18 [©  2

(pOIN[e]lK6GNOC BAQ] 19  [<5>  9&IM&N K.  <t>.,  6  being

a  dittograph  both  of  rtiBTI  and  lOH]  4828  [©
0A.IMAN],  |^)L  [Pesh.],  for  MT  -nbFI,  'ye  shall
measure'  [metiemini,  Vg.  ]),  and,  as  is  usually  held,
one  of  the  cities  fortified  by  Solomon  (iK.9i8  Kt.
and  RV  ;  AV,  however,  gives  TADMOK  [q.v.~\  6epM&9
[A,  om.  BL],  leeepMAG  [B  at  10  23,  om.  A],  9oA-
MOp  [L  ib.];  Palmiram  ;  ioaotL  [Pesh.]).  Knobel
among  critics,  and  Robinson  and  Wetzstein  among
geographers  (cp  TRADE,  §  50),  have  identified  Tamar

(1)  with  the  Thamara  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (  =  the
military  station  Thamaro  of  Ptol.  4  16  and  the  Peutinger
Tables),  a  village  which  is  a  day's  journey  from  Mapsis  3
(OS21086  853)  between  Hebron  and  Elath,  and  further

(2)  with  the  ruin  called  Kurnub,  on  an  elevated  site  SE.
of  'Ar'ara  (AROER, 3).4 This,  however,  does  not  suit
the  passages  in  Ezekiel. It  appears  that  some  point
near  the  SW.  point  of  the  Dead  Sea  must  be  meant.
ZOAR  \q.  v.  ]  was  called  'villa  palmarum  '  in  the  times
of  the  Crusaders,  and  Zoar  was  probably  not  the  only
place  in  the  district  which  rejoiced  in  its  stately  palms.
Engedi,  however,  is  too  far  N.

The  TAMAR  of  i  K.  9  18,  which  has  generally  been

1  Cp  Toi,  where  it  is  inquired  whether  '  'j,'ji,  king  of  ncn.'  is
not  mis  written  for  '  'a^rii  king  of  HDi'D*  (Talmai,  king  of  Maacah).

2  Reading, 'from HAZAR-AEN'ON [in the NE.] . . . the
Jordan  forms  the  boundary  (© Siopi'ijei  =  S'3  JD)  as  far  as  the
eastern sea  (going  along)  unto Tamar (mon)-' So Smend,
Cornill,  Davidson,  Toy,  etc.

3  See  Buhl,  Pal.  184,  n.  545. The  origin  of  the  form  'Map-
sis  '  is  not  clear. Hommel  (Exp.  T.  12  288  [1901])  has  identified
with  it  the  Mai/;  of  Ptolemy  v.  Hi  10,  and  the  obscure  n&'DD  on
pottery  stamps  from  the  Shephelah  district  (PEF  Mem.,  1902,
pp.  106^).

*  See  Van  de  Velde,  Syria  and  Pal.  2  iyff-  (more  judicious
than  Robinson  [BR  26i6],  who  did  not  actually  visit  Kurnub),
who  sees  that  Kurnub  cannot  be  the  '  Tamar  '  of  Ezek.,  and  cp
Buhl,  I.e.  and  Del.  Gen.W  581.

4890


TAMAR

identified  with  that  of  Ezekiel,  requires  separate  treat
ment.  It  is  credible  that  Solomon's  fortress  was  for  the
protection  of  the  commercial  road  from  Ezion-geber  to
Jerusalem  ;  but  it  is  not  less  possible  that  it  was  to
guard  the  Negeb  towards  the  land  of  Musri  (see
SOLOMON,  §  7).  '  Tamar,'  both  here  and  elsewhere,  is
therefore  probably  miswritten  for  rcn  (Ramath),  which
is  a  corruption  of  '  Jerahmeel'  (see  TAMAR  ii.  ).  'In
the  wilderness,  in  the  land*  (p«3  nanna)  should
probably  be  'in  Arabia,  in  Missur'  (i5fC2  a^J??)  (Che.  ;
see  Crit.  Bib.  .


TAMAR  (ion,  as  if  '  date  palm,'  §  69  ;  6A/v\<\p
[BNAUEL]).  The  name,  in  the  sense  of  '  date  palm,'
is  of  course  suitable  enough  for  a  woman  (cp  Cant.  "nf.
[8/]).  But  it  also  occurs  as  a  place-name,  and  we  have
to  find  an  explanation  which  will  fit  both  the  personal
name  and  the  place-name.  Winckler  (r;/  2g8/  io*f.  227)
offers  such  an  explanation.  Tamar,  he  thinks,  is  the
Canaanite  Istar  ;  the  myth  of  Tammuz  and  Istar  was
doubtless  transplanted  into  Canaan  (cp  Stucken,  Astral-
mythun,  14-16).  BAAL-TAMAR  was  the  place  where
the  men  of  Benjamin  had  their  tribal  sanctuary,  and
dedicated  to  the  [female]  goddess  Istar.  Cp  KIRJATH-
JEAKIM,  SAUL.  '  Baalath  and  Tamar,'  iK.  9i8,
should  rather  be  Baalath-tamar  (a  less  original  form  of
Baal-tamar).  All  this  is  set  forth  with  great  force  and
learning  ;  but  there  is  a  doubt  whether  the  relics  of
mythology  can  be  so  easily  traced,  and  whether  textual
criticism,  methodically  applied,  does  not  here,  as  often
elsewhere,  suggest  a  better  explanation.

Proper  names  in  the  OT  are  even  more  frequently  corrupt
than  has  been  supposed,  and  need  very  careful  emendation,  and
it  so  happens  that  ion,  both  as  an  appellative  and  as  a  proper
name,  is  specially  liable  to  corruption.  The  passage  i  K.  9  18  is
treated  separately  (see  TAMAR  i.)  ;  we  are  here  only  considering
the  passages  in  which  '  Tamar  '  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  woman.
A  careful  study  of  this  group  of  passages  suggests  that  '  Tamar  '
has  here  most  probably  arisen  out  of  one  ol  the  popular  distor
tions  of  '  Jerahme'elith  '  ;  another  such  corruption  is  MAACAH,
and  a  third  is  MAHAI.ATH.  We  may  add  that  -eiTN,  ITHAMAR
(the  name  of  a  son  of  Aaron)  very  possibly  came  from  S^cnTi
Jerahme'el  (n  from  n)  i  CP  JEREMOTH.

i.  The  wife  of  Judah's  son  Er,  who  subsequently,
through  her  father-in-law,  became  the  mother  of  PERKZ
and  ZERAH  [>/.*'.]  (Gen.  386^  [J]  iCh.  24  Mt.  1  3
[AV  here  THAMAK]).  The  story  is  referred  to  in  Ruth
(4  12)  as  furnishing  a  parallel  to  Ruth's  marriage  with
Boaz.  According  to  Winckler  it  is  a  Canaanitish
development  of  the  myth  of  Istar  (see  above).  For
another  and  a  preferable  view  of  the  significance  of  the
story,  see  JUDAH,  col.  2617  f.

•2.  Sister  of  Absalom  (2  S.  13  if.  i  Ch.  89  [B  always
077/uap  and  so  A  in  i  Ch.]),  and  probably  daughter  of
the  same  mother  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  vii.  81);  see  MAACAH,  2.
According  to  Winckler  (G/2^7f.),  not  only  has  this
Tamar's  name  mythological  affinities,  but  the  whole
story  of  her  being  outraged  by  her  half-brother  Amnon
is  mythological.  An  old  myth  respecting  Tamar,  the
Canaanitish  Istar,  and  her  relation  to  her  brother  (to
whom  TAMMCZ  corresponds)  has  been  transformed  by
the  people  into  a  quasi  -historical  narrative.  Note
especially  Tamar's  cake,  which  reminds  Winckler  of
the  cakes  of  Ashtoreth  (Jer.  44  19).  See,  however,
above,  and  cp  ABSALOM,  DAVID,  col.  1033.

3.  (0ijfj.ap  [B],  Thamar,  but  /uaa%a  [L]),  a  daughter
of  Absalom,  2  S.  1427f  (vv.  25-27  late  ;  see  Bu.  SHOT,
'  Sam.').  Elsewhere  we  hear  of  a  daughter  of  Absalom
and  wife  of  king  Rehoboam  called  Maacah,  and
(SBA  in  2  S.  1427  identifies  Absalom's  daughter  Tamar
with  the  wife  of  king  Rehoboam  ;  <SL,  indeed,  goes
further  and  reads,  not  Tamar,  but  Maacah.  If  the
addition  in  ©,  28.1427,  relative  to  the  marriage  of
Absalom's  daughter  with  Rehoboam  is  correct,  one
would  be  inclined  to  follow  <5'-'s  reading  'Maacah.'
But  perhaps  the  difficulty  is  not  really  existent.  '  Tamar'
and  '  Maacah  '  may  both  be  corruptions  of  Jerahme'elith
('a  Jerahmeelite').  For  the  rest  see  MAACAH,  3.  Thus

4891


TAMARISK  TREE

two  of  the  cases  of  the  recurrence  of  a  name  in  the
same  family  would  disappear  (see  also  MEPHIBOSHETH,
and  cp  Gray,  HPN  6f. ).  T.  K.  c.

TAMARISK  TREE  is  the  rendering  in  RV  of  'Met.
E?'N,  for  which  AV  has  in  Gen.  2133  'grove,'  mg.
'tree'  ;  in  i  S.  226  'tree,'  mg.  'grove'  ;  and  in  i  S.
31 13  '  tree."  The  variety  of  rendering  suggests  that  the
Heb.  word  has  an  interesting  history,  and  though  it  has
become  traditional  to  render  '  tamarisk,'  the  critical
tradition  needs  periodical  revision  at  the  hands  of  critics.1

1.  Apart  from  (5,  whose  rendering  apot'pa.  Wellhausen
(Sam.  1 24)  pronounces  unintelligible,  theancients  took  the
word  in  a  general  sense,  translating  sometimes  '  grove  '
or  '  plantation'  (Aq.  devSpui'  and  d&dpufjia.'*  (?)  ;  Sym.
</>i>reia., Vg.  nentus, D'Tia  Tg. Jer. 1 and  2,  and  Her.
rab.  54,  end),  sometimes  'tree'  (Sym.  tpvr6v  ;  so  Onk.
Pesh. )  or 'oak  tree'  (Theod. [rds] SpDs  ; i  Ch.  10 12
nSi«,  instead  of  the  Sc*K  of  i  S.  31 13). Such  a  view  of
the  meaning  is  supported  by  the  Rabbis,  and  even  by
Celsius (1 535 ff.}', but  the  rendering 'tree'  would be
excusable  only  as  a  protest  against  the  cultus  of  some
special sacred tree  (cp  OAK) — philologically  it is of
course  untenable.

2.  The  tendency  to  explain  obscure  Heb.  words  from
the  Arabic  has  led  to  the  identification  of  'esel,  ^istt,  with
the  Arab,  'athl,  which corresponds  phonetically, and
means 'tamarisk.' Of  this  tree perhaps  as  many  as
half  a  dozen  species  are  found  in  Pal.  (Tristram,  FFP,
250)  :  our  common  tamarisk  is  not  one  of  them. The
common  riverside  species is T.  Pallasii,  Desc. The
tamarisk '  is  a  very  graceful tree,  with long  feathery
branches  and tufts, closely  clad  with the  minutest  of
leaves,  and  surmounted  in  spring  with  spikes  of  beauti
ful  pink  blossom.' '  Though  it  is  often  a  mere  bush,'
some  of  the  Palestinian  tamarisks  '  reach  such  a  size  as
to  afford  dense  shade  . . . Beersheba  is  well  suited  for
the growth of  the  tamarisk  ;  and we  observed large
numbers  of  the  Eastern  tamarisk  on  the  banks  below
the  site  of  Jabesh  Gilead '  (Tristram,  I.e.}. It  is  also
common  in  Egypt,  where  it  was  anciently  consecrated
to  Osiris,  and  bore  the  (Semitic?)  name  of  asari.3

3.  It  may  be  doubted,  however,  whether  this  is  really
the correct explanation. It will be noticed that
Tristram  says  nothing  about  tamarisks  at  Gibeah of
Saul. The  tree  referred  to  in  i  S.  226  wras  no  doubt  a
sacred  tree  (see  HIGH PLACE,  §  3  and  n.  6). In  i  S.
142  we  read  apparently  of  a  pomegranate  tree  under
which  Saul  sat  (see  MICRON). There  is  no  probability
in  the  view  that  the  tree  on  the  high  place  at  Gibeah  was
a  tamarisk. But  if  we  give  up  'fie/  in  i  S.  226,  we  can
hardly  defend  it  in  Gen.  21 33  and  i  S.  31 13;  the  pre
sumption  is  that  the  same  word  is  meant  in  all  these
passages,  and  that  in  all  three  it  is  corrupt. Now  let
us  turn  to  @'s  dpovpa  (thrice). At  first  sight  this  looks
like  an  orthodox  substitute  for  a  word  liable  to  be  mis
used  (cp  the  Vss. on  Gen.  126, and  see OAK). But
how  can  ©  possibly  have  understood  the  phrase  t<f>v-
Tfvfftv  dpovpav,  if  apovpa  means  '  tilled  land'? Clearly
dpovpa must  cover  some  tree-name, and  it  has  been
suggested that  apovpa  may  come  from  i^ny  or  lyny,
which (5, like Tg. and Vg. , understood to mean
'tamarisk.' Thus the harder part of  <§'s  riddle is

I  explained.  It  remains  to  account  for  (P's  reading  ijnj:
or  -li'1"!!'  in  lieu  of  SSTN — it  is  no  mere  interpretation  but
a  genuine  reading  that  <S  gives  us.  There  is  only  one
hypothesis  which  will  do  this  ;  -ijny  or  -\yny  is  a  corrup
tion  of  ms>K,  asherah  (Che. ).  This,  then,  is  the  true  read
ing  in  all  three  places  : — Abraham  built  an  asherah  at
1  H.  P.  Smith  sounds  a  note  of  warning.  Though  he  renders
StfX  'tamarisk,'  he  remarks,  'As  the  word  only  occurs  three

times,  the  species  is  uncertain.'

-  Sei'Spuip.a.  seems  to  be  an  error  for  Sei-Spotva  (see  Schleusner,
Lex.  in  I'T,  s.i'.).

3  Pierret,  Diet, darchM.  cgj'pt.  534  ; Maspero, Dawn  cf
Civ.,  28,  n.  3.

4892


TAMMUZ

Beersheba  ;  Saul  sat  tinder  the  ashcrah  at  Gibeah ;  the
bones  of  Saul  and  his  sons  were  buried  under  the  asherak
atjabesk*

mC'N  was  corrupted  in  one  important  MS.  into  njpj?  or  nynj;  \
in  another  into  SJ»N.  The  idea  of  the  latter  hypothesis  was
suggested  by  Klo.,  who  supposes  *?£•«  to  be  a  deliberate  dis
tortion  of  mB"N>2  in  order  to  discourage  Asherah-worship.  (B's
apovpa,  ace.  to  him,  is  nTIK,  'the  cursed  (tree)' — again  a  protest
against  tree-worship.

2.  'ar'dr. ijny,  Jer.  176  48  6f  RVm«r-,  EV  HEATH.

TAMMUZ  (T-1GF1),  whose  worship  is  supposed,  on
doubtful  grounds,  to  be  alluded  to  in  Ezek.  814  (0AM-

l  Personality  MO*Z  t8^'  *Aa)NI  tQmg']'  Adonis
1.  rersoi  .anty  ;yg  ^ derives his name from the

and  cult.  Bab  Dumuzi3  (4  R>  28>  soa)—i.e.,
'  son  of  life,1  which,  according  to  G.  A.  Barton,  refers  to
Tammuz  as  the  child  of  the  goddess  of  fertility,  or  perhaps
'  a  true  divine  child  '  (  =Ass.  aplu  kenu  ;  so  Frd.  Del. ).
He  is  variously  described  as  the  youthful  husband  of  the
goddess  Istar,  as  her  son,  and  as  the  first  in  the  series
of  her  rejected  husbands.  Every  year,  in  the  fourth
month  (Duzu,  see  below) — i.e. ,  July — he  descended  to
Hades,  and  remained  there  till  the  next  spring.  His
disappearance  gave  occasion  to  drink-offerings  and  a
great  bikitu  or  '  weeping. '  The  '  motives '  of  his
legend  and  the  meaning  of  his  cultus  can  be  found  in
the  Babylonian  myth  of  the  Descent  of  Istar.  There  is
also  an  illustrative  passage  in  the  Gilgames-epic,  Tab.  6,
where,  among  other  lovers  of  the  goddess  who  have
encountered  a  sad  fate,4  Tammuz  ( Dumuzi)  is  mentioned,
'  Tammuz,  the  spouse  of  thy  youth,  thou  compellest  to
weep  year  after  year. ' 5  The  discovery  of  Friedrich
Delitzsch  and  Jensen  (Kosmol.  197)  that  4  R.  30,  no.  z
contains  a  song  of  lamentation  for  Tammuz  is  not  less
suggestive.  This  is  how  the  song  runs,  as  translated
by  A.  Jeremias.6

'  He  went  down  (?)  to  meet  the  nether  world,  he  has  sated
himself,  the  sun-god  caused  him  to  perish  (passing)  to  the  land
of  the  dead,  with  mourning  was  he  filled  on  the  day  when  he
fell  into  great  sorrow."

The  word  rendered  'sorrow'  (idirtum)  occurs  again
in  5  R.  48,  col.  44,  where,  on  the  name  of  the  month
Tammuz,  stands  the  note — idirtum,  'sorrow.'  The
Tammuz  festival  was  in  fact  the  idealisation  of  human
sorrow — a  kind  of  'All  Souls'  Day.'  Hence  partly
the  strong  hold  which  it  obtained  upon  the  masses.
'  Dirges  were  sung  by  the  wailing  women  to  the  accom
paniment  of  musical  instruments  ;  offerings  were  made
to  the  dead,  and  it  is  plausible  to  assume  that  visits
were  paid  to  the  graves.'  It  is  probable  that,  to
gratify  the  general  sentiment,  specially  important
national  mournings  were  placed  in  the  month  Tammuz
(see  below).  'The  calendar  of  the  Jewish  Church  still
marks  the  iyth  day  of  Tammuz  as  a  fast,  and  Houtsma
has  shown  that  the  association  of  the  day  with  the
capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  represents  merely
the  attempt  to  give  an  ancient  festival  a  worthier
interpretation.  The  day  was  originally  connected
with  the  Tammuz  cult. '  7

The  month  devoted  to  Tammuz  in  the  later  Jewish  Calendar
(.Mfg.  Ta'amt/i,  456)  was  the  Babylonian  month  Du'uzu  or

1  It  is  assumed  here  that  the  Asherah  was  originally  a  sacred
tree. But  cp  ASHEKAH.

2  Siegfr.-Sta.  agree,  so  far  as  Gen.  I.e.  is  concerned.

3  The  form  Tamuzu  has  also  been  found  in  the  personal  name
Ur(?)-(ilu)  Tamuzu  (Jensen,  in  Kraetzschmar's  note  on  Ezek.
814). See  further  Delitzsch,  ffel>. and  Assyrian, 16,  and  in
Baer's  Ezekiel,  pref.  xvii/I  ; Zimmern, Biisspsalmen,  26,  60,
and ZA  1 17-24  2i5_/C Zzjof.; Lenormant, '  Sur le nom de
Tammonz,'  in  Proc.  of  Paris  Congress  of  Orientalists,  2  149-165  ;
Baudissin,  Stud.  z.  sent.  Rel.-gesch.,  \  35  3007^  ;  G.  A.  Barton,
Semitic  Origins  (1902),  p.  86  ;  Zimmern,  KA  7"(3),  397  ff.

4  For  parallels  to  this  view  of  Istar  in  mythology  and  folklore
(including  that  in  T  obit  3  8)  see  Stucken,  Astralmythcn,  16.

5  Jeremias, Izdnbar-Nimrod, 24  ; cp Maspero, Dawn of
Civ.  580,  672  ;  Jastrow,  Rel.  Bab.  Ass.  482.

6  Op.  cit.  50  ;  but  cp  on  one  part  of  the  song  Jensen,  Kosmol.
226.

7  Jastrow,  Rel.  Bab.  Ass.  682.

4893


TAMMUZ

Piizu,  which  was  assigned  to  Xinib,  the  god  of  the  hot  mid-day
sun,  as  regent.  See  MONTH,  §  2.

Originally  and  properly  Du'uzu  or  Duniu/u,  is  the
spirit  or  god  of  the  spring  vegetation  ;  *  also,  by  a
natural  sequence,  he  is  the  lord,  and  his  sister  Bilili
(see  BELIAL,  §  2)  is  the  lady,  of  the  underworld,  the
region  of  growth,  though  also  the  place  of  the  dead.2
But  it  was  not  possible  to  keep  this  conception  in  its
purity  ;  it  was  natural  to  identify  the  vegetation  spirit
with  the  sun,  and  to  treat  Du'uzu  as  a  manifestation  of
the  solar  deity  (Ninib).  For  the  drama  of  the  sun  is
similar  to  that  of  plant-life  ;  after  the  summer  solstice
the  sun  seems  gradually  to  lose  its  strength,  and  at
length  to  die,  till  at  the  winter  solstice  it  is  born  again.
Originally  too,  the  Du'uzu  story  was  distinct  from  the
Adonis  and  the  Osiris  stories  ;  but  at  an  early  date  the
distinction  was  forgotten  ( ADONIS,  §2).  The  identity
of  Tammuz  and  Adonis  is  asserted  by  Jerome3  and
other  fathers  (see  ASHTORKTH,  §  2,  with  n.  3).

According  to  Robertson  Smith  the  wailing  for
Tammuz  was  not  originally  connected  with  the  death  of
vegetation,  but  was  a  ceremony  of  mourning  for  some
sacrificial  victim,  such  as  is  performed  among  the  Todas
of  S.  India  to  this  day.  Later,  a  different  explanation
was  sought  for  the  wailing — one  more  in  harmony  with
advancing  civilisation — and  the  rite  was  projected  into
the  myth  of  the  death  of  Tammuz.  Robertson  Smith
also  thinks  that  the  yearly  mourning  for  Tammuz- Adonis
is  the  closest  parallel  in  form  to  the  humiliation  of  the
Hebrew  Day  of  Atonement  (Rel.  Sem.M,  411,  cp  414).

To  this  view  G.  A.  Barton  (Sent.  Or.  114)  assents.  The
story  of  Adapa,  however  (AY>fii,  p.  97;  cp  Jastrow,  Kcl.
Bab.  Ass.  549),  discloses  an  earlier  form  of  the  Tammuz-myth
according  to  which  Tammuz  did  not  go  into  the  death-world
on  leaving  the  earth,  but  ascended  to  the  gate  of  Anu,  where
he  was  stationed  ('  as  door-keeper ')  with  another  solar  god  or
vegetation  god  called  Giszrida.  According  to  Jensen  (TL7.,
1896,  col.  70)  another  ancient  belief  made  Tammuz,  the  god  of
vernal  vegetation,  the  son  of  ahsu  (the  primaeval  ocean).
Certainly  Gudea  (about  3000  is.c.)  mentions  Tamiizi-abzu
(zuaba),  i.e.,  Tammuz  of  the  ocean,  beside  Ningiszida  (identical
with  Geszida,  mentioned  above) ;  compare,  however,  Jastrow
(KB A  96),  who  deprecates  fusing  the  two  Tammuz-deities,  and
Barton  (Sem.  Or.  inf.),  who  makes  this  deity  a  goddess.

We  now  turn  to  the  single  express  reference  to
Tammuz  in  the  MT.  It  occurs  in  the  description  of

heathen  rites  practised  in  the  temple,
2 OT  tra.C6S

which  Ezekiel  in  his  captivity  professes

to  have  seen  when  in  the  ecstatic  state.  First  among
these  rites — according  to  Toy's  explanation  of  chap.  8 —
comes  (perhaps)  an  Asherah-image  (v.  5).  Next,  the
secret  worship  of  reptiles  and  beasts,  probably  forms  of
old-Israelitish  worship  (v.  10).  Next,  the  women
weeping  for  Tammuz  (v.  14).  Next,  twenty-five  men
worshipping  the  sun  in  the  east  (v.  16).  The  last  form
of  heathenism  (as  most  explain  v.  17)  is  not  recognised
as  such  by  Toy,  but  we  have  to  mention  it  here  for
completeness  ;  it  is  '  stretching  out  the  branch  to  the
nose.'4  According  to  Toy,  the  sun-worship  of  the

1  See  Jensen,  Kosmol.  197,  227,  but  especially  Frazer,  GBP)
2 115^ Barton  thinks  that  the  goddess  Istar  was  originally
connected  with  some  never-failing  spring,  and  that  some  sacred
tree  near  it  represented  her  son  (Sem.  Or.  86).

2  Jensen,  Kosmol.  225  ; cp  Jastrow,  KBA  575. Bilili  is  the
world-principle  of  generation  and  growth.

3  There  is  a  remarkable  statement  of  Jerome  (ed.  Vallarsi,
1 321), '  Bethlehem nunc nostram . . . lucus inumbrabat
Thamus,  id  est  Adonidis.' Just  before,  he  tells  us  that  this  cult
of  Adonis  has  lasted  about  180  years,  from  the  times  of  Hadrian
to the empire of  Constantine. Evidently he regarded the
Adonis  cult  practised  in  the  reputed  grove  of  the  Nativity  as  a
deliberate  profanation. It  is  not  probable,  however,  that  any
such  profanation  would have been committed in  the  time  of
Hadrian  ;  it  was  the  Jews,  not  the  Christians,  who  were  at  that
time  the  objects  of  heathen  persecution. And  we  may  assume
that the predominant element in the  cultus in  _  the cave at
Bethlehem  was  not  connected  with  Tammuz-Adonis.  but  rather
with  Isis  and  Sarapis,  just  as  at  Byblus  the  legend  of  Astarte
and  Adonis  became  fused  with  that  of  Isis  and  Osiris  (cp  Conradi,
Kindheitsgeschichte  Jesus',  315  ./T  ;  Usener,  Rel.-gesch.  Unter-
such.  1  202).

4  Toy  takes  miOl  (*'•  *?)  'n  tne  sense  of  '  stench,'  and  renders,
'  they  are  sending  a  stench  to  my  nostrils '  ('2N'7N). Kraetz-

4894


TANACH

Jews  was  probably  borrowed  from  Assyria,  so  that
Tammuz-worship  and  sun-worship  would  naturally  be
mentioned  together.

Plausible  as  this  is,  a  critical  scepticism  appears  justifiable.
It  is  strange  that  nom  should  occur  nowhere  else  in  the  OT.
In  Ezek.  8  5  ntOpn  is  certainly  corrupt  ;  this  may  reasonably
make  us  suspect  )lOnn-  First  of  all,  however,  the  whole  context
should  be  critically  examined.  The  most  obvious  corrections
(if  we  presuppose  some  very  constant  types  of  corruption)  are
those  in  v.  10,  on  which  see  SHAPHAN.  From  the  probably
true  text  of  this  verse  we  may  divine  that  the  whole  description
of  which  it  forms  part  relates  to  heathen  rites  of  Jerahmeelite  or
N.  Arabian  origin.  Elsewhere  (see  Crit.  Bib.)  the  text  of  v.  14
is  corrected,  and  a  reference  to  the  cult  of  the  N.  Arabian
goddess  is  supposed.  See,  however,  also  HADAD-RIMMON,
where  a  reference  to  Tammuz-worship  is  suspected  to  exist  both
here  and  in  Zech.  12  n.  For  a  generally  supposed  reference  to
the  parallel  cult  of  Adonis,  see  GAKDKN,  §  8  ;  and  cp  NAAMAN.
According  to  Ewald,  the  'desire  of  women  '  mentioned  in  Dan.
11  37  is  Tammuz-Adonis.

It  is  maintained  by  Stucken  and  Winckler  that
features  of  the  Tammuz,  Adonis,  and  Osiris  myths
have  attached  themselves  to  certain  legendary  Israelitish
heroes.  Thus  Abram  and  Sarai,  brother  and  sister,  as
well  as  husband  and  wife,  also  Amnon  and  Tamar,
suggest  comparison  with  Tammuz  and  Istar1  (see
Stucken,  Astralmythen,  n  ;  Wi.  (7/223,  227  f.  cp
io5/.  ,  and  TAMAK,  2).  The  story  of  Joseph  devoured
by  a  wild  beast,  also  the  detail  about  Moses  in  the  ark  of
bulrushes  (see,  however,  MOSES,  §  3),  suggest  respectively
the  Adonis  and  the  Osiris  myth.  David,  the  beautiful
young  shepherd,  also  reminds  one  of  Tammuz  or
Adonis.  Many  critics  may  be  inclined  to  admit  that
the  details  here  mentioned  (Winckler  has  much  more  to
mention  besides)  are  of  mythic  origin  ;  but  to  connect
them  directly  with  the  Babylonian  myth  of  Duzu  seems
to  be  at  present  a  somewhat  bold  hypothesis.  That  the
mourning  for  Jephthah's  daughter  is  analogous  to  the
Tammuz  wailing  is,  however,  beyond  the  possibility  of
doubt  (see  col.  2362).  T.  K.  C.


TANACH  (^Itfl),  Josh.  21  25  AV,  RV  TAANACH.

TANHUMETH  (n»-imn  ;  cp  the  Talm.  pr.  name
Tanhum),  father  of  SKRAIAH  [q.v.  ]  (2  K.  25  23  :
e&Ne/v\&9  [B],  -MAN  [A],  GANeeMM&G  [I-]  I  Jer.
408  ;  e&NAeMAiG  [B],  e<\N&e/v\ee  [AQ],  NAB-  [N]).

The  name,  though  possibly  (cp  Nahum  in  OS)  Nearly  explained
as  'comfort'  (cp  §  62;  pointed  so  as  to  exclude  a  woman's
name?),  may,  according  to  analogies  (e.g.  Rehum,  connected
with  Jernhme'el),  come  from  an  ethnic  of  the  Negeb  (cp
NAHAMAN'I).  In  2  K.  Seraiah  b.  Tanhumeth  is  called  a
Netophathite  ;  but  the  present  writer  takes  Naphtuhite  to  be
meant  (cp  NETOPHAH)  —  i.e.,  he  belonged,  like  (probably)  his  com
panions,  to  the  Negeb.  In  Jer.  the  designation  is  apparently
given  to  certain  '  sons  of  EPHAI  '  (g.v.).  But  '£iy  '33  (as  Kt.)  is
a  corrupt  duplication  of  <n21BJ-  Cp  Crit.  Bib.  on  Jer  40  I  5,
where  it  is  argued  that  Gedaliah's  Mizpah  may  have  been
Zarephath  in  the  Negeb.  T.  K.  C.

TANIS  (TANCOOC  [BA])  Judith  1  10. See  ZOAN.

TANNER,  TANNING. See  LEATHER.

TAPESTRY  (D^IPD,  marbaddim],  RV  '  Carpets,'
AV  '  coverings,'  RV"1*-'-  '  cushions,'  of  tapestry  are  men
tioned  in  Pr.  Ji6  3l22t.  See  EMBROIDERY,  WEAVING.

TAPHATH  (nStp,  §  78),  'daughter  of  Solomon,'
wife  of  one  of  the  king's  prefects  (see  BEN-ABINADAB),
i  K.4n  i-r&BAHeei  [B],  eAei  [Bab-  vkl-]-  T&BA&6
[I-].  T<\cpA,TA  [A]).  Probably,  however,  it  was  a
Saltnaean  (i.e.,  Arabian)  woman  who  is  meant;  point
ilpp"'.  So  in  v.  15.  Her  name  was  perhaps  Naphtu-
hith  (cp  §  78);  and  her  husband's  prefecture  may  have

schmar  agrees  with  this,  and  finds  in  T.  17  a  contemptuous
reference  to  the  sacrifices  of  the  '  high  places,'  which  gave  forth
to  Yahwe  no  'sweet  savour.'  Most  see  a  reference  to  the
Baresina,  or  bundle  of  branches  of  flowering  trees,  held  by
worshippers  of  the  solar  fire  in  the  Parsee  religion  (see  Vendiiiad
10  64,  Spiegel,  Hran.  Alterth.  8571).  Cp  a  Cyprian  parallel  in
Ohnefalsch-Richter,  Kyfros,  137  _ff.  Clermont  -  Ganneau
(Etinies  if  arc/if  nl.  orientale,  28  [1880])  supposes  some  rite  in  the
mysteries  of  Adonis.  This  would  require  us  to  transfer  the  last
clause  of  v.  17  to  the  end  of-'.  14.

1  Though  strictly  the  sister  of  Tammuz  was  Bilili.

4895


TARALAH

comprised all any  runs:, Naphtoah-arab. See Crit.
Bib. ;  also  SALMAH.  T.  K.  c.

TAPHON  [AV]  or  TEPHON  [RV]  Te4>o>N  [AN],
T64>CO  [V],  TOXOAC  [Jos.  Anf.xm.l3,  §  \^\,  Cepho
[Vet.  Lat.],  Syr.  ^aja^J).  One  of  the  '  strong  cities '
in  Judtta  fortified  by  Bacchides  ;  i  Mace.  9  50.  The
name  is  a  corruption  either  of  Tappuah  (cp  Josh.  168
<5H),  in  which  case  BETH-TAPPUAH  (q.v. )  may  be  meant,
or  of  NETOPHAH  (q.v.).  The  latter  view  (Gra.  Gesck.M
iii.  1 8,  n.  5)  is  geographically  possible,  but  is  phonetically
perhaps  rather  less  natural.

TAPPUAH  (n-1Sn  ; §  103,  cp  APPLE  and  FRUIT,

§").

1.  A  place  grouped  with  Zanoah, En-gannim,  and
Enam among the towns of the lowland of Judah

IJosh.  1634),  and  connected  apparently  with  Hebron
i  Ch.  243).  (In  Josh.  iXovBuB1  [B?],  adia.0a.ein1  [A],
Oatjxpova  [L]  ;  in  i  Ch.  Oawovs  [B],  6a,(f><f>ov  [A],
<t>f0pov8  [L]).  Perhaps,  however,  '  Tappuah  and
Enam'  should  rather  be  'and  Tappuah  [of]  Enam,'
and  the  same  place  may  be  referred  to  in  Gen.  38 14
(read  'at  Tappuah  of  Enaim')  and  in  Josh.  15gl8is
(read  for  '  unto  the  fountain  of  the  waters  of  NEPHTOAH,'
'unto  Nephtoah,  or  Tappuah,  [of]  Enam').  In  all
these  passages  there  is  most  probably  a  geographical
confusion  due  to  the  redactors — i.e.  the  place  originally
intended  was  in  the  Negeb  (cp  SOCOH,  ZANOAH,  ZORAH).
Very  possibly,  too,  Tappuah  is  a  popular  distortion  of
Nephtoah  or  Naphtoah,  the  name  the  present  writer
supposes  to  underlie  the  difficult  '  Naphtuhim  '  in  Gen.
10 13.  See  MIZRAIM,  §  zb,  where  Gen.  10  13 /.  is  ex
plained  in  the  light  of  the  theory  that  c'lXD  is  very  often
not  Misraim,  '  Egypt,'  but  Misrim,  the  Musri  on  the  N.
Arabian  border  of  Palestine.

2.  A place which appears once (see below)  at  a
critical  point  of  the  history  of  Israel,  situated  on  the
border  between  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  (see  KANAH),
Josh.  168  178. In  \1  ^  it  is  called  EN-TAPPUAH,  and
in  the  next  verse  we  are  told  that  the  land  or  district  of
Tappuah  belonged  to  Manasseh,  but  Tappuah  itself  to
the  b'ne  Ephraim. This  is  inserted  to  account  for  the
expression  in  v.  7, 'and  (then)  the  border  goes  along
southward to the  inhabitants (=the  district) of En-
tappuah. ' Conder  (Hdbk.  263)  identifies  En-Tappuah
or  Tappuah  with  a  spring  near  Yasuf,  at  the  head  of  a
branch of  the Wddy  Kclnah, S. of  Shechem and of
Michmethath. Robinson, however, and formerly
Conder (PEFQ, 1877, p. 48), connected it with
Kh.'Atilf,  and  GueYin  (Sam.  1259)  with  'Ain  el-Fdrfah,
both  NE.  of  Nablus. In  each  case  the  identification
depends  on  the  situation  assigned  to  the  torrent  KANAH.
Probably  enough  there  was  a  northern  Tappuah  ; but
the  name  (a  distortion  of  Naphtoah)  comes  from  the
Negeb. It  is  historically  unsafe  to  suppose  that  the
northern  Tappuah  was  the  city  so  cruelly  treated by
Menahem in his hour of victory, 2 K.  15  16 (see
TIPHSAH).

(*P  Ta<f>ov,  7T>)y»;?'  6a(j>0ui0  \va<f>(6,  a,  b,  mg.],  6a.<t>e6  [B] ;  e<t><f>ov(,
mj-y^f  0ad<!>ta6,  Oa(f>9<ad  [A];  ftun^ore ,  TrrrjTjc  i'a<j>8<a6,  [fla^iuS]
[L]).  Dillmann  holds  that  the  Ephraimite  Tappuah  was  the
royal  city  of  Josh.  12  17  (arar/xwT  [Bl,  flcujxf>ou  [A],  ()a.ir<j>ov  [L]).
With  the  preceding  name  Bethel,  the  list  of  cities  passes  into
central  Palestine.  The  present  writer  thinks,  however,  that
Josh.  12  7_/C  has  been  recast  by  the  redactor,  and  that  the  royal
cities  are  really  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (cp  SHIMKON-MERON,
TIRZAH).  T.  K.  C.

TARAH,  RV  Terah  (IT)F1  ;  TARAG  [BL].  e-  [A]
6K&PA.6,  6K9-  [F,  the  preposition  e«  dittographed]),  a
stage  in  the  wandering  in  the  wilderness;  Nu.  8827/1
See  WANDERING,  WILDERNESS  OF.

Probably  a  mutilation  of  Jerahmeel  (cp  TERAH)  [Che.].  Cp
MAKHELOTH,  TAHATH,  MOSERAH.

TARALAH  (H^nri ;  Q\peH\&  [B],  6&P&A&  [A],
9e.  [L] ;  therela,  tf«ni*M [05*81  2  1563i ;  cp261  25]),

1  See  ADITHAIM.
4896


TAREA


TARSHISH


apparently  a Bcnjamite place-name (Josh.  1827), but
really, like  ha-eleph in v.  28, a  corruption of ?XD"I\

IKPEEL  (q.  v. ),  or  of  7XOm't,  of  which  7NDT  may  be  a
corruption  (Che. ). See  ELEFH.

TAREA  (in>Xn  [Ba.],  IHNn  [Gi.]  in  i  Ch.  835;
but  innfl  [Ba.],  innFI[Gi.],'EV  TAHKEA  in  94it ;
Gepee,  GAPAX  tB  and  N  in  941],  6&pee.  6&p&  [A],

6<\PAA.  [L]), a descendant of Saul mentioned in a
genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v. ,  §  9,  ii.  ^3),  i  Ch.  835  =  941.

TARES  (ZIZANI&.  Mt.1325/:).  The  Greek  word,
which  does  not  occur  in  <S>,  is  plainly  of  Semitic  origin.  Its
Syriac  form  ziznd  is  (as  Lagarde  says,  Son.  63)  equivalent  to
zinzan,  and  so  derived  from  \/n,  which  in  Ar.  means  '  to  be
dry.'  A  kindred  word  is  Ar.  (and  Pers.  ?)  zawan,  which
denotes  the  seed  of  dawsar — i.e.,  darnel,  (ifdnov  is,  according
to  Suidas,  ^  fv  T<a  <riT<a  alpo  ;  the  medicinal  effects  of  atpa  are
described  in  Diosc.  '2  122.  ,

From  the  statements  in  Mishna  and  Talmud  (see
Low,  133/1 )  we  learn  that  c':it,  the  post-biblical  Hebrew
equivalent  of  ftfacca,  denoted  plants  closely  resembling
wheat,  alongside  of  which  they  grew,  and  were  indeed
sometimes  regarded  as  a  degenerate  form  of  wheat
produced  under  unfavourable  conditions  from  the  same
seeds.  In  view  of  these  and  other  statements,  it  is
generally  agreed  that  the  plant  intended  is  Lolium
temulentum,  or  darnel  (Tristram,  NHB  487,  where
there  is  a  good  account  of  the  plant).

It  is  not  improbable  that  'darnel'  has  been  associated  with
'white  crops,'  especially  wheat,  from  the  earliest  times.  With
imperfect  methods  of  cleaning  the  seed-grain,  the  seed  would  be
sown  with  that  of  the  wheat.  It  grows  to  about  the  same  height,
and  would  naturally  be  regarded  as  a  degenerate  form.  Darnel
was  long  regarded  as  poisonous  (op  Hooker,  Student's  l'~lora,
454) ;  this,  however,  is  now  attributed  to  the  ergot  with  which
it  is  peculiarly  prone  to  be  affected.  Its  rarity  in  England,
where  it  is  only  a  '  weed  of  cultivation,'  is  due  to  greater  care  in
the  sowing.  A  native  of  Europe  and  N.  Asia,  it  occurs
throughout  the  Mediterranean  basin.  N.  M. — \V.  T.  T. -D.

TARGET. ( i )  H3 X,  sinnah,  i  K.  10 16  ;  see  SHIELD,

i. (2)  J1T3,  k'idon,  i  S.  176. See  JAVELIN,  i,  5;  SNVORD.

TARGTJMS.  See  ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE,  §  6  ;  TEXT
AND  VERSIONS,  §  65.

TARPELITES  (X??S"1D,  Ezra49t;  T<\p&c}JAAA,MOi
[B],  Tap<f>.  [AL];  I^SvJ),  according  to  most  recent  writers  not
an  ethnic  name,  but  miswritten  for  N^DEC,  '  tablet-writers '  (from
Ass.  duf-sarrii)  ;  cp  Schr.  COT  on  Jer.  51  27,  but  see  SCRIBE.
Cp  also  APHARSITES.

TARSHISH  (tr'trW:! ;  6&pc[e]lC  [BNA, etc.]— every
where  except  Is.  2i6  [see  below]  and  28161014  [K&P-
XHA60N  (BNQT),  x&PK-  (B*  once,  N*  twice)]  where
Quigr.  twice  has  G&PCGIC  as  the  reading  of  Aq.  Symm.
Theod.,  and  Ezek.  271225  [«APXHAONIOI  or  XARK-
(BAQ— A  -t'.  25  adding  G&pcoc)]  8813  [KApXHAoN IOI
(B);  x^AKHAONOC  (A),  GApceiC  (Qm*-  vid')J ;  thrice
spelled  Tharshish  in  AV  [i  K.  1022  bis,  2248]).  A  son
of  Javan,  Gen.  1641  Ch.  1  7  (where  mis-written  ne'^'in,
1  Biblical  under  tne  influence  of  mrSs1)-  In  a  rela-
rpfprpnr-P*  lively  early  passage  (Is.  2i6  we  find  the

1  ClCl  tJHUUb.  ,  . T,  1 • 1  1 •  I 1

phrase  larshish  ships  l  as  a  synonym
for  large,  sea-going  vessels.  We  also  find  the  phrase
in  i  K.  1022-  (twice;  ©  vavs  fK  6.  the  second  time),
224o3  Is.  609  1*5.487  [8],  and  Ezek.  2?25.  The  infor
mation  given  us  respecting  Tarshish  may  be  very  briefly
summed  up.  According  to  Jer.  10g  (later  than  Jeremiah),
silver  was  brought  from  it,  and  elsewhere,  besides  silver,

1  (ES,  however,  does  not  support  the  rendering  ' Tarshish  ships' ;
SaAatrtrr)?  in  TTO.V  TrAoioi/  0aAa<r<rr)S  [RN'A,  etc.]  is  an  erroneous
transliteration  ;  for  another  case  of  this  see  Dan.  10  6  (0aAa<r<n)s
[37]  =  #ap<7ets  [Theod.] ;  cp  Vg. 's  inaris  in  Ezek.  1  16). In  Talm.
Jer.  Meg.  74^,  c^E'in  —  CaAao-crios  (Levy).

2  Regarded  as  a  redactional  insertion  (see  Kittel,  Benzinger).
The  Hebrew  has  Yl  ':K  (collective).

3  Stade,  Kittel,  and  Benzinger  agree  that  (following  <E5)  we
should  read  here  mN  and  mxn  (singular). Note  m^e'j  (Kt.),
'  was  broken.' <P"  omits  ty'Bnjl  whilst  (5A  and  <SL  have  respec
tively  in  their  insertion  after  i  K.  1628  vaJuv  ccs  6.  and  vavv  .  .  .
tit  6.

4897


iron,  tin,  and  lead  are  specified  among  its  riches  (Ezek.
27 12  ;  cp  8813).  It  is  mentioned  with  the  iyyim  (CVN)
or  'coast-lands'  (Is.  236  6619  [wiih  other  countries],
Ps.  72 10).  Jonah,  when  fleeing  from  the  presence  of
Yahwe,  set  sail  for  Tarshish  from  Joppa  (Jon.  13  \z\
cp  2  Ch.  92i  bis  [7r\o?a  £K  0.  once],  2036/. — where
Tarshish  ships  have  become,  through  the  author's  mis
understanding,  '  ships  that  go  to  Tarshish  ').

The  identification  of  the  locality  is  difficult. Most
scholars since Bochart have thought of Tartessus
T7lffff '•  bPolyb.iii. 24a,  Totw


2.  Where  ?
Tartessus  ?


in  S.  Spain. This  was  the  ancient  and,


as  far  as  known  to  the  OT  writers,  the
remotest  goal  of  Phoenician  commerce  (see  GEOGRAPHY,
§  izb}.  Herodotus  (4152)  indeed  places  Tartessus
beyond  the  Pillars  of  Hercules;  cp  StraboSisi  ;  Plin.
iii.  38.  Elsewhere  (2148)  Strabo,  with  whom  Pausanias
(iv.  19s)  agrees,  makes  Tartessus  the  name  of  the
River  Baetis  (Guadalquivir),  and  also  of  a  city  in  the
delta  of  this  river,  the  surrounding  territory  being  called
Tartessis.  Diodorus  (5 35^.)  as  well  as  Strabo  speaks
of  the  silver,  iron,  tin,  and  lead  of  Tartessus.  The
exact  site  seems  not  determinate,  nor  is  it  clear  that
the  Hebrews  knew  it.  Cp  SILVER.

[The  name  Tartessus  was  extended  to  the  whole  of  S.  Spain.
'  As  far  as  the  terminus  Tartesiorum  '  is  found  in  Avienus  (462),
and  in  the  second  treaty  between  Carthage  and  Rome  we  read
that  the  Romans  are  forbidden  Mao-Tt'as  Taporjt'ou  juij  Ajjcjea-flai
eire'Ketfa  (Polyb.  iii.  24  3) — i.e.,  they  are  not  to  go  beyond  the  city
of^Mastia  in  the  land  called  Tarseion  =  Tarshish.  See  E.  Meyer,
G^26S7  (§425).]

What  is  likely  is,  that  Tarshish  is  a  Semitised  form
of  the  native  name.

©  in  Ezek.  and  Is.  23  renders  '  Tarshish '  by
'Carthage.'  In  its  ordinary  sense  this  name  is  of

3  Carthage  *? course unsuitable. But when the

&  '  Carthaginians  brought  the  Phoenician
settlement  of  Mastia  (see  §  i,  end)  in  the  land  of
Tarseion  (Tarshish?)  under  their  rule,  they  made  it  a
Kart-hadast  (  =Carthage),  so  that  (5's  rendering  in  a
new  sense  appears  to  be  defensible  (Wi.  A  OF  1 445/1 ).

Tarsus  in  Cilicia  is  the  identification  adopted  by
Josephus  and  Jerome,  and  in  modern  times  by  Baron

4  Tnr<jiiB9 Bunsen. Sayce,1  and— for  Gen.  10 4— by

%. -LclibUb { . , . T~  / 1  l  r T  f

A.  H.  Keane  (who  takes  '  a  son  of  Javan
to  mean  '  an  Asiatic  Greek  '  ;  cp  The  Gold  of  Ophir:
g2jf.).  The  objections  to  this  are  ( i)  that  the  recorded
foundation  of  TARSUS  [y.  v.  ]  does  not  go  back  far
enough,  and  (2)  that  its  name,  as  given  on  coins  and  in
Assyrian  inscriptions,  has  c  instead  of  s.

Le  Page  Renouf  (PSBA  16104-108  138-141)  advocates
the  claims  of  the  Phoenician  coast,  so  that  the  phrase

5.  Phoenicia?  '  Tar^ish  shiPs  '  }vould  b(;  equivalent
to  '  Phoenician  ships.  1  his  is  in
accordance  with  W.  M.  Mailer's  explanation  of  the
Egyptian  phrase  '  Kefto  ships '  as  =  '  ships  built  in  the
Kefto  style,'  As.  u.  Eur.  349,  n.  2  (cp  CAPHTOU).
But  plausible  as  this  interpretation  of  '  ships  of  Tarshish  '
may  be,  the  sense  '  Phoenicia '  for  '  Tarshish  '  has  not
been  made  out.  It  would  appear  as  if  this  learned
Egyptologist  had  read  the  text  of  Is.  23 10  too  un
suspiciously.  Of  course,  too,  the  sense  '  Phoenicia '
for  '  Tarshish'  cannot  easily  be  made  to  agree  with  the
biblical  references  (apart  from  the  phrase  mentioned)
to  the  city  or  district  of  Tarshish.

Knobel  (Gen.('2])  and  Franz  Uelitzsch  (Gen.W]  separate
the  Tarshish  of  Gen.  104  from  that  of  other  passages,

6 Tvrseni  ?  anc*  suPPose  ^  to  mean  t'le  Tyrseni —  i.  e. ,
*  ' the Etruscans. This  we  may  at  once

venture  to  reject ;  if  Tyrseni  are  meant,  it  must  be
those  of  the  yEgean  (cp  TIRAS).  These  famous  sea-
rovers  appear  in  the  Egyptian  inscriptions  as  Tur(u)sa,2

1  In  Exp.T,  1902,  p.  179.

2  '  It  is  safe  to  recognise  in  the  Turusa,  expressly  mentioned
by  Rameses  III.  as  a  maritime  people,  Tyrsenian  pirates  who
appear  in  the  old  Greek  tradition — by  no  means  the  Etruscans'
(E.


Meyer,  GA  1  313,  §  260).


4898


TARSHISH

and  if  they  are  referred  to  at  all  in  Gen.  104,  it  would
be  best  to  read  there,  not  'Tarshish,'  but  '  Turus '  or
'  Turus.'  If  we  take  this  step,  it  becomes  possible  that
the  phrase  '  ships  of  Tarshish  '  may  have  been  originally
1  ships  of  Turus'  (tshipi?).  In  this  case  the  expression
v/ould  be  very  old,  and  be  a  monument  of  the  times
when  '  ships  of  the  Turus '  were  no  unfrequent  sights.
I^ater,  Turus  might  very  possibly  be  confounded  with
,he  Tars  implied  in  the  Greek  form  Tap<nf)ioi>  =  Tartessus
(see  §2).

It  has  hitherto  been  assumed  in  this  article  that  the

Hebrew  text  of  the  passages  referred  to  is  on  the  whole

correct, though the doubtfulness of  Gen.

Ah104  and  Is'23l°  has  been  alluded  to-
Arabian  >^OWj  however,  we  must  proceed  further,
Assnur  .  and  {ake  mtQ  account  t^e  fact  ^at  there

13  much  corruption  in  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  OT,
and  specially  in  the  readings  of  the  proper  names.
As  a  preliminary,  we  must  separate  the  inquiry  as
to  the  signification  of  Sniyyotk  Tarns  (trcnD  ni'JN  :
EV  'ships  of  Tarshish')  from  that  as  to  the  meaning
of  trc'in.  where  it  stands  alone,  partly  because  most
critics  (e.g. ,  Stade,  G  Vl\  533,  note)  agree  that  '  Tarshish-
ships '  means  'ships  of  the  largest  dimensions,'1  and
partly  because  a  close  examination  of  the  passages
where  the  phrase  'n  nvjN  occurs  appears  to  show  that
the  text  is  corrupt,  '  ships '  being,  according  to  the
text  here  adopted,  nowhere  referred  to  except  in  i  K.
1622  2248  and  2  Ch.  92i.  Confining  our  attention
in  the  first  instance  to  these  three  passages,  and  more
especially  to  those  in  Kings  as  primary,  we  are  struck
by  the  improbability  of  the  language  employed  (as  the
text  represents).  In  i  K.  11)22  we  have  'a  navy  of
Tarshish  with  the  navy  of  Hiram';  in  2248,  'ships
of  T.  to  go  to  Ophir  for  gold.'  If  we  knew  nothing
about  a  place  supposed  to  have  been  called  Tarshish,
should  we  not  suppose  that  trtrin  represented  something
connected  with  naval  architecture  or  management?
Should  this  consideration  seem  to  warrant  emendation,
no  better  one  presents  itself,  perhaps,  than  B'IB;D  (Ezek.
2729) — i.e.,  the  phrase  'ships  of  Tarshish'  means,  not
our  '  East-Indiamen,'  but  'galleys  with  oars.'  In  Is.  8821
we  actually  find  almost  the  very  phrase  here  taken  as
the  original  of  'n  'K,  viz  ,  e's*  \JN  ( EV  '  galley  with  oars  ' ).

Turning  to  the  remaining  passages  in  which  the  phrase  'ships
of  T.'  is  supposed  to  occur,  we  are  struck  by  finding  that  here
too  there  is  frequently  the  appearance  of  corruption.  In  the
passage  which,  if  correctly  read,  is  the  earliest  authority  for
this  phrase  (Is.  2  16),  we  cannot  possibly  avoid_  reading,  at  the
end  of  the  list  of 'objects  '  high  and  lifted  up,'  in  lieu  of  '  ships
of  T.,'  'palaces  of  Asshur '(  ||  'dwellings  of  _Jerahmeel  "-)  ;  cp
Am.  3  9,  where,  as  Winckler  has  already  seen,3  '  Ashdod  '  should
be  'Asshur.'  Similarly  in  Kzek.  27  25  Is.  CO  9  and  Ps.  48  8,
'  ships  of  Tarshish '  should  probably  be  '  tribes  (n'lSN)  of  Asshur'.
In  all  the  other  passages  where  this  word  occurs  (the  har
monising  must  be  due  to  an  early  editor),  s"Z"V\  (Tarshish)
should  probably  be  emended  into  linp'N  (Ashhur)  or  "titi'R
(Asshur) ;  an  interesting  proof  of  this  is  suggested  by  Ezek.
38i3.4  By  'Asshur'  is  meant,  of  course,  not  the  famous  rival
of  Babylonia,  but  a  N.  Arabian  district  of  somewhat  uncertain
extent,  also  known  perhaps  as  Geshur  (see  GESHUR,  2).  That
ihe  Chronicler  in  the  third  century  H.C.  read_  trC"in,.and_ sup
posed  it  to  be  a  comparatively  distant  maritime  region,  is  no
obstacle  to  the  theory  here  maintained,  whilst  an  objection
•  lr;i\\n  from  Gen.  104  (Tarshish,  a  son  of  Javan)  would  imply
that  we  possessed  the  Table  of  Nations  in  its  original  form  (see
TIRAS,  §  2).  See  Crit.  Bib.

F.B.,  §  I/  ; T.K.C.,  §§3-7-

1  See,  however,  Benzinger's  note  on  i  K.  1022.

2  The  Jerahmeelites  also  appear  to  be  referred  to  in  Is.  2  20
(see  MOLE).

3  Alttest.  Unt.  185,  where,  however,  Winckler  supposes  a  refer
ence  to  Assyria.

•»  We  there  find  C:<rin  "Vlbl  JTT1  N^,  where  "inD  almost
certainly  represents  "IWC:K,  and  at  once  suggests  that  the
following  word  Sri  (which  has  no  1)  is  a  corrupt  dittogram  of  the
same  N.  Arabian  name.  Certainly  'Tartessus'  docs  not  suit
at  all.

4809


TARSHISH,  STONE  OP


TARSHISH  (tTEhri).  i.  One  of  the  '  seven  (?)
princes'  at  the  court  of  Ahasuerus  (Esth.  1  14  MT).
On  the  <rapcra0cuos  (  crape  <r#eos)  of  <5HNAL/3,  see  SHETHAK.
If  the  underlying  story  of  the  Jewish  deliverance  is  N.
Arabian  (see  PURIM,  3),  '  Tarshish  '  probably  comes  from
'  Asshur  '  or  Ashhur.  See  TARSHISH  (above),  and  cp
SHETHAR-BOZNAI.

2.  b.  Bilhan,  of  BENJAMIN  (§  9,  ii.  [a]),  i  Ch.  7  10
(pa.fj.fffffai  [B],  tfapcreu  [AL]).  Here,  at  any  rate,
1  Asshur  '  or  Ashhur  is  the  underlying  original.

'  JEDIAEL,'  the  branch  of  Benjamin  to  which  '  Bilhan  '  belongs,
certainly  comes  from  'Jerahmeel';  so  also  probably  does
'  Bilhan  '  itself.  Of  Bilhan's  sons,  Je'ush  (son  of  Aholibamah  =
Jerahmeel,  Gen.  865)  comes  from  '  Ishmael,'  'Benjamin'  from


'Ashhur'  (see  SHEHARIAH).*  It  will  be  understood  that  the
ethnics  may  early  have  become  corrupted,  and  that  the  corrup
tions  may  soon  have  attained  an  independent  existence,  and
have  become  further  corrupted.  T.  K.  C.


1  Occurrences


TARSHISH,  STONE  op'trin  px),  Ezek.  io9,

RVm£-. The  text  of  EV  has  here  '  the  appearance  of

the  wheels  was  as  the  colour  <!'*')  of  a
beryl  stone  '  ; the  mg.  gives  a  needful

warning  (cp  TOPAZ)  against  trusting  this  too  implicitly.
More  commonly,  however,  'stone'  (fben]  is  omitted,
and  the  stone  referred  to  is  simply  called  in  MT  '  tar-
shish,'  in  EV  'beryl.'  Thus  in  Ezek.  1  16  (nearly  =
10  9^)  EV  has  'like  unto  the  colour  of  a  beryl"
and  in  Cant.  5  14,  'set  with  beryl'
)-  'Beryl,'  however,  lacks  justification
(see  BERYL),  and  in  Cant.  I.e.  RVme-  suggests  'topaz'
(see  TOPAZ,  end),  whilst  in  Ezek.  2813  AVme-  offers  us
'  chrysolite,'  thus,  as  it  were,  connecting  the  Old  and  the
New  Testaments  (see  Rev.  21  20).

'  Chrysolite  '  rests  on  the  authority  of  (£5,  which,  supported  by
]os.(Ant.  iii.  7s  BJ  'v.  07),  Acj.  Ezek.  1  16  10  9  Dan.  10  6,  and  Vg.
(except  Ezek.  1  16  Cant.  5  14),  thrice  (Ex.  28  20  39  13  [36  20]  Ezek.
2813)  renders  c'T'in  hy  \pvcroAi0os(r).  It  should  be  added,
however,  that  in  Ezek.  10  9  (B  gives  At'flos  av9paKo<;  (Yl  px)>  and
that  in  Ezek.  1  16  Cant.  5  14  it  is  content  to  transliterate  <?apcrei«
(cp  Symm.,  Theod.  Dan.  10  6  and  Theod.  Ezek.  10  9);  also  that
Symm.  in  Ex.  28  20  Ezek.  1  16  10  9  Cant.  5  14  gives  voucu'Sos  (cp
Vg.  Cant.  5  14,  and  see  JACINTH);  and  that  (P  in  Dan.  106  gives
OdAacrcra  (cp  Vg.  Ezek.  1  15,  and  see  TAKSHISH).

The  modern  chrysolite  is,  of  course,  excluded.  There
remain  the  'hyacinthus'  —  i.e.,  the  sapphire  of  the
,.fl  moderns  (see  JACINTH)  —  and  the  topaz,
2.  lOentinca-  which  pliny.s  description  of  the  chrysolite
tions.  as  <aurco  fuigOre  tralucens'  (//A'3742/.  )
has  led  some  (HWB®,  334/>,  Del.,  Kraetzschmar)  to
identify  with  the  chrysolite  of  the  ancients  (see,  however,
CHRYSOLITE).  For  the  hyacinthus  no  plausible  case  can
be  made  out.  The  chrysolite  or  topaz  (?)  has  found
some  favour  because  Pliny  speaks  of  a  large  chrysolite
from  Spain,  and  Tarshish  is  generally  placed  in  southern
Spain.  But  Pliny  also  states  that  chrysolites  were  found
in  Arabia,  and  it  seems  likely  (i)  that  the  Hebrews
would  have  obtained  precious  stones  chiefly  from  Arabia,
and  consequently  (2)  that  if  the  name  of  the  stone  under
consideration  were  derived  from  a  country,  the  country
would  be  some  part  of  Arabia.  Luther's  identification
of  '  tarshish  '  with  the  turquoise  would  therefore  be
plausible  if  the  name  '  tarshish  '  could  be  traced  to  some
ancient  name  of  the  Wady  Maghara  in  the  Sinaitic
Peninsula,  where  the  turquoise-mines  were  worked.  But
the  mere  similarity  of  names  is  of  course  valueless,
and  the  Sinaitic  turquoises  so  quickly  lose  their  colour2
that  they  can  hardly  have  been  much  in  requisition.
We  must,  therefore,  look  farther  for  a  clue  to  the
meaning  of  '  tarshish.'

Let  us  then,  as  we  have  done  already  in  the  case  of  the

1  Cp  i  S.  6  19,  where  the  original  of  ®'s  text  (note  [oil  v'toi
'IfXoviov) must  have run, CB:3  TV?  'ffJK?  'rjSin  'J31?  «]«  in.'},
'and the Kenites  were  angry  with  the  men  of  Beth-cusham.
Cp  SHIMSHAI.

2  Ebers,  Durch  Gasen,  137.

4900


TARSUS

moBi  pitddh  (see  TOPAZ),  turn  to  the  Assyrian  lexicon.
_,  It  is  well  known  that  to  the  Assyrians  the

.  '  precious  stone  par  excellence  was  that  called

Assyrian  ^m^u  (etymologically  identical  with  Heb.

Cimesu?  haiiamis ;  see  FLINT),  which  is  hardly  the
diamond  (Del.  Prol.  85;  Ass.  HWB  s.v.),  but  may
perhaps  be  the  white  sapphire.

Here  are  two  Assyrian  passages  given  by  Delitzsch  in  which
the  name  occurs  :  '  Like  a  ring  of  elmesu  may  I  be  precious  in
thine  eyes,'  and  'a  carriage  whose  wheels  were  of  gold  and
elmesu '  (cp  Ezek.  1  16).  It  is,  at  any  rate,  possible  that  the
'  tarshish-stone  '  should  rather  be  the  '  halmis-stone,'  *  and  that
the  inferred  Hebrew  form  E^Ippn  (Ass.  elmfsu)  is  equivalent  to
the  attested  form  halmal  in  Ezek.  1 4  27  82  (cp  AMBER,  §  i).

Probably  enough  the  halmis-stone  is  referred  to  again
in  Job  28  i8# ,  where  rdmoth  w H-giibiS  ( trnai  niSNi)  should
perhaps  be  [«]ci«i  tro^n,2  and  in  v,  19,  where  ty'D^ri
should  be  read  for  0-13  (see  TOPAZ).

There  is  also,  however,  the  possibility  that  j?'s5nn  [px]
or  '  Tarshish  [stone],'  is  a  corruption  of  JVWN  [3N,
'  Asshurite  stone '  or  -flntPN  'N  '  stone  of  Ashhur  '  (cp
TARSHISH,  §  7).  T.  K.  c.

TARSUS  (TAPCOC.  Acts93°  11 25  223  ;  Ethnic,
T&pceyc.  2  Mace.  4 30  Acts  9  n  2139).

Tapcro?  (Attic,  Tappos)= '  wing,"  or  'feather.'  The  town
was  said  to  have  derived  its  name  from  a  feather  which  fell  from
the  wing  of  Pegasus  (cp  Juv.  Sat.  3  118)  ;  but  that  was  a  legend
based  upon  an  etymological  fancy.  It  is  the  nn  of  late  coins
(with  Aramaic  inscriptions),  and  is  mentioned  under  the  name
Tarzi  by  Shalmaneser  (Black  Obelisk  Inscr.  /.i38;  Scheil,
V?/'(-),  447;  Wi.  GBA,  196,  256)  in  the  ninth  century.  For
stories  of  its  origin,  see  Ammianus,  xiv.  83,  and  Strabo,  673,  and
on  the  name  cp  Jensen,  ff/ttiter  u.  Armenier  1898,  pp.  62_/T,
-itxiff.  [The  Heracles  of  Tarsus  was  the  Cilician  god  Sandan.
Dio  Chrys.  calls  him  the  dpxrjyos  of  the  Tarsians  (2  23),  and  he
may  be  identified  with  the  Baal  of  Tarsus  named  on  coins.  He
was  worshipped  by  the  periodical  erection  of  'a  very  fair  pyre  '
{ibid.),  a  rite  presumably  analogous  to  that  described  in  the  De
Dea  Syria,  ch.  49 — WRS.  See  RS('~),  377,  where  Is.  30  33  is
compared.  On  Sanclan,  WRS  refers  to  K.  O.  M  Ciller  in  Rhein
Mus.  1829,  and  E.  Meyer  in  ZDMG,  1877,  pp.  73&yC  On  the
identification,  sometimes  proposed,  of  Tarsus  with  Tarshish,  see
TARSHISH.]

Tarsus  the  chief  town  of  CILICIA  [q.  v.  ]  was  situated
on  the  right  bank  of  the  ancient  Cydnus  in  the  wide

, and  fertile  plain  between  Alt.  Taurus  and
1.  Site  and  .• ,

,  . ,  the sea, thus commanding the passes

•''  leading  from  Cilicia  into  Lycaonia  or
Cappadocia.  Almost  necessarily  also  the  route  through
Mt.  Amanus  into  Syria  involved  passage  by  Tarsus.
The  city  thus  at  an  early  date  attained  importance.
Xenophon  (who  uses  the  plural  form,  Tapcro:)3  speaks
of  it,  in  401  B.C.,  as  a  great  and  prosperous  city  (TTO\LV
fj-eydXr/v  KO.I  fvdai/jiova,),  the  residence  of  Syennesis  the
king  of  Cilicia  (Anab.  1 2  23).  In  the  time  of  Alexander
the  Great  it  was  the  residence  of  a  Persian  satrap,  who
fled  on  his  approach,  so  that  the  city  surrendered  with
out  resistance.  Alexander  nearly  died  here  from  a  fever
aggravated  by  bathing  in  the  icy  waters  of  the  Cydnus
(Arrian,  Anab.  24;  cp  Paus.  viii.  28s).  After  Alex
ander's  death  Tarsus  usually  belonged  to  the  Syrian
empire,  and  under  the  Seleucid  kings  Antiochus  VII.
to  Antiochus  IX.  was  one  of  the  royal  mints.  For  a
short  time  under  Antiochus  IV.  (175-164  B.C.)  it  bore
the  name  '  Antioch  on  the  Cydnus'  ('  Airtoxeta  TT/JOS
T$  Ki'Sfy  ;  Antiochia  ad  Cydnum)  as  we  find  from  the
coins  (see  Head,  Hist.  Numm.  612  f. ).  For  a  time  it
was  in  the  possession  of  the  Ptolemies.

Coming  down  to  Roman  times,  we  find  that  in  the
Civil  War  Tarsus  took  the  side  of  Cassar,  though  it  was
to  Pompeius  that  she  owed  her  liberation  from  the
sway  of  eastern  rulers.  Caesar  in  consequence  honoured
the  city  with  a  visit,  and  its  name  was  changed  to

1  I.e.,  n  and  n,  h  and  -|,  Q  and  y;  (cp  old  Hebrew  script)  have
been  confounded.

2  So,  at  least,  if  n  in  JYIIDNT  represents  •>  in  ty'B?!"!' Otherwise
rrtONI  may  spring  from  VDN1,  which  became  first  l^N")  and  then
1CN"I  (with  stroke  of  abbreviation). There  is  no  inducement  to
make  niONT  come  from  TOjn  (the  '  Ra'amathite  stone').

3  Pausanias  calls  it Tapo-eis. Other forms  are Teptrds, or
©apcros.

4901


TARSUS

Juliopolis  (Caes.  Bell.  Alex.  66;  cp  Dio  Cass.  4/26).
For  this  attachment  Cassius  ordered  it  to  be  plundered  ;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  Antonius  rewarded  it  with
municipal  freedom  and  exemption  from  taxes  (i.e. ,  it
became  a  civitas  libera  et  immunis).  But  none  the
less  it  was  the  seat  of  a  conventus — i.  e. ,  periodical
assizes  (cp  Acts  1938)  were  held  within  it  by  the  Roman
governor  (Cic.  Ep.  ad  Att.  v.  164,  etc.),  though  in
strict  theory  a  '  free  city '  was  outside  the  province  and
the  governor's  jurisdiction  (see  further,  with  reference
to  Tarsus,  Philostr.  V.  Apoll.  Ii2,  tv  Tapffois  5t  &pa
ayopav  f/yev  ;  and  Alomms. -Marq.  Rom.  Staatsverw.
I8o  n.  3J.1  Like  Thessalonica,  the  legal  position  of
which  was  similar,  Tarsus  was  the  headquarters  of  the
Roman  governor.

The  freedom  {libertas,  a.vrovojj.ia)  or  self-government  which
Tarsus  enjoyed  is  expressly  attributed  to  Antonius  (App.  Bell.
Civ.  5  7).  It  was  at  Tarsus  that  Antonius  received  Cleopatra  in  38
B.C.  when  she  sailed  up  the  Cydnus  in  the  character  of  Aphrodite
(Plut.  Ant.  25  _/).  Rut  others  attribute  the  status  to  the
bounty  of  Augustus  (Lucian,  Macrob.  21  ;  cp  Dio  Chrysos.
236  R,  KaKelvos  [i.e.,  Augustus]  vfj.it'  Trape'cr^e  xt"P"LV  •'o^ow
Ttfiiji'  e£oucriai>  TOV  nora.fj.ov  TTJS  6aAacr<r>)s  TTJS  xa.9'  aiirous,  thus
summing  up  municipal  independence,  freedom  from  taxation
and  control  of  internal  sources  of  revenue).  Probably  Augustus
confirmed  in  this  respect  the  action  of  his  rival.  Note

that  it  by  no  means  followed  that  Paul's  possession  of  Rinnan
citizenship  (Acts  22  28)  was  a  consequence  of  the  autonomy
enjoyed  by  Tarsus.  The  citizenship  of  Tarsus  possessed  by
all  Tarsians  who  came  within  the  prescribed  conditions,  could
never  carry  with  it  Roman  citizenship  (cp  Ramsay,  St.  Paul
the  Traveller,  30  f.).

It  is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  influence  exerted  upon
the  intellectual  life  of  Paul  by  the  peculiar  surroundings

.T_ and  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed
2.  W  JL


references.


at  Tarsus. Tarsus  was indeed renowned


as  a  place  of  education  under  the  early
Empire.  Strabo  (673)  even  ranks  Tarsus  above  the
other  two  great  '  University  cities  '  of  his  time  for  love
of  learning.  It  was  the  home  of  eminent  Stoics,  like
Athenodorus  the  tutor  of  Augustus,  and  Nestor,  who
taught  Tiberius  (Strabo,  674).  A  remarkable  feature
was  that  this  zeal  for  learning  was  not  an  extraneous
characteristic,  but  was  due  to  natives  of  the  city  itself
(Strabo,  I.e. ),  so  that  Tarsus  rather  sent  teachers  to  the
rest  of  the  world,  then  received  students  therefrom.  It
would  doubtless  be  very  satisfactory  to  have  been  able
to  trace  in  Paul's  writings  (as,  e.g. ,  in  the  case  of  the
writer  of  Lk.  and  Acts)  some  tinge  of  Hellenic  culture,
some  echo  from  the  lecture-rooms  of  Tarsus  ;  but  the
attempt  must  be  abandoned.  The  three  references  to
Hellenic  literature  (Actsl728  i  Cor.  1632  Tit.  1 12)  by
no  means  bear  out  this  imagination,  but  are  merely
floating  sentiments  of  a  popular  character.  Passages
like  i  Cor.  1 20  or  Col.  2  8  would  hardly  favour  the
probability  of  finding  a  tinge  of  classical  culture  or
philosophy  in  Paul.  Even  the  speech  in  Athens,  if  its
historicity  is  to  be  accepted  as  beyond  dispute,  cannot
on  an  unbiassed  view  be  made  to  support  the  somewhat
extravagant  claims  made  on  Paul's  behalf  by  some
modern  commentators.  Seeing  that  Paul's  teacher
Gamaliel  was  inclined  to  encourage  Greek  studies,  the
fact  that  so  little  trace  of  such  can  be  found  in  Paul  is
itself  an  argument  against  attaching  undue  weight  to
the  Hellenic  influences  which  surrounded  his  early  life2
(see  ATHENS).

This  verdict,  on  the  other  hand,  by  no  means  implies  the
denial  of  the  formative  influences  of  Tarsian  life  upon  Paul.  In  a
city  which  was  in  contact,  both  in  the  philosophic  schools  and  in
its  harbour,  with  both  the  eastern  and  the  western  world  ;  which
entered  intimately  into  the  general  life  of  the  Roman  provincial
organisation  to  which  it  belonged,  but  also  retained  the  vestiges
of  that  vigorous  municipal  life  which  was  so  characteristically
Greek — in  such  a  town  Paul  could  not  fail  to  gain  that

1  On  the  constitution  of  Tarsus  under  the  Romans,  see  the
details  given  in  Dio  Chrysos.  2  43  R.

2  [WRS,  EKVto,  23  67  b,  presumes  that  Paul  '  formed  no  higher
opinion  of  the  culture  of  Tarsus  than  did  his  contemporary
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  whose  testimony  as  to  the  character  of
the citizens  (Vit.  Ap.  1 7)  is confirmed by  Dio Chrysostom  '
He  thinks  that  'sensuous  Eastern  religion  had  more  attraction
for  the  inhabitants  than  the  grave  philosophy  of  the  Porch. 'J

4902


TARTAR

familiarity  with  cosmopolitan  ideas,  that  knowledge  of  the
working  of  complex  organisations,  and  that  grasp  of  Roman
ideas  and  methods,  wliich  runs  through  his  life  and  work.  In
short,  it  is  the  Roman,  rather  than  the  Greek,  that  we  find  in
Paul.

After  his  conversion,  Tarsus  became  once  more  Paul's
home  when  he  was  obliged  to  quit  Jerusalem  (ActsOao).
Here  he  remained  until  brought  by  Barnabas  to  Antioch
(Actsll2s).  This  period  of  residence  and  preaching  in
Tarsus  and  other  Cilician  towns  (cp  Gal.  lai)  extended
over  several  years.  Doubtless  Tarsus  was  again  visited
on  the  second  missionary  tour  (Actsl54i)  ;  for  the
Roman  road  ran  from  Tarsus  through  the  '  Cilician
Gates,'  in  Mt.  Taurus,  giving  access  to  Lycaonia  (cp
Acts  16  i ).  Similarly,  on  the  third  missionary  tour,
Acts  18  23  conceals  a  visit  to  Tarsus,  on  which  occasion,
so  far  as  the  record  goes,  Paul  looked  for  the  last  time
upon  the  busy  quays  and  market-squares  of  his  native
town.

Tarsus  is  now  Tersus.  The  ruins  of  the  old  town  are  con
cealed  15  or  20  feet  deep  in  the  silt  of  the  river  and  no  systematic
excavation  lias  yet  been  made.  See  Murray's  Hdbk.  to  A /If
i84_/;  The  chief  coin-type  resembles  that  of  Antioch,  being
the  Tyche  of  Tarsus  seated,  with  the  river  Cydnus  swimming
at  her  feet.  The  imperial  coinage  shows  great  variety  of  subject.
Among  the  titles  are  MtjTpoiroAt?,  'EAmde'pa,  Neioxopos,  and  Ilpw-n)
/ieyurnj  /caAAio-nj  ypan/aaTC  0ouArjs.  W.  J.  W.

TARTAK  (prnn ;  e&pe&K  [BAL]),  the  god  of  the

people  of  Avvah  (imported  into  Samaria),  2  K.  17  31.
Perhaps  Tartahu,  the  '  lance-star '  of  the  Babylonians
(cp  nmn,  'lance,'  Job-ll2i;  MT  nmn),  identified  by
Jensen1  with  Antares,  and  by  Hommel2  with  Procyon,
and  regarded  by  the  Babylonians  as  the  star  of  the  god
Ninib.  By  a  textual  error 3  prnn  became  inn:,  or
(perhaps  better,  see  NIBHAZ)  jra:,  and  by  another  error,
similar  to  that  which  has  duplicated  the  deity  of  Sephar-
vaim,  made  its  way  into  the  text,  and  was  even  in  one
form  of  the  text  (see  (51-)4  assigned  to  the  people  of  the
imaginary  city  of  HEN  A  \_q.  v.  ]  in  order  to  leave  Nibhaz
for  the  Avvites.

If,  however  (cp  SUCCOTH-BENOTH),  the  colonists  of  piD^i
Shinirnn,  came  from  the  non -Israelite  Negeb,  both  Nibhaz
(Nibharu?)  may  be  a  corruption  of  Jerahmeel  and  Tartak  of
Terah  (a  distorted  form  of  Jerah  =  Jerahmeel  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

T.  K.  C.

TARTAN  (jrnn  ;  in  2  K.  0AN0AN  [B],  e<\p6.  [A],
TANG.  [M;  in  Is.  TANA6,\N  [BNc-a'd-a-alQ*J,  N&6AN
[X*A],  0&p6£  [Qm>f-] ;  Tharthan)\s  an  exact  reading
of  the  familiar  Assyrian  title,  tartAini,  turtanu,  tartan,
which  occurs  in  2  K.  13  17,  and  Is.  'JO  i.

In  Assyrian  historical  times,  the  Tartan  was  the
commander-in-chief  of  the  army,  and  ranked  next  to  the
king.  The  office  seems  to  have  been  duplicated,  and
there  was  a  tartanu  irnni  or  'tartan  of  the  right,'  as
well  as  a  tartanu  siimcli  or  'tartan  of  the  left.1  In
later  times  the  title  became  territorial  ;  we  read  of  a
tartan  of  Kummuh,  or  Commagene.  The  title  is  also
applied  to  the  commanders  of  foreign  armies  ;  thus
Sargon  speaks  of  the  Tartan  Musurai,  or  Egyptian
Tartan.  The  Tartan  of  720  B.C.  was  probably  called
Asur-iska-danin  ;  in  694  B.C.,  Abda',  and  in  686  B.C.
Bel-emurani,  held  the  title.  It  does  not  seem  to  have
been  in  use  among  the  Babylonians.  C.  H.  \v.  J.

TARTARUS,  a  term  for  'hell'  (so  EV  text)  in
RV'mg.  of  2  Pet.  24.  The  Greek,  however,  has  rap-
rapwcras  =  eis  Tdprapov  pi\{/as.  Sextus  Empiricus  (about
200  A.  i). ),  speaking  of  the  expulsion  of  Kronos  by  Zeus,
has  KaTfTaprapwcre.

Tdprapos  occurs  twice  in  Job,  viz.  (a)  in  40  15  [20],  where,
however,  TeTpaitoviv  ev  TU>  raprapa)  must  be  an  error  for  rer.  ei>
TU>  aypu  (so  Grabe,  ap.  Schleusner),  the  initial  rap  being  ditto-
graphic,  and  T  (T)  miswritten  for  y  (r),  and  (£),  in  41  23  [24],
where  rbi>  Se  rdprapov  TTJS  a/ivtro-ov  may  represent  cinn  I?p1p
'  the  bottom  of  the  abyss  '  (see  OINTMENT,  3,  with  n.  i).

1  Kosmol.  49  ff~.  ;  cp  15053.

-  Exf>.  T  033i  ;  GBA  666,

3  The  error  may  have  been  partly  due  to  a  reminiscence  of
Nergal  (Sllj)  <  11133  springs  out  of  imp.

•*  <ca't  avSpei  atuirctjix  fTTOtr^O'av  TTJP  6ap6a.K  KOU  01  fiiaiot
€7roiT/(roti'  TV\V  e^3Aaie£ep.

4Q03


TATNAI

Upon  Job  41  23  [24],  among  other  passages,  is  based
the  theory  that  BEHEMOTH  AND  LEVIATHAN  [y.v.]
belong  primarily  to  mythological  zoology.  Leviathan
is  in  fact  a  reflection  of  Tiamat,  the  chaos-dragon  (cp
DRAGON,  §  7),  and,  according  to  one  form  of  the
creation-myth,  was  cast  into  the  abyss  under  ward.
But  Tartaros  was  not  properly  a  watery  abyss  ;  it  had,
according  to  the  Greek  myth,  '  a  gate  of  brass  and  a
threshold  of  bronze.'  The  essential  parts  of  the  con
ception  are  depth  of  situation  and  (of  course)  darkness.
Tartaros  was  '  as  far  beneath  Hades  as  heaven  is  high
above  the  earth'  (//.  813^  ;  cp  Hes.  Theog.  807),  and
the  Titans  are  even  described  as  '  below  Tartaros '
(roi)s  virorapTapiovs),  11.  14279.  Analogous  to  the  fate
of  Kronos  and  the  Titans  was  the  fate  of  the  fallen
angels,  who,  according  to  2  Pet.  2  4,  were  'committed
to  pits  of  darkness  '  (<npots  £b<t>ov  :),  having  been  '  hurled
into  Tartaros.'  The  allusion  may  be  to  the  passage
on  the  punishment  of  AZAX.EL  [y.v.  ]  in  Enoch  10,  where
the  vigorous  Greek  version  (Syncellus)  gives,  fyi/3a\e
O.VTOV  etj  rb  aKbros  .  .  .  Kal  iviK&\vij/ov  avrf  CTKOTOS.
For  a  more  remote  parallel  see  Rev.  202.  See  ABYSS  ;

ESCHATOLOGY, §  89.  T.  K.  C. , §  5.

TASK,  TASKMASTER,  TASKWORK.  See  TAXA
TION,  §  5.

TASSELS  (fiyy),  Nu.  1538  RV">g-,  EV  FRINGES.

TATAM  (TATAM  [BL], -MI [A]),  Josh.l559,  ©
Between  KULON  and  SORES.

TATNAI,  or  rather  (RV)  TATTENAI  (*3nFl ;  TAN
GAN&IOC  [L];  Ezra5s  GANANAI  [B],  e&ee.  [A],  5i>
e^ee&NAC  [A],  66  Acocere  [BAj
[B],  0A89&NAI  [A]),  the  'governoi
of  the  region  beyond  the  river '  (see  GOVERNMENT,  §  25,
Ezra  5  3  66),  called  in  i  Esd.  SISINNES  (q.v. ).  We
shall  assume  here  that  the  present  form  of  the  text  is
original  (see,  however,  Crit.  Bib.,  where  this  and  other
names  are  disputed).  According  to  Meissner  (7.A  Til',
1897,  p.  191 /. ),  this  Persian  official  is  mentioned  in
neo- Babylonian  contracts.  Here,  in  texts  of  the  first
and  third  years  of  the  reign  of  Darius,  is  mentioned
a  certain  Us-ta-an-ni  or  Us-ta-nu,  satrap  of  Babylon
and  Syria.  The  dates  agree,  and  also  the  titles
(snnj  "ny  nnB,  pihat  ebir  ndri}.  The  name  corre
sponds  to  old  Pers.  Vistana,  and  appears  in  a  Greek
form  as  'Riffdav-rj^  (Arr.  iii.  194),  'Iffrdvrjs  (Arr.  vii.  64),
and  'Tffrdvris  (Herod.  777).  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  a  much  easier  transition  to  ^nn  from  old  Pers.
Thithina  (a  form  assumed  by  Marq.  Fund.  52,  and
E.  Meyer,  Entst.  des.  Jud.  32)  than  from  old  Pers.
Vistana,  for  we  have,  on  Meissner's  hypothesis,  to
suppose  that  ';nn  was  corrupted  from  MriB'l.  According
to  Arrian,  however  (vii.  64),  there  were  two  con
temporary  persons  named  respectively  Sisines  and
Histanes.  May  not  the  document  from  which  the
name  of  the  Syrian  satrap  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  is
derived  have  confounded  the  two  names?  As  to  the
historicity  of  what  is  told  us  of  Tattenai  and  Shethar-
bozenai,  we  must  draw  a  distinction  between  the
narrative  and  the  inserted  documents  on  which  the
narrative  is  supposed  to  be  based.  According  to  Well-
hausen  (GGA  1897,  no.  2),  the  official  correspondence  is
but  an  invention  for  dramatic  effect.  Sisines  (Tatnai),
for  instance,  attempted  to  get  the  building  of  the  temple
interrupted,  and  failed.  But  the  Jewish  writers  had  no
access  to  official  archives.  The  same  view  is  taken  by
Kosters  (Herstel,  29).  Marquart,  however  (Fund.
49),  thinks  that  the  'kernel'  of  the  decree  of  Darius
may  be  genuine,  whilst  Meyer  (Entst.  dt's  Jud.  41-53;
maintains  that  the  documents  are  almost  entirely
genuine,  and  the  narrative  therefore  in  the  highest

1  Cp  J-ide6,  VTTO  £6$ov,  'under  darkness'  (cp  Enoch  10  5,
above).  The  reading  aeipcus  ('chains')  is  not  accepted  by
editors  (see  I'ar.  Bible),  though  both  JudeO  and  the  foundation-
passage  in  Enoch  speak  of  bonds.

4904


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

degree  trustworthy.  The  only  passage  in  the  docu
ments  to  which  this  scholar  takes  exception  is  TLzrn.  6  iza,
which  is  certainly  not  the  language  appropriate  to  an
imperial  decree.  This  criticism  seems  hardly  keen
enough.  Even  the  name  Sisines,  on  which  Meyer
relies  so  much,  is  very  doubtful,  and  Rosters'  and
Wellhausen's  criticisms  are  not  altogether  baseless.  Cp

EZRA-NEHEMIAH, §  6.  T.  K.  C.

TAXATION1  AND  TRIBUTE

The  modern  sheikh  (§  i). Tithe  (§  gf,).
Religious  dues  (§  2).  Firstlings  (§§  11-13).

Monarchical  idea  (§  3).  Levitical  cities  (§  14).

Political  taxation  (§§  4-7). Expenses  of  worship  (§  15).
Sanctuary  dues  (§  8).  Priests'  revenue  (§§  16-18).

The  nomads  of  the  Arabian  desert  know  nothing  of

tax  or  tribute,  either  to  their  sheikhs  or  to  Allah  ;  so  far

_, indeed  from finding  a  source  of  revenue in

, their  people,  the  sheikhs  are  under  obligation

.  ...  to  spend  their  own  private  fortune  for  the
'  public  good.  It  is  expected  of  a  sheikh  that
he  entertain  strangers  and  visitors  better  and  more
sumptuously  than  an  ordinary  member  of  the  tribe
possibly  can  ;  his  duty  is  to  support  the  poor  and  to
share  what  he  has  with  his  friends  (Burckhardt,  Notes
on  the  Bedouins,  1830).  Often  enough  it  happens  that,
even  with  a  rich  sheikh,  this  ends  in  poverty  ;  but  a
reckless  hospitality  always  brings  high  repute.  The
means  for  such  hospitality  have  to  be  found  in  war  and
pillage.  The  Syrian  towns  and  villages  on  the  borders
of  the  settled  land  have  to  pay  their  regular  '  brother
hood  '  (httwu<e]  to  the  Bedouins.  By  ancient  custom  a
special  share  of  the  booty  taken  in  war  falls  to  the
commander  ;  he  has  the  first  choice,  and  in  old
Arabia  was  entitled  to  a  fourth  of  the  whole.  In  ancient
Israel  the  practice  was  similar.  The  only  due,  if  we
may  so  call  it,  falling  to  the  chief  is  a  larger  share  of
the  spoil  ;  Gideon,  for  example,  receives  the  golden
'crescents'  of  the  Midianites  (Judg.  824;  cp  630).
David  sends  his  share  in  the  spoil  (sdldl,  ^y,  T&V
ffKvXwv-)  from  the  Amalekite  raid  in  presents  to  his
friends  in  Judah  (i  S.  30 a6/).

The  offerings  also  which  were  presented  to  the  god
did  not  originally  come  under  the  category  of  dues
o  T>  -I-  •  which  were  demanded  and  had  to  be
paid.  When  a  beast  from  the  flock  or
herd  was  slaughtered,  there  was  no
question  of  a  definite  tax  or  tribute  ;  it  was  a  case
of  voluntary  giving.  Indeed  in  the  most  ancient
Semitic  ritual  the  notion  of  giving  to  a  deity  at  all  has
no  place,  or  at  best  only  a  very  subordinate  one  ;  the
root-idea  being  that  the  blood  poured  out  and  the
sacrificial  meal  are  fitted  to  renew  and  strengthen
sacramentally  the  mystic  bond  in  which  the  deity  and  his
worshippers  are  united  (on  this  subject  cp  SACRIFICE).

A  solitary  exception  would  seem  to  be  found  in  the
paschal  offering.  Following  Wellhausen  (Prol.W]  and
Robertson  Smith  (Rel.  Sem.W,  463  /". ),  most  recent
scholars  explain  it  as  an  offering  of  the  firstborn  of  the
flock.  If  this  be  right,  its  character  as  a  due  payable
to  the  deity  can  hardly  be  denied  ;  and  it  is  certain  that
the  paschal  offering  was,  in  the  later  period  at  least,  so
regarded.  Robertson  Smith,  indeed  (loc.  cit. ),  seeks  the
original  explanation  of  this  sacrifice  of  firstlings  in  another
region  of  thought ;  the  exact  parallel  to  the  sacrifice  of


an-b  ypa<|>iijs,  see  Swete).

2  siildl  is  also  n-poco/uj},  e.g.,  in  Nu.  31  32,  and  c.pTrayij  [BNA]
in  Is.  102. For  other  terms  used  see  SPOIL.


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

the  firstlings  of  cattle  he  finds,  not  in  the  yearly  offering
of  the  first-fruits  of  the  field  generally,  but  in  the  law  of
Lev.  1923^:,  according  to  which  the  fruits  of  a  newly
planted  field  for  the  first  three  years  may  not  be  eaten.
'  The  characteristic  feature  of  this  ordinance,  from  which
its  original  meaning  must  be  deduced,  is  the  taboo  on
the  produce  of  the  first  three  years,  not  the  offering  at
the  temple  paid  in  the  fourth  year.'  This  same  con
ception  of  a  taboo  is  what  he  finds  underlying  the
sacrifice  of  the  firstlings  of  the  flock.  That  which  is
taboo  has  supernatural  attributes  which  forbid  its  being
appropriated  to  common  uses.  This  character  of  taboo
attached,  he  thinks,  in  the  oldest  times,  in  a  certain
measure  to  all  domestic  animals,  and  naturally  there
fore  in  an  intensified  degree  to  the  firstborn.  It
is,  however,  hardly  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  this
line  of  explanation.  Certainly  no  other  instance  of  an
offering  of  firstlings  besides  the  passover  can  be  adduced
for  the  earliest  Hebrew  period  before  the  settlement  in
Canaan.  And  the  passover  itself,  as  is  shown  in  more
detail  elsewhere  (FEASTS,  §  2,  PASSOVKK,  §§  9-11)  was
not  originally,  or  before  the  settlement,  a  sacrifice  of  the
firstborn.  The  passover  ritual  points  clearly  to  the
contrary,  and  shows  that  under  this  sacrifice  lay  the
same  fundamental  ideas  as  under  all  the  other  sacrifices,
namely,  that  the  blood  of  the  victim  was  to  renew  the
communion  with  the  deity,  and  thereby,  in  this
particular  instance,  be  a  powerful  protective  against
pestilence  and  the  like.  It  was  only  in  the  course  of
the  subsequent  development  that  the  passover  was
brought  into  connection  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  first
born,  or  sought  to  be  explained  as  such.

As  already  said,  the  sacrifice  of  the  firstborn  cannot
be  proved,  in  the  Hebrew  domain,  for  the  oldest
period  ;  all  the  probabilities  point  rather  to  the  other
conclusion — that  it  was  a  secondary  development  ;  out
of  the  custom  of  offering  the  first-fruits  of  the  field  arose
the  other  of  offering  those  of  the  flock  and  of  the  herd,
and  here  accordingly  we  have  only  the  extension  to
animals  and  men  of  the  deity's  original  claim  to  be
presented  annually  with  the  first-fruits  of  the  field.

The  entire  conception  of  sacrifice  as  being  a  tribute
due  to  God  is  in  Hebrew  religion  subsequent  to  the
settlement  in  Palestine,  and  on  internal  evidence  must
be  regarded  as  impossible  in  the  earlier  time,  for  it  had
its  origin  in  the  complete  revolution  in  the  idea  of  God
which  followed  upon  the  settlement.  The  tribal  and
national  god  became  thereby  a  territorial  god,  and  thus
came  into  the  position  which  the  Canaanites  had  as
signed  to  their  Baal  ;  he  himself  became  the  '  bnal,'
that  is,  'lord'  of  the  land,  —  in  the  sense,  especially,
that  he  was  lord  of  the  soil,  and  that  the  produce  of  the
soil  was  regarded  as  his  gift  (see  BAAL).  This  whole
view  of  the  deity  as  the  bestower  of  all  the  gifts  of
nature  is,  it  is  obvious,  possible  only  for  an  agricultural
people.  As  soon  as  this  view  had  become  the  prevailing
one,  however,  the  next  step  was  exceedingly  simple,
nay,  it  was  inevitable  ;  thanks  were  offered  to  the  deity
for  the  gifts  of  the  soil,  and  he  was  acknowledged  as  the
giver  by  having  the  firstlings  and  the  best  of  the  fruits
of  the  earth  returned  to  him  in  sacrifice.  The  Canaan
ites  had  already  come  to  this  view  of  their  offerings,
and  the  Israelites  took  it  over  from  them,  as  we  see
very  specially  in  their  adoption  of  the  originally
Canaanite  yearly  festivals.  All  these  festivals  are  agri
cultural  in  character  :  they  are  intimately  associated
with  harvest,  and  the  idea  they  express  is  that  the
harvest  is  sanctified  by  the  festal  offering.

In  the  further  development  in  Israel  a  new  thought
came  to  be  added.  Once  the  monarchy  had  become
established,  the  monarchical  idea  was
applied  to  Yahwe  also,  and  he  was
thought  of  as  the  supreme  king  of  his
people  (cp  MESSIAH,  MOLECH).  But  among  the  rights
of  kings  one  of  the  first  was  that  of  levying  tax  and
tribute  ;  and,  as  we  shall  see  later,  it  was  exercised  very

4906


3.  Monarchical
idea.


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

early  (David,  Solomon)  ;  cp  GOVERNMENT,  §  19.  A  '
main  duty  of  subjects  was  and.  is  the  payment  of  the
king's  dues  ;  this  principle  was  applied  to  the  deity  and
to  his  worship  in  sacrifice,  as  soon  as  he  came  to  be
regarded  as  the  king  of  his  people.  How  nearly  related  ;
are  the  two  things — secular  taxation  and  sacred  tribute
— is  instructively  shown  by  the  instance  quoted  by
Robertson  Smith  (Kel.  Sem.&,  246)  ;  at  Tyre  tithes
were  paid  to  Melkarth  as  '  king  of  the  city.'  The  same
thing  is  seen  in  the  motives  assigned  for  sacrifice  by  the
later  Hebrews.  The  offerings  brought  voluntarily  to
the  altar  are  regarded  as  a  tribute  to  the  deity  on  quite
the  same  footing  as  the  presents  voluntarily  brought  to
an  earthly  king.  To  the  sacrifices  offered  during  the
Hebrew  monarchy  equally  apply  the  words  of  Homer  :

5wpa  deovs  iTfiOfi,  dup  aidoiovs  j3ain\rjas.

One  does  not  come  into  the  king's  presence  empty-
handed  (Judg.  Si;/  i  S.  1027),  but,  if  one  has  aught  to
ask,  brings  a  gift  of  homage  ;  so,  in  like  manner,  when
one  'seeks  the  face'  of  God  (Mai.  18).  Precisely
similar  is  the  ancient  Greek  conception  of  sacrifice  as
being  the  tribute  and  homage  due  to  the  divinity  on
whom  a  man  is  dependent  (Nagelsbach,  Homerische
Theologie,  186).  In  the  last  resort,  the  offering  comes
to  be  expressly  called  '  a  gift '  to  the  deity  ;  minhah
(Gen.  43  /".  i  S.  2 17,  and  often)  or  k<>rban.

Such in general is  the  course  of  the  development.

As  to  the  development  in  detail  of  taxation  and  tribute

p  .... .as  political  institutions  the  deficiency  of

tical  Qur  sources  leaves  us  very  much  in  the

taxation :  dark  Under  Saul  xve  hear  nothing  of
special  dues  levied  by  him  ;  he  had  no
capital  and  no  special  court,  but  lived  on  his  ancestral
holding  at  Gibeah.  Nor  had  he  any  state  officials  to
govern  the  land  under  his  orders  and  receive  their  pay
from  him.  We  may  take  it  for  granted  as  self-evident
that,  in  accordance  with  ancient  custom,  he  claimed  and
received  his  special  share  of  the  spoils  of  war,  as  we  are
expressly  told  that  David  at  a  later  time  did  (28.811
l-Jao).  We  hear  of  gifts  of  homage,  as,  for  example,
when  he  was  elected  to  be  king  (i  S.  1027),  or  when  his
favour  was  specially  sought  (iS.  1620).  It  is  easily
conceivable  that  this  source  of  income,  added  to  the
revenue  derived  from  his  property  at  Gibeah,  may  have
been  amply  sufficient  for  the  modest  requirements  of
his  throne.  At  any  rate,  it  is  not  safe  to  draw  from
what  is  said  in  i  S.  17  25  strict  inferences  as  to  the  exist
ence  of  certain  specified  exactions  in  Saul's  day.  The
passage  promises  freedom  from  taxation  to  the  slayer  of
the  giant  and  to  his  house,  thus  presupposing  the  exist
ence  of  fixed  taxes.  But  this  is  evidence  only  for  the
much  later  period  of  the  author,  or  editor,  to  whom  it
appeared  self-evident  that  such  must  have  arisen  as  soon
as  a  monarchy  had  come  into  being.  The  same  obser
vation  applies  to  the  so-called  '  manner '  or  constitution
of  the  monarchy  as  set  forth  to  the  people  by  Samuel
( i  S.  Siojf.,  esp.  v.  15),  where  also  taxes,  and,  in
particular,  tithes  of  the  field  and  the  vineyard  are
mentioned.

Under  David,  and  still  more  under  Solomon,  we  see

the system growing. Under David, in addition to

._ ., the  king's  share  of  booty  (28.  lio l'2so),

5.  David,  promjneilce  is  given  to  the  tribute  received

Solomon.  from  subjugated  pe0ples  ( i  K.  5 1  [4  21]  2  K.
84),  and  the  voluntary  gifts  of  subjects  still  continued  to
come  in  (i  K.  1025).  We  may,  nevertheless,  conjecture
with  some  degree  of  probability  that  David's  numbering
of  the  people  (28.  24 1/)  was  connected  with  the  levy
ing  of  taxes,  and  was  intended  to  be  used  in  regulating
their  incidence  and  the  exaction  of  military  service.
The  duties  of  the  'governors'  (D'3W.  nesibim,  EV

1  garrisons,'  28.  814)  also,  whom  he  set  over  conquered
territory,  must  essentially  have  consisted  in  the  collection
of  tribute.  We  are  expressly  told,  at  all  events,  that
this  was  the  object  of  Solomon's  division  of  the  kingdom

4907


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

into  districts.  If  the  text  (iK.  47-19)  is  correct,  it
would  seem  that  the  king's  own  tribe  (Judah)  was
exempt  from  dues  and  imposts  (but  see  GOVERNMENT,
§  19).  However  this  may  be,  the  purpose  of  the
division  is  given  with  substantial  correctness  in  the  text
as  it  stands  (see  special  articles  on  the  names  of  the
'officers').  The  statement  thai  each  'officer'  (or
'  prefect ')  had  to  provide  victuals  for  the  king  and  his
household  for  a  month  in  the  year  may  owe  its  form  to
a  desire  to  show  the  glory  of  Solomon's  court  ;  but  in
substance  the  narrative  is  undoubtedly  correct  :  the
chief  object  of  the  division  into  districts  had  reference
to  taxation,  and  in  connection  with  this  to  the  '  task
work'  or  personal  service  which  was  exacted  (i  K.  625).
We  also  hear  that  Solomon  levied  toll  on  the  caravans
travelling  by  the  trade-routes  through  the  kingdom
(i  K.  Ids).  The  complaint  made  by  the  people  after
his  death  leaves  the  impression  that  his  system  of  taxes,
besides  being  grievous  in  itself,  was  objected  to  as  some
thing  new  and  unaccustomed.

We  find  hardly  any  other  references  to  regular  taxes

in  pre-exilic  times  ; but  the  '  king's  mowings '  are  men-

..  tioned  in  Am.  7i  (see  GOVERNMENT,  §  19  ;

6.  Later ^OWINGS; ancj_ on tne  text, LOCUSTS).

°  '  From  the  fact  that  in  post-exilic  times  tithe
appears  from  the  first  as  an  established  institution,
we  may  perhaps  infer  that  it  was  of  pre-exilic  origin.
The  narrator  of  i  S.  8i4/  regards  it  as  an  ancient
institution.  With  this  would  harmonise  the  fact  that
Am.  44  knows  of  a  tithe  paid  to  the  sanctuary.  For
the  rest,  in  the  ideal  state  as  constructed  by  Ezekiel
we  find  no  such  thing  as  taxes  ;  the  prince  maintains
his  court  and  officers  out  of  the  revenue  of  the  princely
domains.  He  gives  the  princely  domain  to  his  officers
in  fief.  This  also  is  an  arrangement  which  we  may
unhesitatingly  presume  to  have  existed  in  the  earlier
times  (iS.  812).  A  property-tax  was  imposed  only  for
extraordinary  emergencies,  not  regularly  (2  K.  2835).
See  GOVERNMENT,  §  20.

In  post-exilic  times  a  heavy  tribute  was  exacted,  of

course,  by  all  the  overlords  of  the  country. Unfortu-

.p , ... nately  we  are  without  information  as  to

7.  Post-exilic.  the  nature  of  the taxes  or  how  they

were  levied.  On  the  latter  point,  however,  it  is  practi
cally  self-evident  that  the  Persian  rulers,  like  the  Syrian
and  Roman  after  them,  availed  themselves  of  the  local
Jewish  administrations  for  assessment  and  collection.
The  land  as  such  paid,  doubtless,  a  definite  composition
as  tribute.  Moreover,  when  it  had  a  governor  of  its
own,  the  community  had  also  to  pay  for  his  support,
as  well  as  make  a  contribution  towards  that  of  the  resident
Persian  official  in  Samaria  under  whom  it  was  placed.
That  these  burdens  were  not  trifling  can  be  seen  from
such  a  passage  as  Neh.  014:  the  governor  drew  40
shekels  a  day  besides  what  the  '  rulers '  and  their  sub
ordinates  extorted  from  the  people.  If  we  find  a
Xehemiah  in  public  discourse  to  the  people  characteris
ing  this  as  severely  oppressive  and  taking  merit  and
credit  to  himself  for  having  drawn  nothing  from  the
people,  but  on  the  contrary,  having  met  all  charges  out
of  his  own  private  means,  we  may  safely  conclude  that
the  pressure  of  these  dues  was  not  regarded  as  light.

Besides  these  direct  taxes  were  the  indirect  ones
levied  by  the  Persian  court  :  rents,  customs,  tolls,  etc.
(Ezra  4 13  20  7^4);  unfortunately,  we  are  very  in
sufficiently  informed  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  various
technical  expressions  here.1

Over  and  above  these  were  the  requirements  of  the
internal  administration,  and  even  if  these  may  on  the

1  [Of  the  three  terms  in  Ezra4i32o  V  24  (Bibl.  Aram.),
ntindah  (mjp,  AV  'toll,'  RV  '  tribute ')  is  quite  general,  a  tax
for  every  one  (Ass.  mandattu),  belt  0^3,  AV  '  tribute,'  so  RV
'custom'),  lit.  what  is  brought  (Ass.  biltit- \/S3').  and  hillak
OjSri,  AV  'custom'),  a  'toll '(so  RV)  exacted  of  travelers.
From  the  Ass.,  also,  comes  Aram,  ttta/csa,  '  toll,'  and  nnikesd,
'  toll-gatherer '  (publican).]

4908


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

whole  have  been  relatively  light,  nevertheless  the
maintenance  of  the  temple,  of  the  sacrificial  system,  and
of  the  priests  and  Levites,  must  have  cost  considerable
sums.  The  voluntary  gifts  of  worshippers  were  not
enough,  and  soon  (under  Ezra;  cp  Neh.  10  337".  )a
fixed  poll-tax,  besides  other  payments  in  kind,  had  to
be  established  (see  below,  §  15).  On  other  accounts,
also,  heavy  demands  were  from  time  to  time  made  on
the  community,  as,  for  example,  for  temple  restoration
and  wall-building  ;  in  the  latter  connection  also  in
the  form  of  cor~vt!e,  even  if  in  both  cases,  as  it  would
seem,  the  voluntary  character  of  the  service  was  formally
retained.

The  priests  and  Levites,  and  the  whole  personnel  of  the
temple,  were  declared  wholly  exempt  from  taxation  by  decree
of  the  king  of  Persia  to  Ezra  (Ezra724).  On  the  rest  of  the
people  the  burden  of  taxation  pressed  all  the  more  heavily  as
the  community,  broadly  speaking,  was  a  poor  one.  Thus,  in
Nehemiah's  time,  the  complaint  was  raised  by  many  that  in
order  to  pay  their  taxes  they  had  been  compelled  to  borrow
money  and  mortgage  their  property,  thus  coming  into  great
straits  (Neh.


Nor  did  matters  improve  after  Alexander,  in  the
days  of  the  Seleucids  and  Ptolemies.  The  principal
burden  was  the  poll  tax  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  4i)  of  which  we
learn  more  particularly  from  (Ps.  -)  Aristotle  (Oeconom.
ii.  14)  that  in  the  Syrian  kingdom,  as  distinguished
from  the  Egyptian-Roman,  it  was,  strictly  speaking,  a
kind  of  trade-tax,  a  percentage  that  varied  according  to
the  nature  of  the  work  and  the  means  of  the  individual,
not  a  personal  tax,  uniform  and  unchanging.1

In  addition  to  this  there  were  now  also  other  taxes,
presumably  indirect,  which  Josephus  (Ant.  xii.  83)  refers
to  but  does  not  name.  A  characteristic  example  of
the  manner  in  which  new  dues  arose  out  of  voluntary
gifts  is  seen  in  the  crown  tax  which  grew  out  of  the
voluntary  gift  to  the  sovereign  of  a  golden  crown  of
honour.  The  priesthood  of  Jerusalem  were  exempted
from  all  such  dues  and  tribute  from  the  time  of  Anti-
ochus  the  Great  (Jos,  Ant.  xii.  83).

The  method  of  collecting  was  by  farming  to  the
highest  bidder  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  k\ff.  5  i  Mace.  1128  13  15)
and,  indeed,  according  to  the  same  authority  (loc.  cit.  ),
the  taxes  of  each  individual  city  were  let  from  year  to
year.  Elsewhere  it  appears  that  there  were  also  farmers-
general  of  taxes  for  the  whole  land  (see  below).  This
system  was  widely  spread  throughout  the  whole  of
antiquity,  and  was  adopted  also  under  the  Roman
Empire.  Even  at  present  it  is  in  the  Turkish  Empire
the  usual  method  of  raising  certain  dues.  The  advan
tages  and  disadvantages  of  the  system  can  easily  be
seen  in  actual  operation  there.  That  it  is  the  least
favourable  of  all  for  the  taxed  needs  no  showing  ;  at  all
times  the  farmers  have  known  how  to  enrich  themselves
at  the  expense  of  the  taxed,  since  any  surplus  naturally
falls  to  them.

A  classical  instance,  in  fact,  is  one  that  comes  to  us  from
Judaea.  A  certain  Joseph  b.  Tobia,  who,  it  ought  to  be  men
tioned,  had  the  reputation  of  being  very  lenient  with  his  own
countrymen,  had  acquired  the  taxing  rights  under  Euergetes
and  Philopator  by  bidding  twice  as  much  as  any  other  com
petitor,  and  paid  the  (for  those  times)  enormous  yearly  sum  of
16,000  talents,  nevertheless  accumulating  vast  wealth  during  his
twenty-two  years'  tenure.

The  question  of  immunity  from  taxes  played  a  great
part,  naturally,  from  the  Maccabsean  period  onwards,  in
all  the  dealings  between  the  Jewish  leaders  and  their
Syrian  overlords  ;  it  was  more  or  less  identical  with
the  entire  question  of  dependence  or  independence.
Jonathan  was  able  to  secure  immunity  from  Demetrius
II.  (i  Mace.  1134-37  ;  see  ISRAEL,  §  26),  but  this  privi
lege  does  not  seem  to  have  been  long  maintained,  for
at  a  later  date  Simon  had  to  demand  it  anew  for  all
time  to  come  (cp  ISRAEL,  §  78).  We  are  unable  to

1  It  has  been  recently  maintained  by  Willrich  (fudaica,  1900,
pp.  52-58)  that  under  the  Seleucids  the  poll-tax  was  still  a  thing
unknown,  that  it  was  not  introduced  until  the  time  of  Augustus.
As  against  this,  see  the  evidence  marshalled  in  Schiirer,  GfVft),

1  220/

4909


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

say,  it  must  be  added,  how  great  a  relief,  if  any,  this
meant  for  the  subjects  concerned.  Fundamentally,  it
meant  nothing  more  than  a  change  in  the  taxing
authority  ;  the  continued  wars  in  any  case  were
enormously  costly.

When  the  country  became  tributary  to  the  Romans
(Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  44  BJ\.ld}  they  at  once  took  in  hand
the  system  of  taxation.  Gabinius  divided  the  country
into  five  districts — probably  taxation  areas  after  their
usual  practice  in  subject  provinces  (Schiirer,  (!Jl  <3',
1340  ;  cp  ISRAEL,  §  85) — in  which  the  local  authorities
were  at  the  same  time  the  leviers  of  taxes.  Here  also
Caesar  showed  his  friendly  disposition  towards  the  Jews
by  respecting  the  sabbatical  year  as  regarded  taxation.
The  Roman  census  and  the  Roman  system  of  taxation
as  a  whole  do  not  seem,  however,  to  have  been  intro
duced  for  some  considerable  time,  the  raising  of  the
taxes  being  left  in  the  hands  of  the  native  authorities.
Herod  the  Great,  at  least,  paid  sometimes  (whether
always  is  doubtful)  a  definite  tribute  to  the  Romans,  but
as  regarded  the  raising  of  this  sum  he  could  exercise
independent  authority  as  rex  socius.  Thus,  he  could
remit  taxes  wholly  or  in  part  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  104  xvi.  2s
xvii.  2i).  We  nowhere  hear  of  a  Roman  tax  during
his  reign  (cp  ISRAEL,  §  87,  end).  The  situation  changed
when,  after  the  time  of  Herod  and  Archelaus,  the  land
was  administered  by  procurators ;  the  Roman  taxes,
including  the  personal  tax  of  the  census,  were  now
introduced.  The  new  division  of  the  land  into  eleven
toparchies,  like  that  formerly  made  by  Gabinius  (see
above)  doubtless  had  reference  primarily  to  taxation.
The  procurators  levied  these  taxes  through  native  com
missions.  The  indirect  taxes  were  now  also  farmed  to
the  publicans  (see  PUBLICAN).  From  the  NT  (Lk.  19 1
and  elsewhere  ;  cp  Jos.  BJ  ii.  144)  we  learn  that  these
were  mostly  Jews  ;  intelligibly  enough,  they  were  not
popular  :  in  the  NT  '  publican  '  and  '  sinner '  are
virtually  synonymous  (cp  ISRAEL,  §  90).

On  the  whole  subject  of  Roman  taxation  see  Schiirer,  GJV$),
1  508 _^  and  the  copious  literature  there  referred  to;  cp  Qui-
RINIUS,  §  2_/I

Sanctuary  dues  fall  under  two  categories  :  ( i )  the
regular  offerings  at  the  sanctuary  prescribed  by  custom

8 Sanctuarv  °r by  law ; <2) the  occasional Sifts
3 which  the  priests  received  for  their  ser-
dues.  -c  •  i

vices  on  each  sacrificial  occasion.

As  for  the  first  of  these  two  classes,  it  has  been
already  observed  that  in  the  old  times  no  other  dues
were  known  beyond  the  offerings  themselves,  as  also
that  it  was  only  in  a  secondary  way  that  the  offerings
assumed  the  character  of  dues.  To  this  class  of  dues,
in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word — that  is  to  say,  regular
offerings  definitely  fixed  by  custom  or  law,  as  distin
guished  from  free  gifts  presented  on  all  or  any  of  the
various  occasions  of  public  or  private  life — belong  the
offerings  of  the  first-fruits  of  the  ground  and  of  the
firstlings  of  cattle.  To  both  these  Vahwe  from  an
early  date  set  up,  so  to  say,  a  legal  claim.

Even  in  the  oldest  decalogue  (Ex.3426  J)  it  is  made
a  legal  injunction  that  the  Israelites  are  to  bring  to
Yahwe  '  the  best,  the  first-fruits  of  thy  ground  '  (rr^'tn
irnnx  '?33>  irpuToyevrj/jLaTa).1  The  Book  of  the
Covenant  (Ex.  2229  [28])  has  the  ordinance  :  '  thou  shall
not  delay  (to  offer)  thine  abundance  and  the  best  of  thy
winepress '  ;  the  exact  meaning  of  the  expression  is
doubtful,2  but  the  idea  of  first-fruits  is  not  directly  con-

1  Bikkftrim being  always  a relative idea, it  makes little
material  difference  whether  we  translate  '  the  best,  that  is  to
say,  the  first-fruits  of  the  ground,'  or  'the  best  of  the  first-fruits
of  the  ground.' Still,  as  in  v.  22  (cp  23  16)  the  harvest  festival
is  designated  as  the  feasl  of  first-fruits,  the  expression  Mkkftrlm
ought,  doubtless,  to  be  taken  as  referring  to  the  first-fruits  that
are  offered  and  not  to  the  first-fruits  generally,  and  thus  equiva
lent  to  rcsith.

2  On  the  meaning  of  IVDni  inxSa  see  the  commentaries (p
has  aTropxas  aAoji/os  Kai.  Arjt/ov,  thus  taking  it  to  mean  the  first-
fruits. Doubtless  it  was  led  to  this  rendering  by  the  parallel
clause  :  '  thy  firstborn  son  shalt  thou  give  unto  me,'  etc.

4910


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

tained  in  the  words  themselves  at  any  rate,  and  neither
is  the  injunction  in  substance  quite  the  same  as  that  of
the  old  decalogue.  There  only  the  first-fruits  of  the
field  are  spoken  of,  whilst  here,  in  all  probability,  oil
and  wine  also  are  intended  ;  there  an  offering  to  God
at  the  harvest  festival  is  intended,  here  no  such  fixed
date  is  given.  Most  probably  the  two  laws  were  in
tended  to  run  concurrently  ;  alongside  of  the  precept  to
offer  the  first-fruits  of  the  harvest  at  the  harvest  festival
stood  the  other  injunction  not  to  be  niggardly  towards
Yahwe  with  the  fulness  wherewith  he  had  blessed  floor
and  press.

Nothing  is  said  as  to  the  amounts  of  such  offerings.
Apart  from  the  offerings  definitely  provided  for  in  the
ritual  of  the  old  feasts,  it  is  clear  that  the  amount  of
first-fruits  to  be  offered  was  left  to  the  free  will  of  the
individual  offerer.  In  particular,  JE  has  no  hint  that
at  that  early  date  it  was  already  the  custom  to  give  to
God  the  tenth  part  of  the  produce.  Not  until  D  is  this
expressly  laid  down  by  law.  As  the  taxes  and  tributes
payable  to  the  king  were,  throughout,  of  older  date  than
those  payable  to  the  temple,  so  also  the  tithe  was  first
of  all  exacted  by  the  state,  and  not  till  afterwards  took
its  place  among  the  dues  of  the  sanctuary.

Indeed,  in  the  time  of  the  old  decalogue  and  of  the
book  of  the  covenant  there  is  as  yet  no  word  of  dues  at
all  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  but  only  of  definite
offerings  fixed  by  custom.  Men  offered  the  first-fruits
to  Yahwe  in  sacrifice,  and  in  the  sacrificial  meal  became
Yah  we' s  guests.  This  custom  is  presupposed  in  L>  as
still  maintaining  its  ancient  standing  (see  below).
Accordingly  we  have  not  in  D,  as  in  later  times,  to  do
with  a  tax  designed  to  fill  the  temple  treasury,  to  defray
the  cost  of  the  temple  worship,  and  the  like.  The
maintenance  of  the  temple  in  Jerusalem,  and  of  the
regular  worship  there,  was  the  king's  affair;  the  priests
derived  their  income  from  the  offerings  that  were  brought
(see  below,  §  16),  and  thus  there  was  no  occasion  for  levy
ing  on  behalf  of  the  temple  any  regular  dues  over  and
above  such  voluntary  offerings  as  might  be  made  at  the
sanctuary  (cp  2  K.  12sj^).  Further,  in  bringing  his
first-fruits  the  idea  in  the  mind  of  the  pious  Israelite  in
early  times  was  not  at  all  that  Yahwe  had  a  claim  to
the  fruits  as  being  the  giver  of  them  ;  his  action  was
dictated  by  the  consideration  that  his  whole  harvest,
and  all  the  bread  which  he  enjoyed  from  year  to  year,
was  pure  and  hallowed  only  if  some  part  of  it  had  been
received  by  Yahwe.  It  is  one  of  the  heavy  punishments
with  which  the  nation  is  threatened  by  Hosea,  that  in
its  exile  Israel  shall  have  only  '  bread  of  mourners '  to
eat,  bread  that  is  unclean,  inasmuch  as  no  portion  of  it
can  be  brought  into  the  house  of  Yahwe  (Hos.  94).

The  sanctuary  tithe  is  first  met  with  in  Am.  44,  which

passage shows that in the northern kingdom it was

.  . customary,  in  the  yearly  pilgrimages  to  the

9. fltne. sanctuaryi  jn  addition  to  the  daily  offering

to  bring  tithes  on  the  third  day. The  narrative  of  E,

dating  from  somewhere  about  the  same  period,  tells  of

Jacob's  vow  to  pay  the  tithe  at  the  sanctuary  at  Bethel

(Gen.  2822).

D  makes  it  quite  evident  that  the  tithe  intended
simply  means  the  first-fruits,  of  which  the  proportion,
roughly  speaking,  of  a  tenth  had  been  gradually  fixed
by  custom.  For  in  Deuteronomy  (1422^)  it  is  enjoined
that  the  produce  of  the  field  (corn,  wine,  oil)  is  to  be
tithed  ;  but,  exactly  as  in  the  earlier  time  (see  above,  §  8),
in  such  a  manner  that  this  tithe  is  not  to  be  paid,  so  to
say,  into  the  sanctuary,  but  simply  to  be  laid  out  in  a
sacrificial  meal  at  the  sanctuary.  Should  the  distance
from  Jerusalem,  however,  be  so  great  as  to  make  it
impossible  to  carry  thither  the  tithe  in  kind,  then  (v.  2$f. )
'  thou  shall  turn  the  tithe  into  money  and  carry  the
money  with  thee  and  go  to  the  place  which  Yahwe  will
choose,  and  there  thou  shall  bestow  Ihe  money  for
whalever  Ihou  desiresl,  oxen  or  sheep,  or  wine  or
slrong  drink,  or  whatsoever  thy  soul  askelh  of  Ihee,  and

49"


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

thou  shall  eal  il  there  before  Yahwe  thy  God,  and
rejoice,  thou  and  thy  household  and  the  Levite  that  is
within  thy  gates. '  Now,  this  tenlh  is  actually  called  the
first-fruil  (rcsith,  jrtS'N'i)  in  Dl.  262,  and  is  accompanied
by  a  furlher  regulalion  as  regards  ritual,  which  may
very  well  have  been  in  accordance  with  ancient  custom,
although  the  text  itself  appears  to  be  a  later  addition
(see  Steuernagel,  ad  loc. ) :  the  regulation,  namely,  that
the  Israelite  who  makes  the  offering  is  to  put  a  small
portion  of  the  tithe  into  a  basket,  and  set  it  down  before
the  altar  of  Yahwe,  and  in  doing  so  to  make  use  of  a  pre
scribed  form  of  prayer.

Along  with  these  general  regulations  regarding  the
tithe  D  gives  also  a  special  one  for  the  tilhe  of  every

10  Third  vear third  year  (U28/);  every  third  year
' t-th  the  entire  tithe  is  to  be  expended  at

home  on  the  poor  and  indigent,  in
which  calegory  Ihe  Levite  also  is  included  in  D,  no  part
of  it  being  applied  to  a  sacrificial  meal  in  the  sanctuary.
In  devoting  the  tithe  to  this  purpose,  also,  a  special
prayer  is  lo  be  used,  which  is  given  in  Dt.26i2jf.
This  tilhe  conslilules  one  of  Ihe  main  sources  of  income
of  the  rural  priesthood  (see  below,  §  17).  This  shows
that  by  '  the  third  year  '  we  are  to  understand  not  a  fixed
date  holding  good  for  the  whole  country,  but  a  relative
one,  falling  differently  in  different  places  or  with  different
families,  yet  always  in  such  a  way  thai  every  year  some
portion  of  the  Israelite  nation  was  paying  ils  '  lithe  of
Ihe  ihird  year'  for  the  poor  and  similar  objects.  It  is  a
debatable  queslion  whelher  by  Ihis  lenlh  of  the  third
year  we  are  to  understand  a  second  tilhe  every  third
year  over  and  above  the  yearly  lithe  thai  has  already
been  spoken  of.  The  precept  was  interpreled  in  Ihis
sense  by  <Q,  which  gives  '  Ihe  second  lithe"  (r6  devrepov
€Tri5tKa.Tov)  for  -\yycn  rutf,  '  in  the  year  of  tilhing,'  in
Dl.  26 12,  and  the  same  view  is  taken  by  some  modern
scholars  (e.g. ,  Steuernagel).  For  various  reasons,
however,  it  seems  highly  improbable.  In  the  first
place,  we  should  have  expected  in  the  lexl  of  Ihe  law
some  kind  of  explicit  indication  thai  quite  another  tithe
than  the  preceding — a  second  tithe,  in  fact — is  being
spoken  of ;  but  of  this  there  is  no  hint.  Moreover,  the
imposilion  of  a  due  of  two-tenths  of  the  whole  produce
of  Ihe  field  over  and  above  the  various  payments  exigible
by  Ihe  slate  would  be  something  quite  unusual  and
unheard  of,  and  not  at  all  in  harmony  with  the  general
spirit  of  Deuteronomy.  It  is  not  permissible  to  evade
Ihis  argument  by  answering  lhal  Ihe  yearly  lilhe  paid  in
Jerusalem  was  nol  a  lenlh  reckoned  with  any  precision.
The  exact  opposile  would  seem  lo  be  the  fact,  if  it  is
remembered  thai  the  '  renewal '  in  D,  as  contrasted  with
the  old  law,  consisted  precisely  in  this,  thai  for  a  sacri
ficial  offering  lo  be  made  al  discrelion  was  substituted
an  offering  of  which  the  amount  was  precisely  deter
mined  by  law,  and  that  amount  fixed  al  one-lenth  of  the
lolal  produce.

A  later  decision  in  Dl.  184  furlher  enacls  that  the
priest  has  a  claim  to  the  best  of  Ihe  corn,  Ihe  wine,  and
Ihe  oil,  as  well  as  of  the  sheep-shearing  ;  over  and  above
the  tithe  the  rcHith.  also.  This  again  is  not  in  the  spirit
of  D,  which  regards  Ihe  relitA  and  Ihe  lithe  as  identical
(see  above,  §  8).  We  have  here  again  an  expression
of  the  growing  claims  of  the  priesls,  who  in  other  direc
tions  also  were  dissalisfied  wilh  Ihe  revenues  assigned
to  them  by  D  (see  below,  §  13).

The  course  of  the  development  of  the  offering  of  the

firstlings  ran  parallel  with  thai  of  the  offering  of  first-

_. ... fruits. For  its  origin,  see  above,  §  2.

11.  Firstlings.  The  law  of  the  older  decaiogue  in  F,x.

34  ig/  runs,  '  every  firslborn  is  mine,  and  all  the  catlle
lhal  is  male,  Ihe  firsllings  of  ox  and  sheep.  Bui  Ihe
firstling  of  an  ass  Ihou  shall  redeem  wilh  a  sheep,  or,
if  thou  will  not  redeem  it,  then  thou  shall  break  its  neck.
All  the  firslborn  of  thy  sons  thou  shall  redeem.1  The
expression p<!ter  rthem  (crn  las)  means  the  first  offspring

4912


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

of  the  mother,  not  the  earliest  of  the  animals  born  year
after  year  (cp  WRS  Rel.  Sem.  462 /. ).  Here,  accord
ingly,  even  at  this  early  date  the  demand  is  extended  to
human  beings  and  to  animals  that  cannot  be  offered  in
sacrifice.  This  is,  in  point  of  fact,  however,  quite
secondary  ;  the  original  precept  had  reference  only  to
sacrificial  animals.  For  it  may  be  taken  as  certain  that
genuine  Yahwism  was  always  opposed  to  human  sacri
fices,  and  therefore  that  in  the  law  of  the  redemption  of
the  human  firstborn  we  are  to  see  not  a  toning  down  of
an  ancient  custom  which  had  demanded  human  sacrifice,
but  only  an  expedient  for  extending  the  precept  relating
to  firstlings  so  as  to  include  men  and  non-sacrificial
animals.  We  should  also  take  note  of  the  parallelism
with  the  first-fruits  of  the  ground,  and  consider  how
opposed  to  such  sacrifices  is  the  entire  character  of  the
sacrificial  system  in  ancient  Israel  so  far  as  we  know  it.
Literary  analysis  also  shows  that  the  words  in  question
are  secondary.  In  the  original  ten  short  words  (see
DECALOGUE,  col.  1050}  the  precept  probably  ran,  '  every
first  birth  is  mine" — a  law  which,  as  matter  of  course,
applied  only  to  animals  capable  of  being  offered.  See
further,  FIRSTBORN  ;  SACRIFICE,  §  3 ;  also  ISAAC,

§4-

In  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  also,  Ex.  2229  [28],  the
claim  to  the  human  firstborn  is  made  ;  but  here,  too,
the  originality  of  the  clause  is  highly  questionable.  To
begin  with,  the  position  of  the  firstborn  of  men — between
the  fruits  of  the  field  and  offerings  from  the  herd— is
remarkable.  Moreover,  it  would  be  unnatural  to  under
stand  the  requirement  literally  ;  it  must  be  supplemented
by  the  precept  of  redemption  ;  but  this  highly  important
point  is  not  mentioned,  although  in  view  of  the  inclina
tion  occasionally  shown  by  the  people  to  offer  human
sacrifices,  it  could  hardly  be  omitted  as  too  self-evident.
With  reference  to  offerings  of  the  firstborn  there  is  added
the  further  detail  that  the  animals  are  to  be  sacrificed
on  the  eighth  day  after  birth.

We  know  not  at  what  date  it  was  that  the  law  relating
to  human  firstborn  first  became  general.  The  deutero-
nomistic  passage  in  Ex.  13  n/l  presupposes
it  as  a  settled  custom.  D  itself  (Dt.  1423
15  ig)  has  nothing  to  say  on  the  subject  ;  D  plainly  has
no  intention  of  laying  down  a  complete  law  about  offer
ings  of  firstborn,  but  only  of  settling  points  where
traditional  custom  had  necessarily  to  be  departed  from
in  consequence  of  the  centralisation  of  worship.  The
chief  stress  accordingly  is  laid  upon  the  injunction  that
this  offering  is  to  be  made  year  by  year  at  the  place
which  Yahwe  will  choose.  This,  but  still  more  the
further  command  not  to  do  any  work  with  the  firstling
of  cattle  or  to  shear  the  firstling  of  the  flock  ( Dt.  1 5  20  [19] ),
shows  that,  according  to  the  intention  of  D,  the  animal
was  not  to  be  offered  exactly  on  the  eighth  day  after
birth.  That  the  offering  of  the  firstborn  was  to  be  made
precisely  at  the  Passover  feast  is  nowhere  expressly  laid
down  ;  but  the  connection  into  which  the  two  are  brought
in  the  narrative  of  the  exodus  (Ex.  13u_^)  shows  that
their  union  had  already  been  accomplished  at  the  time
when  that  account  was  written  '(cp  PASSOVER).  Since
blemished  animals  could  not  be  offered  in  sacrifice  it  is
enjoined  that  they  are  to  be  consumed  as  ordinary  food
under  the  same  conditions  as  those  applied  to  ordinary
slaughtering  in  D  (Dt.  \§-z\  ff.}.  Substitution,  or  re
demption  of  such  animals,  is  not  required  ;  but  this  does
not  exclude  the  possibility  that  the  custom  nevertheless
existed,  since  D,  as  already  remarked,  does  not  start
with  the  intention  of  giving  a  complete  law  on  this
subject.  From  all  these  considerations  it  is  plain  that
here  also  there  is  no  question  of  a  '  due '  in  the  strict
sense  of  that  word,  but  only  of  an  offering.  Like  the
first-fruits  so  also  ought  the  firstlings  to  be  set  apart  for
a  sacrificial  meal  in  which  of  course  the  priest  has  his
usual  share  (see  below,  §  16).

It  is  on  this  last  point  that  P  makes  a  characteristic
change  affecting  principle  ;  all  offerings  of  firstlings  are

4913


12.  In  D.


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

now,  for  the  first  time,  converted  into  simple  dues  pay-

13  In  P  a^e  t0  tlle  Pr'ests>  tlle  fixed  offerings  become
mere  taxes.  Even  Ezekiel  (44 30)  had  de
manded  for  the  priests  the  first  of  all  firstlings  of  every
thing  C?j  nisz-^r  nT;N-i).  But  the  Priestly  Code  claims
not  merely  a  portion  but  the  whole  of  the  firstlings  for
the  priests  ;  all  the  first-fruits  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil  are
handed  over  by  Yahwe  to  the  priests  (Nu.  18  i?Jf- ).  The
entire  tithe  belongs  to  the  Levites,  who,  in  turn,  have
to  make  over  their  tenth  part  of  this  to  the  priests  (Nu.
ISeo^i).  The  firstlings  of  clean  beasts  are  offered  in
kind  ;  after  their  blood  has  been  sprinkled  on  the  altar
and  the  fat  burnt,  the  flesh  falls  to  the  priests.  The
firstborn  of  unclean  beasts,  and  of  man,  must  be  re
deemed.  The  redemption  money  belongs  to  the  priest
(Nu.  1815  _^,  cp  Neh.  1037).  The  amount  of  the  re
demption  money  is  in  the  case  of  human  firstborn  fixed
at  five  shekels  (Nu.  18i6;  cp  Dillmann,  in  loc.}.  In
the  case  of  unclean  beasts  the  estimated  value  is  to  be
paid  with  addition  of  a  fifth  (Lev.  27z6/.  ;  certainly
secondary).

Apart  from  this  change  in  the  scope  of  the  law,  P
shows  a  quite  extraordinary  advance  in  the  amount  of
such  payments.  The  firstborn  is  given  to  the  priests  ;
but  the  Passover  remains  unaffected  by  this.  In  the
case  of  fruits  of  the  earth  the  payment  of  the  resilh  is
retained  as  well  as  that  of  the  tithes  already  enjoined  in  D
(see  above,  §  9  ;  Nu.  18  12  20^  ),  and,  besides  the  '  best '
of  the  winepress  and  the  threshing  floor,  there  is  de
manded  payment  of  the  first-fruits  (bikkurim,  DH133)  of
all  that  grows  in  the  field.  What  we  are  to  understand
by  this  expression  is  not  quite  certain.  The  most
probable  interpretation  still  is  that  which  takes  it  as
referring  to  the  fruits  that  have  come  earliest  to  maturity
(Nu.  1813,  EV  '  first-ripe' ;  cp  the  commentaries).  Over
and  above  all  this  we  find  in  Nu.  15  17  ff.  the  further  de
mand  that  the  first  of  the  nDHVi  'artsiUt  ('  dough'  [EV]?
'  coarse  meal '  [RV"'S-]  ?  '  kneading  trough  '  ?  see  FOOD,
§  i  a),  a  cake,  must  also  be  given.  In  accordance  with
this  the  post-exilic  community  drew  a  distinction  between
resith  and  bikkurim,  and  paid  on  both.  In  Neh.  1036-38
the  entire  community  comes  under  a  solemn  obligation
to  bring  the  bikkurim  of  all  fruits  of  the  tilled  land  and
of  all  trees  to  the  temple,  and  moreover  to  pay  to  the
priests  the  restth  of  the  wine  and  oil  and  tree  fruits,  and
also  of  the  'cirtsdh — all  this  to  be,  along  with  the  tithe,
the  portion  of  the  Levites  (cp  Neh.  1244  13s  2  Ch.
Sisiz).  Finally,  Lev.  1923  jCnjoins  that  the  fruit  of
newly-planted  trees  must  not  be  eaten  within  the  first
three  years,  and  that  in  the  fourth  year  the  entire  yield
must  be  given  to  Yahwe — that  is,  to  the  priests.

Nor  is  even  this  enough  ;  the  decision  preserved  in
Lev.  27s2/.  includes  cattle  also  in  the  tithe  ;  the  offerer
in  rendering  this  tithe  must  not  select  the  animals  :
each  tenth  head  at  the  counting  belongs  to  Yahwe.  If,
however,  it  should  so  chance  that  one  animal  has  been
changed  for  another,  both  shall  belong  to  the  sanctuary.
Even  in  Neh.  1037-39  (CP  1244-47  18512)  there  is  no
allusion  to  any  such  law.  It  must,  therefore,  have
come  into  existence  at  a  later  date.

In  real  life  such  a  tithing  of  cattle  is  impracticable.

But  the  legal  theorist  did  not  concern  himself  about  any

_ .  . .  such  consideration  as  that  ;  he  was  able,

.®. 1C therefore, to put the copestone on his

Cities. SyStem  by  that  extraordinary  enactment

which  assigns  to  the  tribe  of  Levi  forty-eight  cities,  each

having  a  territory  of  2000  cubits  square  (cp  LEVITES,

§  6). The  impossibility  of  carrying  out  such  a  theory  is

demonstrated  by  any  map  of  Palestine. But  nothing  can

better  reveal  the  spirit  underlying  such  legislation  than

the  fact  that  the  lawgiver  in  the  same  breath  in  which

he  assigns  these  forty-eight  cities  to  the  Levites  alleges,

as  a  reason  for  the  dues  he  is  imposing,  that  the  Levites

had  received  no  inheritance  in  land  like  the  other  tribes.

Another  point  deserves  notice  :  in  Ezekiel  the  people

4914


TAXATION  AND  TRIBUTE

already  pay  their  dues  as  a  tax  to  the  prince,  who,  hovv-
_,  ever,  has  laid  upon  him  in  return  the

'  'kP  ,  .  responsibility  for  the  expenses  of  the
imp>  public  worship  (Ezek.  45 13  f.}.  In  P
it  is  the  priests  who  receive  these  taxes  ;  but  they  keep
them  to  themselves  :  the  support  of  the  regular  cultus
is  not  their  concern.  On  the  contrary,  a  further  tax
has  to  be  levied  for  that  purpose  ;  a  poll  tax  of  half  a
shekel  has  to  be  exacted  (Ex.  30 11  ff.}.  With  the  spread
of  the  Persian  monetary  system  the  third  of  a  shekel
found  its  way  into  Palestine,  and  accordingly  in  Neh.
lOsz "[33]  we  find  the  temple  tax  fixed  at  that  amount.
The  coinage  of  the  Maccabees  reverted  to  the  older  type,
and  thus  in  the  time  of  Jesus  we  find  the  temple  tax
again  fixed  at  half  a  shekel  (Mt.  172427  ;  cp  Benzinger,

HA  193)-

As  to  the  manner  in  which  priestly  service  was  paid
in  the  early  period  we  know  very  little. At  first  the
,  priest  was  not  so  much  a  sacrificer  as  a


guardian  of  the  image  and  giver  of  oracles


16.  Priests'

whose  business  it  was  to  impart  Yahwe's
torah  or  oracle  to  those  who  consulted  him  (see  PRIESTS).
It  may  with  safety  be  assumed  that  the  priest  received
payment  for  communicating  the  oracle,  precisely  as  did
seers  such  as  Samuel,  Ahijah,  and  the  like  (i  S.  9j/.

1  K.  \4;2f.  ). When  a  sacrificer  came  to  the  sanctuary
and  arranged  a  sacrificial  meal,  he  naturally  invited  the
priest  to  it,  or  gave  him  some  portion  of  the  flesh  for
such  service  as  he  had  rendered. But  these  gifts  were
voluntary, and  regulated  not  by  law  but  by  custom.1
The  priests'  right  to  a  definite  share  is  not  recognised  ;
this  is  proved  by  the  story  of  the  sons  of  Eli  (  i  S.  2  13  ft.  ),
who  demand  a  tribute  of  flesh,  and  even  take  it  by  force
instead  of  accepting  what  is  voluntarily  given, but  in
doing  so  show  themselves  to  be  '  sons  of  Belial,"  heedless
of  law  and  priestly  duty,  thus  bringing  the  offering  of
Yah  we  into  contempt.

It  is  clear  that  at  the  greater  sanctuaries,  and  particu
larly  at  Jerusalem,  a  fixed  practice  gradually  established
itself  in  regard  to  this,  with  the  result  that  a  definite
share  of  the  offering  and  certain  other  perquisites  fell  to
the  lot  of  the  priests.  As  early  as  in  David's  time,  we
learn  that  the  shewbread  loaves  in  the  sanctuary  were  the
priests'  perquisite,  although  they  could  also  be  eaten  by
ceremonially  pure  laymen  (i  S.  21  3^).  With  regard
to  a  considerably  later  period  we  find  that  the  fines  paid
to  the  sanctuary  for  various  (presumably  ceremonial)
offences  also  fell  to  the  priests  (2  K.  12  16  [17]).  On  the
other  hand,  the  income  from  voluntary  gifts  and  votive
offerings  was  to  be  applied  to  the  maintenance  of  the
temple  ;  the  control  of  this  money  was  taken  from  the
priests  because  they  applied  the  whole  of  it  to  their  own
uses  (2  K.  124  [5]  ff.}.  This  was  by  royal  ordinance;
possibly  tradition  had  previously  sanctioned  such  an
application  of  the  revenues.  Finally,  we  gather  from

2  K.  23p  that  the  unleavened  bread,  or  meal  offering,
with  which  no  sacrificial  meal  was  associated,  fell  to  the
priests.

The  priestly  revenues  are  legally  regulated  for  the
first  time  in  D.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  practice

in  Jerusalem  lies  at  the  basis  of  its  provisions.

In  any  case  the  legislation  had  a  very  special
motive  for  thus  disposing  of  the  questions  involved.
For  by  the  centralisation  of  the  worship  the  priests  of
the  high  places  and  rural  altars  were  made  penniless.  To
remedy  this,  D  gives  the  Levites  the  right  to  discharge
priestly  functions  in  the  sanctuary  at  Jerusalem,  and  to
share  in  the  temple  revenues  (Dt.  186/.  ).  But  if  all
priests  were  thus  relegated  to  the  sanctuary  at  Jerusalem
it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  dues  for  offerings  there  required
to  be  strictly  regulated  and  perhaps  also  raised.  The
right  of  the  priests  as  towards  the  people  who  sacrificed
in  the  temple  now  became  definite  (Dt.  183)  ;  the  shoulder,

1  i  S.  228,  where  'all  the  offerings  of  the  children  of  Israel
made  by  fire  are  assigned  to  the  priests,  is  of  post-deuteronomic
origin  ;  cp  Dt.  18  1.

4QIS


17 T _.

'


TEACHER

the  two  cheeks,  and  the  maw  of  every  animal  sacrificed
belonged  to  the  priests.  That  such  a  provision  was
wholly  inadequate  in  view  of  the  increased  number  of
clergy  and  the  diminished  number  of  offerings  in  conse
quence  of  the  centralisation,  was  seen  by  the  Deutero-
nomist  himself.  The  rural  priests,  accordingly,  are
bidden  to  look  specially  to  the  sacrificial  meals  set  on
foot  by  the  offerers  ;  but  at  the  same  time  details  as  to
this  are  left  to  the  charitable  disposition  of  the  worshippers
(Dt.  12i2i8/).  For  the  tithe  of  the  third  year  (Dt.
14  28  f.  26  12  ft)  and  for  the  rcsith  assigned  in  a  subse
quent  decision  to  the  priests  (Dt.  184),  see  above,  §  gf.

These  dues  to  the  priests  increased  in  amount  also,
like  the  other  dues,  in  process  of  time.  In  Ezekiel
18  Later  (^2Zff-  )•  besides  the  minhah,  the  sin-offer
ing,  the  guilt  -offering,  and  'every  devoted
thing  '  are  handed  over  to  the  priesthood.  According
to  P  the  priests  receive,  in  addition  to  the  dues  men
tioned  above  (first-fruits,  etc.),  '  the  most  holy  things'  —
i.e.  ,  the  minhah,  the  sin-offering,  and  the  guilt-offering
in  so  far  as  these  are  not  burnt  ;  they  may  be  eaten  only
by  males  of  the  family  of  Aaron,  and  that  only  '  in  the
holy  place  '  ;  what  is  left  over  must  be  burnt  (Xu.  18  8/.
Lev.  10i2/;,  cp  Ex.  2932^).  So  also  with  the  shew
bread  (Lev.  24g).  Of  the  burnt-offering,  the  skin  of  the
animal  sacrificed  belongs  to  the  priest  (  Lev.  7  8  ;  this  may
perhaps  have  been  an  ancient  custom),  of  the  peace-
offerings  the  right  thigh  and  the  breast  (Lev.  7  34  Ex.
2927/1  ),  and,  besides,  one  cake  of  each  meal-offering,  of
whatever  kind,  offered  along  with  these  (Lev.  7  13).  With
the  breast  of  the  peace-offering  which  belongs  to  the
priest  is  performed  the  peculiar  ceremony  of  waving  ;
that  is  to  say,  the  priest  swings  it  upon  his  hands  towards
the  altar  and  back  again,  a  symbolical  representation  of
the  idea  that  this  portion  is  presented  to  Yahwe  as  a
gift,  but  by  him  delivered  over  to  his  servant  (Lev.  7
30-34  921  10i4  Nu.  620).  The  thigh  pertaining  to  the
priests  is  always  designated  as  '  the  heave  thigh  '  (  Lev.
734).  This  expression  presumably  does  not  refer  to
any  special  ceremony  analogous  to  that  of  waving,  but
is  intended  to  denote  that  the  part  in  question  is  '  lifted
up  '  from  the  offering  as  the  priests'  perquisite  (cp
SACRIFICE,  §§  14,  2ia,  29^).  The  last-named  portions
of  the  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings  may  be  con
sumed  by  the  male  and  female  members  of  the  priests'
families  alike,  and  in  any  clean  place  —  and  thus,  with
out  the  sanctuary  (Lev.  10  14  f.  Nu.  189).  The  slaves
also  of  the  priest  may  eat  of  it  ;  but  not  (for  example)
daughters  married  to  '  strangers'  —  i.e.  ,  to  men  who  are
not  priests.  And  if  a  'stranger'  —  say,  for  example,  a
hired  servant  of  the  priest  —  'unwittingly'  eat  of  it,  he
shall  pay  to  the  priest  the  value  of  the  holy  thing  with
an  added  fifth  (Lev.  22  ioft).

With  further  detail  as  regards  the  rights  of  priests  it
is  laid  down  that  the  guilt-offering  and  the  sin-offering,
as  well  as  the  skin  of  the  burnt-offering,  shall  belong  to
the  officiating  priest  (Lev.  67  f.  );  of  the  meal-offering
he  is  entitled  to  all  that  is  '  baked  in  the  oven  or  dressed
in  the  frying-pan  and  in  the  baking-pan  '  ;  the  rest  shall
belong  to  the  priesthood  as  a  whole  (Lev.  7  qf.  )  ',  of  peace-
offerings  the  wave  breast  seems  to  have  pertained  to  the
priesthood  in  general,  whilst  the  acting  priest  received
the  shoulder  and  the  cakes  (Lev.  7  31  ;  cp  7  33  14).

The  more  detailed  regulations  of  post-biblical  times  will  be
found  collected  in  a  series  of  tractates  in  the  Mishna  :  Terfniwth,
Maaserdth,  Ma'difrsAtnl,  Challa,  'Grid,  Bikkfiritii,  Skfkalim,
Bekoroth.  See,  further,  \Vellh.  Prol.W,  149  ff.  and  passim;
the  archaeological  text-books  of  De  Wette,  Ewald,  Keil,  Schegg,
Benzinser,  Nowack,  and  the  articles  '  Erstge  hurt'  and  '  Erstlings-
opfer'  in  PKK,  Winer,  Schenkel,  and  Riehm.  I.  B.

TEACHER.1  In  the  earliest  stage  of  the  Christian
Church  the  two  most  striking  figures  are  those  of  the
apostle  and  the  prophet.  In  several  important  passages
a  third  figure  is  found  in  their  company,  that  of  the
teacher


1  In  the  OT  Hab.  2  18,  etc.,  the  word  is  rnic  ;  for  later  terms
see  EDUCATION,  §§  15-17.

4916


TEBAH

Thus  in  i  Cor.  1228,  Paul  declares  that  'God  hath  set  in  the
Church  first  apostles,  secondly  prophets,  thirdly  teachers.  .  .'
In  his  enumeration  of  gifts  in  Rom.  126-8  we  have  the  order
'prophecy,'  'ministry'  (SiaKoviav),  'he  that  teacheth,'  'he  that
exhorteth,'  and  so  forth.  And  in  Eph.  4n,  'apostles,'  'pro
phets,'  'evangelists,'  'pastors  (Troi^fVa?)  and  teachers'  are
among  the  gifts  of  Christ  to  his  Church.  In  Acts  13  i  we  read
of  '  prophets  and  teachers '  as  belonging  to  the  church  in
Antioch.

These  notices  taken  together  suggest  a  class  of  men
endowed  with  a  spiritual  gift  for  the  instruction  of  the
Church,  and  taking  rank  next  after  the  apostles  and
the  prophets.  Their  function  probably  consisted  in  a
Christian  exposition  of  the  OT  scriptures  and  an
application  of  the  Gospel  to  the  needs  of  common  life,
and  stood  in  contrast  with  the  enthusiastic  utterances  of
the  prophets.  The  vagueness  of  the  term  '  teachers '
might  suggest  that  it  included  any  who  gave  instruction,
and  that  the  word  denoted  a  function  rather  than  a
permanent  office.  It  is  quite  likely  that  this  was  so  at
first.  The  use  of  the  word  as  a  title,  however,  is
assured  by  the  evidence  of  the  Didacht,  where,  although
teachers  are  far  less  prominent  than  prophets,  they  are
joined  with  them  as  a  cognate  class,  and  honour  is
claimed  for  '  the  bishops  and  deacons '  on  the  ground
that  '  they  too  minister  the  ministry  of  the  prophets
and  teachers.'

In  the  African  church  the  title  remains  to  the  beginning  of
the  third  century,  and  is  found  in  conjunction  with  that  of
'presbyter.'  Thus  we  have  in  the  Passion  of  St.  Perfctua
(ch.  13)  a  mention  of  '  Aspasius  the  presbyter-doctor '  (cp  Cypr.
<•/.  29).  About  the  same  time  Origen  as  a  layman  at  the  head
of  the  Christian  school  in  Alexandria  affords  the  most  illustrious
example  of  the  exercise  of  the  gift  of  teaching  apart  from  the
regular  orders  of  the  ministry.

Of  these  three  grades  of  what  was  pre-eminently  '  the
ministry  of  the  word,'  in  contradistinction  to  official
administration,  each  in  its  turn  ceased  to  exist  as  a
separate  order.  The  apostles  are  the  first  to  disappear.
The  Twelve  and  Paul  passed  away  by  death,  and
in  the  next  generation  the  title  was  already  becoming
sacred  to  them  ;  the  apostles  of  the  Didacht  are  a
survival,  destined  immediately  to  disappear.  The
prophets  on  the  contrary  are  still  in  full  power,  at  any
rate  in  certain  localities.  Yet  even  they  show  pre
monitory  symptoms  of  decay  ;  and  the  failure  of  the
Montanistic  movement  to  re-establish  them  as  a
permanent  order  in  the  Church  led  to  the  final  dis
appearance  of  prophecy  as  an  institution.  The  teachers
fulfilled  a  ministry  which  would  naturally  grow  in  im
portance  as  the  authoritative  voices  of  apostles  and
prophets  were  ceasing  to  be  heard,  and  as  the  inroad
of  heresy  increased  the  demand  for  the  grace  of  true
teaching.  That  they  too  ceased  to  be  a  distinct  class
in  the  Church  was  clue  to  the  fact  that  their  duties  wrere
taken  over  more  and  more  by  the  administrative  order,
which  gathered  round  its  chief  representatives  many  of
the  functions  and  much  of  the  prestige  of  apostles,
prophets  and  teachers  alike.  Cp  MINISTRY,  §  39.

j.  A.  R.

TEBAH  (rat? ;  TA.Be«  [AD],  -x  [L]),  a  son  of
NAHOR  by  Reumah  (a  corruption  of  Jerahmeel),  Gen.
2224.  The  names  in  the  Nahorite  genealogy  (vv.  20-24)
make  a  southern  (i.e.,  N.  Arabian)  connection  very
plausible.  Against  this  we  must  not  quote  'Aram,'
for  'Aram'  (i.e. ,  Jerahmeel)  is  primarily  a  N.  Arabian
name.  The  brethren  of  '  Tebah  '  are  Gaham  (rather,
Naham,  j  and  3  being  confounded),  Tahash  (i.e. ,
Hushah  =  Cushah  ?),  and  Maacah.  Nor  can  we  safely
urge  that  BETAH  in  2  S.  88  (which,  if  <S  may  be  trusted,
is  miswritten  for  Tebah)  or  Tibhath  in  i  Ch.  188  (for
which  Pesh.  has  ma)  was  a  city  of  Hadad-ezer,  king
of  Zobah  ;  for  it  is  maintained  elsewhere  (ZOBAH)
that  the  wars  of  David  referred  to  were  in  the  S. ,
not  in  the  X. ,  and  that  for  '  Hadad  -  ezer,  ben
Rehob,  king  of  Zobah,'  the  original  narrative  had
'Hadad,  ben  Rehob[oth],  king  of  Missur.'  We  can
now  for  the  first  time,  as  it  seems,  give  an  altogether
satisfactory  explanation  of  2  S.  88  and  the  ||  i  Ch.  188,

157  4917


TEHINNAH

as  well  as  of  i  K.  1  \^f.  (with  \\  in  Ch.  ).  Betah
turns  out  to  be  nearer  the  truth  than  Tebah.  The
Sam.  passage  should  run  thus,  '  And  from  Rehoboth,
the  city  of  Hadad,  king  David  took  brass  in  great
abundance,'  while  in  the  latter  the  name  of  the  city
should  be  '  Rehoboth-jerahmeel.'  l  It  would  seem  that
there  was  more  than  one  Jerahmeelite  city  called
'Jerahmeel,'  at  least  if  we  are  right  in  supposing  that
the  city,  whose  capture  by  David  is  described  in  2  S.
1226^:,  was  not  'Rabbath'  but  'Rehoboth  (of  the
Jerahmeelites).  '

Had  the  redactor  who  is  responsible  for  the  present
form  of  the  narrative  in  2  S.  %T,ff~.  a  conception  such  as
is  geographically  possible  of  the  geography  of  David's
'  Aramaean  '  campaign  ?  In  order  to  answer  in  the
affirmative  we  should  have  to  emend  '  from  Betah  and
from  Berothai'  ('ninaci  fieao)  into  'from  Tebah  and
from  Tabbur'  (-11392?  nnac).  Tebah  might  be  the
Tubihi  of  the  Am.  Tablets  (127,  5,  14,  etc.),  the
Dibhu  of  the  List  of  Thotmes  III.  (A'PM,  543  ;  Sayce,
Acad.,  Feb.  21,  1891;  WMM  As.  -it.  Kur.  178396).
In  the  'Travels  of  an  Egyptian'  (RPM,  109  m  ;
Brugsch,  Gesch.  ^E^.  340)  Kadesh  on  the  Orontes,
Tubihi,  Tihis  (see  THAHASH),  and  Dapuru  appear  as
neighbouring  places.

We  now  turn  to  i  K.  7  45^-47,  the  difficulties  of  which  neither
Renzinger  nor  Kittel  appear  to  have  altogether  removed  ;  the
help  which  the  former  scholar  derives  from  ©L  is  illusory.  It
should  be  noticed  that  the  current  rendering,  'of  burnished
brass,'  for  cica  rtJ'rl3>  Puts  an  undue  strain  on  the  root-meaning
°f  anD-  ^e  cannot  pause  to  investigate  Is.  18  2  7  Ezek.  21  14-16
(9-1  ij,  but  may  suggest  that  even  the  RV  must  not  be  followed
blindly.  The  key  to  i  K.  I.e.  (and  the  ||  2  Ch.  4  ie/.)  is
furnished  by  i  Ch.  188/>,  which  shows  that  the  original  narrative
of  Hiram  the  artificer  stated  that  the  brass  came  from  a  city  of
Hadad,  king  of  Missur.  In  short,  the  OTOO  of  K.  and  the  pnc

of  Ch.  come  respectively  from  i"C~IO  and  ni3rn£,  and  the
second  of  these  readings  is  the  better.  "1333  and  pTn  which
follow  are  corrupt  forms  of  a  dittographed  ^NDITT  (see  JORDAN,
§  2  [2]).

The  result  is  that  i  K.  746  2  Ch.  4  17  should  run  thus,
'  Of  brass  from  Rehoboth-jerahmeel  did  Jerahmeel
[i.e.,  'Hiram';  see  HAMMELECH]  cast  them,  in
Maacath-aram,  between  Maacath  and  Zarephath  '  (cp
SCCCOTH,  ZARETHAN).  An  imaginary  place  'Tebah'
has  in  fact  usurped  a  part  of  the  honour  which  rightly
belongs  to  REHOBOTH  [q.  v.  ].  Cp  the  commentaries.

T.  K.  c.


TEBALIAH  (-liTnp,  perhaps  for  Tobliyyahu,
'  Yahwe  is  gracious  to  me,'  §  38  ;  T&BA.M  [B],  TABeAiAC
[A],  T&BehA  [L]).  a  Merarite  doorkeeper  (i  Ch.  26  n).
But  (in  spite  of  (5)  the  name  should  possibly  be  read
?n"3ia  (perhaps  from  irrna  misread  irr'yaa)  ;  cp

TOBIJAH, I,  also  TAHEF.L.2  S.  A.  C.

TEBETH  (rat?),  Esth.  2  16. See  MONTH,  §  2.

TEHAPHNEHES  (DTOEpnn),  Ezek.  30  18.  See
TAHPANHES.

TEKINNAH  (nsnjjl,  as  if  'supplication,'  §  74;  cp
OS  1666  G&NA  X<*Pic).  father  of  IR-NAHASH,  i  Ch.

4i2f  (9<MM<\N  [B], 0&N&  [A], 0eeNN&  [!>])•

If  RECAH  (q.v.)  is  rightly  corrected  to  Recab,  Tehinnah
should  almost  certainly  be  n3'p,  KIXAH;S  (Josh.  15  22),  i.e.,
a.  settlement  of  the  Kenites.  See  IR-NAHASH.


1  In  2  S.  I.e.  rm3  and  >rn3  are  both  fragmentary  representa
tions  of  ni3m  (Rehoboth),  and  in  i  Ch.  I.e.  J13C1  fin3B  represents
'jNCnT  ni3m  (Rehoboth-jerahmeel).  For  the  latter  emendation,
cp  probably  pap  miswritten  in  Judg.  10  5  for  7KDITV'  Note,
however,  that  (pBNAL's  fK\fKT(av  implies  niim,  which  is  virtually
ni3m>  a  correction  of  n3D ',  J1301  's  not  represented.  Cp
MEROM.

-  According  to  Cheyne,  the  name  is  probably  either  from
'SaiP,  'a  man  of  TUBAL'  (g.v.),  or,  if  1,T  is  correct,  from  73D
7NCnT,  Tubal-jerah[meel]  (cp  |>p  731:1,  '  Tubal-kain ').  Cp
ZEDEKIAH,  §  i.

3  When  p  had  become  n,  it  was  natural  for  a  pious  scribe  to
prefix  j-|,  and  so  get  the  meaning  'supplication.'
4918


TEIL  TREE

Pesh.  has,  '  he  begat  Ja'azer,'  for  which  reading  there  is  no
obvious  reason.  T.  K.  C.

TEIL  TREE  (H^iSt), Is.  613  AV, RV  TEREBINTH
(q.v.).

TEKOA  or  TEKOAH  (flipFI,  HinpJV  hardly  =
'settlement,'  from  \/l?pn,  to  strike  [tent-pegs  into  the
ground];  6eKO)e2).  gentilic  Tekoite  ([DPlflpJfl,
9eKoo(e)iTHC3).  'woman  of  Tekoa'  (JVUIpn,  6eKCO-
6ITIC  [1*A]  -KOyi-  [L])'  a  city  S.  of  Bethlehem,  on  the
borders  of  the  wilderness  to  which  it  gave  name  ("DTD
1/lpF),  2  Ch.  2020,  THN  epHMON  9-.  i  Mace.  933)-
Assuming  that  the  same  place  is  always  meant,  we  find
it  mentioned  as  the  residence  of  a  '  wise  woman '  who
interceded  for  Absalom  ;  as  one  of  the  towns  fortified
by  kehoboam  ;  and  as  the  birthplace  of  the  prophet
Amos  (28.  142  i  Ch.  2 24  2  Ch.  20 20  Jer.  61  Am.  li).
It  is  also  mentioned  in  Josh.  15 59  ©BAL  (06/cu>)  where  it
heads  the  list  of  eleven  towns  wanting  in  MT  (Tekoa,
Ephrathah  which  is  Bethlehem,  Peor  [see  under  ETAM,
i],  Etam,  Kulon  [q.v.~\,  Tatam,  Sores  [see  SEIR,  2],
Karem  \_q.v.  |,  Galem  [^.v.],  Bether  [^.z'.]and  Manocho
[see  MANAHATH,  3]).  It  comes  also  into  an  obscure
genealogy  in  i  Ch.  4  5-8  where  Tekoa  (cp  i  Ch.  224)
figures  as  son  of  ASSHUR  and  (if  for  Coz  we  ought  to
read  Tekoa)  as  father  of  Anub  and  Zobebah  and  the
families  of  Aharhel4  (d5f\(J>ou  PT/xa/3)  son  of  Harum
(i.e. ,  Jearim  ;  see  (5HA).  Still  assuming  that  there  is
only  one  Tekoa,  we  may  identify  it  with  the  modern
Tekti'a,  which  lies  six  miles  S.  of  Bethlehem,  on  an
elevated  hill,  not  steep,  but  broad  at  the  top,  and
covered  with  ruins  to  the  extent  of  four  or  five  acres.
These  consist  chiefly  of  the  foundations  of  houses  built
of  squared  stones,  some  of  which  are  bevelled.  The
middle  of  the  space  is  occupied  by  the  ruins  of  a  Greek
church.  The  site  commands  extensive  prospects  (cp
AMOS,  §  3),  and  towards  the  E.  is  bounded  only  by
the  level  mountains  of  Moab.  Before  and  during  the
Crusades  Tekoa  was  well  inhabited  by  Christians  ;  but
in  1138  A.D.  it  was  sacked  by  a  party  of  Turks  from
beyond  the  Jordan,  and  nothing  further  is  known  of  it
till  the  seventeenth  century,  when  it  lay  desolate,  as  it
has  ever  since  done.

It  is,  however,  by  no  means  certain  that  all  the  references  to
'  Tekoa '  mean  the  same  place.  In  Jer.  6  i,  for  instance,  a  more
southerly  place  is  meant  (see  TEL-HARSHA).  It  is  contended
elsewhere  (see  PROPHET,  §§  26,  40;  ZAFHON)  that  it  is  a  Jerah-
meelite  invasion  that  is  most  probably  apprehended  ;  the  places
mentioned  should  be  sought  in  the  Negeb.  Amos  too  was  hardly
a  native  of  the  Tekoa,  S.  of  Bethlehem  (see  PROPHET,  §§  10,  35).
And  in  i  Ch.  ±4f.,  just  as  '  Beth-lehem  '  is  not  the  place  in
Judah  so  called  but  Beth-jerahmeel  in  the  Negeb,  so  Tekoa1
is  more  southerly  than  the  best  known  place  of  that  name.

,  T.  K.  C.

TEL-ABIB  (T3X  7F)3;  Merecopoc,  see  below;
[ti(f]  acen'iim  novarum  frugum],  the  seat  of  a  colony  of
Jewish  exiles  (Ezek.  3  ist).  To  a  Hebrew  ear  the
name  meant  'Mound  (hill)  of  ears  of  corn'  (cp  ABIB).
As,  however,  Friedrich  Delitzsch  has  pointed  out,6  if  it

1  The  ending  is  hardly  locative  ;  nyipn  in  2  S.  14  2  is  probably
a corruption of  roj,'0  JV3 '  Beth-maacah ' (=  Beth-jerahmeel,
see  SAUL,  p  4),  a  '  wise  woman '  of  which  place  is  mentioned  in
connection  with  Joab  in  2  S.  '20  \^/, Very  possibly  too,  we  may
explain yipn itself  as  a  primitive popular  corruption  of  n'3

2  The  variants  are  :  2  S.  142  Seicowe  [L],  i  Ch.  224  fleicwv  [A],
4  5  deKiap.'  [A],  Jer.  C  i  Am.  1  i  flexoue.

3  The  variants  are  :  2  S.  23  26  flexci  [L],  i  Ch.  11  28  60«c<o  [BK],
o flex&n  [A], 27  9, 0e/ca)i>eiTr,s [B], Neh 8527 0eicco«i/ui  [xAL],
-eu'  f  B  and  x  in  7'.  27],  BeKialrai  [L  ?'.  27],

"*  Surely  'irnnN  's  one  of  the  numerous  distortions  of  7KDHT'
Grimeisen's  pointing  ?rn~K  (Ahnencnltus,  257),  leads  to  no
satisfactory  explanation.  Cp  (S1-,  TTJS  TOV  apatrjA  a&e\t}>ov  pr;xa0.

6  'Tel'  (Ass.  til[l]u),  in  ancient,  as  in  modern  times,  formed
the  first  part  of  the  name  of  many  Babylonian  places  situated  near
a  mound  of  ruins  of  a  previous  settlement  (cp  7B,  Dt.  13  17  [16]
Josh.  823).  Cp  TEL-HARSHA,  TEL-MELAH,  and  TELASSAR
(Tel-Asshur).

6  Calwer  Bib.-Lexikon$\  901  a,

4919


TELASSAR

is  a  Babylonian  place-name,  the  right  form  ought  to  be
Tel-abub  (  7\l-abubi).  Abubu  ( '  flood-storm '  or  '  storm-
flood  '  ?)  is  the  proper  Assyrian  word  for  the  Deluge
(see  DELUGE,  §  13,  n.  i);  Til-abubi,  as  a  Babylonian
name,  might  mean  either  a  mound  of  ruins  so  ancient
(cp  D^iy  main)  that  it  was  called  a  Deluge-mound,  or
one  that  had  been  produced  by  the  rushing  in  (possible
at  any  time)  of  a  cyclone  from  the  Persian  Gulf.  There
is  a  common  phrase  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  '  I
made  (or,  destroyed)  the  city  like  a  til-abubi.' 1

If,  however,  the  view  advocated  in  PROPHET,  §  27,  is  correct,
and  Ezekiel  together  with  Jehoiachin  and  his  fellow-exiles
resided  in  N.  Arabia,  we  must  look  out  for  another  explanation.
And  it  so  happens  that  this  view  (the  'Jerahmeelite  theory1)
supplies  the  only  key  to  the  manifold  corruptions  of  the  single
passage  in  which  Tel-abib  occurs  (see  Crit.  liib.).  The  text  of
Ezek.  'A  i\f.  which  results  from  the  application  of  this  key  runs
thus  :  - —

(14)  'And  (the)  spirit  lifted  me  up  and  took  me  to  Maacath  of
Jerahmeel,  and  the  hand  of  Yahwe  upon  me  was  strong.  (15)
And  I  came  to  the  company  of  exiles,  to  Tel-arab  [Ishmael,  by
the  river  of  Jerahmeel],  and  to  Tel-asshur  [Jerahmeel,  Ishmael],
and  there  for  sesren  days  I  dwelt  among  them  astonished.1
The  text  which  underlies  ©  is  only  slightly  different ;  /ucrctopo;


ica  irtpiT)Aeoi>=31DNl  =  TIB'Nll.  Probably  we
may  restore  it  thus  in  z>.  15  :

'  And  I  came  to  the  company  of  exiles,  to  Tel-jerahmeel  and
Tel-asshur  [Isbmael,  by  the  river  of  Jerahmeel,  Ishmael].'

Thus,  combining  MT  and  ©,  we  are  led  to  suspect  that
Tel-arab  and  Tel-jerahmeel  were  two  names  for  the  same  place.
We  know  of  a  'valley  (N'J)  of  Jerahmeel1  (see  SALT,  VALLEY
OK)  and  also,  probably,  of  a  '  wiidy '  (Vm)  of  '  Arab.1 3  We  also
find  a  Tel-melah  or  Tel-jerahmeel  in  Ezra -Neh.  (see  TEL-
MELAH),  and,  as  a  probable  equivalent  of  Tel-asshur,  Tel-harsha
or  Tel-ashhur  (see  TEL-HARSHA).  Very  possibly,  however,  a
further  result  awaits  us.  ^n,  wherever  it  occurs  in  compound
names,  is  simply  a  short  way  of  writing  ^airij  TUBAL(?.Z'.).  See
Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  C.

TELAH  (rfcj-l,  GAAeec  [B],  e&Ae  [A],  e^Ad.  [L]),


mentioned  in  the  list  of  the  b'ne  Ephraim  (i  Ch.  725).

There  are,  however,  several  corrupt  repetitions  in  this  section
(i  Ch.  Izoff.),  and  it  is  probable  that  nSn  is  a  corruption  of
n^rw ;  cp  Wellhausen,  Prol.W  214.  See  EPHRAI.M,  §  12,
SHUTHELAH.

TELAIM  (D^U),  i  S.  15  4-  and  Telam  (Heb.
D7li?O),  i  S.  278  RVms-.  See  TELEM.

TELASSAR  (ibfXDn ;  e&eceeN  [B],  9AA<\cc*.p

[AL]  in  Ki.,  ev  X<Vr>  0«/na  [«*  (sup  ras  e  2°  fort  o)],  -9  [B],
Se^av  [tf<:];  daifj-aS  I  A],  flat  [jxa]0  [Ovid],  Otu/jLav  [Q]  ;  thelassar).

Telassar  is  named  in  2  K.  19i2  (Is.  37i2)  as  the  loca
tion  of  the  'children  of  Eden.'  The  places  Gozan,
Haran,  and  Rezeph  named  before  Telassar  follow  an
order  from  E.  to  W.  This  suggests  that  '  the  children
of  Eden  '  once  dwelt  nearer  to  Palestine  ( Judah  ?)  than
Rezeph,  which  was  W.  of  the  Euphrates.  The  conquest
of  these  cities  is  ascribed  to  the  kings,  '  my  fathers,'
who  had  preceded  Sennacherib.

The  identification  of  '  the  children  of  Eden '  with  the
Bit  Adini  of  the  Assyrian  Inscriptions  already  made
by  Schrader  (KATW,  327)  has  more  or  less  difficulty
(cp  BETH-EDEN)  according  to  the  situation  in  which
this  widely  scattered  Aramaic  folk  are  supposed  to  be
located.  The  Bit  Adini  of  the  earlier  times  formed  a
powerful  race  inhabiting  the  district  S.  of  Edessa,
over  Haran  between  the  Balikh  (on  the  E.  of  which  lay
Gozan)  and  the  Euphrates.  But  it  also  included  a  wide
strip  on  the  W.  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  in  which  lay
many  large  cities.  This  country  made  strong  resist
ance  to  Asur-nasir-pal  (KB  164,  102,  104,  116),  but
was  finally  conquered  by  Shalmaneser  II.  (858  B.C.).
Shalmaneser  changed  many  of  the  city  names,  among
others  giving  to  Nappigi  (Mabbug,  Bambyke)  the  name
of  Lita-Asur  (A7?li32  156  162).  There  was  also

1  Del.  Ass.  HWB,  s.v.  'abubu ' ;  Schr.  KA  7f2)  234 (29),  2(52 (i).

2  It  will  be  understood  that  the  words  in  [  ]  are  presumed  to  be
glosses. Arabia,  Ishmael,  Jerahmeel,  and  Asshur  were  in  fact,
as,  in  the  present  writer's  view,  the  phenomena  of  the  Psalms
abundantly  show,  practically  synonymous  to  the  later  writers.

3  In Am.  614  non  is  probably  a  corruption  of  Maacath  (a
Jerahmeelite  name)  and  n:n£n  7[U of 3^  ')  «  G'riJ?  3 (so
read)  in  Is.  15  7. See  Crit.  Dib.

4920


TBLEM


TEL-MELAH


a  branch  of  the  Aramaic  Bit  Dakkuri  who  lay  E.  of  the
Tigris  in  Babylonia.  A  third  settlement  of  the  Bit
Adini  is  associated  by  Tiglath-pileser  III.  with  Hauran,
'Azaz,  and  Aribua,  in  Syria,  which  may  possibly  be  the
'house  of  Eden'  referred  to  in  Amos  1  5  (Winckler,
AOF  1104).  Whether  the  children  of  Eden  had  their
home  in  Telassar  and  were  now  deported  elsewhere,  or
whether  they  had  been  deported  to  Telassar  will  depend
on  the  identifications  adopted.

It  is  tempting  to  recognise  in  Telassar  the  Til-Assuri
of  Tiglath-pileser  III.  (Tiele,  BAH  231);  and  of  Esar-
haddon  (A7?2  128144).  But  these  passages  show  that
there  were  two  different  places  of  that  name.  The
first  was  certainly  in  Babylonia  ;  but  there  is  no  indica
tion  that  the  Bit  Adini  were  settled  there.  The  second
was  inhabited  by  an  Aramaic  people,  the  Bit  Parnaki,
and  Esarhaddon  says  that  the  place  had  native  names
Mihranu  and  Pitanu.  Mihranu  suggests  Tell  MachrS,
which  would  place  it  NE.  of  the  Tigris  (?).  But  unless
the  Bit  Parnaki  were  a  branch  of  the  Bit  Adini,  there  is
nothing  to  connect  this  Til-Assuri  with  '  the  children  of
Eden.  '

On  the  one  hand,  Til  Assuri  may  have  been  one  of
the  names  conferred  by  Shalmaneser  on  one  of  the
conquered  cities  of  Bit  Adini,  or  Tel-Assar  may  be  a  cor
ruption  of  Lita-Asur,  or  of  Til-basere  a  city  in  Shal-
maneser's  Bit  Adini  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  name
Telassar  may  be  derived  from  a  totally  different  name,
not  yet  recognised.

[The  closing  sentence  of  the  preceding  article  opens  the  door
for  a  renewed  examination  of  the  question  from  the  point  of
view  of  SENNACHERIB,  §  5.  '  Rezeph"  and  'the  b'ne  Eden  in
Telassar  'are  easily  explicable  if  it  is  a  king  of  the  N.  Arabian
Ashhur  whose  victories  are  referred  to  in  2  Ki.l9i2  (Is.  37  12).
'  Eden  '  was  a  district  of  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (see  PARADISE,
§  7),  and  Tel-ashhur  is  a  very  probable  name,  if  we  should  not
rather  read  Tubal-ashhur.  See  TELHARSHA.  —  T.  K.C.]

C.  H.  \V.  J.


TELEM  (0?^).  a  c'ly  'n  l^e  NeSeb.  mentioned  be
tween  ZIPH  and  BEALOTH  (Josh.  1024  ;  jeAeM  [AL],
MAI  NAM  [B?]).  This  may  be  the  TELAIM  (n\xjra),  or
perhaps  rather  cx'rn  (Telam),  where  Saul  mustered  his
warriors  before  fightingwiththeAmalekites.  I  S.  lo4(MT
assumes  the  article,  'aa  ;  cp  Yg.  quasi  agnos}.  Appar
ently  there  was  an  ancient  clan  called  Telem,  with
which  name  the  real  or  assumed  personal  names
TELEM  (^p),  TALMON  (paSa),  and  even  TALMAI
(•sSn)  should  undoubtedly  be  grouped,  and  the  import
ance  of  which  may  be  estimated  from  the  fact  that
'  Talmai  '  stands  beside  '  Sheshai  '  and  '  Ahiman  '
(corruptions  probably  of  '  Cushi  '  and  'Jerahmeel')  as
representing  the  primitive  population  of  Kirjath-arba
(rather  K.-'arab),  otherwise  called  Hebron  (rather
Rehoboth).  Observe  too  that  '  Talmon  '  occurs  in
i  Ch.  9  17  beside  'Ahiman'  (Jerahmeel)  as  the  name  of
a  family  of  so'arfm  (  EV  '  porters  '  ),  or  rather  'aSfurtm  l
(Asshurites),  and  that  niVi'3  (Bealoth),  beside  which  nVa
(Telem)  occurs  in  Josh.  1024,  is  probably  miswritten  for
the  ancient  clan-name  Tubal  (see  TUBAL-CAIN).

The  place  called  Telam  must  have  been  situated  not
very  far  from  the  'jm  or  wady  which  separated  the
Judahite  from  the  Amalekite  territory.  For  the  first
movement  of  Saul  was  towards  the  cities  (?'.  5  :  ©Iil-
£'ws  T&V  TroXeco!')  of  Amalek  on  the  other  side  (read
•QjTi)  of  the  wady  (v.  5).  Possibly  there  was  near  it  a
place  called  Gilgal  (a  popular  corruption  of  Jerahmeel),  for
<5'!AL  in  i  S.  1»4  gives  'in  Gilgal'  (fv  TaVyctAots)  instead
of  '  in  Telam.  '  '2  We  can  hardly  venture  to  go  further,
and  suppose  that  Telam  was  regarded  as  itself  the
boundary  between  Judahite  and  Amalekite  land.  This
supposition  has  indeed  actually  been  made,  and  the
text  of  i  S.  15;  (MT  ,-rriro)  and  278  (MT  c^iyo)  been


1  See  Amcr.  Jour,  of  TheoL,  July  1901,  p.  439.

2  It  is  also  possible,  however,  that  TaAaAots  is  a  very  early
alteration  of  Te^e/m,  the  better  known  place  being  substituted  for
the  more  obscure.


4921


emended  accordingly.1  This,  however,  implies  inade
quate  criticism  of  the  proper  name  n^'in  (Havilah),  and
the  same  objection  may  be  made  to  Winckler,  when  he
emends  nViriD  in  15?  into  D^iyc.  in  accordance  with

27s.2

A  place  called  'Olam  is  highly  problematical,  and  a  better
way  out  of  the  critical  difficulty  ought  to  be  found.  As  is
pointed  out  else  where  (see  SHUR),  nV'iri)  like  nV^n  in  i  S.23  19,8
is  miswritten  for  'Jerahmeel.'

In  i  S.  -'78  -yeAa/x  in  yeAa^i//(o-)ovp  of  BA  has  been  thought  to
represent  Telam,  which  indeed  a  number  of  cursives  attest.  But
T  may  be  a  corruption  of  ["•  Klostermann  ingeniously  extracts
"Kysn  *7n:>  ' tne  wady  of  BESOR  '  (tj.v.).  Cp  Exp.  T  10239  ['899].

T.  K.  C.

TELEM  (D^D;  reAHM  [B],  reAAHM  [KAL]), a

door-keeper,  Ezra  1024.  In  i  Esd.  9  25  TOLUANES  (roAj3ai'>]s
[BA]).  See  TELEM,  i  ;  and  cp  TALMON.

TEL-HARSHA, RV  for  Tel-haresha [Xeh.] and

Tel-harsa [Ezra] (NCnn  Sn ; Ezra 0aapij<7a [B], 0eAap. [A],

SeAaaprjo-o-a  [L]  ;  Nell.  apTJcra.  [BN],  fleAaptra  [A],  0eAAapj;s  [L]  ;
i  Esd.,  THELERSAS  [EV],  SeAepo-as  [B],  SeAo-a?  [A],  0aAaa  [(cat
p»)cra]  [L]).

A  place  from  which,  according  to  the  great  post-
exilic  list,  came  certain  families  of  doubtful  origin
( Ezra 2 59  =  Neh.  76i  =  i  Esd.  536f).  The  name  in
Hebrew  might  mean  '  mound  of  the  forest '  ;  but  hursu
(or  hursu)  in  Assyrian  means  '  mountain  -  range,1
whence  Friedrich  Delitzsch 4  proposes  to  explain  as  if
til  hursi,  '  hill  in  the  mountains.'

If,  however,  we  adopt  the  theory  (cp  PROPHET,  §  27)  that  the
Israelites  who  returned  from  exile  came  chiefly  from  the
Jerahmeelite  region  in  N.  Arabia  (including  the  Negeb)  we
shall  have  to  seek  for  some  other  explanation.  In  this  case,
Nw'in  W'H  almost  certainly  be  miswritten  foriflB'X — i.e.,  Ashhur.
In  i  Ch.  2  24  Ashhur  is  called  the  father  of  Tekoa,  where
'  Tekoa  '  is  probably  not  the  modern  Teku'a,  2  hrs.  S.  of  Ben
jamin,  but  some  place  farther  south  ;  cp  Jer.  61,  where  '  Tekoa  '
is  mentioned  with  '  Belh-haccerem,'  or  rather  '  Beth-jerahmeel,'
and  both  places  are  near  the  land  of  Zaphon  (pss),  which

apparently  included  Kadesh  and  the  sacred  mountain  of  Yahwe
(see  ZAPHON).  On  the  possible  identity  of  Tel-ashhur  with  the
so  called  Telassar,  see  TEL-MELAH.  T.  K.  C.

TEL-MELAH  (Pita  ^Fl  ;  GepMeAeG  [B],  GeA-
MeAex  [L].  MexeA  [A]),  a  place  from  which,  according
to  the  great  post-exilic  list,  came  certain  families  which
could  not  prove  their  Israelitish  origin,  Ezra  2 59  =  Neh.
76!  (GepMeAeG  [N],  9eAM.  [B],  GeAMeAex  [AL])  =  i
Esd.  536  (THERMELETH  [EV]  ;  GepMeAeG  [A],  GeA-
MeAep  [L])-  The  name  is  generally  supposed  to  be
Babylonian,  and  since,  in  this  case,  the  explanation  '  hill
of  salt '  is  impossible,  Friedrich  Delitzsch  (Calwer  Bib.-
Lex.W  901)  would  give  the  name  as  Tll-maUihi,
'sailors'  hill,'  on  the  analogy  of  TEL-ABIB  (q.v.}.

If,  however,  we  follow  the  analogy  of  the  names  rt^D  K'J  or
nSe.T  N'J,  and  nScn  TJ?  (see  SALT,  VALLEY  OF,  and  SALT,
CITY  OF),  Tel-melah  will  mean  '  hill  of  Jerahmeel,'  and  will
become  part  of  the  evidence  for  the  theory  (cp  PROPHET,  §  27)
that  the  Israelitish  exiles  who  returned  came  mainly  from
the  region  called  Jerahmeelite  in  N.  Arabia  (including  the
Negeb).  The  names  with  which  Tel-melah  is  grouped  are  Tel-
harsha  and  Cherub-addan-immer  or  '  Cherub,  Addan  (Ezra)  or
Addon  (Neh.),  and  Immer  '  paxi,  Neh.).  Two  of  these— viz.,
Cheruband  Immer — at  once  become  intelligible,  if  we  may  venture
to  set  aside  the  prejudice  of  a  Babylonian  connection  ;  both  are  of
the  same  type  as  numerous  corruptions  of  '  Jerahmeel.'  Addan
or  Addon,  too,  is  very  possibly  N.  Arabian,  and  in  spite  of  the
initial  N  in  Ezra-Neh.,  may  be  another  form  of  py — i.e.,  the  N.
Arabian  '  Eden,'  which  is  very  possibly  referred  to  (i)  in  the
story  of  Paradise  (see  PARADISE,  §  7),  and  (2)  in  the  qtherwise
enigmatical  phrases  '  Beth-eden  '  (Amosl  5)  and  '  the  b'ne  Eden
who  were  in  Telassar'  (2  K.  19i2  =  Is.  37  12).  Probably  we
should  read,  for  'Cherub-addan-immer,'  'Eden  of  Jerahmeel '
('jMSrlT  pyX  'cherub'  and  '  immer '  being  variants  for  the
fuller  and  truer  form  Jerahmeel.  TEL-HARSHA  (y.v.)  probably

1  H.  P.  Smith  accepts  D^'a  in  27  8,  but  not  in  15  7  ;  Driver
holds  himself  in  suspense.  We.,  Bu.,  and  Ki.  read  D^>ac,  or
O^BO,  in  both  places.  Lohr  resists  the  temptation  to  change  ;
Klost.  retains  MT  in  107,  but  strikes  out  a  new  path  in  278.

a  Musri,  2  (MVG,  1898,  4),  6.

3  Glaser  needlessly  emends  n/'lrt  in  J  S.  into  fl7'3H«

4  Heb.  Lang.  i6/!  ;  Calwer  Bib.'Lex.W  901  ('  Waldhiigel'
can  hardly  be  right ;  cp  Ass.  HIVB  293  b).

4922


TEMA

=  Tel-ashhur,  and  notice  again  the  significant  phrase  'the  b'ne
Eden  who  were  in  Telassar,'  where  Telassar,  the  meaning  of
which  is  otherwise  scarcely  a  soluble  problem,  is  probably  a
corruption  of  Tel- or  Tubal-ashhur.  See  TELASSAR  (end).

T. K.  C.

TEMA  (NE'E,  and  once  NDF1  [Job  619]  ;  6&IMAN
[BKAQFL]),  son  of  Ishmael  [Gen.  25 15  0H-  [L>E]  ;  i
Ch.  1  30).  The  name  appears  as  early  as  Jeremiah  ('2623  ;
6e.  [Xc-a]  0u/j.fav  [N*]),  also  in  a  prophetic  fragment  on
Arabia  ('land  of  Tema,'  Is.  21 14).  In  both  these  passages
it  is  associated  with  DKDAN  (y.v.  ).1  In  Job  619  the
'  caravans  of  Tema '  (6aifj.a.vti}v)  are  parallel  to  the
'  companies  of  Sheba. '  For  its  geographical  position
see  ISHMAEL,  §  4  [6].  In  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  of
Tiglath-pileser  III.  its  people  are  spoken  of  as  (alu)
Te-mai  —  i.e.,  belonging  to  the  city  Tema'u  (cp
Schrader,  A'GFz6i_f.  ;  Del.  Par.  301^).  Its  modern
name  is  Taima.  The  explorations  of  Euting  have
brought  to  light  some  important  Aramaic  inscriptions,
dating  from  before  the  Persian  period,  which  testify  to
the  existence  of  a  highly  developed  culture  among  the
ancient  Arabs  of  Tema  (see  ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE,  §  2).

Special  mention  is  made  in  one  of  them  of  the  KC'rl  'n^K,  '  the
gods  of  Tema,'  one  of  the  most  important  of  whom  bore  the
name  cVs  (CIS,  2113  114),  cp  yy  oSs  the  name  of  one  of  his
priests  ('  D^S  saves,'  a  name  perhaps  ||  to  the  biblical  TiOJ'S'D) ;
see  Baeth.  Beitr.  80 f.,  and  cp  ZALMUNNA.

TEMAH  (Plpri),  the  family  name  of  a  company  of
(post-exilic)  Nethinim  :  Ezra  2  53  (fle^.a[a]  [BAL],  AV  THAMAH)
=  Neh.  7  55  (rtfj-ad  ( BN],  %ia  [ A],  0f,xaa  [L],  AV  TAMAH)=  i  Esd.
632  THOMUI,  RV  THOMEI  (flo^i  [B],  00/uei  [A],  0<r/uaa  [L]).

TEMAN  (iJp'n.  \!  P"1.  '  what  is  on  the  riSht  hand'?
— i.e.,  'south  ' ;  Oai^av  [BADQL],  occasionally  fle^i.  in  XADEQ  :
Vg.  Tinman,  except  Ezek.  25  13  Hab.  3  3,  Atistcr  and  Ob.  9
Meridu-s;  gentilic  'JO'n,  EV  TEMANITE,  in  Job  22  i,  'en  ;
0ai/xai<(e)iT>)S,  or  6ffi. ',  occasionally  Oai^ai'iis,  0e^ai<i);,  Ot^aviTi.?
[A  Job  15  ;  cp  42  17^] ;  Themanites).

Teman  was  originally  the  name  of  a  clan  and  district
(cp  NAMES,  §  55)  of  Edom,  no  doubt  one  of  the  oldest
and  most  important,  and  is  genealogically  described  as
the  eldest  son  of  Esau's  first-born  son  Eliphaz  (Gen.  36
1115  [da/Avav  E]  i  Ch.  1  36).  In  Gen.  36  42  ( i  Ch.  1  53)
Teman  is  counted  among  the  '  dukes  '  (  \illiiph\  or  clans
],  of  EUUM  (ij.v.  §  4),  not,  however,  heading  the


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

list.  In  the  list  of  ancient  Edomite  kings  we  find  a  king
called  '  Husham,  of  thelandof  theTemanites(Gen.  8634).'
In  Ezek.  25  13  the  prophet  threatens  destruction  to  Edora
'  from  Teman  even  to  Dedan. '  Later  writers  vise  '  Teman '
as  a  poetical  synonym  for  '  Edom  '  (Amos  1 12  [on  date,
see  AMOS,  §  9],  Ob.  9[cp.  Jer.  49  22],  Jer.  49  20  Hab.  83
Bar.  822/1)  ;  but  in  Jer.  49?  we  seem  to  find  Teman
recognised  as  the  name  of  a  district.  '  Is  wisdom  no
more  in  Teman  ? '  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the
description  of  the  oldest  of  Job's  friends  as  '  the
Temanite'  (Job  2  n  etc.).  '  Eliphaz  the  Edomite'
would  have  been  an  insufficient  description  ;  '  Temanite '
must  refer  to  the  district  best  known  for  proverbial
wisdom.  As  to  the  locality  intended  by  '  Teman,'  Ezek.
25 13  (already  quoted)  entitles  us  to  assume  that  Teman
was  in  the  N.  (NE. ),  for  the  land  of  Dedan  was
certainly  to  the  S.  (SE. )  of  the  land  of  Edom.  (This
suggests  a  comparison  of  the  name  with  Jamin  =  Jerah-
meel. )  See  Amos  1 12,  where  Bozrah  is  mentioned  as
the  capital  of  Teman.  Bozrah  being  situated  in  the
district  of  Gebal  (Ps.  838),  northward  from  Petra,  we
may  perhaps  venture  to  regard  the  district  of  Teman  as
having  much  the  same  limits  as  the  later  district  of
Gebal :  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Teman  and  Bozrah  in
Amosl  12  are  the  names,  not  merely  of  a  district  and
its  chief  town,  but  of  the  land  of  Edom  and  its  capital.

Cp  Kautzsch.  in  Riehm,  HW&,  1648  ;  Buhl,  Edomiter,  y>f.  ;
Lury,  EiJomiter,  26.  Trumbull  (Kadesh-barnea,  117  Jf.)  takes
a  different  view:  Teman  'was  probably  the  portion  of  Edom  which
lay  directly  S.  or  Teman-ward,  of  Canaan.'  Trumbull  even
finds  a  trace  of  the  old  name  in  the  Nakb  ('pass')  el-yemen,
which  goes  northward  from  \Vady  Fikreh  'over  against  ancient
Teman'  ;  and  in  Josh,  15  i  he  would  render  the  closing  words
JO'n  nsj3O  (RV  '  at  the  uttermost  part  of  the  south  ')  '  from  the
extremity  of  Teman'  (so,  too,  the  pioneer  British  critic  Geddes).
Greene  too  (He/>.  Migration,  145)  regards  Teman  as  the
southern  part  of  Kclom,  now  known  as  ef-sera,  as  distinguished
from  the  northern  (Gebalene),  and  including  the  Iduma:an  range
as  far  N.  as  Mt.  Hor.  According  to  Ens.  and  Jer.  (OS  260  96  ;
155  32),  Thaiman  was  the  name  of  a  village  distant  15  (Jer.  says,
5)  R.  m.  from  Petra,  and  the  seat  of  a  garrison.  T.  K.  C.

TEMENI  (VWR  [Baer],  ^"Fl  [Gi.],  and  ^D'J-I  ;  cp
TEMAN),  son  of  ASHUR,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  ;  i  Ch.  46  (Bai^av
[BA], -i/ei  [L]).  Probably  miswritten  for  '3Cn,  Timni,  the  gen-
tilic  of  Timnah.  See  TI.MNAH  i.  T.  K.  C.


Meaning  (§  i).

Oldest  Israelite  temples  (§  2).

Solomon's temple  : David's

preparations  (§  3).
Solomon's  motives  (§  4).
Site  of  temple  (§  5).
The  main  buildings  (§  6).
Internal  arrangements  (§  7)
The  holy  place  (§  8).


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

CONTENTS

I. THE  TEMPLE

Ornamentation and decora- The  candlesticks  (§  17).  Internal  arrangements  (§  25).

tion  (§  q).  The  altar  of  bronze  (§  18).  A  priestly  temple  (§  26).

Roof  (§  10).  The  brazen  sea  and  lavers  (§  19).  History  of  second  temple  (§  27).

Side-buildings  (§  n).  Meaning  and  origin  of  temple  plan  The  temple  of  Herod  (§  28).

(f»  20).  Herod's  motives  (§  29).

History  of  Solomon's  temple  (§21).  Plan  of  temple  (§  30).


The  pillars  of  bronze  (§  12).
Forecourt  and  gates  (§  13).
Equipment  :  the  ark  (§  14).
The  brazen  serpent  (§  is).
Table  of  shewbread  (§  16).


Ezekiel's  temple  (§  22).
Zerubbabel's  temple  (§  23).
Measurements,  etc.  (§  24).


The  courts  and  gates  (§  31).
The  chambers  (§  32).
Internal  arrangements  (§  33).


1  ntroductory  (§  34).
Officers,  etc.  (§35).
Functions  of  priests  and  Levites  (§  36).


I. THE  TEMPLE

For  the  ancient  Israelites,  as  for  the  ancient  Semites
in general, a '  temple '  was the  abode  of  a  deity — a

beth-el  (*?x  rra) — in  the  strictest  meaning
1.  Meaning. ,  ,

of  the  word,  and  not  solely  in  the  sense  in

which  we  also  speak  of  Christian  places  of  worship  as
houses  of  God. A  temple  in  antiquity  was  not,  in  the


The  offering  of  incense  (§  40).

The  musical  service  (§  41).

The  Sabbath  and  festivals  (§  42).


II. TEMPLE-SERVICE

The  temple  services  :  the  daily  offering  (§  37).

The  preliminaries  (S  38).

The  prayers  and  blessings  (§  39).

Bibliography  (§  43).

situated,  not  within,  but  without  the  building  known
as  the  temple.  The  temple,  rightly  considered,  is  the
dwelling-house  of  the  deity  to  whom  it  is  consecrated,
and  whose  presence  is  denoted  by  a  statue,  it  may  be,
or  some  other  sacred  symbol.  The  erection  of  temples,
accordingly,  can  always  be  regarded  as  already  indi
cating  advanced  development  of  the  religion  concerned.
For  the  temple  is  never  the  original  dwelling-place  of


first  instance,  a  place  of  meeting^for  the  worshippers  of I the  deky In  the  most  primitive  phase  of  religion,  and

particularly  in  the  case  of  the  oldest  forms  of  Semitic
religion,  the  deity  was  found,  in  the  first  instance,  in
certain  natural  objects  and  features  which  impressed


the  deity  ;  many  ancient  temples  were  accessible  to
none  but  the  priests,  and  the  altar — the  place  of  worship
in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  expression — was  usually

1  Cp  Gen.  25  3  ©  (0aifj.av  [AD],  6t/j..  [E  ;  om.  L],  brother  of
Dedan).

4923


1  GEBAL  (q.v.)  is  a  late  name  of  Arabic  origin.
4924


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  primitive  worshipper  (see  NATURE-WORSHIP)  ;  high
mountains,  rocks  of  peculiar  formation,  wide-spreading
trees,  shady  groves,  springs  of  water  and  the  like  were
regarded  as  seats  of  deity  and  places  where  his  servants
could  meet  with  him,  and  bring  him  their  gifts,  though
temple  building  of  any  sort  there  was  none.  Such
natural  objects,  where  human  intervention  and  labour
were  unnecessary,  are  everywhere  older  than  images
and  suchlike  accessories.  In  the  primitive  Hebrew
worship,  in  particular,  temples  played  but  a  subordinate
part.  Ordinarily  they  were  wholly  superfluous.  Sacri
fice  was  offered  under  the  open  sky.  The  natural
objects  which  were  regarded  as  seats  of  deity  required
no  protecting  covering. l  Often  they  had  no  need  of  an
altar  even  ;  the  sacred  rock  was  itself  an  altar  ;  cp
Gen.  28,  where  Jacob  anoints — that  is,  presents  his
offering  of  oil  upon — the  stone  which  sheltered  the
deity.  At  the  sacred  springs,  wells,  and  caves  the
gifts  of  the  worshippers  are  simply  dropped  in,  as,  e.g. ,
the  well  of  Zemzem  at  Mecca  (cp  ALTAR,  NATURE-
WORSHIP).

The  situation  changed  as  soon  as  men  began  to  make

images of  the deity. Wherever such an image  had

Olri t  come  mto  existence> there  naturally  arose

.'  ...  also  the  need  for  a  house  to  shelter  it.  In
the  case  of  a  costly  image,  too,  theft  had
emp  es.  tQ  ^e  guarcjed  against  (cp  Judg.  17  f.);
someone  was  required  to  watch  and  tend  it  ;  but  here
again  we  observe  that,  in  principle  and  to  begin  with,
nothing  more  is  required  than  some  simple  housing,
such  as  the  worshipper  is  ordinarily  in  the  way  of
constructing  for  himself.  A  modest  apartment  in  the
family  dwelling-house  sufficed,  as  the  story  of  Micah's
graven  image  shows  (ludg.  17).  Here  again  it  is  not  a
place  of  worship — a  meeting-house  for  worshippers —
that  has  to  be  provided,  but  simply  a  dwelling-place
for  the  image,  or,  if  you  will,  for  the  deity.  Still  less
was  any  spacious  apartment  or  stately  palace  required,
because  according  to  the  ancient  Hebrew  conception
the  deity  chose  rather  to  have  his  dwelling  in  [thick]
darkness.  Even  in  Solomon's  temple  the  apartment
occupied  by  the  deity,  the  so-called  Holy  of  Holies,
was  quite  small,  plain  and  dark  (see  below,  §  7  end).

In  accordance  with  this  is  the  fact  that  in  the  OT  we  read  of
temples  only  where  there  is  an  ephod.  Micah  had  a  house  for
his  ephod  (Judg.  17s)  ;  at  Dan  this  same  ephod  afterwards  had
a  temple,  as  doubtless  also  had  Gideon's  ephod  at  Ophrah  (Judg.
18824^).  Similarly,  at  Nob  there  was  a  great  temple  with  a
numerous  priesthood  in  connection  with  the  famous  oracular
image  there  (i  S.  21).  The  sacred  ark,  the  most  sacred  object
in  Israel,  stands  in  this  respect  in  the  same  category  with  the
image  as  representing  the  deity.  It,  too,  naturally  requires  to
be  housed  ;  it  cannot  be  left  simply  in  the  open.  The  house
assigned  to  it  was  the  same  in  kind  as  those  its  worshippers
lived  in.  As  long  as  these  lived  in  tents,  the  ark  also  remained
in  a  tent.  After  the  settlement  in  Canaan,  it  received  a  house
of  stone  at  Shiloh.  But  even  then  it  was  not  absolutely
necessary  that  it  should  have  a  house  of  its  own,  entirely  to
itself.  After  the  temple  at  Shiloh  had  been  destroyed,  no  one
for  a  long  time  thought  of  getting  a  new  house  built  for  the  ark.
After  it  had  been  brought  back  from  Philistia  it  wandered  about
from  place  to  place,  finding  a  temporary  resting-place  now  in  the
house  of  a  prominent  citizen,  now  in  that  of  a  royal  official,
until  at  last  within  the  precints  of  David's  palace  it  found
shelter  merely  in  a  simple  tent  (see  ARK  OK  THE  COVENANT).

We  know  nothing  in  detail  as  to  the  arrangement  of
the  oldest  Israelite  temples.  We  can  only  conjecture
that  they  were  built  on  the  same  model  as  those  of  the
Canaanites,  for  here  also  the  conquered  were  doubtless
the  teachers  of  the  conquerors.  The  Canaanites  at
that  period  already  had  large  temples  of  their  own.
The  temple  of  El-Berith  at  Shechem  was,  we  know,
the  place  of  refuge  of  the  Shechemites  in  times  of
danger,  and  must  therefore  have  been  large  and
strongly  built  (Judg.  946 /.).  At  Gaza  there  was  a
great  temple  with  a  hall,  the  roof  of  which  was

1  The  kaba  of  Mecca,  even,  is  no  beth-el  (house  of  God),
'household  god,'  no  covering  for  the  black  stone  worshipped
there.  The  stone  in  question  is,  in  fact,  visible  from  without,
let  into  the  wall,  and  the  entire  ka'ba  is  merely  an  expansion  of
the  stone  ;  cp  Wellh.  Heid.Q-)  3,  69,  (2)  73.

4925


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

supported  by  two  pillars  (Judg.  1629).  Here,  too,  it
need  hardly  be  pointed  out,  the  fundamental  idea  was
the  same  ;  the  principal  thing  was  the  sanctuary,  the
apartment  for  the  image  or  other  sacred  object  ;  in
connection  with  this  there  ultimately  arose  also  another
apartment  or  hall  to  which  the  worshippers  of  the  god
had  access,  and  in  which  they  had  audience  of  him.

In  what  sense  Solomon's  temple  can  be  spoken  of  as
something  new,  may  easily  be  judged  from  what  has

3 Solomon's  already keen said- In their general
'  t t>l • arrangenient and details temple and

D  .  ,P  '  palace  were  alike  wonders  to  Solomon's
parations. "  f  'JJects,  such  as  had  never  been  seen
before  ;  but  the  conception  of  a  temple
of  Yahwe  was  not  in  itself  any  novelty.  Tradition
assigns  the  original  idea  to  David  ;  according  to  our
present  books  of  Samuel,  it  was  David  who  first
thought  of  building  a  temple  for  the  ark,  inasmuch  as
it  seemed  unbefitting  that  he  himself  should  be  dwelling
in  a  palace  whilst  the  ark  of  Yahwe  remained  in  a  mere
tent.  Yahwe,  however,  the  narrative  goes  on  to  say,
would  not  suffer  this.  Not  David  was  to  build  a  house
for  Yahwe,  but  Yahwe  was  to  build  a  house  for  David,
by  assuring  the  permanence  of  David's  dynasty  (2  S.  7).
The  Chronicler  develops  the  idea  further  :  David
himself  indeed  cannot  build  the  temple,  but  he  can
make  everything  ready  for  it  ;  and  this  he  does  in  such
a  manner  that  little  is  left  for  Solomon  to  do.  The  latter
receives  from  David  plans  and  models  for  this  temple
and  all  its  furniture  ;  the  stone  and  timber  are  all  hewn
and  prepared,  the  workmen  engaged  and  trained,  the
gold  and  silver  collected,  the  whole  temple  service
organised  (i  Ch.  I'Zff.}.  All  this,  however,  belongs  to
the  latest  strata  of  the  narrative.  There  is  no  historical
probability  that  David  had  thoughts  of  building  a
temple.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  it  is  not  easy  to  see
what  should  have  prevented  him  from  carrying  out  the
idea.  But  the  conditions  under  which  such  a  purpose
might  be  formed  were  absent.  When  David  was
building  his  palace  he  had  no  need  for  a  splendid
sanctuary  also  in  his  citadel.  The  ark,  of  course,  he
wanted  to  have  there  ;  but  the  genuine  old  Israelite
idea  was  that  in  view  of  its  origin  and  significance  the
appropriate  lodging  for  the  ark  was  in  a  tent.  This
comes  out  quite  clearly  still  in  the  words  of  Nathan
when  he  asks  (2  S.  7 sf.  ',  cp  i  Ch.  176)  :

Has  Yahwe  ever  spoken  a  word  to  any  of  the  judges  of  Israel
saying,  Why  have  ye  not  built  me  a  house  of  cedar?

I  have  not  dwelt  in  an  house  since  the  day  that  I  brought  up
the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  even  to  this  day.

Such  was  the  normal  order  of  things.  It  is  easy  to
understand,  however,  how  after  the  temple  of  Jerusalem
had  acquired  its  importance,  the  people  of  a  later  time
found  it  difficult  to  understand  wherefore  the  pious
David  had  not  built  the  temple.  The  cause  cannot
have  lain,  for  him,  in  religious  indifference  ;  and  it
was  necessary  to  find  another  explanation.  Hence  the
whole  theory  now  before  us.

In  Solomon's  case  again  we  need  not  seek  too
exclusively  for  purely  religious  motives.  It  was  by

. n  ^  , no means his intention, as tradition

4.  Solomon  s

,.  represents it to have been, to provide

the  Israelites  with  one  solitary  sanctuary,
legitimate  and  central,  and  so  to  bring  to  an  end  the
worship  of  the  high  places,  and  such-like  practices.
His  motives  were  more  political  than  religious.  He
was  a  splendour-loving  prince  to  whom  the  old  palace
of  David  no  longer  seemed  good  enough,  and  who
wished  to  have  a  new  and  magnificent  residence  similar
to  those  of  neighbouring  sovereigns.  In  his  complex
of  new  buildings  a  fine  house  of  cedar  for  the  venerable
and  sacred  ark  was  also  included,  since  a  simple  tent
seemed  no  longer  to  suffice  for  a  royal  sanctuary.  It
was  a  citadel-sanctuary  for  himself,  not  a  temple  for
Israel  that  he  built.

Only  thus  can  we  understand  the  mistrust  and  even

4926


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

antipathy  with  which  large  masses  of  the  people
regarded  the  work  of  Solomon.  The  citizens  of  the
northern  kingdom  still  adhered  to  the  ancient  sanctu
aries  and  went  on  making  pilgrimages  to  Beersheba  and
Gilgal,  to  Dan  and  Bethel,  the  places  where  their
fathers  of  old  had  paid  their  devotions.  In  the
southern  kingdom,  too,  the  'innovation'  was  far  from
finding  unanimous  approval  Ultimately,  indeed  (in
Deuteronomy),  the  prophets  came  to  recognise  the
temple  as  the  lesser  evil  when  compared  with  the
worship  of  the  high  places.  Yet,  at  the  bottom  of
their  hearts  they  put  it  on  a  level  with  the  other
sanctuaries  of  Samaria  or  Shiloh  (Jer.  7  12  Mic.  1  5).  In
fact,  in  religious  circles  the  luxury  of  the  temple  of
Solomon  came  under  very  severe  censure  as  out  of
keeping  with  the  true  Israelite  character  (cp  the  law
concerning  the  altar  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant).  To
lift  a  tool  upon  an  altar  stone  is  to  pollute  it  ;  so  also
to  go  up  to  it  by  steps  is  a  desecration  (Ex.  20 nf. ).
A  more  pointed  condemnation  of  the  altar  of  Solomon,
which  was  raised  high  after  the  fashion  of  heathen
altars  and  covered  with  brass,  can  hardly  be  conceived

(Cp  2  K.  10  10  ff.}.

On  the  site  of  Solomon's  temple  cp  PALACE,
JKRUSALEM,  §  19.  We  may  regard  it  as  settled  that
„.,  -  it  stood  on  the  eastern  hill.  The  archi-
'  *  6  °.  tectural  history  of  the  place  shows  that  a
"  '  sanctuary  always  stood  there,  within  the
limits  of  the  present  Haram.  The  temple  of  Jupiter
built  there  by  Hadrian  stood,  as  we  have  reason  to
believe,  upon  the  site  of  the  temple  of  Herod,  which  in
its  turn  was  only  a  reconstruction  of  the  second  (post-
exilic)  temple,  and  this  again,  of  course,  can  only  have
been  raised  on  the  site  of  that  of  Solomon.  It  is  only
as  regards  the  particular  spot  within  the  Haram  area
that  any  dispute  is  at  all  possible.  For  example,
Fergusson,  Trupp,  Lewin,  W.  R.  Smith  and  others,
have  placed  it  in  the  south-western  angle  of  the  modern
Haram.  This  is,  however,  in  view  of  the  lie  of  the
ground,  quite  impossible.  The  south-western  angle
of  the  Haram,  when  strictly  considered,  lies  not  upon
the  eastern  but  upon  the  edge  of  the  western  hill.  The
temple,  in  that  case,  must  be  held  to  have  stood  on  the
steep  slope  of  the  hill  towards  the  Tyropoi'on  valley,
entirely  on  artificial  substructions.  In  fact,  the  southern
half  of  the  place  cannot  be  thought  of  in  this  connection
at  all,  for  the  site  did  not  receive  its  great  extension
southwards  until  the  time  of  Herod  (see  below,  §  30).

W.  R.  Smith  (EB($),  s.v.  'Temple')  also  starts  from  the
assumption  that  the  whole  Herodian  temple-complex  lay  in
the  SW.  of  the  present  Haram.  Now  it  is  indisputable  that
the  S.  wall  and  the  southern  portion  of  the  western  wall  of  the
Haram  are  precisely  those  parts  of  the  wall  the  external
features  of  which  betray  a  Herodian  origin.  Smith's  contention,
further,  that  the  dimensions  of  the  Herodian  temple  as  given  by
Josephus,  entirely  exclude  the  sacred  rock  from  the  temple
limits  can  hardly  be  maintained,  as  will  presently  be  shown.
Moreover,  apart  from  any  other  consideration,  his  argument
fails  in  view  of  the  lie  of  the  ground,  as  can  very  well  be  seen
from  his  own  map  :  between  the  SW.  corner  and  the  NW.
corner  of  his  temple  area  there  is  a  difference  of  level  of  soft.;
between  the  SW.  and  NK.  corner  of  his  temple  court,  a  similar
difference  of  90  ft.  In  other  words  :  his  temple  stands  entirely
on  the  steep  south-western  slope  of  the  hill,  and  numerous  sub
structions  would  have  been  necessary  in  order  to  secure  even
the  small  area  that  was  necessary  ;  no  less  improbable  is  it  that
the  temple  should  have  stood  on  a  level  so  considerably  below
the  summit  of  the  hill  with  the  sacred  rock  where  there  was  a
fine  level  plateau.

On  the  other  hand,  considerations  suggested  by  the
history  of  religion  speak  very  strongly  in  favour  of  the
site  of  the  present  dome  of  the  rock.  In  the  East,  from
the  remotest  antiquity  down  even  to  the  present  day,
sacred  sites  have  always  maintained  themselves  with
unyielding  tenacity  through  all  religious  changes.  Thus
there  is  a  high  degree  of  probability  that  what  is  to-day
regarded  as  the  centre  of  the  whole,  the  sacred  rock  in
the  mosque  of  'Omar,  the  second  holiest  site  in  all
Islam,  should  from  the  first  have  been  a  particularly
sacred  point.  The  rock  is  doubtless  to  be  regarded


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

as  the  scene  of  the  angelic  appearance  in  2  S.  24,  which
marked  the  place  as  a  site  of  a  sanctuary  of  Yahwe  (cp
Judg.  6 11  f.  13 19).  The  statement  of  the  Chronicler  that
Solomon  built  his  temple  here  at  the  threshing-floor  of
Oman,  has  every  probability  in  its  favour.  That  the
sanctity  of  the  place  goes  back  to  a  still  earlier  time
is  not  unlikely.

In  this  case  there  arises  only  the  question  as  to  the  place
more  precisely  where  the  temple  stood  with  reference  to  this
sacred  rock.  Several  scholars  (Rosen,  Schick,  and  others)
have  supposed  that  the  rock  was  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  and
that  the  ark  stood  upon  it.  This  is  also  an  old  Christian
and  Mohammedan  tradition  ;  that  such  a  tradition  was  current
among  the  Jews  in  NT  times  is  evident  from  the  Tahmtdic
legend  that  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  the  place  of  the  lost
ark  was  taken  by  a  stone  called  the  'foundation  stone'  (p^
.TrtC'i  I'fftna  5  2).  Further,  this  stone  was  identified  with
Jacob's  stone  at  Bethel  (cp  Rashi  on  Gun.  '26  and  Breithaupt's
notes).  Both  Mohammedans  and  Christians  transferred  these
legends  to  the  Sahra,  which  the  former  accordingly  venerated
as  '  a  gate  of  heaven  '  (Ibn  'Abd  Rabbih,  'Ikii,  3  369).  Moham
medan  sources  enable  us  to  trace  back  this  identification  to  the
Moslem  Jew  Wahb  ibn  Monabbih,  who  enriched  Islam  with  so
many  Jewish  fables  and  died  a  century  after  Jerusalem  was
taken  by  the  Arabs  (Tabari  1  571  f.  ;  Ibn  al-Fakih  97  f.\
Eutychius,  on  the  other  hand,  who  is  the  first  Christian  writer
to  apply  the  Jewish  legend  to  the  Moslem  Sahra,  avers  that  the
tradition  was  communicated  to  'Omar  by  the  Christian  patriarch
Sophronius  on  the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  and  guided  the  caliph
in  the  choice  of  a  site  for  his  mosque.  This  identification,  how
ever,  is  impossible,  were  it  only  by  reason  of  the  dimensions
of  the  rock  which  is  about  59  ft.  [17.7  metres]  long,  51^  ft.  [15.5
metres]  broad,  with  a  height  above  ground  of  4  ft.  \\  in.  to  6j
ft.  [1.25-2  metres].  The  Holy  of  Holies,  which  was  a  cube  of
20  cubits  !  was  too  small  to  contain  it.2  In  other  respects  also
the  suggestion  is  attended  with  great  difficulties  on  account
of  the  conditions  of  space  ;  the  altar  of  burnt -offering
would  have  to  be  moved  considerably  to  the  E.  of  the  rock,
thus  leaving  very  little  room  for  the  court  which  was  to  accom
modate  the  worshippers — unless  great  substructions  on  the  E.  be
assumed,  which  is  inadmissible  (see  PALACE,  §  4).

In  a  word,  there  is  everything  in  favour  of,  and
nothing  against,  the  theory  that  this  rock  was  the  site
of  Solomon's  altar  of  burnt -offering  (§  18).  This  would
fit  in  with  the  view  that  it  was  here  the  angel  stood  at
the  theophany.  Further,  on  the  rock  there  has  been
discovered  a  channel  which  may  perhaps  have  served
to  carry  off  the  blood  (cp  also  Ebers  and  Guthe,
Paldstina,  1 66).  This  channel  was  connected  with  a
hollow  under  the  stone.  Further  examination  has  not
been  hitherto  permitted  ;  but  it  is  extremely  probable
that  this  hollow  is  really  a  cistern  connected  with  the
general  system  of  conduits  (cp  CONDUITS,  §  3).  If  in
accordance  with  what  has  been  said  we  may  regard
this  rock  as  being  the  site  of  Solomon's  altar  of  burnt-
offering,  then  the  temple,  properly  so  called,  lay  to  the
westward  of  this,  and  its  site  is  determined  with  tolerable
accuracy.

On  the  text  of  the  description  of  Solomon's  temple,
cp  what  is  said  elsewhere  with  reference  to  the  descrip-
_,  . tion  of  his  PALACE,  §  2. In  the  present

'  ..^.main  case,  also,  after  the  many  later  additions
°  '  have  been  separated  out,  we  arrive  at  no
clear  account.  Much  that  would  be  of  importance  is
wanting  ;  perhaps  its  disappearance  is  in  some  measure
due  to  the  frequent  redactions.  How  manifold  these
\vere  can  be  seen  in  the  Commentaries  (e.g. ,  Benzinger,
Konige,  16 f.).  For  a  reconstruction  of  the  buildings
some  help  can  be  obtained  from  the  description  of
Ezekiel's  temple  (40^).  True,  his  temple  is  primarily
a  work  of  the  imagination  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
his  description,  broadly  speaking,  agrees  with  i  K.  6.
That,  as  a  former  priest,  he  was  familiar  with  the  first
temple  may  be  taken  for  granted  ;  there  is  also  an  .;
priori  probability  that  in  his  description  he  would  follow
the  lines  of  the  old  temple.  Such  changes  as  he  does
introduce  are  on  the  one  hand  occasioned  by  his  desire
for  a  scrupulous  symmetry  in  the  plan  of  his  temple,
and  partly  by  his  determination  to  remove  the  dwelling

1  [It  is  assumed  throughout  this  article  that  the  longer  cubit
of  20.67  'n-  is  meant;  see  WRIGHTS  AND  MEASURES,  §  i.]

2  The  threshing-floor  of  Oman  cannot  have  been  on  the  rock,
which  has  an  irregular,  not  level,  surface.

4928


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

of  the  prince  from  the  temple  hill.  The  features  that
may  be  traced  to  the  working  of  his  free  fantasy  are  in
particular  the  specifications  regarding  the  courts  and
the  buildings  contained  in  them.  In  matters  where
these  points  do  not  come  into  question  we  shall  for  the
most  part  be  safe  in  transferring  his  data  without  hesita
tion  to  the  earlier  temple.

The  temple-complex  fell  into  two  divisions — the  main
building,  the  'house  of  God'  properly  so  called,  and
the  subsidiary  buildings  by  which  it  was  surrounded.


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

mentions  120  cubits,  which  is  a  sheer  impossibility.  The
text  is  hopelessly  corrupt ;  the  20  cubits  of  ©A,  Pesh. ,  and
Arab,  are  incorrect  as  appears  from  the  data  as  to  the
height  of  the  pillars  (see  below,  §  12)  ;  these  can  hardly
have  been  taller  than  the  porch.  Our  most  natural  course
will  be  to  suppose  for  the  porch  a  height  equal  to  that
of  the  temple  itself,  viz.  30  cubits.  Perrot  and  Chipiez,
and  others  with  them,  have  sought  to  justify  the  120
cubits  in  Chronicles  by  suggesting  that  the  porch  was
similar  to  the  pylons  of  the  Egyptian  temples  ;  but
neither  the  word  'uldm  (D^X)  nor

* T  '

yet  the  other  measurements  would
be  appropriate  to  a  gateway  of
this  sort.  In  Ezekiel's  temple
one  ascended  to  the  porch  by  ten
steps.  This,  we  may  take  it,  will
have  been  in  agreement  with  the
actual  facts.

The  internal  space  was  divided,
as  already  said, into  two  apart-


SCALE  OF  FEET


FIG.  i. — Ground-plan  of  the  Temple.

The  main  building  was  a  rectangular  structure  60  cubits
in  length,  20  cubits  in  breadth,  and  30  cubits  in  height,
corresponding,  on  the  basis  of  the  qubit  of  20.7  inches,
in  round  numbers  to  104,  35,  and  52  feet  respectively.
It  lay  E.  and  W. ,  with  entrance  from  the  E.  The
measurements  given  above  are,  as  appears  from  the
description  of  the  debir  (i  K.  6ida,  cp  v.  20),  and  as  is
confirmed  by  Ezekiel's  account,  the  internal  dimensions.
On  this  assumption,  indeed,  we  must  suppose  that  either  the
total  length  (60  cubits)  or  one  or  other  of  the  detailed  figures
for  the  Holy  Place  and  the  Holy  of  Holies  is  incorrectly  given,
as  the  dividing  wall  between  the  two  must  of  course  have  taken
up  some  space.  The  thickness  of  the  walls  is  given  by  Ezekiel
(41  15)  as  6  cubits,  a  measure  that  may  also  be  taken  as  apply
ing  to  the  old  walls.  At  all  events  the  walls,  to  begin  with,
were  of  considerable  thickness  as  appears  from  the  circumstance
that  for  the  second  and  third  stories  successively  they  were
made  thinner  by  rebatements  of  half  a  cubit,  or  it  may  be  of  a
whole  cubit  (but  see  below,  §  n).

Before  the  hi  kill  (Srn), the Holy Place,  eastward,
stood  a  porch. Its  length  was  the  same  as  the  breadth


FIG.  2.— Section  of  the  Temple.

of  the  house  (20  cubits)  and  it  was  10  cubits  in  depth  ;
but  its  height  is  nowhere  given  either  in  Kings  or  in
Ezekiel.  The  parallel  place  in  Chronicles  (2  Ch.  84)

4929


'  smaller  behind.
The  wall  which  separated  them
has,  in  Ezekiel's  temple,  a  thick
ness  of  two  cubits.  From  the
description  of  the  door  it  is  clear
that  in  Solomon's  temple  also
the  partition  consisted  of  a  solid
wall,  not  of  a  curtain  merely.1
The  door  was  made  of  olive  wood
and  was  pentagonal  —  i.e.,  the

lintel  was  not  horizontal  but  formed  an  angle  as  Thenius
rightly  explains,  i  K.  631  (cp  St.  ZATW3i4&).2  In
Ezekiel's  temple  a  breadth  of  6  cubits  is  given  to  this
door  (Ezek.  41 2);  whether  this  figure  is  applicable  to
Solomon's  temple  also  we  have  no  materials  for  de
termining.  All  that  we  learn  further  about  it  from  our
present  texts  is  that  it  was  a  folding  door,  was  decorated
with  carvings  of  cherubim,  palm  trees,  and  open  flowers,
and  overlaid  with  gold.  This  notice,  however  (i  K.  632),
does  not  belong  to  the  old  architectural  description.  If
the  walls  of  the  hckal  and  of  the  dfblr  were  unprovided
with  carvings,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  doors  were
otherwise  treated  ;  and  as  for  the  overlaying,  we  learn
from  2  K.  18i6  that  it  was  Hezekiah  who  first  overlaid
the  temple  doors  with  gold.

The inner apartment [dcbir] was lower than the
main  building — being  only  20  cubits  in  height. It  thus
formed  a perfect  cube,  20  cubits in the  side. As  we
can  hardly  picture  to  ourselves  the  Holy  of  Holies  as
being  merely  a  sort  of  low  annex  to  the  temple,
we  must  suppose  that  above  it  there  was  an  upper
chamber  of  10  cubits  in  height,  and  that  thus  the
temple  roof  had a uniform height  of 30  cubits
from  the  ground. From  i  K.  812  f.  (see  Kenz. ad
loc. )  we  may  venture  to  infer  that  the  inner  room
was  perfectly  dark. This  adytum,  called  fater  the
Holy  of  Holies,  was  the  most  essential  part  of  the
temple. It  was  the dwelling-place  proper  of  the

1  According to 2  Ch.  3 14 there was a  curtain  before
the  entrance  to  the  dcbir. This  would  not  be  improbable
in  itself ;  but  there  is  no  mention  of  it  in  the  old  description
of  the  temple  in  Kings. Thenius,  Riehm,  and  others  indeed
have  found  a  curtain  in  i  K.  621  :  'he  drew  [the  curtain]
across  with  chains  of  gold,'  etc.;  but  if  these  words  belong
to  the  original  text  they  must  relate  to  the  altar  ;  cp  Benz.
ad  loc.

2  The  other  interpretation  (Ges.,  Bahr,  Keil,  and  others)
explains  the  JV£:Cn  of  i  K.  631  as  meaning  that  the  area
of  the  door  was  a  fifth  of  the  entire  superficial  area  of  the
wall. So also Klostermann  with  emendation : the  lintel
was  i  fifth — i.e.,  of  the  transverse  wall,  which  is  equivalent
to  saying  that  the  breadth  of  the  doorway  was  a  fifth  of

that  of  the  house, — in  other  words  4  cubits.  Both  explanations
are  very  forced.  JVB'Crl  stands  in  contrast  with  nijD^,  'square,'
in  i  K.  623  7  5.

4930


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

deity,  whose  presence  here  was  represented  by  the  sacred
ark.'

The  walls  of  the  dcbir  were  panelled  with  cedar ;  the  floor
was  of  cypress  wood.  According  to  the  present  text  the  walls
were  also  overlaid  with  gold  (iK.  620);  this,  however,  is  a
later  addition  to  the  text  (see  below).

The  anterior  apartment,  the  hekal,  afterwards  known
as  the  Holy  Place,  was,  as  already  mentioned,  40  cubits

ft  Tlio  TTnlTr  lon§'  2O  broad'  and  3°  high.  It  also
•  p"e  ™01*  was  floored  with  cypress  and  panelled  with
ce>  cedar,  so  that  of  the  mason  work  nothing
was  visible.  Here  again  the  statements  as  to  the  walls
having  been  overlaid  with  gold  (i  K.  621 22  a  30)  are
quite  late  additions  to  the  text  (see  below,  §  9).  This
apartment  also  was  not  particularly  well  lighted.  Since
the  building  that  surrounded  the  house  was  15  cubits  in
height  and  the  dUbir  had  probably  no  window  at  all,  we
must  suppose  that  such  windows  as  the  apartment  had
were  situated  above  the  20  cubit  level  of  the  dttbrr.  We
must  further  take  into  account  the  thickness  of  the  walls
which  was  such  that  even  if  the  windows  were  made  so
as  to  widen  inwards  after  the  manner  of  embrasures  (cp
i  K.  64  RVme-),  they  could  not  have  admitted  much
light.  Add  to  this  that  they  were  provided  with  wooden
lattices  like  the  windows  of  dwelling-houses  generally  ;
so  at  least  we  are  to  interpret  the  expression  ' ' atumim
(o'sax;  cp  Benz.  on  i  K.64).  We  learn  further  that
the  windows  were  casement  windows — furnished,  that  is
to  say,  with  wooden  frames  and  not  mere  openings  in
the  stone  wall,  a  refinement  which  was  unknown  in
ordinary  dwelling-houses.  Also  the  doorway  leading  to
the  anterior  room  was  provided  with  posts  of  olive-wood,
and,  in  contrast  to  that  leading  to  the  Holy  of  Holies
(see  above),  was  rectangular  in  shape.  The  door  was
of  cypress  and  either  half  consisted  of  two  folding  leaves
which  were  so  connected  in  some  way  with  each  other,
by  means  of  double  hinges  or  charnieres,  that  in  enter
ing  one  did  not  requre  to  open  the  whole  door,  but  only
the  two  inner  leaves.1  The  width  of  the  doorway  is  not
stated  ;  in  Ezekiel's  temple  it  was  10  cubits  (Ezek.  41  2).
Here  also  are  repeated  the  statements  as  to  overlaying
with  gold  (r  K.  635).  More  particularly  it  is  here
stated  that  the  covering  of  gold  was  fitted  exactly  on  to
the  engraved  design  (nprorrty  ntP'p).  Thus  the  decora
tive  work  in  question  did  not  consist  of  figures  carved
in  relief  (Reliefschnitzereien),  but  of  figures  outlined  on
the  flat  (Konturenzeichnungen).

Stade  (ZATWZ-noff.}  has  shown  that  the  various
statements  as  to  the  overlaying  of  the  walls  of  the  dSblr

(i  K.  620), of  the walls  of  the hekal
9.  Ornamenta-  jw>  n  Ja  ^  of  the  doors  (vv  ^}<

toon  and of  {he  cherubim  ^  28^  and  of  the  altar
decoration. m  thg  h-Ml  ^_  ^  wkh  gold  are  all

very  late  additions  to  the  text.  From  the  point  of  view
of  literary  criticism  they  can  be  shown  to  be  such  by  the
circumstance  that  they  come  in  at  the  wrong  place  and
moreover  that,  in  part  at  least,  they  are  absent  from  <!§.
Besides,  their  incorrectness  in  point  of  fact  appears  from
certain  other  data  of  the  OT.

On  the  occasions  when  the  temple  is  despoiled,  the  foreign
foes  and  King  Ahaz  when  in  financial  straits  take  everything  of
value,  but  the  covering  of  gold  is  not  mentioned,  though  this
certainly  would  not  have  been  left  untouched  had  it  existed
(i  K  14  26  2  K.  14  14  16  17).  On  the  other  hand  we  are  told  of
Hezekiah  that  he  overlaid  the  doors  and  doorposts  of  the  hekal;
but  it  was  not  with  gold  (2  K.  18  16).  Moreover,  strictly  speaking
a  covering  of  gold  must  be  regarded  as  incompatible  with  the
carving  on  the  walls.  The  whole  is  taken  from  the  description
of  the  Tabernacle  with  its  wealth  of  gold  and  transferred  to  the
temple  of  the  wealthy  king,  which,  it  was  thought,  was  certainly
not  less  costly  (see  Benz.  on  i  K.  6  20).

That  the  temple  walls  were  adorned  with  carvings  is
more  credible.  In  Ezekiel's  temple  (41 1?/. )  we  read
that  the  whole  wall  was  in  like  manner  decorated  with
carved  cherubim  and  palms,  a  palm  between  two

1  Ewald,  Keil,  and  others  think  of  the  doors  as  horizontally
divided  each  into  an  upper  and  a  lower  half,  of  which  only  the
lower  had  to  be  opened  on  entering.  Against  this  cp  Thenius
on  i  K.  634.

4931


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

cherubs.  Here,  however,  great  suspicion  cannot  but
be  aroused  by  the  fact  that  the  relative  notice  ( i  K.  0  18)
is  wanting  in  (@,  that  the  verse  disturbs  the  connection  in
the  most  violent  way,  and  that  with  its  statement  that
'  all  was  of  cedar  '  it  is  inconsistent  with  what  has  been
said  in  i  K.  615.  Nevertheless,  there  is  nothing  im
probable  in  the  supposition  that  the  temple  walls  were
at  a  later  date  decorated  with  carvings  (as  we  are  led  to
infer  from  Ezekiel).  Elsewhere,  also,  we  read  of  later
adornments  of  the  temple  (2  K.  128_^  29  16 \o/.
23  4  1 1  f. ).  Thus  we  may  safely  regard  the  carvings  as
having  been  the  work  of  a  later  king.

We  are  not  told  anything  as  to  the  construction  of
the  roof  of  the  building.  Many  scholars,  such  as  Lund
T?  f  (see  ^'e  alt.-jiid.  Heili^thiimer},  Hirt  (see
10.  KOOI.  Dgr  Tempei  Salomos],  Schnaase  (Gesch.  d,
bildenden  Kiinste,  1 ;  1843),  take  it  to  have  been  gabled  ;
but  according  to  2  K.  23 12  2  Ch.  89  this  cannot  have
been  the  case  ;  the  roof  was  flat.  It  is  highly  probable
that,  as  in  the  case  of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon
(see  PALACE),  it  was  made  of  beams  and  planks  of
cedar.  Upon  this  we  may  suppose  to  have  been  laid,
for  protection  against  the  weather,  a  coating  of  clay,
according  to  ancient  custom,  or  perhaps  even  slabs  of
stone.  The  usual  railing  or  battlement  ran  round  it
(cp  Dt.  228).  We  must  assume  some  sort  of  subsidiary
arrangement  for  the  support  of  the  beams,  since  cedar
beams  of  the  length  specified  must  have  bent  if  un-
propped.  The  text  says  nothing  of  this  ;  but  in  the  case
of  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon,  where  the  span
was  much  less  (only  12^  cubits,  about  aii  ft. ),  we  hear
of  struts  (lit.  shoulder-pieces  i  K.  7z/!  (5,  see  Benz.
ad  loc.  and  PALACE,  §  5,  with  illust. )  on  the  pillars  which
served  as  supports  for  the  beams  of  the  roof.  We  must
think  of  similar  supports  projecting  from  the  walls  in  the
case  of  the  temple  building.

The  main  building  was  surrounded  on  three  sides
(N. ,  W. ,  and  S. )  by  a  side  building,  or  ydsua  (yw\
AV  '  chamber,'  RV  '  story  ')  in  three  stories
11;  Side-  containing  'side  chambers,'  slid' oth  (nil'Ss
buildings.  AV  ,  chambers  .  .  cp  Ezek  41 5  /  ).  The
under  story  was  5  cubits  broad,  the  middle  one  6  cubits,
and  the  upper  7.  The  increasing  width  seems  to
have  been  obtained  by  narrowing  the  temple  wall,  which
diminished  in  thickness  by  successive  steps  or  rebate-
ments  on  the  outside  (i  K.  66  RV).  Thus  the  cedar
beams  which  formed  the  floors  (and  the  roofs)  of  the
side  chambers  were  not  built  into  the  temple  wall  but
rested  upon  the  rebatement  (cp  fig.  2).

Stade  has  conjectured — what  is  not  at  all  improbable — that
this  was  also  the  case  with  the  exterior  wall  of  the  side-building.
In  that  case  the  differential  breadth  of  i  cubit  falls  to  be  divided
between  the  two  walls ;  the  thickness  of  the  temple  wall  there
fore  diminished  with  each  story  by  only  half  a  cubit,  which  is
much  the  more  probable  view.  On  this  basis  we  shall  have  to
suppose  that  the  temple  wall  at  the  base  of  the  middle  story  was
still  sJ  cubits  thick,  at  the  base  of  the  upper  story  5  cubits,  and
above  the  upper  story  4  cubits  thick  (see  fig.  2).  The  thickness
of  the  external  walls  of  this  subsidiary  building  is  not  given  in
i  K.  Ezekiel  gives  it  as  5  cubits,  and  this  will  doubtless  have
been  the  old  measurement  (Ezek.  41  9).

The  height  of  each  story  from  floor  to  ceiling  was  5
cubits  (i  K.  610),  and  thus  the  height  of  the  whole
structure  over  15  cubits  (3x5  cubits,  plus  the  thickness
of  floors  and  roof).  The  number  of  the  side  chambers
is  not  stated  in  Kings,  but  in  Ezekiel  it  is  given  as  30
(or  33)  for  each  story  (cp  Cornill  and  Bertholet  on
Ezek.  41  6).  Thus  they  were  very  small  ;  but  this  need
not  cause  us  any  difficulty,  as  they  were  not  used  as
living-rooms  but  only  for  storage  of  temple  furniture
and  the  like.  We  are  left  entirely  without  information
as  to  the  windows  of  the  side  building.  On  the  other
hand,  with  regard  to  the  only  door  we  learn  that  it  was
on  the  S.  side  (i  K.  68).  The  passage  from  one  story
to  another  was  by  means  of  steps,  or  more  probably
ladders,  through  openings  in  the  roof  (i  K.  68). *  That

1  Lfitim,  D^h>  is  usually  rendered  as  meaning  a  winding
staircase.  For  this  rendering  reliance  is  chiefly  placed  on  &

4932


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  several  chambers  of  a  story  communicated  with  each
other  by  means  of  doors  may  be  taken  for  granted,

In front of  the porch of  the temple  stood  at the
entrance two bronze pillars cast by Huram-Abi, a
12 Th n'llars Tyrian  artincer  (see  HIRAM  2)  ;  for
' fh  further  details  see  below,  also  JACHIN

AND  BOAZ.  We  are  told  that  Jakin
was  the  one  on  the  right — i.e.  S. — Bo'az  that  to  the  left
or  N.  ;  but  what  the  names  mean  we  do  not  know.
Their  precise  position  is  a  much  disputed  point.  Many
scholars,  including  Nowack  (HA  233  f. ),  hold  that  they
were  engaged  in  the  portal  of  the  porch  itself  and  that
the  lintel  rested  upon  them.  For  this  view  reliance  is
placed  mainly  on  Ezek.  4649,  where  two  columns  to
right  and  left  of  the  entrance  are  mentioned  over  and
above  the  pillars  of  the  porch.  This  evidence,  however,
is  not  conclusive.  To  begin  with,  the  very  circumstance
that  Ezekiel  does  not  give  the  columns  the  names
handed  down  by  tradition  is  in  itself  noticeable.  It  is
very  questionable,  too,  whether  Ezekiel  has  these
columns  in  his  mind  at  all,  and  whether  he  has  not
rather  dropped  them  altogether  as  he  has  done  in  the
case  of  the  brazen  sea  and  the  lavers.  In  ©  (i  K.  745)
is  preserved  the  information  that  there  were  yet  other
pillars  in  the  temple  ;  these  cannot  well  have  stood  any
where  else  than  in  the  porch  where  those  of  Ezekiel  also
are  found  ;  or,  if  we  are  to  identify  the  latter  with  Jachin
and  Hoaz,  it  still  remains  very  possible  that  he  deliber
ately  not  only  suppresses  their  names  but  also  assigns  to
them  a  quite  different  place  which  deprives  them  of  all
special  significance.  Some  special  significance  they
must  certainly  have  had  originally  ;  the  mere  fact  of
their  having  special  names  would  be  enough  to  prove
this  :  there  would  be  no  point  in  it  if  they  were
architectural  ornaments  merely.  Nor  is  it  possible  to
assign  to  them  a  structural  value  as  supporting  the
roof,  for  it  is  certain  that  they  did  not  stand  in  the
inside.  There  is  to  be  con
sidered  also  the  further  cir
cumstance  that  there  were
quite  analogous  pillars  in
other  Semitic  temples  as
well.  In  temples  of  Baal
they  are  quite  usual  ;  the
sanctuary  of  Melkarth  at
Tyre  for  example  had  two
costly  pillars  in  which
Melkarth  was  worshipped
(Herod.  244).  The  an
nexed  figure,  representing
the  temple  at  Paphos  on  a
coin,  exhibits  the  two
pillars  standing  wholly  de
tached  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  entrance.  In
front  of  the  temple  at  Heirapolis,  also,  were  similar
pillars  (\VRS,  Rcl.  Sem.ft  208,  488).  Since  the
temple  of  Solomon  was  assuredly  affected  by  Syro-
phoenician  influences  it  is  natural  to  conjecture  that
in  it  Jachin  and  Boaz  had  a  significance  analogous
to  that  of  the  other  pillars  just  alluded  to  ;  namely,
that  they  were  symbols  of  the  deity.  In  that  case
their  origin  will  have  to  be  sought  in  the  ancient
masseboth  which  used  to  be  customary  objects  in  all
Semitic  sanctuaries,  including  those  of  ancient  Israel
(see  MASSKBAH  ;  also  Benz.  HA  379/1  WkS,  Kel.
Sem.W  1 9 1,  n.  i).

(eAiKTi)  aya/Sao-is).  This,  however,  is  not  a  translation  of  D',17
but  proceeds  upon  another  reading  (Benz.  ad  loc.).  In  buildings
of  the  ancient  E.  no  trace  of  winding  staircases  has  anywhere
been  found,  and  it  is  therefore  very  improbable  that  they  are
mentioned  here.  Levy  (NHll'B)  points  out  that  the  openings
in  the  roofs  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  by  which  the  workmen  were
let  down  (see  below,  §  33)  are  called  J'7l7  (cp  Middoth,  4  5).
Thus,  as  Stade  has  rendered  probable,  we  shall  most  likely  have
to  think  of  openings  provided  with  trap-doors  and  reached  by
ladders  or  trap-stairs.

4933


FIG.  3. — Coin  representing
temple  at  Paphos.


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

This  is  not  equivalent  to  saying  that  as  late  as  Solomon's  time
these  pillars  were  still  regarded  as  symbols  of  Yahwe  ;  we  can
equally  well  suppose  that  they  were  set  up  in  accordance  with
an  ancient  custom  no  longer  understood,  or  simply  in  imitation
of  Phoenician  models.  If  the  view  just  taken  be  correct,  it
becomes  easy  to  understand  why  Ezekiel  should  have  ignored
them,  or  have  sought  to  disguise  their  original  meaning  by
reducing  them  to  mere  supports  of  the  roof.  And  if  so  it  also
becomes  highly  probable  that  the  Chronicler  is  right  in  assigning
them  a  position  in  front  of  the  temple  (^D'nn  'SB^'^')-  It  would
not  be  easy  to  guess  how  he  could  have  come  to  place  them  so
unless  he  had  some  old  source  to  go  upon,  for  the  meaning  of
the  pillars  offered  above  was  certainly  unknown  to  him.


FlG.  4. — Glass  bowl  with  representation  of  Temple.

The  view  that  they  occupied  detached  positions  in
front  of  the  temple  is  confirmed  by  the  interesting  repre
sentation  of  the  Jewish  temple  found  upon  a  glass  bowl
of  the  third  or  fourth  century  A.  n.  which  shows  two


FIG.  5 — Brazen  pillars.

quite  detached  pillars  near  the  entrance.  The  detailed
description  of  the  pillars  has  been  preserved  in  a  three
fold  form  (i  K.  7 15-22  41 /.  2  Ch.  815-17  Jer.  52  21-23

4934


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

2  K.25i7),  in  accordance  with  which  Thenius  was  able
to  restore  the  text  of  the  account  with  considerable
accuracy.  Each  of  the  pillars  was  18  cubits  (about  30  ft. )
in  height,  and  12  cubits  (<5  wrongly  14  cubits)  in  circum
ference.  They  were  hollow,  the  brass  being  4  ringer-
breadths  in  thickness.  Each  was  surmounted  by  a
molten  chapiter,  or  capital,  5  cubits  in  height.  The
capitals  were  covered  with  bronze  net-work  which  was
surrounded  by  two  rows  of  pomegranates.  The  one
questionable  datum  is  that  of  i  K.  7  19  where  the  mean
ing  can  be  either  that  the  capitals  were  curved  outwards
at  the  top  after  the  fashion  of  lilies  (as  is  also  said,  for
example,  of  the  brazen  sea),  or  that  above  the  capitals
there  were  lily-shaped  additions  (cp  Benz.  on  i  K.7is).
The  temple  was  surrounded  by  a  court,  called  the
'  inner '  court,  as  distinguished  from  the  great  court

_  ,  enclosing  the  entire  citadel.  This  inner
j  ,  court  was  surrounded  by  a  wall  of

°  '  three  courses  of  hewn  stone  surmounted
by  a  course  of  cedar  beams  (i  K.  636).  As  to  the
dimensions  of  the  court,  its  entrances,  or  any  other
architectural  details  the  description  in  i  K.  says  nothing.
The  measurements  in  Ezekiel  (100x100  cubits)  are
not  to  be  transferred  to  the  old  temple,  since  with
that  prophet  the  court  had  quite  a  different  function.
He  makes  it  accessible  to  the  priests  alone;  whence
the  Chronicler  actually  describes  it  simply  as  the  '  Court
of  the  Priests  '  (D'Jflsn  isn  ;  2  Ch.  49).  In  ancient  times
and  down  to  Ezekiel's  day  everyone  had  free  access  to
it  ;  it  was  a  place  of  public  assembly  as  we  can  see
from  such  passages  as  Jer.  35  i^  36 10  2  K.  12 12.  For
the  position  it  occupied  in  the  complex  of  buildings,  see
I  'ALACK,  §  3.  In  Jer.  36  10  it  is  quite  rightly  designated
as  the  '  upper  forecourt '  as  it  was  higher  up  than  the
great  palace  court.  By  the  '  new  gate '  one  went  down
from  it  to  the  king's  house  (Jer.  26 10  36 10).  This
designation  'new  gate'  tells  us  that  it  must  have  been
restored  by  some  later  king  ;  for  of  course  there  can  be  no
question  of  an  entirely  new  gate,  such  as  had  never  stood
there  before  ;  there  must  always  have  been  some  way
by  which  the  king  could  pass  northwards  from  his  palace
to  the  sanctuary.  The  same  will  hold  good  also  of  the
'  upper '  gate  which  according  to  2  K.  loss  was  built
by  Jotham  ;  here  also  we  have  to  do  merely  with  a
restoration  of  an  ancient  gate.  We  may  with  consider
able  confidence  seek  for  this  gate  on  the  upper,  that
is  on  the  northern,  side  of  the  court,  and  thus
identify  it  with  Ezekiel's  'north  gate'  (83  92)  and  with
Jeremiah's  'upper  gate  of  Benjamin'  (202),  since  the
road  to  Benjamin  lay  northward.  If  this  N.  gate  is
called  the  gate  of  the  altar  in  Kzek.  815  we  shall  best
explain  the  designation  as  referring  to  the  fact  that  it
was  the  people's  usual  way  of  access  to  the  altar.
Other  expositors  (such  as  Graf)  think  of  2  K.  16 14
where  we  are  told  that  Ahaz  set  up  the  old  altar  on  the
N.  side  of  the  forecourt.  This  N.  gate  appears  also  in
Ezekiel's  temple  as  the  chief  entrance  (46g  40s8^).
Whether  Solomon's  temple  had  a  third  gate — to  the  E.
— is  not  certain  ;  but  it  is  probable.  Ezekiel's  temple
has  one  such  gate  which  is  opened  only  on  Sabbath  and
feast  days  and  reserved  for  the  prince  (Ezek.  46^).
But  in  the  old  temple,  where  the  royal  palace  stood
immediately  to  the  S.  of  the  court,  the  king  of  course
approached  the  sanctuary  direct  from  his  house.  If,
accordingly,  the  Chronicler  (iCh.  9i8)  speaks  of  a
'  king's  gate,'  there  are  only  two  possibilities  ;  either  he
means  the  S.  gate  and  is  to  this  extent  aware  of  what
the  ancient  conditions  were,  or  he  means  the  E.  gate,
in  which  case  he  is  simply  transferring  without  criticism
to  the  older  period  the  circumstances  which  existed  in
his  own  time.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Jer.  8814  we  read
of  a  third  entrance,  and  such  a  third  gate  can  best  be
looked  for  on  the  E.  side.  The  mention  also  of  three
'keepers  of  the  threshold'  (2  K.  2f>i8  Jer.  5224)  points
to  the  existence  of  three  gates.  We  further  learn  of
the  temple  court  that  it  was  already  paved  in  the  pre-
4935


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

exilic  time  (2  K.  1617).  So  also  that  in  the  same  period
there  were  '  chambers '  in  it.  Jer.  804  mentions  a
'chamber  of  the  princes'  (HSkath  ha's-sArim,  DHC-H  nzv^)
which  was  above  a  '  chamber  of  Maaseiah,  the  keeper
of  the  threshold,'  and  adjoined  that  of  the  'sons  of
Hanan.'  According  to  Jer.  36 10  Baruch  read  the  book
of  the  words  of  Jeremiah  in  the  chamber  of  Gemariah,
which  was  situated  at  the  entry  of  the  New  Gate.  Here
we  are  doubtless  to  understand  partly  chainljers  which
served  as  lodging  for  various  officials,  partly  store
rooms  for  temple  equipments.  In  the  temple  of
Ezekiel  a  series  of  cells  are  provided  for  the  priests  on
the  N.  and  S.  side  of  the  court  (Ezek.  40  44^  42 1  /. ).

The  sacred  object  par  excellence  in  this  royal  seat  of
worship  was  the  ark  of  Yahwe  (see  ARK)  which  had  its

. _  . place  in  the  Advtum  (THI  dlbir\,  the

14.  Equipment :  *

the  ark  dark  inner  chamber,  and  in  the
ancient  view  represented  the  presence
of  the  deity.  It  is  remarkable  to  find  in  the  temple  of
Solomon  this  special  significance  of  the  ark  weakened
1  by  the  addition  to  it  of  two  cherubim.  These  stand  10
cubits  high,  their  wings  each  measure  5  cubits  ;  the  wings
stretching  inwards  touch  one  another  in  the  middle  of
the  house,  those  stretching  outwards  touch  respectively
the  N.  and  S.  walls  of  the  dlbir.  Their  faces  are
turned  towards  the  E.  Beneath  the  wings  that  touched
one  another  was  the  ark.  On  the  form,  origin,  and  mean
ing  of  these  figures  see  CHERUB  (cp  also  Benz.  or  i  K.
630).  What  is  of  special  interest  to  note  here  is  that
the  cherubs  are  the  bearers  of  Yahwe,  the  signs  and
witnesses  of  his  presence  (Ezek.  ISioigf. )  ;  it  is  on
this  account  that  we  read  of  Yahwe  as  throned  above
the  cherubim  (Ps.  18 10  [n]),  and  the  name  Yahwe,  the
Lord  of  hosts,  now  receives  the  addition  '  who  sitteth
upon  the  cherubim'  (i  S.  44  2  8.62).  In  accordance
with  this  the  dtbir  is  regarded  as  an  extension  of  the
ark  just  as  the  Kaba  at  Mecca  is  an  extension  of  the
sacred  stone  (see  above,  §  i  end,  n.).

Another  quite  peculiar symbol of  deity  which  had
not its like  at the  other  sanctuaries  was  the  brazen

Tii K  serpent, Nehustan. It stood in the

15.  me  brazen  temple_whether  in  the  Holy  of  Holies

.erpen  .  oj.  jn  the  outer  chamber  we  are  not
told.  Down  to  Hezekiah's  reformation  incense  was
offered  to  it.  On  its  origin  and  meaning,  cp
NEHUSHTAN.  The  absence  from  the  accounts  of  the
temple  which  have  reached  us  of  any  reference  to
this,  which  a  later  age  had  learned  to  regard  as  an
idolatrous  object,  is  easily  intelligible  ;  and,  besides,  it  is
not  to  be  assumed  off-hand  that  this  serpent  had  its
place  in  the  temple  from  the  first.

In  the  outer  chamber  of  the  hekdl  stood,  in  front  of

the  entrance  to  the  di'bir,  the  table  of  shewbread  ( i  K.

T  KI f  t>20)- This  was  an  altar  of  cedar  wood

t t j which is not further described in the

shewbread.  account of the tcmpie in i  K., but

Ezekiel's  description  of  the  corresponding  object  will
doubtless  apply  here.

According  to  this,  it  was  2  cubits  in  length  and
breadth  and  3  in  height ;  doubtless,  therefore,  there  were
steps  up  to  it.  Further,  it  had,  as  was  usual  with
altars,  'horns' — i.e.,  corner-pieces  resembling  horns
(Ezek.  41 21 ).  According  to  i  K.  62o/.  it  was  overlaid
with  gold  ;  but  to  this  statement  will  apply  what  has
already  been  said  of  the  corresponding  statements
elsewhere  (§  9)  ;  it  is  a  later  addition.  The  table
of  Ezekiel  is  plain  cedar.  The  use  of  the  table  is  for
offering  the  so-called  shewbread  (see  SACRIFICE,  §i?  14,
34 a).  In  order  to  be  able  to  make  out  from  Solomon's
temple  the  existence  of  an  altar  of  incense  not  otherwise
mentioned,  Keil  and  others  will  have  it  that  this  is  the
altar  in  question.  A  table  of  cedar,  however,  even  if
thinly  plated  with  gold,  would  be  useless  for  the
purpose  of  burning  incense.  Moreover,  the  offering
of  shewbread  indeed  is  attested  from  an  early  date
i  S.  2i),  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  regular  offering

4936


17.  The
candlesticks.


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

of  incense  such  as  would  have  demanded  a  special
altar.  In  i  K.  748  an  altar  of  incense  is  mentioned
along  with  the  table  for  the  shewbread  ;  but  both  this
verse  and  that  immediately  following  it  are  later
additions  to  the  account  of  the  temple  (see  Benz.  ad
loc. ).  In  ch.  6  there  is  nothing  of  any  such  altar,  which
indeed  makes  its  appearance  only  in  later  strata  of  P.

Similarly,  it  is  only  in  a  late  appendix  (i  K.  7 49)
that  the  golden  candlesticks  said  to  have  been  made  by
Solomon  are  mentioned.  When  this
is  said  it  is  not  of  course  meant  that
there  were  no  candlesticks  at  all  in
the  temple.  It  is  an  ancient  custom  to  keep  a  light  or
lamp  constantly  burning  in  dwellings  ;  if  at  the  present
day  in  conversing  with  fellahin  or  bedouin  of  Palestine
cne  says  '  He  sleeps  in  the  dark,'  what  is  meant  is  that
he  is  so  poor  that  he  cannot  buy  himself  a  drop  of  oil.
The  Hebrew  expression  that  speaks  of  a  man's  lamp
as  having  gone  out,  meaning  that  he  and  his  family
have  disappeared,  is  analogous  (cp  Jer.  25 10);  see
LAMP.  This  custom  makes  it  probable  that  a  light
was  also  burnt  in  the  sanctuary,  the  dwelling-place  of
Yahwe  ;  according  to  i  S.  83  this  was  the  case  during
the  night  at  all  events.  From  what  has  been  said  above
(§  7/. )  as  to  the  lighting  of  the  hekdl  it  will  also  be
apparent  that  the  use  of  artificial  light  in  the  temple
cannot  have  been  out  of  place ;  we  shall  not  err
therefore  if  we  suppose  that  Solomon  caused  lampstands
to  be  made  by  Huram-Abi — of  bronze,  however,  not
of  gold.  The  number  10,  too,  can  hardly  be  right  ;
as  the  tabernacle  had  only  one  candlestick  it  would
probably  be  nearer  the  truth  to  assume  but  one  for
the  temple  also.  That  there  is  no  mention  of  the
candlesticks  in  2  K.  25i4/.  may  be  due  to  accident
merely  (cp  Jer.  52  19,  which  verse,  however,  is  regarded
by  Stade,  in  view  of  Ex.  2629,  as  an  interpolation  ;  see
ZA  T  \ V  3  [1883]  i73 / ).  Cp  CANDLKSTJCK.

In  2  Ch.  4s  mention  is  also  made  of  ten  tables,  five  on  the
S.  and  five  on  the  N.  side  of  the  sanctuary.  These  are  often
explained  (as  for  example  by  Keil)  as  having  been  intended  for
the  shewbread,  but  certainly  not  correctly  (see  above,  cp  2  Ch.
13  ii  2'J  13)  ;  they  are  rather  to  be  placed  in  the  same  category
as  the  ten  candlesticks  (see  Bertheau  on  2  Ch.  4  19).

To  the  temple  service  also  pertained  of  course  a  variety  of
minor  furnishings,  such  as  knives,  forks,  dishes,  and  the  like.
In  i  K.  748^  these  are  introduced  by  a  later  hand  and
represented  as  having  been  of  gold.  In  the  original  description
they  were  either  passed  over  without  mention,  or  they  have
been  removed  from  it  to  make  room  for  this  later  notice.

In  the  forecourt,  due  E.  from  the  temple  entrance,
stood  the  great  altar  of  burnt  offering.  In  our  present


18.  The  bronze


left wholly  undescribcd-


altar


-

at  a  "escr'Ptlon  of  it  once  stood
in  this  place,  and  that  Solomon  caused
an  altar  of  bronze  to  be  made  by  the  same  Tyrian
artificer  who  cast  the  other  pieces,  are  facts  attested  by
i  K.  864,  cp  2  K.  16  10^:  A  later  redactor  stumbled
at  this,  for  in  his  view  there  already  existed  in  connec
tion  with  the  tabernacle  an  altar  which  was  now  trans
ferred  to  the  temple.  Here  also  we  may,  generally
speaking,  suppose  Phoenician  influences  to  have  been
at  work.  The  mere  fact  that  the  altar  was  of  bronze
shows  this,  for  in  old  Israelite  practice  altars  were  made
of  earth  or  unhewn  stone  :  cp  the  law  of  the  altar  as
laid  down  in  Ex.  20  24^  In  2  Ch.  4i  some  additional
data  are  given  as  to  the  size  of  this  altar  ;  it  is  repre
sented  as  having  been  10  cubits  in  height  and  20  in  length
and  breadth.  These  are  the  measurements  of  Ezekiel's
altar,  and  may  safely  be  presumed  to  have  been  taken
from  the  ancient  altar,  which  in  other  respects  also  must
have  been  the  prototype  of  that  of  Kzekiel.  The
dimensions  given  (20x20  cubits)  will  therefore  apply
to  the  area  of  the  base,  from  which  the  altar  rose  in
three  successive  stages  each  diminishing  by  2  cubits  ;
the  lowest  was  2  cubits  and  each  of  the  other  two  was
4  in  height.  The  actual  hearth  was  12  cubits  square,
and  it  was  reached  by  means  of  steps.  Cp  further
ALTAR.

4937


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

To  the  service  of  the  altar  belonged  a  variety  of  utensils
which  were  also  cast  by  Huram-Abi.  See  Benzinger  on  i  K.
i  40  45  ;  ALTAK,  §  9.

Between  the  altar  and  the  porch,  to  the  SE.  of  the
temple  building,  stood  the  great  brazen  sea  (r  K.
19  The  brazen  ^23'26)'  as  to  probable  shape  and
sea  and  lavers.  ^gnificance  <*  which  see  SKA  (BKAZKN).
lo  this  brazen  sea  belong  the  ten
wagons  (AV  bases,  nuilp,  mfkdnoth}  with  lavers,  which
were  arranged,  five  on  the  S.  side  and  five  on  the  N.,
of  the  temple  ( i  K.  7  27-39).

The  text  of  the  description  of  these  lavers  is  extraordinarily
corrupt,  and  inasmuch  as  the  parallel  description  of  the
Chronicler  is  no  longer  extant,  whilst  the  LXX  offers  but  few
data  on  which  a  restoration  could  proceed,  it  is  by  no  means
easy  to  amend  it  satisfactorily,  and  many  details  in  the  descrip
tion,  after  every  effort,  still  remain  obscure.1  The  following-
description  rests  on  the  reconstruction  of  the  text  upon  which
Stade  proceeded  in  1883  (so  also  Benz.  ati  loc.)\  in  many  details
Stade  has  since  (1901)  preferred  a  different  interpretation.  The
various  particulars  cannot  be  discussed  here.


/-• .


SCALE  OF  FEET


FIG.  6.— The  brazen  laver.

The  wagons  which  support  the  lavers  are  4  cubits  in
length  and  breadth  and  3  in  height.  Their  sides  are
not  of  massive  plates  but  consist  of  a  brazen  framework
ornamented  with  ties  or  cross-pieces  of  brass  (misgiroth,
EV  'borders').  The  ties  were  subsequently  removed
by  Ahaz  for  the  sake  of  the  metal,  so  that  the  frames
alone  were  left  (2  K.  1617).  Frames  and  ties  were
decorated  with  lions,  oxen,  and  cherubim.  The  whole
structure  was  carried  on  brazen  axles  and  wheels.
Upon  each  stand  rested  a  brazen  laver,  of  40  baths
capacity  (see  WEIGHTS  AND  MKASUKKS,  §  3  [ii.]),  having
a  diameter  of  4  cubits  (equal  to  the  length  and  breadth
of  the  stand).  The  statement  as  to  the  cubic  capacity
accords  with  the  diameter  given  (see  SEA  [BKAZKN]),
but  the  lavers  were  certainly  shallower,  and  we  must
also  allow  for  the  thickness  of  the  metal.  As  for  the
manner  in  which  the  lavers  were  mounted  in  the  stands

1  Cp  Ewald,  Gott.  Gel.  Nadir.,  1859,  pp.  131^,  Jahrbb.  f.
tibl.  U'issensch.  10273,  and  GVIP\  3  333  ./I;  Stade,  7. 'A  Til',
1883,  and  1901,  145^  ;  Benz.  in  KHC(Kdn.);  Kiltel  in  HK
(A'an.),  and  art.  LAVER.

4938


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  most  probable  conjecture  seems  to  be  that  a  sort
of  hollow  cylinder  rested  upon  the  stand  and  was  firmly
fixed  to  it  by  means  of  ties  and  struts  ;  the  upper  end
of  this  cylinder  supported  the  laver.  At  a  later  date
these  lavers  proved  stumbling  blocks  as  well  as  the
brazen  sea.  They  are  absent  alike  from  the  temple
of  Ezekiel  and  from  the  tabernacle  of  P.  In  lavers
and  sea  alike  we  may  therefore  safely  conjecture  the
original  meaning  to  have  been  a  symbolical  one.  The
cherubims  and  animals  with  which  they  were  adorned
had  at  first  assuredly  a  mythological  significance.
Nowack  and  others  with  some  probability  bring  the
lavers  into  connection  with  the  chariot  of  the  cherubim
in  Ezek.  1  ;  there  the  cherubs  are  the  bearers  of  the
cloud-throne,  here  of  the  collected  waters.  Rosters
(Th.T,  1879,  p.  455)  explained  them  as  symbolising
the  clouds.  This  is  possible  (see  SEA,  BRAZEN),  but
cannot  be  made  out  with  certainty.  The  Chronicler
disposes  of  any  difficulty  of  this  kind  connected  with
these  vessels  by  assigning  to  lavers  and  sea  alike  a
highly  prosaic  function,  that  of  supplying  the  water
required  in  connection  with  the  sacrifices.  It  can
hardly  be  said  that  they  were  conspicuously  well  adapted
for  any  such  purpose.

If  we  proceed  next  to  a  consideration  of  the  meaning

and  origin  of  the  whole  temple  plan,  it  is  plain  at  the  very

M ' outset that it reproduces the funda-

and  o/fctaS  ™ntal  type  of  the  Semitic  sanctuary,

, . °  . viewed  as  the  abode  of  the  deity  in  the

temple  plan. sense  already  set  forth  (see  §  ^ The

essential  feature  is  the  little  cella,  the  dlbir,  where  the
deity  himself  is  conceived  of  as  present  in  mysterious
gloom.  In  front  of  this  is  a  greater  hall,  comparable
to  the  audience-chamber  of  human  kings,  where  the
deity  receives  the  adoration  of  his  worshippers.  Finally,
in  front  of  the  building  is  an  open  space  with  its  altar,
where  the  people  can  gather  together  around  the
sacrifice  in  reverential  stillness.

This  ground  plan — the  tripartite — is  common  to  the
temples  of  various  peoples.  It  is  seen  particularly
clearly  in  Egyptian  temples,  which  has  led  many
scholars  (Renz.  HA,  385)  to  think  of  a  preponderant
Egyptian  influence  here.  There  are  other  considera
tions,  however,  which  serve  to  render  this  less  probable.
In  the  case  of  the  other  Solomonic  buildings  Syro-
phoenician  influence  is  quite  unmistakable  (cp  PALACE).
Phoenician  architects  built  temple  as  well  as  palace,  and
can  hardly  fail  to  have  embodied  their  ideas  in  both.
In  point  of  fact  all  the  noteworthy  features  of  a  distinc
tive  kind  in  the  temple  buildings  of  Solomon  have  been
discovered  also  in  the  temples  of  the  northern  Semites.
Puchstein  (Ja/irb.  d.  kaiser  I.  -deutschen  archaol.  hist.
1 13),  on  the  basis  of  a  comparative  survey  of  the  extant
architectural  remains,  thus  characterises  the  Syrian
temple  :  '  To  judge  by  the  (as  yet  not  very  numerous)
certain  examples  of  Syrian  temple-architecture,  a  com
plete  old  Syrian  temple  consisted  of  portico,  cella,  Holy
of  Holies,  and  side-buildings.  Portico  and  side-buildings
are  to  be  regarded  as  capable  of  being  dispensed  with
according  to  circumstances.  The  Holy  of  Holies  can  be
open  or  closed,  on  a  level  with  the  cella  or  above  it,  semi
circular  or  angular,  and  the  side-buildings  can  be  either
divided  or  undivided. '  Robertson  Smith  (art.  'Temple'
in  Kncy.  Brit.^}  points  especially  to  the  temple  at
Hierapolis  (Mdbug],  which,  as  described  by  Lucian,
offers  an  exact  parallel.  It  faced  the  E.  and  had  two
cells;  and  a  pronaos.  In  front  of  the  door  stood  a  brazen
altar  in  a  walled  court.  This  walled  court  is  also  one
of  the  characteristic  peculiarities  of  the  Syrian  temple
(cp  T.  L.  Donaldson,  Architectura  Numismatica,
London,  1859;  Renan,  Mission  de  Phtnicie;  Perrot  and
Chipiez,  Art  in  Jud. ).  On  details  of  decoration,  cp
CHERUB.  The  palm  tree,  likewise  so  prominent  a
motif  in  the  temple,  is  also  one  of  the  commonest
symbols  in  Phoenician  art.

When  Solomon built his temple, it  was  as  a  royal

4939


TEMPLE, TEMPLE-SERVICE


21.  History  of

Solomon's

temple.


private  chapel,  one  sanctuary  among  many,  and  not
even  the  most  famous  of  these  ;  the
ancient  sanctuaries  of  Bethel,  Beer-
sheba,  Dan,  etc.,  long  continued  to
rank  far  above  it  in  the  popular  esti
mation.  The  development  in  the  standing  of  the
temple  and  its  importance  in  the  history  of  Israel  need
not  be  dwelt  on  here  (see  DEUTERONOMY,  §  13 ;  ISRAEL,
§  33/.  ;  LAW  LITERATURE,  §  13)  ;  but  it  falls  within
the  scope  of  the  present  sketch  to  trace  the  external
history  of  the  temple  building  itself.  Unfortunately,
here  also  our  sources  are  far  from  copious,  and  some
times  what  has  reached  us  is  far  from  clear.  Of
Jehoshaphat  the  Chronicler  relates  (2  Ch.  '20s)  that  he
built  an  outer  court.  The  form  of  the  notice — that  it
is  with  an  '  outer'  court  that  we  are  now  concerned  (see
above  §  13) — is  due  to  the  Chronicler;  but  the  fact
itself  need  not  on  that  account  be  questioned.  Under
Joram,  Ahaziah,  and  Athaliah  the  sanctuary  must  have
been  greatly  neglected  and  allowed  to  fall  into  disrepair ;
under  Joash  at  least  extensive  repairs  had  become
necessary  (2  K.  124^!).  Jotham  built  a  new  gate,  the
'  upper  gate'  of  the  minor  forecourt  (2  K.  1035)  already
referred  to.  The  '  godless '  Ahaz  also  beautified  the
sanctuary,  although,  indeed,  this  is  set  down  by  the
narrator  to  his  discredit  ;  he  caused  a  new  and  more
magnificent  altar  after  the  pattern  he  had  seen  at
Damascus  to  be  set  up  in  place  of  the  old.  Afterwards
indeed  he  found  himself  in  such  monetary  straits  that  to
meet  the  demand  of  the  king  of  Assyria  he  found  him
self  compelled  to  strip  off  the  ties  (EV  '  borders,'
misgSrotti)  of  the  lavers,  and  to  melt  the  oxen  of  brass
which  supported  the  brazen  sea  (2  K.  1614^) — an
incidental  illustration  of  the  freedom  with  which  the
kings  acted  within  their  own  private  sanctuary.  In  the
spoiling  of  the  temple  it  was  no  other  than  the  pious
Hezekiah  who  followed  the  example  Ahaz  had  set  ;
after  having  in  prosperous  days  overlaid  the  door-posts
and  doors  of  the  temple  with  gold,  he  found  it  necessary
to  strip  them  again  to  meet  the  demand  of  the  Assyrian
king  (2  K.  18  16).  The  structural  changes  made  in  the
temple  by  Manasseh  were  connected  with  his  introduc
tion  of  foreign  eastern  cults  ;  on  the  temple  roof  and  in
the  court  he  set  up  altars  to  the  '  host  of  heaven '
(2  K.23i2)  ;  the  houses  for  the  hieroduli  and  the
accommodation  for  the  horses  of  the  sun  (2  K.  23 711)
are  doubtless  also  to  be  assigned  to  Manasseh's  reign.
Josiah  removed  all  this,  and  took  in  hand  extensive
restorations  of  the  temple  fabric  (2  K.  23s  ff.}.

According  to  our  present  accounts  the  temple  was
plundered  by  foreign  foes  four  times  before  its  final
destruction  by  the  Babylonians.

First  by  Shishak  in  Rehoboam's  time  (i  K.  14  26);  again,  under
Joram's  reign,  by  the  Philistines  in  conjunction  with  Arab  tribes
(Joel  3,  cp  2  Ch.  21  i6_/C22  i);  a  third  time  under  Amaziah  by
Joash,  king  of  Israel  (2  K.  14 14) ;  and  a  fourth  time  under
Jehoiachim  by  Nebuchadrezzar  (2  K.  24  13).  These  all  contented
themselves  with  robbing  the  temple  of  its  treasures,  without
carrying  the  work  of  destruction  farther  so  far  as  we  know.

It  was  not  till  eleven  years  after  the  first  appearance
of  Nebuchadrezzar  that  the  building  itself  was  burnt  to
the  ground,  after  it  had  been  stripped  of  everything
valuable, — whether  of  gold,  silver,  or  bronze, — the  pillars
also  being  broken  up  and  carried  away  (2  K.  258^
Jer.  52i2^  2  Ch.  36 18).  This  was  according  to  the
MT  of  2  K.  on  the  seventh  of  the  fifth  month,  according
to  Jer.  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  fifth  month,  and  accord
ing  to  (SL  of  2  K.  25  8  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  month.
The  Talmud  harmonises : — on  the  seventh  day  the
Chaldceans  forced  the  temple,  on  the  evening  of  the  ninth
they  set  fire  to  it,  and  on  the  tenth  it  was  destroyed.

Ezekiel's  temple  (Ezek.  40-43) J  never  got  beyond  the

1  The  text  of  Ezekiel's  description  of  his  temple  is  very
corrupt.  It  is  impossible  therefore  to  reconstruct  it  with
exactitude.  Consult  especially  CornilPs  edition  of  the  text ;  as
also  the  commentaries  of  Smend  and  Hertholet,  and  the
Archzologies  of  Benzinger  and  Nowack.  On  Ezekiel's  altar  cp
ZK1VL,  1883,  pp.  *>}  j£ *&ff.,  1884,  pp.  496^


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

theoretical  stage,  and  remained  always  an  imaginative

F V"  V construct'on  nierely. It  demands  some

•  notice  here,  however,  as  giving  expression

temple. tQ  a  new  conception  Of  the  sanctuary  and

its  significance — new  or  at  least  differing  from  that
which  finds  expression  in  the  temple  of  Solomon.
On  the  other  hand,  as  already  remarked,  the  later
representation  is,  as  has  been  pointed  out  above,  in
many  respects  fitted  to  be  of  use  to  us  in  our  recon
struction  of  the  earlier  temple.  The  fundamental  con
ception  of  the  entire  structure  is  the  strict  separation  of
sacred  from  profane.  The  whole  temple  area  is
sacrosanct,  and  no  secular  building  of  any  description,
whether  royal  or  official,  is  allowed  a  place  within  its
precincts.  The  whole  eastern  hill  is  set  apart  for  its
exclusive  occupancy.  A  protective  area,  the  land  of
the  Zadokites,  encloses  it  and  shuts  out  the  rest  of
Jerusalem.  At  no  point  are  the  city  walls  allowed  to
be  in  immediate  contact  with  this  land  of  priests.  A
similar  determination  to  separate  sacred  from  profane
dominates  the  internal  arrangements.  It  is  with  this
purpose  in  view  that  the  temple  has  two  courts  ( whereas
the  pre-exilic  temple  had  but  one)  ;  the  inner  court  is
accessible  only  to  the  officiating  priests  and  their
servants  the  Levites.  The  laity  are  restricted  to  the
outer  court.

Another  characteristic  feature  of  the  whole  arrange
ment  is  the  strict  symmetry  observed  throughout.  The
fundamental  unit  of  measurement  is  the  length  of  50
cubits  ;  the  buildings  exhibit  by  preference  the  proportion
of  i  :  2  ;  the  gateways  are  25  cubits  in  width  and  50
in  length,  the  temple  proper  50  cubits  (from  end  to  end
100),  the  open  space  surrounding  the  altar  is  100
cubits  square,  and  so  forth.  The  entire  temple  area  is
500  cubits  square,  enclosed  by  a  wall  6  cubits  in  height
and  thickness.  Outside  this  wall  a  further  strip,  50
cubits  in  breadth,  is  still  reckoned  to  the  holy  territory,
and  must  not  be  cultivated  even  by  the  priests.  The
northern,  eastern,  and  southern  sides  are  pierced  at  the
middle  by  great  gateways  (25x50  cubits),  each  with
siderooms  and  a  gateway.  These  lead  into  the  outer
court  which  surrounds  the  inner  to  a  breadth  of  i  so
cubits  on  the  northern,  eastern,  and  southern  sides.
On  each  of  these  three  sides  are  10  cells — making  a
total  of  30 — intended  to  be  used  by  the  people  for
miscellaneous  purposes  such  as  refreshment  and  the  like
(cp  Ezra  106  Neh.  134/i ).  In  the  four  corners  are
lesser  courts  separated  off  by  partitions  ;  here  are  the
kitchens  where  the  Levites  cook  the  offering  of  the
people.  Gateways  corresponding  exactly  to  the
three  gates  just  mentioned  lead  on  the  three  sides
from  the  outer  to  the  inner  court.  Within  and  in
close  proximity  to  the  eastern  gate  stand  the  tables
for  slaughtering  the  sin-  and  trespass -offerings  (or
burnt  offerings  and  peace-offerings).  At  the  N.  and  S.
gates  are  chambers  for  the  officiating  priests.  Exactly
in  the  middle  of  the  square  in  front  of  the  temple  stands
the  altar  of  burnt  offering.  The  temple  building  itself,
which  stood  on  a  higher  'level  reached  by  ten  steps,
consisted  of  a  porch (20  cubits  in  width  and  12  in  depth),
the  Holy  Place  (40x20  cubits,  inside  measurement),
the  Holy  of  Holies  (20  x  20  cubits)  and  the  threa-storied
side-building.  The  thickness  of  the  walls  was,  in  the
main  building,  6  cubits,  and  in  the  side  building  5  ;  the
width  of  the  chambers  was  4  cubits,  the  total  breadth
thus  amounting  to  50  cubits.  The  total  length,
including  the  porch,  was  100  cubits,  outside  measure
ment.

As  the  Chronicler  relates,  the  first  care  of  the  exiles
on  their  return  was  the  restoration  of  divine  worship.

23  Zernb  In  the  first  instance,  however,  they  con-
babel's  temnle  tented  themselves  with  setting  up  a
e'  new  altar  of  burnt  offering  on  the  site
of  the  old  (Ezra  83;  cp  Hag.  214).  So  much  indeed
was  evidently  indispensable ;  without  an  altar  there
could  be  no  sacrifice,  without  sacrifice  no  worship,

4941


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

without  worship  no  Jewish  community.  A  considerable
time  elapsed  before  the  returned  exiles  proceeded  to  the
building  of  a  temple  proper.  In  our  present  book  of
Ezra  indeed  it  is  made  out  as  if  the  work  was  begun
with  great  zeal  immediately  after  the  return.  It  has
long  been  recognised,  however,  that  the  representation  in
Ezra  in  its  essential  features  is  unhistorical  (see  EZRA-
NEHEMIAH,  §§6/.  ,  10,  i6[i],  17;  HAGGAI,  §  3  (6)  •
ISRAEL,  §§  S3/-)-

As  regards  the  build  ng  itself  the  OT  supplies  us  with
only  a  few  fragmentary  notes,  which  are  but  sparingly
24  Measure  suPPleniented  by  Josephus  and  Pseudo-

ments  etc  Hecata;us  <ap"  Jos'>"  The  dimensi°ns
of  the  whole  temple  area  are  given  by
Hecatoeus  (ap.  Jos.  c.  Ap.  122),  in  so  far  as  he  tells  us
that  the  court  was  5  plethra  (i.e.  ,  500  Gk.  ft.  =485^
Eng.  ft.)  in  length,  and  100  Gk.  cubits  (  =  145^  ft.)  in
breadth.  The  gates  had  double  doors.  Within  the
court  stood  the  altar  which  now  was  in  exact  accordance
with  the  precepts  of  the  law,  being  constructed  of
unhewn  stones  (i  Mace.  444).  Doubtless  also  it  was
reached  by  a  sloping  ascent  instead  of  steps.  According
to  Hecataeus  it  was  as  large  as  that  of  Solomon.  In
like  manner,  in  accordance  with  the  description  of  the
tabernacle  arrangements,  there  was  but  one  laver  in  the
court  (Midd.36;  Ecclus.  50s  :  the  latter  passage  is
certainly  very  corrupt).  Of  the  gates  mention  is  made
in  Neh.  831  of  the  Miphkad  Gate,  and  in  Neh.
12  39  of  the  Prison  Gate,  which  last  doubtless  was  on
the  southern  side.  Whether  the  cells  and  store-rooms
(liskoth  ;  Tra,ffTo<t>6pia)  of  which  we  incidentally  hear,
were  in  the  court  or  in,  the  side-building  of  the  temple
itself  we  do  not  know.  1  Over  the  Tyropceon  valley  was
a  bridge  from  the  temple  area  which  was  broken  down
by  the  Jews  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Pompey  ;
its  position  is  indicated  by  the  so-called  Wilson-
arch.  When  it  was  erected  we  do  not  know
(Josephus,  Ant.  xiv.  42;  BJ  i.  7  2  ii.  163  vi.  62).  Like
Ezekiel's  temple  this  also  had  two  courts  (av\al,
i  Mace.  434  48):  only  —  the  point  of  chief  importance
—  the  laity  had  in  this  case  access  to  the  inner  as
well  as  the  outer  court  and  to  the  altar.  When  on  one
occasion  Alexander  Jannosus  did  something  that  was
contrary  to  to  the  sacrificial  ritual,  the  multitude  pelted
him  with  palm  branches  and  citrons.  It  was  only  in
consequence  of  this  incident  that  he  afterwards  caused
a  wooden  enclosure  to  be  set  up  round  the  altar,  the
space  within  which  was  thenceforth  accessible  to  the
priests  alone  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  13s).  The  whole  account
of  Josephus  presupposes  that  until  that  time  the  laity
had  unhindered  access  to  the  inner  court  and  altar.
In  this  most  essential  matter  of  the  strict  exclusion
of  the  laity  from  the  sanctuary  proper,  accordingly,
we  see  that  the  demands  of  Ezekiel  and  P  were  not
carried  out  immediately  but  only  gradually  made  way.

The  temple  building  itself,  according  to  Ezra  t>  3,  had  a  breadth
and  height  of  60  cubits.  But  this  statement  has  no  satisfactory
sense.  It  is  all  the  less  credible  because  we  are  expressly
informed  that  this  second  temple  came  so  far  short  of  that  of
Solomon  that  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  had  seen  the  first  it
appeared  as  nothing  (Hag.  2  3).  Certainly,  therefore,  it  cannot
have  been  so  very  considerably  larger  than  the  other.  The  text
of  the  passage  is  hopelessly  corrupt  (cp  also  Ryssel  and  Bertholet
in  loc.).

As  regards  the  internal  arrangements,  we  know  that

the Holy  of Holies was  empty  ; the  ark no longer

„ j ,  . existed. A stone three fingers in

arran^em^ts  hei^ht  was  laid  in  the  Place  of  the
arrangements.  ark  go  {hat  the  high  pries[  on  the

Day  of  Atonement  could  set  down  his  censer  upon  it.
It  was  the  foundation  stone  (tf&en  stthivyah]  already
referred  to  in  §  5  ;  cp  Jos.  BJv  5s,  YC<nul  5  2).  The
Holy  of  Holies  were  separated  from  the  Holy  Place  by
a  curtain  (i  Mace.  122  4  51).

The  Holy  Place,  in  like  manner,  was  closed  by  a
curtain  (i  Mace.  4  51)  ;  within  it  stood,  as  in  the  former

1  Cp  i  Mace.  438;  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  4  7  xiv.  16  2  ;  Ezra  8  29  106
Neh.  3  30  1037.2?:  12  44^.  13


4942


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

temple,  a  table  of  shewbread.  The  place  of  the  ten
candlesticks  (see  §  17)  was  taken  by  one  with  seven
branches  which  was  removed  by  Antiochus  (i  Mace.
123).  It  was  restored  by  Judas  the  Maceabee.  The
Holy  Place  also  contained  the  golden  altar  of  incense.
As  already  mentioned,  this  was  a  quite  recent
arrangement,  resulting  from  a  duplication  of  the
golden  table.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the
accounts  continue  to  vacillate  down  to  a  quite  late  date  ;
Hecatasus  and  the  author  of  2  Mace.  2s,  each  naming
two  pieces  of  furniture  in  the  sanctuary  :  the  former
(Jos.  c.  Ap.\m)  the  /3w/u6s  and  the  candlestick,  the
latter  the  incense  altar  and  the  candlestick.  On  the
Arch  of  Titus,  also,  only  two  pieces  are  shown.

The  first  temple  resembled  other  temples  of  antiquity
in  being  built  to  contain  a  visible  symbol  of  the  presence

.  .. of  the  deity, namely, the  ark, which

26.  A  priestly  stood in  the  imier  chamber In the

empie.  second  temple  the  adytum  was  empty  ;
but  the  idea  that  the  Godhead  was  locally  present  in  it,
still  found  expression  in  the  continuance  of  the  altar
service,  in  the  table  of  shewbread  (a  sort  of  continual
lectisternium)  that  stood  in  the  outer  chamber,  and
above  all  in  the  annual  ritual  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,
when  the  high  priest  entered  the  Holy  of  Holies  to
sprinkle  the  blood  of  the  expiatory  sacrifice  on  behalf  of
the  people.

Not  only  in  this  point  but  in  all  others  the  ritual  of  the
second  temple  was  dominated  by  the  idea  of  priestly  media
tion,  and  the  stated  sacrifices  of  the  priests  on  behalf  of  the
people,  which  took  the  place  of  the  old  stated  oblations  of  the
kings,  became  the  main  feature  of  the  altar  service.  The  first
temple  was  primarily  the  royal  chapel,  and  the  kings  did  as
they  pleased  in  it ;  the  second  temple  was  the  sanctuary  of  the
priests,  whose  chief  now  became  the  temporal  as  well  as  the
spiritual  head  of  the  people.  In  the  time  of  Kzekiel,  not  only
laymen  but  uncircumcised  foreigners  entered  the  sanctuary
and  acted  as  servants  in  the  sacred  offices  (Kzek.  44  7)  ;  in  the
second  temp  e  the  laity  were  anxiously  kept  at  a  distance  from
the  holy  things,  and  even  part  of  the  court  around  the  altar  was
fenced  off,  as  we  have  just  seen,  by  a  barrier,  which  only  the
priests  were  allowed  to  cross  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  13  5).

As  regards  the  later  history  of  Zerubbabel's  temple,
the  subsequent  works  upon  it  and  the  strengthening  of
„.  .  the  wall  surrounding  the  outer  court  are

7_Hi  tory  associated with the name of  the high


of  second


priest  SIMON  II.  (Ecclus.  50  i). Antiochus


P  '  Epiphanes  not  only  plundered  it,  but
desecrated  it  by  setting  up  on  the  altar  of  burnt  offering
a  small  altar  to  Jupiter  Olympius  (i  Mace.  123^!
44  ^i  54  4s8  2  Mace.  6  2  ft).  Three  years  later,  after  the
reconquest  of  the  city,  Judas  the  Maceabee  restored  the
temple,  set  up  a  new  altar  with  new  furniture,  and
consecrated  the  building  anew  (cp  i  Mace.  123^  443^
52  f.  2  Mace.  10  5  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  7  6).  At  the  same  time
he  fortified  the  temple  with  high  towers  and  walls
(i  Mace.  46067),  so  that  the  temple  thenceforward
could  be  regarded  as  the  citadel  proper  of  Jerusalem.
These  fortifications  were  demolished  by  Antiochus  II.
Eupator  (i  Mace.  622);  but  they  were  again  restored  by
Jonathan  (i  Mace.  1236  Jos.  Atif.xm.5si),  and  at  a
later  period  further  strengthened  by  Simon  (i  Mace.
1852).  At  the  time  of  Pompey's  siege  (63  B.C.)  the
temple  was  an  exceptionally  strong  fortress,  defended
on  the  northern  and  more  accessible  side  by  towers  and
deep  ditches  (Ant.  xiv.  42).  Pompey  took  it  by  storm,
but  left  the  sacred  vessels  untouched  (Ant.  xiv.  4;).
Crassus,  on  the  other  hand,  plundered  it  without  mercy
(Ant.  xiv.  7  i,  /?/i.  88).  The  temple  was  again  besieged
and  stormed  by  Herod  ;  like  Pompey  he  concentrated
his  attack  on  the  north  side.  In  this  siege  some  of  the
temple  cloisters  were  burnt  and  some  persons  killed  ;
but  the  desecration  stopped  at  this  (Ant.  xiv.  1(J2/. ).

In  the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign  (20-19  B.C.)
Herod  the  Great  began  to  build  the  temple  anew.
28  The  temnle  Besides  the  descriptions  in  Josephus,

f  H d We  have  f°r  Herod's  tem.Ple  a  mass  of
details  and  measurements  in  the  Mishnic

treatise  Middoth. Josephus  was  himself  a  priest,  whilst
4943


TEMPLE, TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  Mishnah  was  not  written  till  a  century  after  the
destruction  of  the  temple,  though  it  uses  traditions  that
go  back  to  Levites  who  had  served  in  the  temple.  The
two  sources  differ  in  many  measurements,  and  the
Middoth  appears  to  be  possessed  of  detailed  traditions
only  for  the  inner  temple.  The  state  of  the  evidence  is
not  such  as  to  allow  a  plan  of  the  temple  to  be  formed
with  architectural  precision.  The  following  account
rests  almost  entirely  on  Josephus,  who,  apart  from
certain  exaggerations  in  detail,  gives  a  satisfactory
general  account,  such  as  could  be  written  from  memory
without  notes  and  drawings  (for  literature,  see  §  43).

Herod's  motives  in  this  undertaking  were  not  so
much  religious  as  political.  On  the  one  hand  it  afforded

29  H  od"  ^'m  an  °PPortumty  °f  K'vm&  some  satis-
'  ,.  faction  to  the  religious  feelings  of  his

Jewish  subjects,  which  he  had  so  often
outraged,  and  of  gaining  some  favour  in  pious  circles
throughout  the  country.  On  the  other  hand,  he  had
his  full  share  of  the  passion  for  building,  which  char
acterised  that  age.  After  raising  so  many  splendid
temples  in  the  various  Greek  cities  of  his  kingdom,  it
seemed  hardly  fitting  that  the  temple  of  his  capital
should  fall  behind  the  others  in  magnificence.  His
preparations  for  the  work,  we  are  told,  were  made  on  a
very  comprehensive  and  elaborate  scale,  so  as  to  spare
the  Jews  any  apprehension  lest  in  the  event  of  his
death  the  scheme  should  remain  uncompleted.  In
other  directions,  also,  he  showed  all  possible  respect
for  the  religious  susceptibilities  of  his  compatriots.  As
it  was  not  lawful  for  any  laymen  to  enter  the  inner
precincts  of  the  temple,  he  found  it  necessary  to  have  a
thousand  priests  trained  as  masons  and  carpenters,  so
that  the  building  might  be  duly  completed.

The  rebuilding  meant,  in  the  first  place,  a  consider
able  enlargement  of  the  temple  area.  According  to
pi  f  Josephus'  account  (Ant.  xv.  11s,  /y/l2i)
'  a!*  °  the  former  area  was  exactly  doubled,  and
the  perimeter  raised  from  four  stadia
(Ant.  xv.  US)  to  six  (Zf/v.oz).  In  other  words,  the
breadth  (from  E.  to  W. )  remained  as  before  —  a
stadium  (Ant.  xv.  Us)— but  the  length  (N.  to  S. )
was  increased  from  one  stadium  to  two.  The  available
level  ground  on  the  temple  hill  was  insufficient  for  a
plan  so  extended,  and  vast  substructions  on  the
southern  side  became  necessary.  The  whole  S.
wall  was  new  from  the  foundation.  Even  to-day  the
southern  portion  of  the  temple  area  is  seen  to  rest  on
immense  arches,  known  in  Arab  tradition  as  Solomon's
stables,  but  really  dating  from  the  time  of  Herod.

The  whole  area  was  surrounded  by  a  battlemented
wall  (BJ\\.  9 12).  On  the  N.  was  the  gate  Tadi  of  the
Mishnah,  which  Josephus  mentions  only  incidentally.
This,  like  the  gate  Shushan  on  the  E. ,  which  he  does
not  mention  at  all,  must  have  been  of  minor  import
ance  ;  the  chief  accesses  were  necessarily  from  the
lower  city  to  the  S. ,  and  the  upper  city  to  the  W.
beyond  the  Tyropoeon  valley.  The  S.  wall,  says
Josephus,  had  gates  in  the  rrfiddle  (Ant.  xv.  11s).  The
Mishnah  names  them  the  two  gates  of  Huklah.  There
is  a  double  gate  in  the  substructure  of  the  S.  wall,
350  ft.  from  the  S\V.  angle,  and  from  it  a  double
tunnel  leads  up  to  the  platform.  This  double  gate
exactly  fits  Josephus's  description.  There  is  also  a  triple
gate,  600  ft.  from  the  SW.  angle,  which  is  probably
to  be  regarded  as  the  second  Huklah  gate.  In  the  W.
side  the  Mishnah  places  one  gate  (Kiponus),  while
Josephus  recognises  four.  The  most  southerly  is
necessarily  the  one  which  opened  on  a  flight  of  steps
descending,  and  then  reascending  across  the  Tyropceon
to  the  upper  city  opposite.  Now,  at  the  S\V.  corner
of  the  platform,  there  are  still  remains  of  the  great
arch  (Robinson's  arch),  which  must  have  belonged  to  a
bridge  connecting  the  upper  city  with  the  S.  portico  of
the  temple.  Many  scholars  (as,  for  example,  W.  R.
Smith,  in  Ency.  Brit.W,  s.v.  'Temple')  look  for  this

4944


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

southern  gate  here.  It  is  more  probable,  however,  that
it  lay  somewhat  farther  to  the  N. ,  at  the  point  where,
tolerably  low  down  in  the  temple  wall,  the  colossal
lintel  of  a  gate  was  found,  consisting  of  a  single  stone.
The  steps  of  which  Josephus  speaks,  must,  in  that  case,
have  been  inside  the  gate,  as  the  gate  itself  was  not  far
above  the  level  of  the  bottom  of  the  valley.  Comparing
/•'/ ii.  1(3  3  vi.  62  v.  4  2,  we  see  that  the  embankment  also
carried  the  city  wall  (the  so-called  first  wall).  Of  this
approach  there  are  remains  at  Wilson's  arch,  600  ft.
N.  of  Robinson's  arch.  Here  also  as  in  the  case  of
Robinson's  arch,  under  the  so-called  Wilson's  arch,
have  been  found  remains  of  the  arch  of  an  older  bridge
in  the  Roman  style,  which  presumably  dates  from  the
Herodian  period  (as  to  this  cp  JERUSALEM,  §  8).
Round  the  entire  temple  area  on  all  four  sides  ran
porticoes  built  against  the  enclosing  wall.  The  finest
was  that  on  the  S.  side — the  Stoa  Basilica— which  was
formed  by  four  rows  of  Corinthian  columns  of  dazzling
white  marble  (162  columns  in  all).  Of  the  three  aisles
that  in  the  middle  was  twice  as  high  (some  28  metres)
as  those  flanking  it,  and  broader  by  one  half  (some
12  metres).  On  the  three  other  sides  of  the  area  were
double  porticoes,  some  15  metres  in  breadth  with
monolith  pillars  of  some  12  metres  in  height.  All
hese  buildings  were  roofed  with  cedar  beams,  richly
carved  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  11s,  />/  v.  02).  The  eastern
portico  \vas  known  as  Solomon's  porch  (Jn.  1023,  Acts
3n/i  5 12);  there  must  therefore  have  previously  stood
on  this  side  a  structure  which  was  considered  as  resting
on  Solomon's  foundations.  The  court  itself  immediately
within  these  buildings  was  paved  in  mosaic  fashion  with
stone.

Connected  with  the  temple  was  the  citadel  of  Antonia  (see
JERUSALEM,  §  28).  It  lay  on  the  NW.  and  dominated  the
temple  area  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  11  4).  Stairs  descended  from  it  to
the  NW.  corner  of  the  area,  to  the  northern  and  western
porticoes.

In  the  temple  of  Herod  the  separation  of  sacred  from
profane  was  rigorous.  The  Antonia,  the  porches,  and
the  space  immediately  within  these  were  not  holy
ground,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  They  were

, m,  accessible  to Gentiles  even, on  which

31.  The  courts

, ,  account  the '  outer court is actually

often  called  the  '  court  of  the  Gentiles,'
although  this  description  is  nowhere  met  with,  either  in
Josephus  or  in  the  Mishna.  In  the  centre  of  this
enclosed  space  rose  a  platform  at  a  height  of  15  cubits
above  the  court  of  the  Gentiles — the  inner  court  with
the  sanctuary  proper.  This  platform  itself  was  in  turn
surrounded  by  a  narrow  terrace,  10  cubits  in  breadth
(hcl :  DJ\.  02;  MiddJth,  2  3).  From  the  court  of  the
Gentiles  fourteen  steps  led  up  to  this  terrace,  and  from
this  again  five  steps  to  the  gate  of  the  inner  court  (see
Jos.  BJ\.  5 2  ;  Middoth  gives  the  number  of  the  steps
differently).  There  was  no  entrance  upon  the  W.
side.  A  breastwork  (rriDi  si>nig)  of  stone  ran  round
the  whole  of  the  inner  court  beneath  the  level  of  the
steps.  On  it  were  placed  .at  intervals  inscribed  tablets
forbidding  every  one  who  was  not  a  Jew  from  crossing
the  limit  or  treading  the  holy  place,  on  pain  of  death.1
At  the  top  of  the  steps  was  the  inner  court  properly  so
called,  surrounded  by  a  wall  rising  25  cubits  above
the  level  of  the  outer  court.  The  inner  court  was
divided  into  two  unequal  portions  by  a  cross  wall  running
X.  and  S.  The  eastern  and  smaller  space,  which  lay
at  a  somewhat  lower  level,  formed  the  so-called  court
of  the  women  ('dsdralh.  ndsim,  D'ifO  rmy,  Midd.  2s),
and  was  accessible  to  Jewish  women.  The  western
space,  containing  the  temple  buildings  properly  so
called,  was  for  men  only.  The  wall  enclosing  the
inner  court  was  pierced  by  nine  gates  ;  the  X.  and  S.
sides  had  each  four  gates,  the  easternmost  of  which  in
each  case  led  directly  into  the  court  of  the  women,  whilst
1  One  such  inscription  (Greek  and  Latin)  is  still  extant
(PEFQSt.,  1871,  p.  132;  Benz.  HA  404;  Nowack,  HA
277)-

4945


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  others  opened  into  that  of  the  men.  The  gates
had  double  doors  which  were  covered  with  silver  and
gold,  the  gift  of  the  Jewish  alabarch,  Alexander  of
Alexandria.  To  the  W.  there  was  no  gate  and  the
E.  side  had  but  one,1  which,  however,  was  specially
magnificent  and  costly.  Its  doors  were  of  Corinthian
brass.  It  led,  according  to  what  has  just  been  said,
directly  into  the  court  of  the  women.  In  a  straight
line  with  it,  finally,  in  the  wall  between  the  courts  of
the  men  and  women,  the  most  magnificent  of  all  the
gates  closed  the  eastern  approach  to  the  temple  (Jos.
BJ  v.  5s).  It  was  the  'Great'  gate,  40  cubits  broad
and  50  cubits  high  ;  15  semicircular  steps  here  ascended
from  the  court  of  the  women  to  that  of  the  men.
Which  of  these  two  doors  on  the  E.  is  intended  by  the
'  Beautiful '  gate  of  Acts  3  2,  it  is  impossible  to  determine.
According  to  the  Mishna  (Midd.\t},  the  last-named
inner  gate  between  the  court  of  the  men  and  that  of  the
women  corresponded  to  the  gate  of  Nicanor ;  ac
cording  to  the  description  of  these  gates  by  Josephus,
however,  there  would  seem  to  be  some  mistake  in  this.
The  gates  were  probably2  all  of  them  porch-like  in
plan,  with  side  recesses  (exedras)  which  made  the  con
nection  with  the  chambers  skirting  the  length  of  the
walls.  In  like  manner  there  was  an  upper  chamber
above  the  gateway  properly  so  called  (cp  Midd.  Is;
Tarn  id,  1 1,  wrhere  mention  is  made  of  an  upper  chamber
of  the  gate  of  Sparks  [psrari  nj,'tr]  on  the  N.  side).  This
gave  the  gates  the  tower -like  appearance  of  which
Josephus  speaks.

Along  the  enclosing  wall  ran  a  series  of  chambers
(Ifsdkoth)  which  served  for  storage  of  the  various  utensils,

„„  Th  skins  °f  sacrificial  animals,  sacrificial  salt,
,  '  .  wood,  vestments,  and  the  like,  or  for  various
c  am  ers.  0peratjonSi  Sucj1  as  ^e  preparation  of  the
meal-offering,  and  so  forth.

The  supreme  council  also  held  its  sittings  in  one  of  these
chambers.  Their  precise  number  is  unknown.  Midd.  5  3yC
mentions  three  on  the  N.  and  three  on  the  S.  ;  elsewhere
yet  others  are  alluded  to.  According  to  Jl/ii/t/,2^  there  were
four  chambers  in  the  women's  court  also — a  piece  of  information,
however,  the  accuracy  of  which  is  with  reason  called  in  question
(Schiirer  in  Riehm,  Hll'JJ,  conjectures  that  the  statement  is
an  inference  from  Ezek.  40  21).  Some  of  these  chambers
(whether  all  of  them  is  uncertain)  had  upper  stories  (\'o»ni  1  5,
and  Tamid\  i  ;  allusion  is  made  to  an  upper  chamber  of  the
Bet-Abtinas).  In  front  of  the  chambers  were,  as  in  the  first
inner  court,  porticoes,  though  much  smaller  in  size.  Finally,
we  hear  of  thirteen  offertory  chests  for  free-will  offerings  of  all
sorts.

From  this  court  of  the  Israelites  the  portion  immedi
ately  surrounding  the  sanctuary  was  separated  by  a
breastwork  of  stone — on  all  sides,  according  to  the  ex
press  statement  of  Josephus  (ttjv.  56  Ant.  xiii.  13s)  ;
but  the  Mishna  (Midd.  26)  speaks  only  of  a  wall  running
from  N.  to  S.  The  area  thus  shut  off  was  the  court
of  the  priests.  Laymen  had  access  to  this  court  only
when  the  ritual  connected  with  certain  offerings  de
manded  the  presence  of  the  persons  presenting  them.

Within  the  court  of  the  priests  stood  on  a  still  higher

level  the  temple  building  proper. The  ascent  to  it  was

Th ^  twelve  steps  (Afidd.  36). The  ground

, ' , plan  and  dimensions  of  the  building  were

, ..  P the  same  as in the temple  of  Solomon —

1  a  ne-  v;z  t  50  cuijjts  jn  length  20  in  breadth  and

40  in  height. Two  costly  curtains  shut  off  the  Holy  of

1  According  to  Midd.  1 6  (cp  M.  Skckillim,  6  2)  the  gates  on
the  S.  side  were  these  :  (i)  p'^V?  "^'^  (wanting  in  Midd.
l4/);  (2)  pjn  'y;  (3)  Dili 32?  'y\  (4)  C'Cn  'r;  and  those  on
the  N.  side  were:  (i)  "'TJr  'c* ;  (2)  ja'pn  'v ;  (3)  C'lTin  'v  ;
(4)  "l'i?:?  ^'-  Midd.\nf.  gives  three,  quite  different  names;
those  at  the  eastern  end  leading  into  the  court  of  the  women  are
not  taken  account  of  at  all.

a  Jos.  BJ  v.  63  seems  to  presuppose  this  for  all  the  gates.
Elsewhere  in  Josephus  mention  is  made  of  the  northern  or
western  exedra,  so  that  it  might  seem  as  if  not  all  the  gates  were
so  constructed.  The  last  seems  to  be  the  view  of  the  Mishna
also.  Moreover,  a  hall  or  exedra  of  the  same  kind  existed  also
upon  the  W.  side,  where  there  was  no  gate.

4946


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

Holies  (20  x  20  cubits),  which  was  quite  empty.  The
outer  curtain  was  folded  back  upon  the  S.  side,  whilst
the  inner  was  similarly  folded  back  on  the  N.  side,  so
that  in  this  way  the  high  priest  entered  the  intermediate
space  from  the  S.  and  passing  along  it  entered  the  Holy
of  Holies  on  the  N.  side.

The  anterior  apartment  of  the  sanctuary  (VavHITWl
Midd.  47)  was  40  cubits  in  length.  It  was  entered  from
the  E.  through  the  porch  by  a  great  double  door  (-\yy
^•un  Midd.  42,  cp  T timid  87)  of  40  cubits  in  height  and
16  cubits  in  width  (so  Jos.  DJ  \.  64;  according  to
Midd.  4 1  only  20  cubits  high  and  10  broad).  Like  the
gates  of  the  court  it  was  richly  covered  with  gold.  In
front  of  the  great  door  hung  a  magnificent  curtain  of
Babylonian  workmanship ;  its  colour  according  to
Josephus  symbolised  the  universe  :  byssus  the  earth,
purple  the  sea,  scarlet  the  element  of  fire,  and  hyacinth
the  air  (BJ\.  04).  Above  the  gate  were  golden  vines
and  grape  clusters  as  big  as  a  man  (Bf\.  5 4;  Ant.  xv.  11 3
cp  Tacit.  Hist.  65).  The  sanctuary  was  accessible  only
to  the  officiating  priests.  The  altar  of  incense  stood
near  the  entrance  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  the  table  of
shewbread  to  the  N.,  the  seven-branched  candlestick
to  the  S.  (cp  the  figures  on  the  arch  of  Titus  ;  also
CANDLESTICK).

Eastward  from  the  temple  was,  as  in  the  temple  of
Solomon,  a  porch  (' iiLim]  100  cubits  in  breadth,  100
cubits  in  height  and  20  cubits  deep  (according  to
Midd.  4  7  only  n  cubits).  Its  gateway,  which  had  no
doors,  was  70  cubits  high  and  20  cubits  broad  (Jos.
Z?/5s  ;  according  to  Midd.  87  it  was  only  40  cubits  high
and  20  cubits  broad).  Above  this  gate  Herod  caused
the  name  of  Agrippa  his  patron  (DJ\.  21s)  and  a  golden
eagle  to  be  placed.  The  eagle  was,  as  may  well  be
believed,  an  abomination  in  the  eyes  of  pious  Jews  ;  and
Josephus  tells  how,  shortly  before  the  death  of  Herod,
two  zealous  rabbins  incited  some  youths  to  tear  it  down
(Ant.  xvii.  62-4).

The  temple  building  had  an  upper  story  of  the  same
dimensions  with  the  lower  (BJ  v.  5s).  The  Holy  of
Holies  could  be  entered  directly  from  above  by  means  of
a  trap-door  ;  by  this  means  workmen  could  be  let  down
in  boxes  whenever  repairs  were  needed.  The  access  to
the  upper  room  was  from  the  S.  from  the  roof  of  the
side-building.  As  in  Solomon's  temple,  the  side-build
ing  surrounded  the  house  on  the  S. ,  W. ,  and  N.  It
was  three-storied  and  40  cubits  in  height.  The
individual  chambers  were  not  only  connected  with  those
on  the  same  floor  by  means  of  doors,  but  there  was
communication  between  those  above  and  those  below
by  means  of  trap-doors.  The  principal  entrance  was
on  the  NE.  where  it  was  possible  to  pass  from  the
portico  direct  into  these  chambers.  The  whole  breadth
of  the  temple  buildings  inclusive  of  the  side-building
was  70  cubits  (.}fidd.  ±7,  where  the  separate  figures  are
given  from  which  this  total  results).  Thus  the  porch
on  each  side  exceeded  by  15  cubits  the  breadth  of  the
temple  building.

Eastwards  of  the  temple  at  a  distance  of  22  cubits
from  the  porch,  in  the  court  of  the  priests,  stood  the
great  altar  of  burnt  offering  of  unhewn  stones  (see
ALTAR).  At  the  SW.  corner  was  a  channel  which
drained  into  the  Kidron  valley.  Twenty -four  rings
fixed  in  the  ground  to  the  N.  of  the  altar  served  for
tying  up  the  sacrificial  animals,  there  were  eight  pillars
connected  by  cedar  beams  for  hanging  up  the  carcases,
and  eight  marble  tables  on  which  to  prepare  the  sacri
ficial  flesh  (Midd.Zs  52  TdmidZ*,  ShtkdlimQ*).  On
the  S.  side  was  the  bronze  laver  at  which  the  priests
washed  hands  and  feet  before  entering  the  sanctuary
(Midd.Zts;  cp  YomdZio);  also  a  silver  table  for  the
vessels  and  a  marble  table  for  the  sacrificial  flesh
(SMkdlim  6  4 ;  Tamidb  3  )•  Herod's  gigantic  and  costly
structures  were  still  in  building  forty-six  years  after
their  commencement,  when  Jesus  began  his  ministry
(Jn.  220),  and  the  works  were  not  completed  till  the

4947


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

procuratorship  of  Albinus  (62-64  A. n. ).  In  66  the
great  revolt  against  Rome  broke  out,  and  in  August  70
Jerusalem  was  taken  by  Titus  and  the  temple  perished
in  a  great  conflagration.  i.  n.


II.  THE  TEMPLE-SERVICE.

The system of worship of which the Jerusalem

„ , . ,  sanctuary  was  the  centre  assumed

34.  Introductory. jts  most  elaborate  and  highly  de.

veloped  form  in  the  temple  of  Herod.

The  immense  and  manifold  religious  activities  that
concentrated  themselves  in  the  temple  worship,  can
only  be  adequately  realised  when  it  is  remembered  how
unique  was  the  position  occupied  by  Judaism's  central
shrine.  It  was  absolutely  the  one  and  only  sanctuary
where  the  highest  expressions  of  the  religious  life  of  a
whole  people  could  be  offered.  Judaism  possessed  but
one  sanctuary,  and  that  was  in  Jerusalem.

At  the  time  when  the  Christian  movement  was  born,
Palestine — though  its  population  was  by  no  means  ex
clusively  or  (except  in  such  districts  as  Judcea  and
possibly  Galilee)  even  predominantly  Jewish — had  once
again  become  the  centre  of  Jewish  national  life.  And
it  was  in  the  Holy  City,  and  pre-eminently  in  the
temple  worship,  that  this  life  found  its  most  intense
and  Jewish  expression.  Jerusalem  was  constantly
thronged  with  pilgrims  from  the  Jewish  communities
scattered  over  the  E.  and  W.  worlds  (see  DISPERSION)
laden  with  gifts  for  the  temple.  And  here,  in  the
elaborate  sacrificial  worship,  they  rendered  the  highest
tribute  of  homage  within  their  power  to  the  God  of  their
fathers.  How  immense  the  influence  of  the  temple
worship  was  is  evidenced  by  the  large  space  devoted  to
its  details — the  minutire  of  its  ritual  and  organisation —
in  the  later  Jewish  literature  (the  Mishna  and  Gemara),
which  was  compiled  long  after  the  destruction  of  the
sanctuary.  Such  pious  ejaculations  as,  for  instance,  the
following  constantly  recur.  Towards  the  end  of  the
Mishna  tractate  Tdmid,  which  sets  forth  in  detail  the
course  of  the  daily  offering,  we  read  :  '  Such  is  the
order  of  the  daily  offering  for  the  service  of  the  house  of
our  God.  May  it  be  his  will  to  build  it  speedily  in  our
days.  Amen'  (7 3).  The  same  sentiment  finds  fre
quent  expression  in  the  liturgy  of  the  synagogue,  which
also  reflects  the  influence  of  the  sacrificial  worship  in  its
essential  structure.  Cp  SYNAGOGUE.

Of  the  more  important  features  of  this  worship,  so
far  as  known,  a  brief  sketch  may  here  be  appended.
As  a  preliminary  to  this  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  some
account  of  the  officers  by  whom  it  was  carried  on.

(a)  The  Priests. — According  to  Josephus  (c.  Ap.1%)

the  priesthood  in  his  day  numbered  no  less  than  20,000

men. It was  only  on  rare  occasions

35.  Officers,  etc.  _a(.  certain  of  the  'high  festivals— that

the  whole,  or  anything  like  the  whole,  of  this  number
officiated  at  one  time  within  the  temple  precincts.  For
the  purposes  of  regular  worship  this  body  was,  as  is
well  known,  divided  into  twenty-four  •  courses'  (mismdr,
istro,  '  watch  '  =  Trarpia  or  ^^/xepia,  cp  Lk.  Is  8,  or
tfirjfjifpis) ;  and  the  'courses'  again  into  subdivisions  or
'families'  (ni3K  •r\3  =  <f)V^)-

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Josephus  (  Vit.  1  i)  claims  to  belong
by  birth  to  the  first  of  the  twenty-four  'courses' — that  of  Joiarib
— from  which  also  the  Hasmonaeans  sprang  (i  Mace.  2  i).  Both
the  main-  and  the  sub-divisions  were  presided  over  by  'heads'
(C'D'NI),  each  of  whom  was  termed  respectively  '  head  of  the
course  '  (ICC'CH  PHI)  or  '  head  of  the  family '  (2N  H'3  fKl).

Each  '  course  '  in  succession  was  responsible  for  the
regular  temple  services  for  the  week  (from  sabbath  to
sabbath),  and  divided  up  the  week's  services  among  its
'  families'  according  .to  their  number  (which  varied).

At  the  head  of  the  whole  priesthood  stood  the  high
priest  (kohen  hag-gddol,  Snjn  ;.-ID,  dpxt6/rei'*),  a*  this
time  the  greatest  native  personage,  both  in  church  and

4948


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

state,  to  whom  was  reserved  the  performance  of  the
highest  religious  acts,  such  as  the  supreme  sacrificial
act  enacted  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  On  ordinary
occasions,  however,  it  was  rare  for  him  to  participate
officially  in  the  temple  worship,  and  as  a  rule  he  did  so,
according  to  Josephus,  only  on  sabbaths,  new  moons,
and  the  great  annual  festivals  (BJ\.  5?).  During  the
time  of  the  Roman  predominance  the  office  was  held
almost  exclusively  by  members  of  two  or  three  families
(those  of  Phabi,  Boethus,  Ananus,  and  Kamith)  who
formed  the  priestly  aristocracy,  and  were  divided  by  a
deep  social  gulf  from  the  great  mass  of  the  priesthood.

(b)  Levites. — Another  class  of  temple  officials,  occupy
ing  a  position  subordinate  to  that  of  the  priests,  was
the  Levites,  who,  however,  like  the  priests, formed  at
this time a strictly exclusive and hereditary order,
though, strange to  say, they  had now  absorbed the
musicians and door-keepers,  who (even in the post-
exilic  period)  had  formerly  been  carefully  distinguished
from  the  Levites  proper. Later  still  (just  before  the
destruction of  the  temple) the musicians advanced a
step  further  in  securing  from  King  Agrippa  II.,  with  the
assent  of the  Sanhedrin, the  privilege  of  wearing  the
white  linen garments  of  the  regular  priesthood  (Ant.
xx.  96).

The  Levites,  like  the  priests,  were  divided  into  twenty-four
'courses,'  and  each  performed  duty  in  a.  corresponding  manner.
Similarly  these  were  also  presided  over  by  '  heads'  (c'C'Nl)-

(c]  The  official 'Israelites.' — Corresponding  to the
divisions  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites  there  was  also
a division of  the  people  into twenty-four  courses of
service  (nnDtfc)  '  each  of  which  had  to  take  its  turn  in
coming  before  God,  every  day  for  a  whole  week,  by  way
of  representing  the  whole  body  of  people  while  the  daily
sacrifice  was  being  offered  to  Yahwe '  (Schurer). The

.division  on  duty  for  the  time  being  was  technically
termed  'a  station'  (maamad,  lays).  It  seems,  how
ever,  that  not  the  whole  division,  but  only  a  deputation
of  it,  was  actually  required  to  be  present  at  the  offering
of  the  sacrifice  in  the  temple.  At  the  time  when  this
was  being  performed  the  absent  members  of  the
1  station '  met  together  in  the  local  synagogues  for
prayer  and  the  reading  of  certain  passages  of  Scripture.
The  leading  passage  on  the  subject  in  the  Mishna
(Taanithkz}  runs  as  follows  : —

'The  earliest  prophets  established  twenty-four  courses  of
service  (miScro)-  To  each  belonged  a  staff  (-joyc)  in  Jerusalem,
composed  of  priests,  Levites,  and  Israelites.  As  soon  as  its
turn  to  serve  came  round  to  a  course,  the  priests  and  the  Levites
belonging  to  it  proceeded  to  Jerusalem,  but  the  Israelites  as
sembled  in  the  synagogues  of  their  different  towns  and  there
read  the  account  of  the  creation.'  (It  should  be  noted  that  the
ivhole  of  the  course,  of  priests  and  Levites,  when  its  turn  came,
had  to  be  present  in  Jerusalem.)

The part taken by the  high priest in the temple

worship has already  been  referred to, and  need not

_ ,. here  be  further  enlarged  on. It  may

36.  Functions  be inted  out>  however,  that  the  daily

of  priests  and  meal.offering  of  the  high  priest,  which

Levites. wag oft-crecl ;n conjunction  with the

daily  burnt-offering  of  the  people  (Lev.  612-16),  was  (in

practice)  not  so  much  offered  by  him  as  on  his  behalf

and  at  his  expense. According  to  Schiirer  ( Hist.  ii.  1  288

n.  243) it  is  this offering  which is referred to in  the

difficult  passage  Heb.  727,  though  it  was  in  no  sense  a

sin-offering.

The  functions  of  the  ordinary  priests,  when  they  were
engaged  in  the  service,  mainly  consisted  in  ministrations
at  the  altar.  These  will  be  described  in  greater  detail
below  (§  38).  To  the  priests  the  Levites  were  in  all
respects  subordinate  —  the  strictly  priestly  function  of
officiating  at  the  altar  was  forbidden  to  the  Levites,  nor
were  they  permitted  to  enter  the  inner  sanctuary  ;  their
duties  mainly  consisted  in  such  offices  as  the  guarding
of  the  temple  fabric,  and  acting  as  choristers  and  door
keepers  (see  further  below,  6).  There  were,  how
ever,  other  high  officials  of  whom  mention  must  be

lf.8  4949


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

made.  The  most  important  of  these  was  the  slgan
(Aram,  jjp,  the  vocalisation  of  the  Heb.  form  po  is
uncertain),  who  ranked  next  to  the  high  priest.  The
widely-held  view  that  the  slgan  was  the  high  priest's
deputy  or  substitute  has  been  controverted  on  cogent
grounds  by  Schiirer  (Hist.  ii.  1 257  f. )  who  points  out  that
a  substitute  for  the  high  priest  was  appointed  annually,
seven  days  before  the  Day  of  Atonement,  to  act  in  case
of  necessity  (Yomd\i) — a  superfluous  provision  if  an
official  substitute  already  existed.  Schurer  gives  good
reasons  for  identifying  this  official  with  the  captain  of
the  temple  (ffrpaTTrjyos  TOV  iepoD)  frequently  mentioned
in  both  Josephus  and  the  NT,  who  controlled  all
arrangements  for  maintaining  order  within  the  temple
area.  Subordinate  to  him,  but  exercising  functions
essentially  similar,  were  a  number  of  other  slgdnim  or
captains  of  the  temple  police,  who  are  probably  to  be
identified  with  the  '  captains  '  (ffrparriyoi)  of  Lk.  224  52-

Next  in  dignity  to  the  high  priest  and  the  slgan
ranked  the  heads  of  the  twenty-four  courses  (ice'Sn  t?jn)
and  (below  them)  those  of  the  constituent  'families'
(DN  JvatPNi).  Besides  the  above  there  were  various
other  functionaries  connected  with  the  temple  among
the  priests  and  Levites.  These  (following  Schurer)  we
may  group  into  three  divisions  :

(a)  Those  entrusted  with  the  administration  of  the
temple  stores,  furniture,  and  treasures.  The  officials
who  controlled  this  vast  department — which  included
not  merely  the  custody  of  the  sacrificial  plate  and  vest
ments,  and  supplies  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil  for  ritual
purposes,  but  also  the  care  of  vast  sums  of  money
belonging  to  the  temple,  as  well  as  of  large  amounts
deposited  there  by  private  individuals  for  safety — were
known  as  '  treasurers  '  (gizbdrim,  D'12J3  ;  yafo<pv\a.Kes).
They  also  gathered  in  the  half- shekel  tax  (Shfk.  2i  ).
The  full  complement  of  officials  in  this  department  must
have  been  very  large,  and  may  have  included  Levites  ;
but,  in  any  case,  the  more  important  offices  connected
with  it  were  filled  by  priests.

Not  improbably  the  'treasurer'  mentioned  by  Josephus  in
conjunction  with  the  high  priest  (Ant.  xx.  8  n)  was  the  head  of
the  order.  To  the  order  of  treasurers,  forming  probably  one  of
its  subdivisions,  belonged  the  amarkelin  (p->31DK)i  a  word  of
Persian  origin  meaning  'accountants.'  The  Jerusalem  Talmud
also  mentions  another  class  that  falls  within  this  category:  viz.,
the  pp-Sinp  (Ko.Qak.iKoC),  about  whom,  however,  the  Mishna  is
silent.

(b}  Officials  connected  with  the  police  department.
Here  Levites  were  mostly  employed.  According  to  the
Mishna  (Tdmid\-i),  of  twenty-four  points  at  which
guards  were  stationed  at  night  no  less  than  twenty-one
were  occupied  by  Levites,  whilst  the  other  three  were
watched  by  priests.  In  point  of  fact  the  whole  space
within  the  low  barrier  beyond  which  Gentiles  were
forbidden  to  pass  on  pain  of  death  (§  31) — i.e. ,  the
inner  court,  or  court  proper — was  guarded  by  priests.
Outside  of  this  inner  court,  at  the  gates  and  the  corners,
the  Levite  posts  were  stationed,  and  also  (but  on  the
inside)  at  the  gates  and  the  corners  of  the  outer  court
(i.e.,  the  'court  of  the  gentiles'  ;  §  31).  All  these
gates  were  also  occupied  during  the  day  time,  and,
amongst  other  things,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Levitical
guards  to  see  that  the  prohibition  of  Gentiles  from
entering  the  sacred  enclosure  was  strictly  carried  out.
Patrols  also  moved  round  by  night  and  day.  At  night
it  was  usual  for  a  captain  of  the  temple,  known  as  o'K
rv:n  in,  to  make  a  round  of  inspection  to  see  that  the
guards  were  not  sleeping  at  their  posts  (Middoth  12).

Another  officer  (crrparriyos)  is  also  mentioned  under  the  title
of  Ish  hab-bJrah  (,YV3n  K"N)— '•?-,  'man  of  the  citadel'— the
citadel  in  this  case  doubtless  being  the  temple  proper,  and  the
officer  in  question  the  head  of  the  priestly  guard  (of  the  inner
court).  All  the  gates  of  the  courts  were  shut  at  night  by  the
guards,  and  a  special  officer  was  appointed  to  superintend  the
operation  (Shek.  5  i).  The  keys  of  the  gates  of  the  inner  court
were  kept  by  the  elders  of  the  particular  division  of  priests  on
duty  for  the  watch,  and,  when  the  divisions  were  changed,  were
handed  over  to  the  elders  of  the  incoming  division.  As  the
morning  sacrifice  was  offered  at  daybreak  it  was  necessary  that

495°


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  gates  should  be  opened  somewhat  earlier.  At  the  great
festivals  (when  large  preparations  for  additional  sacrifices,  etc.,
had  to  be  made)  the  gates  were  opened  much  earlier  —  as  early
as  midnight  during  Passover  (Ant.  xviii.  2  a).

(c)  Special  functionaries  connected  with  public
worship.  Whilst  the  general  conduct  of  the  sacrificial
worship  was  exercised  by  the  priesthood  as  a  whole  (in
their  courses),  certain  special  duties  were  performed  by
permanent  officials,  who,  in  many  cases,  belonged  to
families  which  had  acquired  a  hereditary  right  to  fulfil
a  particular  office.  A  number  of  these  (who  were  in
office  during  the  closing  years  of  the  temple)  are
enumerated  in  the  Mishna  (Shfkdlimbi).  From  this
passage  we  learn  that  there  was  an  officer  '  over  the
lots  '  (  /'.  <•.  ,  the  lots  cast  daily  for  the  allocation  of  par
ticular  offices  to  the  officiating  priests),  another  '  over  the
seals'  (tokens  issued  to  the  people,  which  corresponded
to  the  various  kinds  of  drink-offerings).  These  '  seals  '
were  handed  by  the  purchasers  to  another  official  who
was  'over  the  drink-offerings'  and  who  'in  return
would  give  to  the  person  tendering  one  the  amount  of
drink-offering  requisite  for  the  particular  occasion  for
which  it  was  wanted  '  (Schiirer).

The  hereditary  offices,  confined  to  certain  families,  were
connected  with  matters  involving  special  technical  skill  and
knowledge,  such  as  the  preparation  of  the  shewbread  (family  of
Garmu),  and  of  the  frankincense  (family  of  Abtinas).  Other
officials  mentioned  are:  a  master  of  the  psalmody,  a  cymbal-
player  (who  gave  the  signal  for  the  Levites  to  begin  the  music),
a  temple  physician,  a  master  of  the  wells,  a  herald,  a  keeper  of
the  veils,  and  a  keeper  of  the  priests'  garments.

A  comparatively  large  class  of  officials  was  the  guild
of  sacred  musicians  (mZHortrim,  Q'-neo,  if/aXrtjiSoi,
iepo\f/d\rcu,  v/j.vu5oi,  KiOapuTrai  re  Kal  v/j.vudol),  who
formed  a  hereditary  and  exclusive  order  (now  Levitical).
They  were  divided  into  three  families  (those  of  Heman,
Asaph,  and  Ethan  or  Jeduthun  ;  cp  e.g.  ,  i  Ch.  25),  and
these  again  into  twenty-four  courses  of  service.  Greatest
importance  was  attached  to  the  singing,  to  which  the
musical  accompaniment  was  regarded  as  subordinate.
For  the  instruments  employed  see  Music.

It  may  be  noted  that  reed-pipes  (/MlJliin)  were  introduced
into  the  choir  at  the  high-festivals  (Passover,  Pentecost,  and
Tabernacles),  and  that  the  only  instruments  not  assigned  to  the
Levites  were  the  metal  trumpets  (AafdferStX),  which  were
regularly  blown  by  priests  (esp.  to  accompany  the  offering  of
the  daily  sacrifice).  The  place  of  the  Nethinim  in  Herod's
temple  seems  to  have  been  taken  by  the  hazzanlin  (C'ftn
'servants,'  'sextons':  see  e.g.,  T/i/tiTi/5  3).  Menial  offices  were
also  perform  xl  by  boys  of  the  priestly  families  (nana  'rnfl>  'scions
of  the  priesthood,'  Tii»tht\  i,  etc.).

We  may  pass  over  the  details  connected  with  such
subjects  as  admission  to  the  ranks  of  the  officiating
priesthood  (Schiirer,  .#&/.  ii.  1  210  ft),  the  residence  of
the  priests  and  Levites  (ib.  229),  and  the  sources  of  the
temple  revenue  (ib.  230  ft),  the  consideration  of  which
hardly  falls  within  the  scope  of  this  sketch  ;  but  some
description  must  be  given  of  the  public  worship  of  the
sanctuary,  in,  at  least,  its  typical  features.

The  regular  worship  of  the  temple  centred  in  the
daily  public  offering  (rcrn  n^iy  or  simply  rcnn)  of  the

37.  The  temple  Pres<rribed  nsacrifi£f'  ,  mo™inS .a»<1
evenmg' On sabbaths  and  festivals


services:  the


f,  ,

the ru'nbe °f  the


f

daily  offering.  te  ru'ne\  °  te  .^"ces  was  in-
0  creased,  and  (in  particular  cases)  other
ritualistic  elements  were  added  ;  but  essentially  the
course  and  sequence  of  the  worship  was  the  same.
There  were  also,  of  course,  multitudes  of  private
sacrifices  offered.  But  here  we  are  mainly  concerned
with  the  public  worship,  which  embodies  the  typical
features  of  the  rest.  Fortunately  a  detailed  account  of
the  course  of  the  daily  offering  has  been  preserved  in
the  Mishna,  which  devotes  a  whole  tractate  to  the
subject  (  Tarn  id),  based  evidently  on  sound  tradition.
The  substance  of  this  may  here  be  given.

The  service  naturally  divides  itself  into  three
moments  :  (  i  )  the  preliminaries,  mainly  affecting  the
priests,  and  including  the  slaughter  and  preparation  of
the  sacrifice  (§  387.  );  (2)  the  offering  of  incense  and  of

4951


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

the  sacrifice,  accompanied  by prayer  (§  40)  ; and  (3)
the  service  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  (§  41).

i. The  priests  on  duty  slept  within  a  chamber  of  the

inner  court. Very  early  those  who  were  desirous  of

38 The taki"g Part  in 'he  sacrificial  worship

preliminaries.  arose Kand  l°ok  th^  baptismal  bath  so
as  to  be  ready  for  the  official  summons,
which  might  come  at  any  moment.  When  the  summons
came  the  priests  who  were  ready  followed  the  super
intendent  through  a  wicket  into  the  court.  They  then
divided  themselves  into  two  parties,  one  going  eastward
and  the  other  westward,  with  lighted  torches  in  their  hands
(except  on  sabbaths  when  the  temple  was  lit  up)  and
met  in  'the  place  of  the  pancake  makers'  (i.e.,  the
apartment  where  the  high -priest's  daily  meal -offering
was  prepared),  and  greeted  each  other  with  the  words
1  It  is  well ;  all  is  well  ! '  They  then  passed  to  the
Hall  Gazith  (rrun  ns:?1?,  lit.  'hall  of  polished  stones,'
where  the  Sanhedrin  also  met)  and  proceeded  to  cast
lots.  Altogether  four  lots — not  immediately,  but  at
intervals — were  cast  during  the  service,  the  first  to
determine  who  was  to  cleanse  the  altar  and  prepare  it.

The  mode  of  casting  the  lots  is  thus  described  by  Edersheim
(TttKple,  122):  'The  priests  stood  in  a  circle  around  the
president,  who  for  a  moment  removed  the  head-gear  of  one  of
their  number,  to  show  that  he  would  begin  counting  at  him.
Then  all  held  up  one,  two,  or  more  fingers — since  it  was  not
lawful  in  Israel  to  count  persons — when  the  president  named
some  number,  say  seventy,  and  began  counting  the  fingers  till
he  reached  the  number  named,  which  marked  that  the  lot  had
fallen  on  that  priest '  (so  Lightfoot,  Temple  Service,  chap.  9  i,
following  Maimonides).

The  person  selected  first  of  all  bathed  his  hands  and
feet  at  the  brazen  laver,  which  stood  between  the  temple
and  the  great  altar,  and  mounting  the  altar  carried
away  the  ashes  in  a  silver  pan.  While  he  descended,
the  other  priests  washed  their  hands  and  feet  at  the
brazen  laver,  removed  the  unburnt  sacrifices  and  debris
from  the  altar,  laid  on  fresh  wood,  and  replaced  the  *
unconsumed  pieces  of  the  sacrifice.  They  then  all
adjourned  to  the  '  Hall  of  Polished  Stones,'  where  the
second  lot  was  cast.

During  the  proceedings  above  described,  which  took  place  in
darkness,  the  only  light  being  the  glow  of  the  altar  fire,  those
priests  to  whom  the  duty  had  been  assigned,  were  preparing  the
baked  meal-offering  of  the  high  priest  in  the  '  place  of  the
pancake  makers.'

The  second  lot  designated  the  priest  on  whom  it  fell,
together  with  twelve  others  standing  next  him,  to  dis
charge  the  following  duties: — (i)  the  slaughter  of  the
victim  ;  (2)  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  upon  the  altar  ;

(3)  the  removing  of  the  ashes  from  the  altar  of  incense  ;

(4)  the trimming  of the lamps on the candlestick  ;
further, the lot determined who were to carry the
various  portions  of  the  victim  to  the  foot  of  the  ascent
of  the  altar,  viz., who  was  to  carry  (5)  the  head  and
one  of  the  hind  legs  ;  (6)  the  two  forelegs  ;  (7)  the  tail
and  the  other  hind  leg  ; (8)  the  breast  and  the  neck  ;
(9)  the  two  sides;  (10)  the  entrails  ;  (n)  the  offering
of  fine  flour  ;  (12)  the  baked  meal-offering  (of  the  high
priest)  ;  and  (13)  the  wine  for  the  drink-offering.

Immediately  after  this  the  president  directed  inquiries
to  be  made  as  to  whether  the  time  for  slaughter  had
arrived  (determined  by  the  approach  of  dawn  when  it
was  visible  in  the  sky  up  to  Hebron).  On  the
signal  being  given  the  lamb  was  brought  from  the
lamb-chamber  (o'ltWl  rus?"?),  given  some  water  to  drink
from  a  golden  bowl,  and  led  to  the  place  of  slaughter
on  the  N.  side  of  the  altar.  At  the  same  time  the
ninety- three  sacred  vessels  were  brought  from  the
utensil-chamber.  Meanwhile  the  two  priests  to  whom
the  duty  had  been  assigned  of  cleansing  the  altar  of
incense,  and  trimming  the  lamps  on  the  candlestick
(3  and  4  above)  proceeded  to  the  sanctuary,  the  one
with  a  golden  pail  (-is),  the  other  with  a  golden  bottle
(rs).  At  this  point  orders  were  given  (by  the  elders
who  had  charge  of  the  keys)  to  open  the  temple  gates,
the  noise  of  which  (according  to  the  Mishna)  was  heard
at  Jericho.  The  accomplishment  of  this  was  heralded

4952


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

by  three  blasts  on  the  silver  trumpets,  which  gave  the
signal  for  the  Levites  and  '  men  of  the  station  '  (repre
sentative  Israelites)  to  assemble,  and  also  announced  to
the  city  that  the  morning  sacrifice  was  about  to  be
offered  (for  these  details  see  the  Gimdra  on  Tdmid}.'
At  this  point  also,  the  great  gates  leading  into  the  holy
place  were  opened  to  admit  the  priests  whose  duty  it
was  to  cleanse  the  incense-altar  and  trim  the  candle
sticks,  into  the  sanctuary  (see  above).  The  opening  of
the  sanctuary  gates  was  the  signal  for  the  actual
slaughter  of  the  sacrifice.  See  Edersheim,  Temple,  133,
SACRIFICE,  §  32.

Meanwhile  the  two  priests  above  referred  to  had
entered  the  holy  place.  While  the  slaughter  of  the
lamb  was  taking  place  the  first  of  the  priests  cleansed  the
golden  altar  of  incense,  putting  the  burnt  coals  and
ashes  into  the  golden  pail  ('JD),  and  then  withdrew,
leaving  the  utensil  behind.  The  second  priest,  while
the  blood  of  the  lamb  was  being  sprinkled,  proceeded
to  trim  and  re-light  the  lamps  of  the  candlestick.

The  procedure  was  as  follows  : — Only  five  of  the  seven  lamps
were  at  this  time  trimmed — the  other  two  being  reserved  for  a
later  period  of  the  service.  If  the  two  farthest  E.  were  still
burning  they  were  left  undisturbed,  and  the  trimming  and  re
lighting  of  the  five  others  was  proceeded  with.  But  the  central
lamp,  called  the  '  western  '  (because  it  inclined  westward  to  the
most  holy  place),  could  only  be  relighted  by  fire  brought  from
the  altar.  If  it  happened  that  the  two  farthest  K.  were  out,
they  were  first  of  all  trimmed  and  relighted,  before  the  others
were  attended  to.  The  candlestick  was  approached  by  three
stone  steps,  and  on  the  second  of  these  the  priest,  when  this  part
of  his  duty  was  done,  deposited  the  golden  bottle  (113)  and
withdrew.

Meanwhile  the  slaughtering  of  the  sacrifice  and  the
sprinkling  of  the  blood  upon  the  altar  had  been  followed
by  the  flaying  of  the  victim,  which  was  cut  up  into
pieces,  and  the  entrails  washed  upon  the  marble  tables.
The  pieces  were  carried  by  the  six  allotted  priests  (each
taking  one  piece)  to  the  altar,  while  a  seventh  carried
the  offering  of  flour,  an  eighth  the  baked  meal-offering
(of  the  high  priest),  and  a  ninth  the  wine  of  the  drink-
offering.  These  were  all  laid  at  the  foot  of  the  altar-
ascent,  and  salted  ;  and  then  all  the  priests  assembled
once  more  in  the  Hall  of  Polished  Stones.

Here  a  service  of  prayer  was  celebrated,  the  details
of  which  are,  however,  not  free  from  ambiguity.  The


39.  The  prayers
and  blessings.


Mishna  passage  (Tdmid 5i),  bearing
on  the  matter,  runs  as  follows  : —


The  president  said  :  '  Give  one  blessing  ' ;
and  the  priests  blessed  and  read  the  ten  commandments  (and),
the  Shema'  (in  its  three  sections).  They  blessed  the  people
with  the  three' blessings — viz.  (the  blessing)  'True  and  firm'
(3'S'l  rc.x),  (tne  blessing)  '  Service  '  (rnirj?),  and  '  the  blessing
of  the  priests' (c'3n3n  rO"12)-  And  on  the  sabbath  they  added
one  blessing  for  the  outgoing  temple  course.

The  points  undetermined  here  are  the  following  : — (a)
how  far  we  are  to  understand  that  these  prayers  were
said  in  the  hall  by  the  priests  alone,  and  how  far  in  the
temple  itself  by  priests  and  people  ;  and  (6)  what  is
meant  by  '  one  blessing  '  and  by  '  three  blessings  '  ? 1

Regarding  (<7)  it  has  been  usual  to  suppose  that  the
Shema  (i.e. ,  the  three  sections  of  the  Law,  01.64-9
11 13-21  ;  and  Nu.  1037-41  which  had  to  be  repeated  by
each  Israelite  every  day,  morning  and  evening),  pre
ceded  by  a  benediction  and  the  ten  commandments,
was  repeated  by  the  priests  in  the  hall,  whilst  the  other
prayers  mentioned  form  part  of  the  public  service,  and
come  later  (so  Edersheim,  and  apparently  Schiirer).
The  difficulty  about  this  view  is  that  the  benediction
'  true  and  firm'  belongs  to  the  Shema,  which  it  ought
immediately  to  follow.  In  any  case,  if  the  benediction
was  said  by  priests  and  people  publicly,  must  we  not
suppose  that  the  Shema'  itself  was  recited  publicly  as
well?  It  is  not,  perhaps,  altogether  impossible  to
regard  the  priest's  service  in  the  hall — -i.e.,  the  recita
tion  of  the  Shema'  preceded  and  followed  by  the  bene
dictions  mentioned,  including  '  service '  and  '  the  priestly
blessing '- — as  a  sort  of  rehearsal,  before  the  solemn

1  (See  L.  Rlau,  '  Origine  et  Histoire  de  la  lecture  du  Schema,
[1895]  pp.  179-201.)

4953


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

part  of  the  sacrificial  worship,  of  what  was  publicly
recited  later  when  the  incense  ascended  from  the  altar.
We  may  suppose  also  that  the  people,  during  the
interval  of  silent  prayer,  mentally  repeated  the  same
prayers.

The  analogous  case  of  the  Shemoneh  'Esreh  ('  The  Eighteen
Benedictions ')  in  the  modern  synagogue,  may  be  cited.  This
is  first  of  all  said  by  the  congregation  inaudibly,  and  then  re
peated  aloud  by  the  reader.

The  recital  of  the  ten  commandments,  which  is  else
where  attested  as  a  daily  practice,  was  afterwards
discontinued,  probably  for  anti-Christian  reasons  (cp
C.  Taylor,  Sayings  of  J.  Fathers,^  Excurs.  4119).
(i>)  As  to  what  benediction  was  recited  before  the
Shema',  the  Mishna  gives  no  indication,  and  it  was
early  a  matter  of  dispute  (D.  Her.  lib]  whether  it  was
that  over  the  creation  of  light  (-HN  isv  ;  the  modern
form  can  be  seen  in  Singer's  Ed.  of  Heb.-Eng.  Prayer
Book,  37 ff.],  or  that  in  praise  of  God's  love,  known  as
Ahabah  Kabbah  (  =  '  with  abounding  love ' ).  Accord
ing  to  the  generally  received  opinion,  it  was  the  latter
that  was  recited  in  the  temple.  In  its  early  form  this
ran  somewhat  as  follows  : —

With  abounding  (or,  according  to  another  version,  everlasting)
love  hast  thou  loved  us,  O  Lord  our  God  (Jer.  813).  With
great  and  exceeding  compassion  hast  thou  taken  compassion
on  us  (cp  Is.  63  9).  Our  Father,  our  King,  for  the  sake  of  our
fathers  who  trusted  in  thee  and  whom  thou  taughtest  the  statutes
of  life,  be  gracious  unto  us,  and  be  thou  also  our  teacher.  En
lighten  our  eyes  in  thy  law,  and  make  our  hearts  cleave  to  thy
commandments  ;  render  our  hearts  one  that  we  may  love  and
fear  thy  name,  and  not  be  ashamed.  For  in  thy  holy  name  we
trust ;  we  rejoice  and  exult  in  thy  salvation.  For  thou  art  the
God  who  works  salvation,  and  thou  hast  chosen  us  from  all
peoples  and  tongues,  and  brought  us  nigh  unto  thy  great  name
(Selah)  in  truth,  that  we  give  praise  unto  thee  and  proclaim  thy
unity  in  love.  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord,  who  hast  chosen  thy
people  Israel  in  love.  (Cp /<.'wz.s/z  Kncycl.  1  281,  and  refT.)

The  benediction  that  followed  the  Sh6ma',  beginning
with  the  words  '  true  and  firm  '  (a'S'i  DDK),  is  a  thanks
giving  to  God  for  various  acts  of  redemption  (hence  its
technical  name  geulld],  and  has  been  much  amplified
in  the  later  Jewish  liturgy.  In  its  earliest  form  it  may
not  have  contained  more  than  the  following  : —

True  and  firm  (established)  it  is  that  thou  art  Yah  we  our  God,
and  the  God  of  our  fathers;  our  King  and  the  King  of  our
fathers  ;  our  Saviour  and  the  Saviour  of  our  fathers  ;  our  Maker
and  the  Rock  of  our  Salvation  ;  our  Help  and  our  Deliverer.
Thy  name  is  from  everlasting,  and  there  is  no  God  besides  thee.
A  new  song  did  they  that  were  delivered  sing  to  thy  name  by
the  sea-shore  ;  together  did  all  praise  and  own  thee  as  King,
and  say,  Yahwe  shall  reign  who  has  redeemed  Israel.  (See
further  Zunz,  Gottesd.  Vortr.  d.  Judenfi)  370,  (-)  383.)

Of  the  other  two  'blessings,'  the  first,  that  known  as
'service'  (rninj,1),  was  doubtless  a  thanksgiving  for  the
splendid  temple  worship,  which  may  have  been  an
earlier  form  of  the  present  'Aboda  prayer  (  =  the  iyth
of  the  Shemoneh  'Esreh  ;  cp  Singer,  50  f. ),  and  in  its
earlier  form  may  have  run  thus  : —

Accept,  O  Lord  our  God,  thy  people  Israel  and  their  prayer ;
receive  in  love  and  favour  both  the  fire  offerings  of  Israel  and
their  prayer  ;  and  may  the  service  of  thy  people  Israel  be  ever
acceptable  unto  thee.  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord,  who  receivest
the  service  of  thy  people  Israel  with  favour  [for  the  last  clause,
see  Kashi  on  Berakh.  n/']-

The  '  blessing  of  the  priests '  was,  doubtless,  some
form  (not,  however,  the  precative  form  now  used  in  the
synagogue  =  the  last  of  the  ShSmuneh  'Esreh)  of  the  well-
known  priestly  blessing  (Nu.  624-26),  in  using  which
within  the  Temple  the  priests  pronounced  the  ineffable
name  (mrr)  as  written.  After  the  priests  had  recited
the  Sh2ma'  and  the  accompanying  prayers  in  the  Hall,
the  third  and  the  fourth  lot  were  taken — the  third  to
determine  who  should  offer  the  incense  in  the  sanctuary,
and  the  fourth  to  determine  who  should  lay  the  various
parts  of  the  victim  upon  the  altar.  The  most  im
portant  duty  of  the  service  that  could  fall  to  a  priest
was  that  of  offering  the  incense,  and  only  those  who
had  not  performed  the  office  before  were  eligible  (except
in  the  rare  case  when  all  present  had  so  officiated).
Those  on  whom  no  lot  had  fallen  were  now  free  to  go
away,  after  divesting  themselves  of  the  priestly  dress.

2.  The  offering  of  incense  and  of  the  sacrifice  accom-

4954


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

panied  by  prayer. — The  incensing priest now  took  a
golden saucer (^3) covered  with a  lid,
40.  Offering  contajnjng a smauer saucer (7113) with
of  incense.

the incense. An assistant priest then

brought  some  live  coal  from  the  great  altar  in  a  silver
pan  (nnnp)  which  he  emptied  into  a  golden  pan.  This
done,  both  proceeded  with  another  assistant,  and  with
the  two  who  had  already  dressed  the  altar  and  candle
stick,  into  the  sanctuary,  striking  as  they  passed  the
instrument  called  magrephdh  (see  col.  3229),  at  the  sound
of  which  priests  hastened  to  the  worship,  the  Levites  to
occupy  their  places  in  the  choir,  while  the  delegates
( '  stationary  men  ' )  ranged  at  the  eastern  gate  of  the
Temple  (=the  gate  of  Nicanor)  such  of  the  people  as
were  to  be  purified  that  day  ( '  the  defiled  men  ' ).

The  two  priests  who  had  dressed  the  altar  and  the
candlestick  entered  first,  the  former  merely  to  bring
away  his  utensil,  which,  after  prostrating  himself,  he  did  ;
while  the  latter  completed  the  trimming  of  the  lamps,
and  then,  prostrating  himself,  withdrew  with  his  utensil.

The  assistant  priest  who  had  the  pan  of  coals  emptied
them  on  to  the  altar  of  incense,  prostrated  himself,  and
withdrew.  The  other  assistant  then  arranged  the  in
cense,  and  withdrew  in  like  manner.  The  chief  offici
ating  priest  was  now  left  alone  within  the  sanctuary,
awaiting  the  signal  of  the  president  before  burning  the
incense.  When  this  was  given  (with  the  words  '  offer
the  incense ' ),  he  emptied  out  the  saucer  on  to  the  coals,
and  the  incense  ascended  in  clouds  of  smoke.  At  this
solemn  moment,  the  people  withdrew  from  the  inner
court  and  prostrated  themselves,  spreading  out  their
hands  in  silent  prayer  (cp  Rev.  81  3/.  quoted  by  Eders-
heim).  The  incensing  priest,  also,  after  prostrating
himself  for  worship,  withdrew  from  the  sanctuary.  The
period  of  silent  prayer  was  followed  (if  the  conjecture
given  above  is  correct)  by  the  recitation  of  the  Shgma',
with  the  ten  commandments  and  benedictions  set  forth
above.  Others  think  that  only  the  three  '  blessings  '
(mentioned  in  Tdmid  5i)  were  here  recited.  In  any
case,  ttie  priestly  blessing  was  given  in  the  following
manner.  The  five  priests  who  had  been  engaged
within  the  Holy  Place  now  proceeded  to  the  steps  in
front  of  the  Temple,  and  with  uplifted  hands,  pro
nounced  the  priestly  benediction.  This  was  pronounced
by  the  leader  (probably  the  incensing  priest),  the  others
following  audibly  after  him.  As  already  mentioned,
the  divine  name  was  on  these  occasions  pronounced.
The  people  also  responded  :  '  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God,
the  God  of  Israel,  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.'
The  offering  of  the  burnt  offering  was  now  proceeded
with.  The  chosen  priests  brought  up  the  various
pieces  of  the  victim  from  the  foot  of  the  ascent,  and,
after  placing  their  hands  upon  them,  threw  them  on  to
the  altar-fire.  When  the  high  priest  officiated,  he
received  the  pieces  from  the  priests,  placed  his  hands
upon  them,  and  threw  them  on  to  the  altar.  The
appropriate  meal  offerings  (that  of  the  people,  and
that  of  the  high  priest)  were  now  brought,  oiled,  salted,
and  laid  on  the  fire  ;  and  the  drink  offering  was  poured
out  at  the  foot  of  the  altar.

3. The  Service  of  praise  and  thanksgiving. — Here
upon  the music  of the  temple  began. The choir  of
__ . Levites,  to  the  accompaniment  of  instru-
isica mentaj  musiC]  sang  the  psalm  of  the  day,
service. wnich was divided into  three sections.
At the  close  of  each  section, a  body  of  priests  blew
three  blasts on the silver trumpets, and the people
prostrated  themselves  in  worship. The  singing  of  the
psalm closed the morning service, and the private
sacrifices  were  proceeded  with.

The  evening  sacrifice  (which,  according  to  the  law,
was  to  be  offered  'between  the  two  evenings  — i.e.,  in
the  evening  twilight)  was  at  this  period  offered  early  in
the  afternoon,  about  3  o'clock.  It  was  in  all  respects
exactly  similar  to  that  of  the  morning,  save  that  incense

4955


TEMPLE,  TEMPLE-SERVICE

was  offered  after  the  burnt  oftering  instead  of  before  it,
and  the  lamps  in  the  sanctuary  were  not  trimmed,  but
simply  lighted.  The  priests  on  whom  the  lots  had
fallen  again  officiated  in  the  evening,  except  the  in
censing  priests.  For  this  office  another  lot  was  taken.

The  daily  psalms  were  the  following  :  first  day,  24 ;
second,  48;  third,  82;  fourth,  94;  fifth,  81;  sixth,
93  ;  on  the  sabbath,  92.

On  the  sabbath  and  festivals  the  same  daily  sacrifices
were  offered,  only  increased.  Thus  on  the  sabbath


42.  The  sabbath  ,
and  festivals.


the  sacrifice  was  doubled,  and  so  on.


Fhe  essential  features,  however,  were


much the  same. [For  details, see
FKASTS,  SABBATH,  and  the  works  cited  below.]

G.  H.  B.

The  literature  of  the  subject  is  immense. The  older  books  are
given  in  Bahr  (Der  Salonwnische  Tempel)  and  other  writers ;
only  the  more  important  modern  works
43.  Bibliography,  can  be  mentioned  here.

(a) General: The Archaeologies of

Jahn,  Saalschiitz,  Scholz,  Schegg,  Haneberg,  de-Wette-Rabiger,
Keil,  de  Visser,  Benzinger,  Nowack  ;  the  articles  s.z>. '  Temple  '
in  /'A'A' (Merx),  BL  (Diestel),  Riehm's  HWB,  Ency.  Brit.®)
(by  W.  R.  Smith  ;  it  has  been  freely  used  in  the  preparation  of
the  present  article),  Hastings'  DB  (T.  W.  Davies) ;  the  com
mentaries  on  Kings  by  Keil,  Thenius,  Klostermann,  Benzinger,
Kittel ;  Fergusson,  The  Temple  of  the  Jeivs,  London,  1878

(ft)  Text  and  Literary  Criticism:  The  commentaries  on
Kings  (above);  Wellhausen  in  Bleek,  A7«/.<4);  Stade  'Der
Text  des  Berichts  iiber  Salomos  Bauten '  in  ZATlf,  1883,  pp.
129-177.

(c)  Topographical:  The  results  of  modern  survey  and  excava
tion  are  given  in  the  PEF\o\.  'Jerusalem'  (London,  1884)  and
in  the  accompanying  atlas. See  also  Robinson,  BR  (al  ;  Tobler,
Topographic  Jerusalems, 1853-54  ;  Fergusson, Topography  of

Jerusalem,  1847;  Thrupp,  Ancient  Jerusalem,  1855;  De
Vogue,  Le  Temple  de  Jerusalem,  1864  ;  Rosen,  Das  Harani
von  Jerusalem  u.  der  Tempelplatz  des  Moria,  1866;  Schick,
Beit  el  Makdas;  oder,  der  alte  Tempelplatz,  1887  :  id.,  Die
Stiftshiltte,  der  Tempel  in  Jerusalem  u.  der  Tempelplatz  der
Jctztzeit ;  Adler,  Der  Felsendom  u.  d.  heutige  Gral>eskirche  zu
Jerusalem,  1873;  Socin-Benzinger  in  Baedeker's  /W.I3)

(d)  Solomon's Temple :  Of  older  works  may be mentioned
those  of  Bh.  Lamy,  De  Tabernaculo  Farderis,  de  sanctacivitate
Jerusalem et de Templo  ejus, Paris, 1720 ; A. Hirt, Der

Tempel  Salomos,  Berlin,  1809;  Fr.  v.  Meyer,  id.,  Stuttgart,
1839.  A  more  modern  phase  of  discussion  may  be  said  to  begin
with  Bahr,  Der  Solomonische  Tempel  mit  Beriicksichtigung
seines  Verhdltnisscs  z.  h.  Architektur  uel'erhaupt,  1848.
See  further  B.  Stade,  GI\-*,iiff.  ;  H.  Pailloux,  Monographic
du  temple  de  Salomon,  Paris,  1885;  F.  O.  fame,  Solomon's
temple  and  Capital,  1886;  Th.  Friedrich,  Tempel  u.  Palast
Salomos,  1887  ;  O.  Wolff,  Der  Tempel  von  Jerusalem  u.  seine
Maase,  1887  ;  E.  C.  Robins,  The  Temple  of  Solomon,  1887  ;
Guinand,  Monographic  du  Temple  de  Salomon,  ib88  ;
Perrot-Chipiez,  Le  Temple  de  Jerusalem  et  la  Maison  du
Bois-Liban  restitucs  apres  Ezechiel  et  le  livre  des  Rois,  1889  ;
L.  Feuchtwang  in  Zt.  f.  bildende  A'unsf,  new  ser.  2,  1891,  p.
iH\ff.  ;  H.  Becker  in  Il'iener  allgem.  Bauzeitnng,  1893,  hit.
1-4;  Perrot-Chipiez,  Judaea.

(<?)  Ezekiets  Temple:  Cornill's  edition  of  text  ;  the  commen
taries  of  Smend,  Cornill,  Bertholet ;  also  Toy  in  SBOT;
Bottcher,  Proben  A  Tlicher  Schrifterklarung  (1833),  id.  Neue
Aehrenlese;  Balmer-Rinck,  Des  Propheten  Ezekiel  Gesicht
rjin  Tempel,  1858;  Kiihn  in  St.  A'r.,  1882;  H.  Sulley,  The
Temple  of  EzekieFs  Prophecy,  1889:  Stade,  GTl^ff.

(f)  ZerubbabeTs  Temple:  De  Moor  and  Imbert,  in  Le
Must  on,  1  and  8  ;  the  commentaries  of  Ryssel  and  Bertholet  on
Fzra  and  Nehemiah.

(,(,')  Herod 's  Temple :  A  tolerably  complete  catalogue  of  the
older  literature  on  Herod's  temple  will  be  found  in  Haneberg,
Die  religiose  Altertilmer  der  Bibel,  260 ff.  ;  for  the  modern
literature  see  Schiirer  (*//  "(31 1  323^  We  mention  here  :  Mishna
tractate  Sliddoth,  with  the  commentary  of  Obadja  Bartenora  in
Surenhusius,  5;  ET  in  Barclay,  The  Talmud,  255^  Moses
Maimonides  in  npin  T  (discussion  of  the  Talmudic  details  as  to
the  temple  and  its  furniture,  in  Ugolini's  Thes.  8) ;  J.  Lightfoot,
Descriptio  templi  Hierosolymitani  (also  in  Ugolin.  Thes.  0) ;
Hirt,  '  Ueber  die  Bauten  Herodes  des  Grossen  '  in  Abh.  fieri.
Akad.  : philol.-hist.  classe,  1816-17,  pp.  1-24  ;  Haneberg,  Alter
tilmer,  266-336;  Spiess,  Das  Jerusalem  des  Josephus,  1881,  pp.
tfijf.  ;  id.  Der  Tempel  des  Jerusalem  wiihrend  des  letzten
lahrhunderts  seines  Bestandes  nach  Josephus,  1887  ;  Schurer,
"Riehm,  Hll'B,  1663,^  :  Block,  Entiimrf  eines  Grundrisses
votn  Herodianischen  Tempel  nach  Talmudischcn  Quellen
bearbeitet  :  Hildesheimer,  '  D.  Beschreibung  d.  Herod.  Tempels
im  Tractate  Middoth  u.  b.  Fl.  Josephus'  mjahresbcr.  d.  Rabb.
Semimars  f.  d.  orthodoxe  Judentum,  1876-7 ;  Lewin,  The
Si'ge  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  1 863.

(//)  Temple  worship.  In  addition  to  the  works  cited  above,
see  esp.  Schurer,  67  Y(3>,  §  24  (bibliography) ;  SYNAGOGUE,  §  n.

I-  B. (§§  1-33' 43)  I G.  H.  B. (§§  34-42).
4956


TEMPLE-KEEPER


TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS


TEMPLE-KEEPER  (NGGOKOPON),  Acts  19  35  AVms-
RV.  See  NEOCOKOS.

TEMPTATION.  The  word  HBO,  massaA  (®  neip-
A.CMOC  always),  occurs  in  the  OT  not  only  as  a  place-
name  (see  MASSAH),  in  Ex.  17?  etc.  1's.  958  (AV
'temptation,'  RV  'Massah,'  RV"1*.'-  'temptation'),  but
also  as  a  common  noun  in  Dt.  4  34  7  19  29  2  [3]  where  EV
has  '  temptations'  and  RVm£-  '  trials'  or  'evidences,'  in
Job 9 23 [see©] where  EVhas  '  trial'  and  RVms-  'calamity.'
The  verb  is  nDJ.  AV  renders  inconsistently  ;  in  Ex.  17  2  7
Dt.  616  etc.,  it  gives  up  the  best  rendering — i.e. ,  'to
prove' — and  substitutes  what  to  modern  readers  is
certainly  misleading — 'to  tempt.'  As  Driver  (on  Dt.
616)  well  observes,  'no:  is  a  neutral  word,  and  means

T  •

to  test  or  prove  a  person,  to  see  whether  he  will  act  in  a
particular  way  (Ex.164  Judg.  222  84),  or  whether  the
character  he  has  is  well  established  (i  K.  10 1).  God
thus  proves  a  person,  or  puts  him  to  the  test,  to  see  if
his  fidelity  or  affection  is  sincere,  Gen.  22 1  Ex.  20  20  Dt.
82  [(/.  v.  ]  184  [3]  ;  cp  Ps.  262  ;  and  men  test,  or  prove
Jehovah  when  they  act  as  if  doubting  whether  his  promise
be  true,  or  whether  he  is  faithful  to  his  revealed  char
acter,  Ex.1727  Nu.  1422  Ps.  78i8  (see  -v.  19)  4156  95g
10614;  cp  Is.  7 12.  So  massoth  Dt.  434  7 19  29  2  [3],  are
not  "temptations,"  but  trials,  provings  (see  note  on
434).'  With  regard  to  the  NT,  it  is  satisfactory  that
Treipdd}  is  rendered  'try'  in  Heb.  11 17  Rev.  2210,  and
Trelpa  'trial'  in  Heb.  1136.  On  the  use  of  weipacr/j-os
('temptation,'  but  RVme- sometimes  'trial'),1  Holtzmann
(//C145/. )  remarks  that  this  is  one  of  the  expressions
to  which  the  NT  has  given  a  pregnant  and  almost  new
meaning,  indicating  the  external  conflicts  and  distresses
which  become  the  means  of  inward  temptation  ;  see
Lk.  2228  Acts  20 19  Jas.  12  i  Pet.  16.  Such  a  conflict,
such  a  distress  is  reported  to  have  been  the  lot  of  Jesus,
at  the  beginning  of  his  ministry.  See  below.

TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS

Three  stories  (§§  1-4).  Discussion  (§§  9-11).

Contents  of  the  tradition  (§  5./C).  Possible  light  from  myths  (§  12).
Nucleus  (§  7).  Specially  parallel  stories  (§  13).

Possible  light  from  Persia  (§  8). Mythic  elements,  etc.  (§  14).
Bibliography  (§  15).

[There  are  three  chief  modes  of  procedure  in  dealing
with  the  traditional  story  of  the  Temptations,  or  rather
Trials,  of  Jesus,  (i)  The  narrative  may  be  regarded  as
having  arisen  in  consequence  of  a  kind  of  natural  law  or
tendency  which,  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  won  the
crown  of  moral  perfection  for  himself  and  for  his
disciples,  places  a  symbolic  event  summing  up  the  trials
and  achievement  of  his  life  at  the  very  outset  of  his
career,  just  as  the  final  victory  of  good  over  evil  needs,
through  the  operation  of  the  same  law,  to  be  effectually
guaranteed  by  a  reported  initial  victory  of  the  Light-god
over  the  Dragon  of  Chaos.  This  may  lead  us  to  begin
our  consideration  of  the  story  of  the  Trials  of  Jesus  by
putting  the  story  side  by  side  with  similar  stories  of  other
spiritual  heroes  known  to  tradition,  and  to  put  our
literary  criticism  of  the  narratives  under  the  control  of
results  already  obtained  by  such  a  comparison.  Thus
the  literary  criticism  of  the  narrative  will  become
subordinate  to  the  historical  (religions-geschichtlicli)
criticism  of  the  narrative.  The  neglect  of  this  procedure
has,  according  to  Gunkel  and  others,  led  to  much  mis
understanding  of  some  of  the  narratives  in  the  OT
(notably  those  of  Paradise,  of  the  Deluge,  and  of  Jonah),
and  it  would  perhaps  be  too  much  to  suppose  that  no
loss  would  be  sustained  by  the  neglect  of  it  in  the  study
of  the  NT.  (2)  It  is  also  possible  to  begin  our  con
sideration  of  the  narratives  of  the  Trials  by  applying  a
purely  literary  criticism — i.e.,  by  determining,  so  far  as
may  be  possible,  from  what  literary  sources  they  pro
ceed,  and  explaining  their  details  by  reference  to  the  OT
or  to  passages  in  the  traditional  life  of  Jesus.  We  may

1  In  Acts  20  19  Rev.  3  10,  etc.,  RV  gives  '  trial '  in  the  text.
4957


then  consider  whether,  endeavouring  to  realise  in  some
slight  degree  the  mental  state  of  Jesus,  and  applying  the
ordinary  canons  of  probability,  we  can  venture  to  point
out  a  historical  nucleus  of  the  traditional  story  of  the
Trials,  and  we  may  then  compare,  or  contrast,  the
Christian  tradition  with  apparent  parallels  elsewhere.
(3)  We  may,  without  disparaging  either  of  the  preced
ing  methods,  consider  whether  light  cannot  be  thrown
on  the  Christian  tradition  by  inquiring  whether  the
peculiarities  of  the  narrative  may  not  be  accounted  for
by  the  discover}'  of  some  custom  or  observance  the
details  of  which  are  similar  in  essentials  to  those  of  the
story  of  the  Trials,  and  yet  are  beyond  the  suspicion  of
having  been  derived  from  it.  The  difference  between
the  first  and  the  second  of  these  methods  and  between
both  and  the  third  is  striking.  It  may,  however,  be
minimised,  when  the  student  of  literary  criticism  is  not
opposed  to  the  comparative  study  of  myths,  and  when
the  student  of  strange  customs  does  not  at  all  deny
the  importance  of  illustrating,  and  to  some  extent  at
least  explaining,  the  narrative  from  biblical  and  extra-
biblical  literary  sources.  The  essential  truth  of  the
significant  and  instructive  narrative  of  the  Temptation
is  of  course  not  a  matter  of  controversy.  Cp  Cheyne,
Hallowing  of  Criticism.  ]

It  is  usual  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  three  synoptic  *

reports  of  the  temptation  by  one  or  other  of  two  critical

_,  hypotheses: (a) that Mk.'s represents a

' . bare  and  brief  allusion  to  the  larger  story,

s  ones,  substantially  reproduced  in  Mt.  and  Lk. ,
which  was  already  current  when  he  wrote  (cp  433,  allu
sion  to  parables  omitted),  or  (&}  that  Mt.  and  Lk.
represent  a  common  and  somewhat  mythical  expansion
(in  Q,  the  Logia-source)  of  the  original  nucleus  pre
served  by  Mk.  Neither  of  these  hypotheses  is  without
its  difficulties,  however,  and  it  seems  preferable  upon
the  whole  to  conjecture  that  Mk.'s  report  constitutes  an
allied  though  independent2  account  of  the  incident  (in
the  Ur-Marcus  or  Petrine  narrative),  which  has  been
depicted  with  fuller  ethical  detail  and  for  other  ends  in
Q  and  thence  transferred  with  editorial  modifications  to
Mt.  and  Lk.  The  standpoint  for  criticising  the  con
tents  of  both  stories  is  furnished  by  the  principle  that  in
its  higher  forms  temptation  becomes  more  than  ever  a
mystery  —  hard  to  understand  as  an  experience  and
harder  to  communicate,  especially  to  less  sensitive  souls
with  a  tendency  to  materialise  the  subtler  elements  of
moral  conflict.

Upon  this  view  Mk.  1  12  f.  portrays  the  inaugura
tion  of  Jesus  as  Messiah  by  a  contest  with  daemonic

« iun i f  powers  whom he  encountered in bestial
!.  MK.  1 12  /. ,

J form. I  he  allusion  to  'wild beasts is

not  a  realistic  touch  (see  §§  gf.)  or  a  reference  to  the
loneliness  and  danger  of  the  experience,  much  less  a
subtle  parallel  to  the  first  Adam  (Gen.  128  2 19),  but
symbolic  —  and  symbolic  not  of  passions  and  hostile
powers3  but  of  devils  who  appeared  in  such  guise  to

1  The  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  with  his  higher  Christ-
ology,  naturally  omits  the  temptation  as  one  of  several  features
(e.g.,  the  agony  in  Gethsemane)  in the  human  experience  of
Jesus  which  would  not  have  lain  in  line  with  his  specific  con
ception  of  Christ's  person. He  prefers  to  dwell  on  the  resultant
sinlessness  (7  18  846),  and the  incidental  allusions  to  a  strife
(1227-32  1430)  breathe  security  of  triumph  rather  than  intensity
of  struggle.

2  Mk.  1  1-13,  though  not  an  excerpt  from  earlier  and  fuller
writings,  is  a  resume  of  facts  already  familiar  in  the  evangelic
tradition  (cp  '  the  gospel,'  v.  i). That  does  not  imply,  however,
that  v.  12  f.  is  the  conscious  abbreviation  of  a  tale  corresponding
to  that  preserved  in Mt.  and Lk.,  even  although  the Logia
underlying  those  gospels  was  composed  of  didactic  pieces  which
circulated  earlier  than  the  Ur-Marcus. See  Soltau's Unsere
Evangelicn,  35-50  and  A.  Menzies'  Karlicst  Gospel,  62-63.

3  As  R^ville  (Jesus  de  Nazareth,  2  14)  suggests — '  leb  betes
sauvages  sont  les  passions  devorantes  que  dechainent  les  revolu
tions  violentes  ;  les  anges  conseillent  et  donnent  les  armes  pures
de  la  persuasion  et  de  1'appel  aux  consciences.' This  is  too
modern  an  idea. In  Jewish  apocalyptic  angels  are  often  violent
and  punitive,  by  no  means  to  be  identified  with  gracious  and
gentle influences. The wilderness might also be symbolic
(Herm.  Vis.  i.  1 3),  or  part  of  the  scenic  accompaniment  of  a

4958


TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS

the  vision  of  devotees  in  the  desert.  To  the  fervour
and  imagination  of  Jesus  the  divine  spirit  is  like  a
fluttering  dove  (v.  10),  the  satanic  spirits  like  wild  beasts.
Here,  as  afterwards  in  human  form  (123,  etc.,  especially
12227  with  the  different  application  in  Mt.  728),  the
satanic  spirits  comprise  for  Mk.  a  prominent  sphere  in
which  Jesus  lived  and  worked  as  Messiah,  the  foe  of
daemons.  This  interpretation  of  Mk. 's  language,1  there
fore,  is  not  simply  in  line  with  the  naive  psychology  of
the  age,'2  which  peopled  the  desert  with  haunting  deities,
visible  especially  to  rapt  devotees,  but  entirely  consonant
with  the  leading  idea  of  Jesus'  career  developed  in  Mk.  's
gospel  (cp  the  mutual  recognition  of  Jesus  and  daemons
in  123  /  34  3  n /.  56/.  9  20;  and  Wrede's  Das  Messias-
gcheimniss  in  den  Evangelien,  23/1).

Common  to  all  three  gospels is  the  symbolic  term
of '  forty  days ' (cp the  forty  years of  Israel  in the
wilderness, Dt.  82, and the  forty days'


fast  in  the  experience  of  Moses  [Ex.  3428]


3.  Common
matter. and  E1~ah  ^  K  19g-j  and  s(;e  NuMI!FKt

§  8)  to  delineate,  as  in  Acts  1  3,  a  considerable  period
of  time.  In  Mk.  ,  at  any  rate,  whatever  be  thought  of
Mt.  4  ii  (cp  815  25  44  27  55),  the  angelic3  service  has  no
reference  to  food  (Ps.  7825  Wisd.  1620).  It  is  simply
the  counterpart  of  satanic  opposition,4  and  represents
an  experience  of  continuous  aid  during  the  vigil,  not
(as  in  Mt.  )  a  reward  and  refreshment  vouchsafed  after
the  strain.  All  three  accounts,  however,  imply  that
Jesus  passed  through  the  prolonged  crisis  without  fall
or  wound.  Whatever  he  thought  or  sought  in  the  desert,
his  character  suffered  no  deflection  or  compromise,  much
less  defeat.  This  is  developed  in  Mt.  and  Lk.  ,  who
draw  independently  upon  a  didactic  passage  in  the  Logia
which  evidently  contained  a  naive,  pictorial  descrip
tion  of  what  Jesus  experienced  in  a  far  less  matter-
of-fact  and  obvious  fashion  at  this  period.  The  form
of  it  is  vivid  and  severely  simple  upon  the  whole,  but
dramatic  rather  than  mysterious,  and  naturally  less
impressive,  because  less  inward  and  direct,  than  the
later  record  of  Jesus'  strenuous  temptation  in  Geth-
semane  or  even  of  his  sharp  encounter  with  an  insidious
enticement  near  Ccesarea  Philippi  (Mk.  831-33).  It  now
remains  for  us  to  consider  the  temptation-vision  in  this
semi-parabolic  presentment  which  Mt.  and  Lk.  have
realistically  preserved.  (Cp  HC  [1901]  1  i.  45-48.)

Both  in  Mt.  and  in  Lk.  the  original  report  of  Q  has
been  worked  over,  and  traces  of  editorial  handling  are
°^v'ous  'f  (as  a  rul°)  comparatively
unimportant.

Favourite  or  characteristic  Mattluean  terms  in  4i-n  are:
'then'  (tore,  quater),  'coming  forward'  (Trpoo-eAftoi/),  'the


Mt ri
a


vision  (Rev.  17  3)  translated  into  circumstantial  prose. But  the
literal  sense  is  quite  suitable  and  natural.

1  It  is  one  bit  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the  verdict  that  whilst
Mk.'s  gospel  rests  upon facts,  not  upon ideas,  at a relatively
small  number  of  points  '  legendary  features  have  come  to  attach
themselves  to  the  facts  '  (O.  Holtzmann  in  ZXTW,  1901,  p.  273).

2  For  demons  in  bestial  shape  see,  e.g. ,  Mk.5  12 11  Rev.  1'.'3  13  n
1(5 13  /.,  and  —  for the current belief  in their  connection  with
waste  and  lonely  places — Mt.  1-43  (HKMONS,  §  3  ;  MAGIC,  §  2,
b.  i,  and  Cheyne  on  Is.  1821),  with  Charles'  note  on  Apoc.  Bar.
108. These  and  other  traces  of  Semitic  folklore  (see  Doughty,
A  r.  Des.  '1  189-194)  form  the  atmosphere  for  much  in  the  synoptic
tales  of  evil spirits  and  their  malign influence  upon men (cp
also  2  Cor.  11  3  ;  Everling,  Die  paid.  Angclologie,  etc., 51-57).
In  the  Arabic '  gospel  of  the  infancy '  demons  emerge from a
lad's  mouth  in  the  shape  of  crows  and  serpents  {Apocryphal
Gospels,  ed.  B.  H.  Cowper,  170). _

3  Evidently  part  of  the  primitive  tradition, for  Mk. never
mentions  angels  elsewhere  in  narrative. A  fohannine  equivalent
in  In.  1  51?

4  Just  as  the  '  rulers  of  this  world  '  (dpxoi'Tfs  TOV  aiwyos  TOV'TOU,
i  Cor.  2  6-8)  are  evil  spirits  who  attempt  to  thwart  the  Lord  of
glory,  so  here  the  Messiah  encounters  supernatural  foes,  after
Ps.  Ivf.  where  the  rulers  (oi  dpxoiTes)  gather  against  the  Lord
and  his  anointed  (KCU  Kara  roO  xpicrrou  UUTOU),  the  latter  being
God's  son  par  excellence  (v.  7  =  Mk.  1  n  Lk.  822  [D],  etc.). Cp
Cie»i.  Horn.  S  22  of  Satan  setting  himself  to  catch  him  (drjpeveiv
avrov  eTri\tip<av)  at  this  period. In  Herm.  I  'is.  iv.  2  4  Segri  is  the
angel  with  authority  over  beasts  such  as  are  seen  in  the  vision.
The  conception  of  Messiah  as  inevitably  assailed  by  daemons  is
preserved  in  Rev.  12  4/!  (cp  Mk.  3  27  and  specially  Mt.  S  29).

4959


TEMPTATION  OP  JESUS

tempter'  (6  neipd^uiv),  'and'  (6e,  4),  'the  holy  city"  (riji'  ayiav
TrdAii/),1  '  takes  '  (TrapaAa/ujSayet,  bis),  the  asyndeton  in  7,  'again  '
(iroAii',  i>is),  '  the  world  '  (rov  KOO>LOV,  8),  '  and  behold '  (icai  1601!),
besides  the  additions  of  $c,  8  (high  hill),  and  '  depart,  Satan '
(un-aye  (rarava.,  10).  Lucan  peculiarities  in  4  1-13  are:  '  full  of
holy  Spirit'  (n-Atjpr;?  irv.  ayi'ou,'2  i/>),  'in  those  days'  (ei>  rai?
Vjjut'paif  cKci'patf),  'and  he  said'  (flirtv  Se':  GOSPELS,  §  38,  n.  2),
'answer  '  (diroKpiVecrftu  jrpos),  '  lead  '  (dyuj,  fa's),  '  departed  '  (inre-
<rTpf*jifv,3  fa's),  TOV  with  intin.  (10),  'world'  (oi(cou/u.e'n),  cp  2  i),
'complete'  (trvfreAtw,  6is),  'before'  (ivunrtov),  'departed'
(an-eerTj)),  besides  the  addition  of  z/>,  5  (in  an  instant),  6f,  9
(evrevdfv),  io(to  safeguard  thee),  13  (for  a  season),  and  the  omis
sion  of  the  angelic  ministry  at  the  close  (made  up  for  by  the  later
vision  of  22  43  V).

It  is  evident  that  the  original  tale  in  Q  was  little  altered
in  subsequent  recensions  and  that  the  final  editors  have
reproduced  it  accurately  though  not  slavishly,  preserving
the  essential  features  of  the  story.  The  main  exception
to  this  rule  is  the  altered  order  of  the  second  and  third
temptations  by  a  process  of  transposition  which  is  fairly
common  throughout  the  synoptics  (see  SERMON  ON  THE
MOUNT,  §  9).  There  are  no  data  which  would  enable
us  to  decide  with  any  confidence  which,  if  either,
represents  the  original  series  in  the  Logia,  much
less  the  actual  sequence.  Fortunately  the  order  is  not
a  matter  of  moment.4  Each  of  the  two  canonical
sequences  has  plausible  features  and  is  ethically  effective,
especially  in  view  of  the  gospel  in  which  it  occurs.

In  Mt. ,  where  Jesus  is  pictured  as  the  real  if  unex
pected  (11s)  Messiah  of  Judaism,  the  newly  realised
consciousness  of  his  position  (3 17)  suggests  the  final  and
supreme  temptation  of  adopting  compromise  with  ex
ternal  methods  in  order  to  gain  the  universal  dominion
which  formed  his  goal  (48-n).  The  true  Messiah,  as
had  been  already  seen  in  part  (Ps.  Sol.  1737-45),  was  to
be  no  second  Solomon  but  one  whose  reliance  was  solely
upon  God  for  strength  and  wisdom.  In  Lk. ,  again,
the  climax  is  not  merely  that  the  OT  scriptures  them
selves  might  suggest  unworthy  ideas,  but  that  pre
sumptuous  claims  upon  God  are  a  danger  subtler  than
seductions  appealing  to  the  flesh  or  to  the  external  and
sensuous  inclinations  (49-12).  Besides,  '  thou  shall  not
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God '  formed  a  dramatic  and  appro
priate  ending  to  the  initial  series  of  temptations  in  a  life
which  Lk.  emphasises  (4 13  2228)  as  a  tempted  existence
throughout.  Further,  an  apologetic  tendency  is  to  be
traced  in  his  anxiety  to  give  a  more  natural  geographical
order,  to  show  that  the  retirement  was  due  to  a
spontaneous  and  spiritual 5  impulse  or  rather  habit
(4  if.,  TrX^pT/s  irv(Vfj.a.ros  aylov  .  .  .  ijyfTO  ev  T$  irvev-
/J.O.TI,  cp  Rom.  814),  and  to  explain6  for  the  benefit  of
non- Jewish  readers  (46,  STI  .  .  .  avrrfv)  how  Satan
could  reasonably  make  such  an  offer.7  The  awkward

1  The  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  apparently  agreed  here  with
Lk.  (TO  lovSaiKOV  OVK  f\ei  '  "  eis  TTJV  ay  Can  TroAii/"  dtAA'  "  ei>  iA>j/i
[ifpovcra.\fiij.],  Handmann, TU  [1888]  v.  3  70). The  telic  note,
characteristic  of  Mt.  (4i),  is  added  to  Lk.  harmonistically  by
Ss,  as  Lk.'s  '  for  a  season  '  to  Mt.  4  n<z  (so  Cur.).

-  Here,  as  at  822  (  =  Mt.  3  16  Mk.  1  10),  the  most  correct  form
(Dalman,  IVorteJesu,  i66/).

3  In  v.  i,  whither? Hardly  to  Galilee  (P. 14). There  is  a
good  deal  to  be  said  for  Hahn's  idea  that  the  retirement  and
conflict  of  Jesus  in  Lk.  forms  an  aside — a  change  of  purpose  (cp
7>.  i  and  7'.  14). Certainly  that  is  the  impression left  by  the
narrative. But  this  may  be  due  simply  to  the  ill-arranged  order
of  Lk.  at  this  point  (see,  e.g.,  the  unchronological  position  of
3  igyC)  and  not  to  the  author's  real  conception.

4  '  The  thoughts  crossed  and  recrossed  each  another,  occurred
and  recurred,  and  the  record  is  simply  a  classified  summary  of
forty  days'  reflections  and  examinations'  (Peyton),  or  rather  of
prolonged  agitation  in  mind  and  soul. Some  historical  signifi
cance,  however,  is  attached  by  Honig  to  the  order  (desert,  hill
=  Galilee,  temple  =  Jerusalem)  ;  see  also  O.  Holtzmann's  Leben

Jesu,  35  f.  io8yC

5  Bruce  (Expos.  Grk.  Test.  1  486)  prefers  to  regard  this  as  the
first instance of  Lk.'s editorial solicitude : no  evil thoughts
possible  in  the  mind  of  such  a  holy  man.

6  Mt.  naturally  takes  it  for  granted  that  his  readers  understand
the  Jewish  notion,  shared  by  most  early  Christians,  that  the
present  age  and  world  lay  under  the  control  (2  Cor.  44  Eph.  6  12,
etc.; Everling,  op.  cit.  49  _/T, 107  /.)  of  Satan  as  king  of  the
present time  (o Trpoiricaipo? ^acriAfu?)  or king  of  the present
things  ((3.  riav  irapovToii')  (Clem.  Hani.  S  21).^

7  The  transport  to  a  hill-top,  characteristic  of  Jewish  apoca
lyptic  (Rev.  21  10,  cp'  Herm.  Sim.  ix.  1  i,  etc.,  also  Ezek.  402,
Apoc.  Bar.  76  8),  is  also  softened  down  (avayaytav),  and  stress

4960


TEMPTATION  OP  JESUS

insertion  of  the  genealogy  (823-38)  between  the  baptism
and  the  temptation  may  have  been  intended  to  suggest
that  Jesus  was  mature,  as  well  as  equipped  by  descent,
iit  his  entrance  upon  ministry  and  at  the  moment  of  his
conflict  with  Satan  (so,  evidently,  Justin,  Dial.  125,  354:
tire  yap  avOpwiros  y^yovfv,  irpoarjXdev  avri?  6  5id£foXos).
It  cjrtainly  makes  the  connection,  rightly  emphasised  in
Mk.  1 12  (KM  etOvs)  and  even  Mt.  (4i,  r6re),  somewhat
loose.

Treating  the  subject of  their  relation  to similar  narratives

elsewhere  (see  §  13)^  we  may  remark  that  the  figurative  !  stories

in  Mt.  and  Lk.  were  written  in  an  atmosphere

5.  Contents  Of of  belief  in  Satan  as  the  arch-opponent  of
the  tradition. God's authority  (Mt.  1-27  _/^  =  Lk.ll  19  _/;,

etc.)  and  the  personal  agent  in  seduction —
a  belief  (Jewish  and  early  Christian  ;  Spitta,  Das  Urchrist.  1  34-
38)  which  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  was  shared,  in  however
minimised  and  moralised  a  form,  by  Jesus  himself.  In  two
other  visions  of  spiritual  conflict  recorded  by  Lk.2(10  18  2231^),
Satan  appears  as  the  defeated  protagonist  of  Jesus  ;  and  these,
like  the  original  nucleus  of  the  baptism-story  (Historical  New
Testament,  1901,  p.  18)  and  possibly  also  the  transfiguration,
certainly  represent  (ii^rjyjjo-aTO  ini.lv,  Clcin.  Horn.  11  35)  auto
biographical  communications  of  one  who,  like  Paul,  though  far
from  being  a  visionary,  had  visions  and  moments  of  rapture,
especially  at  crises  of  his  religious  experience.  These  communi
cations3  must  have  been  made  to  the  disciples  in  order  to  re
assure,  impress  (Mt.  20  38),  and  clarify  their  minds.  The  main
object  was  to  throw  light  upon  his  own  method  and  aims,  and
also  by  inference  upon  the  course  of  life  to  be  followed  by  his
adherents.  Hence,  in  their  present  didactic  form,  it  is  not  easy
to  determine  whether  the  stories  originally  possessed  a  Messianic
or  a  human  significance,  unless  both  are  conceived  to  have  lain
blended  together.

[With  regard  to  the  order  of  the  three  Trials,  it  is  worth  men
tioning  (after  O.  Holtzmann,  Lcben  Jesn,  §  72)  that  according
to  the  fragments  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  (referred  to  again
in  §  14)  the  narrative  was  originally  so  arranged  that  the
temptation  on  the  mountain  came  first,  that  in  the  city  second,
and  that  in  the  wilderness  third,  whereas  in  Mt.  the  order  is  :
wilderness,  city,  mountain,  and  in  Lk.  wilderness,  mountain,
city.  He  gives  psychological  reasons  for  preferring  the  order  of
the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews,  pointing  out  that  it  coincides  more
over  with  that  in  which  the  texts  quoted  from  Deuteronomy
occur  (ti  13  16  82_/).  It  was  in  Deuteronomy,  he  supposes,
that  Jesus,  in  the  prolonged  period  of  meditation  after  his
baptism  in  which  his  vocation  had  been  revealed  to  him,  sought
for  the  guidance  of  which  he  felt  in  need.]

i.  Loneliness  and  fasting,4  the  normal  conditions  of
an  ecstasy  or  trance,  naturally  introduce  the  first

c mu«  4.U synoptic  temptation,  the  ethical  point  of

6.  The  three •,  •  r ,. •  , ,

. • i  which lies in the refusal of Jesus to

seek  exemption  from  the  limitations  of
common  needs  and  bodily  privations.  The  later
counsel  Mt.  625-33  is  thus  grounded  in  his  own  ex
perience  (cp  Jn.  431-34  and  Mt.  lOS-io  Lk.  9s  104).
Divine  sonship,  even  in  its  highest  degree,  is  thereby
shown  to  confer  no  title  to  exceptional  treatment  ;  it
merely  enforces  the  duty  of  loyalty  to  God's  interests
and  demands  as  the  supreme  thing  in  the  moral  life
(see  the  application  of  this  in  Jn.  626/1),  and  the  com
panion  duty  of  faith,  that  such  devotion  shall  not  be  left
ultimately  destitute  by  God.

ii.  With  admirable  penetration  the  very  intensity  of
such  faith  is  represented  in  the  temple-temptation  as  an
insidious  occasion  for  presumption.  The  inclination

laid  on  the  time  (ei<  oriy/ir;  \povov,  4  5).  The  appositeness  of
Mt.  4  3  and  the  more  vivid  Lk.  4  3  lies  in  the  resemblance  between
the  rounded  shingle  of  the  locality  and  loaves  of  bread  (cp
Mt.  7  9).  There  is  no  subtle  allusion  to  the  Baptist's  remark
(Mt.  8911),  which  indeed  is  amply  illustrated  otherwise  (cp
Klein  in  /.NTH',  1901,  pp.  343-344).

1  They  appear  to  lie  between  a  chronicle  and  a  poetical  parable.
As  early  as  the  seventeenth  century,  the  Temptation  was  viewed
as  'an  interchange  of  dangerous  thoughts,'  by  Balthasar  Bekker  :
Die  bezauberte  IVeltc  (chap.  21).

-  It  is  noticeable  that  the  tempted  nature  of  Christ  is  brought
forward  in  Hebrews,  a  book  linguistically  allied  to  Lk.-Acts.

3  For  the  imparting  of  the  substance  of  ecstasies  and  trances
see  Acts  11  4/1  16g./  18g _/C  226yC,  etc.,  and  Asc.  Isaiip,  6  10-15,
'  Oculi  eius  erant  aperti,  os  vero  clausum,  sed  inspiratio  spiritus
erat  cum  illo. Visio  quam  videbat,  non  erat  de  seculo  hoc,  sed
de  abscondito  omni  carni. Et  cum  cessavit  a  visione,  reversus
notificavit  visionem  Ezechiae  et  filio  eius  Nasoni.'

4  See  Gunkel's  Die  IVirknngen  des  heiligcn  Geistes (1899),  22,
and FASTING, §  2  (with  PROPHETIC LITERATURE,  §  19). A
notable  exception  occurs  in  Rev.  1  9  f. Intense  prayer  may
have  preceded the  Temptation  (see  von  der  Goltz.  das  Gebct,
3-4),  but  it  is  not  specifically  mentioned.

4961


TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS

now  is  to  abuse  not  one's  feeling  of  independence  but
one's  consciousness  of  dependence  —  i.e.,  the  current
pious  conviction,  shared  by  Jesus,  that  God  could  and
would  miraculously  interpose  on  behalf  of  his  servants
in  peril.  Jesus  repels  this  suggestion.1  Genuine  faith
in  man,  he  is  convinced,  will  be  content  to  believe  in
God's  care  without  nervously  insisting  upon  arbitrary
proofs  of  it.

iii.  The  mountain-temptation  depicts  Jesus'  rejection
of  another  attractive  and  plausible  idea  which  occurred
to  him  (no  doubt  suggested  in  part  by  popular  expecta
tion),  viz.,  that  his  Messianic  goal  might  be  swiftly  and
smoothly  reached  along  paths  bordering  upon  com
promise.  Kenan's  motto  fof  the  scene — '  Christ  or
Mahomet ' — hits  off  one  aspect  of  the  dilemma  precisely.
Yet  the  bearing  of  the  temptation  need  not  be  exclusively
messianic,  as  Mk.  836  shows  ;  the  latter  passage 2  (with
833)  indicating  also  that  here  at  any  rate  the  larger
temptation-narrative,  relegated  not  without  psychological
aptness  to  the  opening  of  Jesus'  life,  forms  really  a
miniature  of  the  fundamental  temptations  which  recurred
as  constant  factors  in  his  career,  just  as  the  Sermon  on
the  Mount  is  placed  by  Mt.  unchronologically  in  the
forefront  of  the  ministry  as  a  summary  of  his  general
teaching.  No  doubt  the  moral  insight  of  Jesus  carried
with  it  foresight  of  coming  perils.  At  Nazareth  he  had
not  been  out  of  touch  with  currents  surging  from  the
outside  pagan  world  and  its  glories  (see  GASm.  HG
35~37>  433"435'  f°r  {he  consciousness  of  ethnic  splendour
possible  to  a  Galilean).  But  the  full  force  of  such  a
temptation  could  not  be  felt  until  he  had  entered  defi
nitely  upon  his  public  mission  (cp  Jn.  6i4/. )  ;  and  the
same  may  be  said  of  the  temple-temptation  (Mt.  26s3/. ),
for  hitherto  Jesus,  though  acquainted  of  course  with  the
dizzy  pinnacle  of  the  temple  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  11 5),  had
run  no  risk  to  his  person  (see  further  the  didactic  side
of  this  developed  in  Mt.  1017-31  Lk.  122-12).  The
difficulty  of  Jesus  at  the  outset  naturally  was  to  see  and
choose  the  true  method  :  his  subsequent  trial,  recurring
at  frequent  stages,  was  to  adhere  to  the  choice  made  in
this  initial  hour  of  insight.

The  Logia  passage  on  the  temptation  thus  represented

the  disciples' memory  of  Jesus' memory. It was  the

__. . . . literary embodiment, coloured by OT

7.  .Historical  reminiscences,3  of  a  crisis  in  the  "life  of

nucleus. jesus  which ^ Mt-122g  Mk.  827)  he

imparted  in  an  ideal and concentrated form, looking

back  on  it  through  the  later,  deeper  experience  of  his

1  The  ethical  triumph  of  the  crisis,  as  Keim  points  out  (Jesu
von  Nazara,  ET,  2  328),  is  not  simply  that  Jesus  conquered  but
that '  the  inexorable  godlike  loftiness  of  his  judgment  discovered
the  devil  in  scruples  which  even  the  noblest  would  have  fondled
as  spiritual  pearls.'  Further,  with  the  possible  and  partial
exception  of  the  hunger -experience,  the  allurements  in  this
initial  crisis  of  Jesus'  life  are  depicted  as  attractive  rather  than
threatening  or  painful.  All  trial  (in  the  modern  sense  of  the
word)  is  temptation  ;  but  all  temptations  are  not  trials.  As
Gethsemane  indicates,  Jesus  felt  the  harsh  as  well  as  the  soft
touch,  and  emerged  from  the  ordeal  unspoiled  :  cp  irfTrovftev
aurbs  7rfipa<r#ei.'s  .  .  .  x^opW  a/uapn'as  (Heb.  2  ib  4  15).

-  The  allusion  to  Peter  as  an  embodiment  of  Satan  corresponds
with  the  early  Christian  belief  that  seductions  through  human
influence  were  the  devil's  work  (Weinel,  Wirkitngen  ties  Gn'stes
u.  der  Gcister,  14-17  [1899]);  but  the  synoptic  stories,  in  their
present  form  at  any  rate,  expressly  exclude  the  idea  that  Jesus
bad  to  grapple  in  the  temptation  with  anything  but  spiritual
hosts  of  wickedness  (Eph.  li  11-13).  Even  the  notion  of  the
temple-temptation  as  a  miracle  of  display  before  a  crowd  is  rather
irrelevant  and  theatrica.1.  For  the  unpolitical  character  of
Christ's  propaganda,  see  Barth's  HoMptprobleme  des  Lcbens
Jesu,  pp.  41-44.

3  The  OT  citations  are  all  from  ©,  and  present  little  or  no
difficulty.  Mt.  \$c  omits  ru>  before  e/cn-op.  with  AF  (Dt.83);
the  other  variants  e>>  apru>  (Zahn,  EM.  2  316  ;  Nestle,  Einfilhr.
2ii)and  fv  prifiari  are  insignificant  and  uncertain.  Ps.  91  ii_/C
is  quoted  with  some  freedom  in  Mt.  46.  But  in  citing  Dt.  6  13
both  Mt.  and  Lk.  agree  with  ©A  in  substituting  TrpotrKuiojo-ets  for
<J>o/3r;(?»jo7)  and  in  adding  fiot'ta  to  aur<p.  The  sequel  in  Ps.  28  f.
to  ?'.  7  may  have  suggested  the  mountain -temptation,  just  as
perhaps  the  beasts  of  Ps.  91  ij  may  have  suggested  Mk.  1  13.
But  such  conformations  or  infusions  are  at  most  subordinate  to  the
dominant  factor  in  the  composition  of  the  story— viz.,  the  en
deavour  to  summarise  the  cardinal  temptations  of  Jesus.

4962


TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS


TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS


actual  ministry,  when  the  initials  eductions  had  become
more  grave  and  subtle  than  before.  The  historical
nucleus  of  the  tradition  is  the  natural  and  overpowering
impulse  which  drove  Jesus  into  the  gaunt,  wild  solitudes
W. 1  or  rather  E.  of  the  Jordan  to  reflect  upon  the
strange  consciousness  (Balclensperger,  Das  Selbst-
beioussteein  Jcsit,  229  f. )  which  had  recently  dawned
upon  him  at  his  baptism,2  to  forecast  its  issues  and
determine  his  course  of  action  (cp  Gal.  115-17).  It  is
noticeable  that  he  does  not  seem  to  have  doubted  the
reality  of  his  Messianic  consciousness  ;  for  the  words
'  if  thou  art  a  son  of  God '  (el  vlbs  el  rov  Oeod)  do  not
bear  this  full  hypothetical  meaning.  What  he  had  to
win  clearness  and  conviction  upon  was  the  real  nature
and  consequences  of  his  position  ;  if  any  hesitation  or
uncertainty  upon  the  genuineness  of  this  occurred  to
him,  it  was  during  the  period  of  conflict3  (implied  by
Mk.  and  Lk. ,  not  Mt. )  and  self-questioning  preceding
that  in  which  Mt.  and  Lk.  place  the  triple  and  typical
conflict  of  what  is  rather  inappropriately  termed  the
Temptation  of  Jesus.  J.  Mo.

It  has  been  remarked  above  (introd. )  that  light  might
be  expected  to  be  thrown  upon  the  singular  and  sug
gestive  story  of  the  Trials  of  Jesus  by  comparing  it
with  more  or  less  striking  parallels  in  the  literature  of
other  religions,  but  that  it  is  also  possible  that  the
insertion  of  such  a  narrative  (which  is  plainly  not
literally  true)  may  conceivably  be  accounted  for  by  the
existence  of  some  custom  or  observance  which  may  have
led  the  narrator  to  postulate  such  an  event  as  the  threefold
trial  at  the  opening  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  In  an  essay
read  before  the  Oxford  Society  of  Historical  Theology  in
Nov.  1901  (an  abstract  of  which  is  given  in  the  Society's
Proceedings  [privately  printed],  1901-2,  pp.  27-31)  the
view  has  been  expressed  by  Prof.  A.  A.  Bevan  that  the
so-called  Temptation-story  in  its  original  form  (i.e. ,  a
form  resembling  the  narrative  in  Mk. )  was  a  description
of  a  traditional  practice  or  ceremony,  by  which,  it  was
supposed,  a  man  could  obtain  control  over  demons.
p  ...  The  practice  referred  to  must  have

i- ilf  f 4.1, been  of  ancient  origin,  and  it  has  con-
rom  tne  dnued  in  the  Eagt  down  to  the  present

modern  tast.  day  Rather  tnan  attempt  to  describe
it  anew,  Prof.  Bevan  cites  the  testimony  of  an  Oriental,
as  reported  by  Prof.  E.  G.  Browne  in  his  work,  A  Year
amongst  the  Persians  (1893),  148  /.  About  fifteen
years  ago  Prof.  Browne  heard  this  story  from  a
philosopher  of  Isfahan,  entitled  Aminu-sh-Shari'at.

'  At  one  time  of  my  life  I  devoted  myself  to  the  occult
sciences,  and  made  an  attempt  to  obtain  control  over  the //«««,
with  what  results  I  will  tell  you.  You  must  know,  in  the  first
place,  that  the  modus  operandi  is  as  follows  : — The  seeker  after
this  power  chooses  some  solitary  and  dismal  spot.  .  .  .  There
he  must  remain  for  forty  days.  .  .  .  He  spends  the  greater  part
of  this  time  in  incantations  in  the  Arabic  language,  which  he
recites  within  the  area  of  the  tnanJal,  or  geometrical  figure,
which  he  must  describe  in  a  certain  way  on  the  ground.  Resides
this,  he  must  eat  very  little  food,  and  diminish  the  amount
daily.  If  he  has  faithfully  observed  all  these  details,  on  the
twenty-first  day  a  lion  will  appear,  and  will  enter  the  magic
circle.  The  operator  must  not  allow  himself  to  be  terrified  by
this  apparition,  and,  above  all,  must  on  no  account  quit  the
mandal,  else  he  will  lose  the  results  of  all  his  pains.  If  he
resists  the  lion,  other  terrible  forms  will  come  to  him  on  subse
quent  days  —  tigers,  dragons,  and  the  like  —  which  he  must
similarly  withstand.  If  he  holds  his  ground  till  the  fortieth


1  In  the  vicinity  of  BKTHABARA?  Cp  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST,
§  i.  On  the  haggard,  austere  Judaean  desert  with  its  vipers
(Mt.  3  7),  see  GASm.  HG  312-317.

-  Justin  (Dial.  103,  331)  loosely  brings  the  two  into  close
connection — O./J.OL  r<a  ava^rji/ai  avTov  OLTTO  TOV  'lopSarov  the  voice
from  heaven  is  followed  by  the  temptation  to  worship  the  devil.

3  In  Clem.  Horn.  (1135  192)  these  forty  days  are  occupied
by  discussions  (StaMyecrOai)  with  the  devil  (trporpe-ntav  Ka.i  ava-
TTfiBtav,  8  21).  See  the  striking  passage  cited  from  Victor  Hugo's
Quatre-vittgt-treize  (in  John  Morley's  Studies  in  Literature,
2357^)  on  the  moral  incitements  and  haunting  effects  of  Nature
upon  the  human  conscience,  and  especially  of  Nature  in  her
more  savage  and  gloomy  scene*.  Where  the  strong  conscience
resists,  and  develops  by  resisting,  '  the  puny  conscience  soon
turns  reptile  ...  it  undergoes  the  mysterious  infiltration  of  ill
suggestions  and  superstition.'

4963


day,  he  has  attained  his  object,  and  the  jinnis,  having  been
unable  to  get  the  mastery  over  him,  will  have  to  become  his
servants  and  obey  all  his  behests.  Well,  I  faithfully  observed
all  the  necessary  conditions,  and  on  the  twenty-first  day,  sure
enough,  a  lion  appeared  and  entered  the  circle.  Next  day  a
tiger  came,  and  still  I  succeeded  in  resisting  the  impulse  whLh
urged  me  to  flee.  Hut  when,  on  the  following  day,  a  most
hideous  and  frightful  dragon  appeared,  I  could  no  longer
control  my  terror,  and  rushed  from  the  circle,  renouncing  all
further  attempts  at  obtaining  the  mastery  over  the  jinnis.
When  some  time  had  elapsed  after  this,  and  I  had  pursued  my
studies  in  philosophy  further,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I
had  been  the  victim  of  hallucinations  excited  by  expectation,
solitude,  hunger,  and  long  vigils  ;  and,  with  a  view  to  testing
the  truth  of  this  hypothesis,  I  again  repeated  the  process  whicli
I  had  before  practised,  this  time  in  a  spirit  of  philosophical
incredulity.  My  expectations  were  justified  ;  I  saw  absolutely
nothing.  And  there  is  another  fact  which  proves  to  my  mind
that  the  phantoms  I  saw  on  the  first  occasion  had  no  existence
outside  my  own  brain.  I  had  never  seen  a  real  lion  then,  and
my  ideas  about  the  appearance  of  that  animal  were  entirely
derived  from  the  pictures  which  may  be  seen  over  the  doors
of  baths  in  this  country.  Now,  the  lion  which  I  saw  in  the
magic  circle  was  exactly  like  the  latter  in  form  and  colouring,
and,  therefore,  as  I  need  hardly  say,  differed  considerably  in
aspect  from  a  real  lion.'

This  custom,  it  will  be  noticed,  belongs  to  the  large
class  of  observances  now  often  called '  ceremonies of
initiation,' that is to  say, ceremonies


by  which a man is introduced into


9.  Initiation
ceremonies. some  new  jjnc  Of  jjfe  sucn  ^  tnat

a  warrior,  a  priest,  a  king,  and  so  forth.  Among
savages,  as  is  well  known,  these  ceremonies  are
often  very  elaborate  and  very  repulsive,  involving,  for
example,  mutilations  of  the  body  and  other  torments;
among  civilised  peoples  there  is  naturally  a  tendency  to
soften  them  down,  or  suppress  them  altogether  ;  but
traces  of  them  have  survived  in  almost  every  country  of
the  world.

In  the  particular  case  under  consideration  the  purpose

„ ,  .  of the ceremony is perfectly clear,

?V?* namely, to obtain power over those

ion  o  Jinn.  Beings  Wh0rn  modern  Orientals  call
jinn  —  a  term  which  in  meaning  corresponds  to  the
Jewish  shedhlm  and  to  the  Greek  dai/j.oi>fs,  8a.Lu.bvia,.

Later  Jewish  writers  told  that  King  Solomon  possessed  such
a  power  (rrji'  Kara  TUIV  Satiuoviav  Tt\vijv,  as  Josephus  calls  it).
Josephus  also  states  that'  Solomon  composed  incantations
whereby  diseases  are  relieved,  and  left  behind  him  forms  of
exorcism,  whereby  men  control  and  drive  out  demons,  so  that
they  can  never  return.  He  adds,  '  even  to  the  present  day  this
mode  of  cure  prevails  among  us  to  a  very  great  extent'  (Ant.
viii.  2  5).

In  this  connection  it  is  to  be  observed  that  both  in

ancient and in modern times a distinction  is made

between  subjugating  demons,  as  Solomon  is  supposed  to

have  done,  and  entering  into  league  with  them,  in  order

to  gain  some  advantage  for  oneself  or  to  injure  one's

enemies. The  former  is  called  lawful,  the  latter  unlawful

magic. Now the  ceremony  which we are discussing

evidently  belongs  to  the  former  category, and  that  it

bears  a  striking resemblance to the accounts of the

temptation  in  the  Gospels,  as  Prof.  Bevan  points  out,

.  cannot  be  denied. In  both  cases  we

88  find  the  forty  days  spent  in  the  desert,

gospel  story. {he  fastingi and'  the presence of  the

wild  beasts.  It  is  also  plain  that  in  the  Synoptic
narrative  of  Jesus'  ministry  the  casting  out  of  demons
is  a  continually  recurring  feature.  It  appears  natural,
therefore,  that  the  narrative  should  begin  with  an
account  of  the  process  by  which  Jesus'  power  over
the  demons  was  acquired.  Nor  must  we  overlook  the
important  fact  that  the  Fourth  Gospel,  which  omits  the
'  Temptation,'  also  omits  all  reference  to  the  casting  out
of  demons.  Does  not  this  give  plausibility  to  the  view
that  the  early  Christians  believed  that  their  Master  had
obtained  control  over  the  demons  by  performing  this
rite  at  the  outset  of  his  ministry?  Further  corro-
borations  of  this  view  are  given  in  the  abstract  of  this
essay  in  the  Proceedings  referred  to.

An  earlier  explanation  must,  however,  be  mentioned.

The  more  we  familiarise  ourselves  with  the  utterances

4964


TEMPTATION  OP  JESUS


TEMPTATION  OF  JESUS


of  primitive  antiquity,  the  more  we  are  relieved  from  the

~ T» -LI difficulties incident to  a  literalistic and
12 Possible ....  .. ...

'  ,  , ,.  rationalistic  reading  of  ancient  religious

tvf0m  records-  Primitive  antiquity  delights
y  s'  in  myths,  and  details  derived  from
myths  were  not  held  to  be  misplaced  in  narratives  the
nucleus  of  which  was  historical.  Indeed,  even  whole
episodes  might  be  borrowed  from  myths  and  adapted
to  their  own  needs  by  the  writers  of  popular  narratives,
without  any  sense  of  incongruity.  How  largely  this  is
the  case  in  the  earlier  portion  of  Israelite  history,  is
becoming  known,  and  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for
denying  the  existence  of  a  more  or  less  modified  mythic
embroidery  in  early  Christian  narratives.  The  narrative
of  the  Temptation  of  Jesus  is  one  of  the  most  precious
of  these  narratives.  We  cannot  call  it  an  allegory  any
more  than  we  can  call  the  Hebrew  paradise-story  an
allegory,  for  it  is  put  forth  as  history — such  history  as
to  early  Christians  of  a  primitive  habit  of  mind  appeared
to  need  no  proof,  because  it  was  ideally  and  undeniably
true.  Had  these  been  called  upon  to  prove  the  facts
of  the  history,  they  would  not  have  understood  the
summons,  unless,  indeed,  it  came  to  them  from  one
who  was  equally  sceptical  as  to  all  that  the  truly  ancient
mind  held  most  dear,  and  in  this  case  they  would  have
scorned  to  answer  it.  We  need  not  then  indulge  the
pleasant  fancy  that  Jesus  himself  may  have  given  the
impetus  to  the  production  of  the  temptation  narrative,
by  giving  some  of  his  nearest  disciples  glimpses  of  his
early  soul-history.  The  fancy  is  not  only  unnecessary
but  also  unwise — at  least,  if  it  entices  us  to  suppose  that
our  purely  subjective  imaginings  are  of  equal  value  with
critical  or  traditional  facts,  and  so  to  lose  that  sobriety
which  in  a  student  of  religion  is  the  crowning  moral
quality.

There  are  two  stories l  parallel  to  that  now  before  us
which  deserve  the  attention  of  the  student.  One  is  the
,  ,  Q  ...  Temptation  of  Zarathustra  (Zoroaster)
11  1  ky  l^e  ev'l  sP'r't  Angra  Mainyu  ;  the
P  .  other  is  the  Temptation  of  Gautama

les-  (the  Buddha)  by  the  demon  Mara.  In
both  these  stories  the  tempter  seeks  first  of  all  to  over
come  the  Holy  One  by  violence,  and  only  when  this
effort  fails  has  recourse  to  spiritual  temptations.

Ahriman,  'the  guileful  one,  he  the  evil-doer,'  bids  a  demon
rush  down  upon  Zarathustra.  But  the  holy  Zarathustra  steps
forward  to  meet  him,  wielding  'stones  as  big  as  a  house,'
obtained  from  Ahura  Mazda  (i.e.,  thunderbolts).  Then  the
guileful  one,  fearing  the  overthrow  of  his  own  empire,  promises
Zarathustra  that  if  he  will  '  renounce  the  good  law  of  the  wor
shippers  of  Mazda,'  he  shall  '  gain  such  a  boon  as  Zohak  gained,
the  ruler  of  the  nations.'2  Zarathustra  answers,  '  No  !  neverwill
I  renounce  the  good  law  .  .  .  though  my  body,  my  life,  my
soul,  should  burst.'  And  when  Ahriman  howls  out,  '  By  whose
word  wilt  thou  strike  and  repel,'  Zarathustra  answers,  'The
words  taught  by  Mazda,  these  are  my  weapons,  my  best
weapons.'  Once  more  he  chants  the  sacred  formula,  the  Ahuna
Vairya,  and  prays,  '  This  I  ask  thee  :  teach  me  the  truth,  O  Lord  ! ' 3

With  this,  Darmesteter4  well  compares  the  Tempta
tion  of  Gautama  by  the  demon  Mara.

The  legend  is  that  when  the  young  Indian  prince  made  the
'great  renunciation'  to  devote  himself  to  the  discovery  of  truth
for  the  sake  of  his  fellowmen,  Mara  became  visible  in  the  air,
promising  that  in  seven  days  from  now  the  wheel  of  empire
would  appear,  and  would  make  Gautama  sovereign  over  the  four
continents  and  the  two  adjacent  isles.  Baffled,  the  demon  Mara
sends  his  three  daughters,  Craving,  Discontent,  and  Lust ;  but
their  wiles  are  fruitless  ;  on  the  forty-ninth  day  the  king  of  the
gods  brings  water  for  his  face,  and  the  four  guardian  angels
minister  to  him.5

It  is  plain  that  both  these  stories  are  of  mythic  origin  ;

1  Already  referred  to  by  J.  E.  Carpenter,  The  First  Three
Gospels,  ibsff.',  J.  M.  Robertson,  Christianity  and  Mythology,
343  353  355-  .

2  A  king  in  ancient  Iranian  mythology  who  ruled  the  world
for  a  thousand  years.

3  I'endldad  (Zendavesta),  19i-ii (the  Revelation chapter),
6" B E  4  204-206  ; cp Intrpd.  p.  Ixxvii. There  is  also  a  briefer
account  of  the  episode  in  the  Dfnkart,  besides  allusions  to  it
elsewhere  (A.  V.  Williams  Jackson,  Zoroaster,  the  Prophet  of
Ancient  Iran,  53).

4  Ormazd  et  Ahriman,  201.

5  Birth  Stories  (Rhys  Davids),  1  84  <)(>/.  106^

4965


plain  too  that  psychological  reflection  has  done  more
for  the  Buddhist  story  than  for  the  Zoroastrian.1  The
more  archaic  of  the  two  stories  is  the  Temptation  of
Zarathustra,  the  more  appealing  the  Temptation  of
Gautama.  Darmesteter  traces  both  to  the  nature-myth
embodied  in  the  dialogue  of  the  Panis  and  Sarama  in
the  Rig  Veda.  This,  at  least,  seems  highly  probable  ;
the  Temptation-stories  in  general  origin-


14.  Mythic
elements.


ated  in  the  mythical  conflict  between  the


Light -god  and  the  Storm -spirit,  and
while  we  fully  grant  that  the  story  of  the  Temptation
of  Jesus  has  been,  like  that  of  the  Temptation  of
Gautama,  enriched  by  psychological  reflection,  and
(we  may  add  in  the  case  of  the  Gospel-story)  by  remini
scences  of  the  Temptation  of  Adam  and  of  ancient  Israel,
we  cannot  consistently  deny  that  its  ultimate  germs  are
mythical.  Not  that  the  mythic  element  in  this  story
can  be  traced  to  imitation  of  either  of  the  two  parallel
stories  mentioned  above  (§  15)  ;  so  far  as  we  know  as
yet,  it  is  only  in  the  apocryphal  Gospels  ( 1 50-700
A.  D. )  that  Buddhistic  influence  can  safely  be  admitted.
Indeed,  the  'exceeding  high  mountain,'  from  the  top
of  which  the  tempter  shows  Jesus  '  all  the  kingdoms  of
the  world  and  the  glory  of  them,'  would  seem  to  be
suggested  by  the  Babylonian  mountain  of  the  gods
which  passed  into  the  folklore  of  the  Israelites2  (cp
Is.  14 13  Ezek.  28 16),  and  is  ultimately  the  great  mythic
earth-mountain.  '  We  know  not  where  to  look  for  the
' '  high  mountain,"  '  remarks  Keim.  The  Gospel  accord
ing  to  the  Hebrews,  however,  did  know.  According  to
a  fragment  in  Origen,3  '  the  Saviour  said,  Even  now  my
mother  the  Holy  Spirit  hath  seized  me  by  one  of  my
hairs,  and  hath  brought  me  to  the  great  mountain
Tabor  (0a/3w/),  Ta/3wp).'  Why  Tabor?  Probably  by
a  misunderstanding.  It  was  the  mountain  of  the
Navel  (THIS)  that  was  originally  meant — the  mountain
in  the  earth's  centre.  Earlier  generations  knew  where
this  mountain  was — it  was  in  the  old  Hebrew  Paradise,
but  certainly  no  one  in  the  first  Christian  century  could
have  localised  that  Paradise.4  It  was  also  on  this
mountain  that  we  should  have  expected  to  find  Jesus
spending  the  forty  days  ;  the  analogies  of  Ex.  24  18  3428
i  K.  19  Sf.  point  distinctly  to  this.  But  here  again  the
lapse  of  centuries  since  the  period  of  a  still  flourishing
folklore  must  be  borne  in  mind.  Since  these  passages
were  written  transcendentalism  had  placed  its  seal  on
Jewish  theology,  and  even  the  most  venerated  earthly
mountain  was  no  more  than  the  footstool  of  God  (cp
Ps.  99s  1327).  Jewish  ascetics  naturally  resorted  to
the  desert,  as  the  region  where  communings  with  another
world  would  be  most  attainable  (cp  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST,
§  i).  It  was  possible  there  to  reduce  the  claims  of
fleshly  nature  to  the  utmost  ;  there,  too,  mysterious
oracular  voices  might  be  heard  (see  col.  3882,  with  n.  2) ;
there,  too,  the  moral  athlete  might  prove  his  spiritual
weapons  in  conflict  with  the  Evil  One.  Whether  the
'  forty  days  '  were,  according  to  the  earliest  form  of  the
narrative,  really  forty  days  of  temptation  may  be  doubted.
The  Lenten  fast  of  forty  days  might  naturally  exert  a
modifying  influence  on  the  original  tradition,  which
surely  must  have  said  that  Jesus,  as  the  second  Moses
and  the  second  Elijah,5  communed  \\ith  God  for  forty
days  before  he  underwent  the  sorest  attack  of  the  Evii

1  According  to  Rhys  Davids  (Buddhism,  36,  SPCK),  'the
very  thoughts  passing  through  the  mind  of  Gautama  appear  in
gorgeous  descriptions  as  angels  of  darkness  or  of  light.  Unable
to  express  the  struggles  of  his  soul  in  any  other  way,  they  repre
sent  him  as  sitting  sublime,  calm,  and  serene  during  violent
attacks  made  upon  him  by  a  wicked  visible  tempter  and  his
wicked  angels,  armed  by  all  kinds  of  weapons.'  We  must  not,
however,  imagine  that  the  Temptation  of  Gautama  is  of  purely
psychological  origin.  Even  here  the  first  germs  are  evidently
mythological  (see  Darmesteter).

-  The  fondness  for  references  to  mountains  in  Jewish  eschato-
logical  literature  also  has  its  roots  in  mythology.

3  See  Nestle,  NT  Gr.  Supplementum,  77,  and  cp  TABOR,  §  5.

4  There  is  evidence  suggesting  that  the  early  tradition  placed
it  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  (see  PARADISE,  §  n,  with  n.  6).

5  On  the  genesis  of  the  '  forty  days  '  in  the  Moses  and  Elijah
story,  cp  MOSES,  §  n.

4966


TEMPTATION  OP  JESUS

One.1  Just  so,  Zarathustra  is  said  to  have  beheld  seven
visions  of  Ormazd  and  the  archangels  before  meeting
the  combined  attack  of  the  powers  of  evil.2  It  may
well  be  that  in  the  original  Temptation  of  Jesus,  as  in
that  of  Zarathustra,  the  efforts  of  the  tempter  were  made
to  centre  in  the  one  object  of  drawing  the  Saviour  away
to  a  false  ideal  of  success.  Analogy  favours  the  view
that  this,  like  other  stories  of  the  same  class,  grew,  and
by  the  belief  that  it  grew  our  appreciation  of  the  final
perfected  form  is  increased  rather  than  diminished.

One  serious  difficulty,  however,  remains.  The  short
account  in  Mk.  runs —

1  And  he  was  in  the  wilderness  forty  days  tempted  of  Satan  ;
and  he  was  with  the  wild  beasts ;  and  the  angels  ministered
unto  him'  (Mk.  1 13),

To  suppose  that  this  account  merely  sums  up  a  fuller
narrative,  such  as  Mt. 's,  is  scarcely  admissible.  It
consists  of  three  clauses,  and  it  is  only  the  first  and
the  third  which  can  be  represented  as  the  skeleton
of  the  vivid  narrative  known  to  Mt.  and  Lk.  '  He
was  with  the  wild  beasts'  (fy  /xerd.  TUW  (typiuv)  —
clearly  there  is  something  more  than  picturesque  realism
here,  and  the  duty  of  the  critic  is  not  performed  by
referring  to  Is.  306,  2  Mace.  027.  We  seem  to  have
here  a  fragment  of  another  separate  narrative,  attached
to  the  beginning  of  Jesus'  career,  the  trials  described
in  which  were  those  incident  to  initiation  into  mysteries,
or  (in  Egypt)  to  the  passage  of  the  soul  to  the  Islands
of  the  Blest.3  J.  M.  Robertson 4  is  inclined  to  account
in  this  way  for  the  tempter's  invitation  to  Jesus  to  grasp
at  food  before  the  appointed  time.  '  We  know  that
among  the  trials  of  the  later  Mithraic  initiations  were
those  of  hunger  and  thirst  ;  and  as  the  adversary,  the
tempter,  is  a  capital  figure  in  all  stages  of  the  Mazdean
system,  it  would  be  almost  a  matter  of  course  that  the
initiate  should  figure  as  being  tempted  by  him  to  break
down  in  the  probation.'  It  would  certainly  not  be
extraordinary  that  some  echo  of  these  mysteries  should
have  made  its  way  into  the  Christian  community,  con
sidering  how  close  was  the  struggle  between  Christianity
and  Mithraism  (the  successor  and  supplanter  of  Mazda-
worship)  at  a  later  period.  Nor  have  we  even  thus
exhausted  critical  possibilities.  Considering  that  ability
to  vanquish  demons  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most
essential  gifts  of  the  Messiah  (cp  Mk.  3),  it  is  not  sur
prising  if  an  attempt  was  made  by  early  Christians  to
connect  the  temptation-story  with  this  widely-spread
view  of  the  messianic  office.  The  discussion  in  §§  8-n
will  not,  indeed,  supersede  the  mythological  theory,
but  it  may  help  us  to  realise  the  popular  theories  which
may  possibly  have  been  based  at  an  early  time  on  the
narrative  of  the  temptation.  T.  K.  C.

On  the  literary  criticism  of  the  synoptic  narratives,  besides  the

relevant  sections  in  critical  editions  of  the  synoptic  gospels  and

in  the  various  biographies  of  Jesus,  see  von

15.  Literature. Engelhardt, De tentatione Jesu (1858),
Hiinefeld, Die Versuchungsgeschichte

(1880);  N.  Schmidt,  St.  A>.,  1889,  p.  443/1  Wendt's  Lehre
/esu(ET,l  101/395);  W.  Hiinig, '  DieVersuchungsgeschichte'
(Protest.  Monatsliefte,  1900,  331  /  382 /);  and  B.  W.  Bacon,
Bibl.  H'orlii,  Jan.  1900,  pp.  18-25  »  a'so  U\\mann'RSatidl0sig-&eit
Jesu  (ET,  123-144  265-291  [1870]);  Trench's  Studies  in  Gospels,
1-65  (1867);  Ecce  Homo  (ch.  2);  Campbell's  Crit.  Studies  in
Luke,  16-28  (1851);  A.  E.  Garvie,  Ex/>.  7'  10  3oi/  3s6/  4ig/
453/  5°9/)  '.  W.  \V.  Peyton,  Ex/>os.,  third  ser.  0  369-301,  fourth
sev.  2360-378  439-454  4223-236  340-360;  and  W.  B.  Hill,  Bibl.

l\rorld,  \  128-36;  further,  on  the  metaphysical  problem,  Bruce,
Humiliation  of ' Christ  W  (1889),  236-288  ;  and  Fairbairn,  Christ
in  Mod.  Theology,  348-353  (1893).  A  crude  literalism  dominates
essays  like  Nebe's  Der  I'ersuch  ties  Herrn  cine  diisserc  TJiat-
sache  (1857),  and  F.  Nerling's  'Die  Versuchung  Jesu  Christ!,
dcs  Sohnes  Gottes,  durch  S:ttanas  in  der  Wuste '  (Mittheil.  und
Xachrichtenfiir  die  evang.  Kirche  in  Russland,  8249-104);  cp

1  Keim  unites  the  two  views  of  the  forty  days.  '  He  stands
like  Moses  on  Sinai  in  still  converse  with  God,  by  whose  word
he  lives,  but  he  is,  at  the  same  time,  put  to  the  test  by  Satan  ;
and  it  is  this  side  of  his  sojourn  which  has  been  most  industri
ously  portrayed  '  (Jesus  of  Nazara,  ET  2305).  The  synoptics,
however,  only  speak  of  his  being  tempted  of  the  devil.

-  Williams  Jackson,  Zoroaster,  so/
3  Masp.  Dawn  of  Chi.  i84/

*  Christianity  and  Mythology,  354.

4967


1.  Introduction.


TENT

A.  D.  Kurrikoff  (ibid.  1895,  pp.  289-307  395-417).  [Add —
published  since  the  above  article  was  written — liarvie,  Expos.
June  1902;  Hilgenfeld,  ZIVT,  1902,  pp.  289-302;  Denney,
Death  of  Christ  (1902),  16-18  ;  and  J.  Halevy,  Kevue  Si'mitique
(Jan.,  1902),  p.  13  f.\  also,  for  rabbinic  parallels  on  Satan
tempting  Abram,  Moses,  and  Israel,  Gfrorer's  J ' ahrhitndert  d.
HeiU,  2  379/1

J.  Mo.  (§§  1-7, 15); T.  K.  C.  (§§  I2-I4).

TENT.  The  tent,  as  a  place  of  abode  or  shelter,
appears  to  stand  midway  between  the  tree  and  the
circular  hut.  The  tree,  with  its
canopy  of  branch  and  brushwood,
would  suggest  to  nomad  triljes  the  use  of  the  tree-trunk
or  pole,  around  which  would  be  hung  the  skins  of
animals  caught  in  the  chase,  whilst  settled  races  would
prepare  a  more  lasting  shelter  by  the  erection,  on  a
similar  plan,  of  round  (or  nearly  round)  dome-shaped
buildings  of  straw  and  clay.  A  later  development  of
this  would  be  the  construction  of  round  buildings  with
perpendicular  walls,  and  sloping,  not  conical  roof.

F'or  these  stages  cp  Montelius,  cited  by  O.  Schrader,  Indo-
gerinaii.  Altertuin.  339/,  and  J.  H.  Middleton,  art.  '  Templum '
in  Smith's  Diet.  Class.  Ant.  2  773^  ('the  round  shape  was  the
earlier  form  for  a  god's  house,  just  as  the  circular  hut,  built
round  a  central  pole,  is  the  early  architecture  for  a  human
habitation ').  It  is  not  denied,  however,  that  oval  or  oblong
buildings  are  very  old,  and  although  there  are  indications  that
the  Indo-Germanic  races,  for  example,  passed  through  the
'round-hut'  stage  (Schrader,  gSi/),  it  cannot  be  proved,
although  it  may  plausibly  be  inferred,  that  they  were  originally
tent-dwellers.  To  proceed  farther  along  this  line,  and  to  sug
gest  that  from  the  cave  has  arisen  first  the  rock-hewn  chamber
and  then  the  rectangular  abode,  is  a  hypothesis  not  yet  sufficiently
warranted  by  the  evidence.1  At  all  events,  there  is  reason  to
suppose  that  the  portico  or  gateway  in  front  of  the  Egyptian
house,  for  example,  has  evolved  from  a  previous  practice  of
building  some  kind  of  structure  before  the  mouth  of  a  cavern.
Cp  ORACLE,  3.

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  exact  age  of  the  circular  dome-
shaped  bee-hive  buildings  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  which  are
described  by  Palmer  (Desert  of  the  Exodus,  139 /^,  169,  317,
etc.),  is  unknown.2  At  all  events  there  is  no  solid  ground  for
the  old  theory  (based  on  Lev.  23  43)  that  they  were  once  occupied
by  the  children  of  Israel  during  their  wanderings  in  the  wilder
ness.  Some  of  them  (at  least)  appear  to  have  been  used  as  tombs
by  monks,  a  use  to  which  they  are  occasionally  put  at  the  present
day,  and  this  supports  Mr.  F.C.  Hurkitt's  suggestion  that  the  term
applied  to  them,  nazvti»iis,  is  not  from  natniis,  '  mosquito,'  but
is  '  an  evident  oral  corruption  of  naiuiiivis,  plural  of  tm'its,  which
is  ultimately  derived  from  vaos  (Syr.  nausa),  "temple,"  but  is
used  for  "cemetery,"  and  apparently  for  the  Parsee  towers  of
silence — in  fact  for  any  non-Mohammedan  kind  of  burial-place"
(private  communication).

The  characteristic  Hebrew  term  for  the  tent  is  chel
(Snx,  ffKijvT)  [BAL]),  occasionally  rendered  TABER
NACLE  (f.v. ,  §  i).  It  has  been  connected3  with  the
ASS.  dlu,  '  settlement,  city  '  (in  contrast  with  nta/jdzu,
'  fortified  place ' ) ;  but  the  relationship  is  doubted  by
Noldeke  ( ZD.UG  40 720  [1886]),  who  also  questions  the
identity  of  the  Hebrew  word  with  the  S.  Sem.  ahl  (op.
cit.  154,  n.  i).4  On  the  other  hand,  ohel,  like  bdyith
(see  HOUSE,  §  i),  may  refer  not  only  to  the  dwelling,
but  also  to  its  occupants;  cp  Ps.  83  7  [6]  'tents  of
Edom '  (||  Ishmaelites),  120s  'tents  of  Kedar '  (cp
7'.  (,b  'those  who  hate  peace'),5  and  for  this  reason  it
has  been  considered  probable  that  the  last  two  letters  of
C.TSi.x  in  i  Ch.  441,  and  that  rupa  of  2  Ch.  14 14  [15],  are
corruptions  of  tribal  names.6

'  Tent '  is  also  the  rendering  of  titiskaii,  J2w'C,  Cant.  1  8  and
(||  hnx)  Nu.  24s  Jer.  30  18  ;  of  sukkah,  HJp  ('booth')  in  28.
11  n,  see  PAVILION  (i),  TABERNACLE,  §i;  and  of  kubbah,
rt2p,  Nu.  258,  see  PAVILION  (2),  and  §  4  below.  Biiyith,  too,  is
used  of  a  tent  7  in  Gen.  27  15  33  17  (J),  and  is  thus  rendered  also

1  For  cave-  or  underground  dwellings  among  Semitic  peoples,
cp  Now. HA \  i35/  (E. of  Jordan. Petra), and  Landberg,
L 'Arabic  M eridionalc ,  \  159  (S.  Arabia).

2  See  KlBROTH-HATTAAVAH, NEGKK,  g  6.

3  E.g.,  by  Fr.  Delitzsch  (Prol.  105),  Sayce  (  TVTjSX  i.  2  305).

4  Xoldeke  compares  Syr.  yahlti,  'troop,  tribe.' From  the  S.
Semitic  comes  also  the  cognate  Nab.  Vt<i  found  in  two  inscrip
tions  from  Hauriin  (CIS  2  i64/).

8  Not  to  be  corrected  into  \^&  »N3:r>  'haters  of  the  Salmu
(i.e.,  Salamjeans)'  as  the  emendation  in  Cant.  1 5  (see  We.
/';v/.(3t  218,  n.  i)  might  suggest.

6  Cp  Wi.  '  Musri,'  etc.  Ml'G,  1898,  1  48^,  and  see  ZF.RAH.

?  Cp,  perhaps,  the  gloss  in  Hesychius  :  /3<u'rr)  =  tent  of  skin.

4968


TENT

fcy  RV  in  2  K.  287  (but  see  DRESS,  §  8,  col.  1140).  Conversely,
6hel  seems  to  refer  to  the  palaces  of  Israel's  neighbours  in  Ps.
84  10  (n)1  Job  21  28.

On  the  use  of  phel  in  Sabaxin  and  Phoenician  proper  names,
see  AHOLIBAMAH,  OHOLAH,  OHOLIBAH.

Originally  the  Hebrews,  like  the  Arabs,2  were  essenti
ally  a  tent-living  people,  and  in  one  of  their  legendary
_  .  ,.,  genealogies  they  enumerate  among  their
fe  ancestors  Jabal,  the  father  of  tent-dwellers

in  Israel.  ^n^  herdsmen,  thus  recognising  their
nomadic  origin  (Gen.  4 20,  cp  Heb.  11 9,  and  see  CAIN-
ITES,  CATTLE,  §  i).  The  tent-dweller,  if  he  follows  an
honest  calling,  is  essentially  a  herdsman,  and  it  is  not
until  he  has  become  at  least  an  agriculturist — the  two
types  are  represented  in  Abel  and  Cain  respectively —
that  he  will  begin  to  think  of  replacing  the  tent  by  a
shelter  of  a  more  substantial  character.3

The  Canaanites  among  whom  the  Hebrews  settled
were  house-dwellers  (cp  Nu.  13 19  28  Dt.  128  85,  and  see
CITY,  §  i),  and  that  the  immigrants  in  time  followed
their  example,  is  only  to  be  expected,  and  is  presup
posed  in  the  (later)  law  Dt.  228  (cp  HOUSE,  §  i).
Still,  it  is  noteworthy  that  outside  help  was  desirable,
if  not  actually  necessary,  and  for  the  building  of  his
temple  Solomon  was  obliged  to  invoke  the  aid  of  the
more  expert  Phoenicians  (see  HIRAM,  i),  just  as  Arabian
tradition  relates  that  for  the  erection  of  the  Ka'ba
Coptic,  Persian,  or  Roman  workmen  were  called  in
(Fraenkel,  op.  cit.  4).

In  this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  Arabic
word  for  '  roof  (iijurr)  is  of  Aramaic,  and  ultimately,  perhaps,
of  Assyrian  origin  (Fraenkel,  5,  Muss-Arnolt,  Ass.  Diet.  160),
and  that  the  Hebrew  synonym  gtig-  is  of  unknown  etymology,
and  does  not  appear  to  be  Semitic.  Similarly,  the  derivation
of  the  Heb.  'ir,  kir,  cicletk,  basar  (in  mil'sar,  etc.),  and  hcl,  all
of  which  presuppose  town-life,  are  quite  obscure.

Long  after  the  settlement,  the  Hebrews  retained  in
their  language  traces  of  their  earlier  mode  of  living.
Wealth  and  cattle  (mpo)  are  identical
terms.4  Nd-ia'  (yw).  '  to  journey,'
conies  from  the  idea  of  pulling  up  the
tent-pegs  before  journeying.  Removal
is  compared  to  the  carrying  away  of  the
shepherd's  tent  (cp  Is.  38  12) ;  desolation
is  as  the  breaking  of  the  tent-cords,  and
as  the  fall  of  the  tent,  when  there  is
none  to  set  up  or  spread  the  curtains
(Job 42i  RV,  Jer.  10 20).  A  tent  firmly
staked  with  stout  cords  s  a  figure  of
security  (Is.  8820),  and  a  tent-peg,  like
our  '  pegging  out  a  claim,'  is  synony
mous  with  the  right  of  possession
(Ezra  98).  'To  your  tents,  O  Israel'
remains  the  formula  of  dismissal,  and
even  in  the  time  of  Amaziah,  Judah  is
deemed  to  dwell  among  tents  (zV^.  14 12).

In  spite  of  this,  however,  it  is  im
portant  to  remember  that  there  were
certain  clans  in  Israel  which  apparently
continued  to  remain  semi-nomads  (e.g.,
Kenites  and  doubtless  other  elans  living
S.  of  the  Xegeb,  and  to  the  E.  of  the
Jordan).  Again,  although  modern


TENT

during  the summer, or from religious principle (see
RKCHAiiiTKs).1 See  below,  §  4.

On  the  ease  with  which  the  people  will  pass  from
house  to  tent-life  see  Per. -Chip.  Art  in  L'hald.\  199.
To  understand  this  we  must  realise  the  deeply-rooted
preference  which  all  Bedouins  have  for  their  tent.'2  It  is
still  the  practice  to  the  E.  of  the  Jordan  for  the  popula
tion  of  such  towns  even  as  es-Salt,  and  Kerak,  to  pitch
their  tents  in  the  country  during  the  summer.  The  same
holds  good  of  the  peasantry  of  S.  Palestine,  and  was  no
doubt  usual  in  ancient  times  (Thomson,  Land  and  Book,
296).  Another  practice,  Schumacher  remarks,  is  for
the  fellahm  of  the  Jaulan  to  build  a  hut  of  branches  or
reeds3  upon  the  roofs  of  their  houses  (Jaulan,  43).  Cp
also  BED,  §  i  ;  HOUSE,  §  3  ;  HUT.

As  an  instance  of  the  modification  of  the  tent  by  a  more  settled
folk,  the  usage  of  the  Turcomans,  >.'  \V.  of  Aleppo,  is  of  interest.
According  to  Burckhardt  (Travels  in  Syria,  636;  London,
1822),  the  dwellings  consist  of  oblong  walls  of  about  4  ft.  in
height.  These  are  made  of  loose  stones,  and  the  whole  is
covered  over  with  a  black  cloth  of  gout's  hair,  elevated  by
twelve  or  more  posts,  about  8  ft.  high,  in  the  middle  of  the
enclosure.  A  stone  partition  near  the  entrance  bars  off  the
women's  apartment  from  that  of  the  men.  Many  of  the  people,
however,  live  in  large  huts  15  ft.  high,  which  look  like  tents
but  have  roofs  of  rushes.  As  a  further  adaptation  may  be
noticed  the/iwr^-or  tent  of  the  Kirghiz  in  Central  Asia,  'con
sisting  of  a  wooden  frame  for  sides,  radiating  ribs  for  roof,  and  a
wooden  door.  .  .  .  Over  this  framework  a  heavy  covering  of
felt  is  thrown,  which  is  either  weighed  down  with  stones  or,
when  necessary,  stitched  together.'4  From  this  it  is  possible  to
gain  some  idea  of  the  construction  of  the  Israelite  tabernacle  as
it  existed  in  the  mind  of  the  priestly  writers.  See  further
TABERNACLE,  §  10.

The  well-known  retention  of  ancient  customs  in  the
East  being  admitted,  our  conception  of  the  tent  of  the

„ _. ... Hebrews  must  be  based  upon  our  know-
3.  Description.  , , ,.  ..

ledge oi its  construction among the

Bedouins  of  the  present  day,5  supplemented  by  the  un-


FIG.  i. — Sennacherib's  camp  at  Lachish. Brit.  Mus. Assyrian  Saloon.


analogy  supports  the  inference  that  the  agriculturists  were
almost  wholly  house-dwellers  (however  mean  their  abode
may  have  been  ;  see  HOUSE),  yet  to  a  certain  extent
these  still  retained  the  earlier  custom  of  dwelling  in
tents,  whether  it  was  during  the  ingathering  of  the
-vintage  (see  TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF)  or  for  comfort

1  [Che.  /Y(2)  contends  that  in  a  number  of  passages  (Ps.  15  i
19  5  '27  sf.  61  5  69  26  78  60  84  n)  'inN  is  miswritten  for  Sj<n.]

2  Cp  Gen.  37  25  Judg.  8  n  (where  Tg.  actually  has  'Kmy  for
O'Snxn  '313^')  PS-  886(7)  x  Ch.  5  10. As  an  examination  of  the
terms  appears  to  show,  the  Arabs  learned  the  art  of  building  from
the  Aramaeans  (Fraenkel,  Aram.  Fremihv. i  Jf.\ The  older
civilisation  of  the  Minjeans  and  Sabaans  of  the  S.  of  Arabia
does  not  come  under  consideration  here.

3  On the gradual settling of  the Hebrews;  cp Buhl,  Die
socialen I'erhaltnisse  d.  Israelitcn,  T$ff.  (Berlin,  1890).

4  Cp  also  perhaps,  Syr.  marhate,  and  see  CATTLE,  §  8  (end).

4969


fortunately  small  number  of  representations  of  tents
upon  the  Assyrian  sculptures,  and  illustrated  by  the
scanty  details  in  the  OT.  The  sculptures  furnish  us
with  illustrations  of  the  royal  pavilion  which  accom
panied  Sennacherib  at  the  siege  of  Lachish,6  and  from

1  Cp Bu.  '  The  Nomadic Ideal in the  OT '  (New  World,
1805).
-  Cp  v.  Oppenheim,  Mittelmeer  z,  Pers.  Calf,  250.

3  Called  'arishi ;  cp  below,  col.  4973,  n.  2.

4  Ency.  Brit.W  'Tent,'  23  183(1. The  tent  of  Shiloh,  accord
ing  to  Rabbinical  writers,  was  also  supposed  to  be  a  walled  en
closure,  covered  over  with  curtains.

5  Among  the  descriptions  of  the  various  travellers  in  the  East,
Burckhardt,  and  more  especially  Doughty,  have  been  drawn
upon  most  frequently  in  this  section.

6  Cp  also  the  pavilion portrayed  upon the  bronze  gate  of
Balawat  (expedition against Carchemish). For other royal
tents,  cp  Per.-Chip.  Art  in  ChaM.  1 175  193.

4970


TENT

the  same  source  there  is  preserved,  fortunately,  a  plan
of  the  Assyrian  camp,  in  which  are  depicted  both  the
royal  pavilion  and  tents  of  a  less  luxurious  description
(fig.  i).  In  addition  to  this,  upon  the  sculptures
representing  Asur-bani-pal's  expedition  against  the
Arabians  (AT?  2217  /.  122),  there  are  interesting
portrayals  of  the  tents  of  the  enemy  (fig.  2).  In
the  uppermost  panel,  the  tent-dwellers  are  seen  peace
fully  working  ;  below,  is  depicted  the  hand-to-hand
conflict  with  the  Assyrians  ;  and,  finally,  the  Arabians
are  overpowered  and  killed,  and  the  burning  tents  are  on
the  point  of  collapse.  The  representation  is  extremely
vivid.  The  framework  of  the  tents  appears  to  consist  of
an  upright  branch  from  the  middle  of  which  other  branches


FIG.  2.— Arabian  tents. Brit.  Mus. Assyrian  saloon.


project,  and the  general  appearance, it  will  be  seen,
is  markedly  inferior  to  that  in  Sennacherib's  camp.1

The  Assyrians,  like  the  Egyptians,  were  especially  a  house-
dwelling  people.  Hut  according  to  1  >e  Morgan  (A* cclierchcs  sur
Ics  Origincs  dc  FEgyfte,  66_/.,  Paris,  1897  ;  cp  Budge,  Hist.
of  Egypt,  1  42  56  102  ;  London,  1902),  the  earlier  inhabitants  of
Egypt  lived  in  booths  of  rush  and  reed,  and  the  art  of  brick-
making  (see  BRICK)  was  introduced  probably  from  Chaldaea.
As  regards  the  Assyrians,  the  theory  that  they,  too,  once  dwelt
in  tents  or  booths,  can  at  present  be  supported  only  by  the  fact
that  they  were  in  the  custom  of  erecting  a  tent  upon  the  flat
house-roof  (Per.-Chip.,  A  rt  in  Ckald.  \  197,  cp  above,  §  2,  end),  a
practice  which  might  lead  to  the  erection  of  the  so-called  '  upper-
chamber  '  (found  also  in  Egypt,  e.g.,  Wilk.  Anc.  Kg.  1  352),  and
of  the  rounded  tops,  domes,  or  sugar-loaf  roofs  of  -Mesopotamia
(cp  Art  in  Chald.  1  128  145  165^.).  May  we  also  point  to  the
general  lack  of  windows  ?

The  nomad  tent  (hejra.  Doughty,  Ar.  DCS.  1224)  is
made  of  black  worsted  or  hair-cloth,  or  of  sheep's  wool
mingled  with  the  hair  of  goats  and  camels.2  Tents  of
linen  were,  and  still  are,  used  only  occasionally  for
holiday  or  travelling  purposes,  by  those  who  do  not
habitually  live  in  them  (Kitto,  Bibl.  Cyd.  art.  '  Tent,"  cp
Doughty,  2356).  The  Bedouins  of  the  Jaulan  according
to  Schumacher  (Jaulan,  $4/-)  do  not  make  the  plaited
goat-hair  tent-cloths  themselves,  but  buy  them  from
certain  tribes  and  gipsies  (Nauwdr),  who  for  the  most
part  drive  a  regular  trade  in  this.3  The  skeleton  con
sists  of  a  number  of  tent-poles  ('amddn,  'awdmld),*
varying  in  number  from  three  to  nine  according  to  the
size  of  the  tent,  which  are  kept  in  position  by  cords
(yt'tker,  methar[cp  CORD],  mod.  tunub  or  X/aW[Eg.])
attached  to  stakes  or  pegs  (ydthed,  mod.  wated).°

1  Cp  also  Layard,  Ninei'ch  and  its  Remains,  2271  (London,
1849),  and  Per.-Chip.  Art  in  Ckald.  1  330.

2  Hence  the  mod.  name  bait  ?a'r,  t.  ivabar;  for  the  material,
cp  also  Ex.  2526  3fii4,  TABERNACLE,  §  4_/C,  SACKCLOTH,  fin.

3  Tent-making,  the  trade  followed  by  Paul,  was  no  doubt  a
lucrative  profession. The Pesh.,  however,  in  Acts  18  3  reads

jyV^i^X, '  saddle-makers,'  (  =  lorarius  ?),  whence  it  has  been

suggested  that  (TKTji'OTrcuds  is  an  error  for  TJI'IOTTOIOS. See  further,
CILICIA,  PAI-L,  §  5,  SACKCLOTH, and  cp  SHIP,  §  8  n.

4  For  a  collection  of  other  mod.  terms  in  use  see  Oppenheim,
Votn  Mittelmeer  z.  Pers.  Golf,  vol.  2,  facing  44.

5  The  Hebrew  phrase  for  '  to  pitch  a  tent '  (^nxn  JIN  J'pn,  Gen.

4971


TENT

Over  the  poles  are  stretched  the  coverings  of  skin  or
rag  (ylrfoth,  cp  AZUBAH),  and  around  the  sides  is  hung
a  long  cloth,  an  open  space  being  left  at  one  side  for
light  and  ventilation.1  Inside  the  larger  tents,  a  hanging,
commonly  not  more  than  breast  or  neck-high,  separates
the  smaller  and  inner  apartment  (kubbat,  mahram]  for
the  women  (who  rarely  have  their  own  tent,  cp  §  4
below),  from  the  larger,  and  commonly  open  division,
which  is  used  as  a  reception  and  general  living  room
(tnak'ad).^  When  there  is  a  tiiple  division,  and  this  is
rare  (cp  Doughty,  2285),  the  extra  room  is  used  for
servants  and  cattle.  The  tents  average  20-25  ^eet  'n
length  (though  sometimes  reaching  as  much  as  40  feet) ;
they  are  about  8-10  feet  high,  and  usually  oblong  in
shape ;  round  tents  are  mentioned  in  the  old  Arabian
poems,3  and  a  few  traces  have  been  found  at  the  present
day  near  Teima  (Doughty,  1284/1);  but  with  these
exceptions,  they  are  used  only  by  Turkish  officials  and
travellers.

The  Arabs  usually  wander  in  ferjan,  or  nomad
hamlets,  according  to  their  kindreds,4  accompanied
perhaps  by  some  poor  unprotected  followers.  The
collection  of  tents  forms  the  menzil  ,-5  if  few,  they  may
be  arranged  in  a  circle  or  semicircle,6  but  usage  varies,
and  not  unfrequently  a  tribe  may  be  identified  at  a
distance  by  the  arrangement  adopted.7  Zarebas,  en
campments  surrounded  with  a  stone  wall,  are  vouched
for  in  the  desert  of  Pharan  (Nowack,  HA  137),  but  are
not  common.

The  sheikh's  tent  is  naturally  the  most  important,
though  not  necessarily,  therefore,  the  most  luxurious.8
It  is  usually  placed  in  the  most  prominent  position,  and
will  often  face  the  direction  from  which  travellers  may
be  expected  to  arrive  (cp  Gen.  18 1/.).  To  it  repair
the  desert  wanderers  (duyuf  Allah,  'God's  guests'),
who  find  therein  a  sanctuary  and  can  claim  protection
for  two  nights  and  a  day.9  The  rahla  ('  migration')  is
agreed  upon  the  previous  day  by  common  assent  or  may
rest  with  the  Sheikh.  Should  his  tent  remain  standing
an  hour  past  sunrise,  it  is  known  that  the  camp  will  not
move  that  day  ( Doughty,  1 216).  Naturally  the  proximity
of  trees  and  wells  (cp  Gen.  184)  is  sought  for  in  selecting
a  fresh  nmnzil.

To  the  women  falls  the  duty  of  erecting  and  taking  down  the
tents  (Doughty,  1  216).  It  is  in  their  apartment  that  the  goods
and  chattels  are  stored,  though  these,  it  is  true,  are  few  in
number  (Doughty,  1216227).  Some  lumps  of  rock-salt,  a  few
lengths  of  cloth  and  patches  of  leather,  a  box  for  the  feminine
vanities,  the  great  brazen  pot,  a  lamp,  and  a  dozen  minor
utensils  will  form  the  average  equipment  (Doughty,  1227,  cp
HOUSE,  §  6  and  references).

Nowhere  do  we  find  such  conservatism of  ancient


31 25  Jer.  6  3)  really  contains  a  reference  to  the  hammering
(yBn)  of  the  tent-peg.

1  This  is  the  only  door,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word  ;  se?
DOOR.  Contrast  Gen.  18  if.  the  entrance  {petkak)  of  the  tent,
and  19  7  the  door  (deleth)  of  the  city-house  (bdyith  ;  cp  v.  8,
where  mention  is  made  of  the  beam,  kfrak).  Cp  Jer.  4831,  the
Arabians  who  have  neither  'doors  nor  bars.'

*  Doughty  (Ar.  Des.  1227)  well  says:  'Tent  is  the  Semitic
house  ;  their  clay  house  is  built  in  like  manner,  a  public  hall
for  the  men  and  guests,  and  an  inner  woman's  and  household
apartment.'

3  The  tents  in  the  illustrations  from  the  monuments  (above)
are  also  probably  round.

4  Cp  P's  conception  of  the  camp  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness
(Nu.  1  52,  etc.). In  modern  times  the  size  of  a  tribe  is  frequently
reckoned  by  the  number  of  tents;  for  examples,  see Merrill,
East  of  the  Jordan,  471.

?  From  Ar.  naza/a,  'to  dwell,'  perhaps  originally  '  to  unload.'
Cp  in  Syr.  tnasritha,  'camp,'  from  sera,  'to  loosen'  (unload).
See  Fraenkel,  of.  cit.  3,  n.  i.

6  Cp  the  Ar.  name  dutuar,  and  the  Heb.  tirah  ;  see  CAMP,
§  i ;  CATTLE,  §  i ;  NKGEB,  §  6.

7  Cp  CAMP,  §  i. Thus  the  tents  may  be  arranged  in  the  shape
of  a  triangle,  rectangle,  in  one  long  line,  or  in  two  parallel  lines
(Conder,  Tent  Work  in  Palestine,  2275^);  for  square-shaped
encampments,  cp  Robinson,  RK  2  180  707,  and  for  oval,  ib.  201.

8  Rich  and  elaborate  tents  are  more characteristic of  the
Persians,  cp  Judith  10  21.

9  Doughty,  1  228, cp WRS, Kinship, 41  f. 259, and see
STRANGER  AND  SOJOURNER,  §  5.

4972


TENTH  DEAL

customs  as  in  matters  outside  everyday  life,  and  in  the
T  .  .  case  of  the  tent  this  is  paiticularly
m  ,  illustrated  in  certain  religious  festivals
marriage  a  ^Cp  a^ove>  g  2),  and  in  marriage  cere-
reugion.  monjes.  it  has  not  escaped  notice
that  in  a  few  cases  in  the  OT  the  tent  appears  to  be  the
property  of  the  wife  (e.g. ,  Jael,  Judg.  4  7  ;  Sarah,  Gen.
2426;  Jacob's  wives,  3133/1 ),  and  in  this  Robertson
Smith  recognised  ,the  survival  of  an  earlier  stage  of
society  (still  found  in  various  phases  among  some  com
munities)  where  the  woman  possesses  her  own  tent,  into
which  she  receives  her  husband,  and  in  which,  though
married,  she  retains  perfect  independence  (the  so-called
beena  marriage).  In  later  ages,  when  marriage  entails
the  loss  of  her  independence,  and  the  woman  belongs
to  the  man,  the  importance  of  the  tent  is  retained  in  a
variety  of  ways  :  thus,  notably,  the  Arab  still  erects  a
special  hut  or  tent  for  his  wife  on  the  first  night  of
marriage,  although  it  is  otherwise  unusual  for  the  woman
to  possess  a  separate  dwelling  (Kinship,  167).

The  erection  of  this  tent  for  the  consummation  of  the  marriage
illustrates  2  S.  1C  22  (the,  not  a,  tent  as  in  AV);  such  a  bridal
chamber  may  well  have  been  called  huppah,  HSfl  (cp  Joel  2  16
[where  the  II  heder  is  used  of  a  bridegroom,  as  also  is  huppah
itself  in  Ps.  19s  [6]).l  According  to  Robertson  Smith  {Kinship,
168  291)  the  '/res  or  bridal  bed  (Cant.  1  16)  was  also  primarily  a
booth;  cp  Ar.  'irris,  'thicket,'  'arrasa,  'to  make  a  booth'
(esp.  with  a  view  to  marriage),  'arfis,  '  bridegroom,'  and  'irs,
'wife,'2  but  this  is  doubted  by  Budde,  Fiinf  Megillot,  on
Cant.  I.e.

Allusion  has  already  been  made  to  the  circular  and
tent-like  shape  of  the  earliest  temples  in  the  classical
world  (§  i),  and  although  there  do  not  appear  to  be
actual  records  of  the  use  of  tents  as  temples,  at  least
Orestes  had  his  sacred  booths  (Paus.  ii.  31 6),  and
temporary  booths  were  not  unfrequently  erected  in
sacred  precincts  (Frazer,  Paus.  2 165  f.  204).  These
usages  remind  us  both  of  the  tents  and  booths  erected  by
the  Israelites  on  special  religious  festivals  (Hos.  12 9,  see
TABERNACLES,  FEAST  OF),  and  of  the  temporary  tents
in  which  dwelt  the  female -mourners  over  Hosein.3
Portable  tents  were  also  used  as  shrines  on  military
campaigns  (WRS,  Rel.  Sem.M  37,  cp  Schwally,  Semit.
Kriegsalterth.  1 13),  and  the  use  of  tents  as  sanctuaries4
was  familiar  to  the  Israelites  long  after  the  settlement  in
Canaan.  See  further,  TABERNACLE,  esp.  §  12.

s.  A.  c.

TENTH  DEAL  (frfyy),  Ex.  29  40  AV,  RV  'tenth
part  [of  an  ephah].'  See  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES,
§  3  (s.v.  '  omer').

TEPHON  (recbooN  [A]),  iMacc.  9So  RV,  AV
TAPHON  (y.v.).

TERAH  (I'm,  0A.PA,  [BADEL]  ;  AD  sometimes
6&PP&  ;  Thare),  the  father  of  Abraham  (Gen.  1124^:
Josh.  24  2  iCh.  126  Lk.  834).  Tradition  described  him
variously  as  the  son,  and  as  the  brother,  of  Nahor.  P
represents  him  as  migrating  from  '  Ur  Kasdim '  (see
UR  OF  THE  CHALDEES)  to  'Haran'  (Gen.  11 31).  To
understand  '  Terah,'  we  must,  first  of  all,  have  a  definite
view  as  to  the  meaning  of  '  Abraham  '  and  '  Haran. '

(i)  There  is  some  probability  in  Winckler's  theory  (GI 2  24  n.  i)
that  mn  is  an  intentional  distortion  of  PIT  (ycrah)  =  Ass.  arhu,
originally  'the  beginning  of  a  moon.'  Ur  Kasdim,  whence

1  Another  word  is  kubbah  (Nu.  25s,  see  PAVILION,  2)  with
which  cp  the  Ar.  term  kubba  (§  3,  above).  BDB  prefer  '(Zimri's)
princely  tent,'  but  the  older  view  is  better  (see  Ges.  Thes.,  Di.),
and  is  supported  by  the  vulgar  colloquial  usage  of  the  word  in
both  MH  and  Ar.  (cp  Freytag).  Note  that  the  derivative  'al
cove  '  itself,  was  used  in  Spanish  to  denote  especially  the  recess
in  a  chamber  for  the  bed.

"  Add,  too,  the  ' arishi  (co\.  4970,  n.  3  above).  The  stem  is  to
be  kept  distinct  from  Ass.  erisu,  '  bridegroom,'  which  corresponds
to  Hebr.  cresdym),  'to  espouse,"  lit.  'pay  the  price.'  Theoriginal
meaning  of  BHJJ  is  uncertain.

3  As  Eerdmans  has  shown,  the  rite  has  traces  of  the  Tammuz-
cult  (ZA  9  303) ;  cp  also  v.  Kremer,  Stud.  z.  vergleich.  Cultur-
gesch.  1  59  (Vienna,  1890).

4  The  Kaba  appears  to  have  been  evolved  from  a  tent  (Wellh.
fftitt.®  7$.

4973


TERAPHIM

Terah  came,  was  (as  is  commonly  held)  the  S.  Babylonian  city
of  Uru,  which  was  the  seat  of  the  moon-cultus.  Harran
(  =  Haran,  where  Terah  died)  was  the  other  great  centre  of  the
same  cultus  (see  HARAN).  This  must  be  taken  in  connection
with  the  theory  of  Winckler  and  Stucken  as  to  the  mythological
character  of  Abraham  and  Sarah  (cp  SARAH).  (2)  Another
view,  however,  may  deserve  to  be  mentioned.  There  is  strong
reason  to  think  that  Abraham  is  the  hero  of  the  Jerahmeelites,
as  Israel  (cp  Sarah)  is  the  hero  of  the  Israelites,  and  that  his
original  seat  (i.e.,  that  of  the  Jerahmeelites)  was,  traditionally,
in  the  southern  Haran.  Terah 's  close  connection  with  Haran
and  Nahor  (  =  Haran  ?),  suggests  that  he  is  a  double  of  Abraham,
and  that  his  name  is  a  corrupted  fragment  of  Jsrahmeel.
Possibly  for  'corrupted'  we  should  rather  say  'altered.'  P,
or  his  authority,  may,  as  Winckler  (see  above)  remarks,  have
had  a  repugnance  to  a  name  which  suggested  moon-worship.  (3)
Jensen's  comparison  of  N.  Syrian  (flittite)  proper  names,  like
Tarhular  (Z A  £>  70 ',  Hittiter,  153),  leads  to  the  meagre  result
that  Terah  may  have  been  a  divine  name.  T.  K.  C.

TERAH  (rnrt),  Nu.  8827 /.  RV,  AV  TARAH  (q.v.).
TERAPHIM (D^S-to, ©  in Gen. eiAOiAA, Hist.

Books  <?epac£[e]ti',  Sap.,  Sepan-eic,  -c^ei/a  [exc.  i  8.1023  fltpa-
•n-fiav  (B)  19  13  16  (cei/ora^ta  or  KCUJ>.],  Hos.  84  STJA.OI  [see  below,
n.  2],  Ezek.  2l2i  [26]  yAwn-rd,  Zech.  102  airotyOfyyoufvoi  ;  Aq.
juop<|>u>ju.aT<x,  7rpoTop.ai  Sym.  etSioAa,  eTri'Avcris,  Oepacpeii',  Theod.
$Fpa^>[e]ii',  €;riAv6;aei>os)  ;  AV  (following  Vg.)  sometimes  tran
scribes,  sometimes  translates  'image,'  'idols,'  idolatry';  RV
more  consistently  adopts  '  teraphim '  throughout.

The  name  appears  to  designate  a  particular  kind  of
idol  (cp  Gen.  31 19  with  v.  30,  'my  god';  also  8524).
Of  the  form  of  these  images  we  learn  nothing  from
the  scanty  notices  in  the  OT  ;  we  cannot  certainly  infer
from  the  fact  that  Laban's  was  concealed  under  a
camel  saddle  that  it  was  small,  nor  from  the  use  which
Michal  makes  of  David's  (i  S.  19i3i6)  that  it  was  of
the  size  or  shape  of  a  man.  Laban's  teraphim  (his
god)  was  stolen  by  Rachel  (Gen.  31),  but  with  other
foreign  gods  and  heathenish  amulets,  was  put  away  by
Jacob  before  he  went  to  worship  Yahwe  at  Bethel
(802-4)  ;  the  meaning  of  the  story  (in  E)  plainly  is  that
the  teraphim  were  relics  of  Aramaean  paganism  which
Israel  cast  off  to  serve  Yahwe  alone  (cp  Josh.  24 15)  ;
see  also  I  S.  1623,  where  in  a  prophetic  passage  (E,
Budde)  teraphim  *  is  coupled  with  divination  as  a  type
of  sin  most  hateful  to  God,  and  2  K.  2824  (RD).
Micah  had  an  ephod  and  teraphim  in  his  shrine,  which
were  carried  off  by  the  Danites  to  their  new  settlement
at  the  sources  of  the  Jordan  and  placed  in  their  sanctuary
(Judg.  17s  18).  The  teraphim  in  David's  house  (i  S.
19i3i6)  is  spoken  of  as  if  it  was  a  thing  which  would
be  found  in  every  household.  In  the  eighth  century
Hosea  joins  the  ephod  and  teraphim 2  with  sacrifices
and  massebahs  as  essential  to  the  religious  observances
of  his  people  ;  in  their  absence  religion  would  cease
(Hos.  84).

Like  the  ephod,  with  which  they  are  associated  (in
Judg.  and  Hos.),  the  teraphim  were  employed  or  con
sulted  in  divination  (2  K.  2824  Ezek.  21  2i[26]  Zech.  102).
Ezekiel,  in  the  passage  cited,  represents  the  Babylonian
king  as  divining  by  shaking  arrows  (belomancy  ;  see
URIM  AND  THUMMIM),  inquiring  of  the  teraphim,
examining  the  entrails  of  a  sacrifice  (extispicium]  ;  cp
also  i  S.  1623,  where  divination  (nop,  sortilegiitm]  is
connected  in  a  similar  way  with  the  teraphim.  It  is
not  clear,  however,  that  the  teraphim  were  consulted  by
the  lot ;  Ezekiel  seems  to  distinguish  the  two.  Spencer's
theory  that  the  turaphim  were  small  images  (figurines),
perhaps  of  human  form,  the  heathen  counterpart  of  the
Urim,  has  no  substantial  foundation.3  Other  scholars
have  inferred  from  Gen.  31 1930-35  Judg.  17  $  ff.  i  S.
19  13  16,  that  the  teraphim  were  household  gods  (penates,
a  Lapide;  Seb.  Schmid,  Vitringa,  Ew. ,  Eerdmans,  etc.);
more  specifically,  images  of  the  ancestors,  so  that  the
consultation  of  the  teraphim  was  a  kind  of  manes  oracle
(E.  Meier,  Stade,  Schwally,  etc. ).  The  latter  hypothesis
rests  upon  questionable  anthropological  or  etymological

1  Read  D'Sin  Jltf-

2  It  is  to  be  observed  that  ©  has  SrjAcu,  elsewhere  used  to
render  c'lIN-

3  See  URIM  AND  THUMMIM.

4974


TEREBINTH


TERESH


assumptions ;  other  passages  are  hardly  compatible
with  the  theory  that  the  teraphim  were  solely  domestic
idols  (see  Hos.  84  Ezek.  21 21  [26]  Zech.  lOz  2  K.  2824).

The  etymology  and  meaning  of  the  word  are  unknown  ;  for
various  conjectures  see  Ges.  Thes.  1519  f.,  Moore,  Judges,  -^>\f.
cp  also  I.  Low,  in  IVZKM  10136;  those  who  think  that  the
teraphim  were  images  of  the  ancestors  connect  the  name  with
C'K3"l  (Neubauer,  Sayce,  Klo.,  Schwally).  The  opinions  of
Jewish  writdrs  about  the  nature  of  the  teraphim  may  be  found
by  the  curious  in  Kuxtorf,  Lex.  Taint.  2660 Jf.  ;  Beyer,  Addita-
menta  to  Selden,  synt.  ii.  chap.  1.  The  most  remarkable  is  that
the  teraphim  was  a  mummied  human  head  (Jer.  Targ.  Gen.
31  19,  etc.) ;  with  which  cp  the  stones  of  this  kind  of  divination
among  the  Harranians,  Chwolsohn,  Ssabier,  2  \qff-  388_/I  150^

Literature. — Jerome,  Ep.  29,  De  Ephod  et  Therapkiin ;
Selden,  De  dis  Syris,  synt.  1  chap.  2,  with  Beyer's  Addita-
nienta ;  Spencer,  De  legibus  ritualibus,  bk.  3  chap.  7  ;  Pfeiffer,
Exercitationcs  biblictf,  4 ;  van  Dale,  De  divinatiombus
idolatricis,  chap.  11  (against  Spencer);  Kwald,  AlterthUnter,
296-299 ;  Scholz,  GStztntiienst  und  Zaubenuesen,  127  ff.  ;
Stade,  Gl '/  1 467  ;  Schwally,  Lebcn  nach  dem  'fade,  35  ff.  ;
Moore,  Judges,  379  Jf.  ;  T.  C.  Foote,  JBL  21  27^  (1902).  See
also  IDOLATRY,  and  cp  ESCHATOLOGY,  §  4.  G.  F.  M.

TEREBINTH. The  four  forms fT^K, clah, H^N,
allilh,  p ?N, <•/.'«,  and  [i.X, alien, are  evidently  closely  con
nected  in  origin. C'7'N,  cllm,  or  D'7K,  elltn,

1.  Hebrew

terms  ls  ')est  regar^ed  as  plur.  of  rPN,  eldh,  or  per
haps  of  the  masculine  form  'j-x  (occurring  only
in  the  proper  name  ["1K9  'VN)  from  which  H7X  is  the  nomcn
unitalis.  Rliih  and  elfin  are  usually  taken  together  as  =' tere
binth,'  alliih  and  allon  as='oak";  though  Celsius  {Hierob.
1  34.^0  joins  alldk  as  '  terebinth  '  to  eldh  and  elfin.  The  con
nection  of  these  words — at  least  of  n^K,  C'^'N — with  the  divine
name  ^N,  suggested  by  Wellhausen  (Prol.  ET,  238)  and  blade
(G!  1 455),  is  too  vague  to  help  towards  identifying  the  tree
intended  (cp  WRS,  Ktl.  -SY;«.('2)  iqzf.);  the  difficulty  is  in
creased  by  our  uncertainty  as  to  the  original  meaning  of  the
root  ^iN — according  to  others  rt^N — with  which  the  words  appear
to  be  connected.  (See  the  literature  cited  in  Geseniusl13)  under
^X,  and  cp  NAMES,  §116.)  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that
Aram,  tliimi,  which  is  in  form  exactly  equivalent  to  flfin,  means
'  a  tree '  in  general,  may  suggest  that  the  special  sense  which
these  words  have  acquired  in  Hebrew  is  derived  from  a  more
general  one — viz.  that  of  trees  par  excellence — the  large  and
strong  trees  characteristic  of  the  region.  This  view  is  supported
by  the  fact  that  the  place  Elim  was  apparently  so  called  from
its  palm  trees  (see  ELIM),  and  the  possible  or  (Moore)  probable
identity  (but  see  DINAH)  of  the  iTYO'rnpn  in  Judg.  4  5  with  the
r)O3  ji'T'X  of  Gen.  05s.  Twice,  however  (Is.  6  13  Hos.  413),
eldh  and  allon  are  mentioned  in  the  same  verse  as  distinct  trees.
And  as  a  considerable  body  of  tradition  has  identified  clah  with
the  terebinth  (Celsius,  I.e.),  and  there  is  repeated  mention  of  the
allonim  of  Bashan  (Is. '2  13  Ezek.  276  Zech.  11 2),  a  district
famous  for  its  oaks,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  clah  and
allon  came  to  be  used  for  these  trees  respectively.  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  distinction  in  pointing  between  clah  and  alldh  and
between  elfin  and  allon  is  more  than  an  artificial  creation  of
later  times.1  The  occurrence  in  (P  of  r;Aa  (i  S.  21  10(9])  and
T)Ao>i'  (Judg.  9  37  [B])  may  help  to  show  which  of  the  forms  were
original.

The  special  associations  of  large  trees  like  the  oak
and  the  terebinth  with  the  religion  of  the  Hebrews,  as

-  _  ..  .  with  those  of  other  Semitic  peoples,

3  have  been  discussed  by  Baudissin

associations.  ^Sfudien<  2i84^),  Robertson  Smith
(Rel.  Sew.W  185^),  Stade  (Gil 455^),  and  others.
Such  names  as  elon  moreh  (rnio  iiSx).  'oak  of  the
teacher'  (Gen.  126  Dt.  1X30),  and  elon  mU'dntnlm  (p^x
D'jyijfp).  'diviners'  oak'  (Judg.  937),  point  to  their
having  been  early  seats  of  prophetic  oracles.  The
custom  of  burial  beneath  the  tree  (Gen.  358  i  Ch.  10 12)
is  again  an  evidence  of  sacred  association.  On  the
appearance  of  the  angel  to  Gideon  beneath  the  nSx  in
Ophrah,  see  Wellh.  Pro/. ,  ET,  238.  By  the  prophets
the  association  of  worship  with  sacred  trees  was  con
demned  as  a  departure  from  the  spiritual  ideal  of
Israel's  religion,  and  also  on  account  of  the  degrading
practices  connected  with  it  (Hos.  4  13  Ezek.  613  etc.).

1  G.  F.  Moore  goes  farther,  '  There  is  no  real  foundation  for
the  discrimination  ;  the  words  signify  in  Aramaic  "tree"  simply;
in  Hebrew  usually,  if  not  exclusively,  "  holy  tree  "'  (note  on  Judg.
4  n).  If  so,  however,  the  correctness  of  the  text  in  Is.  6  13  Hos.
4  13  will  have  to  be  disputed.

4975


We  proceed  to  notice  briefly  the  occurrence  of  the
various  words.

i. rrSx, eldh  (Gen.  864  Judg.  61119 i  S.  172[©BA  Om.]  19

[®B0m.]  21  9  [10)28.  ISgyCIlpLfoVSpoi-and  in  v.  14114  i  K.  13  14

i  Ch.  10  12  Is.  1  30  613  Ezek.  6  13  [©B  om.]

3.  References.  Hos.  4i3  [©  «eV6pov  <ruuKi^ovio-i}\  ;  «p«'-

fj.(P)i.v9os  in  Ecclus.  24  16  ;  the  proper  name
n?'N,  Elath,  Dt.  28  etc.  is  possibly  the  same  word)  is  in  AV
rendered  'oak'  (RVmg.  'terebinth')  except  in  the  two  places
where  p^K,  alldn,  is  also  present  ;  in  Is.  6  13  AV  has  '  teil  tree,'
and  Hos.  413'  elms,'  while  RV  has  '  terebinth  '  and  '  terebinths  '
in  these  verses.  ©  renders  six  times  by  ipus  and  thrice  by
Tfpe>(/3)t  1-805  ;  besides  these,  twice  in  Judges  ©AL  has  6pu«  anil


As  has  been  shown  at  length  by  Celsius  (I.e.  )  the
meaning  '  terebinth  '  will  suit  all  the  passages  where
eldh  occurs.  Pistacia  Terebinthus,  L.  ,  which  in  some
countries  is  only  a  shrub,  attains  in  Syria  the  proportions
of  'a  noble  umbrageous  tree,'  20  to  40  ft.  or  more  in
height  (Fl.  and  Hanb.i'2'  165).  It  may  thus  constitute  a
landmark.  Robinson  (DR  3  15)  describes  one  he  saw
on  the  way  from  Hebron  to  Ramleh  —  such  a  tree  as
we  can  imagine  to  have  given  the  valley  of  Elah  its
name.  '  Here,  in  the  broad  valley,  at  the  intersection
of  the  roads,  stands  an  immense  Butm  tree  .  .  .  the
largest  we  saw  anywhere  in  Palestine,  spreading  its
boughs  far  and  wide  like  a  noble  oak.  .  .  .  The  Butm
is  not  an  evergreen  ...  its  small  feathered  lancet-
shaped  leaves  fall  in  the  autumn  and  are  renewed  in
the  spring.  The  flowers  are  small  and  followed  by
small  oval  berries,  hanging  in  clusters  from  2  to  5  in.
long,  resembling  much  the  clusters  of  the  vine  when  the
grapes  are  just  set.'  The  abundant  branching  and
foliage  of  the  terebinth  agree  with  the  references  in
2  S.  18gf.  14  Ecclus.  24  1  6  ;  the  fact  that  it  is  neverthe
less  not  an  evergreen  explains  the  simile  in  Is.  1  30.

2.  n^N,  alldh  (T«pe'/ii[/3Jii'0os,  Josh.  24  26t),  can  be  only  a  slightly
divergent  form  of  H^K,  eldh. The  tree  intended  in  Josh.  (I.e.)
may  be  the  same  as  that  mentioned  Gen.  35  4  Judg.  9  6  (/SaAayos),
where  for  AV,  '  plain,'  read  '  oak  '  or  '  terebinth.'

3.  D'^'N, Him, or  D-I?X,  elim,  the plur.  of  H^N  or  V'N  (see
above)  occurs  Is.  1  29  57  5  61  3  and  possibly  Ezek.  31  14!. In
the  first  two  places  ©  has  wrongly  et^iuAa,  which  is  followed
by  AV  '  idols  '  in  the  second. In  the  first  passage  '  it  is  the
disappointingness  of  nature-  worship  which  is  indicated  '(Cheyne);
the  same  species  of  idolatry  is  referred  to  in  57  5. In Is.  61  3
(where  (B  interprets  loosely  yeveai)  we  have  a  spiritual  metaphor
drawn  from the  noble  stature  and luxuriant  foliage  of these
trees;  cp  60  21  and  other  passages. The  word  D[1'7N  constitutes
a difficulty in  Ezek.  31  14  ; its  rendering  n-pbs  aura  formed  no
part of  the  original  <B,  according  to  some  cursives  (Field,  ad
loc.),  and  the  verse  reads  more  smoothly  if, with  Cornill,  we
omit  the  word. [See  Crit.  Bib.}

4.  fl^K, elan  (in  © usually  fipu?, Gen.  126  13  18  14  13  18  i
Dt.  11  30  Josh.  19  33  [cp  ©]  Judg.  4  ii  9637  i  S.  10  3!,  wrongly
'  plain  ' in  AV), and  (5)  [i^N,  allon  (usually  ipus  or  /SaAai/o?,
Gen.  35s  Is.  2  13  [SeVSpof  /3aAarov]  6  13  44  14  [om.  ©]  Ezek.  27  6
[cAaru'DusV]  Hos.  4  13  Am.  2g  Zech.  11  2!).

Elon  and  allon  are  slightly  varying  forms  of  the  same
word,  which  had  come  to  denote  a  particular  large  tree
distinct  from  n^Ni  eldh,  most  probably  the  oak.  Ac
cording  to  Tristram2  (NHB  368  /:)  there  are  three
species  of  Quercus  which  flourish  in  Palestine,  the  most
abundant  being  the  evergreen  Q.  pseudo-coccifera  ;  the
others  are  both  deciduous  species,  Q.  ALgilops  and
Q.  irtfectoria.  The  first  he  describes  as  in  appearance
much  like  our  '  holm  oak,'  and  he  speaks  of  one  very
large  tree  of  this  species,  the  so-called  '  Abraham's  oak  '
near  Hebron.  The  oak  of  Bashan  he  believes  (follow
ing  Hooker)  to  be  Q.  sEgilops.  Cp  Anderlind  in
ZDPV\Z^off.  On  the  oaks  of  Sharon,  see  SHARON.

N.  M.  —  VV.  T.  T.-D.

TERESH  (tTnn),  a  chamberlain  of  king  Ahasuerus
(Esth.  221  62  om'.  BAL«0,  6<\p[p]AC  [Nc-am*-]).  called  in

1  For  Ps.  29  9  and  Gen.  49  21  where  (5  compares  Naphtali  to
a <rrf\exoi  avtififvov  (i.e.,  nnbv  rrV'K, Di., etc.), see  HIND,
NAPHTALI.

2  His  statements  are  based  upon  the  important  paper  by  Sir
J.  D.  Hooker  in  Trans.  Linn.  Soc.  28381-387.

4976


TERTIUS


Esth.  12i,  THARRA
If  the  name  must  be  Persian,  we  have  a  choice  between
turf,  '  dark,  fierce'  (Ges.  />.*.("'),  and  tarsatd,  '  feared,'
the  supposed  original  of  Tirshatha  (cp  Marq.  Fund.
70)  ;  Oppert  (A/males  de  philos.  chrttienne,  janv.  1864),
however,  compares  Tiri-  dates,  the  name  of  the  governor
of  Persepolis  (temp.  Alexander).  But  if  underneath  the
present  Esther-story  there  is  an  earlier  story,  the  scene  of
which  was  not  in  Persia,  but  in  the  land  of  Jerahmeel
(N.  Arabia),  the  only  one  of  the  above  suggestions
which  will  serve  us  is  the  second,  and  the  question  is,
What  is  the  origin  of  TIRSHATHA?  But  cp  also
ZETHAR.  T.  K.  c.

TERTIUS  (jeprioc),  in  the  present  text  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Romans  (1622),  figures  in  the  first
person  as  having  '  written  '  the  epistle  (eyili  Teprtos  6
yptyas  rrfv  eTrttrroXijc).  As  long  as  the  authen
ticity  of  the  epistle  is  maintained  it  is  impossible  to
suggest  a  reason  why  Paul's  amanuensis,  while  deliver
ing  the  author's  greetings  in  the  usual  manner  in
vi>.  21  23,  should  thus  abruptly  have  taken  an  independ
ent  course  in  v.  22.  True,  i  Cor.  1621  Col.  4i8  2  Thess.
817  compared  with  Gal.  6n  can  be  urged  for  the  opinion
that  Paul  dictated  his  epistles  ;  but  so  far  as  Rom.  1622
is  concerned  this  does  not  lead  to  any  further  conclusion
than  that  an  amanuensis  had  to  be  mentioned  somewhere
in  the  pseud-epigraphon.  In  point  of  fact  the  appear
ance  of  Tertius  at  this  place  belongs  only  to  almost  the
final  form  of  the  work.  See  ROMANS,  §  4,  7,  par.  3.

w.  c.  v.  M.

Various  conjectures  have  been  made  regarding  Tertius  (r'./.
Terentius)  on  the  assumption  of  the  authenticity  of  the  epistle.
A  favourite  suggestion  is  that  he  may  have  been  one  of  those
Jews  whom  Claudius  had  expelled  from  Rome.  Under  JUSTUS,
2,  it  has  been  suggested  that  he  really  is  the  Titius,  or  Titus,
Justus  of  Acts  IS  7.  Ryder  (JBL  xvii.  98  197)  thinks  of  him
as  an  influential  Roman  Christian,  and  argues  that  Rom.
15-10  23  is  a  letter  or  part  of  a  letter  from  him  to  his  friends
at  Rome.  It  can  hardly  be  disputed,  however,  that  the  argu
ment  for  the  separation  of  chaps.  15-1(5  from  the  rest  of  the
traditional  epistle  is  stronger  than  that  for  their  ascription  to
Tertius.  Cp  SIMON  ([7]  the  Cyrenian).  In  the  lists  of  the


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

'seventy' disciples by the Pseu do -Dorotheas and Psettdo-

riippolytus  Tertius  appears  as  bishop  (according  to  Dorotheus
the  second  bishop)  of  Iconium.

TERTULLUS  (repTyAAoc  [Ti.  WH]),  the  rhetor
or  orator  who  appeared  for  the  prosecution  against
Paul  before  Felix  ( Acts  24 1/. ).

TESTAMENT  (AI&GHKH).  Mt.  26  28  etc.  See
COVENANT,  §  7  ;  also  GALATIA,  §  21.

TESTIMONY  (n-VU'),  Ex.  16 34-  See  ARK,  §  3.
Cp  also  WITNESS.  On  2  K.  11  12  see  BRACELETS,  5.

TETA  (ATHTA.  [A]),  iEsd.528  AV)  =  Ezra242,
HATITA  (y.v.).

TETRARCH  (reTp&pXHc),  the  ruler  of  a  tetrarchy
(T6TP&PXI&)'  tnat  is>  in  the  original  sense  of  the  word,
of  one  quarter  of  a  region.  The  title  of  tetrarch  is
familiar  from  the  NT  as  borne  by  certain  princes  of  the
petty  dynasties,  which  the  Romans  allowed  to  exercise
a  dependent  sovereignty  within  the  province  of  Syria.
In  this  application  it  has  lost  its  original  precise  sense,
and  means  only  the  ruler  of  part  of  a  divided  kingdom,
or  of  a  region  too  narrow  to  support  a  higher  title.
After  the  death  of  Herod  the  Great  (4  B.C.)  his  realm
was  shared  among  his  three  sons  :  the  chief  part,  in
cluding  Judrea,  Samaria,  and  Idumrea,  fell  to  Archelaus
(Mt.  222),  with  the  title  of  ethnarch  (see  ETHNARCH);
Philip  received  the  NE.  of  the  realm,  and  was  called
tetrarch  ;  and  Galilee  was  given  to  Herod  Antipas,  who
bore  the  same  title  (Lk.  3i).  These  three  sovereignties
were  reunited  under  Herod  Agrippa  from  41  to  44  A.D.
On  the  tetrarchy  of  Lysanias  mentioned  in  Lk.  3 1  see
ABILENE,  LYSANIAS.

TETTER  (pn'3,  bohak  ;  A.A<J>oc),  a  harmless  eruption
of  the  skin  (Lev.  ISsgf,  AV  ''  freckled  spot ').

'  In  Syria,  at  the  present  day,  this  disease  is  known  by  the
same  name,  bdhaq,  and  it  is  recognised  as  not  dangerous.  It
takes  the  form  of  dull  white  or  reddish  spots  on  the  'skin,  of
unequal  size,  and  hardly  rising  above  the  surface  of  the  skin.
The  spots  have  no  bright  surface,  and  in  time  disappear  of
themselves.'  SBOT,  Lev.  Eng.,  ad  loc.


TEXT AND VERSIONS


INTRODUCTORY  (§  i).


CONTENTS

TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  (§  2).

I. NEW TESTAMENT
A.  TEXT


Authorities  (§  3).
Chief  MSS  (g  4).
Printed  editions  (g  5).
Textus  Receptus  (§  6).

i. LATIN.
First  traces  (g  13).
Their  origin  (g  14).
Classification  (§  15).
Gospels  (§  1 6).
Pauline  epistles  (§  17).
Acts  (§  1 8).

Catholic  epistles  (§  19).
Apocalypse  (g  20).
History  of  Vulgate  (§  21).


Westcott  and  Hort's  theory  (§  7).

The  three  texts_  (g  8).

Remarks  :  Antiochian  revision  (g  9).

B.  VERSIONS
ii.  SYRIAC.
Gospels  :  Three  early  versions  (g  22).

Peshitta  (g  23).

Diatessaron  (g  24).

'  Old  Syriac  '  (§  25).

Relation  of  three  (g  26).

Relation  of  Old  Syr.  to  Diatess.  (§  27).

Conclusion  (g  28).
Acts  and  Epistles  (g  29).
Later  Syriac  versions  (g  30).
Palestinian  Syriac  version  (g  31).


Pre-Antiochian  text  (g  10).
Conclusion  of  discussion  (§  n).
Illustrative  notes  (§  12).


iii. COPTIC AND  OTHER VERSIONS.

Coptic  :  Date  of  translation  (g  32).
Three  versions  (g  33).
Age of Bohairic and Sahidic

(§  34)-

Three  compared  (g  35).
Armenian  (g  36).
Ethiopic  (§  37).
Gothic  (g  38).

Other versions  : Georgian, Slavonic,
Arabic  (g  39).


Massoretic  text  (g  40).
Samaritan  recension  (§  45).


i.  GREEK.

Septuagint  :  origin  (g  46).

citations  (g  47).

Aquila,  Symmachus,  Theodotion(§§  48-50).
Origen's  work  (§  51).
Three  recensions  (g  ^2).
Extant  MSS  (§  53).
Printed  editions  (g  54).
Recovery  of  original  Septuagint  (§  55).

4977


II. OLD TESTAMENT

A. TEXT

Massoretic  vowels  (§  41).
Massoretic  notes  (g  42).

B.  VERSIONS

List  of  versions  (§  44).

ii.  LATIN.
Old  Latin  (§  56).
Manuscripts  (§  57).
Apocrypha  (§  58).
The  Vulgate  (§  59).


Bibliography  (§  67)


Printed  editions  (§  43).

Correction  of  Massoretic  text  (§  66).


iii.  SYRIAC  AND  OTHER  VERSIONS.
Peshitta  (g  60).

Syriac  versions  from  Greek  (§  61).
Palestinian  version  (g  62).
Other  versions  :  Coptic  (g  63).

Armenian,  Gothic,  Arabic  (§  64).

Targums  (g  65).


4978


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

INTRODUCTION

The  exact  determination  of  the  original  text  of  the
Old  and  New  Testaments  is  a  study  which  has  points  of

,  contact  with  questions  concerning  both  the
1.  General  f-,

.. ., Canon  of  Scripture,  and  the  literary  sources

of  the  several  books.  There  are  instances  of
a  translation  acquiring  a  scriptural  authority  which  has
never  been  accorded  to  the  original,  as  in  the  case  of
ECCLKSIASTICUS  (q.v. );  other  books  have  been  the
product  of  successive  compilations  and  revisions,  so  that
it  may  become  a  matter  of  doubt  at  what  stage  of  its
existence  it  can  be  said  to  have  been  in  its  '  original '
form.  Generally,  however,  the  limits  of  the  subject
can  be  marked  out  by  the  actual  state  of  extant
documents.  Thus  the  criticism  of  the  '  Priestly  Code '
(P),  or  of  the  book  usually  called  JE,  as  they  may  have
existed  before  the  compilation  of  the  Pentateuch,  lies
quite  beyond  textual  criticism.  Our  documents  do  not
carry  us  back  behind  the  Pentateuch  already  complete
as  a  single  work.  On  the  other  hand,  the  extant  texts
of  the  Greek  translation  of  Jeremiah  suggest  very  serious
questions  as  to  the  collection  and  editing  of  his  prophecies
and  as  to  the  authority  for  the  arrangement  found  in
the  Hebrew  and  adopted  in  the  English  Bible.

The  case  stands  much  the  same  with  the  NT.  We
can  learn  from  the  variations  of  our  MSS  little  that
directly  bears  on  the  apostolic  origin  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  or  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  Even  the  earliest
versions  do  not  take  us  behind  the  collection  of  the
four  evangelical  narratives  which  together  made  up  the
Gospel,  or  the  collection  of  the  thirteen  Pauline  Epistles.
Of  the  literary  fate  of  the  Apostle's  letters,  of  the  journeys
which  they  may  have  made  from  Corinth  to  Rome,
or  from  Thessalonica  to  Philippi,  before  incorporation
into  the  collected  edition,  our  MSS  tell  us  nothing.
There  is  some  evidence  that  there  circulated  in  the
West  an  edition  of  the  Epistle  'to  the  Romans,'  in
which  the  name  of  Rome  was  absent  from  the  opening
salutation,  and  there  is  strong  evidence  that  elsewhere
than  in  the  West  the  name  of  Ephesus  was  absent  from
the  Epistle  '  to  the  Ephesians ' ;  but  on  this  one  cir
cumstance  it  is  difficult  to  build.  The  only  real  point
where  textual  study  touches  the  '  Higher  Criticism  '—
though  it  must  be  confessed  that  it  is  an  important  one
—arises  when  we  consider  what  inferences  are  to  be
drawn  from  the  incomplete  condition  in  which  the
Gospel  according  to  Mk.  appears  in  the  best  texts.  By
whomsoever  Mk.  169-20  was  supplied,  and  at  whatever
time  it  was  first  attached  to  the  Gospel,  the  fact  remains
that  the  genuine  text  breaks  off  in  the  middle  of  a  sen
tence  with  all  the  marks  of  accidental  mutilation.  The
natural  inference,  the  only  inference  which  would  be
drawn  from  a  similar  state  of  things  in  any  classical  or
ecclesiastical  writing  in  which  such  phenomena  were
observed,  is  that  all  our  MSS  are  ultimately  derived
from  a  single  copy  itself  imperfect  at  the  end.1

But  this  forms  an  exception  to  the  class  of  problems
raised,  and  the  subject  of  this  article  may  with  little  loss
of  accuracy  be  defined  to  be  the  history  of  the  text  of
the  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  from  the
time  each  became  canonical,  whether  in  the  Jewish  or  the
Christian  church.

The  methods  of  scientific  criticism  are  of  course
equally  applicable  to  the  whole  of  the  Bible.  Indeed,  in
certain  branches  of  textual  study  the  division  observed
in  this  article  between  OT  and  NT  has  no  significance.

The  Old  Latin,  for  instance,  and  the  Egyptian  versions  are
translations  of  the  Greek  Bible  as  a  whole ;  in  such  cases  the
only  true  divisions  are  those  produced  by  the  mechanical  con
ditions  of  transcription.  Those  books  of  the  Bible  which  were
usually  included  in  the  same  volume  have  usually  the  same
literary  history.  Nevertheless,  the  division  into  NT  and  OT
represents  for  the  most  part  a  real  distinction.  All  purely


2 Textual
criticism.


1  Probably  it  was  mutilated  elsewhere. '  Boanerges '  is  too
monstrous  a  form  not  to  be  a  mere  corruption.

4979


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Jewish  documents  obviously  extend  to  the  OT  only.  Then,
again,  the  Peshitta  and  the  Latin  Vulyate  are  in  the  OT  trans
lations  of  the  Hebrew,  and  the  study  of  them  raises  a  class  of
questions  quite  separate  from  that  raised  by  the  study  of  the
texts  of  the  NT  with  which  they  are  bound  up.

But  the  great  distinction  between  the  textual  study
of  the  OT  and  that  of  the  NT  lies  in  the  very  different
^art  w^'c^  paln-'ographical  error  has
P^yed  in  the  surviving  documents.  Ac-
cidental  mistakes  in  the  chief  ancient
texts  of  the  NT  are  rare  ;  but  in  the  OT  they  are  to
be  found  continually.  The  inevitable  result  is  that
conjectural  emendation,  which  is  almost  inadmissible  in
the  NT,  is  in  the  OT  a  necessity,  and  one  which  can
historically  be  justified.

A  few  words  here  on  this  important  subject  may  not
be  out  of  place.  Strange  and  confusing  as  the  appearance
of  an  ancient  MS  is  to  our  eyes,  it  was  nevertheless
clear  enough  to  those  who  wrote  it,  and  the  mistakes  in
copying  which  we  make  are  as  a  rule  avoided  in  old
times.  The  discoveries  of  very  ancient  papyrus  frag
ments  of  classical  works  have  not  overthrown  but  rather
confirmed  the  better  class  of  extant  mediaeval  codices.
As  long  as  a  work  was  frequently  read,  as  long  as  the
scribe  was  fairly  familiar  with  what  he  was  copying,
mere  mistakes  do  not  seem  often  to  have  been  made,
and  when  made  were  frequently  corrected.  In  rare
and  unfamiliar  writings  a  perfectly  different  state  of
things  obtains,  and  there  is  then  no  limit  to  the  perversity
of  the  copyist.

The  NT  was  written  by  Christians  for  Christians  ;  it
was  moreover  written  in  Greek  for  Greek  -speaking
communities,  and  the  style  of  writing  (with  the  exception,
possibly,  of  the  Apocalypse)  was  that  of  current
literary  composition.  There  has  been  no  real  break  in
the  continuity  of  the  Greek-speaking  church,  and  we
find  accordingly  that  few  real  blunders  of  writing  are
met  with  in  the  leading  types  of  the  extant  texts.  This
state  of  things  has  not  prevented  variations  ;  but  they
are  not  for  the  most  part  accidental.  An  overwhelming
majority  of  the  '  various  readings  '  of  the  MSS  of  the
NT  were  from  the  very  first  intentional  alterations.
The  NT  in  very  early  times  had  no  canonical  authority,
and  alterations  and  additions  were  actually  made  where
they  seemed  improvements.  The  substitution  of
t\erifj.offvvr]v  for  Smcuoffforiv  in  Mt.  6  i  and  the  addition  of
the  doxology  to  the  Lord's  Prayer  a  dozen  verses  later
are  not  palnsographical  blunders,  but  deliberate  editing.

The  literary  history  of  the  OT  has  been  very  different.
While  the  Canon  of  the  OT  was  being  formed,  Hebrew
was  a  dying  language,  and  the  political  misfortunes  of
the  Jews  were  of  a  nature  far  less  favourable  to  the
preservation  of  ancient  documents  than  the  legal  per
secutions  of  the  Christians.  Under  Antiochus,  under
Titus,  and  finally  under  Hadrian,  the  Palestinian  Jews
suffered  all  the  devastating  and  uprooting  effects  of  a
war  for  existence,  and  it  is  no  wonder  if,  at  the  close  of
each  of  these  epochs,  the  MSS  which  survived  were  few
and  torn,  and  the  scholars  who  could  read  them  fewer
still.  Hebrew  had  become  a  learned  tongue,  its  place
being  mostly  supplied  by  the  various  forms  of  Aramaic,
and  it  was  not  ever}'  Jew  who  could  read  the  Scriptures
in  the  original,  far  less  spell  out  correctly  a  damaged  or
faulty  exemplar.  These  are  the  very  conditions  in
which  slips  of  copying  are  inevitably  made  and  least
easily  detected.  The  veneration  which  the  Jews  felt  for
their  Scriptures  ultimately  led  them  to  copy  so  accurately
as  to  preserve  the  most  obvious  blunders  in  the  trans
mitted  text  ;  but  this  antiquarian  science  came  too  late.

Nor  are  we  on  much  surer  ground  when  we  come  to
the  only  very  ancient  version  —  viz.  ,  the  Greek  OT,
commonly  called  the  Septuagint.  The  fable  of  the
seventy  translators,  each  of  whom  independently  agreed
in  their  rendering,  may  be  evidence  that  the  Alexandrian
Jews  had  some  common  tradition  of  the  meaning  of  the
Law  ;  but  if  we  except  the  Pentateuch,  to  which  alone
the  name  '  Septuagint  '  properly  applies,  the  various


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


books  of  the  Greek  OT  bear  all  the  marks  of  having
been  originally  the  private  ventures  of  untrained  scholars.
These  unsatisfactory  translations  passed  over  into  the  keep
ing  of  the  Church  ;  but  Christian  scribes  were  unable  to
check  corruption  in  a  text  which  frequently  cannot  be
translated  to  make  rational  sense,  nor  have  we  any
gaurantee  that  the  earliest  MSS  which  came  into  Christian
hands  were  accurate  representatives  of  the  original
version.  Yet  from  these  earliest  Christian  MSS  our
copies  seem  to  be  descended.

Thus  both  in  the  Hebrew  original  and  in  the  Greek
translation  there  are  serious  breaks  of  continuity  in  the
history  of  the  OT,  to  which  the  history  of  the  NT


offers  no  parallel.  The  textual  critic  is  therefore
justified,  in  the  case  of  the  OT,  in  a  temperate  use  of
conjectural  emendation  based  (i)  on  the  scientific  study
of  the  Hebrew  language  and  (2)  on  the  ascertained
usage  of  the  biblical  writers  in  passages  where  the  text
is  comparatively  free  from  suspicion.

From  various  causes,  but  chiefly  from  the  better
preservation  of  the  documents,  the  textual  criticism  of
the  NT  is  at  the  present  time  in  a  more  advanced  state
than  that  of  the  OT.  Contrary,  therefore,  to  the  usual
custom,  the  history  of  the  text  of  the  NT  in  the  original
and  in  translations  will  precede  that  of  the  OT  in  this
article.


I.— NEW TESTAMENT.


A.—  TEXT


The  original  authorities  for  the  text  of  the  NT  may

be  divided  into  three  classes — vis. ,  Greek  MSS,  Versions

_ . . . made from the Greek, and Patristic

authorities.  Q^ations.  The  Greek  MSS  range  in
date  from  the  fourth  century1  to  the
invention  of  printing,  the  Versions  from  the  middle  of
the  second  century  to  the  ninth.  The  original  form  of
each  version  is  attested  by  MSS,  some  (as  in  the  case
of  the  Old  Latin)  as  early  as  any  known  Greek  MS,
and  by  the  quotations  of  writers  who  used  the  version.

We  may  point  out  here  the  inherent  merit  of  the
testimony  obtained  from  versions  and  patristic  quota
tions,  and  the  counterbalancing  difficulties  attendant  on
their  use.  The  most  ancient  versions  of  the  NT  into
Latin,  Syriac,  and  Egyptian,  are  older  than  our  oldest
Greek  MSS  ;  wherever,  therefore,  we  can  be  sure  that
we  have  the  original  form  of  any  of  these  versions,  and
wherever  we  are  able  to  retranslate  with  certainty  that
original  form  into  the  Greek  underlying  it,  we  have  a
resultant  Greek  reading  possessing  a  higher  direct  claim
to  antiquity  than  the  reading  of  any  single  extant  Greek
MS.  But  obviously  this  is  not  always  the  case.

i.  Until  a  version  has  been  critically  studied  we  may  not  as
sume  that  any  single  MS  faithfully  represents  its  original  form,
for  the  text  of  the  MS  may  have  been  revised  from  later  Greek
texts.  Moreover,  the  early  translations  were  not  always  literal,
nor  can  Greek  distinctions  always  be  represented  in  another  lan
guage,  so  that  retranslation  in  some  cases  is  a  matter  of  un
certainty.

ii.  The  testimony  derived  from  quotations  in  ecclesiastical
writers  also  requires  very  cautious  handling.  Many  '  Fathers '
were  not  in  the  habit  of  quoting  accurately,  and  the  text  of  their
works,  which  in  some  important  instances  depends  ultimately  on
a  single  late  MS,  is  often  open  to  suspicion.

Nevertheless,  patristic  quotations  have  a  special  value
to  the  textual  critic.  They  are  as  a  rule  both  localised
and  dated.  Where  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the
quotation  in  a  writer's  work  reproduces  the  reading  of
his  Bible  we  have  in  effect  a  fragment  of  a  MS
of  the  writer's  own  age  and  country,  which  serves  as  a
fixed  point  in  our  historical  and  geographical  grouping
of  the  continuous  extant  biblical  texts.

Unfortunately  patristic  evidence  is  often  lacking  just  where  it  is
most  wanted.  The  verses  most  instructive  for  tracing  the  literary
history  of  the  text  of  the  Bible  are  rarely  those  of  immediate
doctrinal  import,  and  again  and  again  where  crucial  variations
occur  the  testimony  of  early  Fathers  is  absent.  It  is  especially
difficult  to  ascertain  the  true  weight  of  the  patristic  evidence
for  omissions.

Most  non-Greek  Fathers  are  to  be  reckoned  among
the  authorities  for  the  version  in  their  vernacular  ;  but
some — notably  Tertullian  and  Jerome — seem  often  to
make  independent  translations  of  their  own  direct  from
the  Greek.

In  quoting  authorities,  the  Greek  MSS  written  in
4  Chief  MSS  unc*al  letters  (ranging  from  the  fourth
to  the  ninth  cent.  — or  later)  are  denoted
by  capital  letters,  those  written  in  minuscule  (ranging
from  the  ninth  to  the  sixteenth  cent. )  by  numerals.
These  latter  are  commonly  called  'cursive.'  (See

\  Some  papyrus  fragments  from  Oxyrhynchus  are  still  earlier,
being  assigned  to  the  middle  of  the  third  century  A.D.

159  4981


WHITING.  ) There  is  absolutely  no  distinction  in  critical
value  between  a  '  cursive  '  and  an  '  uncial '  MS.

CHIEF  GREEK  MSS  OF  NT


Designation.

Place. Contents.

^th  Cent.

B  (Cod.  I'aticanus)

Rome all  books  except  part

of  Hebr., Pastoral

Epp.,  and  Apoc.

N  (Cod.  Sinaiticus) S.  Petersburg all  books  complete.

StA  Cent.

D  (Cod.  Bezce)

Cambridge

Gospels  and  Acts.

A  (Cod. Alexan-

drinus)

London

all  books.

C  (Cod.  Ephrtftni)

Paris

fragg. of nearly all

books.

6th  or  -jth  Cent.

Da  (Cod.  Claromon-

t  an  its)

Paris

Pauline  Epp.

~E.%(Cod. Laudi-

anus) Oxford

Acts.

St/i  Cent.

L  (Cad.  Regius)

Paris

Gospels.

gth  Cent.

(\(Cod. Sangal-

\ lensis)

S.  Gallen

Gospels \ A  and  Gg

\  &3  (Cod. Bcerneri-

(originally

\ anus)

Dresden

f formed

P2  (Cod. Porphyri-

Paul.  Epp.  }  one  book.

anus)

S.  Petersburg

all  bks.  except  Gospels.

The  following  fragmentary  uncial  MSS  are  important
for  the  light  they  throw  on  the  history  of  the  text  :  —

Z  (6th  cent.) — fragments  of  Mt.  ;  H  (8th  cent.) — fragments  of
Lk.  ;  six  fragmentary  MSS  denoted  by  T,  ranging  from  the  5th
to  the  yth  cent,  and  containing  portions  of  the  Gospels  with  a
Sahidic  translation,  which,  together  with  some  similar  fragments
lately  published  by  Amelineau  (Not.  et  F.xtr.  vol.  xxxiv.),  give
the  type  of  Greek  text  current  in  Upper  Egypt.

The  most  important  cursives  are  :  i.  In  the  Gospels,  those
numbered  33,  157,  28,  565,  700;  and  the  two  groups  1-118-131-
209  and  13-69-124-346-543.  These  two  groups  are  composed  of
the  immediate  descendants  of  two  lost  uncials,  each  of  which
would  have  been  as  valuable  for  critical  purposes  as  any  but  the
very  chief  codices  BNDA.  ii.  Outside  the  Gospels  a  special
mention  must  be  made  of  61  of  the  Acts,  for  the  goodness  of  its
text  ;  also  of  137,  180,  and  in  the  Epp.  for  the  marginal  readings
cited  as  67**  (Paul)  and  66**  (Cath.  Epp.).

Cod.  565  (Gregory)  is  also  called  473  (Scrivener,  Burgon),  and
2pe  (  Tischendorf).

Cod.  700  (Gregory)  is  also  called  604  (Scrivener,  Hoskier).
.. 543  (Gregory)  ,,  556  (Scrivener).

The  history  of  the  printed  text  of  the  Greek  NT  falls
into  three  divisions,  i.  The  first  age  opens  with  the
editio  princeps  of  Erasmus  at  Basel  in
1516,  and  includes  the  early  printed
editions  of  Stephanus  (<:l),  1550),  Beza,
etc.,  and  the  Polyglots.  During  this  period  the
ordinary  form  of  the  text,  commonly  called  the  Textus
Receptus,  was  fixed,  and  the  first  collections-  of  various
readings  were  made.  ii.  The  second  age  dates  from
Mill's  edition  of  1707.  Little  change  was  made  in  the
printed  text  during  this  second  period  ;  but  it  is  marked
by  the  great  collections  of  variants  brought  together  by
Mill,  Wetstein,  Matthaei,  and  others.  The  first  attempts

4982


5.  Printed
editions.


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


towards  a  systematic  arrangement  of  the  material  by
Bentlcy,  Bengel,  and  Griesbach  also  fall  within  this
period.  iii.  The  third  age  dates  from  Lachmann's
edition  of  1831,  in  which  for  the  first  time  a  modern
editor  constructed  the  text  from  ancient  evidence  alone,
without  reference  to  previous  editions.  During  the  last
fifty  years  man}'  very  ancient  documents  have  been
discovered  ;  many  more  have  been  for  the  first  time
accurately  collated,  or  edited  in  full.  As  a  natural
consequence  the  earlier  collections  of  various  readings
have  been  almost  entirely  superseded.  The  same  may
be  said  also  of  the  earlier  critical  theories,  which  were
based  on  imperfect  data,  especially  with  regard  to  the
primitive  forms  of  the  early  versions.

The  Textits  Receptus  derives  its  name  from  a  passage
in  the  preface  to  the  Elzevir  edition  of  1633.  This  edi-

ft ,p , tion, though really little more than a

-J  ,  bookseller's  reprint,  professed  to  give  the
ecep  us.  text  as  recejvecj  by  the  best  authorities.1
As  a  matter  of  fact  the  early  editions  of  the  NT
were  constructed  from  but  few  MSS,  and  those  which
were  chiefly  followed  were  late  and  of  no  special
critical  value.  Yet  from  the  very  fact  that  the  MSS
used  were  commonplace,  these  editions  give  a  very
fair  representation  of  the  ordinary  text  of  the  middle
ages.

The  importance  of  the  Te.rttis  Rcceptus  is  derived  not  from
the  accident  that  it  was  the  text  of  the  early  editions,  or  of  any
one  of  them,  hut  from  the  fact  that  it  is  in  all  essentials  the  text
of  the  NT  as  publicly  read  in  the  Greek  church  ever  since  the
fifth  century.  For  this  reason,  in  collating  the  variations  of  MSS
the  Text  us  Receptus(f.g.,'w\  Scrivener's  reprint  of  Stephanus)
should  still  be  used  in  preference  to  any  modern  critical  text.

A  complete  list  of  the  editions  of  the  NT  in  Greek  is
given  in  '  Tischendorf,'  vol.  iii.  pp.  202-287.  The
two  editions  which  are  practically  indispensable  to  the
student  are  those  of  Tischendorf-Gregory  (1869-1894),
and  of  \Yestcott  and  Hort  (1881).  '  Tischendorf  (i.e. ,
the  '  edit  to  octavo,  critica  tnaior'}  contains  by  far  the
fullest  collection  of  variants  of  every  class,  those  of  the
uncial  MSS  being  almost  completely  recorded.  The  Pro
legomena  by  C.  R.  Gregory  (who  brought  the  whole
edition  to  a  conclusion  after  the  successive  deaths  of  Tis
chendorf  and  Ezra  Abbot)  occupy  the  third  volume,  and
include  full  lists  and  descriptions  of  all  the  MSS,
versions,  and  editions.  The  edition  thus  forms  a
complete  Introduction  to  the  study  of  the  textual
criticism  of  the  NT.

In  using  it,  however,  we  must  remember  :— ^i)  The  text  is  the
product  of  Tischendorf  s  somewhat  arbitrary  judgment,  and  has
no  special  authority ;  (2)  some  valuable  readings,  now  only
found  in  minuscules,  are  not  recorded,  and  must  be  looked  for
in  earlier  editions,  such  as  Wetstein,  or  even  Mill  ;  (3)  the  read
ings  of  the  versions,  especially  of  the  Oriental  versions,  are  not
always  given  accurately,  and  they  are  rarely  quoted  where  their
text,  though  implying  a  different  Greek  reading,  is  not  supported
by  any  known  Gieek  MS.

The  general  theory  contained  in  Westcott  and  Hort's

New Testament in  the Original Greek  (published  in

__..., 1881,  (2>  1896)  has  formed  the  starting-

j  TT j.. point  for  all  subsequent  investigation  of

^h  8 the  textual  histoIT  of  the  NT-  whether  by

'  ^'  way  of  defence  or  of  criticism.  It  will
therefore  be  necessary  to  describe  the  main  outlines  of
this  theory  at  some  length.2

If  a  text  of  the  NT  were  formed  by  taking  in  each
variation  the  reading  of  the  majority  of  the  Greek  MSS,
it  would  be  in  all  essentials  identical  with  that  found  in
the  works  of  Chrysostom,  who  died  in  407,  after  having
lived  all  his  life,  except  the  last  ten  years,  at  or  near
Antioch.3  .  It  would  also  be  the  text  of  Theodoret  and
the  other  writers  of  the  Antiochian  school  as  well  as  of
later  Greek  Fathers  generally.  Such  a  text  would,

1  The  words  of  the  Preface  are  :  Tcxtmn  ergo  hal>cs,  nunc  ab
omnihts  receptunt :  in  quo  nihil  immutatum  aut  corruption
daunts.

2  The Introduction to this  edition  is  from  the  pen  of  Dr.
Hort  (§  21). In  the  following  pages  it  will  be  cited  as  '  Hort,'
•with  a  reference  to  the  numbered  paragraphs.

3  Hort  130.

4983


moreover,  be  practically  identical  with  the  '  Received
Text  '  —  that  is,  the  text  as  first  printed  by  Erasmus  in
1516  and  repeated  with  little  serious  variation  till
Lachmann's  edition  in  1831.  The  text  thus  formed  is
called  by  Westcott  and  Hort  Syrian  or  Antiochian.
Hort  commonly  uses  the  term  '  Syrian  '  ;  but  the
'  Syrian  Text  '  of  the  Greek  NT  is  so  easily  confused
with  the  Syriac  version  (with  which  it  has  nothing  to
do),  that  the  term  '  Antiochian  '  will  be  used  here
instead.

The  agreement  of  the  Antiochian  text  with  C'hrysos-
tom's  shows  it  to  have  been  in  existence  as  early  as  the
fourth  century,  whilst  the  fact  that  the  MSS  by  which  it
is  supported  form  in  most  cases  a  majority  numerically
overwhelming,  shows  that  it  continued  to  be  the  current
text  of  succeeding  generations.  It  does  not  agree,  how
ever,  with  the  text  as  preserved  in  our  oldest  MSS  X  and
B  or  in  the  Egyptian  versions,  and  still  less  would  it  be
the  text  represented  by  the  older  forms  of  the  Latin  and
Syriac  versions.  The  clearest  view  of  the  nature  of
the  Antiochian  text  and  of  the  documents  which  support
it  is  found  in  a  series  of  readings  called  '  conflate  '  by
Hort,  where  the  later  text  has  combined  earlier  rival
variants.

For  example  :  —

i.  Lk.  24  53  (after  '  and  they  were  continually  in  the  temple  ')  —
(a)  blessing  God  KBC'L  Syr.sin.  -palest  Boh.

(/3)  praising  God  D  e  a  (fi)fflr  Aug.

(S)  praising  and  bless- A unc.rell minusc.omn ffg-
ing  God  Lat.vg  Syr.vg-hcl  Arm.

('  blessing  and  praising  God  '  Ath.)

(Latin  MSS  are  represented  by  italics.  For  the  notation  of
the  Versions  and  the  weight  to  be  given  to  them,  see  the  sections
upon  each  version.)

Of  the  three  readings  here  called  a,  ft,  and  S,  either  a  and  ft
are  independent  abridgments  of  S,  or  S  has  been  made  put  of  a
and  ft.  That  is,  unless  S  be  the  original  reading  it  is  not  a
chance  alteration  or  expansion,  but  a  combination  of  previously
existing  variants.  Now  although  S  has  the  immensely  pre
ponderating  numerical  majority  of  witnesses  in  various  regions,
it  is  not  supported  by  the  older  forms  of  text  in  any  of  the
main  classes  of  evidence.  In  Greek,  S  is  opposed  by  the  three
oldest  MSS  NBC.  though  it  is  supported  by  A,  a  MS  of  the
fifth  century  ;  it  is  opposed  by  the  African  (?)  and  the  Kuropean
(abffr)  forms  of  the  Old  I,atin,  though  supported  by  the
revised  texts  fg  and  Jerome's  Vulgate  ;  in  the  East  &  is
opposed  by  the  Old  Syriac  (Syr.sin  or  Ss)  and  the  Palestinian
lectionary,  though  supported  by  the  Syriac  Vulgate  and  the
Harclean  ;  finally  it  is  unknown  in  the  Egyptian  version.

The  analysis  of  the  evidence  is  fatal  to  the  originality  of  S,
the  Antiochian  reading  ;  it  must,  therefore,  be  later  than  a  and
ft,  and,  if  later,  must  be  a  mere  combination  of  them.

2.1  Mk.  S  26  (following  Kai  aTrecrreiAev  ai/rbv  eis  ol/cor  aiiTOv
Aeywv).

(a)  M))5e  «U  Tr)V  KwfiTiv  eicre'A0T)«  (N)I3L  i*-2oo.  Syr.sin  Boh.

[ft  has  fxn  for  jur)6i.]

(/3)*Yn-aye  eis  rov  O'KOV  crou  KOL  /oiijSeia  eiTnjs eis  TI\V  Kuifirjv


olxov  crou Kai  ta.v  eis  -n\v  Kw/arji'  «i<7-«A0fl?
ii6e (v  Tjrj  (CuijiT) 13-69-346  28  565  (/'),  and
ev  rfj  KWJU.TJ  frfff  vg  [also  a,


(/So)  "Yn-aye


with  the  omission  o
nearly].
(j33)  MTjSei'i  eii-ps  eis  T<\V  Kiafirfv  (or  iv  TJJ

Syr.hl(nig.)  Arm.  have  a  prefixed  to  /3«.
-


ACA  unc.rell minusc.omn.  (exc. 8) Syr.vg-hcl  (text)
jfith  Go.

(Notice  that  the  Old  Syriac  version  has  now  to  be  added  in
both  of  these  examples  to  the  little  band  which  supports  the  a
text  adopted  by  Hort.)
3.  Lk.  24  46.
(a)  oiJTcos yeypaTrrai naSelt'  TOV  xpi<TTbi>  NBC*L  D Lat.afr-

eur  (Lat.  afr  om.  ovrui)  Syr.palest  Boh  ^Eth.
(3)  ou'ro)?  e<5ei  miBeiv  TOV  \pi<TTOV  minusc4  Syr.sin  (hiatcur)  Arm

Eus.  Theoph.
(S)ovT(o?  y«yp.  (cai  oirws  eSeL  read.  TOV  xp'  AC2N  rell./y  vg

Syr.vg-hcl.

(Part  of  the  verse  is  illegible  in  Syr.sin  ;  but  there  is  no  doubt
as  to  the  reading.  Note  that  here,  as  often,  the  Armenian
follows  Syr.vt.)

The  distribution  of  documents  in  these  conflate  readings  is,
roughly,  as  follows.  To  o  belong  KBL  and  the  Bohairic
(or  Memphitic)  version  ;  to  j3  belong  P  and  the  older  forms
of  the  Latin  versions.  The  Sahidic  (Thel'aic)  version  sides
sometimes  with  a  and  sometimes  with  0,  as  is  the  case  also
with  the  Old  Syriac.  In  a  few  cases  where  the  Latins  side  with
o,  the  Old  Syriac  forms  the  chief  item  in  the  attestation  of  the  ft

1  Hort  140.
4984


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

text ;  but  it  never  sides  with  S. All  other  authorities  (except
fragments)  have  been  influenced  by  the  S  text.

The  groups  of  authorities  marked  off  above  as  a,  /3,
and  5,  are  found  to  present  distinct  types  of  text  all
through  the  Gospels.  We  can  thus  test  their  witness
chronologically  and  geographically  through  the  quota
tions  of  the  Fathers.  This  examination  again  is  as
adverse  to  the  priority  of  5  to  a  or  p  as  the  analysis  of
the  conflate  readings.  After  the  fourth  century,  evidence
for  5  is  abundant  ;  before  ihe  fourth  century  it  is  doubt
ful  or  non-existent.

A  fourth  family  (7),  independent  of  /3  and  prior  to  the
Antiochian  text  (5),  is  recognised  in  Westcott  and  Hort.
No  document  contains  it  in  a  pure  form  ;  but  readings
characteristic  of  it  are  most  frequent  in  N,  L,  T,  Z
(Mt),  A  (Mk),  3,  (Lk),  and  in  the  Bohairic  version,'  in
fact  in  all  the  documents  where  a  readings  are  found
except  B.  This  text  is  supposed  by  Hort  to  have
originated  at  Alexandria  and  is  called  by  him  Alex
andrian.  The  most  constant  witnesses  for  the  text
called  /3  are  the  various  forms  of  the  Old  Latin  ;  it  was
therefore  supposed  by  previous  investigators  to  have
arisen  in  the  West  of  Europe,  and  is  still  universally
known  by  the  name  of  Western.  The  a  text,  which  is
neither  '  Western  '  nor  '  Alexandrian,'  nor  '  Antiochian,'
is  called  by  Hort  Xeutral.

These  three  strains— the  Western,  the  Alexandrian,
and  the  Neutral  — are  the  three  great  divisions  into
8  The  three  wllicn'  according  to  Hort,  the  ante-
texts.  N'ccne  text  of  the  NT  can  be  divided.
The  '  Western '  text  is  found  every
where,  from  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  to  Spain  and
to  Upper  Egypt.  The  Alexandrian  text  is  witnessed
chiefly  in  Alexandria  and  Lower  Egypt.  The  Neutral
text  is  not  so  clearly  associated  with  any  local  use  ;
but,  as  is  implied  by  the  name,  its  subsidiary  attestation
is  found  among  predominantly  Alexandrian  documents
as  opposed  to  Western  corruptions,  and  among  the
Westerns  as  opposed  to  Alexandrian  corruptions.
Moreover,  not  all  Western  readings  are  shared  by  the
whole  of  the  Western  array,  some  early  Western  texts
in  many  cases  supporting  the  Neutral  reading  where
other  Western  authorities  have  gone  wrong.
_  Put  more  concretely,  the  case  may  be  stated  thus  :  combina
tions  of  B  (the  typical  Neutral  document)  with  K  or  L  or  the
Bohairic  on  the  one  hand,  or  with  D  or  the  Latins  or  the  Old
Syriac  on  the  other,  approve  themselves  as  giving  the  genuine
reading.  B  is  thus  the  central  witness  for  the  text  ;  it  is  some
times  right  almost  alone,  and  to  reject  its  readings  is  never
quite  safe.  Instances  are  also  given  by  Hort  of  'ternary
variations,  where  the  Western  texts  have  a  corruption  in  one
direction  and  the  Alexandrian  in  another,  but  B  retains  the
genuine  reading,  which  could  not  have  arisen  from  either  cor
ruption  and  yet  explains  the  origin  of  both.

Next  in  excellence  to  B  is  x,  which  Hort  believed  to  have
a  text  entirely  independent  of  B  ;  so  that  the  combination  BK>
which  frequently  occurs  even  in  opposition  to  all  other  authorities,
is  practically  certain  to  give  the  true  text.  Almost  the  only  ex
ceptions  are  found  in  a  series  of  passages  found  in  all  except
Western  documents,  which  are  nevertheless  considered  by
Hort  to  be  no  part  of  the  genuine  text  of  the  NT.  In  these
passages,  called  the  'Western  Non-Interpolations,'  B  has  gone
wrong,  and  the  true  text  is  preserved  chiefly  by  D  and  the
Latins.

The  reasons  given  by  Hort  for  the  final  supremacy
of  the  Antiochian  text  are  mainly  two,  one  political  and
the  other  literary.

'Antioch  is  the  true  ecclesiastical  parent  of  Constantinople  so
that  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  traditional  Constantinopolitan
text,  whether  formally  official  or  not,  was  the  Antiochian  text  of
the  fourth  century.  It  was  equally  natural  that  the  text  recog
nised  at  Constantinople  should  eventually  become  in  practice
the  standard  New  Testament  of  the  East '  (Hort  195).  '  The
qualities  which  the  authors  of  the  Syrian  [i.e.,  Antiochian]  text
seem  mostly  to  have  desired  to  impress  on  it  are  lucidity  and
completeness.  .  .  .  New  omissions  accordingly  are  rare,  and
where  they  occur  are  usually  found  to  contribute  to  apparent
simplicity.  New  interpolations,  on  the  other  hand,  are  abundant
most  of  them  being  due  to  harmonistic  or  other  assimilation'
fortunately  capricious  and  incomplete.  Both  in  matter  and  in
diction  the  Syrian  text  is  conspicuously  a  full  text.  .  .  .  The
spirit  of  its  own  corrections  is  at  once  sensible  and  feeble
entirely  blameless  on  either  literary  or  religious  grounds  as
regards  vulgarised  or  unworthy  diction,  yet  showing  no  marks

4985


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

of  either  critical  or  spiritual  insight,  it  presents  the  New  Testa
ment  in  a  form  smooth  and  attractive,  but  appreciably  im-
poverished  in  sense  and  force,  more  fitted  for  cursory  perusal  or
recitation  than  for  repeated  diligent  study'  (Hort  187).

The  survival  of  good  readings  in  some  late  cursives
may  be  accounted  for  in  two  ways.  Readings  from  the
older  texts  may  here  and  there  have  been  introduced
into  a  fundamentally  Antiochian  text  from  marginal
glosses  or  through  the  eclectic  preferences  of  scribes.
But  as  late  MSS  which  contain  good  readings  present
them  in  the  less  read  parts  of  the  narrative  quite  as
much  as  in  the  more  striking  sayings,  it  is  probable
that  these  good  readings  are  generally  the  result  of  a
process  of  imperfect  correction.  A'  MS  containing
another  than  the  dominant  Antiochian  text  would  be
corrected  to  that  text,  but  not  as  a  rule  with  perfect
accuracy.  Only  in  those  readings  which  do  not  agree
with  the  ordinary  text  of  the  Middle  Ages  can  we  be
certain  that  such  MSS  are  reproducing  the  text  of  their
remote  ancestors.  The  minuscules,  in  short,  give  little
additional  authority  to  the  '  received  text  '  where  they
agree  with  it,  whilst  their  differences  from  it  are  often  of
critical  weight.1

It is  still held by  a few  scholars  that the Syriac

Vulgate  is  a  true  product  of  the  second  century, and

9 General that  the  version  known  by  the  name  of

remarks- the '  SeParatctl Gospels' (called in the

Antiochian  above  section  thc  '  Old  s-vriric  ')  is  a  re-
revision  Vlslon  of  !t-  According  to  this  the
support  given  by  the  Syriac  Vulgate  to
the  Antiochian  text  transfers  the  evidence  for  that  text
from  the  fourth  to  the  second  century.  But  Syriac
patristic  evidence  for  the  existence  of  the  Syriac  Vulgate
(i.e.,  the  Peshltta)  in  its  present  form  before  411  A.D.
is  non-existent  ;  whereas  the  text  of  the  '  Separated
Gospels'  (or  'Old  Syriac')  is  actually  attested  from
works  of  the  third  and  early  fourth  centuries.  (For  the
proof  of  this,  see  below  on  •  Syriac  Versions  '  §§  22  ff.}

Another  objection  which  has  often  been  raised  is
the  silence  of  ecclesiastical  writers  with  regard  to  the
Antiochian  revision.  It  has  been  said  that  if  there  had
been  prepared  at  Antioch  early  in  the  fourth  century
a  revision  of  the  text  of  the  NT  which  practically  came
to  supersede  all  other  forms  of  the  text,  we  should  have
expected  clear  references  in  ecclesiastical  writers  to  so
great  an  event.  We  hear  something  about  the  circum
stances  which  gave  rise  to  Jerome's  Vulgate  ;  should  we
not  find  similar  references  to  the  Antiochian  revision  if
it  had  ever  taken  place  ?

The  parallel  here  suggested  with  the  history  of  the
Latin  Bible  is  instructive  ;  a  closer  examination  will
show  that  it  tells  the  other  way.  It  is  true  that  we
know  something  about  the  preparation  of  Jerome's
new  translation  ;  but  this  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  we
possess  the  correspondence  of  that  energetic  and  self-
assertive  personality.  Of  the  reception  of  his  NT  we
know  little,  except  that  his  revision  of  the  (  io.-,pels  seems
to  have  found  favour  immediately  in  Africa.  A  still
closer  parallel  to  the  silent  success  of  the  Antiochian  re
vision  is  afforded  by  the  history  of  the  Book  of  Daniel.

Both  the  Greek  and  the  Latin  branches  of  the  church  originally
received  the  Book  of  Daniel  in  the  LXX  version,  but  afterwards
discarded  this  for  the  version  of  Theodotion.  The  change
occurred  in  the  Greek  -speaking  church  towards  the  end  of  the
second  century,  in  the  Latin  church  (at  least  in  Africa)  about  the
middle  of  the  third  century.  But  on  events  connected  with  this
serious  alteration  of  the  traditional  text  ecclesiastical  history  is
silent,  and  we  are  forced  to  say  with  Jerome  \Praf.  in  Daniei\
et  hoc  cur  acciderit  nescio.'

A  true  picture  of  the  general  attitude  of  the  fourth
century  to  textual  revision  is,  in  the  opinion  of  the  present
writer,  given  by  the  Latin  dialogue  contra  Fulgentium
Donatistam?  where  a  Catholic  and  a  Donatist  dispute
together,  the  Catholic  using  the  Vulgate  throughout  the
Bible  unchallenged,  though  the  Donatist  uniformly  quotes
from  an  Old  Latin  text.

Against  these  objections  to  the  theory  of  the  Antiochian


1  Hort  196.  and  especially  334^
4986


Migne,  43  7fi3


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

revision  \ve  may  now  set  the  evidence  derived  from  the
Sinai  palimpsest  (Ss),  a  MS  discovered  some  years  after
the  publication  of  Hort's  work.

Hort's  estimate  of  the  Old  Syriac  had  been  necessarily  derived
from  Cureton's  MS  (Sc)i  the  surviving  portions  of  which  cover
less  than  half  the  Gospel  text.  It  seems,  moreover,  to  repre
sent  a  type  of  the  Old  Syriac  which  has  undergone  revision
from  the  Greek  (see  col.  5002).  Thus  the  discovery  of  Ss  has
practically  for  the  first  time  revealed  to  us  the  true  character
of  the  great  version  of  the  Eastern  world  in  its  earliest  form.

Now  Ss  is  absolutely  free  from  the  slightest  trace  of
Antiochian  readings.  Not  one  of  the  characteristic
Antiochian  conflations  is  found  in  it.  Moreover,  in
certain  cases  where  the  Latins  agree  with  the  '  Neutral '
text,  but  the  Antiochian  text  has  an  additional  clause,
this  additional  clause  alone  is  found  in  Ss.  An  instance
is  given  above  (§  7)  from  Lk.  2446;  another  may  be
found  at  Mk.  1 13,  whilst  the  additions  to  the  true  text  of
Mk.  1223  and  138  have  a  somewhat  similar  attestation.
These  passages  do  not  merely  prove  that  the  Old  Syriac
was  uninfluenced  by  the  Antiochian  text  ;  they  go  far
to  show  that  a  text  akin  to  the  Old  Syriac  was  one  of
the  elements  out  of  which  the  eclectic  Antiochian  text
was  constructed.  Thus  the  readings  of  B  and  its  allies,
the  readings  of  the  Old  Latin  and  its  allies,  and  now  the
readings  of  the  Old  Syriac,  all  contribute  to  explain  the
phenomena  of  the  Antiochian  text  ;  but  the  mutual
variations  of  H  and  the  Old  Latin  and  the  Old  Syriac
cannot  be  explained  from  the  Antiochian  text  regarded
as  the  genuine  original.1

In  leaving  the  discussion  of  the  Antiochian  revision
\ve  leave  the  region  of  comparative  certainty. Hort's
_.  division  of  the  ante-Nicene  text  into  the

IA'  ?  Pre"  three  strains  of  Western,  Alexandrian,
Antiocfcian  and  Centra!,  still  more  or  less  holds  the
texts.  ground  ;  but  important  details  of  his
scheme  have  incidentally  been  undermined,  and  the
fresh  evidence  of  Ss  is  here  much  less  favourable  to  his
presentation  of  the  history  of  the  text.  The  general
tendency  of  criticism  has  been  to  raise  the  value  of
the  texts  which  Hort  would  have  grouped  under  the
heading  of  'Western.'  The  channel  of  early  'non-
Western  '  transmission  has  been  still  further  narrowed,
whilst  there  have  come  to  light  types  of  early  '  Western  '
texts  purer  than  those  which  have  earned  them  both
their  misleading  name  and  their  bad  reputation.

1.  Recent  research  has  decidedly  confirmed  Tischen-
<lorfs assertion that B  and N came from the  same
scriptorium.

This  was  admitted  by  Hort  ;  but  he  thought  that  the  two
MSS  might  have  been  written  in  Rome.  It  now  seems  almost
certain  that  they  both  belonged  to  the  great  library  collected  by
Pamphilus  at  Caesarea.2  We  must  therefore  allow  for  the  possi
bility  that  their  agreements  come  from  a  partial  use  of  the  same
exemplar.  This  might  happen  in  several  ways  ;  e.g.,  the  im
mediate  ancestor  (or  ancestors)  of  x  may  have  been  largely
corrected  to  the  B  text.  These  considerations  do  not  militate
directly  against  the  excellence  of  the  common  archetype  of  BN
but  they  undoubtedly  raise  once  more  the  very  serious  question
•whether  these  great  codices  are  in  every  case  independent
witnesses.

The  demonstrable  inferiority  of  B  in  certain  books  of  the  OT,
notably  Judges  and  Isaiah  (see  OT,  '  Greek  Versions '),  maybe
held  to  cast  a  certain  suspicion  upon  its  XT  text.  But  the  great
Bibles  of  the  fourth  century  must  have  been  copied  from  several
smaller  codices  or  rolls  containing  only  part  of  the  Scriptures.
The  textual  characteristics,  therefore,  of  B  in  the  Prophets  or
the  Octateuch  are  by  no  means  necessarily  those  it  exhibits  in
the  Gospels  or  the  Acts.

2.  The  claims  of  the  Antiochian  text  to  represent  the
apostolic  original  are  rejected  mainly  because  no  clear
evidence  can be found for  it  earlier  than the  fourth
century. It  is  acknowledged by  all that the  various
forms  of  the  '  Western  '  text  were  widely  spread  in  the
second  and  third  centuries. But  where  was  the  '  Neutral '
text  transmitted  ?

1  The  latest  serious  defender  of  the  conflate  readings  of  the
Antiochian  text  is  W.  Bousset  (Texte  und  Unter.nichungen,
xi.  4  97-102)  ;  but  the  emphatic  rejection  of  these  readings  by  Ss
has  made  the  refutation  of  his  argument  superfluous.

-  See  Bousset,  TU  xi.  4  45  ff.  ;  J.  R.  Harris,  Stichomftry,
71-89 ;  J.  A.  Robinson,  Euthaliana.  36-43.

4987


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Hort's  answer  is  unambiguous.  'The  Western  licence  did
not  prevail  everywhere,  and  MSS  unaffected  by  its  results
were  still  copied.  The  perpetuation  of  the  purer  text  may  in
great  measure  be  laid  to  the  credit  of  the  watchful  scholars  of
Alexandria  ;  its  best  representatives  among  the  versions  are
the  Egyptian,  and  especially  that  of  Lower  Egypt  ;  and  the
quotations  which  follow  it  are  most  abundant  in  Clement,
Origen  (Dionysius,  Peter),  Didymus,  and  the  younger  Cyril,  all
Alexandrians'  (Westcott  and  Hort,  smaller  ed.  550).

It  must,  however,  be  noted  that  the  testimony  of  our
Alexandrian  and  Egyptian  witnesses  becomes  more  and
more  Western  the  earlier  they  are.  Of  the  three  great
Alexandrian  fathers,  Origen  is  more  '  Western  '  than
Cyril,  Clement  is  more  '  Western  '  than  Origen.1  Recent
criticism  has  dealt  similarly  with  the  evidence  of  the
Egyptian  versions.  The  old  arguments  for  the  com
parative  antiquity  of  the  Sahidic  version  remain,  and
new  discoveries  of  ancient  fragments  of  that  version  and
its  immediate  kindred  are  made  year  by  year.  But  in
the  Sahidic  '  the  Western  influence  is  often  peculiarly
well  marked.'-  The  Bohairic,  on  the  other  hand,  is
thoroughly  non-  Western  ;  but  Guidi  has  shown  that
this  version  in  its  present  form,  so  far  from  being
a  product  of  the  third  century,  is  almost  certainly  not
earlier  than  the  sixth.  The  very  existence  of  a  specifi
cally  Bohairic  literature  before  the  sixth  century  is
extremely  doubtful  (see  §  34).

Vet  with  all  deductions  it  remains  true  that  the
'  Neutral  '  text  receives  a  larger  measure  of  general
support  even  from  the  Sahidic  version  than  from  the
early  Latin  or  Syriac  texts.  In  other  words,  a  pre
dominantly  '  non-Western  '  text  was  current  in  Egypt
from  about  Origen's  time  onwards.  We  are,  moreover,
placed  in  a  peculiarly  favourable  position  for  studying
this  type  of  text  owing  to  the  fortunate  accident  that  the
Antiochian  revision  never  found  favour  in  Egypt.  Until
long  after  the  Arab  conquest  the  text  found  in  Egyptian
documents,  both  Greek  and  Coptic,  continued  on  the
whole  to  be  that  which  Hort  has  called  'Alexandrian.'
This  text,  though  far  purer  than  the  Antiochian,  is
equally  with  it  an  artificial  eclectic  revision  ;  its  survival
at  Alexandria,  alone  among  Greek-speakingcommunities,
was  no  doubt  connected  with  the  growth  of  Egyptian
Monophysitism.8

3.  The  '  Western  '  text,  as  a  whole,  has  hitherto  found
few  defenders.  This  is  partly  due  to  '  an  imperfect
apprehension  of  the  antiquity  and  extension  of  the
Western  text  as  revealed  by  patristic  quotations  and
by  versions'  (Hort  170).  Hort,  whose  general  estimate
of  Western  readings  is  no  more  favourable  than  that  of
his  predecessors,  groups  Western  characteristics  under
the  three  heads  of  Paraphrase,  Interpolation,  and

1  Ibid.  549.  The  Gospel  quotations  of  Clement  of  Alexandria
have  been  carefully  edited  by  P.  H.  Barnard  (Texts  and  Studies,
65,  1899).

-  Hort,  550.

3  The  form  in  which  the  alternative  ending  to  Mk.  is
exhibited  by  the  '  Alexandrian  '  text  is  a  good  illustration  of
its  highly  artificial  character.  The  genuine  text  of  that
Gospel  breaks  off  in  the  middle  of  a  clause  at  Mk.  108  with  the
words  e^oftovvTO  yip  ...  ('/or  they  feared  .  .  .  .');  but  an
ancient  text,  now  represented  by  the  Latin  Codex  Bobiensis  (£),
added  the  following  sentence  :  '  But  all  that  they  had  been
commanded  they  showed  forth  in  few  words  to  those  that  were
with  Peter.  Arid  after  these  things  Jesus  himself  also  appeared,
and  from  the  East  even  unto  the  West  sent  forth  by  them  the
holy  and  incorruptible  preaching  of  eternal  salvation.  Amen.'
The  absence  of  quotations  from  Mk.  1*19-20  in  Tertullian  and
Cyprian  makes  it  highly  probable  that  k  here,  as  elsewhere,  faith
fully  reproduces  the  text  of  the  Gospels  current  at  Carthage  up
to  the  middle  of  the  third  century.  This  shorter  conclusion
evidently  presupposes  a  text  which  ended  at  16  8  as  in  BK  and

Most  documents  of  course  add  to  168  the  so-called  '  last  twelve
verses  of  S.  Mark,'  forming  w.  9-20.  It  is  the  characteristic  of
the  Alexandrian  recension  that  it  gives  both  conclusions,  the

This
>me


.  . .  ........  ,  „  ..........  _______  „  _____  .

of  the  best  MS  'of  the  Bohairic?  accompanied  in  most  cases  by
the  critical  note  (see  Amelineau,  Not.  et  Extr.  34  2,  and  the
descriptions  of  *  [Gregory  445],  and  of  -|12  [Gregory  1308],  and
see  also  J.  R.  Harris,  appendix  to  Mrs.  Lewis's  Cat.  of  Syriac
MSS  at  Mt.  Sinai,  toj/.).

4988


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Assimilation  (Hort  173-175).  Notwithstanding  this
unfavourable  verdict,  '  Western  '  documents  not  unfre-
quently  form  the  bulk  of  the  attestation  for  the  readings
adopted  by  him.  1  The  fact  is  that  the  expression  '  the
Western  text  '  is  a  misnomer.  The  '  Western  '  docu
ments  do  not  present  a  single  recension,  like  the
Antiochian  text,  or  even  a  body  of  aberrant  readings  ;
they  rather  represent  the  unrevised  and  progressively
deteriorated  state  of  the  text  throughout  the  Christian
world  in  the  ante-Nicene  age.  '  Western  '  readings  are
accordingly  of  various  types,  ranging  from  the  un-
corrupted  original  to  the  most  extreme  forms  of  inter
polation  and  paraphrase.  It  was  a  perception  of  this
fact  that  led  Hug  as  early  as  1808  to  speak  of  what  is
usually  called  '  the  Western  text  '  by  the  name  of  KOIVTJ


Much  of  the  bad  repute  of  '  Western  '  texts  comes
from  the  almost  universal  practice  of  treating  Codex
Bezos  (D)  as  their  leading  representative.  But  this
famous  MS,  though  it  contains  very  ancient  elements,
is  far  from  being  a  pure  representative  of  any  ancient
strain  of  text.  A  more  just  view  would  be  gained  by
taking,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Latin  fragments  called  Cod.
Bobiensis  (k)  as  the  best  type  of  the  texts  early  current
in  the  West,  and,  on  the  other,  the  Sinai  palimpsest  (Ss)
as  the  best  type  of  the  texts  early  current  in  the  East.
Both  these  documents  would  be  reckoned  as  '  Western  '
according  to  the  ordinary  view  ;  but  it  has  not  yet  been
proved  that  they  have  any  common  origin  later  than  the
archetype  of  all  our  extant  authorities.

The  discovery  of  the  Sinai  palimpsest  has  materially
altered  our  conceptions  of  the  early  '  Western  '  text,  One
of  the  chief  characteristics  formerly  assigned  to  that  text
was  a  tendency  to  admit  interpolation  ;  and  the  presence
in  the  leading  '  Western  '  authorities  of  a  series  of  inter
polations,  which  must  have  come  from  non  -canonical
sources,  seemed  to  make  it  obvious  that  all  '  Western  '
documents  were  derived  from  an  interpolated  copy  of
the  Gospels  later  than  the  archetype  of  BX  and  their
allies.'2  But  though  the  Sinai  palimpsest  has  a  thoroughly
non-  Alexandrian  text,  not  one  of  these  interpolations  is
found  in  it.  It  was  the  presence  of  clear  errors  in  all
'  Western  '  documents  known  to  the  earlier  critics  which
made  them  think  of  a  '  Western  '  recension  or  edition  ;
every  fresh  discovery,  therefore,  of  documents  funda
mentally  'Western,'  but  nevertheless  free  from  these
errors,  makes  the  theory  of  a  single  Western  recension
less  and  less  probable.

4.  One  of  the  arguments  employed  by  Hort  in
favour  of  the  genuineness  of  the  '  Neutral  '  text  is  the
intrinsic  excellence  of  the  groups  containing  B,  the  chief
'  Neutral  '  document.  This  line  of  argument  is  of  course
quite  independent  of  theories  connected  with  the  spread
of  the  '  Western  '  or  of  any  other  ancient  text.  It
is  somewhat  open,  however,  to  the  charge  of  subjectivity,
and  the  very  fact  that  not  all  the  readings  adopted  by
Hort  have  found  universal  favour,  proves  that  the  evi
dence  of  groups  might  have  been  interpreted  differently.
Salmon  (Some  Thoughts  on  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the
NT,  1897)  calls  the  term  '  Neutral  '  '  a  question-begging

1  Notable instances are Mt.  633 [(B)N], 7  13 [K*], 1835
[BXb  min.2 Orig.], 1620 [B* codd. ap. Orig.]. The square
brackets  contain  the  '  non-  Western  '  attestation  of  the  text  of
Westcott  and  Hort. Thus  before  the  discovery  of  x  the  true
text  of  Mt.  6  33  7  13  was  known  from  '  Western  '  documents  alone.

2  There  are  about  twenty  of  these  'Western'  interpolations
in  the  Gospels. The  chief  of  them  are  :  —  Mt.  815  (the  light  at
the baptism); Mt.  162^3 ('the face of  the sky'); Mt.  2028
('  seek  from  little  to  increase  ')  ; Mk.  1(5  3  (the  angelic  host  at
the  resurrection)  ;  Lk.  0  4  (the  man  working  on  the  Sabbath)  ;
Lk.  9  54yC  ('  Ye  know  not  what  spirit  ye  are  of)  ;  Lk.  22  43,/C  (the
bloo'dy  sweat)  ;  Lk.  23  340:  ('  Father,  forgive  them  ')  ;  Jn.  5  4  (the
angel  at  the  pool)  ;  Jn.  7  53-8  n  (the  woman  taken  in  adultery).
All these are absent from Ss as  well  as  from  BN,  but  they
appear  to  belong  to  the  earliest  Latin  texts. The  longer  con
clusion  to  the  Second  Gospel  ([Mk.]  169-20)  is  absent  from  k  in
addition  to  BN  Ss,  so  that  this  passage  forms  no  part  also  of
the  earliest  non-Alexandrian  text.

4989


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

name '  (p.  49),  and  adds  with  great  truth,  '  if  we  want  a
more  precise  answer  to  the  question  what  Hort  means
by  "  Alexandrian,"  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  saying,
those  readings  which  are  Alexandrian  in  their  origin  and
are  not  recognised  by  Codex  B'  (p.  51).  Yet  there  is
no  doubt  that  the  text  of  B  in  the  Gospels  is,  generally
speaking,  an  excellent  one.  Of  this  there  can  be  no
stronger  proof  than  the  support  it  frequently  gives  to
early  readings,  which,  but  for  the  witness  of  B,  would
have  been  dubbed  with  the  fatal  epithet  of  'Western.' 1
The  habitual  associates  of  B  are  of  quite  a  different
character  ;  so  frequently  indeed  does  it  agree  with  such
'  Alexandrian '  documents  as  TL  and  the  Egyptian
versions,  that  it  has  actually  been  maintained  that  the
Gospel  text  of  B  is  a  transcript  of  the  Egyptian  re
cension  of  Hesychius  (Bousset,  TU  x\.  492).  But  the
occasional,  yet  unmistakable,  support  which  B  affords
to  the  WTestern  against  the  specifically  '  Alexandrian '
readings  is  inconsistent  with  this  view.2

To  sum  up,  Hort's  text  of  the  Gospels  is  less  affected
by  recent  discoveries  than  his  criticism  of  the  documents.

_, .  As  was  pointed  out  above,  the  readings

11.  Conclusion.  of  BN the  authorities  on  which  Hort

chieflyrelied,  are  often  supported  by  the  most  ancient  form
of  the  Old  Latin  (k},  or  by  the  most  ancient  form  of  the  Old
Syriac  (Ss).  These  readings  are  almost  always  to  be  per-
ferred,  for  they  represent  an  agreement  between  the  best
'  Western  '  and  the  best  '  non  -  Western  '  texts.  3  The
crucial  difficulty  occurs  where  all  the  early  '  Western  '
documents  unite  against  BX,  or  BNL  and  the  Bohairic.
In  other  words,  the  question  before  the  textual  critic  in
the  immediate  future  is,  Are  the  oldest  forms  of  the
Old  Latin  and  the  Old  Syriac  independent?  We  may
put  the  question  in  another  form.  Accepting  Hort's
nomenclature,  and  remembering  that  '  Western '  docu
ments  such  as  k  and  Ss  not  unfrequently  support  B
against  the  specifically  '  Alexandrian  '  text,  what  grounds
have  we  for  thinking  that  B,  or  even  BN  united,  is
entirely  free  from  'Alexandrian'  corrections?4  In  the
portions  of  the  Gospels  where  k  and  Ss  are  both  ex
tant,  B  has  the  support  of  one  or  other  of  them  about
four  times  out  of  five  ;  may  not  B  be  itself  in  the  wrong
in  the  remaining  readings?  How  far,  in  fine,  can  we
trust  B  whether  supported  by  the  other  Greek  MSS  or
not,  in  cases  where  its  only  attestation  among  the  ancient
versions  is  Egyptian  ?

The  answers  to  these  questions  cannot  positively  be
given  until  a  complete  analysis  has  been  made  of  the
extant  'Western'  variants  to  the  text  of  BX.  It  is,

1  E.g.,  in  Lk.  10  i  17,  B  has  'seventy-two'  disciples  with  the
best  Latin  and  Syriac  texts,  not  'seventy.'

2  There  is  not  the  slightest  likelihood  that  the  non-Alexandrian
readings  in  B  have  been  introduced  into  the  text  of  B's  ancestors
by  irregular  revision. The  probability  indeed  is  all  the  other
way. The  few  indications  afforded  by  the  actual  readings  of
the MS tend to show  that 'Western'  (or at any  rate non-
'  Alexandrian ')  readings  would  have b-un corrected  out, not
introduced. The  most  striking  instance  is  Mt.  27  i6_/I In  these
verses  the  common  text  has  Bapaj3/3<ii/  . .  . Bapa/3/3ai>,  but  an
ancient text (now represented by  some good minuscules, a
scholion,  and  the  Old  Syriac)  read  'I))(ToOi'  Bapa/3/3ai/  .  .  .  '\r\unvv
TOV  Bapa/S/Sai'. Now  fi  has  'Irja-ow  in  neither  place  ;  but  it  in
serts  rbv  before  the  second  BapcgSjSay. The  obvious  explanation
is  that  an  ancestor  of  B  had  the  reading  Jesus  Barabbas,  but  the
corrector  who  expunged  the  word  '\-r\aovv  in  both  places  omitted
to  delete  the  article  in  the  second  place. Other  instances,  some
what  similar, are Mt.  21  31 (ucrrepos)  ; Mt.  2326  (avroG) ; Lk.
1937  (iravTiav) ;  Jn.  8  57  (eopaices). In  such  places  the  '  neutrality '
of  B  is  the  neutrality  of  compromise.

3  A  striking  instance  is  afforded  by  the  readings  connected
with  the  double  cock-crowing  in  Mk.  14. The  text  adopted  by
Hort  was  that  of  B,  a  Greek  lectionary,  and  the  Bohairic. It
is  now  found  also  in  Syr.sin. The  fact  that  Syr.sin.  here  agrees
with B  is  a  strong  confirmation  of  the  correctness  of  Hort's
judgment ;  at  the  same  time  it  removes  the  whole  set  of  varia
tions  from  the  category  of  places  where  the  true  text  is  pre
served  in  'non-Western'  documents  alone.

4  The  definite  issue  is  raised,  for  instance,  in  Mk.  0  20,  where
BNL  Boh  read  TJn-dpei  for  en-oi'f  i. 'En-oi'et  (with  slight  variations)
is  found  in  all  other  documents,  including  Lrit.vt  and  Syr.vt. If
•^jropei  be  not  original,  it  looks  more  like  an  ingenious  conjecture
than  a  palaeographical  blunder.

4990


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


however,  in  the  direction  here  indicated — viz.,  the
preservation  of  the  true  text  in  a  considerable  number
of  cases  by  '  Western  '  documents  alone — that  criticism
mny  ultimately  be  able  to  advance  beyond  the  point
reached  by  Hort.

\Ve  may  add  a  few  illustrations  of  passages  where  the
text  adopted  by  WH  can  be  certainly  or  probably
amended.

i. Mt.  68  'your  Father  knovvcth  what  things  ye  have

need  of  irpb  rov  t)/u.as  airijirai  avrov. ' For  airr/vat  avr6v

,,, , we  find  dfot^at  rb  aro/ota  in  D  h.1 This

picturesque locution has been adopted

-e  texts. ))y  B]ass  and  hy  Nest]e  (Hastings'  DH

739<z) ;  the  slenderness  of  the  attestation  may  l>e  ex
plained  by  the  desire  of  avoiding  what  seemed  an
undignified  expression.  All  Syriac  VSS.  support  the
common  text ;  but  it  is  worth  noticing  that  in  Mt.
5  2  S$  reads  '  and  he  began  to  say  to  them '  instead  of
'  and  he  opened  his  mouth  and  taught  them,  saying.  .  .'
A  somewhat  similar  variant  is  to  be  found  in
Mt.  Ta.i,  where  for  o/uoXcry^crw  we  find  o/uocrw  attested
by  b  (/  vg. codd.pp.lat  (incl.  de  Rebaptismate,  §  7) :  Justin
Martyr  262,  with  the  African  Latin  (k  [Cyp]  also  [«],^)
and  Sc  (hiat  S$),  have  epu — i.e. ,  their  text  has  been  as
similated  to  Lk.  1827.

ii.  Mt.  Us  '  KOLL  TTTwxol  €t'ayyf\i£ovTa.i '  cm.  k  Ss
Diat.vid  (i.e.,  \focs.  100).

These  words  belong  to  the  genuine  text  of  Lk.  7  22
and  are  in  accordance  with  Lk.'s  accustomed  diction.
In  Mt.,  on  the  other  hand,  the  word  evayye\i£fff6ai
never  occurs  again  :  if  the  phrase  omitted  by  k  and  Ss
be  retained,  we  must  almost  assume  that  Mt.  is  here
directly  borrowing  from  Lk.  Omit  the  phrase,  and  the
linguistic  difficulty  is  removed  ;  Mt.  gives  the  actual
words  of  Jesus,  whilst  Lk.  's  addition  '  the  poor  are
evangelised  '  is  an  early  (and  correct)  interpretation  of
them.  Similarly  vo/j.ii<6s  in  Mt.  22 35  is  alien  to  the
diction  of  the  First  Gospel  and  comes  from  Lk.  lOss  :
the  word  is  rightly  omitted  from  Mt.  by  1-118-209
e  Ss  Arm  Origen  lat-

Harmonistic  additions  are  among  the  most  frequent
and  misleading  corruptions  of  the  text,  as  Jerome  was
the  first  to  see  :  '  dum  eundem  sensum  alius  aliter  ex-
pressit,  ille  que  unum  e  quattuor  prinmm  legerat,  ad
eius  exemplum  ceteros  quoque  aestimauerit  emendandos'
(/•'/.  ad  Damasum}.  Other  passages  where  the  dis
covery  of  Ss  has  helped  to  remove  additions  of  this  kind
are  Mt.  21  44  (taken  from  Lk.  20i8)  ;  Lk.  11  33  oiW  virb
rbv  /j.6SLov  (Mt.  5 15)  ;  Jn.  128  'For  the  poor  ye  have
always  with  you,  but  me  ye  have  not  always'  (taken
from  Mk.  147,  Mt.  26n,  but  omitted  in  Jn.  by  D
Ss).

iii.  Mt.  25 1  'went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom
and  the  bride'  D  i*-2og  124*  Latt  Syrr  (incl.  Ss)
Arm.  This  addition  is  certainly  genuine,  and  in  ac
cordance  with  Oriental  custom.  The  bridegroom  goes
with  his  friends  to  bring  away  the  bride  from  her  father's
home  ;  no  one  is  left  at  the  bridegroom's  house  but  a
few  'virgins'  (i.e.,  maidservants)  to  keep  watch.  In
the  parable  these  maidservants  represent  the  church
(as  in  Lk.  1236),  whilst  the  arrival  of  the  wedding  pro
cession  with  the  bridegroom  and  his  bride  represents  the
coming  of  Christ.  Christ  is  here  the  bridegroom  and
the  bride  ;  the  waiting  servants  are  the  church.  But
the  more  familiar  image  was  the  comparison  of  Christ
to  the  bridegroom,  the  church  to  the  bride  ;  when  the
Bride  had  become  the  stock  metaphor  for  the  church,
the  careless  editor  had  a  strong  temptation  to  leave  it
out  in  the  parable  where  it  does  not  mean  the  church.

iv.  Mt.  832  '  Kal  Trapprjfflq.  rbv  \oyov  i  AdXet. '  These
words  come  after  the  first  announcement  of  the  Passion,
without  variation  in  Greek  MSS.  As  they  stand  they
are  a  remark  of  the  evangelist,  to  which  there  is  nothing

1  I.e.,  cod.  Claromontanus  of  the  6th  century.  D  has  the
itacism  ANOlIe-

4991


corresponding  in  the  parallel  passages  Mt.  1621,  Lk.
l<22  :  either  the  remark  was  considered  too  uninteresting
to  repeat,  or  it  originally  contained  something  which
later  writers  might  regard  as  unsuitable.  For  tf .  31/1,
Ss  Diatar  and  k  have  '  the  Son  of  Man  must  suffer
many  things  .  .  .  and  after  the  third  day  rise  and
openly  speak  the  word  ' — i.e. ,  they  read  \a\elv  or  €K\a-
\tif  instead  of  e'XdXei,  thereby  making  the  clause  part
of  Jesus'  word  to  the  disciples.  The  central  thought,
therefore,  of  the  prediction  is  not  the  physical  miracle
but  the  general  victory  of  the  Gospel  after  the  great
struggle  (cp  Hos.  62/. ).  That  Jesus  did  not  preach
1  openly '  after  the  Resurrection  was  a  reason  why  the
clause  should  be  omitted  by  Mt.  and  Lk. ,  and  at  a  later
period  should  be  altered  in  Mk.  ;  but  the  agreement
here  of  our  earliest  eastern  and  western  texts  enables  us
to  restore  the  original  form  with  confidence.

v.  The  restoration  of  the  true  texts  of  Acts  is  a  more
difficult  matter  than  that  of  the  Gospels  owing  to  the
comparative  poverty  of  the  evidence.  We  need  especi
ally  something  corresponding  to  the  'Old  Syriac,'  by
the  aid  of  which  we  might  separate  really  ancient  read
ings  in  the  Old  Latin  and  in  D  from  those  western
variants  that  never  had  anything  beyond  a  local  circula
tion.  Several  of  the  proper  names  are  undoubtedly
corrupt.  E.g. ,  'lovdaiav  Acts  2g  is  impossible,  for
Judaea  is  quite  out  of  place  between  Mesopotamia  and
Cappadocia.  The  African  Latin  (Tert.  adv.  Jud.  7,
Aug.  c.  Fund.}  substituted  Armeniam ;  but  this  is
palaeographically  unlikely  :  possibly  Lk.  wrote
TOpAyAiAN  —  *-e->  Gonlyrta,  now  Kurdistan,  vi.  In
Acts  46  'Iwdvvris  is  a  mistake  for  'luvdOas,  the  true
name  being  preserved  only  in  I),  in  Berger's  I'erpignan
MS  and  (as  E.  Nestle  points  out)  ip  Lagarde's  OS
69  18  :  on  the  other  hand  the  Fleury  palimpsest  (h]  is
said  to  have  [Io~\fiannes,  and  we  may  conjecture  from
the  Doctrine  of  Addai  11  23  that  the  Old  Syriac  attested
Onias.  vii.  In  Acts  138  the  present  writer  has  a  strong
suspicion  that  the  mysterious  name  'EXi'/ios,  for  which
erot/xos  is  read  or  inferred  in  several  Western  documents,
is  a  corruption  of  6  Xot/xos,  '  the  pestilent  fellow '  (cp
Acts  24s).  But  conjectures  of  this  kind  stand  on

quite  a  different  footing  from  those  restorations  of  the
text  which  are  based  on  a  consenus  of  the  most  ancient
evidence.  If  we  are  to  feel  any  confidence  that  this  or
that  phrase  or  variant  is  the  actual  word  of  the  original
writer,  it  must  be  because  we  can  really  trace  back  the
phrase  in  question  to  the  earliest  times,  not  because  it
happens  to  have  commended  itself  to  some  critic  of  the
ancient  or  modern  world.

In  addition  to  Hort's  Introduction  (above,  §  7),  the  following
works  on  NT  textual  criticism  may  be  recommended.  E.
Nestle,  Introd.  to  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  Creek  NT
(Theological  Translation  Library,  vol.  xiii.),  1901,  F.  G.  Ken-
yon,  Handbook  to  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  NT,  1901.
K.  Lake,  The  Text  of  the  NT  (elementary),  1900.  G.  Salmon,
Some  Thoughts  on  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  NT,  1897.
C.  R.  Gregory,  Textkritik  des  NT,  vol.  i.,  1900:  this  will  be  a
separate  edition  of  the  Prolegomena  to  '  Tischendorf/  brought
up  to  date.  A  new  and  important  work  on  textual  criticism  is
announced  (1902)  by  H.  von  Soden.

B. VERSIONS
I. LATIN

Latin  versions  of  the  scriptures  can  be  traced  back  into

the  second  century. The  Scillitan  martyrs  at  Carthage

T  in  the  year  1 80  A.  D.  had  in  their  case  of

13.  Latin  ver-  roUs  ,epistles  of  Paul  the  just  man/i

sions  :  first Wha{  type  of  text  {hese  MSS  may  have

traces. contained it is of course  impossible

directly  to  determine  ;  but  the  occasional  references  of

Tertullian  (e.g. ,  adv.  Prax.  §  5)  to  the  translation  then

in  common  use  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  belief  that

it  was  of  the  same  general type  as  that  found in  the

many  biblical  quotations  of  Cyprian.

To  Cyprian,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  latest

1  Texts  and  Studies,  i.  2  114.
4992


origin.


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

investigator  of  his  style,1  the  Latin  version  seemed
'  clumsily  executed  and  quite  modern  ' ;  but  he  quotes  it
continually  with  remarkable  accuracy,  and  never  seems
to  question  the  correctness  of  the  renderings.  The
natural  inference  is  that  Cyprian  in  the  middle  of  the
third  century  found  a  definite  Latin  text  established  as
an  authoritative  standard  in  Cartilage.

We  are  able  to  carry  back  the  history  one  stage
farther.  The  quotations  of  Novatian,  Cyprian's  Roman
contemporary,  give  us  the  text  current  in  Rome,  just
as  Cyprian's  quotations  give  us  the  text  current  in
Carthage.  To  them  \ve  may  add  the  few  verses
quoted  by  the  Roman  presbyters  Moyses  and  Maxi-
mus  in  their  letter  to  Cyprian  (ap.  Cypr.  Ep.  31,
§  4).  These  quotations  present  marked  differences
from  the  Cyprianic  text,  as  well  as  marked  agreements
with  it  ;  we  are,  therefore,  justified  in  assuming  for  both
the  Carthaginian  and  the  Roman  types  a  common
origin,  which  at  the  same  time  must  have  been  sufficiently
remote  to  allow  for  the  development  of  the  characteristic
differences  between  the  two  texts.

No  tradition  of  the  origin  or  literary  history  of  the
Latin  versions  seems  to  have  been  known  even  to
14  Their  -^u»ust'ne  or  Jerome  ;  it  remains  an  open
question  whether  the  first  translation  was
made  in  Roman  Africa,  in  Italy,  or  in  Gaul.
What  is  certain  is  that  by  the  middle  of  the  fourth
century,  Latin  biblical  MSS  exhibited  a  most  confusing
variety  of  text,  caused  at  least  in  part  by  revision  from
later  Greek  MSS  as  well  as  by  modifications  of  the
Latin  phraseology.  This  confusion  lasted  until  all  the
'Old  Latin'  (or  '  ante-Hieronymian ')  texts  were  sup
planted  by  the  revised  version  of  Jerome  (383-400  A.D. ),
which  was  undertaken  at  the  request  of  Pope  Damasus
and  ultimately  became  the  Vulgate  of  the  Western
church.

We  are  thus  driven  back  on  evidence  other  than
tradition  to  classify  our  MSS — to  find,  if  possible,  the
local  texts  which  they  respectively  represent.  This
classification  is  the  more  necessary  as  the  primary
importance  of  the  Old  Latin  versions  lies  in  their  age.
The  '  Old  Latin '  may  go  back  to  the  second  century  ;
but  before  any  particular  Old  Latin  reading  can  be
safely  treated  as  second-century  evidence  we  require  at
least  prima  facie  proof  that  the  document  in  which  it
occurs  has  a  text  which  has  largely  escaped  revision
from  later  Greek  MSS.

In  classifying  our  Old  Latin  authorities  each  group  of
books  must  be  treated  separately.  As  a  matter  of  fact,

15.  Classification.  th^  different  groups  have  had  differ-
ent  literary  fates.  In  the  Gospels,
the  Psalms,  and  Isaiah,  we  find  a  maze  of  aberrant
texts  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  book  of  Wisdom  seems
never  to  have  undergone  a  thorough  revision  in
later  times,  and  the  text  of  Cyprian's  citations  here
hardly  differs  from  the  printed  Vulgate.

The  necessary  starting-point  is  supplied  by  the  biblical
quotations  in  the  Latin  Fathers.  Some  of  the  evidence,
however,  derived  from  this  source  must  be  used  with
great  caution.

i.  It  is  rarely  possible  to  take  the  many  scriptural  allusions
in  Tertullian's  works  as  literal  representations  of  the  biblical
text  current  in  Carthage  in  his  day.  They  are,  in  fact,  so  unlike
any  surviving  type  of  the  Latin  versions  that  it  is  maintained  by
Zahn2and  others  that  the  Bible  had  not  been  translated  into
Latin  in  Tertullian's  time.  Even  those,  however,  who  place  the
origin  of  the  Latin  Bible  earlier  than  Tertullian  admit  that  he
often  translates  directly  from  the  Greek.  A  clear  instance  of
this  is  tie  Came  Christi  §  20,  where  Mt.  1  16  is  quoted  in  agree
ment  with  the  ordinary  Greek  reading  against  the  combined
testimony  of  all  the  older  Latin  texts.

ii.  A  great  uncertainty  hangs  over  the  age  of  the  Latin  trans
lation  of  Irenjcus's  work  against  Heresies.  If  it  be  contemporary
with  the  author  it  becomes  a  primary  witness  for  the  Gallican
text.  Some,  however,  including  Hort,  have  placed  it  in  the
fourth  century,  and  this  is  undoubtedly  the  safer  view.

iii.  One  of  our  chief  authorities,  the  Testimonia.  of  Cyprian

1  E.  W.  Watson  in  Studio.  Biblica,  4  195.
2  Gesch.  d.  NT  Kanons,  1  51-60.

4993


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

(a  series  of  proof-texts  from  Scripture),  was  so  popular  in  the
Latin  church  that  certain  later  writers  quote  from  it  instead  of
using  the  Bible  directly.  In  so  far  as  this  is  done  these  writers
cease  to  be  independent  witnesses.  This  applies  to  Firmicus
Maternus,  Commodian,  Lactantius,  and  in  part  to  Lucifer  and
Zeno.

Fragments  at  least  of  eighteen  MSS  of  the  Old  Latin
Gospels  are  still  extant.  Of  these  only  one — the  Latin

16 The °f  Codex  Bezoe  ((/)— is  a  bilingual. Five

Gospels °f  these  MSS — vis"  codd-  Vercellensis  (a),

Veronensis (b), Palatinus  (e), Sangallensis

(«),  Bobiensis  (A), — as  well  as  d  itself,  are  of  the  fourth

or  the  fifth  century,  having  therefore  been  transcribed

at  a  time  when  the  Old  Latin  was  in  full  church  use.

Hort  was  the  first  to  point  out  the  close  connection
of  the  texts  of  k  and  e  with  the  many  and  accurate
quotations  of  Cyprian  (died  258).  Of  these  two  MSS
k  is  more  faithful  to  the  Cyprianic  standard  than  e  ;
but  both  are  quite  on  a  different  plane  from  the  rest  of
the  Latin  MSS.  We  may  therefore  take  the  text  of  k
and  e  as  representing  the  form  in  which  the  Gospels
were  read  at  Carthage  in  the  middle  of  the  third  century
before  the  Decian  persecution.  The  only  other  non-
Patristic  authorities  which  show  a  distinctive  African
(i.e.,  Cyprianic)  character  are  the  contemporary  correc
tions  in  the  text  of  «  (esp.  in  Lk.  and  Mk. ),  corrections
which  must  have  been  made  from  a  MS  very  like  e,  and
isolated  sections  (e.g. ,  the  last  chapters  of  Lk. )  in  the
late  MS  c  (Colbertinus).

The  character  of  the  '  African  Latin '  differs  much
from  other  Old  Latin  texts  both  in  language  and  in  the
underlying  Greek  text.1  But  one  fact  stands  out  above
all  others — its  unlikeness  to  the  eclectic  texts  of  the
fourth  century,  both  Greek  and  Latin.

For  the  most  part  the  interpolations  of  this,  the  oldest  con
tinuous  Latin  text  of  the  Gospels  that  has  come  down  to  us,  are
to  a  large  extent  not  the  interpolations  of  the  eclectic  texts,  and
its  omissions  are  not  their  omissions  ;  moreover  its  renderings
are  not  the  renderings  of  the  later  revised  Latin  texts  such  as
the  Vulgate  and  its  immediate  predecessors.  All  this  tends  to
show  that  the  African  text  of  the  third  century  had  to  a  large
extent  escaped  revision  from  Greek  sources ;  in  other  words,
that  the  Greek  text  implied  by  k  and  its  companions  is  that
which  underlies  the  original  translation.

The  remaining  Old  Latin  MSS,  including  the  Latin
of  Cod.  Bezre,  may  be  classed  as  '  European, '  since
they  agree  with  the  European  Fathers  against  the
peculiar  African  renderings.  The  origin  of  this  type  of
text  is  still  obscure.  The  MSS  group  themselves  round
the  two  great  codices  a  and  b.  Of  these  />  occupies  a
central  position,  the  other  MSS  differing  from  one
another  more  than  they  differ  from  it.  At  the  same
time  it  may  be  doubted  whether  a  does  not  represent  an
earlier  stage  of  the  European  text,  as  the  quotations  of
Novatian  (the  Roman  contemporary  of  Cyprian)  pre
dominantly  favour  a  against  b,  so  far,  that  is,  as  the
'  European '  type  is  developed  in  them.  This  is  especi
ally  the  case  in  Jn. ,  where  the  a  text  is  also  supported
by  Lucifer  of  Cagliari.  On  this  view  'African'  read
ings  found  in  a  are  relics  of  the  earlier  form  of  the
'  European  '  text.  On  the  other  hand  b  is  the  oldest
representative  of  that  stage  of  the  European  text  from
which  most  of  the  later  forms  of  the  Old  Latin,  and
finally  the  Vulgate,  are  descended.

Some  of  the  later  Latin  texts  have  been  partially
conformed  to  the  Antiochian  Greek  text.  The  most
prominent  surviving  example  is  Cod.  Brixianus  (/"),  a
Gospel  MS  of  the  sixth  century.  It  has  been  con
jectured  that  MSS  of  this  type  were  referred  to  by
Augustine  under  the  term  Itala  and  that  they  formed
the  basis  of  Jerome's  revision.  But  it  is  much  more
probable  that  Augustine's  Itala  means  the  Vulgate  ;
see  below  (§  59).  The  peculiar  element  of/  is  derived
from  the  codices  of  the  Gothic  version  brought  into  X.
Italy  by  the  Lombards  and  perhaps  by  previous  northern
invaders  during  the  fifth  and  the  sixth  century,  whilst
the  agreement  of  /  and  the  Vulgate  (which  in  parts  is

1  See  especially  Sanday's  essay  on  the  text  of  k  in  Old  Latin
Ptiblical  Texts,  vol.  ii.

4994


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

very  marked)  is  most  likely  due  to  the  intrusion  of
Vulgate  readings  into  the  text  of/.1

Many  '  Antiochian '  readings  are  found  in  the  Vulgate,  as  is
only  natural  in  a  revision  undertaken  by  the  aid  of  Greek  MSS
at  the  end  of  the  fourth  century.  Some  noteworthy  agreements
of  the  Vulgate  with  the  Greek  MSS  X  and  H  are  also  found,
especially  in  the  Acts  :  this  points  to  a  use  of  the  great  library
at  Caesarea.  Jerome  gave  special  heed  to  the  elimination  of
harmonistic  corruptions  and  to  correcting  the  rendering  of
important  doctrinal  expressions.  A  well-known  instance  of  the
latter  is  the  introduction  of  supersiibstntitialetii  into  the  Lord's
Prayer  in  Mt.  instead  ofcotidianum,  to  render  tiriouo-iof.  Quite
as  characteristic  is  mundus  for  6  Koo^of  in  Jn.,  hie  tnundus  being
reserved  for  o  Kocr/xo?  of  ros.2

The African text of the Pauline epistles is im
perfectly  preserved. The  version  used  by  Cyprian is
p . . not  represented  in  any  known  MS,  though
1  . au  me  some  Of  jts  pecui;ar  renderings  reappear

epis  es.  jn  tne  no{  inconsiderable  quotations  of
Tyconius  (flor.  380).  Entirely  distinct  from  these,  and
representing  a  different  Greek  original,  is  the  text  of
Gal.  5  igff-  as  quoted  by  Nemesianus  of  Thubunoe  at
the  Council  of  Carthage  (256  A.D. ),  a  text  which  has
points  of  contact  with  Tertullian  (cp  de  Pudic.  §  i/).3

Among  European  texts  the  Latin  of  cod.  Claromon-
tanus  (D2  </2)  holds  a  high  place.  The  twin  texts  of
bilingual  MSS  are  always  open  to  the  suspicion  of
having  been  greatly  assimilated  one  to  another.  In  the
case  of  d2,  however,  the  genuine  Old  Latin  character  of
the  text  is  vindicated  by  its  frequent  agreement  with  the
quotations  of  Lucifer  of  Cagliari  (t3?o).  The  curious
interlinear  Latin  version  of  Cod.  Bocrnerianus  (G3g3)  is
not  predominantly  supported  by  any  Latin  writer,  and
perhaps  ought  not  to  be  reckoned  among  continuous
Old  Latin  authorities.  The  revised  text  used  by
Augustine  in  this  part  of  the  NT  is  represented  by
fragments  of  two  MSS  formerly  at  Freising,  now  at
Munich  (r,  r2).

In  the  Vulgate  itself  comparatively  few  changes
appear  to  have  been  made  by  Jerome  in  the  Pauline
Epistles,  so  that  it  may  almost  be  reckoned  among  the
late  Old  Latin  texts.  On  the  other  hand  the  Gothic-
Latin  MS  usually  quoted  as  gue  has  very  little  inde
pendent  value,  as  the  Latin  has  been  assimilated  to  the
parallel  Gothic  text.

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  absent  from  the
original  form  of  the  Latin  canon,  and  it  is  not  quoted
by  Cyprian  or  Tyconius,  nor  apparently  by  Irenreus.
Tertullian  quotes  it  once  (de  Pudic.  §  20),  but  not  as
scripture  ;  as  in  the  other  parts  of  the  NT  the  version
he  uses  does  not  agree  with  any  other  Latin  authority.
It  is,  therefore,  of  interest  to  observe  that  the  text  of
Hebrews  in  d.2  stands  on  the  same  footing  with  that  of
the  rest  of  the  epistles,  the  agreement  with  Lucifer
being  there  as  clearly  marked  as  elsewhere,  although  in
the  MS  itself  the  epistle  forms  a  sort  of  appendix  at  the
end.  The  epistle  also  occurs  in  the  Freising  MS,  with
the  text  of  which  the  quotations  of  Augustine  agree.

The '  Western '  text  of  Acts  is  found  in  nearly  all
Old  Latin  authorities  (see  col.  4996,  n.  3)  ;  in  attempt
ing  therefore  to  trace  their  mutual  connec-
18 Acts

tion  we  must  chiefly  be  guided  by  the  style

of  the  Latin  renderings.  The  mere  presence  of  Western
glosses  in  a  Latin  source,  such  as  Augustine,  tells  us
little  of  his  relation,  e.g. ,  to  the  Latin  of  Cod.  Bezee.

The  most  important  quotations  are  found  in  Irenasus,
Tertullian,  Cyprian,  Augustine,  Lucifer  of  Cagliari,
and  the  anonymous  African  tract  de  Rebaptismate

1  F. C. Burkitt,  Journ. o/  Thcol,  Studies,  1  1 29- 1 34  : Fr.
Kauffmann's  '  Beitrage  zur  Quellenkritik  der  gotischen Bibel-
iibersetzung  5,'  in  Ztsch.f.  deiitsche  Philologie,  32  305-335.

2  In  Jn.  10  16  the  Vulgate,  against  all  Greek  MSS,  substitutes
unum  ouile  ('one  fold')  for the Old Latin units grex  ('one
flock  '),  and  from  the  Vulgate  was  derived  the  familiar  rendering
of  the  authorised  version. The  Vulgate  rendering  of  this  verse  has
been  used  by  Wordsworth  and  White  in  support  of  their  view
that  Jerome  used  Greek  MSS  of  a  type  of  text  now  lost. See,
however,  J.  H.  Bernard  in  Hermathena,  11  335-342.

s  For  Nemesianus  see  C.  H.  Turner  in  Journ.  of  Theol.
Studies,  IbmJjF.

4995


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

(usually  bound  up  with  Cyprian).  Of  MSS  we  have
besides  the  Latin  of  the  bilinguals  Cod.  Bezae  (</)  and
Cod.  Laudianus  (<-2),  large  fragments  of  an  African  text
in  the  sixth-century  palimpsest  Cod.  Floriacensis  (h},  a
complete  European  text  in  Cod.  Gigas  Holmensis  (g),
and  1-136  2Si6-end  in  a  (?)  Spanish  text  published  by
Berger  from  a  MS  once  at  Perpignan  (/).  There  are
also  fragments  of  a  late  European  text  in  a  fifth-century
palimpsest  at  Vienna  (s),  now  published  by  H.  J.  White.
The  '  Acta '  of  Augustine's  dispute  with  Felix  the
Manichee  at  Hippo  in  404  A.D.  should  almost  be
counted  among  the  MSS,  for  in  them  Augustine  reads
from  a  codex  the  continuous  text  of  Actsl-2n  (see
below,  §  21).

The  most  primitive  form  represented  by  these  MSS  is
that  found  in  h,  the  text  of  which  is  almost  exactly  that
of  Cyprian  and  also  of  Augustine.  That  the  text  con
tained  in  g  is  ancient,  although  the  MS  is  only  of  the
thirteenth  century,  is  proved  by  its  close  agreement  with
the  quotations  of  Lucifer,  where  it  agrees  with  as  well
as  where  it  differs  from  the  Vulgate.

This  type  of  text  is  also  found  in  a  Milan  lectionary  (g>fo  con
taining  the  story  of  Stephen,  and  to  some  extent  in  s',  it  reappears,
strange  to  say,  in  the  non-Vulgate  portions  of  the  '  Liber
Co»iicu»t,'  a  Visigothic  lectionary  published  by  Morin.  The
text  of/  differs  greatly  from  g,  and  seems  to  have  most  affinity
with  the  very  scanty  extracts  in  the  Speculum  (in)  which  run
parallel  to  it.  The  not  unfrequent  agreements  of/  with  <'2  seem
rather  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  each  is  a  very  literal  version  of
the  Greek  than  to  real  kinship  of  text.  The  Latin  columns  of
the  two  bilinguals  d  and  f%,  as  we  might  almost  expect,  agree
closely  with  no  ancient  Latin  text.1  The  renderings  found  in
the  quotations  of  Tertullian  and  the  Latin  translation  of  Irenasus
here  as  in  other  parts  of  the  Bible  do  not  agree  consistently
with  any  other  authority.

With  regard  to  the  underlying  Greek,  Irenaeus  and
the  Africans  together  with  the  Perpignan  MS  all  go
back  to  a  Greek  text  such  as  that  of  Codex  Beza;,  but
comparatively  seldom  afford  any  real  support  to  the
eccentricities  of  its  Latin  side.  It  is  probable  that  the
'Western'  element  of  E2  (Laudianus)  is  ultimately  of
Latin  origin.2  This,  however,  but  rarely  gives  an
independent  value  to  the  Latin  side  of  the  existing  MS,
except  where  E2  stands  alone  among  Greek  authorities.
Whatever  the  history  of  the  ancestors  of  Cod.  Laudianus
may  have  been,  in  our  MS  the  Greek  and  the  Latin  are
almost  completely  equated  to  each  other.  The  pages
indeed  have  quite  the  appearance  of  a  glossary.

In  the  later  European  text  represented  by  g  and
Lucifer  the  '  Western '  glosses  have  been  to  some  extent
corrected  out.  This  is  true  still  more  of  the  Vulgate,
which  in  Acts  not  unfrequently  follows  the  Greek  text
approved  by  modern  critical  editors.

A  very  remarkable  type — a  third-century  African  text
as  far  as  regards  renderings,  but  without  the  '  Western  '
glosses— is  found  in  the  anonymous  tract  de  Rebaptis-
mate.

It  reflects  in  fact  the  isolated  position  of  the  writer,  who,
although  a  contemporary  of  Cyprian,  differed  from  the  majority
of  the  Africans  in  the  biblical  text  he  used,  as  he  differed  from
them  on  the  question  of  the  Rebaptism  of  heretics.3  The
literary  history  of  Acts  in  Latin  can  never  be  regarded  as  de
finitely  settled  until  the  appearance  of  this  curious  text  is
sufficiently  accounted  for.

The  full  collection  of  seven  Catholic  epistles  which
usually  follows  Acts  in  Greek  MSS  was


19.  Catholic


not included in the Latin canon until


epistles. the fourth century Only  j Pet and
i Jn. with Jude had hitherto been universally re-

1  This  contrasts  strongly  with  the  perfect  agreement  between
e<i  and  Beda,  who  actually  used  the  Cod.  Laudianus  itself.

2  Blass,  Acta  Apl.  p.  z8/

3  The  phraseology  of  the  quotations  in  the  de  Rcbaptismate
is  almost  always  that  of  the  Cyprianic  Bible. The  work  is  a
letter  apparently  addressed  to Cyprian  himself  (§  4,  §  10). It
is  possible  that  it  was  not  originally  composed  in  Latin,  and  that


we  possess  only  the  Latin  translation,  as  in  the  parallel  case  of
Firmilian's  letter  to  Cyprian  (ap.  Cypr.  P.p.  75).  This  would
account  both  for  the  African  phrases  and  for  the  non-African  text.
It  is  worth  noticing  that  the  de  Refraptismate  contains  a  clear
allusion  to  Mk.  16  14  (§  9,  end  :  non  crcdidenint,  mApOStmtOMl*
ab  ipso  Domino  omnibus  modis  fuissent  obiurgati  atque
increpati).

4996


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

ceived,  although  2  Jn.  is  also  quoted  by  some  early
Fathers.

The  extant  Old  Latin  authorities  for  this  division  of
the  NT  are  as  follows  : — (i. )  Of  the  Old  African  version
no  MS  is  known  ;  but  we  have  the  quotations  of  Cyprian
from  i  Pet.  (called  ad  Ponticos,  as  in  Tertullian)  and
i  Jn.  With  these,  on  the  whole,  agree  the  quotations
of  Tyconius.  A  verse  from  2  Jn.  is  quoted  by  one  of
the  Bishops  at  the  Council  of  Carthage,  (ii. )  A  later
African  revision,  including  all  the  seven  epistles  is  found
in  Augustine.  Of  this  revision  we  have  two  MSS,  A  at
Paris  (fragments  of  i  and  2  Pet. ,  i  Jn. )  and  q  at
Munich  (a  large  fragment  of  i  Jn.).  h  is  the  same
Cod.  Floriacensis  as  in  Acts,  but  in  the  Cath.  Epp.
the  text  is  not  Cyprianic,  but  late  African.  A  peculiar
recension  is  found  in  the  pseudo-Augustinian  Speculum
(;«),  in  which  the  extracts  from  Jas.  agree  very  closely
with  the  quotations  of  the  Spanish  heretic  Priscillian.
This  late  Spanish  type  of  text  is  noteworthy  as  the
original  source  of  the  famous  gloss  of  the  Three
Heavenly  Witnesses  in  i  Jn.  67.  (iii. )  Among  Euro
pean  texts  we  have  the  extensive  quotations  of  Lucifer,
including  more  than  half  of  Jude  ;  fragments  of  Jas.
and  i  Pet.  are  also  found  in  s  (see  §  18).  Of  Jas.  a
complete  text  is  extant  in  a  non-biblical  MS  formerly  at
Corbey,  now  at  St.  Petersburg  (ff}.  This  translation
appears  to  be  as  old  as  the  early  part  of  the  fourth
century,  and  is  apparently  used  by  Chromatius  of
Aquileia.  A  fragment  of  3  Jn.  is  found  in  Cod.  Bezre,
immediately  before  Acts  ;  but  it  must  remain  a  matter
of  conjecture  what  other  books  that  MS  once  contained
between  the  Gospels  and  Acts.1

The  Apocalypse  from  the  first  formed  part  of  the
Latin  XT,  and  in  Africa  the  ecclesiastical  version  of  it

20.  Apocalypse.  does not  ,seefm  l°  have  suffered  *T
v J* vision  in  the  fourth  century  as  was  the

case  with  the  rest  of  the  XT,  except  Acts.  Hence  it
comes  to  pass  that  the  '  late  African  '  text  of  the  Apoca
lypse,  as  given  almost  in  full  in  the  Commentary  of
Primasius,  bishop  of  Hadrumetum  in  the  sixth  century,
differs  but  little  from  the  Cyprianic  text.  The  same
text  is  also  found  in  the  fragments  of  Cod.  h  (see  above,
§  i&f. ).  A  somewhat  different  type  appears  in  the
Commentary  of  Tyconius,  large  fragments  of  which
are  preserved  in  Primasius,  in  Beatus  the  Spaniard,
and  in  other  sources.  Beside  these  a  late  European
text  is  extant  in  g  (see  above,  §  18)  ;  but  Lucifer  avoids
quoting  the  Apocalypse  altogether.  A  third  type  of
text  seems  to  underly  the  Vulgate,  which  has  affinities
both  with  g  and  with  the  African  text.

In certain circles  some parts of  Jerome's revised

translation  were  received  immediately  into  Church  use.

21 H'  torv ^"mSl  f°r  instance, was  the  case  at  Hippo.

„  , , y  Augustine, whilst writing to  Jerome in

Vuljrate  ^°3  A-  °'  l°  dePrecate  his  Sreat  changes
in  the  OT,  nevertheless  says  :  '  Proinde
non  paruas  Deo  gratias  agimus  de  opere  tuo  quod
Euangelium  ex  Grreco  interpretatus  es,  quia  pcene  in
omnibus  nulla  offensio  est. '  This  limitation  of  his
praise  to  the  Gospel  is  confirmed  by  the  story  of  the
trial  of  Felix  the  Manichee  in  the  following  year  (see
above,  §  18).  At  the  trial  Augustine  had  occasion  to
read  from  the  XT  the  story  of  the  descent  of  the  Spirit.
Accordingly  there  was  handed  to  him  first  a  Codex  of
the  Gospels,  from  which  he  read  Lk.  2436-49  in  the
Vulgate  text  ;  then  being  given  a  Codex  of  Acts,  he
read  out  Actsli-'2n  in  a  very  pure  African  Old  Latin
text.  The  fact  that  the  text  of  Acts  as  here  given  is
quite  unmixed  with  Vulgate  readings  shows  that  our  MSS
of  '  Aug.  contra  Felicem  '  have  suffered  no  wholesale  cor
ruption  ;  we  cannot  therefore  but  conclude  that  by  404
A.  u.  the  Gospels  were  read  at  Hippo  from  the  Vulgate,

1  The  vacant  space  would  suggest  that  the  missing  books  are
the  Apocalypse,  and  all  three  Johannine  epp. ,  making  up
with  the  Fourth  Gospel  the  complete  Iiutrumentum  lohannis
(Tert.  de  Res.  Carnis,  §  38).

4997


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

whilst  in  other  books  of  the  Bible, such  as  Acts,  the
unrevised  Old  Latin  was  still  publicly  used.

In  some  parts  of  the  Western  Empire  the  old  versions
were  long  retained  in  ecclesiastical  use,  especially  in
Gaul  and  N.  Italy.  This  resulted  in  the  formation  of
mixed  texts,  sometimes  by  the  insertion  of  familiar  Old
Latin  phrases  into  Vulgate  MSS,  but  more  often  by  the
imperfect  correction  of  the  codices  of  the  old  versions  to
the  Vulgate  standard.  These  principles  were  in  action
in  all  parts  of  the  Latin  church  ;  but  they  produced
somewhat  different  types  of  text  owing  to  the  different
epochs  at  which  the  Vulgate  text,  as  current  in  Rome
and  S.  Italy  generally,  was  brought  in  among  the
various  nationalities.

Some  of  the  most  interesting  texts  of  the  Vulgate  come
from  the  British  Isles.  Both  Great  Britain  and  Ireland
had  received  the  Bible  before  the  victory  of  Jerome's
revision  ;  but  the  coming  of  the  heathen  English  almost
entirely  destroyed  Christianity  in  what  is  now  England.
The  mission  of  Augustine  brought  the  Vulgate  with  it,
and  the  careful  English  scholars  of  Xorthumbria  looked
to  Rome  and  S.  Italy  for  patterns  of  text,  rather  than
to  north-western  Europe.  A  product  of  the  Xorth-
umbrian  school  is  the  Codex  Amiatinus,  now  at  Florence,
the  leading  MS  of  the  Vulgate  both  in  the  Old  and  in  the
Xew  Testament.  This  great  book  appears  to  have  been
copied  from  a  Xeapolitan  text  ;  it  was  written  at  Jarrow
or  Wearmouth  a  little  before  716  A.D.  and  was  brought
to  Italy  as  a  present  to  the  Pope  by  the  Abbot  Ceolfrid.

The  Irish,  until  after  the  time  of  Columba,  adhered
to  the  Old  Latin  ;  one  fairly  pure  Irish  Old  Latin  text
of  the  Gospels  survives  in  Cod.  Usserianus  (/•).  From
about  the  year  700,  however,  the  Roman  tonsure  and
the  Roman  text  began  to  make  way  among  the  Irish
also,  and  this  resulted  in  the  prevalence  of  a  mixed  type
of  MSS  of  which  the  Book  of  Kells  and  the  Book  of
Armagh  are  noteworthy  examples.  A  similar  type  of
text  is  found  also  in  MSS  written  in  Britain,  represent
ing  the  fusion  of  lona  and  Rome.

Simultaneous  with  the  re-establishment  of  a  Western  Kmpire
under  Charlemagne  came  efforts  for  improvement  of  the  Vulgate
text.  Hence  arose  the  two  great  eclectic  editions  of  the  ninth
century :  that  of  Theodulfm  Orleans,  who  aimed  at  collecting
a  large  body  of  variants  in  the  form  of  marginal  notes  ;  and  that
of  Alcuin  of  York,  who  at  the  express  desire  of  the  great
Emperor  constructed  a  standard  text.  Alcuin's  revision  was
presented  to  Charlemagne  on  Christmas  Day,  801  A.D.,  and
although  his  text  was  soon  corrupted  in  minor  details  his  work
marks  a  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  Vulgate.  '  Up  to
the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  .  .  .  we  find  a  distressing
jumble  of  the  best  and  the  worst  texts  existing  side  by  side,
the  ancient  versions  mixed  with  the  Vulgate  in  inextricable
confusion,  and  the  books  of  the  Bible  following  a  different  order
in  each  MS.  After  Alcuin  all  is  changed  ;  the  singularities
have  been  levelled,  the  text  has  become  more  equal  and  its
character  more  tame.  .  .  .  From  Alcuin's  time  onward  the
only  Bible  in  use  has  been  that  of  Jerome,  and  the  ancient
versions  have  disappeared  '  (Berger,  Vulgate,  p.  xvii).1

II. SYKIAC

Almost  everything  that  relates  to  the  origin  and  early
history  of  the  Syriac  versions  is  the  subject  of  contro-

22.  Three  early  versy" !"  U,ie  follow;ng  account  .an

Svr'ac  attempt  has  been  made  to  distinguish

versions  between what may be regarded as

proved  beyond  reasonable  doubt,  and

what  must  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge  remain  only

a  probability. It  will  be  necessary, in  discussing  the

earlier  forms  of  the  Syriac  versions,  to  take  the  various

parts  of  the  XT  one  by  one,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Old

Latin. The later Syriac versions will be described

subsequently  by  themselves.

The Four Gospels. — About the  year 420  A.D. the
Gospel  was  extant  in  Syriac  in  three  forms,  viz. —
(i. )  The  Peshifta,  or  Syriac  Vulgate.

1  The  Vulgate  was  first  printed  at  Mainz  between  1452  and
1456  ('  Mazarin  Kible ').  The  authoritative  edition  used  by  the
Roman  Church  was  issued  by  Clement  VIII.  in  1592.  A  critical
edition  of  the  NT  is  being  prepared  by  Bishop  J.  Wordsworth
and  the  Rev.  H.  J.  White,  of  which  the  volume  containing  the
Gospels  has  already  appeared  (Oxford,  1889-98).

4998


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


P v,ift

L'


(ii. )  Tatian's  Diatessaron.

(iii.)  The  '  Evangelion  da-Mepharreshe,'  or  Old
Syriac.

A  clear  idea  of  the  nature  of  these  three  documents
and  their  relation  to  one  another  is  necessary  for  a  right
use  of  the  Syriac  versions  in  the  criticism  of  the  Gospels.

(i. )  The  version  of  the  NT  which  alone  has  been  in
ecclesiastical  use  int  he  Syriac  church  since  the  middle
of  the  fifth  century,  is  known  by  the
name  1'lshitta  (or  Pe'sliittd  in  the
Jacobite  system  of  pronunciation) — i.e.  '  the  simple.'

The  name  Peshitta  was  in  use  as  early  as  the  ninth  or  the  tenth
century  ;  it  has  been  conjectured  that  it  originally  served  to
distinguish  the  Syriac  Vulgate  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments
from  the  Hexaplaric  version  of  the  OT  and  the  Harclean  of  the
NT  (see  below,  g§  30,  61),  editions  which  were  furnished  with
marginal  variants  and  other  critical  apparatus.

The  Peshitta  is  extant  in  many  MSS,  a  few  of  which
are  as  old  as  the  fifth  century.  All  of  them,  however,
represent  the  same  type  of  text  as  is  found  in  the
modern  editions.  It  was  first  printed  by  Widmanstad
(Vienna,  1555).  The  best  edition  of  the  Gospels  is
the  Tetraeuangelium  published  by  (the  late)  P.  E.
Pusey  and  G.  H.  Gwilliam  (Oxford,  1901).  A  small
American  edition  of  the  NT  in  the  Nestorian  character
(New  York,  1886,  etc. )  gives  an  excellent  text  in  a  very
handy  form.  Following  the  notation  of  Westcott  and
Hort,  I  shall  speak  of  the  Peshitta  as  Syriac  Vulgate.

(ii. )  The  Diatessaron,  a  harmony  of  the  Four  Gospels

composed  by  Tatian  the  pupil  of  Justin  Martyr,  at  one

_. time  took  the  place  of  the  separate  Four

,  '  Gospels  in  the  public  services  of  the

Syriac-speaking  church.  But  a  vigorous
effort  to  get  rid  of  it  was  made  by  the  bishops  during
the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century,  and  in  consequence
of  this  no  copy  of  the  Syriac  Diatessaron  is  now
known  to  survive.

Our  main  extant  authority  for  the  text  of  the  Syriac
Diatessaron  is  the  Commentary  of  Ephraim1  (ts73).
This  work  is  no  longer  extant  in  Syriac,  but  is  known  to
us  through  an  Armenian  translation.  A  few  express
quotations  from  the  original  work  survive  in  some  later
Syriac  commentaries  on  the  Gospels,  such  as  those  of
the  Nestorian  Isho'dad  and  the  Jacobite  Dionysius
Barsalibi.  A  complete  Arabic  version  of  the  Diates
saron,  made  early  in  the  eleventh  century,  has  been
published  by  Ciasca  from  two  MSS  (Rome,  1888) ;  this
was  not  made  from  the  Diatessaron  as  Ephraim  knew
it,  but  from  a  later  edition  in  which  the  text  had  been
almost  wholly  assimilated  to  the  text  of  the  Peshitta.'2
It  is  therefore  nearly  worthless  for  the  study  of  the  text
of  the  Diatessaron,  though  valuable  for  determining  the
arrangement  adopted  by  Tatian.3  The  Commentary  of
Ephraim  is  quoted  by  the  pages  of  a  Latin  rendering  of
the  Armenian,  published  in  1876  by  G.  Moesinger.

(iii. )  Another  version  of  the Four Gospels, distinct

from  the  Peshitta  (or  Syr. vg), was  called  Evangelion

- 'Old aa-^l?t'harr<'sh( — i-e- '  Gospel  of  the  Separ-

o'  •  ,  ated  (ones). '4  The  name  obviously  contains
y  '  a  reference  to  the  Diatessaron,  which  in
contradistinction  to  it  is  also  called  in  Syriac  Evangelion
da-Mfhallfte,  '  Gospel  of  the  Mixed. '  The  title  '  Sepa
rated  Gospels '  would  be  equally  applicable  to  the  Four

1  Ephraim  is  often  spoken  pt  as  Efihrem  Syrus,  and  as  '  the
Deacon  of  Edessa.1  The  Syriac  form  of  the  name  is  A/rent.

a  It  is  worth  notice  that  the  textual  history  of  the  Diatessaron
in  the  E.  is  largely  paralleled  by  its  history  in  the  W.,  where  it
is  extant  in  Cod.  Fuldensis  and  its  copies,  the  text  being
altogether  assimilated  to  the  Vulgate.  But  there  are  many
indications  that  it  had  formerly  existed  with  an  '  Old  Latin  '
text.  In  other  words,  the  text  of  the  Diatessaron,  so  far  as  we
are  able  to  trace  it,  was  always  in  process  of  being  assimilated
to  the  prevalent  local  text  of  the  Four  Gospels

3  English  translation  by  J.  Hamlyn  Hill,  The  Earliest  Life
of  Christ  (T.  &  T.  Clark,  1894),  and  (direct  from  the  Arabic)  by
H.  \V.  Hogg  in  Ante-Nicene  Christian  Library,  add.  vol.  pp.
35-138  (T.  &  T.  Clark,  1897).

4  Perhaps  '  Gospel  according  to  the  Separated  (Evangelists) '
is  a  nearer  translation,  the  particle  da  being  used  for  Kara  in  the
Syriac  titles  of  the  Gospels.

4999


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Gospels  as  read  in  the  Peshitta,  and  indeed  the  Peshitta
is  probably  intended  in  the  passage  where  Evangelion
da-i\l?pharrlshe  occurs  in  the  canons  of  Rabbula.1  On
the  other  hand,  the  Sinaitic  and  the  Nitrian  MSS  both
call  themselves  by  this  name,  and  Barsalibi  and  Bar
Bahlul  the  lexicographer  expressly  quote  from  the
Evangelion  da-Mfpharrtshe  the  reading  '  Jesus  Barab-
bas'  in  Mt.  27 17,  found  in  the  Sinaitic  MS.2

Two  codices  of  the  Evangelion  da-Mfpharrtsh'e  are  at
present  known  to  scholars,  viz.,  the  Sinai  palimpsest
(S.s),  and  the  Nitrian  MS  used  by  Cureton  (Sc).
The  Nitrian  MS,  now  B.M.  add.  14,451,  came  with
the  rest  of  the  library  of  the  Convent  of  S.  Mary
Deipara  in  1842-7  to  London,  where  its  peculiar  char
acter  was  shortly  afterwards  recognised  by  Cureton,
then  keeper  of  the  Oriental  MSS.  His  edition  of  the
MS  appeared  in  1858, 3  and  from  him  the  version  came
to  be  known  as  the  '  Curetonian.'  The  Sinai  palimpsest
was  discovered  at  the  Convent  of  S.  Catherine  on
Mount  Sinai  by  Mrs.  Lewis  and  Mrs.  Gibson  of  Cam
bridge  in  1892,  and  transcribed  in  the  following  year
by  the  late  R.  L.  Bensly,  J.  Rendel  Harris,  and  the
present  writer.

Sc  may  be  assigned  to  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century.  It
contained  the  Gospels  in  the  order  Mt.  Mk.  Jn.  Lk.  ;  but  all
that  is  now  extant  is  Mt.  11-832  1032-2825  Mk.  1617-20  Jn.
1  1-42  3  6-7  37  14  10-12  16-18  21-23  26-29  Lk.  2  48-8  16  7  33-10  12  17
1-2444,  or  less  than  half  of  the  whole.  Ss  is  perhaps  half  a

century  older  than  Sc.  It  contained  the  Gospels  in  the  usual
order  :  Mt.  Mk.  Lk.  Jn. ;  only  about  450  verses  (i.e.,  about  one
eighth  of  the  whole)  are  now  altogether  missing  ;  but  many  words
and  lines  are  illegible.  Most  of  the  gaps  in  Cureton 's  text  can
now  in  a  measure  be  filled  ;  but  for  the  history  of  the  text  the
value  of  Ss  lies  less  in  those  parts  where  it  supplements  Sc
than  in  those  where  the  two  MSS  run  parallel.  By  a  com
parison  of  these  portions  we  are  able  to  gain  some  idea  of  the
range  of  variation  found  in  the  codices  of  the  'Old  Syriac.'

Since  the  publication  of  Cureton's  Codex  in  1858,  a
discussion  has  gone  on  as  to  the  relative  age  of  the
26.  Relation  f  '""&li6n  ^'W^she  and  the
of  three  Peshitta.  Ihe  general  opinion  had
formerly  been  that  the  Peshitta,  much
in  its  present  state,  had  existed  ever  since  the  earliest
ages  of  the  Syriac-speaking  church.  The  defenders
of  that  opinion  rested  their  case  upon  the  common
reception  of  the  Peshitta  by  all  the  sects  into  which
Syriac  Chistendom  has  been  divided  from  the  end
of  the  fifth  century,  the  exclusive  use  of  the  Peshitta  by
Syriac  ecclesiastical  writers,  and  the  alleged  conservatism
of  Orientals.  The  first  of  these  arguments  proves,
indeed,  what  is  universally  acknowledged — that  the
Peshitta  had  already  attained  a  position  of  exclusive
authority  by  the  latter  part  of  the  fifth  century.  But
the  publication  of  a  mass  of  early  Syriac  works  during
the  last  fifty  years  has  materially  weakened  the  second
argument.  The  decisive  moment  is  the  episcopate  of
Rabbula,  bishop  of  Edessa  from  411-435  A.D.  From
that  time  the  NT  quotations  of  Syriac  writers  are  all
influenced  by  the  Peshitta,  beginning  with  Isaac  of
Antioch  (f46o).  But  the  quotations  in  Syriac  writers
earlier  than  Rabbula  agree  with  the  known  peculiarities
of  the  Diatessaron  and  the  Ev.  da-MUpharrlshe.  The
text  of  the  Diatessaron  itself,  as  known  to  us  from
Ephraim's  Commentary  and  the  few  but  express  quota
tions  of  later  writers,  very  closely  resembled  that  of  the
Ev.  da-Mfpharrlshe  without  being  identical  with  it.

1  The  codices  of  the  Psalter  in  the  Peshitta  bear  the  title
'  The  Book  of  the  Praises  of  David  du-Mi-pharreshe.' May  not
the  last  word  be  taken  to  mean  '  in  separate  (Psalms)  '?

2  The  Evangelion da-AIf'pharrcslie could  not  have  got  its
name  in  contradistinction  to  the  I'eshitta. The  only  piece  of
evidence  which  seems  to  suggest  this  unlikely  conclusion  is  the
above-quoted  statement  about  Jesus  fiarabbas,  which  is  repeated
word  for  word  by  Barsalibi  and  Bar  Bahlul. Probably,  there
fore,  they  each  took  it  from  some  older  scholion,  in  which  the
'  Old  Syriac  '  was  contrasted,  not  with  the  Syriac  Vulgate,  but
with the Diatessaron. It is possible that Evangelion da-
Mepharreshl  in  Rabbula's  canons  (Overbeck,  '2-0  3)  means  any
MS  of  the  Four  Gospels  as  opposed  to  a  MS  of  the  Diatessaron.

3  It  had  been  already  in  print  for  ten  years. Three  leaves  of
the  codex  found  their  way  to  Berlin,  and  are now  numbered
Orient.  Quart.  528  in  the  Royal  Library.

5000


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

The  writings  in  which  the  Diatessaron  or  the  F.v.  da-Mephar-
reshe  are  used  include  the  Acts  of  Judas  Thomas  (3rd  cent.),
the  Doctrine  of  Addai  (4th  cent.),  the  Homilies  of  Aphraates
{337-345),  the  genuine  writings  of  Ephraim  (t373),  'he  writings
of  Cyrillona  (_/?.  400),  the  Syriac  Doctrine  of  the  Apostles
published  by  Cureton  (4th  cent.).  The  Syriac  translations  of
Eusebius"  Ecclesiastical  History  and  Theophania  (made  be
fore  411)  also  show  the  influence  of  the  Ev.  da-Mepharresh?,
and  even  Jacob  of  Serug  (6th  cent.)  follows  the  Diatessaron  in
his  Homily  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.

The  witness  of  Ephraim  was  long  claimed  for  the  Peshitta
against  the  Ev.  da-McpharreshS  on  the  authority  of  commen
taries  and  homilies  which  were  printed  as  Ephraim's  in  the
Roman  edition  (1737-43),  but  on  insufficient  evidence.  Ephraim's
genuine  writings,  which  include  more  than  350  homilies,  show
no  trace  of  distinctively  Peshitta  readings  (F.  C.  Burkitt,  S.
Ephraim  s  Quotations  from  the  Gospel,  Cambridge,  1901).

To  Rabbula  is  due  both  the  publication  of  the
Peshitta  and  the  suppression  of  the  Diatessaron.  At
the  beginning  of  his  episcopate  (411  A.D.  )  'he  trans
lated  by  the  wisdom  of  God  that  was  in  him  the  NT
from  Greek  into  Syriac,  because  of  its  variations,
accurately  just  as  it  was'  (Life  of  Mar  Rabbula,  in
Overbeck,  17'2i8^).  And  in  his  canons  he  ordered
'  that  in  every  church  there  should  be  a  copy  of  the
Ev.  da-M&pharrtsM,  and  that  it  should  be  read '  (Over-
beck,  220  3).  When  we  consider  that  up  to  the  time
of  Rabbula  the  Gospel  quotations  in  Syriac  works  never
exhibit  the  peculiarities  of  the  Peshitta,  whilst  after  the
time  of  Rabbula  they  uniformly  agree  with  it,  there  can
be  little  doubt  that  the  translation  of  the  NT  prepared
by  Rabbula  was  the  Peshitta  itself.1

The  Peshitta  is  thus  an  edition  of  the  Ev.  da-Mtphar-
rishe,  revised  into  closer  conformity  with  the  Greek,
and  published  by  authority  with  a  view  of  superseding
both  the  Diatessaron  and  the  then  current  Syriac  texts
of  the  Four  Gospels.

The  method  by  which  the  new  edition  was  propagated
may  be  learnt  from  Theodoret,  bishop  of  the  adjoining
see  of  Cyrrhus,  who  '  swept  up  more  than  two  hundred
copies  of  the  Diatessaron  in  the  churches  of  his  diocese
and  introduced  the  Four  Gospels  in  their  place '  (quoted
in  Wright's  Syriac  Literature,  9).  The  older  forms
of  the  Ev.  da-MSpharrgshe  seem  throughout  the  fourth
century  to  have  been  much  less  used  than  the  Diates
saron,  so  that  when  the  Peshitta  was  substituted  for  the
Diatessaron  in  the  public  services,  it  practically  had  no
rivals.  Neither  Ss  nor  Sc  show  any  signs  of  having
been  prepared  for  church  use.  In  a  word,  the  Diates
saron  was  condemned;  the  Ev.  da-Mepharreshe  was
antiquated.

The  internal  character  of  the  Peshitta,  as  compared
with  that  of  the  Ev.  da-Mepharreshe  confirms  the  view
of  their  relation  to  one  another  which  has  been  given
above.

1.  The style of the Ev.  da-MfpharrHshe gives an
impression  of  great  age. All  the  later  Syriac  versions,
such  as  the  Harclean,  are  marked  by  excessive  literal-
ness  ; but  the  Ev.  da-MCpharrfshe  is  less  conventional
and  more  idiomatic  than  the  Peshitta. Certain  particles
also  and  idioms  are  found  in  the  Ev.  da-Mipharr8sh&
which are avoided  in the Peshitta and later Syriac
writings.2

2.  The  subscriptions  at  the  end  of  each  Gospel  in
the  Ev.  da-Me'pharre'she  contain  no  more  than '  Here
endeth  the  Gospel  of  Mark,'  or  'of  Luke,'  as  the  case
may  be. But to  render 'EvayytXiov  Kara,  M. more
exactly  the  Peshitta  has  '  The  [holy}  Gospel,  the  preach
ing  of  M.' Moreover,  it  is  added  in  almost  all  codices
of  the  Peshitta  that  Matthew  composed  his  Gospel  '  in
Hebrew  in  Palestine,'  Mark  '  in  Latin  at  Rome,'  Luke
'in Greek at Alexandria the Great,' and John '  in
Greek at Rphesus. ' Similar  statements are found in
some  Greek  MSS  of  the  Gospels. This  peculiar  render-

1  See  F.  C.  Burkitt,  S.  Ephraim's  Quotations,  57.

2  Such  are  the  occasional  use  of  the  copula  to  introduce  the
apodosis  of  a  conditional  sentence  (e.g.,  Lk.  1245./C  Ss  Sc)  and
the  occurrence  of  the  word  'odh,  'forsooth,'  which  is  met  with
only  in  the  oldest  Syriac  literature  and  has  been  consistently
expunged  in  Sc  by  a  corrector.

5001


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

I  ing  of  Kard,  and  the  insertion  of  these  pseudo-biblio
graphical  notices,  when  contrasted  with  the  simplicity
;  of  the  Ev.  da-MZpharreshi',  are  by  themselves  enough
to  stamp  the  Peshitta  as  a  later  recension.

3.  Although  Ss  and  Sc  usually  agree  closely  with
one  another  against  the  Peshitta  text,  and  sometimes
even  stand  alone  together  against  all  other  critical
authorities,  they  often  differ  in  important  readings.1
But  the  MSS  of  the  Peshitta  hardly  vary  except  in  ortho
graphical  matters  and  other  trifles.  It  is  difficult  to  re
concile  this  fact  with  the  priority  of  the  Peshitta.  If  the
two  versions  had  existed  side  by  side  during  the  third
century,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  why  the  codices  of  the  Ev.
da-MZpharrlshe  should  have  been  honoured  by  revision
from  the  Greek,  whilst  the  codices  of  the  Peshitta  were
untouched.

The  Peshitta  has  too  many  points  of  resemblance
to  the  Ev.  da-M?pharresht*  to  be  considered  an  in
dependent  translation  from  the  Greek.  We  must
therefore  regard  the  Peshitta  as  a  revision  of  the
previously  existing  Ev.  da-Mcpharrgshe,  just  as  the
Latin  Vulgate  was  a  revision  of  an  Old  Latin  text.
For  that  reason  Westcott  and  Hort  quote  the  Peshilta
as  Syr.vg.  The  agreement  of  Ss  and  Sc  may  be
conveniently  indicated  by  Syr.  vt.  or  the  '  Old  Syriac. '

The  Greek  text  of  the  Antiochian  revision  (see  §§
7,  9)  is  usually  followed  by  the  Peshitta,  where  it
differs  from  the  Old  Syriac  ;  but  to  this  rule  there  are
some  exceptions  (e.g.,  Mt.  11 19  22 13  Jn.  1 18).  The
revision  of  the  Syriac  NT  was  therefore  made  from  a
Greek  MS  such  as  Cod.  Ephraemi  (C)  which  retained
some  non-Antiochian  readings  in  the  midst  of  a  funda
mentally  Antiochian  text.  It  will  be  remembered  that
Rabbula  was  the  friend  of  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  in  whose
quotations  much  the  same  state  of  things  is  found.  At
the  same  time  there  are  readings  in  Syr.  vg  which
definitely  reflect  the  local  Antiochian  tradition  (e.g. ,  the
punctuation  of  Jn.  5  27  f. ).

The  only  theory  to  account  for  the  textual  facts  which  has
been  advanced  by  defenders  of  the  priority  of  Syr.vg  to  the
Ei'.  da-Mipharrisht  is  that,  on  the  suppression  of  the  Diates
saron,  a  sudden  demand  may  have  arisen  for  copies  of  the  Four
Gospels.  Scribes  would  then  have  made  imperfect  copies,  full
of  phrases  taken  from  Tatian's  Harmony,  two  of  which  survive
in  Ss  and  Sc.  This  theory  accounts  for  the  marked  resemblance
of  the  Ev.  da-]\Ifpharreshe  to  the  Diatessaron  on  the  one  hand,
and  to  the  Peshitta  on  the  other.  It  does  not  account,  however,
for  the  numerous  instances  where  Ss  and  Sc  (or  one  of  them)
have  a  reading  which  is  neither  that  of  the  Diatessaron  nor  of  the
Peshitta.  Thus  in  Lk.  17  21  ('the  kingdom  of  God  is  evros
vfilav  ')  the  Peshitta  has  within  you,  the  Diatessaron  has  in  your
heart,  but  Ss  and  Sc  have  among  you.  Other  notable  instances
are  Mk.  10  50  Lk.  4  29.

No  hypothesis  about  the  origin  and  mutual  relations  of  early
Syriac  texts  can  stand,  which  does  not  account  for  the  crucial
fact  that  Mk.  ends  at  I(i8  in  Ss,  although  the  'last  twelve
verses '  are  found  in  the  Diatessaron  as  well  as  in  the  Peshitta.

Of  our  two  codices  of  Syr.vt  Ss  is  in  every  respect  a
better  text  than  Sc.  The  discovery  of  Ss  has  justified
Hort's  conjecture  that  Sc  represents  a  form  of  the  Old
Syriac  which  has  suffered  '  irregular  revision  '  from  the
Greek.2  The  best  evidence  for  this  is  afforded  by  the
presence  in  Sc  of  several  conflate  readings  (e.g. ,  Mt.  f> 18
Jn.424).

The  fact  of  this  revision  once  established,  it  is  reason
able  to  assign  to  the  reviser  the  many  passages  where
words  and  verses  which  are  absent  from  Ss  have
been  added  in  Sc.  Thus  the  episode  of  the  bloody
sweat,  the  missing  clauses  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in
Lk. ,  the  long  interpolation  after  Mt.  20  28,  and  the
verse  Mt.  2144,  are  all  found  in  Sc,  though  absent  from
83.  The  process  of  revision,  however,  was  by  no  means
thorough,  for  Sc  agrees  with  Ss  in  omitting  Mt.  1623
17zi  18n  Jn.  63  4,  etc.3

1  The  most  striking  instance  is  [Mk.  1169-20,  which  is  read  by
Sc  but  omitted  by  Ss.

2  Hort,  118.

3  In  Lk.  1041  42  Ss  has  the  shorter  reading  found  also  in  all
genuine  Old  Latin  texts, viz., '  Martha, Martha. Mary  has
chosen  the  better  part,'  etc.,  omitting  the  yap  after  'Mary'  in

5002


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

It  might  have  been  suspected  that  Ss  had  been  corrected  to  a.
Greek  text  such  as  that  of  B  by  the  excision  of  all  these  passages.
But  this  suspicion  is  shown  to  be  groundless  by  the  fact  that  Ss
contains  several  interpolations  (notably  one  at  the  end  of  Lk.
284?)  which  are  especially  characteristic  of  the  Old  Syriac,
though  found  in  no  Greek  MS.  Had  the  passages  which  are
wanting  in  Ss  been  deliberately  expunged  owing  to  their  absence
from  certain  Greek  MSS,  these  other  passages  would  have  been
rejected  along  with  the  rest.

The  crucial  problem  in  the  history  of  the  Old  Syriac
is  its  relation  to  the  Uiatessaron.  There  are  two  views
•R  1  f  conceivable.

f'OldS ' 1-  That the Diatessaron was the

r TV t  original  form  in  which  the  Gospel  was

to  JJiatess.  circulated  in  Syriac,  and  that  the
Evangelion  da-\Iepharreshe  (Syr.  vt)  was  a  later  trans
lation  from  the  Greek  ;  but  the  translation  was  much
influenced  by  the  text  of  the  already  existing  Syriac
Diatessaron.

2.  That  Syr.vt  was  the  original  form  of  the  Gospel
in  Syriac  ;  and  that  the  Diatessaron  was  an  independent
work,  originally  composed  in  Greek  (or  Latin),  but
translated  into  Syriac  as  far  as  possible  in  the  wording
of  Syr.vt,  which  it  eventually  superseded  for  church  use.

A  third  theory,  that  the  Diatessaron  was  a  purely
Syriac  work,  later  than  Syr.vt  and  compiled  exclusively
from  it,  can  no  longer  be  held  since  the  discovery  of  the
Sinai  palimpsest.

The  Diatessaron  undoubtedly  contained  extracts  from  the
Mast  twelve  verses'  of  Mk.,1  which  are  absent  from  Ss  and
therefore  from  the  earliest  form  of  the  Evangelidn  da-Mephar-
reshe.  If  the  Diatessaron  had  been  entirely  based  upon
Syr.vt,  we  should  have  to  assume  that  Syr.vt  had  been  already
revised  \ry  170-180  A.D.,  the  date  of  Tatian's  return  to  the  East.
Besides,  the  theory  that  the  Diatessaron  was  a  Syriac  work  fails
to  account  for  the  Latin  Codex  Fitldensis  and  allied  documents.

An  adequate discussion  of  the other two theories

would  far  exceed  the  limits  of  this  article, although  it

„ . depends upon the conclusion reached

28. Uonciu-  whuther  we  are  to  place  the  Old  Syriac  in

'  the  middle  or  end  of  the  second  century.
It  must  suffice  to  say  here,  that  the  scanty  historical
notices  of  the  early  Syriac-speaking  church  contain
nothing  contrary  to  the  first  view  (viz.,  that  the
Diatessaron  preceded  the  Evangelion  da-Mepharreshe}
and  much  that  confirms  it.2

On  this  hypothesis  we  may  conjecturally  date  the  Ev.
da-Mepharrcshc  about  200  A.n.  and  connect  it  with  the
mission  of  Paliit,  who  was  ordained  bishop  of  Edessa  by
Serapion  of  Antioch.

The  arguments  in  favour  of  the  second  view  are  chiefly
based  on  the  text  of  Ss.  Some  of  the  readings  character
istic  of  that  MS  are  quite  contrary  in  tendency  to  what
we  otherwise  know  of  Syriac  Christianity,  and  that  such
a  text  should  exist  at  all  is  a  remarkable  testimony  to'
the  essential  faithfulness  of  the  translator  to  the  Greek
text  before  him.  The  Diatessaron  much  nearer  reflects
the  tendencies  of  the  time.  In  fact,  some  things  which
we  know  to  have  stood  in  the  Diatessaron  almost  read
like  a  deliberate  protest  against  the  text  of  Syr.vt  as
represented  by  the  Sinai  palimpsest.

Tatian  held  Encratite  views,  and  it  accords  with  them  that  he
left  out  the  genealogies  from  the  Diatessaron,  and  that  Joseph
is  never  called  husband  of  Mary.  This  course  is  also  followed
in  Sc  (except  so  far  as  concerns  the  genealogies),  and  it  harmonises
with  all  we  know  of  the  Syriac-speaking  church  in  the  third
century.  But  in  Ss  this  tendency  is  altogether  absent,  to  such
an  extent  that  the  last  clause  of  Mt.  1 16  is  rendered  'Joseph,  to
whom  zt'as  betrothed  Mary  the  I  'irgin,  begat  Jesus  which  is
called  Christ.'*  Certain  statements  in  Aphraates'  Homily  on

v.  42,  as  well  as  the  words  about  the  '  something  necessary'  in
v.  42. In  Sc  the  missing  words  are  supplied  to  v.  41  ;  but  no

E article  is  added  after  '  Mary '  in  v.  42,  and  thus  the  reviser's
and  is  betrayed.

1  The  same  mosaic  of  Mt.  28  Mk.  16  and  Lk.  24  is  found  in
fuld  as  in the  Arabic  Diatessaron. Aphraates  120  mentions

Christ's  session  at the right hand  of  the  Father  (Mk.  1C  19)
immediately  after  quoting  Mt.  2820.

2  The  public  reading  of  the  Diatessaron  at  Edessa  in  early
times  to  the  apparent  exclusion  of  the  Four  Gospels,  is  implied
in the Doctrine  of  Addai  36. For the date and historical
value  of  this  work,  see  L.  J.  Tixeront,  Les  Origines  de  lEglise
d'  Edesse,  esp.  \?ojf.

3  [On  the  text  of  this  verse  cp  MARY,  §  13  (a).]

5003


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

the  Genealogy  of  our  Lord,  and  some  comments  preserved  by
Barsalibion  Nit.  1  16  prove  that  these  readings  of  Ss  are  not  mere
peculiarities  of  an  isolated  MS.  On  the  other  hand,  Sc  through
out  the  whole  of  the  first  chapter  of  Matthew's  gospel  presents
a  corrected  text  (except  I  It.  1  20,  '  to  titee  ').  The  attempt  which
has  been  made  to  represent  Ss  as  an  heretical  codex  rests  on  no
sure  foundation,  and  the  natural  inference  is  that  Syr.vt  in  its
original  form  was  characterised  by  a  primitive  innocence  of
offence  in  this  matter  (see  Lk.'-^K).

The  arguments  which  go  to  prove  that  the  Ar
menian  and  ^Kthiopic  versions  were  originally  made
from  the  Old  Syriac  are  indicated  elsewhere  (sre  g  36 /. ).
It  may  be  remarked  that  there  is  nothing  to  connect
these  versions  with  the  Diatessaron.  But  if,  as  seems
most  probable,  they  were  made  from  the  Evangelion
da-Mepharreshe,  this  circumstance  affords  another  proof
of  its  antiquity.  If  the  Evangelion  da-Alepharreshc  were
a  novelty,  hardly  holding  its  own  against  the  ancient
and  popular  Diatessaron,  it  would  scarcely  have  been
chosen  in  preference  to  the  Diatessaron  for  missionary
translations.

On  the  first  publication  of  Sc  in  1858,  Cureton  brought
forward  arguments  to  prove  that  the  Gospel  of  Mt.  in  Sc
represented  the  original  '  Hebrew '  Gospel  whilst  the  other
Gospels  were  mere  translations  from  the  Greek.  This  wild
theory  found  few  defenders  and  is  almost  forgotten.  But  it
was  based  on  a  perception  that  there  is  a  difference  of  style
between  the  various  Gospels  in  the  Ev.  da-Alepharreshi.
Lately  Dr.  A.  Hjelt  has  collected  the  indications  which  show
that  the  translation  of  the  four  Gospels  does  not  come  from
the  same  hand,  Mt.  being  the  earliest  and  Lk.  the  latest  to  be
rendered  into  Syriac  (Die  altsyrische  Evangelieniibtrtttntng.
Leipsic,  1901).  The  theory  is  attractive  and  may  very  well
rest  upon  a  basis  of  fact ;  at  the  same  time  too  much  stress
should  not  be  laid  upon  irregularity  of  rendering  as  a  proof  of
composite  authorship.  Only  those  who  have  tried  to  make  a
pedantically  consistent  translation  of  the  Gospels  can  realise
with  what  difficulty  consistency  is  attained.

No  MS  of  the  Old  Syriac  version  of  Acts  or  of  the
Pauline  epistles  is  known  to  have  survived.  That  the

,  Peshitta  is  not  the  original  form  of  the
29.  Acts  and  ,, • •

_ . .. Syriac version in these books also is

"  ' proved  by  the  quotations  in  Aphraates,

and  from  the  commentaries  of  Ephraim.  These  com
mentaries  are  preserved  only  in  the  ancient  Armenian
translation,  having  no  doubt  fallen  out  of  favour  when
the  text  on  which  they  were  based  had  been  superseded
by  the  Peshitta.  In  using  these  commentaries  great
care  is  necessary,  as  the  biblical  text  appears  sometimes
to  have  been  assimilated  to  the  Armenian  Vulgate.  The
quotations  of  Aphraates  from  the  Pauline  epistles  are
many  ;  but  those  from  Acts  unfortunately  cover  only
five  verses.

The  almost  complete  loss  of  the  Old  Syriac  version,  except
for  the  Gospels,  causes  a  serious  gap  in  the  apparatus  of  critical
authorities  for  the  text  of  the  NT.  It  can  be  to  some  little
extent  supplied  from  the  Armenian.  Readings  of  the  Armenian
Vulgate  which  differ  from  the  ordinary  Greek  text,  especially
if  they  are  supported  by  the  Peshitta,  may  be  considered  with
some  confidence  to  have  been  derived  from  the  lost  Old  Syriac.

The  Catholic  Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse  formed  no
part  of  the  Old  Syriac  version.1  In  the  Peshitta  this
defect  is  partially  supplied  by  a  translation  of  James,
i  Peter  and  i  John,  in  agreement  with  the  usage  of
Antioch  as  represented  by  Chrysostom  ;  but  to  this  day
the  'Syriac  Vulgate  does  not  include  the  Apocalypse  or
the  minor  Catholic  epistles.

The  Peshitta  was  firmly  established  for  ecclesiastical
use  in  the  Syriac- speaking  church  at  the  time  of  the
_ . Nestorian  schism,  and  has  continued  to  be
'  •L'a''er'  exclusively used by the Xestorian com-
' munity. Among  the  Jacobites  (or  Mono-
versions, physjte  Dranch  Of  the  Syrians),  however,  two
successive  attempts  were  made  to  render  into  Syriac  the
full  canon  and  the  current  text  of  the  later  Greek-speak
ing  churches.

What appears  to  have  been  a  revision of  the  NT

1  Addai  46  ;  '  The  Law  and  the  Prophets  and  the  Gospel
.  .  .  and  the  Epistles  of  Paul  .  .  .  and  the  Acts  of  the  twelve
Apostles — these  writings  shall  ye  read  in  the  churches  of  Christ,
and  besides  these  ye  shall  read  nothing  else.'  Neither  in
Aphraates  nor  in  the  genuine  works  of  Ephraim  are  there
any  quotations  from  Apoc.  or  Cath.  epp.

5004


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Peshitta,  supplemented  by  those  books  of  the  Greek
canon  which  were  lacking  in  Syriac,  was  made  in  508
A.  D.  for  Philoxenus,  bishop  of  Mabbog.

Whether  any  part  of  this  revision  of  the  Peshitta  survives  is
doubtful : !  but  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  supple
mental  version  of  2  Peter,  2  and  3  John,  and  Jude,  which  was
first  published  by  E.  Pococke  in  1630,  and  is  generally  bound  up
with  modern  editions  of  the  Peshitta,  belongs  to  the  original
Philoxenian.  A  MS  of  the  Apocalypse  in  the  same  version  has
been  discovered  by  Gwynn,  who  has  published  the  text  with
full  Prolegomena  and  critical  notes  (Dublin,  1897).

In  the  year  616  Thomas  of  Heraclea  (Harkel),  bishop
of  Mabbog,  made  at  Alexandria  an  elaborate  revision  of
the  Philoxenian  which  still  survives  in  several  MSS  and
is  called  the  Harclean  Version.  It  was  edited  by  Joseph
White  at  Oxford  in  1778-1803  from  a  slightly  imperfect
MS  ;  but  the  missing  portion  of  Hebrews  was  at  length
supplied  from  a  Cambridge  codex  by  Bensly  in  1889.
It  is  not  improbable  that  the  version  of  the  Apocalypse
published  in  1627  by  De  Dieu,  and  now  commonly
printed  with  the  Peshitta,  is  a  part  of  the  work  of  Thomas
of  Heraclea.

The  text  of  the  Harclean  version  is  remarkable  for  its  excessive
literalness,2  and  for  the  critical  notes  with  which  it  is  furnished.
These  notes  contain  the  various  readings  of  two  (or  three)  Greek
MSS  collated  by  Thomas  at  Alexandria.  In  Acts  these  notes
are  of  real  importance,  as  one  of  the  MSS  must  have  contained
a  '  Western  '  text  much  like  that  of  Codex  Bezae.  The  text  of  the
Harclean  version  itself,  as  distinguished  from  these  alternative
or  additional  readings,  is  almost  invariably  that  of  the  later
Greek  MSS.

The  Syriac  versions  hitherto  described  have  all  been
in  the  '  classical '  Edessene  idiom.  It  is  customary

,,  r,  ,  ...  also  to  reckon  under  '  Syriac  Versions  '
31.  Palestinian  ,  .  .  ...  ,.  .  rj

the  surviving  biblical  fragments  in  the

'  Palestinian '  dialect.

The  Aramaic  language  is  divided  into  two  branches,
the  classical  Edessene  being  the  main  example  of  the
Eastern  Aramaic,  whilst  Palmyrene  and  the  various  types
of  Jewish  Aramaic  (including  Samaritan)  belong  to  the
Western  branch.  The  dialect  in  which  the  Christian
version  described  in  this  section  is  written  is  a  variety
of  the  Western  Aramaic,  almost  identical  with  that  of
the  later  Galiloean  Jews.3  Its  linguistic  interest,  there
fore,  is  very  great,  for  although  it  is  a  somewhat  literal
translation  from  the  Greek,  the  language  in  which  it  is
written  comes  nearest  of  all  known  Christian  dialects  to
that  spoken  by  Jesus  and  the  apostles.  See  ARAMAIC,
§  7  (col.  283).

The  surviving  documents  can  be  traced  to  three
sources:  (i)  the  Malkite  convent  of  S.  Elias  on  the
Black  Mountain  in  the  district  of  the  Dux  near  Antioch  ;  4
(2)  the  convent  of  S.  Catherine  on  Mt.  Sinai  ;  (3)  a
community,  or  communities,  of  Malkites  settled  in  Egypt.

The  MSS  included  under  (i)  appear  to  have  been  bought  for
the  convent  of  S.  Mary  Deipara  in  the  Nitrian  desert  in  the
thirteenth  century,  after  the  sack  of  Antioch  by  Bibars  the
Mameluke  Sultan.  They  include  the  Vatican  lectionary  and
the  London  fragments  published  by  Land.  The  S.  Petersburg
fragments  published  by  Land,  which  were  brought  by  Tischendorf
from  the  East,  are  almost  certainly  to  be  added  to  the  MSS  of
class  (2).  Those  of  class  (3)  include  the  book  of  occasional  offices
now  at  the  British  Museum  (Or.  4951),  the  Praxapostohs  edited
by  Mrs.  Lewis,  and  the  fragments  from  the  Cairo  Genlza  now  in
the  Bodleian  and  the  Cambridge  University  library.

For  the  Gospels  we  have  fragments  of  four  continuous
codices  : —

i.  Land's  Petro(>olitanus  antiquior  (yth  cent.):  2.  Land's
Petropolittinus  recentior  (8th  cent.),  two  leaves  of  which

1  See  Wiseman,  Hares  Syriacce,  178  n.

2  The  same  torturing  of  the  Syriac  idiom  in  order  to  express
every particle of the Greek is found in the contemporary
translation  of  the  Hexaplar  text  of  the  LXX  by  Paul  of  Telia
(see  §  61).

3  Dalman,  Gram.  <ies  Jiid. -Paliist.  Aramtiisch,  33-40. The
only  locality  in  Palestine  with  which  any  of  our  documents  can
be^definitely  connected  is  'Abild,  a  small  town  in  lat.  32°,  long.
35°,  almost  equally  distant  from  Jaffa,  Nablus,  and  Jerusalem—
i.e.,  not  far  from  the  frontier  between  Judaea  and  Samaritan
territoiy.

••The  Malkites  (or  '  King's  Party ')  are  those  Oriental  Christians
who  did  not  become  Monophysites  or  Nestorians,  but  remained
in  communion  with  Constantinople.  The  district  of  the  Dux  (TO
Aovf)  is  mentioned  by  Anna  Comnena  (Alexius,  13  12).


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

appear  to  be  still  at  Sinai  in  Cod.  Iber.  32;!  3.  One  leaf  of
B.M.  Add.  14,450,  published  by  Land  (8th  cent.);  4.  Fragments
of  Mt.  and  Lk.  from  B.M.  Add.  14,664,  published  by  Land
(nth  cent.).  Besides  these  there  are  three  complete  Gospel
lectionaries,  one  at  the  Vatican  and  two  at  Sinai,  besides
fragments  of  at  least  two  others  at  Sinai  and  London,  all  dating
from  the  eleventh  century.  The  Vatican  lectionary  (Vat.  Syr.
xix)  has  been  well  edited  by  Lagarde  (l^vangc  liariuin  Hierosoly-
tttitanum,  1892).  The  Sinai  lectionaries,  together  with  the
readings  of  the  Vatican  lectionary,  were  edited  by  Mrs.  Lewis
and  Mrs.  Gibson  in  i8gp.

The  rest  of  the  NT  is  but  imperfectly  preserved.  The  very
ancient  Bodleian  fragments  of  the  Pauline  epistles  have  been
edited  by  G.  H.  Gwilliam  (Oxford,  1893-6),  and  a  small  frag
ment  of  Galatians  from  Sinai  by  J.  R.  Harris.  Land  has  edited
Acts  146-13  from  an  ancient  lectionary  (see  §62).  In  1895
Mrs.  Lewis  bought  in  Cairo  a  late  MS  (?  i2th  cent.)  containing
lections  from  all  parts  of  the  Bible  except  the  Gospels,  and  in
conjunction  with  Mrs.  Gibson  and  Dr.  Nestle  published  the  text
in  1897  as  Stadia  Sinaitica,  ti.  The  lections  differ  from  those
in  Land's  much  older  lectionary,  and  Mrs.  Lewis'  MS  is  dis
tinctly  stated  not  to  have  come  from  Sinai.  It  may  have  belonged
to  the  same  community  that  owned  the  very  late  MS  of  the
Liturgy  of  the  Nile,  edited  by  G.  Margoliouth  (JRAS,  Oct.
1896).  This  Liturgy  contains  a  lesson  from  Acts  10  ;  but  the
text  is  nothing  more  than  an  adaptation  of  the  Peshitta  to  the
Palestinian  dialect.

The  Palestinian  documents  exhibit  a  mixed  text.
The  influence  of  the  Peshitta  is  often  apparent  ;  but  in
the  main  the  Greek  is  closely  followed,  so  that  even
such  Semitic  names  as  "iTjcroOs  and  2iyucoi/  are  transliter
ated  Isos  and  Simon,  not  Yeshfi  (or  Is/iff)  and  Shim  on.
The  syntax,  moreover,  is  so  much  assimilated  to  the
Greek  as  to  render  the  Palestinian  version  a  very  unsafe
guide  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  original  Aramaic  of
Gospel  phrases.

The  origin  of  this  curious  literature  is  still  obscure  ;
but  the  present  writer  has  given  reasons  for  connecting
it  with  the  efforts  made  by  Justinian  in  the  sixth
century  to  extirpate  the  Samaritan  religion  and  by
Heraclius  early  in  the  seventh  century  to  harass  the
Jews.  An  earlier  date  than  the  sixth  century  is  not
suggested  either  by  the  general  course  of  history  or
by  the  character  of  the  surviving  documents.  F.  C.
Burkitt's  art.  in  Joum.  of  Th.  Studies,  2  183^,  con
tains  a  full  bibliography  of  the  Christian  Palestinian
literature.


III. COPTIC AND OTHER VERSION'S

Egypt  is  the  stronghold  of  '  non-Western'  texts. The
„„ f f determination  of  the  age  of  the  Egyptian

, ' , i versions  is therefore  a problem  of  con-
translation: •  ,

, ,  siderable  interest  for  the  general  history

dau6.  r  ^i  r  ^1 xT'r*

of  the  text  of  the  N  F.

In  Egypt  '  the  progress  of  Christianity  was  for  a  long
time  confined  within  the  limits  of  a  single  city,  which
was  itself  a  foreign  colony  ;  and  till  the  close  of  the
second  century  the  predecessors  of  Demetrius  2  were  the
only  prelates  of  the  Egyptian  church.  Three  bishops
were  consecrated  by  the  hands  of  Demetrius,  and  the
number  was  increased  to  twenty  by  his  successor
Heracles.  The  body  of  the  natives,  a  people  dis
tinguished  by  sullen  inflexibility  of  temper,  entertained
the  new  doctrine  with  coldness  and  reluctance  ;  and
even  in  the  time  of  Origen  it  was  rare  to  meet  with  an
Egyptian  who  had  surmounted  his  early  prejudices  in
favour  of  the  sacred  animals  of  his  country.  As  soon,
indeed,  as  Christianity  ascended  the  throne,  the  zeal  of
those  barbarians  obeyed  the  prevailing  impulsion  ;  the
cities  of  Egypt  were  filled  with  bishops,  and  the  deserts
of  Thebais  swarmed  with  hermits.  '  3  The  date  here
assigned  for  the  spread  of  Christianity  in  the  country  is
borne  out  by  the  Life  of  S.  Pachomius  (§  i),  which
puts  the  repentance  of  the  nations  as  coming  to  pass
after  the  persecutions  of  Diocletian  and  Maximin.
Pachomius,  the  founder  of  organised  monastic  life,  born

1  The Sinai leaves are published in  Mrs.  Lewis's  Cat.  of
Syriac  JfSS,  App.  pp.  118-120. They  exactly  agree  in  size  and
character  with  the  leaves  of  Land's  Petrofiolitanus  recentior.

2  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  189-233  A.  D.

3  Bury's  Gibbon,  2  60,  following  Eutychius  (Anna!.  1  333)  and
Orig.  Cels.  1  757.

5006


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

in  285,  was  converted  early  in  the  fourth  century,  and
established  the  Talxsnnitic  monastery  in  Upper  Egypt
in  322.  Such  a  community  could  not  long  be  without
the  Scriptures  in  the  vernacular,  so  that  the  earliest
version  in  Egyptian  cannot  be  later  than  the  first  quarter
of  the  fourth  century.

There  is  very  little  reason  for  placing  it  much  earlier.
The  notices  in  Eus.  HE  641  of  the  'Egyptian'  Alex
andrians  who  suffered  during  the  Decian  persecution
contain  nothing  to  indicate  that  they  formed  a  separate
community,  with  a  translated  Bible  an^l  Liturgy.  The
Life  of  S.  Antony  is  generally  quoted  as  implying  the
existence  of  a  Coptic  version  in  the  third  century  ;  but
it  is  not  easy  to  say  how  much  may  be  built  upon  the
details  of  the  early  part  of  Antony's  career,  as  related
by  his  biographer.1  The  evidence  of  the  Pistis  Sophia
also  is  indecisive  as  to  date.  The  Pistis  Sophia  is  a
Gnostic  work  of  the  latter  half  of  the  third  century,2
which  survives  in  a  very  ancient  Sahidic  MS.3  Most  of
the  allusions  in  it  to  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are
loose  and  paraphrastic.  But  several  of  the  Psalms  are
quoted  by  number  in  full,  almost  word  for  word  with  the
Sahidic  version.  We  cannot,  however,  certainly  infer
from  this  that  Sahidic  is  the  original  language  of  the
book.  The  Sahidic  version  must  be  older  than  the
Pistis  Sophia  as  we  have  it  ;  but  the  Psalms  in  question,
which  are  all  put  into  the  mouths  of  the  various  apostles
to  illustrate  the  Gnostic  teaching  of  Jesus,  may  have  been
added  by  the  Sahidic  translator  with  the  view  of  com
mending  the  book  to  orthodox  readers  ;  their  strict
fidelity  to  the  biblical  text  shows  quite  a  different  spirit
from  the  free  invention  of  the  rest  of  the  book.

As  many  as  five  or  six Coptic dialects  have  been

distinguished  by  modern  scholars  ;  but  from  the  point

Th °^ Vlevv °f textual criticism the Coptic

' versions fall into three divisions: — the

versions.  SahidiCt  the  payyi-imic<  anci  the  Bohairic.

The  Sahidic  (Sa'idic)  is  the  version  of  Upper  Egypt  (in
Arabic  es-Sdid)  ;  it  was  formerly  sometimes  called  the
Thebaic  version.  The  Fayyumic  version,  formerly
called  '  Bashmuric,'  is  represented  chiefly  by  documents
coming  from  the  Eayyum  ;  to  this  version  belong  also
the  biblical  fragments  in  the  '  Middle  Egyptian  '
dialect,  as  in  text  they  agree  with  the  Fayyumic,
whatever  the  relation  between  the  dialects  may  be.
The  fragment  of  a  very  ancient  MS  of  the  Catholic
epp.  in  the  '  Akhnumic '  dialect  must  be  reckoned
among  Sahidic  authorities  for  a  similar  reason.  Some
of  the  more  ancient  Sahidic  MSS  are  Greece-Egyptian
bilinguals,  the  Greek  occupying  the  page  on  the  left
hand  of  the  open  book.

The  version  now  in  ecclesiastical  use  among  all  the
Copts,  or  Christian  Egyptians,  is  called  by  scholars
the  '  Bohairic. '  This  version  was  formerly  named
'  Coptic  '  and  '  Memphitic  ' ;  but  the  latter  term  is  now
known  to  be  inaccurate,  whilst  '  Coptic '  is  equally
applicable  to  Sahidic  or  any  other  Egyptian  dialect.
The  term  Bohairic  comes  from  the  Coptic  Grammar  of
Athanasius,  Bishop  of  Cos  (A'tf)  in  the  Thebaid  during  the
eleventh  century.  Athanasius  recognised  three  dialects,
viz. ,  '  Cairene  Coptic,  which  is  also  that  of  Upper

1  Antony  died  at  an  advanced age in 356. The  received
date  of  hi«  birth,  viz.  250  A.D.  ,  appears  to  depend  upon  the
fact  that  shortly  before  his  death  he  claimed  to  be  105  years
old,  but  such  statements  from  the  mouth  of  illiterate  men  are
rarely  to  be  trusted. S.  Antony  could  neither  read  nor  write,
and  could  not  speak  Greek. '  My  book,'  he  is  reported  to  have
said,  '  my  book  is  the  Book  of  Nature  (17  <£u(ri5  TMV  yfyovortov),^
and  that  is  present  whenever  I  wish  to  read  the  words  of  God  '
(Evagrius,  ap.  Migne,  401249). The  statements  in  the  Life  of
S. Antony  (g§  2  and  3),  even  if  we  accept  the  details  of  the
story,  imply  no  more  than  that  tv*>o  isolated  sayings  of  Jesus
were  forcibly  brought  to  S.  Antony's  mind,  and  upon  these  he
built his  whole theological system. Many  illiterate Roman
Catholics,  who  may  have  never  heard  the  Gospels  except  in
Latin,  know  that  Christ  said  '  Sell  that  thou  hast  and  give  to
the  poor,'  and  '  Be  not  anxious  for  your  life.'

2  See  Harnack,  TU  vii.  204^  ;  Amelineau,  Pistis  Sophia.

3  Both Harnack  and  Amelineau  hold that Greek  was  the
original  language  of  the  Pistis  Sophia.

5007


'


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Egypt  ;  Bohairic  Coptic,  which  is  named  from  the
Bohaira  ;  and  Bushmuric  Coptic,  which  is  named  from
the  Bushmtir.'1  The  Bushmuric  dialect  had  already
died  out  in  the  time  of  Athanasius,  and  it  does  not
appear  that  the  Bible  had  ever  been  translated  into  it.
The  'Bohaira'  (i.e.  ,  'Lake')  is  not,  as  is  sometimes
stated,  the  Arabic  for  Lower  Egypt  (cl-Wajh  el-Bahri)
or  for  the  Egyptian  sea-coast  ;  it  is  a  district  near
Alexandria  between  Lake  Mareotis  and  the  W.  arm  of
the  Nile.2  The  Bohairic  version  is  therefore  almost
certainly  of  Alexandrian  origin.  The  dialect  in  which
it  is  written  became,  later,  the  ecclesiastical  language
of  Cairo  ;  but  this  change  occurred  only  after  Coptic
had  ceased  to  be  the  speech  of  the  people  in  Lower
Egypt,  and  it  was  probably  caused  by  the  removal  of
the  Coptic  patriarch  from  Alexandria  to  Cairo.

The  earliest  surviving  codices  of  the  Bohairic  NT  of
which  the  date  is  known  with  certainty  are  of  the
twelfth  century,  though  some  fragments  are  probably  as
early  as  the  ninth.3  They  are  often  accompanied  by  an
Arabic  translation  ;  but  there  is  no  instance  of  a  Gra?co-
Bohairic  MS.  All  appear  to  present  the  same  type  of
text,  the  chief  variation  being  the  presence  or  absence
of  certain  interpolations  derived  from  the  great  vulgates
of  the  East  —  i.e.  ,  the  '  Antiochian  '  Greek  text  and  the
Peshitta.4

The  Bohairic  version  was  known  in  Europe  for  a
considerable  period  before  any  form  of  the  Sahidic.  It
I  -  was  long  assumed  to  have  been  the
'  .  9  ,  earliest  version  of  the  NT  in  any
a  Egyptian  dialect,  and  this  opinion  is  still
maintained  —  e.g.  ,  by  A.  C.  Headlam
in  the  fourth  edition  of  Scrivener's  '  Introduction.  '  Many
scholars,  however,  consider  the  Bohairic  to  be  an
altogether  later  recension.  The  most  thoroughgoing
exponent  of  this  view  is  Guidi,  whose  argument  in  the
Nachrichten  von  der  K.  Ges.  der  \Vissenschaften,
Gottingen,  1889,  pp.  49-52,  is  reproduced  in  the
following  paragraphs.

Guidi  considers  that  the  use  of  the  various  Coptic
dialects  as  literary  languages  was  in  great  part  a  re
action  against  the  foreign  Greek  ekment.  The  true
Egyptians  hated  foreigners  and  Alexandrians,  and  the
diffusion  of  Christianity  would  be  favoured  rather  than
retarded  by  the  dislike  of  the  Imperial  Roman  authority
which  was  persecuting  it.5  We  may  add  that  this
dislike  did  not  cease  when  the  Empire  became
Christian.  When  the  Emperors  were  Arian,  Egypt
was  Orthodox  ;  when  the  Emperors  became  Orthodox,
Egypt  became  Monophysite.

The  foreign  and  Greek  element  was  comparatively
strong  in  Lower  and  Middle  Egypt  ;  but  in  Upper
Egypt  it  was  weaker,  and  so  the  native  Egyptian
characteristics  made  their  presence  felt  more  quickly
there  in  any  new  movement.  Hence  it  is  that  the  first
beginnings  of  Coptic  literature  are  found  in  Upper
Egypt  (where  also,  for  analogous  reasons,  Coptic
maintained  itself  as  a  living  language  longer  than  in  the
Delta).  These  early  products  of  Egyptian  Christianity,
whether  originals  or  translations,  contain  a  purely
Egyptian  element.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  Pistis
Sophia,  the  Bruce  papyrus,  and  other  Gnostic  writings,
all  of  which  show  traces  of  the  ancient  beliefs  and

1  The original Arabic text is given by Quatremere,
Rec/terches, 21. A later  form of Athanasius'  statement is
given  by  Stern,  Z.f.  sltg.  Sprache,  1023  (1878),  in  which  the
Bohairic  is  claimed  as  the  Cairene  dialect,  and  the  Sahidic  is
said  not  to  be  current  N.  of  M  inieh. El-Bnshm&r,  not  Bashm&r
is  the  Arabic  name  of  a  district  near  Damietta  (Yakut  1634).

2  The  modern  Bchera  (YAkut  1  514).

3  In  Lord  Crawford's  Catena  (Parham  MS  102),  edited  by
Lagarde,  the  exposition  is  translated  from  Greek  writers  ;  but
the  Gospel  text  is  that  of  the  Bohairic  version. This  MS  is
dated  888  A.D. A  facsimile  is  given  in  Kenyon's  Introduction.

4  See  the  passages  in  square  brackets in  Lagarde, Die  I  'icr
Erangelien  arabisch  (1864),  and  the  critical  notes  which  belong
to  them.

8  Diocletian's  action  in  Egypt  was  not  directed  against  the
Christians  alone  (cp  Gibbon,  1  363-365).


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


superstitions  of  heathen  Egypt.  The  school  of  thought
represented  by  these  writings  is  quite  out  of  touch  with
the  orthodox  Christianity  of  the  Greek  church  of
Alexandria,  and  would  not  long  be  content  to  have  the
Scriptures  only  in  Greek.  Thus  the  Sahidic  version  is
probably  of  considerable  antiquity  ;  it  can  be  traced
back,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  early  part  of  the  fourth
century.

To  allow  the  national  Coptic  element  to  come  to  the
front  in  Lower  Egypt,  where  it  was  less  powerful  than
in  Upper  Egypt  and  where  the  centre  of  government
and  of  the  church  was  situated,  required  a  longer  interval
of  time.  In  the  end,  however,  it  was  remarkably
helped  by  the  Monophysite  heresy.  It  is  well  known
that  after  the  death  of  the  Emperor  Anastasius  ( 5 1 8  A.  ix )
and  the  repression  of  the  heresy  in  Syria,  Egypt  became
the  true  home  of  Monophysitism.  From  that  time
Egyptian  Christianity  detached  itself  more  and  more
from  Byzantine  Christianity  and  the  Greek  church,  and
under  these  changed  conditions  there  grew  up  a  new
Coptic  literature  written  in  Bohairic  (the  Coptic  dialect
spoken  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Alexandria),  comprising
translations  of  the  Bible  from  the  Greek  and  of  many
other  writings.  It  was  probably  at  the  same  period  that
popular  Egyptian  legends,  such  as  the  death  of  Joseph,
were  adapted  into  Bohairic  from  the  Sahidic.1

Coptic  is  generally  supposed  to  have  become  a
literary  language  somewhat  earlier ;  but  that  is  not
supported  by  historical  evidence,  nor  can  it  be  proved
from  the  documents  we  possess.  These  show  us  that
down  to  the  sixth  or  the.  seventh  century  the  official
written  language  of  Egypt  was  Greek.  With  this
accords  the  fact  that  the  most  ancient  writings  connected
with  Egyptian  Christianity — the  original  of  the  Bruce
papyrus,  the  Life  of  S.  Macarius,  the  Rules  of  S.
Pachornius,  etc. — were  all  in  Greek.  Antony  did  not
know  Greek  ;  yet  the  Coptic  letters  attributed  to  him
and  published  by  Mingarelli  (pp.  198,  201)  are  trans
lated  from  the  Greek.2

An  additional  reason  for  assigning  a  late  date  to  the
Bohairic  version  and  literature  is  the  rapid  decay  both
of  the  Coptic  language  and  of  Christianity  in  Lower
Egypt  after  the  Arab  invasion.  By  the  tenth  century
Coptic  was  almost  as  dead  a  language  in  the  Delta  as
Greek  (see  Schwartze,  Copt.  Gram.  10),  though  as
late  as  the  time  of  Makrizi,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  the
Sahidic  dialect  was  still  used  in  Upper  Egypt.  The
entire  absence  of  native  exegetical  literature  is  also  in
consistent  with  the  assumed  antiquity  of  the  Bohairic.
In  Lagarde's  Catena  more  than  thirty  '  Fathers '  are
quoted  —  all  Greek.  Can  one  imagine  (to  take  a
parallel  from  another  Eastern  church)  a  Syriac  Catena
on  the  Gospels  without  one  extract  from  Ephraim  or
Philoxenus  or  Jacob  of  Serug  ?

The three chief forms of the Egyptian NT — the
Sahidic, the Fayyurnic, and the Bohairic, are not
independent. A comparison of the
passages  where  all  three  forms  are  extant
. brings  to  light  three  peculiarities  of  the
compared. Boh^iric  .

1.  Greater  faithfulness  to  the  Greek. The  Bohairic
contains  a  representation  of  nearly  all  the  particles  of
the original, which are often omitted by the other
Egyptian  versions  ; it  also  often  reverts  to  the  Greek
order  of  the  words.

2.  A  different  choice  of  Greek  words  to  be  transliter
ated. The Bohairic is especially distinguished by
vernacular renderings for abstract substantives.
Perhaps  words  such  as  Tri/ms, %ctpts, crcxftia, t^ovffia,
had  acquired  a  heretical  and  '  Gnostic '  signification.

3.  Where the Bohairic follows a different Greek
reading  from  the  others  it  is  almost  always  a  specifically
'Alexandrian'  reading. The  textual  character  of  the
Bohairic  thus  fits  in  with  the  date  assigned  to  it by

1  See  F.  Robinson,  Coptic  Apoc.  Gospels,  T.  and  S.  4  2,  p.  xvi

2  Guidi,  51.

5009


35.  Three
versions


Guidi.  Its  chief  allies  are  Cod.  Regius  (L)  of  the
Gospels,  a  MS  probably  written  in  Egypt  in  the  eighth
century,  and  among  the  Fathers  not  so  much  Clement
and  Origen  as  Cyril  of  Alexandria.

In  all  this  a  close  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  Harclean
Syriac,  itself  the  work  of  a  Monophysite  living  near
Alexandria  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century.
The  great  difference  between  the  general  type  of  Greek
text  represented  by  the  Bohairic  and  by  the  Harclean  is
due  rather  to  the  difference  of  their  ancestry  than  to
their  final  revision.

The  Fayyumic  version  occupies  a  very  peculiar
position  between  the  Sahidic  and  the  Bohairic.  In  the
Pauline  epistles,  indeed,  the  Bohairic  separates  itself  so
much  from  the  other  two  as  practically  to  become  an
independent  version  ;  but  in  the  Gospels  the  Fayyumic
stands  much  nearer  the  Bohairic.  The  general  turn  of
the  sentences  and  the  Egyptian  vocabulary  are  the  same
in  both  versions,  though  the  Fayyumic  is  careless  of  the
connecting  particles  of  the  Greek,  which  here  as  else
where  have  been  industriously  supplied  in  the  Bohairic,
In  essentials,  therefore,  the  official  Bohairic  recension
preserves  in  the  Gospels  an  Egyptian  text  somewhat
older  than  itself.  Unfortunately,  the  date  of  the
Fayyumic  version  is  unknown,  and  its  relation  to  the
Sahidic  obscure.1

The  '  Antiochian '  Greek  text  seems  never  to  have
influenced  Egypt — at  least  not  before  the  tenth  century.
Freedom  from  specifically  Antiochian  readings  is  a
characteristic  of  all  forms  of  the  Egyptian  NT.  The
relation  of  the  Egyptian  versions  to  the  '  Western  '  text
is  more  complicated.  All  Egyptian  texts  are  pre
dominantly  non  -  Western  ;  but  a  few  very  striking
'  Western  '  readings  and  interpolations  are  found  in  the
Sahidic,-  yet  not  as  a  rule  those  which  were  most  widely
spread  in  later  texts.3  In  Acts  also,  there  is  in  the
Sahidic  a  decided  '  Western '  element  ;  but  it  is  by  no
means  so  large  as  that,  for  instance,  of  the  margin  of
the  Harclean  Syriac.  Blass  (p.  29)  puts  the  Sahidic
among  the  numerous  '  mixed  '  texts  of  Acts,  and  it  seems
probable  that  it  had  this  character  from  the  beginning.

Even  more  interest  attaches  to  the  many  readings
where  the  Sahidic  supports  X  or  B,  or  both,  where  these
great  MSS  stand  almost  alone.4  Here  again,  the
version  must  faithfully  have  preserved  its  original  form,
as  these  readings  are  usually  found  also  in  the  fragments
of  the  Graeco-Sahidic  bilinguals.5  We  learn,  therefore,
from  the  evidence  of  the  Sahidic  version  that  a  text
similar  in  essentials  to  that  of  K  and  B,  though  slightly
more  '  Western '  in  character,  was  current  in  Egypt
about  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century.

The  full  Greek  canon  is  represented  both  in  the
Sahidic  and  the  Bohairic  ;  but  the  Apocalypse  seems  to
have  been  regarded  as  non -canonical,  and  is  never
bound  up  in  the  MSS  with  the  rest  of  the  NT.  Acts  is
placed  after  the  Catholic  epistles.  In  the  Pauline  epistles,
Hebrews  follows  2  Thess.  in  Bohairic  MSS  ;  but  in  the
Sahidic  and  the  Fayyumic  it  follows  2  Cor.

1  A  curious  point  of  contact  between  Fayyumic  and  Bohairic
MSS  is  that  the  same  contractions  for  'Lord'  and  '  God'  are
found  in  both,  whilst  in  Sahidic  the  words  are  always  written  out
in  full.

2  Prominent  among  them  is  the  interpolation  about  the  great
stone  in  Lk.  23  53,  with  which  is  connected  the  longer  form  of
Lk.  24  i  2. The  only  non-Egyptian  evidence  for  this  reading  is
DC.

3  E.g.,  '  Nineue  '  for  the  name  of  the  rich  man  in  Lk.  16  19  ;
comp.  'ille  Fineus  diues'  in  de  Pasch.  Comp.  265,  and  '  Finees
inmisericordis  diuitis  '  in  Priscillian,  91.

•»  E.?.,  Mt.  3  14  (om.  'liaavv^) ;  Mt.6a(add.  6  0eos).

6  See,  e.sr.,  Lk.  1024  23  34(1  36  Jn.  8  57,  in  the  fragments  pub
lished  by  Amelineau  (IV.  et  Extr.  34).  It  should  be  noticed  that
Graeco-Sahidic  bilinguals  are  generally  written  with  two  columns
tjn  a  page,  the  Greek  occupying  the  whole  of  the  verso  and  the
Sahidic  the  recto,  so  that  of  the  four  columns  visible  at  the  open
page,  the  two  on  the  left  are  Greek,  and  the  two  on  the  right  are
Egyptian.  The  Greek  and  the  Sahidic  agree  column  for
column,  but  not  line  for  line,  and  the  two  sides  of  the  codex  now
and  then  support  different  readings—^?-.,  in  Jn.  6  33,  the  Sahidic
side  of  T  reads  6  TOU  0eoC  with  KD  against  its  own  Greek.
5010


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

In  an  article  of  this  kind  it  is  almost  impossible  to  indicate
the  printed  texts  of  the  NT  in  the  various  Egyptian  dialects,
which  (apart  from  early  editions,  now  antiquated)  lie  scattered
in  periodicals  such  as  the  Zeitsclirift  fiir  Aegyptische  Sprache.
Complete  lists  of  editions  and  MSS  will  be  found  in  Scrivener
(4th  ed.  [by  A.  C.  Headlam]),  2106-123,  J27-I36.  140-144.  For
the  official  Hohairic  by  far  the  best  edition  is  the  Oxford  text
edited  with  translation  and  critical  apparatus  by  G.  H[orner],
vol.  \.f.  Gospels,  1898  ;  vol.  iii.  Acts  and  Epistles  (shortly).

The  first  mention  of  an  Armenian  church  dates  from
the  episcopate  of  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (248-265),

op  A  •  concerning  whom  Eusebius  relates  that

he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Armenians,
and  that  their  bishop  was  named
Meruzanes.  Gelzer  (Die  Anfiinge  der  armenischen
Kirche]  believes  that  this  community  lived  in  Azerbaijan  ;
but  in  any  case  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  was
evangelised  by  Syriac-speaking  missionaries,  and  that
its  ecclesiastical  language  was  Syriac.  An  Armenian
version  does  not  appear  till  much  later.  Tradition
ascribes  the  work  to  Isaac  and  Mesrob  (ft.  400);  but,  as
Armitage  Robinson  remarks,  the  accounts  '  combine  a
certain  conflict  of  assertion  with  a  suspicious  family
likeness  '  (Euthaliana  72).  He  adds  :  '  One  fact  which
seems  to  stand  out  distinctly  after  the  perusal  of  these
puzzling  statements  is  that  the  earliest  attempts  at  trans
lating  the  Scriptures  into  Armenian  were  based  on  Syriac
codices,'  and  goes  on  to  show  (pp.  76-91)  that  there
are  still  unmistakable  traces  of  the  primitive  renderings
from  the  Syriac  in  the  existing  Armenian  Vulgate.  The
Syriac  text  which  was  employed  was  not  the  Peshitta
but  the  Old  Syriac,  both  in  the  Gospels  and  in  the
Epistles.  About  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  this
primitive  version  was  thoroughly  revised  from  the  Greek,
so  that  it  is  only  here  and  there  that  we  can  recognise
the  original  groundwork.  The  Greek  text  by  which  the
revision  was  made  was  apparently  not  the  Antiochian,
but  one  akin  to  HN  ;  the  readings  of  the  Armenian  which
are  attested  neither  by  Syr.  vt  nor  by  BX  are  very  few
and  may  have  come  from  chance  corruption  in  later
times.1

The  only  critical  edition  of  the  Armenian  version  is
that  of  Zohrab  (NT,  Venice,  1789).  A  useful  abstract
of  the  native  traditions  about  the  Armenian  version,  with
lists  of  some  ancient  MSS,  is  to  be  found  in  F.  C.  Cony-
beare's  article  in  Scrivener  (4th  ed.  2  148-154).

Old  Armenian  MSS  of  the  Gospels  usually  omit  [Mk.]  169-20
altogether  ;  those  which  retain  the  verses  make  a  break  at  v.  8,
giving  the  colophon  Gospel  of  Mark  both  after  1(>8  and  after  1(5  20.
F.  C.  Conybeare  (Expositor,  1893,  PP-  242  ff-)*  however,  dis
covered  at  Etchmiadzin  a  codex  of  the  Armenian  Gospels,  written
in  989  A.H.,  which  contains  the  disputed  verses  with  the  rubric
Ariston  Eritzu  ('Of  the  Presbyter  Aristion').  A  photograph
of  the  page  containing  Mk.  \ti»jf.  is  given  in  Swete's  St.  Mark,
p.  civ.  The  inference  is  that  the  scribe  of  the  MS,  or  of  its
archetype,  had  access  to  a  tradition  that  Aristion,  the  friend  of
Papias  mentioned  in  Euseb.  HE  3  39,  was  the  man  who  added
the  verses  at  the  end  of  the  second  Gospel.  This  would  seem
to  be  some  fifty  years  too  early,  if  other  indications  are  to  be
trusted.  In  any  case,  the  readings  of  the  codex  should  be  pub
lished  in  full,  as  alone  among  Old  Armenian  MSS  it  contains  the
story  of  the  Woman  taken  in  Adultery,  but  in  a  form  quite
different  from  any  other  authority  (Conybeare  in  Expositor,
Dec.  1895).

The  version  in  Ge'ez,  the  classical  language  of  the


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Abyssinians,  is  usually  cited  as  the  '  Ethiopic. ' Abys-
OT T-*UJ« i«  sinian  Christianity  is  said  to  go  back  into

Oil ijLIllOlJlC .,  r  .  .

version  fourth  century ;  but  the  existing

version  is  not  older  than  the  fifth  or  the
sixth  century.  The  translation  was  from  the  Greek  ;
but  it  has  been  proved  by  Guidi  (Le  Traduzioni  degli
Evangelii  in  Arabo  e  in  Etiofico,  Rome,  1888)  that
many  of  the  existing  MSS,  which  are  all  very  late,
represent  later  revisions  made  from  the  mediaeval  Arabic
text  current  in  Alexandria.1

A  few  traces  survive  of  a  yet  older  Ethiopic  version
of  the  Gospels,  made  from  the  Syriac,  as  in  the  case  of
the  Armenian  version.  The  Aramaic  colouring  of  the
vocabulary  of  the  Ethiopic  NT  has  been  pointed  out  by
Gilclemeister  (Tischendorf s  A'71  8895  note),  and  the
text  now  and  again  agrees  with  Syr.  vt  against  almost
all  other  authorities,  though  it  usually  follows  the  Greek
or  the  Arabic.  Thus  in  Mk.  1650  it  reads  (wipaKAv
for  diroj3a\wv,  supported  only  by  cod.  565  and  by  Ss.
(not  by  the  Diatessaron).

The  Ethiopic  NT  was  printed  at  Rome  in  1548-9  ;
this  edition  was  repeated  in  Walton's  Polyglott,  and
has  been  carefully  rendered  into  Latin  (C.  A.  Bode,
Brunswick,  1753).  Another  edition  was  prepared  by
T.  Pell  Platt  for  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society
in  1830.

The  remaining  versions  of  the  NT  are  of  much  less
importance  for  the  text.  The  Gothic  version  dates  from
__  p.j.1,4-,  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century.  It  is  the
OB.  uoimc  work  of  Ulphilas  (  wuifiia>  .  Littie  Wolf),

'  the  apostle  of  the  Goths,  and  so  is  the
earliest  surviving  literature  in  any  Teutonic  language.
Ulphilas  worked  among  the  Goths  of  the  Danubian
Provinces  ;  but  the  surviving  documents  all  appear  to
belong  to  N.  Italy  and  the  age  of  the  Ostrogoths  or
even  of  the  Lombard  conquest.  Of  the  NT  we  have
the  Gospels  and  Pauline  epistles  (except  Hebrews),  but
with  many  gaps,  well  edited  from  MSS  of  about  the
sixth  century.

The  Gothic,  unlike  the  Armenian  and  the  Ethiopic,  has  hardly
any  link  of  connection  with  the  great  ante-Nicene  versions  and
so  for  critical  purposes  is  of  less  value.  For  the  influence  of  the
Gothic  on  some  late  Old  Latin  texts  see  above,  §  16.  The  MS  of
Romans  cited  as  gue  (or  guelph)  is  a  Latino-Gothic  bilingual;
the  Latin  appears  to  be  entirely  dependent  on  the  Gothic  text.
Here  and  there  the  Gothic  MSS  seem  to  have  taken  over  O.
Latin  readings  (e.g.,  Lk.  1  3),  in  the  same  way  that  the  Latin
cod.yhas  been  influenced  by  the  Gothic.

The  Georgian  (or  Iberian)  version  shows  signs  of  having  been

originally  made  from  the  Old  Syriac,  like  its  sister  the  Armenian

(F.  C.  Conybeare  in  Amer.  Journ.  of  Theology

39. Other  1883  ff-)- The Slavonic version, of  the ninth

Versions,  century,  is  made  from  the  Greek  and  is  too  late  to
represent  any  ancient  type  of  text  not  otherwise
preserved.  Arabic  versions  from  the  Syriac  and  the  Greek  can
be  traced  back  to  the  eighth  and  the  ninth  century  ;  but  the
current  Arabic  is  essentially  a  translation  of  the  Bohairic  Coptic,
interpolated  from  the  Greek  and  Syriac  Vulgates.  Its  sole
claim  to  our  attention  here  is  that  Guidi  has  recognised  it  as  the
source  from  which  the  far  earlier  Ethiopic  has  been  corrupted.

Just  as  in  the  East  late  versions  were  made  from  the  Greek  and
Syriac  Vulgates,  so  in  the  West  there  are  various  translations  into
Anglo-Saxon,  Frankish,  etc.,  from  the  Latin  Vulgate.  All  these
secondary  translations  contribute  nothing  for  the  criticism  of  the
original  text  of  the  NT  because  the  Greek,  Latin,  and  Syriac
Vulgates  can  be  accurately  constructed  from  earlier  authorities.


II. OLD  TESTAMENT


A.  THE  MASSORETIC  TEXT


All  MSS  of  the  Hebrew  OT  are  copies,  more  or  less

full  and  accurate,  of  a  single  critical  edition  commonly

__  ,. called '  the Massoretic Text.' This

text 1C  edition'  like  other  critical  works-  con
tains  a  Text,  a  Punctuation ,  and  A'o/es.

'Massora'  means  tradition,  and  the  unknown  editors  only
profess  to  give  the  traditional  text,  as  it  was  traditionally
recited  in  the  synagogue.  The  date  of  the  Massoretic
edition  must  be  placed  somewhere  between  the  fifth  and

1  E.g.,  in  Mt.  1  7-8  the  Armenian  has  a<rd<b  with  BX,  against
the  Antiochian  Greek  text  on  the  one  hand,  and  all  forms  of  the
Syriac  on  the  other.

5011


the  eighth  century  of  our  era.  Jerome  knew  nothing  of
any  system  of  vocalisation  in  Hebrew  MSS  ;  the  present
system  must  have  been  introduced  later  than  the  be
ginning  of  the  fifth  century  ;  an  inferior  limit  is  set  by
the  existence  of  Massoretic  codices  as  old  as  the  ninth
century.2  (On  the  Samaritan  text  of  the  Pentateuch
see  §  45. )

1  Possibly  a  reminiscence  of  this  revision  has  been  preserved
in  the  Encomium  of  Abba  Salama  published  by  Ludolf  in  1691
Commentarius,  p.  205.

2  Systems  of  vocalisation  similar  in  principle  are  now  used  for
Syriac  and  classical  Arabic. All  three  systems  must  have  a
common  origin,  and  may  have  been  indirectly  a  result  of  the
Mohammedan  conquest  and  the  consequent  spread  of  the  Arabic
language in  a  vulgarised form. Before the  seventh century

5012


41.  Vowels.


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

i.  The  Text  of  the  Massoretic  edition  consists  of  the
consonants  of  the  Hebrew  (cp  WkrriNG,  §  7),  which
are,  however,  divided  into  words.

According  to  the  Jewish  view  this  alone  is  '  Scripture,'  and  in
theory  it  is  complete  by  itself  without  further  punctuation  or
vocalisation.  The  extant  MSS,  none  of  which  are  older  than
the  ninth  century,  give  the  consonantal  text  adopted  by  the
Massoretes  with  great  fidelity  ;  throughput  the  forty -eight
chapters  of  Ezekiel  only  sixteen  real  variations  occur  between  a
modern  edition  based  ultimately  on  Western  MSS  and  the
'Codex  Habylonicus  Petropolitanus '  (916  A.D.),  a  newly  dis
covered  MS  of  wholly  Eastern  ancestry.  Yet,  as  will  be  shown
later,  this  consonantal  text  is  frequently  corrupt,  so  that  the
agreement  of  our  MSS  only  enables  us  to  reconstruct  their
common  exemplar  and  affords  no  proof  whatever  that  this
exemplar  faithfully  represented  the  lost  original  as  it  left  the
author's  hands.

The  leather  rolls  used  in  the  synagogue  contain  no  vocalisa
tion  ;  but  their  full  agreement  with  the  pointed  codices  proves
that  they  also  are  only  transcripts  of  the  official  Massoretic  text.

2.  The  Massoretic  Punctuation  serves  what  we  are
accustomed  to  consider  the  double  purpose  of  vocalisa
tion  and  accentuation.  Each  word  is
provided  with  '  points '  and  one  or  more
'  accents,  the  points  indicating  the  vowels  that  are  to  be
supplied  to  each  letter,  whilst  the  accents  indicate  the
inflections  of  the  voice,  telling  the  reader  what  pause,  if
any,  is  to  be  made  on  the  word,  and  thus  forming  a
complete  system  of  punctuation  in  the  English  sense  of
the  term.  These  additional  signs  also  are  given  with
considerable  accuracy  in  the  MSS,  though  there  is  a
certain  amount  of  variation  in  the  case  of  the  subordinate
accents.

The  value  of  the  whole  system  as  a  kind  of  gram
matical  commentary  on  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  can  hardly
be  over-estimated.  So  well  is  the  vocalisation  carried
out,  that  there  are  very  few  places  where  the  text  can  be
emended  by  altering  the  points  and  leaving  the  con
sonants  as  they  stand.  In  fact,  the  Massoretic  pointing
may  even  be  used  as  a  means  of  discovering  errors  in
the  text.  The  Massoretes  did  not  make  a  critical
revision ;  they  only  supplied  traditional  vowels  to  the
traditional  consonantal  text ;  where  the  consonantal
text  was  corrupt,  really  suitable  vowels  could  not  be
placed.  As  a  general  rule,  therefore,  anomalous  point
ing  in  our  Hebrew  text  is  a  sign  that  the  consonants  are
wrong. l  The  chief  exceptions  are  to  be  found  in  places
where  theological  or  national  prejuduce  appears  to  have
influenced  the  punctuation.  Even  there,  however,  the
false  readings  are  hardly  ever  novelties  ;  they  are  the
perpetuation  of  old  and  popular  errors.'2

3.  In  addition  to  text  and  punctuation  the  Mas
soretic  edition  includes  critical  Notes,  which  occupy

42  Notes  the  marSins  of  our  copies.  Some  of  these
'  notes  draw  attention  to  anomalies  of  vocali
sation,  or  what  might  seem  to  be  such,  thereby  fulfilling
the  same  purpose  that  we  express  by  putting  sic  after  a
word  ;  others  form  part  of  a  vast  system  of  '  marginal
references  '  and  computations  intended  to  preserve  the
absolute  integrity  of  the  Massoretic  standard.3  For
textual  criticism,  however,  the  most  interesting  of  these
notes  deal  with  passages  where  the  Massoretes  against
their  usual  custom  have  deserted  the  reading  of  the  text.
Not  that  even  in  such  cases  they  have  dared  to  change
the  written  Word  (KZthibh)  ;  the  consonantal  text  re-


other  systems  of  partial  vocalisation,  such  as  the  introduction  of
the  '  matres  lectionis  '  and  in  Syriac  the  diacritical  point,  had
been  employed  in  Semitic  writing  where  a  purely  consonantal
alphabet  had  been  found  too  ambiguous.

1  Illustrations  of  this  statement  will  be  found,  e.g..  in  Dt.  8821
i  S.  l69  Is.  96(7),  Ezek.  28  12  Mi.  28.

2  Thus  the  Hebrew  oath  was  by  the  life  of  the  person  sworn
by  (f-Sii  Gen.  42  15  f.  Amos  8  14)  ;  but  in  swearing  by  the  true
God  this  is  altered  into  a  predication  of  His  Being. Hence  the
impossible  mixed  formula  '  As  the  Lord  liveth,  and  by  the  life  of
thy  soul'  (i  Sam.  203,  etc.). But  this  mixed  form  is  as  old  as
the  Targum. For  other  instances,  see  col.  5029.

•*  Some  of  these  lists  and  calculations  form  separate  works,
such  as  the  tract  Ochla,  and  are  no  doubt  in  part  older  than  the
written  vow^l-points  and  the  Massoretic  edition.  For  a  full
description  of  the  methods  used  in  the  Massoretic  Notes  see
Wellhausen-Bleek,  Einleitung,  §  277.


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

mains  unaltered,  but  the  vowels  supplied  to  it  are
those  of  the  emended  consonantal  text,  which  appears
only  on  the  margin,  followed  by  the  word  A~f,-e  ('  to  be
read ').

A  certain  number  of  these  alterations  refer  to  the
spelling  or  pronunciation  of  grammatical  forms,  of  which
the  Kfthibh  has  often  preserved  the  older  type,  especially
in  the  Aramaic  portions  of  Daniel  and  Ezra.  But
where  it  is  a  question  of  real  variation  of  reading  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Kfthibh  was  simply  supposed
to  be  corrupt,  and  the  Kgre  was  a  more  or  less  successful
conjectural  emendation.  Thus  we  come  to  the  very
important  conclusion  that  the  Massoretic  text  itself  is,
in  parts  at  least,  ultimately  based  on  a  single  faulty  MS  ;
when  we  find  in  Ezek.  48  16  '  five  five  hundred '  in  the
text,  not  corrected,  but  with  a  marginal  note  to  read
'five'  only  once,  we  cannot  but  conclude  that  here  at
any  rate  the  editors  had  been  reduced  to  following  a
single  MS  in  which  '  five '  had  been  written  twice  over
by  mistake.1

Few  scholars  will  suppose  that  the  Klre  readings
cover  all  the  corrupt  passages  in  the  Hebrew  text.
They  are  simply  the  passages  where  the  mistake  was
most  patent  and  the  remedy  nearest  at  hand.  It  is
only  likely  that  we  should  find  corruptions  in  the  ancient
literature  of  the  Jews,  literature  written  in  a  dead
language  and  relating  to  vanished  national  and  social
conditions,  circulating  among  a  people  whose  seats  of
learning  were  again  and  again  broken  up  by  political
misfortunes  (see  further,  §  66).

But  in  whatever  condition  the  text  underlying  the  Mas
soretic  edition  may  be,  criticism  has  to  start  from  it.
The  direct  evidence  takes  us  no  farther,  and  the  only
quarter  from  which  we  can  hope  for  an  improvement
of  the  Hebrew  text  (apart  from  conjectural  emendation)
is  the  study  of  the  ancient  versions.  From  these  we
may  at  least  learn  something  of  the  history  of  the  text
back  to  the  second  or  the  third  century  B.C.

Since  the  above  was  written  some  fragments  of
papyrus,  containing  the  ten  commandments,  followed
by  the  Shemci  (Dt.  G^f, )  in  Hebrew,  have  been  edited
by  S.  A.  Cook  in  PSBA  (Jan.  1903).  The  appear
ance  of  the  papyrus  and  the  very  remarkable  hand
writing,  which  presents  striking  resemblances  with  the
Palmyrene  character,  point  to  a  date  not  later  than  the
second  century  A.  D.  The  text  agrees  in  several  instances
with  the  Septuagint  against  MT.  It  is  possible,  there
fore,  that  further  discoveries  may  one  day  enable  us
directly  to  control  the  Massoretic  tradition.

The  three  chief  pointed  editions  of  the  Hebrew  text  are  the
Bomberg  Folio,  published  in  Venice  1525-6,  the  Mantua  (Quarto
with  Norzi's  commentary  1742-4,  and  the  octavo
43.  Editions,  edition  of  Van  der  Hooght,  1705.  The  last  is
the  parent  of  the  ordinary  reprints.  The  Bom-
berg  edition  is  the  work  of  Rabbi  Jacob  ben  Hayyim,  and
contains,  besides  Rabbinical  commentaries  and  the  Targums,  a
vast  collection  of  Massoretic  material  there  brought  together  for
the  first  time.  Of  modern  editions  that  of  Baer-Delitzsch  is  to
be  noticed  for  its  correctness  and  the  fulness  of  its  Massoretic
notes.  C.  D.  Ginsburg  also  may  be  mentioned  ;  his  Massora.
(now  nearly  completed)  will  contain  the  entire  apparatus,  with
indices.

In  addition  to  canonical  Scripture  there  was  a  con
siderable  body  of  pre-Christian  Hebrew  literature  ;  but
this  has  altogether  perished,  or  is  only  known  by  trans
lations  into  Greek,  etc.  Such  for  instance  is  the  First
Book  of  the  Maccabees,  the  Book  of  Enoch,  and
others  (see  APOCRYPHA,  APOCALYPTIC).

A  fragment  of  this  literature  in  the  original  Hebrew  was
brought  to  light  in  1896  by  the  discovery  of  part  of  a  MS  of  the
Wisdom  of  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach  (XTD  p).  commonly  called
Ecclesiasticus?  Fragments  of  other  MSS  have  been  discovered
in  the  following  years.  It  is  still  disputed  to  what  extent  these
MSS  preserve  the  original  text,  as  they  seem  to  have  been
corrected  in  places  to  agree  with  the  Syriac  and  with  the  Greek,


160


5013


1  In  any  given  variation  it  is  of  course  quite  likely  that  the
copies  used  by  the  Massoretes  had  not  fallen  into  the  error  for
the first time, but were slavishly repeating the originally
accidental  error  of  a  single  MS.

2  See  ECCI.ESIASTICUS,  §  4  ;  SIRACH.

5014


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

whilst  in  other  places  the  newly-recovered  Hebrew  differs  widely
from  both  versions.  See  ECCLESIASTICUS,  §  ^f.,  and  especially
SIRACH.  The  extensive  variations  between  the  Hebrew  MSS
and  the  ancient  Greek  and  Syriac  versions  show  the  dangers  to
which  Hebrew  works  were  exposed  in  transmission  unless  arti
ficially  preserved  by  rules  such  as  those  observed  by  the  Mas-
soretes  ;  they  also  illustrate  the  freedom  used  by  the  ancients
when  translating  profane  literature.

B.  VERSIONS

The  age  and  character  of  the  versions  of  the  OT  are

so  different  that  it  may  be  well  to  prefix  a  list  of  them,

44 OT arranSecl roughly in chronological order,

.  to the more detailed examination which

follows  :  —

•  I.  The  Samaritan  (Heb. )  Pentateuch  (§  45)  and  the
Samaritan  (Aram.)  Targum  (SAMARITANS,  §  5  a),  the
origin  of  which  goes  back  to  400  B.C.

2.  The  ancient  Greek  version,  commonly  called  the
Septuagint  (§§  46/51-55). Parts  of  it  date  from  the  third
century  B.C.  ;  but  other  portions  are  not  so  ancient,  and
the  whole  has  been  much  revised  and  altered  in  later
times. This  is  the  OT  of  the  Greek  church. There
are  valuable  subsidiary  translations  of  the  Septuagint
into  Latin  (§§  56-58),  Coptic  (§  63),  F.thiopic  (§  64),  and
Armenian  (§  64),  from  trie  second  to  the  seventh  century
A.n. ),  and  at  a  later  period  into  Syriac  (§  6i/  ),  Arabic,
Gothic,  etc.  (§  64).

3.  The Targums, paraphrases  of  the Hebrew  OT
in  the  various  dialects of  Jewish  Aramaic  for  use in
the  synagogue. Their  origin  goes  back  to  before  the
Christian  Era  ;  but  their  extant  form  was  fixed  at  a  much
later  period  (§  65).

4.  Later  Greek  translations  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,
made  during  the  second  century  A.  u.  by  Jews  or  Jewish-
Christians  named  Aquila  (§  46),  Symmachits  (§  47),  and
Theodotion  (§  48).

5.  The  Syriac  version,  commonly  called  the  PeshTtta,
a translation from  the  Hebrew, of  unknown age  but
certainly  earlier  than  the  fourth  century  A.D.  (§  60),

6.  The  new  Latin version  made  by  Jerome  at  the
beginning  of  the  fifth  century  A.D.  ,  now  known  as  the
I'ulgate  (§54).

It  will  be  practically  convenient  to  describe  these
versions  of  the  OT  under  the  languages  in  which  they
are  found,  irrespective  of  the  character  of  the  text.

The  '  Samaritan  Pentateuch '  is  not  a  version  ;  it  is
the  Hebrew  text  of  the  '  five  books  of  Moses '  as  pre
served  by  the  Samaritan  community.

The  Samaritans  were  a  mixed  race  settled  in  the  country

round  Samaria. They  had  been  willing  to  join  the  Jews  in

. rebuilding  the  temple  after  the  return  ;  but

45.  Samaritan  when  the  Jews  refused  their  help  they  became

Pentateuch,  bitterly  hostile,  and  Samaria  formed  a  perma
nent  asylum  for  those  who  left  or  were  driven
out  by  their  co-religionists  in  Jerusalem.  About  333  B.C.  one  of
these  refugees,  a  certain  Manasseh,  grandson  of  the  high  priest
Eliashib  (Neh.  1823-31  ;  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  7  »),  obtained  leave  from
Darius  Codomannus  to  set  up  a  temple  on  Mt.  Gerizim,  and  it
is  highly  probable  that  along  with  the  temple  ritual  he  brought
with  him  the  then  canonical  Jewish  Scriptures — i.e.,  the  Book
of  the  Law  in  Hebrew.1  This  alone  forms  the  Scriptures  of  the
Samaritans.  It  is  written,  like  all  their  books,  in  the  '  Samaritan  '
character,  which  is  the  direct  descendant  of  the  old  Hebrew
writing.  The  dialect  spoken  by  the  Samaritans  was  a  variety
of  western  Aramaic  (see  ARAMAIC,  §  8  ;  SAMARITANS,  §  5  if),
into  which  at  some  period  was  made  a  translation  of  the  Penta
teuch  known  as  the  Samaritan  Targum  (SAMARITANS,  §  5 a);
there  is  also  found  in  Samaritan  MSS  an  Arabic  translation
made  about  the  eleventh  century  A.D. ,  at  a  time  when  the
Samaritans,  like  the  rest  of  the  peoples  of  Syria,  had  adopted
the  Arabic  language.  See  SAMARITANS.

The  Samaritan  Pentateuch  had  from  the  beginning
certain  intentional  adaptations  to  fit  it  to  the  new  wor-

1  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  schism  of  Manasseh  is  the  cause
of  the  well-known  various  reading  in  Judg.  1830,  where  the

name  Moses  (mj'c)  has  been  changed  into  Manasseh  (,TJ>  c)  by
the  insertion  of  a  letter  above  the  line.  By  this  thoroughly
rabbinic  device  a  parallel  between  the  earlier  and  the  later
northern  schism  was  indicated,  yet  without  entirely  falsifying
the  text.  '  Manasseh  '  is  in  the  Kere.  the  Targum,  the  Peshitta,
and  the  later  texts  of  <B  ;  but  the  earlier  text  of  (B  had  '  Moses,'
which  is  still  read  by  the  Lyons  Octateuch  and  some  Greek  MSS.

50IS


!


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

ship,  as  the  command  to  build  an  altar  on  Mt.  Gerizim
inserted  after  Ex.  liOi?,  and  the  interchange  of  Kbal  and
Gerizim  in  Dt.  27  4.  Characteristic  also  of  the  Samaritan
Pentateuch  are  certain  long  interpolations  from  parallel
or  semi-parallel  passages  (e.g. ,  at  Ex.  20  ^  ff.  from
Deut.  18,  and  in  Nu.  '20 /  from  Deut.  1-3),  and  in  some
places  anthropomorphic  expressions  are  paraphrased,
much  as  in  the  Targums.1  On  the  other  hand  it  has,
presumably,  escaped  the  corruptions  which  have  befallen
the  purely  Jewish  line  of  transmission  since  the  fourth
century  B.C.,  whence  now  and  then  it  agrees  with  the
Septuagint  in  preserving  words  and  letters  which  have
dropped  out  of  the  Massoretic  text.2  There  is  nothing,
however,  to  show  that  the  roll  or  rolls  carried  off  by
Manasseh  contained  a  recension  in  any  way  superior  to
those  then  current  in  Jerusalem  ;  in  fact,  the  Samaritan
shares  with  all  other  extant  forms  of  the  Pentateuch
some  clear  palceographical  corruptions,  such  as  »tc',
Nu.  233l  ^BD,  Deut.  33 13,  Km  JIBD,  Deut.  33zi  (see  §  6~6).
The  main  thing,  therefore,  to  be  learnt  from  the
Samaritan  recension  is  that  about  the  year  333  B.C.,
less  than  a  century  after  Ezra,  less  than  a  century  after
the  Torah  in  its  present  form  had  become  once  for  all
the  Law-book  of  the  Jewish  church,  the  text  of  the
Pentateuch  was  read  substantially  as  we  read  it  now.
The  Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  Targum  were  first  printed  by
Morinus  in  the  Paris  Polyglott  (1632)  from  a  MS  brought  to
urope  by  Pietro  de  la  Valle.  This  was  repeated  in  Walton's
Polyglott  (1657),  ar>d  the  Hebrew  text  separately  printed  in  1790.
Bagster's  Polyglott  contains  a  collation  of  this  edition  with  the
ordinary  printed  Hebrew.  Cp  SAMARITANS,  §  5  a.

I. GREEK

Earliest  among  the  versions  properly  so-called,  per
haps  the  earliest  translation  of  any  considerable  body  of

46.  Septuagint  •  literature  ™*°  a  totallv  different  Ian-
.  .  °  guage,  is  the  ancient  Greek  version
°  '  commonly  known  as  the  Septuagint.

According  to  the  constant  tradition  of  the  Alexandrian
Jews  the  Law  was  translated  into  Greek  in  the  reign  of
Ptolemy  Philadelphus  (284-247  B.C.)  at  the  instigation
and  under  the  patronage  of  Demetrius  Phalareus  the
librarian  of  the  Alexandrian  Library.  One  of  the  two
authors  from  whom  we  gather  this  is  Aristobulus  of
Alexandria,  a  Jewish  philosopher  of  the  second  century
B.C.  ;  the  other  is  a  Jewish  writer  of  the  Ptolemaic  period
who  composed  under  the  name  of  Aristeas,  a  courtier  of
Philadelphus,  a  fictitious  account  of  the  origin  of  the
version.  Aristobulus  (ap.  Clem.  Alex.  Strom.  1342  and
Eus.  Praep.  Ev.  96  1812)  maintained  that  Pythagoras
and  Plato  derived  their  philosophy  from  Moses,  whilst
the  object  of  the  pseudo- Aristeas  (HISTORICAL  LITERA
TURE,  §  19,  vi.)  appears  to  have  been  to  represent  the
Greek  version  of  the  Law  as  having  been  undertaken
with  the  express  approval  of  the  high-priestly  circles  in
Jerusalem.  These  authors  had  no  object  in  asserting
that  the  version  had  been  made  about  280  B.C.  under
distinguished  heathen  patronage — such  a  representation
must  have  stood  in  their  way  ;  we  may  therefore  assume
that  it  was  a  historical  fact  of  which  they  were  obliged
to  take  account.3  The  name  Septuagint  comes  from
the  story  given  by  pseudo  -  Aristeas,  and  variously
embellished  by  later  writers,  that  the  translation  was
made  by  seventy  men  (or  seventy-two,  six  from  each
tribe),  who  all  agreed  in  their  renderings.

It  will  be  noticed  that  these  stories  refer  exclusively  to  the
Pentateuch,  to  which  alone  the  name  Septuagint  (LXX)  properly
belongs.  But  the  whole  Greek  OT  is  now  comprehended  under
this  term,  by  a  convenient  if  unhistorical  usage,  which  goes  back
to  the  time  of  Origen.

The  other  books  of  the  OT  had  an  even  less  official
origin  than  the  translation  of  the  Law.  They  seem  to
have  been  turned  into  Greek  by  different  hands  at
various  times  from  the  middle  of  the  third  century  B.C.

*  E.g.,  Nu.  23  4.

2  E.g.,  Gen.  48  Deut.  8235.

3  Demetrius  Phalereus  was  exiled  by  Philadelphus  early  in
his  reign  ; hence  we  cannot  place  the  translation  of  the  Lawr
much  later  than  280.

5016


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

down to the  Christian  Era, or  even later. There  is
evidence  for  believing  that  Philo  the  Jew  (about  30  B.  C.-

47  Citations  5°  A'D->  was  acquainted  with  all  the
LS-  OT  except  Esther,  Ecclesiastes,  Song
of  Solomon,  and  Daniel1  (cp  CANON,  §  50).  At  a  still
earlier  date  (132  B.C.)  the  translator  of  Ecclesiasticus
speaks  of  '  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  and  the  rest  of  the
Books '  as  existing  in  Greek  (cp  CANON,  §  39),  whilst  the
Book  of  Wisd.  2 12  (?  50  B.C.  )  contains  a  clear  adaptation
of  the  very  peculiar  rendering  of  Is.  3io  in  the  LXX.

The  use  of  the  OT  by  the  writers  of  the  various  books
of  the  NT  suggests  many  difficult  problems,  the  solutions
of  which  have  by  no  means  all  been  reached.  Some
writers,  notably  Lk. ,  clearly  use  LXX.  Others,  such  as
the  writer  of  the  first  Gospel,  often  agree  with  the  Hebrew
in  places  where  it  differs  from  LXX.  But  it  by  no  means
follows  that  this  latter  class  are  using  an  independent
Greek  version.  In  the  opinion  of  the  present  writer
it  is  far  more  likely  that  the  quotations  in  the  NT
that  do  not  follow  LXX  are  derived  either  directly
from  the  Hebrew  or  mediately  through  the  more  or  less
fixed  Aramaic  renderings  then  current  in  the  synagogue.
In  the  case  of  the  Apocalypse  we  must  remember  that
it  is  in  language  an  adaptation  of  a  previously  existing
Jewish  Apocalypse  in  Hebrew  or  Aramaic  (APOCALYPSE,
§  z^ff. ),  an  adaptation  so  close  as  to  be  in  parts,  at  least,
a  translation.  Such  a  work  naturally  shows  in  its  Greek
dress  many  coincidences  with  the  OT  which  are  quite
independent  of  LXX  ;  but  these  coincidences  can
scarcely  be  used  with  any  confidence  to  postulate  in
dependent  Greek  versions.  After  the  catastrophe
of  the  Jewish  War  in  70  A.  D.  the  Semitic-speaking
Christianity  of  Palestine  disappeared,  and  by  the  next
generation  the  church  became  entirely  dependent  on  the
Greek  version  of  the  OT.

In  the  middle  of  the  second  century  A.n.  we  find  the
Christian  Justin  and  the  Jew  Trypho  equally  using  the
LXX  and  founding  theirargumentsonitswording,  though
here  and  there  (as  in  Is.  812  7  14)  the  Jew  is  no  longer
satisfied  with  the  traditional  rendering.  But  after  the
Hebrew  canon  became  definitely  closed  under  'Akiba  and
his  school,  and  a  stricter  exegesis  began  to  come  into
fashion,  the  LXX  failed  to  satisfy  the  synagogue,  and
three  separate  attempts  were  made  to  supersede  it.
These  are  the  new  translations  of  Aquila  and  of  Sym-
machus,  and  the  elaborate  revision  of  the  LXX  by  Theo-
dotion.  As  these  works  are  of  importance  mainly  for
their  influence  upon  the  text  of  the  LXX,  which  continued
to  be  the  translation  used  by  the  church,  it  will  be  con
venient  to  describe  them  here.

Aquila,  a  native  of  Pontus,  is  said  to  have  been  a
proselyte  to  Judaism  and  a  disciple  of  the  celebrated

48 Version  of Kabbi  'A1?lba  ^  I3S  A'D'*' His  ver'
'  Aauila  sion' tl"lcrcfore- may  be  dated about

the  second  quarter  of  the  second
century.  It  is  marked  by  the  greatest  literalness,  an
attempt  being  made  to  express  every  word  of  the
original,  and  even  to  render  the  derivatives  of  a.  Hebrew
root  by  derivatives  from  the  corresponding  Greek  root
(Field,  22).  This  method  of  translation  was  not  the
result  of  ignorance,  but  of  a  system  of  exegesis  which
was  willing  to  deduce  important  theological  conclusions
from  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  smallest  particles.2
For  the  textual  critic  Aquila's  method  is  extremely  con
venient.  It  is  always  easy  to  retranslate  his  renderings
into  their  Hebrew  original,  and  (what  is  practically
more  important)  his  style  is  so  pronounced  that  frag
ments  of  his  work  which  have  been  incorporated  with
other  documents  can  be  easily  recognised  and  eliminated.

1  Ryle,  Philo  and  Holy  Scripture,  32.

"The  Hebrew  prefix  eth,  which  marks  the  definite  accusa
tive,  agrees  in  form  with  the  preposition  '  with.'  Hence,  when
Dent.  1020  says,  '  Thou  shall  fear  fM-Jehovah  thy  God,"  Akiba
interprets,  '  Thou  shall  fear  the  doctors  of  the  laiv  along  with
Jehovah. '  So  Aquila,  the  disciple  of  Akiba,  translates  the  mark
of  Ihe  accusalive  by  (n>o"(WRS,  OTJC,  1881,  399).  In  such
cases  trvv  does  nol  govern  a  case.

5017


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

The  version  of  Aquila  was  used  by  Greek-speaking
Jews  in  the  days  of  Justinian  (AW.  146)  ;  but  no  MS
was  known  to  survive  until  some  fragments  of  t\\o  very
handsome  codices  were  found  among  the  de'bris  from
the  Geniza  of  the  Cairo  synagogue,  which  were  trans
ferred  in  1897  to  the  Cambridge  University  Library.
The  fragments  of  the  books  of  Kings  (i  K.  267-17  2  K.
2812-27)  were  edited  in  1897  by  F.  C.  Burkitt,  those  of
Psalms  (parts  of  Pss.  90-103)  in  1899  by  C.  Taylor.1
Small  as  is  the  extent  covered  by  these  fragments,  they
are  of  great  importance  for  the  criticism  of  Origen's
Hexapla  and  the  Hexaplar  readings  in  our  Greek  MSS
of  the  LXX.

A  peculiarity  of  Aquila's  version,  as  revealed  by  these  frag
ments,  is  the  use  of  the  Old-Hebrew  characler  for  the  Tetra-
grammalon  (Yahwe :  see  NAMES,  §  109^)^  ^  ^  ^\,  which  is
lefl  ihus  unlranslated.  In  Ps.  102  17  we  find  TGI  CON  for  jv\,-,  a

notable  transliteration,  to  be  paralleled  only  by  TI&2kH  in  B's
texl  of  Lam.  1  18  2  18  3  52-54  4  18,  itself  probably  adapted  from
Aquila.

Symmachus  is  said  to  have  been  a  Samaritan  by  race
and  an  Ebionite  Christian  by  religion.  His  version

49  Of  Svm-  seems  to  ^ave  been  Published  between
inachus  "  the  tirnes  of  Irenaells  and  of  Origen,
about  200  A. D.  His  method  was
utterly  different  from  Aquila's,  as  he  aimed  at  giving  a
rendering  of  the  OT  in  Greek  sufficiently  idiomatic  not
to  offend  a  reader  ignorant  of  Semitic  constructions.
The  Hebrew  text  which  underlies  the  translation  of
Symmachus  is  equally  with  that  of  Aquila  almost
identical  with  the  Massoretic.  Both  Symmachus  and
Aquila  appear  to  have  published  second  editions  of
their  translations,  differing  slightly  from  the  first.

Theodotion is mentioned along with Aquila by

Irenaeus  (Hcer.  823)  as  a  modern  translator  in  contra-

50 Of  Theo distinction to the ancient Seventy.

'dotion  "  ^e  's  sa'd  to  ^ave  been  an  Ephesian
and  a  proselyte  to  Judaism;  other
accounts  make  him,  like  Symmachus,  an  Ebionite.
The  date  of  his  work  is  uncertain  ;  but,  according  to
Epiphanius,  it  falls  within  the  reign  of  C'ommodus  ( 180-
192  A.D. ).  The  only  reason  for  doubting  this  and
assigning  Theodotion  to  a  considerably  earlier  date  is
that  coincidences  with  the  version  of  Daniel,  which  goes
by  his  name,  have  been  detected  in  various  early
Christian  writings,  including  some  books  of  the  NT.
But  these  coincidences  admit  of  another  explanation
(see  above,  §  47)  which  has  strong  claims  on  our  accept
ance  ;  it  would,  moreover,  be  against  all  analogy  that
Christian  literary  tradition  should  put  a  work  of  this
kind  a  century  too  late.

Theodotion's  edition  differs  essentially  from  those  of
Aquila  and  Symmachus.  It  was  not,  like  theirs,  an
independent  translation,  but  a  revision  of  the  LXX  by
the  existing  Hebrew.  He  supplied  translations  of
words  and  passages  of  the  Hebrew  for  which  there  \vas
no  equivalent  in  the  LXX,  but  retained  the  additions  of
the  Greek  which  are  unrepresented  in  the  Massoretic
text.  The  renderings  of  the  LXX  were  largely  retained
by  him,  and  the  construction  of  the  sentences  but  little
changed.  His  own  renderings  followed  the  general
style  of  the  LXX,  his  chief  peculiarity  being  a  fondness
for  transliterating  Hebrew  words  instead  of  translating.
Theodotion  seems  to  have  based  his  work  on  a  good
text  of  the  LXX,  which  is  often  unrepresented  in  our
existing  MSS,  and  this  constitutes  for  us  his  chief  value.

The  revision  of  the  LXX  thus  made  by  Theodotion
appears  very  soon  to  have  influenced  the  text  used  by
Christian  scholars.  Clear  traces  of  Theodotion's  render
ings  are  found  in  some  of  the  quotations  of  Clement  of
Alexandria  (e.g.,  Peed.  1  10— Is.  4822  ;  Strom.  222  =
Ezek.  18  4-9). 2  A  little  later  the  same  remarkable

1  The  numeration  in  each  case  is  that  of  the  Hebrew  text.

2  See  'Clemens  Alexandrinus  und die  LXX,'  by  Dr.  Otto
Stahlin  {Beit.  z.  Jahresb.  d.  K.  neuen  Gymnasiums  in  Niirn-
berg,  1901).

5018


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

phenomenon  meets  us  in  Tertullian's  quotations  from
Ezekiel  (Tertullian,  De  Res.  Carnis,  §  29  =  Ezek.  37 1-14  ;
Ad-c.  lada-os,  §  ii  =Ezek.  8i2-96).  But  the  quotations
of  Cyprian  and  other  Latin  writers  from  Kzekiel  are  free
from  admixture  with  Theodotion.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Church  definitely  adopted  Theodotion's  revision  of
Daniel  in  the  place  of  the  older  and  more  paraphrastical
translation  of  the  LXX.  The  history  of  this  important
change  is  extremely  obscure.  It  may  have  been  helped
on  by  the  popularity  of  the  commentary  on  Daniel
issued  by  Hippolytus  (about  220  A.u. ),  and,  in  any
case,  it  was  accepted  even  in  the  Latin-speaking  church
at  Carthage  during  the  lifetime  of  Cyprian  (250  A.  u. ).
One  consequence  of  this  change  is  that  all  copies  of  the
genuine  LXX  text  of  Daniel  have  disappeared  except
two,  and  these  give  the  text  only  as  revised  by  Origen
(§  49).  We  have,  therefore,  a  very  imperfect  idea  01
the  range  of  variation  in  the  ecclesiastical  texts  01
Daniel  current  in  early  times,  and  it  is  probable  that
the  coincidences  of  language  with  Theodotion's  Daniel
which  have  been  observed  in  early  writers  are  due  to
the  use,  not  of  Theodotion's  text  itself,  but  of  a  text  of
the  LXX,  akin  to  that  which  Theodotion  took  as  the
basis  of  his  revision.

It  has  been  maintained  by  Sir  H.  H.  Howorth  (PSD A
28147-159  [1901]),  and  the  theory  has  great  probability,
that  the  book  called  Ezra  B  in  our  Greek  MSS  of  the
Septuagint,  which  is  practically  a  literal  translation  of
the  Massoretic  text  of  Ezra-Nehemiah,  is  a  part  of  the
work  of  Theodotion,  the  original  Greek  rendering  of
the  book  being  that  called  Ezra  A — i.e. ,  '  i  Esdras'  in  the
English  Apocrypha  (see  E/CKA,  THE  GREEK,  col.  1490).

About  the  year  240  the  celebrated  Origen,  then  living
as  an  exile  from  Alexandria  at  Cassarea  in  Palestine,
_.  .  ,  prepared  an  edition  of  all  these  versions
?  arranged  in  parallel  columns,  which

W0r  '  is  known  as  the  Hexapla.  The  six

columns  contained  (i)  the  Hebrew,  (2)  a  transliteration
of  the  Hebrew  into  Greek  letters,  (3)  Aquila,  (4)  Sym-
machus,  (5)  the  LXX,  (6)  Theodotion.  In  the  poetical
and  prophetical  books  there  were  also  extracts  from  a
fifth  and  a  sixth  Greek  version,  both  of  unknown  age  and
authorship.  The  columns  were  arranged  in  very  short
cola,  the  extant  fragments  rarely  containing  more  than
the  equivalent  of  one  or  two  Hebrew  words.  A  smaller
edition,  called  the  Tetrapla,  was  afterwards  prepared  by
Origen  himself,  consisting  of  the  four  Greek  versions
alone,  without  the  Hebrewcolumns.  The  Hexapla,  how
ever,  was  not  merely  a  synoptical  table  ;  it  was  rather  an
attempt  to  emend  the  LXX  by  the  Hebrew,  like  the
edition  of  Theodotion.  In  the  words  of  Jerome  (Praf.
in  Paralipomenon),  '  Origen  not  only  brought  together
the  four  translations — writing  down  their  renderings  one
against  the  other,  so  that  the  eccentricities  of  anyone  of
them  can  be  convicted  by  the  agreement  of  the  three  others
between  themselves  ;  but,  what  was  more  audacious,  he
interpolated  the  LXX  from  Theodotion's  translation,
marking  the  fresh  additions  with  asterisks,  and  at  the
same  time  obelising  those  parts  [of  the  genuine  LXX]
which  seemed  to  be  superfluous  ' — i.e. ,  as  having  no  equi
valent  in  the  Hebrew.1  It  should  be  remarked  that
though  the  additions  are  usually  taken  from  Theodotion
there  are  many  places  where  the  missing  words  are  adapted
from  Aquila  or  Symmachus.  In  principle  the  Hexaplar
text  of  the  LXX  differs  from  Theodotion's  edition  only
in  two  particulars: — (i)  the  process  of  revision  was
chiefly  confined  to  supplying  what  was  missing,  not  to
altering  the  Greek  renderings  ;  (2)  all  additions  to  the
text,  of  whatever  kind,  were  indicated  by  critical  marks.
But  there  was  no  clear  indication  of  actual  changes  in
the  text  itself,  as  distinct  from  additions  or  suggested
subtractions.2

1  See  also  Origen  in  Matt.  15  14  (8671).

-  There probably  were a  few  various readings set in the
margin,  some  of  which  are  preserved  in  the  Syro-Hexaplar  text

of4  Kings  under  thesign  Oj('.e.,  fifthcolumn). Some  of  these  O)
5°T9


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

The  last  quarter  of  the  third  century  and  the  beginning
of  the  fourth  are  marked  by  the  appearance  of  three


52.  Three  re
censions.


editions  of  the  LXX,  from  one  or  other
of  which  practically  all  our  Greek  MSS
are  descended.  '  Alexandria  with  Egypt
uses  as  its  Septuagint  the  work  of  Hesychius  ;  Con
stantinople,  as  far  as  Antioch,  uses  the  copies  of  Lucian
the  martyr  ;  the  provinces  lying  between  these  extremes
use  the  MSS  of  Origen's  work  issued  by  Eusebius  and
Pamphilus'  (Jerome,  Pnrf.  in  Patalip.  :  '  Alexandria  et
^Kgyptus  in  Septuaginta  suis  Hcsychium  laudat  auc-
torem,  Constantinopolis  usque  Antiochiam  Luciani
martyris  exemplaria  probat  ;  mediae  inter  has  prouincia?
Palestinos  codices  legunt,  quos  ab  Origene  elaborates
Eusebius  et  Pamphilus  uulgauerunt,  totusque  orbis  hac
inter  se  trifaria  uarietate  compugnat').  Of  these  three
editions,  the  Eusebian  is  the  Hexaplar  text  of  the  LXX
with  its  apparatus  of  asterisks  (*)  and  obeli  (T)  ;  the
Hesychian  edition  is  that  found  in  the  quotations  of
Cyril  of  Alexandria,  and  corresponds  in  character  to
Hort's  'Alexandrian'  text  of  the  NT;  the  Lucianic
1  edition,  like  the  '  Antiochian '  text  of  the  NT,  is
characterised  by  attempts  to  smooth  down  grammatical
harshnesses  and  by  conflate  readings,  where  two  pre
viously  existing  and  mutually  exclusive  renderings  have
been  fused  into  one.1  It  is  this  circumstance  which
gives  the  Lucianic  LXX  considerable  value  for  us,  as
internal  evidence  conclusively  shows  that  one  at  least  of
the  elements  out  of  which  this  composite  text  was  con
structed  was  not  only  ancient,  but  also  quite  indepen
dent  of  the  texts  used  for  the  Hexapla.

Such  in  brief  is  the  history  of  the  LXX  ;  a  few  words
must  now  be  said  about  the  existing  MSS,  and  the

co n A A relation they  bear towards the various
53.  .Lxtant •  T,. . ,

„__ ancient  texts. First  of  course  come  the

four  great  MSS  of  the  fourth  and  fifth
centuries,  viz.  the  Vaticanus  (B),  the  Sinaiticus  (N),  the
Alexandrian  (A),  and  the  fragments  of  Cod.  Ephraemi
(C).  Besides  these  there  are  a  multitude  of  copies  from
the  sixth  century  onwards  ;  but  very  few  of  these  ever
contained  the  whole  OT,  which  is  usually  divided  up
into  divisions  such  as  the  Octateuch,  the  Prophets,  etc.
The  Psalter  is  usually  separate.

The  original  MS  of  Origen's  Hexapla  was  doubtless
never  copied  again  in  full  on  account  of  its  unwieldy
bulk  ;  but  fragments  of  the  Psalms  in  all  five  editions,
accompanied  by  a  Catena  Patrum,  were  discovered
in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan  in  1896  by  G.
Mercati.  The  MS  (O  39  sup. )  is  a  palimpsest,  the
original  writing  containing  in  tenth-century  minuscules
all  the  columns  of  the  Hexapla,  except  the  Hebrew  in
Hebrew  letters.  A  fragment  of  Ps.  22,  containing  all
six  columns,  was  found  in  1898  among  the  Cairo  Geniza
MSS  at  Cambridge,  and  has  been  published  by  C.
Taylor  together  with  his  fragments  of  Aquila  (see
above,  §  48).

More  important  for  practical  purposes  than  these  frag
ments  are  the  MSS  connected  with  the  Eusebian  edition
of  the  LXX.  These  are  of  varied  character.  Some,
like  the  great  codex  N,  give  a  text  more  or  less  corrected
to  the  Hexaplar  standard,  but  without  the  diacritical
marks.  Others,  such  as  Codex  Sarravianus  (G)  of  the
Octateuch,  have  the  critical  signs,  whilst  others  have  the

readings  are  the  last  survival  of  a  very  pure  LXX  text ;  see  below,
§66.

As  to  the  amount  of  change  admitted  by  Origen  into  the
Hexaplar  text,  it  is  probable  that  he  emended  the  Hebrew
proper  names  (cp  Orig.  in  Joann.  1  159  in  Brooke's  edition  with
the  Hexapla  to  Kx.Cie);  but  he  seems  often  to  have  hesitated
to  introduce  emendations  which  seriously  affected  the  sense.
Thus  in  Jer.  15  10  he  retained  ovre  ii</>e'A»)cra,  ovre  u>$e'A»)(reV  /ue
ou6ei?  for  '3  !;•']  N^l  'JVE'J  N^i  instead  of  substituting  cu<|)eiAr)o-a
and  <i$ei'Ar/(Te'  /uoi  from  Theodotion,  although  he  believed  the
LXX  to  contain  a  scribal  error  (Orig.  8225).  The  scribal  error,
however,  seems  to  occur  in  Philo  (De  Confus.  Ling.,  §  12).

1  The  original  copy  of  Lucian's  recension,  written  by  his  own
hand,  is  said  by  Theodoret  to  have  been  found  in  the  time  of
Constantine  at  Nicomedia  walled  up  in  the  turret  of  a  house
belonging  to  Jews.

5020


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

critical  signs  together  with  marginal  notes  containing
renderings  from  Aquila,  Symmachus,  Theodotion,  etc.
Foremost  among  these  fuller  authorities  is  the  Syro-
Hexaplar  version  made  by  Paul  of  Telia  in  616-617
A.u.  (see§6i),  one  of  the  most  valuable  extant  works  for
the  text  of  the  LXX.

From  some  of  the  notes  in  the  Syro-Hexaplaric  version
and  from  remarks  of  Theodoret  it  has  been  possible  for
Field  and  Lagarde  independently  to  identify  the  MSS
which  contain  a  Lucianic  text.  The  Hesychian  text  is
best  represented  by  the  first  hand  of  Codex  Marchalianus
(Q),  a  sixth -century  MS  of  the  prophets.  A  second
hand  has  added  to  this  MS  a  number  of  Hexaplar
readings  from  the  other  editions.

The  chief  printed  editions  of  ©  are  : — (i)  the  A  Mine,  Venice,

1518;  (2)  the  Comfilutensian Polyglott,  Alcala,  printed  1514-

.  17, published 1522, representing a Lucianic

54. Printed text ;  (3)  the  Sixtine,  Rome,  1587,  based  on  Cod.

editions. B;  (4)  the  Alexandrian,  Oxford,  1707-20,  i.e.,

Grabe's  edition,  based  on  Cod.  A  ;  (5)  Holmes

and  Parsons,  Oxford, 1798-1827,  a  reprint  of  the  Sixtine  text

(Cod.  B.),  but  with  an  apparatus  containing  the  various  readings

of  many  MSS  and  Fathers.  1

Quite  distinct  from  these,  as  aiming  to  reproduce  not  MSS
but  particular  recensions  of  ©  are  : — Field's  Hexapla,  a  collection
of  the  extant  fragments,  Oxford,  1875  ;  and  Lagarde 's  restoration
of  the  Lucianic  text  {Gen. -Esther  only],  Gottingen,  1883.

Lagarde  in  his  Annierkungen  zur  griechischen  Uber-
setsung  der  Proverbial,  3  (see  Driver,  TBS,  p.  xlvii)

._  T,  ,  has  laid  down  the  following  rules  for

55.  Recovery  of  . ,., T  vv

.  .  ,  T  .i.,.  recovering  the  ontrmal  text  of  the  LXX.
original  LXX.  ,

from  our  authorities  : —

1.  The  MSS  of  the  Greek  translation  of  the  OT  are
all  either immediately or mediately the result of  an
eclectic  process  : it  follows  that  he  who  aims  at  recover
ing  the  original  text must follow  an eclectic  method
likewise. His  only  standard  will  be  his  knowledge  of
the  style  of  the  individual  translators  :  his  chief  aid  will
be  the  faculty  possessed  by  him  of  referring  the  readings
which  come  before  him  to  their  Semitic  original,  or  else
of  recognising  them  as  corruptions  originating  in  the
Greek.

2.  If  a  verse  or  part  of  a  verse  appears  in  both  a  free
and  a  slavishly  literal  translation,  the  former  is  to  be
counted  the  genuine  rendering.

3.  If  two  readings coexist, of  which one  expresses
the  Massoretic text, while  the  other  can  only  be  ex
plained  from  a  text  deviating  from  it,  the  latter  is  to  be
regarded  as  the  original.

These  admirable  rules,  however,  practically  give  up
the  attempt  to  trace  out  the  history  of  the  text  of  the
LXX.  It  may  therefore  be  worth  while  to  indicate  the
lines  on  which  such  an  attempt  may  be  undertaken.

In  the  first  place  it  is  necessary  to  get  some  criterion
for  estimating  the  worth  of  the  Hexaplar  text  with  its
apparatus  of  asterisks,  etc. ,  as  preserved  in  existing
MSS.  For  this  we  may  use  the  fragments  of  the  Old
Latin  which  are  certainly  derived  from  a  Greek  text
older  than  the  Hexapla  (see  §  567". ).  Along  with  the
Old  Latin  we  may  take  the  quotations  from  the  early
Greek  fathers,  so  far  as  their  text  can  be  trusted.
When  we  compare  our  Hexaplar  text  with  these
primary  sources  of  information  the  general  result
may  be  summarised  thus:  —  (i)  The  critical  signs
attached  to  the  text,  especially  the  all-important
asterisks  (*)  which  mark  interpolations  introduced  into
the  LXX  from  Aquila,  Symmachus,  or  Theodotion,  are
fairly  well  preserved.  Single  authorities  have  dropped
or  misplaced  them  here  and  there  ;  but  it  is  rarely  the  case
that  the  majority  of  our  witnesses  conspire  in  error.
( 2 )  The  Hexaplar  text  itself,  when  purged  of  the  inter
polations  under  *  is  a  good  text  of  the  LXX,  on  the  whole
the  best  continuous  text  which  survives.  (3)  It  is  very
far,  however,  from  being  really  pure.  The  proper

1  The  useful  editions  of  Tischendorf  (7th  ed.  iCSv)  give  the
Sixtine  text  with  the  variants  of  BNAC.  The  Cambridge  Editio
Minor,  1887-1894,  gives  the  text  of  B  and  the  variants  of  NAG
with  some  other  uncial  MSS  ;  a  larger  edition  is  in  progress
which  it  is  hoped  will  supersede  Holmes  and  Parsons.

5021


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

names  have  been  largely  corrected  to  the  Massoretic
Hebrew,  while  in  other  matters  inferior  readings  have
been  either  introduced  or  have  been  wrongly  followed.

Having  thus  gained  some  idea  of  the  worth  of  the
Hexaplar  text  we  may  go  on  to  apply  these  results  to
the  criticism  of  our  chief  surviving  MSS.  Their  value
and  independence  will  be  found  to  differ  greatly  in  the
various  books.  That  they  all  contain  '  Theodotion's  '
Daniel,  not  the  Daniel  of  the  genuine  LXX,  is  perhaps
not  due  to  the  Hexapla  alone,  as  the  change  probably
occurred  earlier.  But  it  was  Origen  who  introduced
nearly  400  lines  (i.e.  ,  half-verses)  into  the  LXX  text  of
Job  from  Theodotion,  yet  these  interpolations  are  found
in  all  our  MSS  ;  so  far  therefore  as  Job  is  concerned  it
is  certain  that  none  of  our  MSS  go  behind  the  Hexapla.
The  fact  that  in  various  parts  of  the  OT,  notably  the
four  books  of  Kings  (KINGS,  §  3  ;  cp  SAMUEL,  §4)  and
Ezekiel,  ©H  leaves  out  many  passages  known  to  be  in
terpolations,  has  given  plausibility  to  the  belief  that  it
presents  us  with  a  pre-Hexaplaric  text  ;  but  other  pheno
mena  of  (5B  are  inconsistent  with  this  view,  and  it  is  better
to  regard  ©H  as  in  the  main  a  Hexaplar  text  without
the  passages  under  asterisk  (Lagarde,  Proverbial,  3,
n.  i).  In  Judges,  Isaiah,  and  Lamentations,  the  text
of  <§"  is  neither  Hexaplaric  nor  that  of  the  unrevised
LXX.1  [On  the  text  of  Judges,  cp  JUDGES,  §  18.]

The  text  of  ©A  shows  greater  independence  than  that
of  <@B  and  though  it  is  sprinkled  more  or  less  throughout
the  OT  with  Hexaplaric  additions  it  often  retains  the
reading  of  the  LXX  when  most  other  MSS  have  gone
wrong.  '2

The  Lucianic  text  contains  a  singular  mixture  of  good
and  bad  readings  ;  but  so  far  as  can  be  judged  from  the
|  surviving  evidence  its  good  readings  are  also  those  of
the  Old  Latin.  Its  value  to  us  therefore  is  to  supply
evidence  akin  to  the  Old  Latin,  where  that  invaluable
witness  fails  us.  The  character  of  the  Lucianic  text  is
indicated  by  Jerome  (Ep.  ad  Sunniam  et  Fretelam,  ap.
Field,  p.  Ixxxvi)  when  he  says:  '  editionem,  quani
Origenes,  etc.  Koivf\v  id  est  communem  appellant  atque
uulgatam,  et  a  plerisque  mine  Aot'/aacoj  dicitur.  '
Lucian's  revision,  rather  than  the  Hexaplar  texts,  is  the
representative  of  the  old  KOIVT]  &c<5ocrts  that  survives
approximately  pure  in  the  better  texts  of  the  Old  Latin.
The  difference  between  the  comparative  value  to  us  of
the  '  Antiochian  '  texts  of  the  OT  and  the  NT  simply
comes  from  the  paucity  of  what  we  might  call  '  early
Western  texts  '  of  the  OT  in  Greek.  If  a  MS  analogous
to  Codex  Bezre  survived,  the  value  of  the  Lucianic  text
would  have  been  largely  discounted.

II.  LATIN

The  Old  Latin  is  the  only  version  of  the  OT  made
from  the  Greek  which  is  certainly  older  than  the  Hexapla.
Syriac version of the OT was


Rfi Th Olrl
' C


translated  direct  from  the  Hebrew,  not


T  .

irsion.  from  the  Greek>  and  the  other  oriental

versions  belong  to  a  later  period.  Hence  the  Old  Latin
occupies  a  unique  position,  and  must  be  regarded  as
the  chief  authority  for  the  restoration  of  the  KOLVT]  HnSoa-is  ,
or  pre-Hexaplaric  LXX.  Unfortunately  it  survives  only
in  fragments,  and  some  of  the  better-preserved  forms
are  the  result  of  revision  from  Greek  texts  later  than  the
original  translation.

As  in  the  NT,  the  quotations  of  Cyprian  (d.  258)  form
the  standard  by  which  we  may  classify  our  texts.
Cyprian  quotes  from  nearly  all  the  books  of  OT  and
NT  and  with  almost  unfailing  accuracy,  so  that  we  may
gather  from  his  works  a  fair  idea  of  the  characteristics
of  the  OT  in  Latin  as  it  was  read  at  Carthage  about
the  middle  of  the  third  century.  Closely  akin  to  the

1  Cp, for example, Is.  49  18 in  ©B and  the Hexapla. In
Lamentations  the  names  of  the  Hebrew  letters  of  the  alphabet
are  transliterated  in  ©u  differently  from  other  MSS,  TI  being
used  for  ;j  and  \<r  for  iy  (see  above,  §  48).

2  E.g.,  Judg.  58,  end.

5022


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS


Cyprianic  text  is  that  used  in  De  Pascha  Computus,
except  in  Daniel.  A  slightly  later  type  is  presented  by
the  various  Donatist  texts,  such  as  that  found  in  the
extensive  quotations  of  Tyconius,  and  in  the  Gesta  of
the  '  Collatio  Carthaginiensis  '  held  in  411  A.n.  ;  among
these  also  must  be  reckoned  the  Lucca  Genealogies
(Lagarde,  Septuaginta  Stitdien,  25-28),  a  historical  work
of  purely  Latin  origin  containing  a  very  large  number
of  biblical  proper  names,  all  of  which  are  given  in  pre-
Hexaplaric  spelling.

Among  '  European  '  texts  special  mention  must  be  made  of
Lucifer  of  Cagliari  (d.  371),  whose  quotations,  especially  from
the  historical  books,  are  very  full  and  accurate.  The  pseudo-
Augustinian  Speculum  (Corp.  Scrip.  Keel.  Lat.  xii.),  a  collec
tion  of  biblical  extracts  somewhat  similar  to  the  Testitnonia.  of
Cyprian  has  a  text,  possibly  Spanish  in  origin,  which  contains
some  elements  belonging  to  the  earlier  form  of  the  version.

Revised  texts,  which  cannot  be  used  as  evidence  for
the  true  Old  Latin  save  in  exceptional  cases,  are  met
with  in  Ambrose,  Augustine,  and  Jerome.  Jerome's
quotations  especially  are  often  taken  direct  from  the
Greek  and  usually  agree  with  <5X  and  <SI!.  Augustine  (to
mention  only  the  clearest  cases)  used  Jerome's  transla
tion  of  Job  from  the  Hexapla,  and  in  Judg.  5  he  agrees
with  the  Hexaplar  Codex  Coislinianus  against  the  true
Old  Latin  as  preserved  by  Verecundus.1  Tertullian's
curious  use  of  a  text  of  the  LXX  mixed  with  Theodotion's
in  the  Book  of  Ezekiel  has  been  already  noticed  (see
above,  col.  5019).

The  most  complete  MS  of  any  part  of  the  Old  Latin
OT  is  the  Lyons  Heptateuch  of  the  seventh  century,
__  IOTQC  containing  most  of  the  Pentateuch,  Joshua,
&S'  and  Judges  to  203i  (ed.  by  U.  Robert,  1881
and  1900).  A  better  text  is  to  be  found  in  the  Freising
Palimpsest  now  at  Munich,  of  the  fifth  or  sixth  century
(Dru  iistiicke  einer  vorhieronymianischen  Ubcrsetzung
des  Pentateuch  .  .  .,  by  L.  Ziegler,  1883);  although
this  MS  shows  some  marks  of  literary  revision  it  con
tains  a  Cyprianic  element,  which  in  conjunction  with  the
general  independence  of  its  text  places  it  in  the  first
rank  of  LXX  authorities.2  Its  independence  is  especi
ally  noticeable  in  the  latter  chapters  of  Exodus.

Other  Old  Latin  MSS,  all  of  them  palimpsests  or
mere  fragments,  are:  —  the  Vienna  Pali  mpsest  of  Genesis
(?  Oct.  )  and  the  historical  books,  fifth-sixth  century,
a  text  which  agrees  remarkably  with  that  of  Lucifer,
and  only  requires  to  be  well  edited  to  take  its  place
among  the  very  best  MSS  ;  the  two  \Viirzburg
Palimpsests,  one  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  other  of  the
Prophets,  fifth-sixth  century,  both  edited  by  E.  Ranke,
1871  ;  the  Weingarten  MS  of  the  prophets,  fifth  century,
also  edited  by  E.  Ranke,  1868-1888.  Besides  these
there  are  smaller  fragments  at  Quedlinburg,  Vienna,
and  S.  Gallen.  Of  a  slightly  different  character  are
the  two  documents  edited  by  Vercellone  in  his  Varies
Lectiones  I'ulg.  Lat.  Bibl.  editionis,  viz.,  extracts  out
of  Genesis  and  Exodus  from  the  Codex  Ottobonianus,
an  eighth-century  MS  of  the  Latin  Vulgate,  and  the
various  readings  written  in  the  margin  of  a  Visigothic
MS  of  the  Latin  Vulgate  at  Leon  in  Spain.  These
various  readings  agree  very  closely  with  the  Lucianic
text,  much  closer  in  fact  than  any  other  form  of  the  Old
Latin,  so  the  conjecture  may  be  hazarded  that  they
were  translated  direct  from  some  Greek  MS.

A  number  of  Latin  Psalters  are  extant  ; but  none  of

1  Printed  in  Pitra's  Spicilegiuin  Solcsntense  and  in  Vercellone  's
T'aritf  Lectiones.

-  See  Ex.  17  14  for  the  revision.  In  Ex.  32  i  the  MS  has  eicere
for  to  'bring  out'  of  Egypt  (eftvyeiy)  with  Cyprian,  Test.\i.
For  an  instance  of  its  positive  value  in  correcting  the  Greek  see
Ex.  40  3,  where  in  place  of  oxen-nereis  TT]V  Kifiiarbv  [TOV  liaprvpio
T<!>  KaTamfTaerjmaTi,  which  is  the  reading  of  all  other  LX


fitiatorium  ;  that  is,  it  reads  niSD  instead  of  rOTS,  with  the
Samaritan  and  the  Jer.  Targ.  Thus  by  Lagarde's  canons  the
Freising  MS  alone  has  preserved  the  true  text  of  the  LXX  in

this  passage.

5023


them  represents  the  earlier  stages  cf  the  version,  as  the
quotations  of  Cyprian  differ  widely  from  them  all.1

The  OT  '  Apocrypha ' — i.e. ,  those  books  of  the  Greek
OT  which  are  not  in  the  Hebrew  canon — were  left  more

68  Anocrvnha  °r  ^6SS  untoucned  bv  Jerome  ;  in  these
•  P  ryP  •  ij00ks,  therefore,  the  Old  Latin  survives
in  the  Vulgate.  In  fact,  the  Vulgate  text  of  Wisdom
and  Ecclesiasticus  does  not  differ  appreciably  from  the
Cyprianic  standard.  It  is  therefore  important  to  notice
the  divergence  in  the  arrangement  of  Ecclesiasticus
30-36  in  the  Greek  and  the  Latin.  '  In  these  chapters
the  Greek  order  fails  to  yield  a  natural  sequence,  whereas
the  Latin  arrangement,  which  is  also  that  of  the  Syriac
and  Armenian  versions,  makes  excellent  sense.  Two
sections  [of  the  Greek],  chap.  3025-33 i3a  (u»s  *ca\a/ta-
/te^os  .  .  .  0i'Xds  'Ia/cii/3)  and  chap.  33  i3b — 36  i6a
\afjiwpa.  xapSia  .  .  .  £<rxaTOS  Tjypi'wvrjcra),  have  ex
changed  places.  .  .  .  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  in
the  exemplar  from  which,  so  far  as  is  certainly  kno\vn,
all  our  Greek  MSS  of  this  book  [Ecclus.]  are  ultimately
derived,  the  pairs  of  leaves  on  which  these  sections  were
severally  written  had  been  transposed,  whereas  the  Latin
translator,  working  from  a  MS  in  which  the  transposition
had  not  taken  place,  has  preserved  the  true  order '
(Swete,  pref.  to  vol.  ii.  of  the  Cambridge  Septuagint,  p.
\if.).z  A  fact  of  this  kind  deserves  to  be  particularly
mentioned,  as  it  brings  out  the  exceptional  value  of  the
Old  Latin  for  the  text  of  the  LXX,  and  the  essential
homogeneousness  of  our  Greek  authorities  notwith
standing  their  numerous  variations.3

A  conspectus  of  the  biblical  quotations  of  the  Latin  Fathers,
together  with  such  Old  Latin  MSS  as  were  then  available,  is  to
be  found  in  the  great  work  of  Sabatier  (Bibliorum  Sacrorum
Latinie  I'ersiones  Antiquie,  1743  and  1751).

Jerome's  edition  of  the  NT  was  a  simple  revision  of
an  existing  text ;  but  his  version  of  the  OT  was  wholly
V  1  t  new.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  translation  of  the
VU  ga  e.  j_je))rew  ;nto  Lat;n  independent  of  the
LXX,  though  Jerome  frequently  adopts  renderings  from
the  other  Greek  editions,  particularly  that  of  Sym-
machus.  The  great  work  had  been  begun  at  the  in
vitation  of  Pope  Damasus ;  but  that  powerful  patron
died  when  only  the  Gospels  had  been  issued  (384  A.  D. ),
and  Jerome  left  Rome  for  Bethlehem.  The  various
parts  of  the  OT  were  published  separately  and  furnished
with  prefaces,  in  which  the  merits  of  the  Hebrew  over
the  Greek  and  the  methods  of  translation  adopted  are
vigorously  defended.

Thus  the  Lntin  church  was  confronted  with  a  new
version  of  the  Bible  which  had  no  external  authority  to
recommend  it  save  the  well -deserved  reputation  of
Jerome  as  the  most  learned  scholar  of  his  day.  It  is
not  surprising  that  it  met  at  first  with  opposition.
Its  ultimate  success  is  probably  due  in  great  measure
to  Augustine.  At  first  Augustine  thought  the  new
version  of  the  OT  too  revolutionary,  and  almost  to
the  end  of  his  life  clung  to  a  belief  in  the  inspiration
of  the  Seventy.  He  wrote  of  Jerome's  translation,
however,  with  increasing  respect  and  occasionally
quotes  from  it  (e.g. ,  De  Civitate  Dei,  1843),  and  in
his  last  work — the  genuine  Speculum,  a  collection  of
biblical  extracts,  left  unfinished  at  his  death  in  430 —
he  follows  the  new  version  wholly,  except  where  he
quotes  from  memory.  In  the  sixth  century  Cassiodorus
seems  to  have  treated  the  two  versions  on  an  equal

1  Cp  also  the  remarks  of  Augustine  (De  Doct.  Christiana,
2iq)on  Ps.  13  3.

2  The English  version, both in AV and RV,  follows  the
Latin  here.

3  The  Syriac  of  Ecclesiasticus  is  not  a  witness  for  the  LXX,
as  it  was  mad«  for  the  most  part  direct  from  the  Hebrew ;  the
Armenian  here  probably  follows  the  Syriac  as  so  often  elsewhere.
The  newly-recovered  Hebrew  text  supports  the  Latin  order,  as
might  be  anticipated.

With  regard  to  the  Latin  text  of  Ecclesiasticus  it  has  recently
been  shown  by  Thielmann  that  chaps,  xl  v.  -I.  are  the  work  of  a  later
hand  ;  apparently  the  praise  of  the  Jewish  Fathers  was  inten
tionally  left  out  by  the  Christian  translator  as  superfluous  to  his
object  (cp  J.  H.  A.  Hart's  edition  of  the  Greek  cod.  248).


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

footing  ;  but  Isidore  of  Seville  in  the  seventh  century
uses  Jerome's  exclusively.  From  that  time  it  really
deserves  the  name  '  Vulgate '  now  universally  applied  to
it,  though  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  not  so  called  before
the  time  of  Roger  Bacon.  In  Jerome's  own  works
Vulgata  means  the  Old  Latin.

The  difference  between  the  Vulgate  and  the  Old
Latin  in  the  OT  is  so  great  that  mixed  recensions  were
less  readily  formed  than  in  the  NT,  though  single
passages  have  suffered  corruption  from  time  to  time  in
the  MSS.  As  was  remarked  above,  the  Latin  church
in  adopting  the  new  version  added  to  it  from  the  Old
Latin  those  books  which  formed  no  part  of  the  Hebrew
canon  and  were  therefore  left  untouched  by  Jerome.

The  best  MS  of  the  Vulgate  is  considered  to  be  the
Codex  Amiatinus  (a  seventh-century  MS  of  the  whole
OT  and  NT,  see  §  21),  the  variations  of  which  from  the
authorised  Clementine  text  have  been  not  very  accurately
published  by  Heyse  and  Tischendorf  (in  1873)  >  a
valuable  collection  of  readings  is  brought  together  in
the  unfinished  {Caries  Lectiones  of  Vercellone.

The  Vulgate  is  less  useful  to  the  textual  critic  than
the  Old  Latin,  just  as  the  later  forms  of  the  LXX  which
contain  interpolations  and  corrections  from  Theodotion
are  not  so  useful  as  the  earlier  forms.  That,  however,  is
because  we  have  access  to  the  Massoretic  Hebrew  in  the
original  and  possess  admirable  renderings  of  it  into  the
vernacular.  The  early  forms  of  the  LXX  are  valuable
because  by  their  aid  we  can  correct  some  errors  which
have  befallen  the  existing  Hebrew  text.  It  should  not  be
forgotten,  however,  that  the  LXX  is  often  a  bad  trans
lation  to  work  from,  many  passages  being  quite  devoid
of  sense  as  they  stand,  a  defect  that  was  sometimes  in
tensified  by  the  further  translation  of  Greek  into  Latin.
The  Vulgate,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  work  of  a  com
petent  scholar,  and  gives  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew
with  comparative  accuracy  and  clearness.  It  was  the
great  good  fortune  of  the  Latin  church  that  so  excellent
a  translator  should  have  been  raised  up  for  the  work,
and  it  is  her  great  glory  that  neither  the  sentimental
associations  of  the  old  version  nor  the  increasing
ignorance  of  the  Dark  Ages  were  able  to  interfere  with
her  final  acceptance  of  S.  Jerome's  labours.

III. SYRIAC  AND  OTHER  VERSIONS

In  the  OT  the  Syriac  Vulgate,  commonly  called
Peshitta,  is  a  translation  made  direct  from  the  Hebrew.
Time  and  place  of  translation  are  alike
unknown.  It  is  conjectured  that  it  was
made  at  Kdessa,  the  centre  of  Syriac  literary  culture,
and  it  seems  to  have  been  the  work  of  Jews  rather
than  Christians.1  There  is  no  surviving  trace  of  any
previous  recension  of  the  text ;  the  earliest  Syriac  Father,
Aphraates,  who  is  our  chief  quarry  for  pre-Vulgate
citations  from  the  Syriac  NT,  quotes  the  OT  in  literal
accordance  with  the  Peshitta.

The  character  of  the  Peshitta  varies  in  the  different
books,  which  has  been  held  as  an  indication  that  the
version  was  the  work  of  several  hands.  The  Pentateuch
and  Job  (which  in  the  Syriac  follows  the  Pentateuch)
are  rendered  literally  ;  some  of  the  other  books,
notably  Chronicles,  are  very  freely  paraphrased.  But
the  Hebrew  underlying  the  Syriac  is  in  almost  all
cases  simply  the  Massoretic  text.2  Here  and  there,

1  Cp  especially  i  Ch.  62,  where  the  words  'for  Judah  pre
vailed  above  his  brethren,  and  of  him  came  the  prince  '  (t'^are
rendered in  the  Peshitta  '  From  Judah  shall  come  forth  King
Messiah.' Cp also I. Perles, Mcletemata. Pcschitthonia.no.
(1859).

2  Some  of  the  best  MSS  supply  a  striking  illustration  of  the
close  connection  of  the  Peshitta  with  the  Hebrew  by  the  fact  that
they  contain  a  note  marking  the  exact  place  where  the  half  of  a.
book  comes  in  the  Massoretic  text. CorM\(Esechiel,  Prol.  144)
brings  this  forward  as  a.  proof  that  the  Anttrosianns  has  been  re
vised  from  the  Hebrew ;  but  the  phenomenon  is  to  be  found  in
other  MSS  of  other  books,  and  as  far  as  we  know  the  tendency  of
the  Syrians  was  to  correct  from  the  LXX,  not  from  the  Hebrew.

There  are  a  few  instances  where  the  Syriac  seems  to  represent

502S


60.  Peshitta.


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

especially  in  the  Prophets,  there  are  unmistakable  traces
of  the  influence  of  the  LXX.  No  satisfactory  explana
tion  of  this  influence  has  yet  been  reached  ;  it  is  possible
that  it  dates  from  the  establishment  of  the  church  in
Edessa  about  the  end  of  the  second  century.

In  addition  to  the  Hebrew  canon  the  Syrians  had
translations  of  the  OT  Apocrypha,  in  most  cases  derived
from  the  Greek  ;  but  the  Syriac  Ecclesiasticus  is  partly
a  rendering  of  the  Hebrew.  The  dates  of  all  these
translations  are  quite  unknown  ;  but  '  it  seems  tolerably
certain  that  alterations  were  made  from  time  to  time
with  a  view  to  harmonising  the  Syriac  text  with  that  of
the  LXX'  (Wright's  Syriac  Literature,  4),  a  process
which  may  have  begun  as  early  as  the  episcopate  of
Palut  (about  200  A.  D. ).

The  Peshitta  is  extant  in  many  MSS  of  considerable  antiquity.
The  oldest  known  dated  M  S  of  any  portion  of  OT  or  N  T  in  any
language  is  the  Cod.  Add.  14,425  in  the  British  Museum  con
taining  Gen.,  Ex.,  Nu.,  Dt.,  transcribed  at  Amid  in  the  year
464  A.D.  A  good  text  of  the  whole  OT  is  presented  by  the
Cod.  Ambrosianus  of  the  sixth  century,  which  contains,  in
addition  to  the  ordinary  '  Apocrypha,'  the  Apocalypse  of
Baruch  and  4  Esdras.  This  MS  has  been  reproduced  in  photo
lithography  by  Ceriani.

The  most  accessible  edition  of  the  OT  Peshitta  (without  the
Apocrypha)  is  that  prepared  by  Lee  for  the  '  British  and  Foreign
Bible  Society'  in  1823  ;  but  it  only  reproduces  with  little  varia
tion  the  text  of  the  London  and  the  Paris  Polyglott.  In  fact
all  the  printed  editions  go  back  to  the  ed.  princess  in  the
Paris  Polyglott,  which  is  a  mere  transcript  of  a  very  late  MS
(now  at  Paris),  as  conjecturally  emended  by  the  editor  Gabriel
Sionita.1  For  practical  purposes,  therefore,  Ceriani's  repro
duction  of  the  Ambrosianus  is  the  most  satisfactory  text  that
has  yet  appeared.

The  earliest  attempt  at  a  Syriac  version  from  the  LXX

seems  to  have  been  that  called  by  the  name  of  Philoxenus,

„ . made  in  508  A.D.  (see  §  30). Of  this  version

fragments  of  Isaiah  survive  in  a  MS  in  the

- , , British  Museum  (edited  by  Ceriani  in  Munu-

IrOlTl bile _ _..j, c* ._ ~t !!...*£ , ,, 1 _ _\  T* „


Greek.


menta  Sacra  et  Profana,  v.  1 1-40). It  seems


to  have  been  a  free  revision  of  the  Peshitta
by  a  Lucianic  MS,  producing  a  curious  mixed  text.

Of  far  more  critical  value  is  the  Syriac  version  corre
sponding  to  the  Harclean  revision  of  the  NT,  which  is
commonly  known  as  the  Syro-Hexaplar.  This  was
made  at  Alexandria  in  616-617  A.D.  by  Paul,  Bishop
of  Telia  (Assemani,  BO  2  333  334).  It  contains  a  trans
lation  of  Origen's  text  of  the  LXX  with  the  asterisks
and  obeli,  together  with  many  marginal  renderings  from
the  other  Greek  editions  ;  the  style,  moreover,  of  the
Syriac  translation  is  so  literal  that  the  exact  Greek  re
presented  can  be  recovered  with  considerable  accuracy.
The  work  of  Paul  of  Telia  formed  Field's  chief  authority
in  his  reconstruction  of  the  Hexapla.

The  Syro-Hexaplar  version  is  extant  for  most  books  of  the
OT.  The  poetical  and  prophetical  books  are  extant  in  a  cod.
in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan  which  has  been  published  in
photo-lithography  by  Ceriani  (Man.  Sacr.  et  Prof.  5).  The
remains  of  the  Pentateuch  and  Historical  Books  are  collected  in
Lagarde's  Bibliotheciz  Syriacip  etc.,  published  in  1892.

At  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century  Jacob  of  Edessa  made
a  final  effort  to  revise  the  Peshitta  by  the  various  Greek  versions  ;
but  his  work  does  not  seem  to  have  ever  gained  any  currency.
He  made  use  of  no  materials  which  we  do  not  possess  from
other  sources

The  whole  OT  appears  to  have  been  translated  into
the  Palestinian  dialect  (see  §  31)  ;  but  only  small  frag
ments  now  survive.  It  is  a  translation
from  the  Greek,  certainly  post-Hexa-
plaric,  and  it  probably  presented  a  text
closely  akin  to  the  '  Eusebian '  edition  (§  52)  and  the
Codex  Vaticanus.  The  fragments  of  the  OT,  so  far  as
they  have  already  been  published,  are  collected  in  Land's
Anecdota,  vol.  iv. ,  in  Anecdota  Oxoniemia  (Semitic

a  really  different  Hebrew,  not  agreeing  with  the  LXX.  In  Judg.
148  Pesh.  reads  minn  for  nmnrti  so  as  to  make  the  sentence
run  'when  Samson  had  not  yet  entered  the  marriage  chamber.'
Such  readings  occur  so  rarely,  however,  that  we  must  suppose
this  instance  to  have  been  the  result  of  a  brilliant  guess  (cp
chap.  15  i).

1  See  An  Apparatus  Criticus  to  Chronicles  in  the  Peshitta
Version  by  \V.  E.  Barnes,  1897.

5026


62.  Palestinian
version.


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Series),  and  in  a  lectionary  edited  by  Mrs.  Lewis
(Siudta  Sinaitica,  6,  1897).

The  general  history  of  the  Bible  in  Coptic  has  been
discussed  in  the  section  upon  Egyptian  versions  of  the

n  r>  x-  NT.  The  Bohairic  version  in  the  OT  has
63  Cootie  ,

the  same  characteristics  as  in  the  New,  and
versions.

there  is every  reason to  assign it to the

same  date,  viz.,  the  sixth  century.  It  is  not  even  yet
edited  in  full  ;  but  the  Prophets  have  been  edited  by
Tattam,  the  Pentateuch  and  Psalms  by  Lagarde,  and
lately  Proverbs  by  Bouriant.

The  Sahidic  version  from  its  greater  antiquity  is  of
more  importance.  Of  this  the  Borgian  MSS,  together
with  other  fragments  previously  collected,  were  admir
ably  edited  by  Ciasca  (Rome,  1885-9).  The  Psalms
have  been  edited  by  Budge  from  a  seventh-century  MS
in  the  British  Museum  (1898),  and  now  lately  again  by
Rahlfs.  There  is  also  a  large  addition  to  OT  Sahidic
texts  to  be  found  in  Maspero,  Mission  arche'ol.  franc. ,
torn.  6.  The  general  character  of  the  text  resembles  that
of  the  first  hand  of  Cod.  Marchalianus  (Q);  that  is,
it  is  akin  to  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  Hesychian
recension  of  the  LXX  (§52).  Ciasca  himself  (2  55)  points
out  that  the  Minor  Prophets  show  clear  signs  of
revision  '  iuxta  archetypum  hebryeum.'  The  text  of
Daniel  is  that  of  Theodotion,  as  in  the  Greek  MSS.
The  type  of  Greek  text  followed  by  the  Sahidic  in  the
Psalms  is  represented  by  U,  the  fragments  of  a  papyrus
book  in  the  British  Museum  (see  F.  E.  Brightman  in  the
Jonrn.  of  Theol.  Studies,  2275).  U  is  now  considered
to  be  of  the  sixth  or  the  seventh  century,  and  is  said
to  have  come  from  a  monastery  near  Thebes.  Doubtless,
therefore,  it  gives  us  the  text  of  the  Psalter  as  sung  in
the  earliest  days  of  Christian  monasticism,  and  where
it  is  defective  it  may  be  reconstructed  from  the  Sahidic
as  edited  by  Budge,  Rahlfs,  and  Ciasca.

The  chief  interest  of  the  Sahidic  version  centres  in
the  Book  of  Job.  As  has  been  explained  above  (§  55),  the
original  Greek  translation  of  Job  omitted  between  three
and  four  hundred  lines,  or  half  verses,  which  were
supplied  in  the  Hexapla  under  asterisk.  The  Sahidic
leaves  these  lines  out,  and  it  is  generally  supposed  that
it  therein  represents  the  pre-Origenian  KOivrj  HicSocris,
like  the  Old  Latin.  But  apart  from  the  difficulty
of  assigning  to  the  Sahidic  version  of  Job  the  high
antiquity  which  would  be  required  for  a  translation
uninfluenced  by  the  Hexapla — we  should  have  to  think
of  the  second  century,  instead  of  the  end  of  the  third  or
the  beginning  of  the  fourth — there  are  other  reasons
which  are  inconsistent  with  this  view.  It  is  far  more  in
accordance  with  all  the  facts  to  regard  the  Sahidic  Job
as  a  translation  of  Origen's  revised  text  of  the  LXX,  -with
the  passages  under  asterisk  omitted.  The  Sahidic  text,
when  it  is  examined  closely,  cannot  claim  to  preserve
even  so  large  a  measure  of  independence  as  the  Greek
Cod.  A  ;  we  may  fairly  describe  (5A  as  a  text  of  the  K.OWT\
interpolated  from  the  Hexapla,  but  the  Sahidic  is
Origenian  from  post  to  finish.

The  importance  of  this  question  for  the  history  of  the  Greek
Rible  makes  it  necessary  to  indicate  the  chief  signs  of  the
dependence  of  the  Sahidic  on  the  Hexapla.

1.  Ciasca  uses  five  Sahidic  codices  for  Job. One  of  these,
the Bodleian MS  edited  by  Erman,  contains  the  Hexaplaric
additions  as  an  integral  part  of  the  text. The  400  half-verses,
therefore,  were  not  altogether  unknown  in  Upper  Egypt.

2.  A  few  of  the  lines  which  are  distinctly  assigned  to  Aquila
or  Theodotion  in  our Hexaplar  authorities  are found  in the
Sahidic. Thus  Job  SO  206  and  22^  (from  Theod.)  are  in  their
ordinary  place  ;  9  15^  (from  Aq.)  is  inserted  after  r>.  14.

3.  After  Job  11  20 f. ©Aadds  nap' avria  yao  <TO<fiia  *ai  Svfajuts.
Syr. -Hex.  obelises  these  words — i.e.,  they  are  a  genuine  part  of
<P,  though  not  in  the  Hebrew. They  are  omitted  by  BXC  and
also bv  the Sahidic, which  thus  represents  here  a  critically
r<:~'iscd  text. [See  also  3  17  e£e'icavicrac  ;  7  n  om.  apot'£u>.]

4.  The  original  Greek  for  ijjj?'  ^S  in  Job  9  3/7  appears  to  have
been oi>6' oil fir)  ai/reiVr)  (cp  Hex.  ad  loc.). Symmachus  and
Theodotion  had  ou  /ui;  VTra/coiierr)  avriZ. In  the  Hexapla,  followed
by  the  Greek  MSS,  a  conflation  of  the  two  was  made,  producing
pw  firj  tin-.  aiiTcjj  iVa  /aj)  ai/Teiirrj. This  conflation  is  reproduced
in  the  Sahidic.

5.  The  clearest  case  of  the  dependence  of  the  Sahidic  on

5027


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

Origen  is  in  Job  28  21  X,  which  runs  thus  in  the  Hexapla,  the
lines  from  Theodotion  being  italicised  :

It  [viz.,  Wisdom]  is  concealed  from  every  man,

ami  from  thejcivls  of  the  heaven  it  is  hui.

Destruction  and  Death  said'.

But  (6e)  we  have  heard  the  fame  thereof.

Omit  the  italics,  and  the  first  person  plural  in  the  fourth  line
is  meaningless ;  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  it  could  have
been  the  original  form  of  the  Greek.  Yet  that  is  exactly  what
the  Sahidic  gives.  The  true  LXX  is  probably  preserved  by
Clement  of  Alexandria  (Strom,  vi.  0763)  who  quotes  v.  21  thus  :
At'yet  6  <fir)S  TJj  aTrioAei'o  fiSoi  /uei>  avrov  OVK  fl&opfv  tfuavifv  Se
aiirov  riitova-anev  (cp  Jn.537).  This  not  being  an  accurate
rendering  of  the  Hebrew,  it  was  emended  in  the  Hexapla  by  the
help  of  Theodotion  ;  but  simply  to  omit  the  lines  here  taken
from  Theodotion,  as  has  been  done  by  the  Sahidic,  cannot  be
managed  without  ruining  the  sense,  and  (we  may  add)  revealing
to  all  time  the  Origenian  source  of  the  text.

The  Ethiopic  version  dates  from  the  fourth  or  the  fifth

century  ;  but  the  existing  codices  are  late  and  seem  to

64 Othe nave  been  niuch  revised,  some  from  mediaeval

versions ^reek°r  Arabic  texts,  some  from  the  Hebrew.

'  Gen. -Kings  has  been  edited  by  Dillmann,

Psalms  by  Ludolf  (1701),  Song  by  Nisselius  (1656),

Lamentations  by  Bachmann  (1893). The  best  critical

discussion  on  this version  is  to be  found  in  Cornill's

Ezechiel,  36-48.

The  Armenian  version  appears  to  contain  in  the  OT,
as  in  the  NT,  both  Greek  and  Syriac  elements.  The
best  edition  is  still  that  of  Zohrab,  published  in  1805.
Some  Armenian  codices  have  the  Hexaplar  critical
marks  ('Scrivener,'  ed.  4,  2153).

The  Gothic  of  the  sixth,  and  the  Slavonic  of  the  ninth
century,  both  of  which  are  intimately  connected  in  origin
with  Constantinople,  are  remarkable  for  their  affinity  with
the  Lucianic  text  (Lagarde's  Lucian,  14,  15).  Of  the
Gothic  OT,  however,  only  fragments  of  Ezra  B,  chap.  2
and  Xeh.  5-7  survive,  besides  a  few  verses  of  Gen.  5.

The  Arabic  versions  of  the  OT  are  of  various  char
acter  and  value.  The  version  printed  in  the  Polyglotts
is  derived  from  a  MS  now  at  Paris  (Colb.  900  =
de  Sacy,  i)  written  in  Egypt  in  the  sixteenth  century.
The  Pentateuch  is  the  translation  of  Sa'adia  from  the
Hebrew  ;  but  the  Prophets  were  translated  from  an  old
uncial  MS  of  <S  akin  to  A  (Cornill's  Esechiel,  49-57).

The  Targums,  or  Aramaic  paraphrases  of  the  OT
prepared  for  use  in  the  Synagogue,  contain  elements

65.  Targums.  °f  various  dftes- The>;  dif!er  fr°m  the
versions  hitherto  considered  in  having

a  directly  edificatory  aim  ;  they  are,  in  fact,  paraphrases
rather  than  translations,  although  the  style  of  some  of
them  is  often  very  literal.  They  take  their  rise  from
the  custom,  described  in  Lk.  4i6J^,  of  giving  a  short
explanation  of  the  sacred  Hebrew  text  in  the  Aramaic
vernacular  of  Palestine.  At  first  the  Targum  was  a
free  oral  exposition  ;  then  it  gradually  acquired  fixed
forms,  and  at  last  it  was  reduced  to  writing.

The  written  Targum  is  found  in  MSS  sometimes
alone,  sometimes  verse  by  verse  with  the  Hebrew  text.
There  are  two  Targums  to  the  Pentateuch  (besides  the
Samaritan  Targum  ;  see  SAMARITANS,  §50),  the  official
Babylonian  Targum,  known  by  the  name  of  the  reputed
author  Onkelos  (oi^p^N,  D^pjix),1  and  the  Jerusalem
Targum,  also  known  as  [Pseudo-]  Jonathan.  'Jeru
salem  '  ( Yeriishalmi}  means  Palestinian  ;  in  fact,  this
Targum  gives  to  a  great  extent  the  old  popular  exegesis,
though  its  extant  form  dates  from  after  Mohammed.
There  once  existed  a  '  Jerusalem '  Targum  to  the
Prophets  ;  but  the  Babylonian  recension  alone  has  come
down  to  us  ;  it  is  commonly  cited  by  its  reputed  author
Jonathan  ben  Uzziel.  The  Hagiographa  are  also  pre
served  in  a  Babylonian  recension  ;  but  they  are  of  varied
character,  being  to  some  extent  private  literary  works,
since  the  Hagiographa  were  not  regularly  read  through
in  the  Synagogues  like  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.
Job  is  a  comparatively  literal  rendering;  Proverbs
appears  to  have  been  made  up  from  the  Peshitta  ;
Esther  is  extant  in  two  forms,  both  wildly  paraphrastical.

The  Targums  are  to  be  found  in  the  great  rabbinical

1  Onkelos  is  probably  a  corruption  of  oS'py  Aqiiila.
5028


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

editions  of  the  OT,  e.g. ,  the  Bomberg  edition  of  1517,
ed.  by  Felix  Pratensis.  Onkelos  has  been  edited  by
Berliner  in  1884,  the  Prophets  and  Hagiographa  by
Lagarde  in  1872,  1873.

The  Hebrew  text  from  which  the  Targums  were
made  is  practically  identical  with  that  of  the  Massoretes.1
Their  value  for  us  is  not  so  much  the  text  they  attest,
as  the  prejudices  they  display.  They  show  us  the
atmosphere  of  thought  in  which  the  tradition  of  the
meaning  of  the  OT  was  preserved,  an  atmosphere  abso
lutely  unliterary  and  unartistic,  and  anxious  at  any
cost  to  remove  the  anthropomorphism  of  earlier  Hebrew
religion  (see  the  amazing  list  of  locutions  in  Cornill's
Ezechiel,  123).  Some  of  the  toning  down  of  old
metaphors  or  reminiscences  of  ancient  heathendom  is
very  ancient  ;  even  ©  does  not  call  God  by  His  personal
name  but  translates  mrr  by  [6]  Ki/pios  ( NAMES,  col.  3321),
and  refuses  altogether  to  call  him  a  Rock  [Heb.  iijf,
e.g. ,  Ps.  95 1].  The  Targums  simply  exhibit  this
tendency  in  an  exaggerated  form.  The  popular  exegesis
has  now  and  then  influenced  the  Massoretic  text.  But
the  Massoretes  were  too  good  scholars  simply  to  point
the  true  text  wrong  ;  it  almost  always  happens  in  such
cases  that  there  is  some  corruption  in  the  transmitted
consonants,  which  formed  the  starting-point  for  the
wrong  interpretation.  The  mode  of  procedure  by
which  the  critic  recognises  the  corruption  is  somewhat
as  follows.  A  grammatical  anomaly  in  MT  surprises
him  ;  he  refers  to  the  Targum  and  finds  it  carefully
reproduced,  perhaps  in  the  midst  of  quite  a  free
paraphrase.  Evidently  the  anomalous  punctuation  is
intentional,  and  as  the  prophets  wrote  better  Hebrew
than  the  Targumists,  it  is  only  too  likely  that  the
traditional  interpretation  of  the  whole  passage  is  wrong.
Now  and  then  it  is  possible  to  restore  the  original,  to
the  great  gain  of  literature.

No  better  instance  can  be  given  than  Is.  63  1-6.  Here  we
find  a  series  of  verbs  pointed  as  jussives  instead  of  with  waw
consecutive  ;  this  arouses  suspicion.  The  same  verbs  are  taken
as  futures  in  the  Targum,  and  the  reference  to  future  punish
ments  upon  the  heathen  is  more  pointed  than  in  the  Hebrew.
Now  63  1-6  is  the  only  passage  in  Deutero-Isaiah  that  contains
the  name  of  any  of  the  petty  nations  of  Palestine ;  in  fact  the
sudden  and  inartistic  mention  of  '  Edom '  has  given  much
trouble  to  commentators.  In  the  popular  Jewish  exegesis,  how
ever,  '  Edom  '  regularly  stands  for  Rome  and  the  Roman  Empire
(cp,  e.g.,  Targum  to  Lam.  4  21  f.).  It  is  out  of  place  here,'2  and
we  should  read  with  Lagarde  (Proph.  Chald.  p.  1)  C^NS  for
011X2  and  1S22  for  msaD,  so  that  the  sentence  runs  :  Who  is
this  that  comcth  all  reddened,  with  garments  stained  more
than  the  gatherer  of  the  vintage  ?'  The  corruption  of  v.  i,
which  took  its  rise  in  popular  exegesis,  was  the  excuse  for  the
wrong  pointing  of  the  verbs  in  TV.  3-6  by  the  Massoretes.

An  article  like  the  present  ought  in  strictness  to
consider  what  may  be  called  the  p«-e-canonical  history

of  the  text. It  is  almost  demonstrable
66.  Correction


of  MT.


that  some  of  the  most  serious  corrup


tions  originated  in  the  documents  before
they  became  part  of  the  OT.  Such  are  all  the  variations
which  can  be  traced  to  confusions  arising  from  the  Old
Hebrew  alphabet.  E.g. ,  S-ja  'for  the  dew'  in  Dt.  8813
corresponds  to  the  more  appropriate  'jya  '  above  '  in  Gen.
4925,  as  in  both  cases  the  word  is  contrasted  with
1  beneath. '  But  in  the  older  character  y  is  Q  and  o  is  (££),
so  the  corruption  was  easily  effected.  Again,  the
influence  of  Hosea2i7  ('  I  will  take  away  the  names  of
the  Baalim  out  of  her  mouth ' )  should  be  mentioned.
This  verse  was  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  very  names
of  heathen  gods  were  unlawful  to  be  used  ;  accordingly
the  vowels  of  bosheth  ( '  shame ' )  are  substituted  for  the
real  vowels  in  such  words  as  Tephe'h  and  Molech  (also
'Moloch'}.  In  Amoso26  Kaiwan  (i.e.,  'Saturn')  has
been  vocalised  with  the  vowels  of  sikkiis  (i.e.,  '  abomin-

1  This  is  especially  the  case  with  the  Babylonian  Targum.
The  Jer.  Targum  sometimes  differs — e.g:,  in  Exod.  40  3  it  reads
11123  f°r  mi3>  with  the  Samaritan  and  the  Old  Latin.

2  & of  this  passage  cannot  be  correctly  preserved,  for  the
constant  rendering  of  '  Edom '  in  the  Prophets  is  rj  'ISov^aia,
not  (as  here)  'EStop.

5029


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS

ation'),  producing  the  form  p»3  (Chiun,  AV).  By  a
more  violent  change  Saul's  son  'Ish-baal  ('Baal's-
man  '),  preserved  almost  intact  as  Eshbaal  in  i  Ch.  833,
becomes  Ish-bosheth  (  '  Man-of-Shame  '  )  in  the  more
frequently  read  book  of  Kings.  In  later  Jewish  writings
this  tendency  is  carried  into  original  literature  ;  there  is
no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  name  Abed-nego,  evidently
meant  for  Abed-nebo  (  '  Worshipper-of-Nebo  '  ),  is  the
invention  of  the  author  of  Daniel,  not  a  scribe's
blunder.  It  is  in  Daniel  (12n)  that  we  find  CCB'  ppi?
(the  'Abomination  which  maketh  desolate'),  an  inten
tional  perversion  of  D'OB*  Ws.  the  title  of  Zeus  BeeX-


We  are  now  concerned,  however,  with  the  corruptions
which  have  befallen  the  text  in  the  course  of  transmission,
and  here,  as  Wellhausen  remarks,  the  chief  agents  have
been  chance  and  caprice,  not  deliberate  falsification
(cp  Well.-Bleek,  §  295^).  Space  will  only  allow  of
a  few  examples  ;  but  those  given  below  will  sufficiently
exhibit  the  commonest  kinds  of  corruption,  while  at  the
same  time  they  bring  forward  the  instances  where  modern
scholarship  has  been  most  successful  in  restoring  the
true  reading,  whether  by  means  of  the  ancient  versions
or  by  simple  conjecture.

Conjecture  is  not  always  a  mere  arbitrary  procedure,
it  may  be  based  on  the  surest  of  all  exegetical  and
critical  rules,  viz.,  the  explanation  of  passages  which
are  obscure  by  those  which  are  plain  and  free  from
suspicion.  Thus  we  can  be  quite  certain  by  comparing
Zeph.  2  14  with  Is.  34  n  that  for  yvt,  'desolation,'  we
must  read  my,  'raven,'  and  that  the  mysterious  TUB"
not  only  contains  the  name  of  some  bird,  but  must  be  a
corruption  of  rp&y,  yansht/ph  or  yanshoph,  '  the  eagle-
owl  '  (see  OWL,  4).  The  translation  then  runs  :  '  Both
the  pelican  and  the  porcupine  shall  lodge  in  the
chapiters  thereof  ;  hark  to  the  eagle-owl  in  the  window,
the  raven  on  the  threshold  1  '

Although  the  Massoretes  point  well  where  the  text
is  sound,  the  smallest  error  definitely  represented  in  the
consonantal  text  is  sufficient  to  throw  them  out.  Thus
the  long  final  nun  of  JNSH  'jy  |3  (  '  verily  the  poor  of
the  flock')  in  Zech.  llyn,  was  doubtless  the  cause
which  prevented  the  first  two  words  from  being  run
together  and  vocalised  jNi-n  %:j;;3,  ktna'ane  has-son  —  /.<•.,
'  the  sheep-dealers.  '  There  are  of  course  a  few  cases
where  the  restoration  of  the  true  text  depends  on  a
point  of  archaeological  knowledge  which  might  easily
fade  from  the  narrowly  grammatical  Hebrew  tradition.
Thus  in  Jer.  46  15  we  should  divide  tjno:  Jflio  into  yno
f]n  D:,  and  translate  with  ©  '  Why  has  Apis  fled?'  (cp
APIS).  Again,  it  was  not  till  some  progress  had  been
made  in  Assyrian  that  Halevy  was  able  to  recognise  in
-j^n  (Ezek.  27n)  the  name  Cilicia,  the  Hilakku  of  the
cuneiform  monuments.

(f§  —  in  its  original  form  —  often  preserves  excellent
readings  which  have  quite  disappeared  from  our  other
authorities.  Thus  'in  2  K.  15io  Griitz's  clever  con
jecture  (Gesc/i.  der  Juden,  ii.  Igg)  Di^a'a  for  the  un-
Hebraic  cjrVap  is  confirmed  by  Lucian  '  (tv  Ie/3\aa,u,
quoted  in  Driver,  TBS,  p.  Hi  note).  Another  example
is  furnished  by  Dr.  Hayman's  too  little  known  emenda
tion  of  Dt.  8821  (Proc.  Cambridge  Philol.  Soc.  1895,
p.  8),  the  essence  of  which  is  the  substitution  of  pSDNm
for  the  impossible  NJVI  |'B3-  The  phrase  is  then  exactly
parallel  with  v.  5.2  Here  also  ©  appears  to  support
the  true  reading  ;  but  OTI  eKel  f/j.fpiffdrj  yr/  ap'x.ovTfav
ffvvrjyfjLtvuv  &fj.a  ap\riyols  \auiv  is  too  paraphrastical
to  suggest  the  actual  change  required.  The  cause  of
the  corruption  here  in  the  Massoretic  text  may  have

1  Nestle, ZATM', 1884, p. 243; see ABOMINATION OF
DESOLATION.

2  Translate: 'And  [Gad]  saw  the  first  fruits  were  for  him,
for  there  was  the  allotment  of  the  Lawgiver,  and  so  the  chiefs  of
a  people  were  assembled  together.' The  reference  appears  to
be  to  the  settlement  of  Gad  on  the  E.  of  Jordan  (cp  Nu.  32).


THADD^EUS

l>een  a  transposition,  the  word  having  been  written  P"
at  the  end  of  a  line  in  the  archetype.

Some  corruptions  are  older  than  any  of  the  versions,
perhaps  older  than  the  final  redaction  of  the  Pentateuch.
Thus  all  extant  authorities  give  ••£&  -|S'l  as  the  end  of
Nu.  283,  generally  translated  :  '  And  he  [Balaam]  went
to  a  level  place.  '  Apart  from  the  grammatical  harshness,
however,  this  and  every  other  sense  which  these  letters
can  be  made  to  bear  are  alike  poor,  and  Kuenen  has
suggested  that  at  some  period  before  the  development  of
medial  3  the  letters  -fr  had  been  written  once  instead  of
twice  over  ;  then  by  reading  the  final  »  as  i  (or  sup
posing  i  to  have  been  lost  before  the  following  ip'i)  we
get  rDBn'ri'ri  (i.e.,  vscb1?  ^'i),  '  he  went  to  his  incanta
tions.'  This  agrees  with  Nu.  24  1,  where  we  read  that
Balaam  '  went  not,  as  at  other  times,  to  seek  for
enchantments.  '

Equally  brilliant  is  Lagarde's  emendation  of  Ps.  32  6.  For
fjEE'7  pT  USD  nj?1?  he  writes  »]B3>  Vp  ISO  nj;S—  i.e.,  li'D  has
been  written  INb'D  (for  12TO)  by  some  scribe.  Translate  '  in  the
time  of  distress  ;  the  sound  of  the  flood  of  mighty  waters  shall
not  come  nigh  him.'  Finally,  we  may  quote  Wellhausen's
restoration  of  the  original  of  2  K.  10  26/1  (=  Is.  37  27^).  For

nmts'i  (27)  :ncp  ':sS  he  writes  imen  Tpp  •JE'?  (27):  so  that

7'.  27  begins  '  Before  me  is  thy  rising  up  and  thy  sitting  down,
and  thy  going  out  and  coming  in  I  know.'  It  is  worth  while
pointing  out,  as  a  final  testimony  to  the  excellence  of  (S  in  its
original  form,  that  this  palmary  emendation  is  not  without  sup
port  from  <5.  In  Is.  37  27  the  nCp  'JE1?  °f  MT  is  omitted.  In
2  K  19  26  most  documents  have  airf.va.VTi  €(TTT)ICOTOS  for  ,-13p  ^S1?!
but  the  text  called  Oj  in  the  Syro-Hexaplar  MSS  (see  col.

5019)  had  airivavTi  (Woracrews  crov  —  i.e.,  -pp  'JS1?,  the  con
sonantal  text  suggested  by  Wellhausen.

In  concluding  an  article  of  any  length  on  the  textual
criticism  of  the  Bible  it  is  always  wholesome  to  remind
oneself  of  the  comparative  soundness  of  the  text.  That
there  are  blots,  especially  in  the  OT,  some  of  them
probably  irremovable,  must  be  admitted  ;  but  they  are
not  enough  seriously  to  obscure  the  main  features  of
the  narratives  related  or  the  ideas  expressed.  So  far
as  the  Pentateuch  is  concerned  we  may  be  especially  at
our  ease.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  separate
the  documents  with  the  minuteness  which  modern
scholarship  has  found  possible  if  the  text  had  been
much  confused  by  scribal  errors.  And  with  regard  to
the  Prophets,  though  their  works  are  less  accurately
preserved  than  the  Pentateuch,  we  .can  be  sure  that
textual  corruption  never  improves  the  style  or  the
thought.  The  fact  that  so  much  of  the  Prophetical
Books  is  —  judged  by  any  standard  —  of  the  first  rank  as
literature,  is  the  strongest  proof  that  they  have  not
been  utterly  disfigured  in  transmission.

Some  of  the  most  important  bibliographical  references  have
already  been  indicated  above.  The  best  general  account  of

the  text  and  versions  of  the  OT  in  any
67.  Bibliography,  language  is Wellhausen's monograph  in

the  fourth  edition  of  Bleek's Einkitung

in  das  Alte  Testament,  Berlin,  1878,  §§  275-298;  later  edd.
are  arranged  on  a.  different  plan.  Somewhat  similar  in  plan,
but  more  confined  to  the  special  books  treated  of,  are  the  intro
ductions  in  Driver's  Notes  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of  the  Books  of
Samuel,  pp.  xxx-lxxxiv,  and  in  Cornill's  Ezechiel,  1-160.
Klostermann,  quoted  by  Driver,  p.  Hi,  says  '  Let  him  who
would  himself  investigate  and  advance  learning,  by  the  side  of
the  other  Ancient  Versions,  accustom  himself  above  all  things
to  the  use  of  Field's  Hexapla,  and  Lagarde's  edition  of  the
Recension  of  Lucian.'  To  these  specially  valuable  authorities  the
present  writer  would  add  any  well  edited  fragment  of  the  Old
Latin.

[See  also  Kittel,  Ueber  die  Not-vendigkeit  und  Moglichkeit
einer  neuen  Ausga.be  tier  hi-f>r.  Bibel:  Studien  u.  F.nvagttngen
(1901);  Cheyne,  CnViVa  Biblica,  pt.  i  (Isaiah  and  Jeremiah).]

F.  C.  B.


THADD.SUS. In Mk.  3  13 GAAA&IOC appears

tenth in the li*t of  apostles. At/3/3aiof is here  a western

variant  (D  a  b  ff  1  i  q). In  Mt.  10s  eaS^alos is

1. Name, the right reading  (KB), but \eppalos is found

in western texts  (D 122 Aug.), and the con

flate Afj3/3. 6 en-ncArjOtU ©aS8. in the late '  Syrian  ' text.

0a5Saio?  has  been derived  from  the Heb. -)2>  =  Syr. tAfi/a  =

mamma,  and  AeftScuos  from 3^  =  cor. But  Dalman  (ll'crte

503T


THASSI

Jcsu,  40)  connects  ©a£6aios  with  ©evSds  ,ind  Aej3/3<uo«  with  the
Nabataan  'joS  WH  {Xotes,  u)  suppose  A«/3/3cuos  to  be  due
to  an  attempt  to  bring  Levi  (Mk.  214)  within  the  number  of
the  Twelve.  But  we  should  have  expected  Aevefc.  A£/3£cuos  =
Aeuei's  is  unparalleled.  It  seems  clear  that  Ae/30atoj  is  a
'  Western  '  gloss  of  a  copyist  who  connected  &a&&alos  with
thi-dd  =  mamma,  and  wished  to  substitute  a  not  dissimilar
name  which  should  be  more  appropriate  to  an  apostle,  and
less  undignified.  If  Aej3/3cuos  can  be  thus  explained  as  an  early
emendation  the  difficult  @o£2ato$  remains.  Dalman's  ©a6-
fialos  =  QeuSoj  is  improbable.  It  is  more  likely  that  QaMatos,
by  corruption  in  Greek  or  Aramaic,  represents  an  original
m(l)n*  or  N-]d),T-  For  the  8  cp  SovSovia  [B]  =  ,Tm,"l,  Neh.  743
(see  HODAVIAH),  flvrjA  [B*vid.N]  =  SNlN,  Ezral034  (see  UF.L);
eou«[B]  =  Ki,1J«(Ahava),  Kzra82i  ;  8t\Ka6  [A^npSrKHelkath),
Josh.  21  31  ;  Oaa-tipei.  [B],  dacrovp  [A]  =  "YlirN,  28.29  (see
ASHURITES);  eaero/3ai>[ADJ,-fA[L]  =  j3sN(Ezbon),Gen.46i6.  1'or
the  doubled  S  and  the  ending  -alos  cp  T  =  'Ia5£cuo«,  De  Vogue,
Syr.  Cent.  63.

In  Lk.  616  Actsl  13  'loi'Sas  'Ia/cu/3ov  =  Judas,  son  of
James,1  takes  the  place  of  Thaddaeus.  See  JUDAS,  7.
It  may,  therefore,  be  reasonably
conjectured  that  Judas  was  the  name
of  the  apostle,  that  Thaddceus  is  a  corruption  of  Judas,
and  that  Lebbasus  is  a  gloss  upon  Thaddanis.  Of
James,  the  father  of  Judas,  nothing  is  known.  Syr.
Cur.  has  here  Judas  Thomas,  and  Syr.  Sin.  Thomas
(see  THOMAS).  The  evidence  of  the  Gospels  being  so
confused  we  not  unnaturally  find  great  uncertainty  in
the  post-biblical  tradition.  In  Origen  (Prcef.  ad  Rom.)
Thaddaeus  =  Lebbaeus  =  Judas  Jacobi.  In  the  Citron.
Pasch.  Thaddaeus  =  Lebba;us=  Barsabas,  whilst  Judas
Jacobi  =  Simon  the  Canaanite.  In  the  Abgar  legend
preserved  by  Eusebius  (HE\ij,)  Thaddaeus  is  distin
guished  from  Judas  Jacobi  =  Thomas.  In  the  Acta
Thoma;  Judas  Thomas  is  the  Lord's  brother.  Accord
ing  to  the  Syrian  Ischodab  (gth  cent.  )  quoted  by  Zahn
(Bin  I.  2263)  the  Diatessaron  identified  James  son  of
Alphnsus  with  Lebbaeus  (note  that  D  in  Mk.  2  14  has
'Id/cwSoi'  for


2.  Identification.


The  earliest  form  of  legend  connected  with  Thaddaeus  is  that
which  represents  him  as  preaching  at  Kdessa.  A  very  ex
haustive  bibliography  of  the  literature  and  sources  of  this
tradition  may  be  found  in  von  Dobschiitz,  Christusbild.tr,  158*-
249*.  In  the  account  given  by  Eusebius  (HE  1  13)  from  Syriac
sources,  Thaddaeus  the  Apostle,  one  of  the  Seventy,  was  sent
by  the  Apostle  Judas  Thomas  to  Abgar,  king  of  Kdessa,  in
accordance  with  a  promise  made  by  Christ  before  his  death.  In
the  later  Syriac  legend  (Doctrina  Addai,  4th  cent.?  ed.  Phillips)
Addai  is  substituted  for  Thaddieus.  In  the  Ok.  Ilpaftis
®a&Sa.Cov  (Lips.  Acta.  Apost.  Apocr.  1  273-278)  Lebbseus  is
identified  with  Thaddseus,  one  of  the  Twelve.  For  this  and
the  later  legends  which  represent  Thaddanis  as  preaching  in
Armenia,  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,  and  in  Persia,  see  Lips.
Diet.  Christ.  Biog.,  s.v.  'Thaddaeus.'  W.  C.  A.

THAHASH,  or  (RV)  TAHASH  (t-':nR  TOXOC.
[ADL]),  a  name  in  the  Nahorite  genealogy  (Gen.
22S4t).

He  is  identified  by  Winckler  (Mittheil.  d.  I'ordcras.  Ces.,
1896,  p.  207)  with  Tihis,  mentioned  in  the  so-called  Travels  of
an  Egyptian  (I'ap.  Anast.  i.  22  3  ;  see  A*/'  2  1  1  1)  and  elsewhere,
as  in  the  region  of  Kadesh  on  the  Orontes  (to  the  N.).  Cp
WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  258.  But  see  alsoTEUAH.  T.  K.  C.

THAMAH  (npn,  66MA  [BA]),  Ezra253  AV,  RV
TEMAH  (y.v.).

THAMAR  (GAMdvp  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.  1  3. See  TAMAR.

THAMNATHA  (6AMN&0A  [AKV]),  i  Mace.  9  50.
See  TIMNAH  (3).

THANK  OFFERING  (iTVin),  2  Ch.  293i  etc.  See
SACRIFICE,  §  29  t>.

THARA  (eARAlTi.  WH]),  Lk.334  AV,  RVTERAH.

THARRA  (e*pp&  [BNc-aAL]),  Esth.  12  1.  See
TERESH.

THARSHISH  (tf'Enn),  i  K.  1022  AV,  RV  TAR-
SHISH  (g.v.  ).

THASSI  (6ACc[e]i  [XV]),  i  Mace.  2  3.  See  SIMON
(i),  and  MACCABEES,  §§  i,  5.

1  So  Syr.  Sin.  Mt.  10  3  Lk.  6  16  ;  Pesh.  Lk.  6  16  Acts  1  13.
5032


THEATRE

THEATRE.  Although  theatres  and  amphitheatres
were  erected  by  the  Herods  in  Jerusalem  and  other
towns  of  Syria  (Jos.  Ant.  xv.  81,  96,  xvi.  5i,  xix.  7s,
82;  BJ  \.  218,  ii.  7  2)  in  which  magnificent  spectacles
were  exhibited,  principally  in  honour  of  the  Roman
emperors,  there  is  no  reference  to  them  in  the  Gospels
or  Acts.  Even  in  narrating  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa
(Acts  1221/1),  whose  fatal  seizure,  according  to  the
Jewish  historian,  took  place  in  the  theatre  at  Coesarea
(Ant,  xix.  82),  the  word  does  not  occur.  The  word
theatre  is  absent  alike  from  the  canonical  and  from  the
apocryphal  books  of  the  OT,  and  in  NT  is  found  only
in  Acts  19  29-31  where  the  theatre  of  Ephesus  is  spoken
of.  It  was  probably  the  usual  place  of  meeting  for
the  assembly  ;  and  the  ruins  can  still  be  seen  (see
EPHESUS,  §  3).

i  Cor.  contains  two  probable  references  to  theatrical
representations,  neither  of  which  is  very  apparent  in  EV.
The  word  translated  '  spectacle'  (i  Cor.  4  9)  is  Otarpov,
and  the  whole  passage  seems  to  refer  to  '  the  band  of
gladiators  brought  out  at  last  for  death,  the  vast  range
of  an  amphitheatre  under  the  open  sky  well  representing
the  magnificent  vision  of  all  created  beings,  from  men
up  to  angels,  gazing  on  the  dreadful  death-struggle  ;
and  then  the  contrast  of  the  selfish  Corinthians  sitting
by  unmoved  at  the  awful  spectacle '  (Stanley,  Corin
thians,  73).  Cp  Heb.  lOss  'being  made  a  gazing-
stock  '  (OfaTpi^ofj-efot).  In  i  Cor.  731,  '  the  fashion  of  this
world  passeth  away'  (wa.pa.jfi.  TO  crx^/uo,  TOU  KOCT/J.OV),
many  have  seen  an  allusion  to  the  drama,  drawn  either
from  the  shifting  of  the  scenes,  or  the  passing  across
the  stage  of  the  gorgeous  processions  then  so  common.

Ancient  history  records  the  name  of  at  least  one  Jewish
dramatist  —  Ezekiel,  who  lived  in  Alexandria  in  the  second
century  B.C.  and  wrote  a  'tragedy'  or  dramatic  poem,  entitled
The  K.rai/us  ('Efa-yoyyrj),  of  which  considerable  fragments  are
preserved  in  Clem. Alex.  (Strom.  123),  Eusehius  (Prtgp.  Rv.
9  28/C)  and  Eustathius  (ati  Hexaem.  25).  On  the  question
of  a  Semitic  drama  cp  CANTICLES,  §  7,  POETICAL  LITERATURE,
§  4  (5).

THEBES. See  NO-AMON.

THEBEZ  (]'3fl).  where  Abimelech  was  killed  whilst
besieging  the  citadel  (Judg.  950  :6HBHC  [BL],  GAlB&lC
[A] ;  2  S.  11 21  andv.  22  in®,  6&/v\ekC[e]i  [BA,  -/weccei
[L]),  was  situated,  according  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome
(OS,  26244,  157 15),  13  R-  m.  from  Neapolis  on  the
road  to  Scythopolis.  Starting  from  this,  Robinson
plausibly  identifies  Thebez  with  the  mod.  Tubas,  a  large
village  on  the  W.  slope  of  a  fruitful  valley,  10  m.  due
NE.  from  Nablus.  So  Buhl,  Pal.  204  and  the  PEF
Survey.

But  is  this  correct?  Tubas  suggests  rather  f31B.  Apart  from
this,  the  form  of  the  name  is  peculiar.  We  expect  some  famous
fortress  to  be  referred  to.  From  the  point  of  view  of  SHECHE.M,
2,  one  may  naturally  think  of  Zephath(  =  Zarephath)  ;  713%;  might
easily  be  written  n3S,  out  of  which  by  transposition  would  come
t»3n-  This  seems  to  give  greater  vividness  to  the  narrative.

THECOE  (QeKooe  [AXV]),  i  Mace.  9  33  AV,  RV
TEKOAH.

THELASAR  pb'X^P)), 2 K.  19 12  AV, RV TEL-

ASSAR  (q.v.  ).

THELERSAS  (GeAepCAC  [B]),  i  Esd.536.  See
TEL-HARSHA.

THEMAN (0MMAN [BAQr]),  Bar.  822/1  AV,  RV

TEMAN.

THEOCANUS  (GCOKANOY  [A],  GOK.  [B]),  i  Esd.
9 14  AV=EzralOis,  TIKVAH  (q.v. ).

THEODOTUS  (GeoAOTOC  [AV]),  one  of  Nicanor's
ambassadors  to  Judas  the  Maccabee  in  161  B.C.  (2
Mace.  14 19).

THEOPHANY.  The  invisibility  of  God  formed  no
part  of  early  Hebrew  belief.  Although  it  was  commonly

thought  that  to  see  God  (or  indeed  to
.  , ,  . . , , , - fV r .-*•  ,\
hear  his  voice Dt.  433  023^: \?°  ff-\)

was  dangerous  and  even  fatal  (Ex.  8820  Judg.  1822  cp


In  huma a
„
lorm.


THEOPHANY

Gen.  16  13  J  Ex.  36  192i  Judg.  622/1  iK.19i2/.  Is.6s),
many  narratives,  including  those  just  cited,  record  cases
in  which  men  saw  God,  or  at  least  perceived  hrough
the  senses  that  he  was  present,  and  yet  lived.  The
most  striking  of  these  is  in  Ex.  24  10  (JE)  where  it  is
quite  simply  related  that  Moses  and  Aaron,  Nadab  and
Abihu,  and  seventy  elders  of  Israel,  having  gone  up  Mt.
Sinai,  saw  the  God  of  Israel.  The  narrator  is  well
aware  of  the  exceptional  character  of  the  occasion,  for
in  the  next  verse  he  expressly  records  that  God  '  laid
not  his  hands  '  upon  them  ;  but  he  gives  no  hint  that
what  was  seen  was  anything  less  than  the  fullness  of
the  glory  and  person  of  the  deity  or  that  it  was  seen
in  any  other  way  than  by  ordinary  vision.  Cp  Nu.
126-8  (K).

In  most  cases,  however,  it  is  implied  that  the  deity,
although  he  makes  his  presence  known  by  a  physical
appearance,  does  not  manifest  himself  in  his  fullness
to  the  ordinary  human  eye.  We  may  conveniently
classify  the  OT  theophanies  into  those  in  which  the
appearance  is  of  the  human  form  and  those  in  which  it
is  some  other  physical  phenomenon.

i.  Theophanies  in  human  form.  —  (a)  Ex.  24  10
records,  as  we  have  seen,  a  complete  exception  to  the

tllat tlle s'Snt °^ <"'od was ^ata^-
The  nearest  parallel  to  this  occurs  in  Ex.

33  1?^  (j),  which  relates  that  Moses  saw
the  back  of  Yahwe  as  he  passed  away,  but  that  even  he
could  not  with  safety  see  the  face  of  Yahwe.  In  other
narratives,  however,  it  is  just  the  face  of  God  which  is
seen—  Ex.  33n  (E),  Gen.  8230  [31]  (probably  E)  ;  in
Nu.  126-8  it  is  said  that  Moses,  unlike  others  (cp  Dt.
4  12  15),  in  his  customary  and  immediate  intercourse  with
Yahwe  sees  his  form  or  tdmunah  (something  less  distinct
than  his  appearance  —  cp  Job4i6).  But  these  are  only
typical  cases  in  connection  with  the  present  subject,  in
which  looseness  and  inconsistency  of  expression  corre
spond  to  looseness  and  variety  of  thought.  We  are
dealing  with  popular  ideas  and  expressions,  not  with
theological  and  systematic  thought.  What  is  common
to  the  present  type  of  theophany  is  that  the  sight  of  God
is  partial.

(t>)  In  another  type  the  peculiarity  consists  in  the  fact

that  God  is  seen  in  human  form  indeed,  but  only  by

_ . . means  of  dream  or  vision  (cp  Nu.  243/1  ).

Vision.  SQ  we  s]lou]cj  probably  interpret  the  ex

perience  of  Isaiah  (Is.  6)  and  certainly  those  of  Ezekiel

(Ezek.  1  etc.) and Daniel (Dan.  729). Cp Gen.  28

13-16  (J).

(c)  But  the  commonest  type  of  a  theophany  in  human
form  2  was  by  means  of  the  '  angel  of  Yahwe  '  or  '  of

G°d  '  (^X  '»' ™n'  -\K^o). Cp  A.NGF.L,

§2;  XAMF-  §  6-  The  narratives
clearly  identify  the  'Angel  of  Yahwe'
with  Yahwe,  though  often  in  the  same  narrative  a
certain  differentiation  is  also  implied.  Thus  in  Gen.  16
the  angel  of  Yahwe  who  appears  to  Hagar  is  called
'Yahwe  who  spake  unto  her'  (v.  13),  and  Hagar
expresses  surprise  that  she  still  lives  after  seeing  God
(cp  further  v.  10  with  e.g.,  122).  On  the  other  hand
in  v.  12  the  angel  speaks  of  Yahwe  in  the  third  person.

For  further  illustrations  from  other  narratives  of  this  identifica
tion,  see  Gen.  22nyC  Ex.3  (angel  of  Yahwe,  v.  2  —  Yahwe,
TV.  40.  5  7),  Nu.  2232-35  (cp  especially  i:  35  with  24  13),  Judg.
'1  1-5  611-24  (angel  of  Yahwe,  iv.-LT.ff.  20  //."  =  Yahwe,  r°7<.
14  16  23),  IS  23  ;  for  indications  of  differentiations  see  Gen.  24  7  40
—  yet  cp  TI>.  2748  Nu.  2231  Judg.  13  &/.  iS.  24  15-1  7.  3  See  also
DESTROYER.

1  Read  'Have  I  even  seen  God  and  am  I  (still)  alive?' So
Ball  in  SBOTin  accordance  with  a  large  consensus  of  critical
opinion. See  BKER-LAHAI-ROI,  §  i.

2  In Ex.32  the 'angel  of  Yahwe'  exceptionally  manifests
himself  in  'a  flame  of  fire,'  presumably  not  in  human  form.

3  The Yahwistic narrative in Gen.  \§f. presents special
peculiarities. Yahwe  appears  to  Abraham  (IS  i)  as  three  men
(v.  2)  who  speak  or  are  addressed sometimes  in  the  singular
(vv.  3  10), sometimes in the plural (w.  4^1). Subsequently
(16-33)  one  °f  the  three,  who  is  identified  with  Yahwe,  remains
behind  with  Abraham,  the  other  two,  who  are  described  in  19  i

5°34


4.


Yh '
we.


5.  Fire.


THEOPHANY

In  brief,  the  '  angel  of  Yahwe '  is  an  occasional
manifestation  of  Yahwe  in  human  form,  possessing  no
distinct  and  permanent  personality  but  speaking  and
spoken  of,  at  times  as  Yahwe  himself  (cp  the  way  in
which  the  word  of  Yahwe  passes  over  insensibly  into  the
prophetic  comment),  at  times  as  distinct  from  him.
The  danger  which  attached  to  the  sight  of  God  attached
also  to  the  sight  of  the  angel.  The  two  early  literary
strata  of  the  Hexateuch  differ  in  their  detailed  accounts
of  the  angel.  In  J  he  eats,  drinks,  and  converses  with
men,  and  in  every  respect  comports  himself  as  a  human
being — the  narratives  of  Judg.  613  are  also  in  many
respects  similar  ;  in  E  there  is  a  tendency  to  keep  even
the  angel  from  close  contact  with  men — thus  he  appears
in  and  speaks  from  heaven  (e.g. ,  Gen.  22  n).

At  a  later  date,  theophanies  in  (human)  form  were
denied  (Dt.  4 15)  or,  as  regularly  in  P,  the  theophany  is
referred  to  in  the  barest  possible  terms  without  any
indication  of  its  character — f-g.,  '  And  God  [or  '  Yahwe  ']
appeared  .  .  .  and  spoke  (said)'  (Gen.  17 1  35g  ;  cp
Ex.  63)  ;  and  thus  (after  the  Exile)  the  '  angel  of  Yahwe  '
was  no  longer  regarded  as  a  theophany  but  became  one
of  the  numerous  distinct  angelic  personalities  which
thenceforward  formed  prominent  objects  of  belief  (see
ANGKL,  §  3/. ).

2.  Theophanies  in  which  the  manifestation  is  not  in
human  form,  (a]  Fire,  in  one  form  or  another,  fre
quently  indicated  the  divine  presence.  The
most  notable  illustrations  of  this  are  the
'Burning  Bush'  (Ex.  3)  and  the  'Pillar  of  Fire'  (Ex.
132i).  In  Ex.  14 19^  (J)  the  'pillar  of  cloud '  =  ' the
angel  of  God,'  v.  igd  (E).  For  further  details  see  the
articles  BUSH  and  PILLAR  OF  FIRE.  But  there  are  a
number  of  other  passages  where  fire  or  a  fiery
appearance  clearly  has  the  same  significance — e.g. ,
Gen.  15 17  Ex.  19 18  24 17  Dt.  4 12  15.

We  ought  also  to  compare  the  part  played  by  fire  in  the
destruction  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  10),  of  Korah  and  his
company  (Nu.  1635),  of  the  people  at  Tab'erah  (Nu.  11  1-3),  in
Elijah's  conflict  with  the  priests  of  I5aal  (i  K.  IS,  cp  2  K.
1  10 ft),  in  the  theophany  at  Horeb  (in  i  K.  WnyC,  where
fire  is  not  itself  the  theophany  but  an  accompaniment  of  it),  in
the  assumption  of  Elijah  (2  K.  2  n),  and  generally  in  the  later
literary  theophanies  (see  below,  §  p),  and  in  similes  (e.g.,  Is.
1017;  'Yahwe  is  a  devouring  fire,'  Dt.  424  93).  Cp  also  the
Arabic  stories  of  fiery  appearances  of  the  jinn  ;  Goldziher,  AM.
zur  Arab.  Philologie,  vo^ff.  •

Even  in  the  NT  we  find,  in  addition  to  citations  from
or  references  to  the  OT  (e.g. ,  Acts?3o  Heb.  12i8  29),
two  or  three  instances  of  theophanic  fire  ;  the  fire
clearly  indicates,  or  is  the  accompaniment  of,  the  divine
presence  in  Acts 2 3  2  Thess.  18  (of  the  second  coming
of  Christ)  2  Pet.  3  10-12  Rev.  10  i  (of  an  angel)  ;  perhaps
also  Mt.  3  ii  =  Lk.  3 16  should  be  compared.  Generally,
however,  in  NT  (as  already  in  Enoch  ;  e.g.,  10 13  21  7-10
983)  fire  is  the  instrument  of  the  divine  punishment  and
does  not  necessarily  or  explicitly  affirm  the  divine
presence.  The  transition  from  the  older  to  the  later
conception  was  facilitated  by  such  passages  as  Am.  56
Is.  33 14  (cp  6624)  Mai.  3 2,  and  is  actually  seen  in
certain  NT  passages — 2  Thess.  18  2  Pet.  3 10-12  i  Cor.

813-15.

(!>}  The  '  glory  of  Yahwe  '  ("•  1133),  which  from  Isaiah

(63)  onwards  (e.g., Nu.  I4zif. Dt.  f>2i  [24]  Ezek.  392i

_.  ,  Ps.8il92[i]963)expressesthemanifestation

T?  r*™  of  the  divine  character  in  nature  and  history,
is  used  by  Ezekiel  to  express  also  the  fiery
appearance  which,  in  his  visions,  indicates  the  presence  of
Yahwe — 1 28  104432  etc.  In  P  the  phrase  is  invariably
used  of  a  fiery  theophany — in  the  first  instance  of  the
theophany  on  Sinai  (Ex.  24is  17)  and,  subsequently,  of
that  in  the  tabernacle — Ex.  2943  4034/.  167  10  (in  ?'.  10
restore  eripzn,  tabernacle,  for  the  redactorial  T3i~nK
Lev.  96  23  Nu.  14 10  1619  ;  cp  further,  i  K.  8io/!,  which
is  dependent  on  P  (Corn.  Einl,  108).  In  its  last  usage

as  '  the  two  angels,'  proceed  to  Sodom ;  but  these  in  turn  are
addressed  and  speak  in  the  singular  (vz>.  19-21),  and  speak  and
act  as  Yahwe  himself  (?/r>.  i.\jffr.).

5035


THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)

the  phrase  corresponds  closely  to  the  Shechinah  of  post-
biblical  Hebrew.  The  fact  that  the  'glory  of  Yahwe,'
where  it  indicates  a  fiery  appearance,  is  so  frequently
associated  with  cloud  and  the  similar  combination  of
fire  and  cloud  in  the  stories  of  the  Pillar  of  Fire  and
Cloud  (q.v. )  may  be,  in  part  at  least,  explained  as
modified  survivals  of  an  old  view,  which  also  maintained
itself  in  greater  purity  in  poetical  passages  (e.g. ,  Pss.
1829),  that  Yahwe  manifested  himself  in  the  thunder
storm.

(f)  Closely  related  to  the  term  just  discussed,  and  in
some  cases  almost  synonymous  with  it,  are  the  '  Name

7 'Name  '  or  °^  ^anwe'  anc^  l^e  '  Face  of  Yahwe' ;

' ,  P  ,  ,  the  former  stands  in  parallelism  with
Y  ^  \  the  '  glory  of  Yahwe '  in  Is.  59 19  Ps.
102is.  The  most  strictly  theophanic
passage  in  which  either  occurs  is  Is.  3027,  and  even  that
is  clearly  figurative.  Cp  NAME,  §  6.  Generally  speak
ing,  both  terms  are  used  of  God  as  made  known  to  men,
but  rather  by  some  decisive  event,  or  otherwise  indirectly,
than  by  a  physical  phenomenon.  In  Phoenician,  on  the
other  hand,  '  the  face '  or  '  name  of  Baal '  is  a  goddess —
^JH  JBTUTb  ^73  DC  mrwy  (cp  Baethg.  Beitr.  56 /.  267/1.
also  NAME,  §  6  ;  and  see  Fr.  Giesebrecht's  monograph,
Die  Alttestamentliche  Schattung  des  Gottesnamens  u.
ihre  religionsgeschichtliche  Grundlage  [1901]).

Two  remarks  are  suggested  by  the  preceding  survey.

(i)  The  belief  that  fire,  especially  the  lightning  of  the

_  . storm, was the physical indication of

, . . Yahwe's  presence  may  lie  at  the  base  of

the belief in the danger of beholding

Yahwe's  face  ;  at  the  same  time,  it  must  be  remembered

that  analogous  beliefs  occur  in  other  religions. (2)  A

large  proportion  of  the  stories  are  connected  with  the

Exodus  and  the  subsequent  Wanderings. The  idea  of

the 'Angel'  or  'Messenger  of  Yahwe'  may  well  have

sprung  out  of  an  attempt  to  reconcile  the belief  that

Yahwe  abode  in  Sinai,  and  yet that  he  accompanied

Israel  to  Canaan (cp  Ex.  2820-23). A  similar  conflict

would  still  have  called  for  reconciliation  when  Yahwe

was  regarded  as  seated  in  heaven.

In addition to the narratives of theophanies where the

theophany  is  regarded  as  sober  historical  fact,  we  have  numerous

purely literary theophanies  —  i.e., descriptions

9. Later, clearly  intended  by  the  writers  to  be  metaphorical

and  imaginative. Some  of  these  are  conceived  in

the  boldest  anthropomorphic  manner  (cp,  e.g.,  the  descriptions

of  Yahwe  as  a  warrior — Is.  t>3  1-6  5!»i5/>^)  ; in  others,  figures

drawn  from  the  storm  or  other  natural  phenomena  play  a  large

part  (cp,  e.g.,  Ps.  18  Hab.  3).

In  the  NT  we  have  angelophanies  (see  ANGEL,  §  7),  but
(except  as  indicated  above,  §  2  a,  ad  fin.)  no  occasional  theo
phanies  such  as  the  OT  records.  Instead,  we  have  the  life  of
Jesus  which,  most  clearly  by  the  author  of  the  fourth  gospej,
but  also  by  other  NT  writers,  is  regarded  as  a  prolonged  mani
festation  of  God  in  the  flesh  (cp  especially  Jn.  1  1-3  14,  and  e.g.,
Rom.  1  1-7  Col.  1  15^  2g  Heb.  1  1-3).  In  the  same  way  the
belief  in  the  Parousia  is  tantamount  to  the  expectation  of  a
coining  theophany.

Literature. — Ch.  J.  Trip,  Die  Theofhanien  in  den  Ge-
schichtsbiichcrndes  A  7*(Leyden,  1858);  this  is  primarily  a  history
and  discussion  of  the  view  that  the  '  Angel  of  Yahwe  '=  '  the  son
of  God.'  Kosters,  ;  De  Mal'ach  Jahwe '  in  Th.T,  1875,  pp.
369-415.  See,  further,  under  ANGEL.  G.  B.  G.

THEOPHILUS  (9eod>iAoc  [Ti.  WH]),  the  'most
excellent '  person  to  whom  the  Third  Gospel  and  the
Book  of  Acts  are  dedicated  (Lk.  la  Actsli).  See
GOSPELS,  §  37.

THERAS  (GepA  [BA]),  iEsd.86i  (cp  v.  4i)  =  Ezra
831,  AHAVA.

THERMELETH(eepMeAe9[BA]),  i  Esd.  5  36  =  Ezra
259,  TEL-MELAH.

THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)

Place  and  time  (§  i).  Its  authorship  (§  8).

Character  of  epistles  (§  6).  2  Thess.  (§  i,/.).

Thessalonian  Christians  (8  7).  Its  authorship  (§§  9-15)-

i  Thess.  (8  2/.).  Bibliography  (§  16).

The  two  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  were  written,
5036


THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)


not  in  Athens  (cp  i  Thess.  3i)  as  stated  in  the  subscrip-

tion  to  the  epistles  in  the  Textus  Receptus,

1.  Place but in Corinth during Paul's first visit

and  time. there recorded jn Acts  18  iff. This

appears  from  the  following  considerations  : —

1.  The  names  of  Silvanus  and  Timothy  are  joined  with  the
namt:  of  Paul  in  the  salutations  of  both  epistles,  and  they  were
with  Paul  in  Corinth  during  his  first  visit  there,  according  to
Acts  18  5, which  is  confirmed  by 2  Cor.  1  19. A  considerable
period  had  elapsed  since  Paul  left  Thessalonica,  for  the  fame  of
the Thessalonian Christians had already spread throughout
Macedonia  and Achaia  (i  Thess.  1  7/),  and Paul  must  have
laboured  at  least  for  some  months  in  Achaia,  as  may  be  gathered
from  the  spread  of  Christianity  in  that  province  implied  in  the
same  passage. Timothy  had  been  sent  back  to  Thessalonica
from  Athens,  and  had  had  time  to  return  and  make  his  _  report
to the apostle  (i  Thess.  3  2  6), and this  return  may  fairly  be
identilied  with  the  arrival  of  Silas  and  Timothy  in  Corinth,
mentioned  in  Acts  18  5. See  TIMOTHY,  §  3  ;  cp  SILAS.

ii.  On  the  other  hand,  the  epistles  cannot  have  been  written
at  a  time  subsequent  to  Paul's  first  visit  to  Corinth,  for  the  first
of  them  was  evidently  written  immediately  after  the  return  of
Timothy  from  Thessalonica,  whither  he  had  been  sent  by  Paul
from  Athens  (i  Thess.  3  6) ;  the  Thessalonian  church  was
apparently  still  a  young  church  (i  Thess.  1  9),  and,  finally,  there
is  no  sign  that  Paul  and  Silvanus  and  Timothy  were  together
again  after  the  first  visit  in  Corinth ;  cp  SILAS.

The  epistles  were  written  probably  in  the  year  48  or
49, 1  or,  according  to  the  generally  accepted  chronology
of  Paul's  life,  in  53  or  54/2  They  are  commonly
regarded  as  the  earliest  of  Paul's  epistles  ;  but  there  is
good  reason  for  thinking  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians
still  earlier.3  The  notable  lack  in  i  and  2  Thessalonians
of  the  doctrinal  element  which  is  so  prominent  in  most
of  Paul's  epistles  counts  for  nothing  in  the  matter  of
date,  for  in  any  case  they  were  written  later  than  the
Council  of  Jerusalem,  sixteen  years  or  more  after  Paul's
conversion,  and  an  interval  of  only  some  five  years
separates  them  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  still
less  from  Galatians  and  Corinthians.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  the  simplicity  of  the  Thessalonian  epistles  and  the
absence  of  the  great  characteristic  Pauline  doctrines  are
to  be  explained,  not  by  the  date  of  the  epistles,  but  by
the  particular  circumstances  which  called  them  forth.

Those circumstances are indicated with sufficient

clearness in the  epistles  themselves. Paul had been

, t  compelled  to leave  Thessalonica before

2.  1  iness.  .  ^g  w;sned  to  do  S0j and  under  circum-
occasion. stances which made him fear for the

permanence  of  his  work  there  ( i  Thess.  2 17  3  if. ).  He
had  apparently  been  driven  away  from  the  city  by  a
persecution  which  continued  to  assail  the  disciples  after
his  departure.  Whether  this  persecution  is  to  be
directly  connected  with  the  attack  of  the  Jews  upon
Paul  recorded  in  Acts  17  5  f.  is  uncertain.  At  any  rate,
if  the  persecution  was  begun  at  the  instance  of  the  Jews,
it  was  carried  on  afterwards  by  the  Gentiles,  and  it  was
at  their  hands  that  the  Christians  of  Thessalonica  chiefly
suffered  (i  Thess.  2 14).*  The  persecution  was  so
severe  that  Paul  feared  his  Thessalonian  converts  might
lose  courage  and  renounce  their  faith,  and  he  therefore
greatly  desired  to  return  himself  to  Thessalonica  ( i  Thess.
2  17  f. ).  For  some  reason,  however,  possibly  because
his  friends  had  given  bonds  for  his  continued  absence
(Acts  17 9),  he  was  unable  to  do  so,  and  he  therefore
sent  Timothy  from  Athens  to  encourage  and  strengthen
his  converts  and  to  bring  him  news  concerning  them
(i  Thess.  3 1/).5

It  is  possible  that  Timothy  also  carried  a  letter  from  Paul  to
the Thessalonian church (see Rendel Harris  in  Expos.  8174


1  According to the chronology of Paul's life adopted by
Kellner, Katholik, 1887, 1 I46/, O. Holtzmann, NTliche
Ztgesch. (1894), Blass, Ada Apostoloruin (1895), Harnack,
Chronol.  (1897),  M'Giffert,  Hist.  Christ,  in  Apost.  Age  (1897),
and  some  others.

2  Cp  CHRONOLOGY,  §  72^

3  See M'Giffert, I.e. 226/5 Zahn,  EM.  1  138.7:  ; Bartlet,
Apostolic  Age,  84  ;  Bacon,  Introd.  to  NT,  57.

*  Zimmer  (Dererste  Thessalonic/ierbrief,  34,  94/)  takes  the
opposite  view,  but  without  sufficient  warrant.

5  Of  this  mission  of  Timothy  to  Thessalonica  we  hear  nothing
in  Acts.  In  fact,  there  is  no  hint  in  Acts  that  Timothy  was  with
Paul  in  Athens,  as  we  know  from  i  Thess.  that  he  was.

5037


[1898]);  but  we  have  no  evidence  of  such  a  letter,  and  the
information  which  Paul  gives  his  readers  in  i  Thess.  21785
rather  argues  against  an  earlier  communication  from  him.  But
though  we  have  no  adequate  ground  for  assuming  that  Paul
sent  to  Thessalonica  another  epistle  before  our  i  Thessalonians,
there  is  some  reason  for  thinking  that  the  Thessalonians  sent  a
letter  back  to  Paul  by  Timothy  (see  Harris,  ibid.  i6jf.).  Harris
finds  evidence  of  such  a  letter  in  i  Thess.  125  2159  10  138  3-6,


o

the  letter  on  p.  172.  'Also  we'  (icai  rjjueis)  in  2  13,  'also  I'
(«ayu>)  in  3  5,  the  conventional  epistolary  formula  '  ye  have  good
remembrance  of  us'  («XeTe  p-vdav  ry/uuif  ayadriv  K.T.A.)  in  36,
'  for  you  yourselves  report  concerning  us '  (avrol  yap  7r«pi
7)jixu>i'  an-ayye'AAeT-e)  in  1 9  (to  adopt  the  reading  suggested  by
Harris)  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  pointing  to  a  Thessalonian
epistle ;  but  beyond  these  hints  we  can  hardly  go.  It  will  not
do  at  any  rate  to  regard  the  words  '  ye  know '  (olSare)  as  evidence
of  such  an  epistle,  Yor  we  cannot  well  suppose  that  the  Thessa
lonians  gave  Paul  an  account  of  his  sufferings  in  Philippi  ('2  2).

The  report  which  Timothy  brought  back  from
Thessalonica  was  upon  the  whole  very  cheering  ;  but
he  informed  Paul  of  the  existence  of  certain  evils  among
the  Thessalonians  which  demanded  the  apostle's  atten
tion.  The  common  fleshly  impurity  of  the  heathen
world,  especially  prevalent  in  a  great  commercial
metropolis  like  Thessalonica,  had  not  been  entirely
overcome  by  the  Thessalonian  Christians  ( i  Thess.  4  \f. ) ;
a  spirit  of  enthusiasm  was  abroad  among  them  which
led  them  to  neglect  their  ordinary  employments  and  so
bring  disrepute  upon  the  brotherhood  (i  Thess.  4n/. )  ;
and  there  was  on  the  part  of  some  a  tendency,  entirely
natural  where  fanaticism  had  so  free  play,  to  disregard
the  counsel  and  authority  of  the  leaders  of  the  church
(i  Thess.  5i2/.).  On  the  other  hand,  in  opposition  to
the  common  enthusiasm,  there  were  some  who  '  despised
prophesyings  '  and  frowned  upon  all  spiritual  manifesta
tions  ( i  Thess.  520).  It  looks  also  as  if  some  of  the
disciples  were  casting  aspersions  upon  the  character
and  motives  of  Paul  himself,  possibly  because  he  had
left  the  city  during  a  time  of  persecution.  At  any  rate
he  felt  obliged  to  defend  himself  in  his  epistle  against
various  charges,  such  as  co vetousness,  avarice,  selfishness,
and  personal  ambition  (i  Thess.  2 1-12).  Finally,  the
Thessalonians  had  apparently  asked  the  apostle  a
question  touching  the  fate  of  Christian  brethren  dying
before  the  return  of  Christ  (i  Thess.  4  is/. ).  Evidently
they  had  believed  that  Christ  would  come  so  soon  that
they  should  all  be  alive  to  greet  him  ;  but  as  time
passed  some  of  their  number  died  and  Christ  still
tarried.  The  question  naturally  forced  itself  upon  them,
Were  such  brethren  to  be  deprived  of  the  privilege  of
seeing  the  Lord  at  his  coming  and  sharing  his  glory?
Either  Timothy  was  asked  to  consult  the  apostle  upon
the  matter,  or  the  question  was  raised  in  the  epistle  to
the  Thessalonians  referred  to  just  above.  It  was  due  to
all  these  circumstances  that  Paul  wrote  his  first  epistle
to  the  Thessalonians.

The  epistle  has  no  central  theme,  nor  is  it  a  studied

composition  constructed  upon  a  well-defined  plan. It

_  is  a  familiar  letter  in  which  expressions

3.  Contents. of  affection  and  words  of  exhortation

and  warning  'follow  one  upon  another  with  no  attempt
at  logical  arrangement.

After  a  salutation,  in  which  the  names  of  Silvanus  and
Timothy  are  joined  with  his  own  (1  i),  Paul  expresses  his
gratitude,  beginning  with  the  conventional  terms  of  contemporary
correspondence  (see  Harris,  ibid.),  for  the  faith  and  steadfast
ness  of  the  Thessalonians  (1  2-8),  and  reminds  them  of  his  own
conduct  while  among  them,  of  his  devotion  and  self-sacrifice
which  some  had  evidently  called  in  question  (2  1-12),  gives
utterance  to  his  joy  at  the  reception  they  had  given  his  message,
and  at  the  steadfastness  they  had  shown  in  the  face  of  persecu
tion  (2  13-16),  tells  them  of  his  anxiety  about  them  while  in
Athens  and  of  his  great  desire  to  see  them,  which  resulted,
when  he  could  not  go  himself,  in  his  sending  Timothy  to  visit
them  (3  1-5),  and  which  is  now  fully  relieved  by  the  good  news
brought  by  him  (36-io).  The  commendatory,  apologetic,  and
explanatory  portion  of  the  letter  is  concluded  with  a  beautiful
prayer  for  the  readers'  growth  in  grace  (3  11-13).

The  passage  just  referred  to  serves  at  the  same  time  to
introduce  the  second  and  hortatory  section  of  the  epistle  (4_/O.
After  emphasising  the  importance  of  purity  (4  i-s).  of  brotherly
love  (4g/),  and  of  quietness  and  diligence  in  daily  business

5038


THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)


(nf.),  the  apostle  turns  to  the  subject  of  eschatology  and
instructs  the  1'hessalonians,  first,  touching  the  brethren  dying
before  the  return  of  Christ  (4  13-18),  and  secondly,  touching  the
uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the  Parousia,  which  makes  it  necessary
to  be  constantly  watchful  and  zealous  (Si-n).1  Then  follow
various  exhortations  having  especial  reference  to  the  disciples'
association  with  each  other  as  a  Christian  brotherhood  (5  12-22),
and  the  epistle  closes  with  a  petition  for  their  perfect  sanctification
(2j_f.),  a  request  for  their  prayers  (25),  a  salutation,  and  a
benediction  (26-28).

The  epistle  apparently  accomplished  its  purpose,  for
we  hear  nothing  more  of  aspersions  upon  Paul's

character,  and  the  '1'hessalonians  seem  to
4 2  TliGSS

have  needed  no  further  instruction  as  to

the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  But  Paul's  words  touch
ing  the  Day  of  the  Lord  (52/)  evidently  led  them  to
believe  that  the  Parousia  was  imminent,  and  some  of
them  in  their  expectation  of  the  immediate  return  of
Christ  were  greatly  excited  and  were  neglecting  their
ordinary  employments  (2  Thess.  1\ff.\  It  is  possible
that  it  was  this  expectation  which  had  led  them  to
similar  fanaticism  before  Paul  wrote  his  first  epistle
(i  Thess.  4n/. )  ;  but  if  so  he  cannot  have  been  aware
of  it,  or  he  would  have  dealt  with  the  matter  in  that
epistle.

How  Paul  learned  of  the  existing  situation  we  do  not
know.  It  is  not  impossible  that  he  had  received
another  letter  from  the  Thessalonians  in  answer  to  his
former  one  (see  Bacon,  I.e.  p.  72) ;  but  we  have  no
positive  evidence  of  it.  At  any  rate,  however  the  news
reached  him,  it  led  him  to  write  a  second  epistle  intended
to  put  a  stop  to  such  unwarranted  fanaticism.2

After  commending the  patience  and  faithfulness  of

the  Thessalonians (2  Thess.  1 1-4), as  he  had  done  in

the  first  epistle,  and  comforting  them

ontents. wkh  a  reference  to  the  recompense

which  God  will  render  both  them  and  their  enemies
(15-12),  he  proceeds  at  once  to  his  main  point.  When
lie  wrote  before,  he  supposed  that  an  exhortation  to  go
about  their  daily  business  with  quietness  and  diligence
would  suffice  to  put  a  stop  to  their  fanatical  conduct,
and  that  they  needed  no  special  instruction  touching
the  time  and  the  season  of  the  consummation  (i  Thess.
:n).  He  saw  now,  however,  that  it  was  because  they
believed  that  Christ  might  come  at  any  moment  that
their  minds  were  disquieted,  and  so  he  reminded  them
that  certain  events  must  occur  before  the  consummation.
The  'man  of  sin,'  the  'son  of  perdition,'  the  'lawless
one  '  must  be  revealed  as  he  had  told  them  when  he
was  with  them  (2  Thess.  2s);  but  he  cannot  be  until
'  that  which  now  restraineth  (2  Thess.  26  rb  KO.T^OV,
v.  7  6  KaTfxuv)  has  been  taken  out  of  the  way '
(2  Thess.  23-io).3

This  eschatological  passage  is  followed  by  renewed
commendations,  and  by  exhortations  to  steadfastness
and  patience,  sobriety  and  diligence  (213-815),  and  the
epistle  concludes  with  benedictions  and  with  a  salutation
from  Paul's  own  hand,  which  he  asserts  is  the  token  in
every  letter  (816-18).

It  would  seem  that  those  disciples  who  were  insisting
that  the  Parousia  was  immediately  at  hand  were  appeal
ing  to  a  letter  bearing  Paul's  name  (2  Thess.  22)  ;  but
as  he  was  not  conscious  of  having  written  anything  to
support  their  opinion,  he  concluded  that  they  must  be
making  use  of  a  forged  document,  and  so  he  was  careful
to  call  attention  to  his  autograph  signature  which
guaranteed  the  genuineness  of  all  his  letters.  It  is  not
likely  that  Paul's  surmise  was  correct,  for  it  can  hardly

1  On  this  apocalypse  see  H.  St.  John  Thackeray,  The  Relation
of  St.  Paul  to  Contemporary  Jewish  Thought,  \ozf.

-  It  was  formerly  maintained  by  some  scholars  (e.g.,  Ew.
Scndschreiten  dcs  Pattltts,  ilf.,  Laurent,  NTliche  Studien,
49  f.)  that  2  Thess.  is  earlier  than  i  Thess.  ;  but  this  is  excluded
by  the  literary  relationship  between  the  two  epistles,  which
clearly  points  to  the  secondary  character  of  the  second,  by  the
sharper  tone  of  2  Thess.  in  dealing  with  the  disorderly  (3  df.\
and  by  the  relation  of  the  apocalyptic  passage  in  2  if.  to
i  Thess.  4  i^yC

3  Upon  the  interpretation  of  this  passage  see  ANTICHRIST,


be  supposed  that  any  one  would  venture  to  palm  off  a
forged  letter  upon  the  Thessalonians  so  soon  after  the
apostle's  departure,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  eschato
logical  passage  in  the  first  epistle  (5i-n)  was  of  such  a
character  that  it  might  easily  serve  to  promote  the
belief  in  the  immediate  consummation,  though  he  seems
not  to  have  realised  it.

The  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  are  almost  wholly
personal  and  ethical  and  throw  very  little  light  upon
_,  . Paul's  theological  views,1  except  in  the

0.  onaracter IliaVer  of  eschatology  to  which  there
P  ' are a great many  allusions. Thus,

the  Parousia  of  Christ  is  referred  to  in  i  Thess.  1 10  2 19
813  4is/.  5a/.  23  2 Thess.  I?/.  2i/.  ;  the  judgment
in  i  Thess.  1 10  2  Thess.  \6f.  2iz  ;  the  resurrection  of
believers  in  i  Thess.  4i4/.  ;  their  future  glory  and  blessed
ness  in  i  Thess.  4 17  5io  2  Thess.  2 14;  and  the  final
kingdom  in  i  Thess.  2 12  2  Thess.  1 5.  It  is  evident
that  the  Thessalonian  Christians  were  much  interested
in  eschatological  questions,  and  it  would  seem  that  Paul
must  have  laid  considerable  stress,  while  in  Thessalonica,
at  any  rate  upon  the  speedy  return  of  Christ  and  the
impendingjudgment  (cp  i  Thess.  1 10  5if.  2  Thess.  2-,).
Possibly  he  was  led  to  do  so  by  the  great  prevalence  of
vice  and  immorality  in  the  city.  However  that  may  be,
the  Thessalonians  expected  the  return  of  Christ  very
soon,  before  any  of  their  number  had  passed  away,  and
Paul  had  evidently  given  them  some  warrant  for  the
expectation,  for  even  when  he  wrote  his  first  Epistle  he
looked  for  the  Parousia  during  his  own  lifetime  and
theirs  (cp  2 19  4  is/  ).  It  was  doubtless  because  of  this
that  Paul  had  not  instructed  them  touching  the  resur
rection  of  believers  and  so  was  obliged  to  do  so  at
some  length  in  i  Thess.  4 13/.  (cp  i  Cor.  15  and  see
M'Giffert,  I.e.  p.  248).

The two Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  throw  con
siderable  light  upon  Paul's  work  in  Thessalonica  and
_,  upon  the  character  and condition  of

his  converts  there. The  Christians  ad-
Thessaloman  dressed  were  mosft  if  not  all  of  them

Christians.  Gentiles  ^  Tness  19  2i4) ;  and,  more
over,  as  appears  from  the  former  passage,  they  had
been  converted  directly  from  heathenism  to  Christianity
under  Paul's  preaching.  But  the  account  of  Paul's  work
in  Thessalonica  contained  in  Acts  (17i/. )  gives  a  very
different  picture  of  the  Thessalonian  converts.  Accord
ing  to  that  passage,  '  Some  of  them  (i.e. ,  of  the  Jews)
were  persuaded  and  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas,  and
of  the  devout  Greeks  (i.e.,  Jewish  proselytes)  a  great
multitude,  and  of  the  chief  women  not  a  few.'  Of
these  Jews  and  Jewish  proselytes  there  is  no  trace  in
either  of  Paul's  epistles,  and  though  of  course  it  is  quite
possible  that  there  were  some  of  them  among  his
converts,  it  is  certain  that  they  must  have  formed  an
altogether  insignificant  minority.  It  is  clear  then  that
the  author  of  Acts,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  has
recorded  the  least  important  part  of  Paul's  activity  in
Thessalonica,  and  that  it  was  not  in  the  synagogue
that  he  did  his  chief  work  (the  only  part  of  his  work
mentioned  in  Acts),  but  among  the  heathen  population
of  the  city.  At  the  same  time  there  is  no  reason  for
doubting  that  Paul  actually  did  preach  to  Jews  and
proselytes  in  the  synagogue  of  Thessalonica.2  But  after
a  brief  period  spent  in  that  work  he  must  have  turned
to  the  Gentiles,  instead  of  leaving  the  city  directly  as
implied  in  Actsl7io,  and  must  have  spent  at  least  some1
months  in  labour  among  them,  as  is  clear  from  i  Thess.
27  /.  and  Phil.4i6,  and  also  from  the  large  and
permanent  results  accomplished.  The  account  in  Acts
is  thus  very  meagre  and  misleading  at  this  point  and
has  to  be  not  only  supplemented  but  also  corrected  by
i  Thess.  It  is  evident  that  that  epistle  was  not  in
the  hands  of  the  author  of  Acts  when  he  was  writing

1  See  i  Thess.  2 12  8813  4  78  61018  2  Thess.  1  n  21316  for
familiar  Pauline  ideas.

2  See  M'Giffert,  op.  cit.  246.

5040


THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)


his  account  of  this  part  of  Paul's  work,  nor  was  Acts  in
the  hands  of  the  author  of  i  Thess.

The  Thessaloninn  epistles  bear  eloquent  testimony  to
the  success  of  Paul's  missionary  labours  in  Thessalonica.
He  succeeded  in  founding  there  a  strong  and  vigorous
church,  and  the  faith  and  patience  and  brotherly  love  of
his  con  verts  were  so  marked  that  their  fame  speedily  spread
even  beyond  the  provinces  of  Macedonia  and  Achaia  (i
Thess.  I?/.),  and  their  generosity  in  ministering  to  the
necessities  of  other  churches,  even  though  poor  them
selves,  called  forth  the  apostle's  hearty  commendation
(i  Thess.  4  10  ;  cp  2  Cor.  8i/.  and  Acts  204).  To  none
of  his  churches  was  he  bound  by  warmer  ties  of  affection
than  to  the  churches  of  Thessalonica  and  Philippi,  and
none  of  his  epistles,  except  that  ,to  the  Philippians,  is
more  thoroughly  pervaded  with  joy  and  confidence  and
affection  than  i  Thess.

It  has  been  assumed  throughout  this  article  that  both
i  and  2  Thess.  are  genuine  epistles  of  Paul.  So  far  as

,,  the  former  is  concerned  its  authenticitv,

8.  Author- , • i  i c

.  .  - denied a couple  of  generations  ago by

_P  '  many  scholars,  is  to-day  generally  recog

nised  except  by  those  who  deny  the
genuineness  of  all  the  Pauline  epistles  (see  PAUL,
§  38).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  one  accepts  any  of
Paul's  epistles  there  is  no  good  reason  for  denying  the
authenticity  of  i  Thess.  The  argument  against  its
genuineness,  drawn  from  its  lack  of  the  doctrinal  and
polemical  material  found  in  the  great  epistles  to  the
Galatians,  the  Corinthians,  and  the  Romans,  is  now
universally  recognised  as  fallacious,  for  the  situation
in  Thessalonica  as  indicated  in  the  epistle  itself  fully
accounts  both  for  what  it  contains  and  for  what  it
omits.  Moreover,  the  style  of  the  epistle,  its  revelation
of  the  character  of  its  author,  its  familiar  and  personal
tone,  the  absence  of  any  doctrinal  or  polemic  interest
which  would  account  for  pseudonymity,  the  discrepancies
between  the  epistle  and  Acts,  the  use  of  the  three  names
Paul,  Silvanus,  and  Timothy  (the  form  2/Xaj  being
found  uniformly  in  Acts  and  2i\ovav6s  only  in
i  and  2  Thess.  2  Cor.  1  19  and  i  Pet.  5  12)  all  make  for
genuineness  [cp  SILAS]  ;  and  the  evidence  brought  by
Rendel  Harris  in  the  article  referred  to  above  (§  2)
that  it  is  part  of  a  correspondence  with  the  Thessalonian
church,  strengthens  the  argument,  and  if  that  evidence
be  regarded  as  conclusive,  of  course  places  the  genuine
ness  of  the  epistle  beyond  all  question.  Finally,  the
implication  in  4  17  that  Christ  was  to  return  during  the
lifetime  of  the  apostle  is  of  itself  enough  to  prove  that
it  was  not  written  after  his  death.1

On  the  other  hand,  the  authenticity  of  2  Thessalonians
is  by  no  means  so  clear,  nor  is  it  so  widely  recognised.

o nr  n  on,™  . The  tendency  to  view  it  as  a  genuine
y.  \JL  z  x  ness. •  A* .r  T% i  i  i

epistle  of  Paul  has  apparently  grown

somewhat  in  recent  years  among  scholars  of  the  critical
school  (e.g.,  Jiilicher,  Einl.  qof.  [1894];  Harnack,
Chronol.  239  [1898];  Bacon,  Introd.  to  NT,  7~,f.
[1900];  and  compare  the  statement  of  Holtzmann
[Einl.W  216]  that  '  at  the  present  day  the  question  is
not  whether  the  epistle  is  to  be  brought  down  into  the
post-apostolic  age,  but  whether  it  does  not  on  the  con
trary  reach  up  into  the  lifetime  of  the  apostle,  and
whether  consequently  it  must  not  be  genuine,  and  have
been  written  soon  after  i  Thess.  '  ).  Many,  however,  who
accept  i  Thessalonians  reject  2  Thessalonians  altogether
(as,  e.g.,  Lipsius,  Hilgenfeld,  Holtzmann,  Pfleiderer,
Schmiedel,  Weizsacker),  or  regard  it  as  largely  inter
polated  (e.g.  ,  P.  Schmidt,  Der  erste  Thessalonicherbrief,


The  first  objection  urged  against  the  genuineness  of

1  Schmiedel,  while  accepting  the  epistle  as  a  whole,  suggests
that  2  isyC  is  an  interpolation.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  to
doubt  the  genuineness  of  the  passage,  though  it  is  quite  possible
that  v.  166  is  an  interpolation  ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of
v.  23^.  The  latter  looks  decidedly  un-Pauline,  and  by  its  omis
sion  v.  24  is  brought  into  immediate  connection  with  v.  23^  with
which  it  seems  to  belong.


the  epistle  is  the  apocalyptic  passage, 2  Thess.  22-12.

10.  Argument  Th'S  objection  *  ba!fd  chiefly  uP.on
,.  °  the  assumption  that  the  passage  is  m-

eschatoloev  consistent  with  I  Thess-  5 a/ ,  and  since
1  °3'  its  substance  is  said  to  have  been
imparted  to  the  Thessalonians  while  Paul  was  still
present  with  them  (2  Thess.  2s),  the  inconsistency  cannot
be  explained  as  due  to  the  further  development  of
Paul's  thought  after  the  writing  of  i  Thessalonians.

It  is  to  be  noticed,  however,  that  though  the  author
indicates  in  2  Thess.  2  that  certain  events  must  occur,
and,  consequently,  some  interval  elapse  before  the  final
consummation,  there  is  no  sign  that  he  regards  the
interval  as  long,  and  that  he  does  not  expect  to  live
until  the  Parousia.  Nor  is  the  fact  that  certain  signs
are  to  precede  the  consummation  inconsistent  with  the
exhortation  in  i  Thess.  5  2  to  be  watchful,  for  the  day  of
the  Lord  comes  as  a  thief  in  the  night  only  for  those
who  sleep,  the  implication  being  that  those  who  are
awake  know  the  signs  of  its  coming  and  will  not  be
taken  unaware.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that  Paul  might
have  told  the  Thessalonians  when  he  was  with  them
why  the  Parousia  was  delayed,  and  might  have  spoken
of  the  traditional  figure  of  Antichrist  (the  TO.VTO.  of  2s
refers  to  what  precedes),  without  contradicting  his  belief
or  theirs  that  the  consummation  was  to  take  place  very
soon.  Only  when  he  found  that  their  expectation  of  its
imminence  was  leading  them  into  fanaticism  would  he
naturally,  in  order  to  show  that  it  could  not  come
immediately,  dwell  more  at  length  upon  the  inter
vening  events,  and  indicate  still  more  fully  what  those
events  were.  Possibly  the  protection  of  the  Roman
pro-consul  at  Corinth  (Acts  18 12)  had  led  him  to  recog
nise  more  clearly  than  ever  before  the  protecting  power
of  Rome  (to  which  r&  Kar^xov  and  6  Kar^x^"  [' tne
restrainer']  certainly  refer),  and  so,  for  the  first  time,
to  bring  this  element  of  the  traditional  eschatology  into
prominence  as  in  2  Thess.  Idf.

The  further  objection  brought  against  the  genuineness
of  2  Thess.  22y. ,  on  the  ground  of  its  alleged  dependence
upon  the  Apocalypse,  or  of  its  acquaintance  with  the
Nero  redivivus  legend,  breaks  down  completely  when
the  passage  is  interpreted  as  it  should  be  in  the  light  of
current  Jewish  eschatology,  and  the  figure  of  Antichrist
is  recognised  as  purely  traditional  (see  ANTICHRIST,

§4/-).

It  must  be  recognised  then  that  there  is  not  sufficient
ground  in  the  eschatology  of  the  second  epistle  for  deny
ing  its  Pauline  authorship.  If  there  is  good  reason  for
ascribing  the  remainder  of  the  epistle  to  Paul,  there
need  he  no  difficulty  in  assuming  that  he  wrote  the
apocalyptic  passage,  22/i  In  fact,  we  may  perhaps  go
farther  and  say  that  that  passage,  when  taken  in  con
nection  with  the  remainder  of  the  epistle,  can  be  better
understood  on  the  assumption  of  its  authenticity  than  on
that  of  its  pseudonymity.  It  can  hardly  be  supposed  that
any  one  would  venture  to  produce  such  a  pseudonymous
epistle  during  Paul's  own  lifetime,  or  that  it  would  find
acceptance  if  he  did.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Paul's
first  epistle  gave  rise  to  misunderstandings — as  the  second
epistle,  whether  genuine  or  not,  seems  to  show  that  it
did — we  should  expect  those  misunderstandings  to  have
arisen  immediately,  not  after  an  interval  of  many  years,
when  the  expectation  expressed  in  the  epistle  was
already  at  least  partially  discredited  by  Paul's  own
death.  And  if  the  fanatical  abuse  of  his  words  appeared
during  his  lifetime,  it  would  be  strange  if  he  took  no
notice  of  it.  If  it  could  be  supposed  that  the  epistle
was  written  simply  to  save  Paul's  reputation  and  set
him  right  with  the  Thessalonians  after  his  death,  by
showing  that  he  had  not  expected  the  consummation  as
soon  as  i  Thessalonians  seemed  to  imply,  its  post-
Pauline  date  would  be  easy  to  understand,  but  there  is
no  sign  of  such  an  interest.  The  sole  purpose  of  the
eschatological  passage  is  clearly  to  put  a  stop  to  the
fanaticism  to  which  the  belief  in  the  speedy  consum-

5042


THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)


mation was  giving  rise. Under  these  circumstances

2  Thessalonians,  so  far  as  the  eschatological  passage  is
concerned,  seems  easier  to  explain  as  a  letter  of  Paul's,
written  within  a  few  months  of  i  Thessalonians,  than  as
the  work  of  a  later  time  and  of  another  hand.

It  has  been  suggested  by  some  scholars  (e.g.,
Schmidt,  of.  cit.  127)  that  2  Thess.  22-12  has  been  inter
polated  in  a  genuine  epistle  of  Paul  ;  but  there  is  no
ground  for  such  a  hypothesis.  The  point  of  the  epistle
is  entirely  gone  if  the  apocalyptic  passage  be  omitted,
and  the  difficulties  which  beset  the  genuineness  of  the
remainder  of  the  epistle  are  even  greater  than  those
which  beset  the  apocalyptic  passage.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  the  suggestion  of  Hausrath  (NTliche  Zeitgesch.Pl

3  198)  that  this  passage  is  the  only  genuine  part  of  the
epistle  is  much  more  plausible.

A  second  objection  to  the  Pauline  authorship  of
2  Thessalonians  is  drawn  from  its  language  and  style.


11.  From
language  and


It  is  true  that  the  epistle  contains  an
uncommonly large number of words


° , .  and  phrases  which  occur  nowhere  else

con  en  s. m  pauj  ^^  pastorai  epistles  not  being
reckoned  as  Pauline).

Such  are  :  '  groweth  exceedingly '  (vnrepavf  avto*),  1  3  ;  1  '  glory  '
(ey/cauxao^ai*),  z/.  4  ;  'token'  (e»'Seiyju.a*),  'judgment'  (icpiVis),
'  count  worthy  '  (jcaraf  iota),  v.  5  ;  '  (laming  fire  '  (irvp  ijiAoyds),
7'.  8 ;  'punishment'  (8iKT)),  'suffer'  (riVw*),  'everlasting  de
struction  '  (aioii'ios,  oAeSpos*),  '  from  the  presence '  (OTTO
TrpotrwTTOv),  "'.  9  ;  '  glorify '  (ei'6of d£<a*),  11'.  1012;  '  good  pleasure
of  goodness'  (fvSoKia  ayaOiaavf^*),  v.  n  ;  'gathering  together
unto'  (eTricnii'ayajyTJ),  2i;  'shake1  (aaAevoj),  'be  troubled'
(SpooCuai),  r.  2  ;  '  falling  away  '  (a7ro<TTa(7ia),  v.  3  ;  '  object  of
worship  '  (<re/3ao>ia),  !"'.  4  ;  '  deceit  of  unrighteousness  '  (aTrdrr)
aSiKi'af  *),  '  because  '  (avO'  <at>),  '  love  of  truth  '  (ayoTn;  aArjSe ias*),
I'.  10;  'a  working  of  error'  (eVepyeia  TrAanjs*),  v.  n;  'be
lief  of  truth  '  (TUOTCS  aArjOei'a?*),  v.  13  ;  '  chose  '  (aipf'o/nai),  v.
13  (occurs  once  in  Phil.  1  22  and  Heb.  11  25  in  another  con
nection  ;  the  common  word  in  Paul,  to  express  the  idea,  being
e/cAe'yiu)  ;  '  good  hope  '  (eAn-is  ayafhj*),  v.  16  (cp  Heb.  7  19  i  Pet.
13);  'unreasonable'  (aron-os),  82;  'busy-bodies'  (7repiepya£o-
faat*),  7'.  ii  ;  'well-doing'  (xciAoTroieaj*),  7'.  13  ;  'note'  ((7J)juei-
oGcr0e*),  v.  14  ;  and  the  particle  '  nor '  Oirjre)  in  '2  2.

Considerably  more  than  half  of  these,  however,  are
found  in  the  apocalyptic  passages  in  chaps.  1  and  2,
and  their  presence  is  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the
nature  of  the  subject-matter,  and  it  is  now  generally
recognised  that  very  little  weight  can  be  laid  in  any
case  upon  the  mere  occurrence  of  hapax  Icgomena.

More  striking  is  the  fact  that  the  epistle  contains  very
few  words  which  are  found  in  Paul's  epistles  but  not
elsewhere  in  the  NT,  except  such  as  it  has  in  common
with  i  Thessalonians.

The  particle  'if  so  be'  (etn-ep),  2 Thess.  1 6,  and  the  word
'working'  (cve'pycia),  '2 911,  are  found  half  a  dozen  times  in
Paul,  the  former  in  Romans,  i  and  2  Corinthians,  the  latter
in  Philippians,  Ephesians,  and  Colossians,  and  '  goodness '
(ayafluxruit))  in  Romans,  Galatians,  and  Ephesians,  once  each.
The  phrase  '  as  that '  (u>?  <m),  2  Thess.  2  2,  occurs  only  in  2  Cor.
Il2i;  'exalteth  himself  (vTrepaipo^at),  2  Thess.  24,  only  in
2  Cor.  127;'  withdraw  '  (crreAAo^at),  2  Thess.  3  6,  only  in  2  Cor.
8  20  ;  '  keep  company  with  '  (<rvvav<i^.iyvvfj.ai),  2  Thess.  3  14,  only
in  i  Cor.  0911;  'deceive'  (efaTraraw),  2  Thess.  2  3,  which  is
found  in  Romans  and  i  and  2  Corinthians,  occurs  also  in  the
post- Pauline  i  Timothy.

On  the  whole,  the  argument  from  style,  so  far  as  it
goes,  seems  to  point  away  from  Paul  rather  than
toward  him  as  author  ;  but  it  must  be  recognised  that
no  definite  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  it.

Nor  can  any  conclusion  be  drawn  from  the  ethical
and  theological  content  of  the  epistle.  There  are  but
few  characteristically  Pauline  ideas — e.g. ,  In:  'that
our  God  may  count  you  worthy  of  [your]  calling '  (iva
i'/xas  dicier??  rr/s  K\T7<reu>s  6  $eos  r)fj.i!>v  ;  cp  Eph.  4  i)  ;  2  16,
'God  who  loved  us'  (6  0e6s  ...  6  ct'/aTTTjcras  Tj[j.as  ;  cp
Rom.  83  Eph.  24)  ;  2 13, '  God  chose  you  from  the  begin
ning  unto  salvation'  (ei'Xaro  V/JLO.S  6  Ofos  air  apx?!?  «'s  ffurr]-
piav  ;  cp  Eph.  1 4,  where  the  idea  is  the  same  but  not
the  language),  and  no  argument  can  be  drawn  from  any
of  these.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  in  the
teaching  of  the  epistle  which  can  be  pronounced  in  any

1  The  words  and  phrases  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  found
nowhere  else  in  the  NT.

5043


way  un- Pauline,  except  possibly  the  conception  of
divine  recompense  and  vengeance  in  16-12.  One  might
almost  be  tempted,  if  accepting  the  epistle  as  a  whole,
to  regard  these  verses  as  an  interpolation  and  to  con
nect  the  '  to  which  end  '  (eis  6)  of  v.  n  directly  with
'that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy'  (ei'j  rb  Kara^iu6 f,vai
Vfj.ds)  of  v.  5.

Much  more  serious  than  the  objections  to  the  genuine
ness  of  the  epistle  already  mentioned  is  the  objection
12 Fro  drawn from its  close  resemblance  to

resemblance l  '^salonians,  amounting  at  times  to
to  1  Theas an amiost slavish dependence. A
detailed  comparison  of  the  two  shows
that  the  only  new  matter  in  the  second  is  found  in  1 5-12

22-12  15 3  1-5  10  I3/~. 17.

Even  within  these  passages  there  is  more  or  less  dependence
upon  i  Thessalonians.  Thus  2  Thess.  17  suggests  i  Thess.  1  10
2  19  4 16  ;  and  2  Thess.  1  ioa  suggests  i  Thess.  813.  2  Thess.  '2  15,
taken  with  the  verses  immediately  preceding,  seems  to  show  the
influence  of  i  Thess.  56-io.  2  Thess.  3  i  and  i  Thess.  5  25  both
have  the  words,  '  brethren,  pray  for  us '  (jrpoo-eu'xeaUe,  a&(\ij>oi,
Trepi  y^uiv),  which  occur  nowhere  else  in  Paul,  and  2  Thess.  3  i
and  i  Thess.  1  8  4  15  have  the  phrase  '  word  of  the  Lord '  (Aoyos
Kvpiov),  which  is  also  wanting  in  Paul's  other  epistles,  though
'  word  of  Christ '  (A6yo«  XpierroG)  is  found  in  Col.  3  16.  2  Thess.
83-5  contains  reminiscences  of  i  Thess.  5  22-24  ^3  811,  and
2  Thess.  3  15  of  i  Thess.  61214.

The  remainder  of  the  epistle,  about  a  third  of  the

whole,  is  simply  a  more  or  less  close  reproduction  of
the  first  epistle.

Thus,  in  addition  to  the  salutation  at  the  beginning  and  the
benediction  at  the  close,  which  are  identical,  except  for  the
addition  of  '  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  *
(aTrb  6eoC  Trarpb?  ica!  Kvpiov  'IrjaoO  XpicrroO)  in  2  Thess.  1  2,  and
of  '  all '  (irdvTtav)  in  3  18,  we  find  that  2  Thess.  1  1-4  is  a  condensed
summary  of  i  Thess.  1.  2  Thess.  2  i  has  the  clause  '  now
we  beseech  you,  brethren  '  (tpajTui/uei'  6e  v^ia?,  a6eA<£oi).  which
occurs  in  i  Thess.  612  (cp  4  i)  but  nowhere  else  in  Paul  ;  also  the
clause  'touching^  the  Parousia,'  etc.  (virep  TTJS  Trapoucria?  K.T.A.),
which  is  nearly  identical  with  i  Thess.  2  19  3  13  4  15  5  23,  and  the
remainder  of  the  verse  suggests  i  Thess.  417.  2  Thess.  2i3yC
contains  reminiscences  of  i  Thess.  1 2  213  (though  'we  are
bound  '  [6</>etAojuei>]  is  added  as  in  13);  of  i  Thess.  1  4  ('  brethren,
beloved  of  the  Lord'  [aoe\<j>ol  liyaTTTj/neVoc  VTTO  Kvpiov]  for
'  brethren,  beloved  of  God  '  [afi«A<£oi  ^yaTrTj^xeVoi  VTTO  0eov]) ;  of

1  Thess.  47  (though  the  combination  of  'of  spirit'  [Tri-ei^a-ros]
with  '  sanctification  '  [ayiaafiia],  and  the  phrase  '  belief  of  truth  '
[TricTTei  aATjSei'os]  are  new)  ;  and  of  i  Thess.  69. 2  Thess.  2  i6yC
may  be  compared  with  i  Thess.  3  2  i2yC  (notice  the  connection
of the two words, 'comfort' [n-apaicaAe'crat] and 'stablish'
[o-T7)pi'<Jio]). 2  Thess.  36-12  is  entirely,  with  the  exception  of  the
latter  part  of  7'.  10,  which  is  new,  a  reproduction  of  i  Thess.  26_/C
4  i  i_/C  ;  Z'.  8  being  verbally  identical  with  a  part  of  i  Thess.  2  9
('  wrought  in  labour  and  travail  night  and  day  that  we  might
not  burden  any  of  you  '  [(v  non-ia  Kal  /j.6\dia  IOI/CTOS  xai  ^tc'paf
fpya£6nfi>oi  Trpb?  TO  >irj eTrtjSaprjo-at rira  ii/uan/])  ; and  if.  loa
with  the  first  clause  of  i  Thess.  3  4  ('  for  even  when  we  were  with
you '  [KO.I  yap  ore  r^ey  Trpbs  v^as], the  particle '  when '  [ore]
being  found  nowhere  else  in  either  epistle,  and  '  for  even  '  [KO.I
•yap]  only  here  in  2  Thessalonians). The  passage  also  contains
striking  reminiscences  of  i  Thess.  1  6_/C  4111614. 2  Thess.  3  16,
'now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  (avrbi  6e  6  Kuptov  7179  eiptjcrjs)
may  be  compared with i  Thess.  5  23, '  and  the  God of  peace
himself  (aurbs  6e  6  #ebs  TTJS  eipijn)?). The  following  words  and
phrases,  which  are  common  to  i  and  2  Thes'-'alonians,  but  occur
nowhere  else  in  Paul,  may  also  be  referred  to:  'work  of  faith'
(epyoi/ TriVreu)?), 2  Thess.  In i  Thess.  1  3  ; 'obtaining' (jrepi-
7rou)c7ts), 2  Thess.  2  14 i  Thess.  69  (the  word  is  found  once  in
Ephesians in a different sense); 'stablish' (crrrypujco) with
'heart  '(xapSi'as),  2 Thess.  2  17  i  Thess.  3  13;  'direct ' (KarevOvi'ta),

2  Thess.  35 i  Thess.  3  ii  ; 'patience of Christ' (UTTO/IOIT)  TOW
Xpiorov),  2  Thess.  3  5  (in  i  Thess.  1  3,  '  patience  of  the  hope  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ '  [vironovrj  njs  eA7ri'6os  TOU  Kvpiov  rtuMV
'Ir)<TOu  XpioTov]) ;  'disorderly'  [adv.]  (draitTcos),  2Thess.36n;
'  behave  disorderly  '  (dro/cre'co),  87;'  disorderly '  [adj.]  (oVaicTOs),

1  Thess.  6  14.

In  the  light  of  these  many  and  close  resemblances
between  the  two  epistles  it  is  clear  that  the  genuineness

•R P 19°^  l^e  second  requires  the  assumption
id.  cy  ram  /  that  Paul  had  much  of  the  thought  and

language  of  the  first  epistle  in  his  mind  when  he  wrote
the  second.  If  it  could  be  supposed  that  ths  two  were
written  at  a  single  sitting,  or  within  a  few  hours  or
days  of  each  other,  as  is  possible  in  the  case  of  Ephesians
and  Colossians,  the  resemblances  might  be  explained  ;
but  an  interval  of  at  least  some  months  separates

2  Thessalonians from i  Thessalonians. The verbal
resemblances  are  altogether  too  many  and  too  close  to
be  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that  the  general  situa-

5044


THESSALONIANS  (EPISTLES  TO)

tion  in  Thessalonica  and  Corinth  remained  much  the
same,  and  suggested  consequently  a  similar  line  of
thought.  The  genuineness  of  the  second  epistle  can  be
maintained,  in  fact,  only  by  assuming  that  Paul  had  a
copy  of  i  Thessalonians  in  his  possession,  and  that  he
read  it  over  again  shortly  before  writing  2  Thessalonians,
and  saturated  himself  with  its  thought  and  language.
It  seems  a  little  unlikely  that  Paul  should  have  had  a
copy  of  his  earlier  epistle  at  hand,1  but  it  is  not  im
possible  ;  and  if  he  had,  it  was  not  perhaps  unnatural
that,  when  the  report  reached  him  that  Thessalonians
were  appealing  to  a  letter  of  his  in  support  of  their
views  touching  the  Parousia,  he  should  read  over  the
earlier  epistle  to  see  if  it  gave  any  justification  for  such
an  appeal.

This  would  also  serve  to  explain  particularly  the
relation  between  2  Thess.  36  f.  and  i  Thess.  26  f.  In
both  passages  Paul  refers  in  almost  identical  terms  to
the  fact  that  he  had  supported  himself  with  his  own
hands  while  in  Thessalonica  ;  but  in  the  first  episile
he  cites  the  fact  as  a  defence  against  the  charges  of
his  enemies,  in  the  second  as  an  example  to  the
disorderly.

The  effort  of  Spitta  ( Zur  Gesch.  u.  Lit.  des  Urchris-
tenthums,  \  1-2-2 f.  ;  cp  TIMOTHY,  §  6)  to  explain  the
resemblances  and  divergencies  between  the  two  epistles
14.  TJ  t  h  ^  l'le  moen'ous  suggestion  that  the
'  °.  9  y  second  was  written  not  by  Paul  but  by
Timothy  at  Paul's  request  and  in  the
name  of  the  three  fellow-workers,  while  it  might  relieve
the  difficulties  somewhat,  is  rendered  impossible  by  the
use  of  the  first  person  singular  in  2s  which  cannot,  occur
ring  as  it  does  without  qualification,  refer  to  Timothy,  as
Spitta  assumes,  but  must  refer  to  Paul.  That  the  Thessa
lonians  should  have  known  from  the  handwriting  that
Timothy  was  the  author  of  the  epistle  instead  of  Paul
there  is  no  ground  for  supposing,  for  it  was  Paul's
custom  to  dictate  his  epistles  to  an  amanuensis,  and  817
must  suggest  to  the  readers  of  2  Thessalonians  that  it
was  written  in  the  same  way.

Those  who  deny  the  authenticity  of  2  Thessalonians
explain  the  striking  resemblances  between  the  two
epistles  by  the  assumption  that  the  author  of  the  second
purposely  conformed  it  to  i  Thessalonians  in  order  to
gain  Pauline  authority  for  its  eschatological  teaching,
and  so  to  displace  the  earlier  epistle,  which  was  giving
rise  to  so  much  trouble  in  the  Thessalonian  church.
Such  a  procedure  is  not  without  parallels,  nor  can  it  be
regarded  as  in  itself  more  improbable  than  the  unique
self-repetition  involved  in  Pauline  authorship.  Indeed,
while  the  reproduction  of  the  earlier  epistle  is  at  times
subtle  and  of  such  a  character  as  to  suggest  that  the
author  wrote  with  a  free  hand,  it  seems  quite  as  easy  to
suppose  that  some  one  familiar  with  Paul's  style  pro
duced  2  Thessalonians  in  conscious  imitation  of  i  Thes
salonians  as  to  suppose  that  Paul  unconsciously  repeated
himself  so  slavishly.  And  if  this  conscious  effort  be
assumed,  the  reference  to  Paul's  own  signature  in  817
(cp  i  Cor.  1621  Col.  4i8  Gal.  6n)  need  constitute  no
_  ,  .  insurmountable  obstacle.  At  the
L0n'  same  time,  in  view  of  the  considera
tions  urged  above  in  connection  with  the  apocalyptic
passage,  the  present  writer  is  inclined  to  think  that  the
evidence  points  rather  in  the  direction  of  the  Pauline
authorship  of  the  epistle,  but  it  must  be  recognised  that
its  genuineness  is  beset  with  serious  difficulties,  and  that
it  is  at  best  very  doubtful.

Upon  the  epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  see  the  various  intro-


1  The  common  notion  that  copies  of  Paul's  epistles  must  have
been  from  the  beginning  carefully  preserved,  either  by  Paul
himself  or  by  his  companions,  rests  upon  a  conception  of  their
dogmatic  importance  which  was  not  shared  in  Paul's  own  time,
as  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  fact  that  so  few  of  his  epistles
— so  far  as  we  know,  only  those  which  we  still  have — were
handed  down  to  the  next  generation,  and  that  even  the  author
of  Acts  apparently  made  no  use  of  them  in  the  composition  of
his  work  (see  McGiffert,  i.e.,  436).


161


5045


THESSALONICA

ductions  to  the  NT,  the  histories  of  the  apostolic  age,  and  lives
of  Paul,  and  the  special  commentaries :  by
16.  Literature.  Schott  (1834);  Jowett,  The  Epistles  P/St.
Paul  to  the  Thessalonians,  Galatians,  and
Romans  (1856,  <3)  1894);  Eadie  (1877);  P.  Schmidt,  Der  erste
Thessahnicherbrief  neu  erkliirt  net'st  cinem  Exkurs  fiber  den
zweiten  glcichnatnigen  $rr'<yf  (1885) ;  Zimmer,  Theologischer
Kommentar  zu  den  Thessalonicherbri  ft-n  (1891).  Of  the
general  commentaries  on  the  NT  special  mention  may  be  made
of  Lijnemann  (Meyer's  HandbvcniPi),  Bornemann  (Meyer,  Is)
and  (6)),  and  Schmiedel  in  Holtzmann's  Hand-Conniientar  zum
NT,  Bd.  2  (1889).  On  the  integrity  of  the  epistles,  see  especially
Clemen,  Die  Einheitlichkeit  der  paulinischen  Briefe  (1894),  p.
i3_/C,  and  on  the  text  Zimmer,  Der  Text  der  Thessalonicher-
briefe  (1893).

In  defence  of  the  genuineness  of  both  epistles,  see  the  NT
introductions  of  Weiss,  Jiilicher,  and  Zahn,  also  Bornemann  in
Meyer.  In  defence  of  the  first  epistle,  see  also  von  Soden  in
St.Kr.,  1885,  p.  z63_/C,  and  Weizsacker,  Ap,  Zeitalter,  241  f.;
in  defence  of  the  second,  Klopper  in  Theologische  Studien  -uiid
Skizzen  aus  Ostpreussen,  8  (1889).  Against  the  genuineness  of
both  epistles,  see  especially  Baur,  Der  Apostel  Paulus  (1845,
(3)  1867);  and  against  the  genuineness  of  the  second  Weiz
sacker,  I.e.,  nqf.;  Schmiedel,  I.e.,  8f.;  Bahnsen,  JPT,  1880,
401  f.  For  further  literature  see  Holtzmann,  Einl.  (3)  210  _/I,
and  Findlay  in  Expos.,  1900,  2  251.71  A.  C.  MCG.

THESSALONICA  (GeccAAoNiKH,1  WH,  Acts  17i
1113  Phil.  4 16  2  Tim.  4  10  ;  ethnic  Oc<r<ra\OPtK£tfs,  Acts
__.  ,  272204  i  Thess.  li  2  Thcss.  1 1  [translated
^'  in  the  three  latter  passages  by  the  curious
syncopated  form  'Thessalonians,'  EY]).  A  large  and
important  city  (now  Salonica}  at  the  head  of  the  Gulf
of  Salonica,  which  in  ancient  times  was  called  the
Thermaic  Gulf,  from  the  city  itself.  Thessalonica,  we
are  told,  was  originally  named  Therma  or  Therme,2
from  the  hot  springs  found  on  the  coast  in  its  neighbour
hood.  But  Therme  seems  to  have  been  a  small  place  in
the  vicinity,  from  which,  as  well  as  from  twenty-five
other  towns  on  the  gulf,  the  inhabitants  were  compelled
to  migrate  in  order  to  create  the  new  city  (Strabo,  330,
frg.  21  ;  Plin.  //.V,  4 17).

The  creation  of  Thessalonica  was  due,  according  to  the  most
probable  account  (that  of  Strabo,  I.e.),  to  Cassander,  who  called
it  after  his  wife  Thessalonica,  step-sister  of  Alexander  the  Great
(about  315  u. c.).  The  history  of  the  town  begins  therefore  with
the  Macedonian,  and  its  importance  increases  as  we  approach
the  Roman,  period.  It  was  the  great  Macedonian  naval  station
(Livy,  44  10)  ;  and  when  Macedonia  was  conquered  by  the
Romans  and  was  divided  by  them  into  four  districts,  Thessalonica
was  made  the  capital  of  the  second  region,  Macedonia  Seciinda
(168  B.C.  ;  see  MACEDONIA). •'  When  the  whole  of  Macedonia
was  reduced  to  a  single  province  (146  B.C.)  Thessalonica  became
virtually  its  capital.

Even  before  the  close  of  the  Republican  period  the
natural  advantages  of  Thessalonica  had  raised  it  to
importance,  for  it  lay  upon  the  great  route  which  con
nected  Rome  with  the  East  (cp  Cic.  De  Prov.  Cons.  2  :
'  Thessalonicenses,  positi  in  gremio  imperil  nostri'),
about  midway  between  Dyrrhachium  on  the  Adriatic,
and  the  river  Hebrus  in  Thrace.  It  was  the  residence
of  the  proconsul  ;  Cicero  during  his  exile  found  here  a
refuge,  in  the  qunestor's  house  (Pro  Pla?ic.  41).
During  the  first  Civil  War  the  town  was  the  head
quarters  of  the  Pompeian  party  (Dio  Cass.  41  18)  ;  but
in  the  second  war  it  took  the  side  of  Octavius  and
Antonius  (Plut.  Brut.  46;  Appian,  /?C4ii8),  and  by
way  of  reward  was  made  a  '  free  city  '  (Plin.  HN  4i7).4
As  a  free  city  it  was  ruled  by  its  own  assembly  (cp  the
use  of  the  word  ST^OS  in  Acts  17  5,  in  accordance  with
the  actual  constitutional  fact)  and  by  its  own  magis
trates,5  who  here  bore  the  special  title  of  politarchs
(TroXiTcipxcu,  Acts  176).

1  ©eTToAcwVr)  in  Pol.  23  4  ;  ©eo-o-aXoi'i'iceia  in  Str.  iy>,frg.  20
etc.

-  0e'pju.i),  Herod.  7  121,  et  step. ;  Thuc.  1 61  .  29.  ©e'pjaa,
^schin.  De  Fal.  Leg;  29  (Bekker).

3  After  158  B.C.,  when  the  right  of  silver  coinage  was  granted
by  the  Senate,  Thessalonica  issued  silver  tetradrachms  with  the
inscription  MAKEAONQN  AEYTEPA2.  See  Head,  Hist.
Numm.  213.  Its  bronze  coins  before  and  during  the  empire  are
plentiful,  bearing  the  name  of  the  town,  or  the  ethnic  in  the
genitive,  often  with  titles  fj.rjTpowo\i.<;  or  KoAoWa.  The  latter
title  dates  from  the  time  of  Valerian  (see  Momms.-Marq.  1  320).

•*  To  this  may  allude  the  word  eAeufcpt'a  with  female  head  on
some  of  its  coins.

5  Cp Livy, 45 29, where ^Emilius Paulus at Amphipolis

5046


THESSALONICA

The  title  politarch  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  Greek
literature,  but  its  use  here  is  quite  accurate,  as  appears
from  an  inscription  (CIG,  1967)  which  was  engraved  on
a.  Roman  arch  of  the  Vardar  gate  (perhaps  a  monu
ment  of  the  victory  of  Philippi)  recording  its  erection
when  certain  persons,  whose  names  are  given,  were
politarchs  of  the  city  '  (iroXiTapxoi'i'Tuv).1  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  number  of  politarchs  was  five  or  six  (see  a
paper  on  the  politarchs  by  Dr.  Burton,  reprinted  from
the  Am.  Jour.  Theol.  [1897],  598,  where  other  inscrip
tions  are  cited  from  Macedonia,  and  more  particularly
from  Tlu-ssalonica,  in  which  the  title  TroXtrctpxai,  or  the
verb  iro\iTapxovvT(s,  occurs).

The  tosvn  flourished  greatly.  Strabo  (330,  frg.  21)  calls  it  the
fiTjTpon-oAis  of  the  Macedonia  of  his  time,  and  notes  its  populous-
ness  (323,  17  vvv  fidAiora  TCUV  dAAioc  euai'fipei).  Lucian,  in  the
second  century  A.U. ,  speaks  in  similar  terms  (Asiii.  Aur.  46,
iroAews  rial'  iv  UaKtSwiq  7179  jueyurris  0e<r<raAoj't'ic»)j).

The  spread  of  the  Jews  after  Alexander's  death  would
doubtless  affect  the  city,  well  placed  as  it  was  for  con-
.,_  trolling  the  trade  of  Macedonia.  That
references  the  Jewish  community  in  Paul's  time
'  was  fairly  large  is  evident  from  the  fact
that  it  possessed  a  synagogue  here  ( Acts  17  i;  con
trast  Philippi,  and  compare  with  Beroaa,  which  also,
being  a  commercial  town,  possesses  a  synagogue,  Acts
17 10).  The  number  of  the  Jews  settled  in  the  town
had  also  produced  an  appreciable  effect  upon  the
Hellenic  section  of  the  population,  and  prepared  the
way  for  Paul's  work  of  evangelisation  by  the  creation  of
a  large  class  of  proselytes  (cp  Acts  174,  '  of  the  devout
Greeks  a  great  multitude,'  EV  ;  ir\rjOos  iro\v).  A
testimony  to  the  number  and  influence  of  the  Jews,
both  in  Thessalonica  and  in  all  this  region  of  Macedonia,
is  to  be  found  in  the  apparent  ease  with  which  they
excited  hostility  against  Paul.  The  exact  ground  of
complaint  alleged  against  Paul  at  Thessalonica  should  be
closely  compared  with  the  charge  used  against  him  at
Philippi,  for  the  difference  runs  closely  parallel  with  the
actual  difference  of  political  status  between  the  two
towns.

The  charge  at  Thessalonica  is  virtually  one  of  political
innovation  or  revolution  (i'.  7,  '  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Caesar  '
.  .  .  'another  king')— a  thing  to  which  the  Empire  was  very
sensitive,  and  one  fraught  with  grave  possibilities  of  undesirable
changes  for  the  people  of  Thessalonica  if  the  imperial  authorities
were  minded  to  take  it  seriously.  In  Philippi,  on  the  other
hand,  a  Roman  colony,  where  there  could  be  no  question  of
loyalty,  the  charge  touches  religious  innovations  (see  on  this
point,  Ramsay,  St.  Paul  the  Traveller,  229.7;).  The  riot  itself,
though  not  so  represented  in  the  narrative  in  Acts,  would  appear
to  have  surpassed  that  at  Philippi  in  malignity  and  violence  (cp
i  Thess.  2  nf.).  The  attitude  of  the  magistrates,  so  far  as  can
be  inferred  from  the  short  account,  would  seem  to  have  differed
entirely  from  that  of  the  magistrates  at  Philippi,  and  to  have
been  not  in  harmony  with  the  feelings  of  the  dregs  of  the  popu
lace  stirred  up  by  the  Jews.  \Vith  the  attitude  of  the  politarchs
and  upper  classes  of  Thessalonica  we  may  well  compare  that  of
the  Asiarchs  at  Ephesus  (Acts  19  31).  Nevertheless  the  poli
tarchs  were  obliged  in  the  interests  of  their  own  safety  to  fetter
Paul's  work  effectually  by  taking  sureties  of  Jason  and  other
prominent  Christians  of  Thess.alunica  against  the  repetition  of
the  teaching.  Paul  was  therefore  cut  off  from  the  city  by  a
barrier  more  effective  than  the  threat  of  merely  personal  danger
(i  Thess.  2  18,  'Satan  hindered  us.'  Cp  Rams.  of.  cit.  230).

As  regards  the  time  spent  in  the  city  by  Paul,  nothing  certain
can  be  inferred.  Probably,  however,  it  would  be  an  error  to
confine  his  work  to  the  limited  space  mentioned  in  Acts  17  2
('  three  sabbath  days  ').  Not  only  is  a  longer  sojourn  indicated
by  the  expression  used  in  i  Thess.  1  8  ('  For  from  you  sounded
out  the  word  of  the  Lord  not  only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia  '),
but  such  is  perhaps  proved  by  the  statement  in  Phil.  4  16  ('  For
even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my  necessity ').

declares  '  omnium  primum  liberos  esse  iubere  Macedonas,
habentes  urbes  easdem  agrosque,  utentes  legibus  suis,  annuos
creantes  magistratus.'

1  The  arch  was  demolished  about  1867,  but  the  inscription  is
now  preserved  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  (Murray,  Hdbk.  to  Greece,  826).
It  is  remarked  as  a  curious  coincidence  (Conybeare  and  Howson,
Life  and  Epp.  of  St.  Paul,  1  395)  that  three  of  the  names  on  the
inscription  are  identical  with  those  of  three  of  Paul's  friends  in
this  region  (Sopater,  Gaius,  and  Secundus  ;  cp  Acts  19  29  204).
Possibly  a  later  date  should  be  assigned  to  the  arch  than  is
given  above  (so  Leake  and  Tafel),  but  that  will  hardly  invalidate
the  weight  of  the  inscription  as  a  testimony  to  the  accuracy  of
Acts  in  this  passage.

5047


THESSALY

Further,  the  church  in  Thessalonica  would  seem  to  have  been
composed  very  largely  of  Gentile  converts  (whether  proselytes  or
pagans  at  the  time  of  Paul's  teaching  is,  of  course,  not  to  be
decided).  At  any  rate  the  Jewish  Scriptures  are  not  employed
in  the  two  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  and  in  i  Thess.  1  9  the
members  are  spoken  of  as  having  '  turned  to  God  from  idols.'
Hence  we  should  infer  that  much  time  was  spent  in  Gentile
circles,  apart  from  the  work  among  the  Jews  which  is  most
prominent  in  Acts.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  inference  as  to
the  length  of  Paul's  stay  in  Thessalonica  derives  any  further
support  from  a  consideration  of  such  passages  as  i  Thess.  2p
2  Thess.  'Anf.,  in  which  stress  is  laid  upon  Paul's  self-supporting
industry.

Though  the  name  of  Thessalonica  does  not  recur  in
Acts,  Paul  almost  certainly  saw  the  town  again,  both
going  and  returning,  on  his  third  missionary  journey
(Acts  20  i/. ).  On  his  return  two  members  of  the
church  of  Thessalonica  accompanied  him  into  Asia
(v.  4)  [see  ARISTAKCHUS,  SECUNDUS].  Possibly  he
was  also  there  after  his  first  imprisonment  (cp  Phil.  126
224);  the  visit  to  Macedonia  recorded  in  i  Tim.  1 3
might  very  well  embrace  an  excursion  to  Thessalonica.

Of  members  of  the  church  at  Thessalonica  we  can
specify  Jason  (Acts  17  5;  possibly  identical  with  the
Jason  of  Rom.  16  21),  Demas  (probably;  2  Tim.  4io),
Gaius  (Acts  1929),  Secundus  (Acts  204),  and  above  all
Aristarchus  (Acts  1929  204  27 2  ;  he  is  alluded  to  also
in  Col.  4  10  and  Philem.  24).

Christianity,  having  been  once  established  in  Thessa
lonica,  spread  rapidly  ( i  Thess.  1 8),  and  in  later  times
the  city  was  the  bulwark  of  religion  in  this  region  of
Europe,  so  much  so  that  it  was  designated  '  The  Ortho
dox  City.'  Its  name  is  prominent  in  the  Byzantine
historians.  It  was  a  safeguard  of  the  Empire  during
the  Gothic  inroads,  and  later  during  the  Sclavonic  wars,
of  which  it  bore  the  brunt  from  the  middle  of  the  sixth
century  A.D.  onwards.  During  the  Middle  Ages  the
city  was  thrice  captured,  by  the  Saracens,  the  Normans,
and  the  Turks.  It  is  now  a  nourishing  place,  the  second
in  European  Turkey  after  Constantinople.  It  is  specially
rich  in  remains  of  Byzantine  ecclesiastical  architecture,
surpassing  in  this  respect  any  other  city  in  Greece
(Leake).

The  most  elaborate  Work  is  that  by  Tafel,  the  first  part  of
which  was  published  in  1835  and  afterwards  prefixed  a*  Prolego
mena  to  his  DC Thessalonica  finsync  agro,
3.  Literature.  pissertatiogeografkica($er\m,i%yf). This
is  especially  full  in  relation  to  the  topography
and  the  Gothic  and  Sclavonic  wars. For  the  history  Finlay's
History  of  Greece  (ed.  Tozer)  may  also  be  consulted. Descrip
tions  of  the  town  and  remains  are  given  by  all  travellers  from
Clark  (1810)  to  Leake  (1835),  and  onwards. A  good  succinct
account  will  be  found  in  Murray's  Handbook  to  Greece.

\V.  J.  VV.

THESSALY  (GeccAAlA.  Actsl/is  D).  Thessaly  is
mentioned  only  in  an  addition  to  Actsl7i5  in  D,  which
runs,  '  and  those  who  conducted  Paul  brought  him  as
far  as  Athens  ;  [and  he  passed  by  Thessalia,  for  he  was
prevented  from  preaching  the  word  unto  them].'  It  is
not  clear  whether  at  this  time  Thessaly  was  included  in
the  province  of  Achasa,  or  fell  to  Macedonia.  If  the
latter  was  the  case,  we  should  naturally  expect  to  find
Paul  going  from  Beroea  to  Larissa,  the  chief  town  in
Thessaly,  for  his  call  was  to  Macedonia  (Actsl6io);
and  in  that  case  his  neglect  to  visit  Thessaly  must  have
been  due  to  divine  injunction  (as  in  Acts  16 7).  If
Thessaly  fell  at  that  time  to  Achsea,  there  was  no
necessity  specifically  to  mention  its  omission,  unless  we
assume  that  already  Paul  felt  that  he  was  called  to  a
wider  field  than  Macedonia.  It  is  indeed  a  strange
omission  in  Acts  that  nowhere  is  it  indicated  when
and  how  this  conviction  forced  itself  upon  his  mind  ;
already  in  Athens  (Actsl7i7)  the  special  call  to  Mace
donia  is  forgotten  in  the  absorbing  self-imposed  task
of  disputing  with  the  Jews  and  proselytes  of  that  city.
Apparently  there  is  no  feeling  of  restriction  to  a  particular
province.

As  regards  the  actual  attribution  of  Thessaly,  Ptolemy
assigns  it  to  Macedonia,  Strabo  to  Achaea  (p.  840).
The  separation  may  have  been  the  work  of  Vespasian.

w.  j.  w.

5048


THEUDAS
THEUDAS

CONTENTS

1.  Acts  and  Jos.  on  Theudas. 5.  Text  and  purpose  of  Acts536/C

2.  Not  two  persons.  6.  Separation  of  sources.

3.  No  error  in  Jos.  7.  Inexact  use  of  Jos.  by  Lk.

4.  Did  Lk.  know  Jos.  ?  8.  Literature.

Theudas  (eeyA&C1  Ti.  WH)  is mentioned  only  in

Acts  636,  where  Gamaliel,  in  his  speech  in  the  synedrium

. , ,in support of his plea for letting the

'  _  apostles  alone,  names  him  as  the  leader

jos.  on r  i-i  -i i-

_,, , of  a movement  which, notwithstanding

'  its  threatening  appearance  at  first,  very
soon  came  to  nothing.  The  peculiar  interest  which
attaches  to  this  passage  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  quite
similar  story  is  found  also  in  Josephus  (Ant.  xx.  5i,
§§97/. ).  (a)  As  the  point  to  be  investigated  is

whether  Lk.  has  here  drawn  upon  Josephus,  it  will  be
convenient  to  print  both  passages  in  close  juxtaposition.

Josephus. — "tafiou  Se  rrjs  'loufiat'as  eViTpon-euoi'TOs  yo>)s  T'S  «'%>
<9eu5a;  ofo/uan  Trei'tfet  TOV  TrAeicTTOj'  o^Aoi'  a.va.\aftot>ra  ras  KTrjtrei?
€7re<rda.i  Trpb?  TOV  'lopSdvriv  TrOTa^bv  aurai.  irpo<j)iJTr]s  yap  eAeyei*
ftpeu,  xal  TrpotTTay/naTi  TOV  TTOTa.fji.bv  ar\io~a<;  oiooov  e'07)  Trapefeip
aijTOis  fK^Smv,  xai  raura  Ae'yuji/  n-oAAous  i7?raTT)cre>'.  ou  fj.r)i>
eiatrev  aiiroi/s  rrjs  a.<f>poo~vvr)S  ovacrOai.  'I>a<5os,  aAA'  tfivtfvfm  lAiji'
tnWwc  err'  aiirovs',  JJTts  a7rpo<r5oKr)TOs  €7ri7re<ToO<Ta  TroAAou?  fj.ev
O.VTMV  ai/etAec,  iroAAous  Se  fuii/ras  e'Aa^ei/ '  avrdi'  re  TOC  ®eu8di>
fojypjjo-ai'Tes  aTrore'^ii'ouo'i.  Ti)v  K«f>a.\riv  (cat  K0/ui'£bv<ni'  eis  'Iepo<ro-
Aviua.  '  While  Fadus  was  procurator  of  Judaea,  a  certain
charlatan,  Theudas  by  name,  persuaded  a  very  great  number  of
people  to  take  their  effects  with  them  and  follow  him  to  the  river
Jordan  ;  for  he  told  them  that  he  was  a  prophet,  and  said  he
would  at  the  word  of  command  divide  the  river  and  give  them
an  easy  passage  through  it  ;  and  by  these  words  he  deluded
many.  Fadus,  however,  did  not  permit  them  to  gain  aught  by
their  folly,  but  sent  a  regiment  of  cavalry  against  them,  which,
falling  upon  them  unexpectedly,  slew  many  of  them  and  took
many  alive.  Taking  Theudas  also  alive,  they  cut  off  his  head,
and  carried  it  to  Jerusalem.'

Acts. — rrpb  yap  TOVTIOV  Ttav  Vj/xepaii/  aj/e'crn)  ©evSas,  Ae'yioi/  flvaL
Viva.  eavTov,  u>  TrpotTcxAi^r/  a>'5pu>i'  api#jtibs  a>s  TeTpa/cocruoi'.  os
avripfOr}  KOLI  TraWes  dam  erreidovTO  avrw  Sie\v9r)<ra.v  Kai  eyeVovro
eis  ouSeV.  '  For  before  these  days  rose  up  Theudas,  giving  him
self  out  to  be  somebody,  to  whom  a  number  of  men,  about  four
hundred,  joined  themselves:  who  was  slain;  and  all,  as  many
as  obeyed  him,  svere  dispersed  and  came  to  nought.

(6)  In  so  far  as  the  differences  betwen  the  two  ac
counts  affect  their  substance,  they  are  so  unimportant
as  in  no  way  to  hinder  us  from  believing  that  the  same
fact  is  inten'led  in  both.

Lk.  naturally  is  shorter,  for  his  object  is  not  to  tell  the
history  of  Theudas,  but  simply  to  cite  an  instance  appropriate
to  the  purpose  of  Gamaliel's  speech.  He  therefore  mentions
only  the  beginning,  and  the  ultimate  issue  of  the  move
ment.  Therefore,  there  is  no  contradiction  with  Josephus
when  Lk.  says  of  the  followers  of  Theudas  simply  that  '  they
were  dispersed  and  came  to  nought.'  If  Theudas  gives  himself
out  '  to  be  somebody,'  the  meaning  can  well  be  what  Josephus
says — that  he  called  himself  a  prophet.2  Lk.'s  expression  re
calls  Acts  8  9,  where  almost  the  same  claim  is  atributed  to  Simon
Magus — an  identical  claim  if  '  great '  (fxe'yai/)  there  be  a  gloss
(see  SIMON  MAGUS,  §  i,  n.).

The  greatest  discrepancy  is  that  whilst  Lk.  is  able  to
give  the  number  of  followers  of  Theudas  as  about  400
men,  Josephus  has  TOV  TrXetaTov  6%Xof.  It  does  not
follow  from  this  expression  that  he  intends  a  substanti
ally  larger  number.

Krenkel  (below,  §  8),  170 _/,  has  collected  abundant  instances
to  show  that  Josephus,  in  places  where  we  are  able  to  control
his  statements,  often  gives  much  too  high  figures.  On  the  other
hand,  we  are  not  precluded  from  supposing  that  to  Lk.'s  400
men,  women  and  children  ought  to  be  added.

That  the  number  must  have  been  a  relatively  moderate  one  is
evident  from  Josephus's  own  statement  that  an  tAr;  (  =  ala)  of
cavalry  (some  500  men)  was  all  that  was  required  for  the  sup
pression  of  the  rising.

(c)  Much  more  serious  is  the  next  difficulty.  Lk.
goes  on  to  say  that  after  Theudas,  Judas  of  Galilee
raised  another  revolt  in  the  days  of  the  taxing.  As  he
particularises  the  taxing  by  means  of  the  definite  article
(4v  TCUS  i]/J.epais  rrjs  ctTroypcK^s)  and  in  his  own  Gospel
(2 1  /. )  mentions  that  under  Quirinius  (in  6  or  7  A.  n.)
and  that  alone,  he  cannot  intend  any  other  here  ;  and

1  On  the  name  see  next  col.,  n.  i.

2  If  Theudas  promised his  followers  to  lead  them  through
Jordan,  like  another  Joshua,  this  will  be  not  the  sole  purpose  he
had  in  view,  but  probably  only  a  first  trial  by  means  of  which  he
hoped  to  confirm  faith  in  his  miraculous  power  with  a  view  to
being  afterwards  in  a  position  to  take  up  some  bolder  enterprise.

5049


THEUDAS

it  was  at  the  time  of  this  taxing  that  in  point  of  fact
Judas  of  Galilee  did  make  his  revolutionary  attempt
(see  JUDAS  OF  GALILEE).  Thus,  Lk.  carries  the  in
surrection  of  Theudas  back  to  a  somewhat  early  date.
According  to  Josephus,  however,  the  insurrection  of
Theudas  was  when  Cuspius  Fadus  was  procurator,  that
is,  some  time  between  44  and  about  46  A. D.  (Tiberius
Alexander,  the  successor  of  Fadus,  held  office  till  48
A.  D. ).  If  Lk.  is  thinking  of  the  same  Theudas,  he  has
thus  not  merely  assigned  him  to  a  wrong  date  but,  what
is  more,  has  put  into  Gamaliel's  mouth  a  reference  to
an  occurrence  which  at  the  alleged  time  of  speaking
had  not  yet  happened.

To  avoid  the  ascription  of  so  serious  an  error  to  Lk. ,
it  has  often  been  assumed  that  he  has  in  his  mind

2 Not  two anotner  Theudas  than  the  one  mentioned

Theudases by  JosePhus- Indeed, the  attempt has
'  been  made  to  prove  this  from  Josephus
himself.  (a)  Sonntag  (below,  §  8)  thought  he  had

discovered  Lk.'s  Theudas  in  the  Simon  who,  originally
a  slave  of  Herod  the  Great,  shortly  after  the  death  of
that  monarch  (4  B.C.),  gathered  round  him  a  band  of
robbers  in  Percea,  got  himself  chosen  to  be  their  king,
burned  and  plundered  royal  citadels  in  Jericho  and  else
where,  but  finally  was  defeated  in  battle  by  Gratus,  an
officer  of  Herod's,  pursued  and  beheaded  (BJ  \\.  42,
§§  57"59>  Ant.-xvn.  106,  §§  273-276).  That  this  Simon,
however,  also  bore  the  name  of  Theudas  is  a  mere
conjecture.  (6)  Zuschlag  (below,  g  8)  identifies

Lk.'s  Theudas  with  Theudion,  brother  of  Doris,  the
first  wife  of  Herod  the  Great  and  mother  of  his  eldest
son,  Antipater.

After  the  execution  of  Herod's  third  son,  Aristobulus  (7  B.C.),
Theudion  married  Berenice  his  widow  (BJ  i.  '2S  i,  §  553).  He
subsequently  engaged  in  a  plot  against  the  life  of  Herod  the
Great  which  had  been  set  on  foot  by  the  Antipater  just  men
tioned.  Antipater  caused  poison  to  be  fetched  from  Egypt
through  the  agency  of  Antiphilus,  one  of  his  friends  ;  Antiphilus
passed  it  on  to  Theudion  and  Theudion  to  Pheroras  the  brother
of  Herod.  Pheroras  handed  it  over  to  the  charge  of  his  wife.
Not  till  after  the  death  of  Pheroras  (5  B.C.)  did  the  matter  come
to  the  knowledge  of  Herod  ;  the  result  was  that  Antipater  was
put  to  death  (BJ  i.  SOsyC,  §§  592-598  ;  Ant.  xvii.  4  2,  §§  69-77).
It  is  plain  that  between  this  Theudion  and  the  Theudas  of  Lk.
there  is  not  the  faintest  resemblance,  and  it  is  therefote  quite
useless  to  inquire  whether  Theudion  could  also  be  called  Theudas.
In  point  of  fact,  Theudas  can  quite  well  be  an  abbreviation  of
Theudion  ;  but  with  few  exceptions  a  person  was  known  ex
clusively  either  by  the  full  or  by  the  abbreviated  form  of  his
name,  not  by  both  indifferently  (Winer,  Grain. (s),  §  169).

(c)  Wieseler  (below,  §  8)  discerns  the  Theudas  of
Lk.  in  Matthias  the  son  of  Margaloth  or  Mergaloth  or
Margalos,  a  teacher  of  the  law,  who,  together  with  his
colleague  Judas  the  son  of  Sariphreus  or  Sephorasus,
in  the  last  days  of  Herod  the  Great,  persuaded  a  number
of  their  pupils  to  cut  down  the  golden  eagle  which
Herod,  in  contravention  of  the  law  against  graven
images  (Ex.  20  4/  Dt.4is-i823  58/  27is),  had  caused
to  be  placed  over  the  great  gate  of  the  temple.  Herod
roused  himself  from  his  deathbed  and  caused  Matthias
and  Judas  and  their  most  prominent  accomplices  to  be
burnt  to  death,  and  the  rest  of  the  forty  who  had  been
taken  to  be  executed  (BJ  \.  882-4,  §§  648-655,  Ant.
xvii.  62-4,  §§  149-167).

This  story  also  has  but  few  points  of  agreement  with  what  we
read  in  Acts.  That  Matthias  gave  himself  out  to  be  any  great
person  of  any  kind  is  neither  asserted  nor  probable  ;  he  simply
appealed  to  the  OT  command.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  he  won
over  a  band  of  followers ;  for  those  who  joined  in  his  under
taking  were  from  the  outset  his  pupils,  and  the  entire  action
was  an  affair  of  a  few  hours,  since  the  temple  captain  intervened
at  once  with  armed  force.  At  the  same  time  all  those  taking
part,  who  were  not  cap_tured,  were  dispersed,  and  it  was  only
afterwards  that  Matthias  and  Judas  were  seized.  Further,
Judas  was  as  deeply  involved  as  Matthias  ;  in  fact,  in  BJ  and  in
the  first  two  mentions  of  him  in  Ant.  he  is  named  before  Matthias,
and  only  afterwards  (§  167)  does  Josephus  name  Matthias  alone
because  directly  before  he  has  spoken  of  another  Matthias ;  so
also  xvii.  9 1,  §  206  :  yiarOCav  leal  TOUS  <rvv  O.VTU.  The  only
reason  Wieseler  has  for  passing  Judas  over  is  that  the  name
Matthias  has  the  same  meaning  as  Theudas.1  But  that  Mat
thias  bore  this  second  name  also  by  no  means  follows.

1  ®6vSas  is  one  of  the  names  formed  with  the  well-known  abbrevi
ation-ending  (cp  NAMES,  §  86,  end  ;  LUKE,  §  6 ;  APOLLOS,  §  i,

5050


THEUDAS


THEUDAS


(d]  Other  critics,  with  rather  more  prudence,  attempt
no  identifications,  but  nevertheless  declare  that  some
Theudas  other  than  the  Theudas  of  Josephus  must  have
come  forward  before  Judas  of  Galilee.  Thus,  in  the
last  instance,  again  Ramsay  (below,  §  8).  The  scholar
who  with  Ramsay  starts  from  the  axiom  that  Lk.  is  a
historian  of  the  same  rank  as  Thucydides  (see  GALATIA,
§  12,  end)  will  not  readily  give  up  this  way  of  dealing
with  the  difficulty.  Those  on  the  other  hand  who  take
cognisance  of  the  great  untrustworthiness  of  Lk.  in
specifically  historical  questions  (cp  ACTS,  §§  2,  4,  I3/.  ;
GOSPELS,  §  132  ;  LYSANIAS)  will  regard  the  assertion
as  rash.  Ramsay  is  certainly  right  in  saying  (p.  259)
of  Josephus  that  '  he  does  not  allude,  or  profess  to
allude,  to  every  little  disturbance  on  the  banks  of  the
Jordan.'  But  it  is  just  as  certain  that  Gamaliel  must
be  supposed  to  be  alluding  not  to  a  little  but  to  a  great
disturbance,  if  his  speech  is  to  be  in  keeping  with  the
gravity  of  the  occasion.  An  occurrence  which  could
reasonably  be  placed  side  by  side  with  the  affair  of
Judas  of  Galilee  would  certainly  not  have  been  passed
over  by  Josephus.

Therefore  also  it  is  quite  irrelevant  to  urge  that  the  name
Theudas  was  a  common  one,  that  the  later  Theudas  was  perhaps
the  son  or  grandson  of  the  earlier  (so  lilass),  or  that  Theudas
was  not  his  original  name  but  only  one  which  he  had  afterwards
assumed  (so  Ramsay).  As  for  the  frequency  with  which  the
name  occurs,  the  evidence  —  particularly  that  from  the  inscriptions
—will  be  found  in  Schiirer  (GJl'ft  \  473,  ET  i.  2  i68/).  That
the  name  was  frequent  among  the  Jews,  however,  is  not  affirmed.
John  Lightfoot  (on  Acts  5  36)  mentions  two  men  named  omn  'n
rabbinic  literature,  with  regard  to  whom  he  himself  adds  that
neither  of  them  can  be  the  person  intended  in  Acts.

Lastly,  some  critics  have  asked  : If  one  or  other  of
the two authors  must have been mistaken, why not
._  Josephus  '  cui  et  in  historia  et  in  chrono-

3.  No  error  ]ogja  titut>ari  et  vagari  non  insuetum  ?  '
in  Josepnus.  ^Q  john  Lightfoot).  joh.  Dav.  Mjchaelis
(Kinl.  i.  d.  Schriften  d.  Nenen  Bu>ides,(*l  [1788]  p.62/.  )
formulates  this  position  with  greater  precision  thus  :
Lk.  dates  Theudas  correctly  ;  Josephus  correctly  re
members  (from  his  childhood)  that  a  revolt  occurred
under  Cuspius  Fadus,  but  is  mistaken  in  thinking  that
Theudas  was  the  name  of  the  leader  on  that  occasion.
Blass  is  conscious  that  such  a  charge  against  Josephus
would  be  inadmissible,  but  reaches  the  same  result  by
the  extremely  bold  assumption  (which,  however,  he
introduces  only  with  a  fortasse)  that,  in  describing  the
rising  under  Cuspius  Fadus,  Josephus  wrote  either  another
name  than  that  of  Theudas  or  no  name  at  all,  and  that
his  copyists,  carelessly  identifying  this  narrative  with
that  of  Acts  536,  introduced  the  name  of  Theudas  into
his  text.  This  identification  would  have  been  occasioned
by  the  circumstance  that  with  both  authors  the  mention
of  ]  udas  of  Galilee  immediately  follows.

Indeed  our  problem  becomes  still  more  complicated

than  at  first  sight  it  appeared  to  be,  by  reason  of  the

_.  .  _  , fact  that  Josephus,  immediately  after  the

'  ' words  about  Theudas  quoted  above  (§  i),

0  * mentions  Tiberius  Alexander's  succession

Josep us  . to  £USpjus  Fadus jn  the  procuratorship

and  the  famine  in  Judrea  during  hij  term  (Acts  1128),
and  then  proceeds  as  follows  :  —

(Ant.  xx.  52,  §  102  [Naber])  Trpos  TOUTOIS  6e  xai  oi  TraiSes  'lovSa

n.  i  ;  Sn.AS,  §  7  a).  Probably  it  comes  from  ©eoSwpos,  ©eoSoros,
or  some  such  form,  and  thus  the  meaning  does  coincide  with
that  of  Matthias  ('  gift  of  God  ')  ;  but  various  other  forms  such
as  ©eoSe'KTJ)?,  ©eoSjj^osand  the  like  could  also  have  produced  it.
®ev-  for  ©eo-  rests  upon  a  contraction  met  with  mostly  in  the
Ionic  dialect  (Gust.  Meyer,  Griech.  Gram.C^  §  119;  Schweizer,
Gram,  der  pergatnen.  Inschriften,  1898,  §  82^;  Meisterhans,
Grant,  u'er  aft.  Inschriften,&  §  19  i).  If  the  accent  lies  on  the
first  element  of  the  composite  name  as  in  the  first  instances
given  above  (of  which  ©evSoros  is  established  in  Attic  inscrip
tions  of  about  200  n.c.  and  ©eiifoupos  —  both  with  ev—  from  the
period  of  the  empire,  whilst  ©Comoros  is  already  found  in  Plato
and  ©toScopos  in  Thucydides),  it  is  proper  to  accentuate  the
word  as  ©ev6a?  (see  SILAS,  col.  4519,  n.  2)  ;  if  such  a  form  as
©fvSocrios—  a  name  met  with  also  in  Attic  inscriptions  of  about
160  n.c.—  is  at  the  basis  of  the  contraction  ©euias  will  be  the
correct  accentuation.

5051


TOV  TaAiAaiou  anipe'0r)<T<xi'  [Niese,  a.irr\\fa]aav\  TOV  TOV  Aaci>  ajrb
'¥iafj.aiiai>  anxxTTija-ai'TO?  Kvpiviov  rrjs  'louiai'at  TI/HT;T«VOVTOS,  <i>s
iv  roil  Tfpb  TOVTtav  e&rjkiavancv,  'laxai/So?  Kai  ii/j.ajr,  oi>s  ai-a-
araupwo-ai  Trpotrerafev  6  'AA«'fai>£pos  :  '  Besides  all  this,  the  sons
of  Judas  the  Galikean  were  now  put  to  death,—  [that  Judas]  who
drew  away  the  people  from  the  Romans  when  Quirinius  made  a
census  of  Judaea  as  has  been  shown  in  a  former  part  of  this  work.
Their  names  were  James  and  Simon,  whom  Alexander  com
manded  to  be  crucified.  '

With  this  must  be  carefully  compared  what  is  said
in  Acts  037  :

juera  TOVTOV  o.viati\  'lov&as  6  raAiAatos  iv  rais  -tifj.epa.is  TTJ?
aTToypac^rjs,  Kal  a7re'cnr)<re>'  Aabi'  oirurcu  aurou  •  (caKelpos  aTriiiAero
xai  7rai>T««  oaroi  fireiOovTo  aiirai  6ie(T<cop7ri<r#i)<7ai'  :  '  After  this
man  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee  in  the  days  of  the  enrolment,  and
drew  away  [some  of  the]  people  after  him  :  he  also  perished,  and
all,  as  many  as  obeyed  him,  were  scattered  abroad.'

(a)  If  Lk.  cannot  be  cleared  of  the  charge  of  having
made  a  mistake  about  Theudas  it  will  be  exceedingly
natural  to  look  for  the  cause  of  his  mistake  in  this
passage  of  Josephus,  on  the  assumption  that  Lk.  took
the  latter  part  of  the  passage  just  quoted  from  Josephus
as  referring  not  to  the  sons  of  Judas  but  to  Judas  him
self.  If  so,  it  could  indeed  appear  as  if  Theudas  ought
to  be  placed  before  Judas  as  long  as  Lk.  confined  his
attention  to  the  dating  of  Judas  which  he  found  in  his
own  gospel  (2if.  )  and  left  that  of  Theudas  out  of  con
sideration  (see  further,  §  7  b}.

The  remarkable  collocation,  by  which  the  two  are  mentioned
in  the  same  order,  has  (since  Keim)  determined  most  critics  who
are  not  shocked  at  the  suggestion  of  an  acquaintance  with
Josephus  on  the  part  of  Lk.  to  see  here  a  proof  of  such  an
acquaintance  —  a  view  which  it  is  rather  difficult  to  avoid.  Indeed,
so  strong  is  the  proof  that  it  and  it  alone  has  led  Wendt,  who  in
the  seventh  edition  of  Meyer's  commentary  on  Acts  had  still
denied  the  use  of  Josephus  by  Lk.,  to  affirm  it  in  the  eighth
edition  (1899,  pp.  35-38);  and  Blass,  who  does  not  admit  it,
nevertheless  says  :  '  non  facile  adducimur  ut  casui  trilmamus
Theoda;  Juda;que  apud  utrumque  scriptorem  junctam  com-
memorationem,'  and  has  no  better  way  of  escape  than  that
mentioned  in  §  3,  end.

(b}  As  for  the  phraseology  :  the  expression  '  to  draw
away  the  people'  (\o.bv  d-rroffT^aai)  in  particular  is  one
that  two  authors  writing  independently  would  not  easily
happen  upon.  Then  there  is  also  the  mention  of  the
census.  In  'obeyed'  (eweidovro)  Lk.  uses,  both  in  the
case  of  Judas  and  in  that  of  Theudas,  the  same  verb
which  Josephus  uses  in  speaking  of  Theudas  (  '  per
suades,'  7rei'0ei).  It  is  specially  important  to  mark  that
i  of  all  the  five  passages  of  Josephus  in  which  Judas  is
mentioned  (see  JUDAS)  only  that  which  we  are  at
present  considering  exhibits  these  agreements  with  Lk.
Theudas's  description  of  himself  is  introduced  in  both
cases  by  \6yeiv,  and  the  participle  \eywv  which  Lk.
employs  Josephus  has  in  his  second  passage.  The
statement  that  after  his  capture  Theudas  had  his  head
cut  off  was  plainly  too  detailed  for  Lk.  ;  but  he  uses
with  reference  to  him  the  verb  avaipelv  (  '  was  slain')
which  Josephus  applies  to  the  death  of  the  followers
of  Theudas  (dvetKev,  '  he  slew'),  and  to  the  sons  of  Judas
in  precisely  the  same  aor.  pass.  (dv-riptOr/aav,  '  were  slain  ')
as  we  find  in  Lk.  Any  one  of  these  coincidences  can
appear  indecisive,  but  taken  together  they  turn  the
scale.

The  last  of  the  coincidences  enumerated  above  is,  it
is  true,  denied  by  Blass.  (a)  Eusebius  (HE\\.  11  i)
,  quotes  the  words  of  Gamaliel  regarding
3  Theudas  in  indirect  narration  as  follows:  —


r f &s  &pa  Kara  rbv  Sr/XovfJievov  xpuv°v  a.v£<ni)
Acts  0307. @e,,gaji  \tuv  eavrbv  dva.1  nva,  to  Kare-


\v07],  Kal  Trdvres  6<roi  tireiffOyffav  cti/nj)  dif\i'0i)ffai'  :
'  that  at  the  time  specified  Theudas  arose,  giving  him
self  out  to  be  somebody,  who  was  destroyed,  and  all,  as
many  as  obeyed  him,  were  dispersed.'

Although  this  quotation  is  far  from  being  verbally
exact  (notice  4ireiff6i)o~a.v  and  the  order  of  the  words
eavrbv  tlvai  nva),  Blass,  nevertheless,  believes  that  we
have  a  survival  of  the  original  text  of  Lk.  in  Ka.Tt\v0r),
and  that  we  shall  be  warranted  in  supposing  the  dvyptdr)
of  the  best  authorities  to  have  been  first  introduced  into
Lk.  by  copyists  of  the  Bible,  from  the  text  of  Josephus

5052


THEUDAS

(dvtlXfv  ;  cp  dvypfd-rjaav  in  his  section  relating  to  the
sons  of  Judas),  and  vice  versa  that  the  name  of  Theudas
was  introduced  into  the  text  of  Josephus  also  by  copyists
(above,  §  3).  Assuredly  a  bold  hypothesis.

(b]  Blass  considers  that  some  support  for  this  hypo
thesis  can  be  found  in the  reading  of  D*  : fis  difXvdr)
avrbs Si avrov  KO.I Travres bffoi eireidovro avrif KO.I
lylvovro  fis  ovdev.

Not  only,  however,  does  this  vary  greatly  from  the  rendering
of  Eusehius ;  it  also  appears  to  be  the  older  of  the  two.  This
has  been  recognised  by  Blass  in  so  far  as  he  takes  up  into  what
he  maintains  to  be  the  first  form  in  which  Acts  was  written  the
words  aiirbs  Si'  O.VTOV  (  =  eaurou)  and  omits  the  Sif\vdr)<ra.v.  It
is  all  the  more  remarkable  to  find  that  he  refrains  from  proceed
ing  to  the  natural  consequence — that  of  taking  the  KareAt/fhj
of  Eusebius  as  a  modification  of  the  Sie\.v0r)  in  D  which  was
preferred  after  the  Sif\vdt]a-av  had  been  introduced  from  the
ordinary  text  into  the  text  of  D.  KaTaAuety  will  have  been
selected  in  the  process  because  it  occurs  in  vv.  38yr  The  con
verse,  that  D  or  his  predecessor  changed  the  /caTeAuflrj  (of  the
original  text  put  forward  by  Blass)  which  yet  was  not  followed
by  any  SieAvOijo-ai',  into  fiieAu'flij,  might  be  hard  to  explain.

(c]  On  the  other  hand  it  is  nevertheless  quite  intel
ligible why Blass should have found difficulty in
accepting  the  text  of  D  entirely,  including  the  dieXvOtj,
as  the original. For D's  text  admits  very  readily  of
being regarded as modification — not indeed of the
primitive  text  assumed by  Blass, yet  certainly  of  the
generally  received text of the  best authorities. The
dvypeO-r)  KO.I  . . . difXi'drjcrav  has  here  been  compressed
into  one  verb  Stf\v6rj.

If  this  Si.e\vdrja-av  had  not  lain  before  the  scribe,  the  single
verb  Sie\vOri  would  never  have  been  chosen.  It  can  be  applied
to  a  group  of  men  who  have  been  dispersed  or  to  a  thing  which
has  been  destroyed,  but  to  apply  it  to  one  man  is  not  natural.
Only  KaTdAu'eii/  is  so  used  (v.  39)  ;  but  /careAuOr)  in  view  of  what
has  been  said  above  cannot  be  accepted  as  the  original  reading.
By  the  compression  of  the  two  verbs  above  referred  to,  however,
the  construction  also  has  suffered.  The  subject  to  fiieAv'Or)  is  in
D  not  merely  (is  but  also  the  plural  as  well,  Traces  iicroi  firdOovro
avrtZ,  and  this  same  second  subject  receives  further  a  verb  in  the
plural  :  KCU  eyeVoi/TO  et«  ovSiv.  The  Latin  translator  of  D  has
seen  that  this  is  inadmissible,  and  has  therefore  taken  occasion
to  delete  the  KO.L  before  eycVoi/ro  :  '  qui  interfectus  est,  et  omnes
quotquot  obtemperabant  ei  facti  sunt  nihil ' ;  and  Hilgenfeld
(A  eta  afiost.  gmce  et  lat.,  1899)  has  found  necessary  the
following  punctuation  —  so  completely  inconsistent  with  the
genius  of  the  Greek  language — of  the  words  of  D  which  he  too
regards  as  those  of  the  true  original  :  os  8teAu9r)  avrds,  61'  avrovi
xal  Tray-res  ocrot  eTreiOovTO  avTiZ,  /cat  eyivoVTO  eis  ouSeV.  The
reason  for  the  compression  of  the  two  verbs  into  one  (SieAv'ffy)
was  perhaps  that  the  eye  of  the  copyist  before  it  reached  avypeQi)
had  already  run  ahead  to  SteAiiOrjcrai/.  Yet  the  addition  of  the
words  aurbs  fit'  aiirou  seems  to  indicate  that  the  alteration,  even
if  in  the  first  instance  it  was  due  to  an  accident  of  the  sort
indicated,  was  nevertheless  carried  out  with  full  consciousness.

(d]  Blass  also  urges  reasons  derived  from  the  context
for  preferring  KareXtiOr)  to  dvrjpedt]. Gamaliel's  design
is  to  persuade  his  hearers  to  leave  the  apostles  alone
(vv.  38/. )  ; but if the revolt of Theudas had been
quelled  by  his being put to death, such  an instance
would  tend  to  show  on  the  contrary  that  the  right  policy
was  to  punish  the  apostles  with  death. We  are  willing
to  believe  that  it  was  this  argument,  whether  by  itself  or
taken  in  connection  with  the  oversight  conjectured  above
under  (c),  which led to  the  reading dieXvOrj  avrbs  di
auTou  in  D. But  the  argument  is  not  conclusive.

Wendt  (in  Meyer's  Conini.)  has  already  pointed  out  that  it  is
not  the  apostles  who  are  intended  to  be  put  in  the  parallel
position  to  that  of  Theudas,  but  Jesus  himself  as  the  head  of  the
new  movement  ;  Jesus,  however,  has  already  suffered  the
penalty  of  death,  and  Gamaliel  therefore  might  all  the  more
assume  that  his  followers  were  no  longer  seriously  to  be  feared.
At  the  same  time  it  is  by  no  means  indisputable  that  Lk.  was
here  thinking  of  Jesus.  Had  it  been  so,  to  have  referred  ex
pressly  to  the  fact  of  his  death  would  have  been  very  natural.  In
point  of  fact  not  only  is  this  reference  not  made,  but  in  speaking
of  the  case  of  Theudas  it  is  not  so  much  as  hinted  that  his  death
was  the  cause  of  the  dispersion  of  his  followers  ;  rather  are  the
two  facts  brought  into  juxtaposition  merely.

Thus  the  point  of  the  comparison  between  the  move
ment  originated  by  Theudas  and  that  in  which  the
apostles  were  engaged  will  rather  be  simply  that  both
at  first  had  an  apparently  threatening  character  but
soon  lose  it,  without  reference  to  the  manner  in  which
the  change  is  effected,  If  this  view  is  correct,  it  must
be  conceded  that  the  example  of  Theudas  from  Josephus

5053


THEUDAS

is  not  in  all  its  particulars  quite  apposite,  and  the
attempt  of  Blass  to  discover  or  conjecture  another
Theudas  who  was  not  'slain'  (dvyptOr])  but  only
'  broken'  (Ka.Te\i>0-rj)  must  appear  to  be  called  for.

(e)  But  let  us  now  for  a  little  leave  aside  all  this
argumentation  and  simply  ask :  What  of  Judas  of
Galilee?  What  avails  it  to  eliminate  the  death  of
Theudas  by  operations  on  the  text  if  nevertheless  that  of
Judas  remains  ?  True,  Josephus  knows  nothing  of  it  ;
but  this  does  not  come  into  account,  for  Lk.  makes
Gamaliel  say,  '  he  also  perished  '  :  KaKeivos  dTrwXero.
Against  this  Blass  can  only  adduce  the  Perpignan  codex
cited  in  ACTS,  col.  50,  n.  2.  This  in  fact  has  for
aTTciXero  in  the  case  of  Judas,  just  as  for  dvypedr)  in  that
of  Theudas,  '  dissolutus  est ' ;  but  must  we  believe  that
the  original  has  been  preserved  in  a  solitary  Latin  trans
lation  ?  Is  it  not  very  easily  conceivable  that  the  second
'  dissolutus  est '  is  due  to  repetition  b}'  a  careless  copyist  ?
And  who  was  it  who  introduced  the  diruXfro  in  the  case
of  Judas?  The  dvypeOTj  for  Theudas,  Blass  will  have
it,  is  taken  from  Josephus  ;  but  the  diruXero  for  Judas
could  not  at  all  have  been  taken  from  Josephus  by  way
of  correction  of  a  KareXvOir)  originally  written  by  Lk.
(according  to  Blass),  for  Josephus  says  nothing  at  all
about  the  end  of  Judas.

It  thus  appears  that  text-criticism  is  of  no  avail  in  the

endeavour  to  show  that Lk. has  fallen  into  no  error  or

6.  Separation  \° djsProve^ his acquaintance with

Of  sources  JosePhus-  Our  next  question  there
fore  must  be  as  to  whether  analysis  of
the  sources  can  contribute  nothing  to  a  solution  of  the
problems  of  our  passage.  Most  of  the  source-critics
named  in  ACTS,  §  u,  have  no  difficulty  in  attributing
the  mistake  as  to  Theudas  along  with  the  entire  speech
of  Gamaliel  to  the  author  of  their  '  secondary '  source,
to  whom  also  they  trace  everything  else  that  is  inappro
priate  or  incredible  in  Acts.  The  situation  is  changed
somewhat  if,  as  Clemen  holds,  the  two  verses  about
Theudas  and  Judas  of  Galilee  were  introduced  into
Gamaliel's  speech  by  the  final  redactor  only.  Clemen
shares  the  view  of  Blass  as  to  the  inappropriateness  of
both  these  instances  to  the  purpose  of  the  speech,  and
therefore  assumes  that  its  purpose  had  not  been  recog
nised  with  sufficient  clearness  by  that  redactor.  Lastly,
B.  Weiss,  with  whom  Feine  and  Hilgenfeld  concur,
regards  only  the  instance  of  Theudas  (from  dvearri  in
v.  36  to  avfcrrri  in  v.  37)  as  being  due  to  the  final
redactor.  The  motive  of  the  interpolation  was,  he
thinks,  because  the  movement  led  by  Theudas,  as  being
of  a  more  religious  character,  supplied  a  better  parallel
to  that  led  by  the  apostles  than  the  purely  political
agitation  of  Judas  of  Galilee.  Even  if  this  is  not  very
convincing,  there  is  nevertheless  this  advantage  gained
by  means  of  Weiss's  hypothesis  that  the  literatim  repeti
tion  of  dv^arri  which  would  seem  clumsy  if  we  suppose
a  single  writer,  as  well  as  that  of  irdvrfs  Scroi  iireiOovro
ai'rtfJ,  become  less  inexplicable.  All  critics  who  accept
separation  of  sources  at  all  are  agreed  in  admitting  the
existence  of  the  error  in  the  existing  text  of  Acts  ;  as  ;o
acquaintance  with  Josephus  on  the  part  of  the  author  of
v.  36  they  differ  in  opinion,  and  this  is  easily  possible,
since  separation  of  sources  naturally  cannot  shed  any
light  upon  this  question.

(a)  Thuswemust  resume  thequestionat  the  point  where
we  left  it  in  §  4  a.  Lk.  's  acquaintance  with  Josephus

_ T  was  in  no  case  an  exact  one  ;  in  fact

7.  Inexact  use  ...  , • ,  ,

of  T h T  k  sometimes denied even from a

J  •  ™  '  standpoint  for  which  the  chronological
difficulty  does  not  exist.  Thus  Schiirer  (below  §  8}
without  holding  the  priority  of  Lk.  in  point  of  time,
says  :  '  either  Lk.  took  no  knowledge  of  Josephus  at
all,  or  if  he  did  he  afterwards  forgot  all  that  he  had  read.
The  first  supposition,  as  the  simpler,  seems  preferable.'
With  reference  to  the  case  before  us,  he  therefore
supposes  that  any  knowledge  Lk.  had  regarding
Theudas  was  by  hearsay  only.  In  that  case,  however,

5°54


THEUDAS


THEUDAS


the  remarkable  degree  of  coincidence  with  Josephus
must  l>e  set  down  to  mere  chance — at  which  explanation
even  Blass  stumbles  (above,  §  4  a).

(&)  It  is  difficult  to  see  why  the  following  explanation
might  not  serve.  Lk.  had  made  notes  from  Josephus
in  which  occurred  the  exact  words  now  common  to  both
authors.  According  to  the  order  of  Josephus,  Theudas
stood  in  the  first  place,  Judas  in  the  second.  Perhaps
in  his  reading  Lk.  had  overlooked  the  circumstance  that
Josephus  strictly  speaking  was  dealing  with  the  sons  of
ludas,  and  thus  erroneously  took  what  was  said  of  the
fate  of  these  as  referring  to  the  father  ;  perhaps,  how
ever,  on  the  other  hand  he  read  quite  correctly,  but  at
the  same  time  made  his  note  only  to  some  such  effect
as  this,  that  '  Judas  of  Galilee  stirred  the  people  to
revolt  in  the  days  of  the  taxing ' ;  because  the  instance
of  the  father  seemed  to  him  better  suited  for  his  purpose
than  that  of  the  sons.  If  now  he  had  never  before
heard  anything  of  a  trustworthy  kind  about  Theudas,
it  will  certainly  be  excusable  in  him  if  he  did  not  retain
in  his  memory  the  date  of  Theudas  (which  of  course  he
did  not  require  for  his  actual  purpose  and  therefore  did
not  note),  and  (especially  if  the  composition  of  his  work
did  not  follow  immediately  on  the  making  of  his  notes)
took  the  order  of  his  notes  to  be  also  in  chronological
order,  and  therefore  represented  Theudas  as  appearing
before  Judas  whose  date  was  well  known  to  him.  If  he
assigns  to  Judas  himself  the  fate  which  according  to
Josephus  overtook  his  sons,  this  admits  of  being  ex
plained,  on  the  first  of  the  assumptions  suggested  above,
from  careless  reading  of  the  passage  ;  on  the  second  it
explains  itself.  Even  Krenkel  concedes  that  Lk. ,  even
without  literary  authority  for  it,  could  believe  that  Judas
must  have  come  to  the  same  end  as  nearly  all  the  in
surrectionary  leaders  of  that  period  (see  JUDAS,  10).

An  instructive  example  of  careless  reading  which  no  one  can
dispute  is  to  be  met  with  in  Kusebius  (UK  ~n),  who  reproduces
verbatim  Josephus's  account  of  Theudas,  including  the  mention
of  Fadus,  and  nevertheless  says  that  it  relates  to  the  same  event
as  Gamaliel  refers  to  in  his  speech.  The  mention  of  Fadus  had
thus  failed  to  suggest  to  him  the  question  as  to  the  date  to
which  the  event  ought  to  be  assigned,  and  as  to  whether  it  could
possibly  be  reconciled  with  the  assumed  date  of  Gamaliel's
speech.

(c)  The  attempt  here  made  to  account  for  the  remark
able  degree  of  coincidence  between  Josephus  and  Lk.
would  have  to  be  abandoned  only  in  the  event  of  its
.being  possible  to  show  that  Lk.  could  not  have  used
Josephus.  Not  to  speak,  however,  of  the  great  number
of  cases  in  which  his  employment  of  that  author  is
raised  to  a  very  high  degree  of  probability  indeed,  if
not  to  absolute  certainty,  the  non- employment  in  the
strict  sense  is  incapable  of  being  proved.  It  is  not
difficult,  indeed,  to  prove  that  Lk.  did  not  make  use  of
Josephus  in  the  manner  in  which  a  modern  scholar
does  ;  but  all  the  cases  in  which  he  diverges  from  him
admit  of  being  arranged  under  two  classes  ;  either  he
knows  some  other  account  besides  that  of  Josephus  and
prefers  it1  (whether,  in  our  judgment,  rightly  or  no  is
not  the  question),  or  he  fails  to  use  statements  of
Josephus  as  to  the  accuracy  of  which  he  would  have  had
no  doubts,  simply  because  he  has  forgotten  them,  unless
indeed,  perchance,  he  had  never  read  them  (for  it  is
possible  that  his  use  of  Josephus  may  have  been
sporadic  only).

(</)  Let  us  suppose,  however,  the  case  that  a  modern
scholar  has  read  the  whole  of  Josephus—  or  most  of
him.  Will  he  at  the  end  of  his  reading  be  in  a  position
to  say  with  confidence,  for  example,  what  were  the
territories  included  in  the  tetrarchy  of  Philip,  and  par
ticularly  whether  Iturnea  (Lk.  3i)  was  one  of  them
(there  are,  in  all,  five  passages  in  Josephus,  not  all  of
them  in  full  agreement,  to  DC  taken  account  of  here  ;
cp  HEROD,  §  n  ;  LYSANIAS,  §  i  b],  or  to  recapitulate  the
facts  about  Lysanias?  He  will  have  to  refer  to  his
author  again.  But  not  only  was  such  an  expedient  more

1  For  example,  on  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.  (Acts
1220-23);  see  HEROD,  §  12,  end.

5°55


laborious  and  time-consuming  in  those  days  in  the  case
of  a  large  work  not  then,  as  now,  divided  into  chapters
and  paragraphs  or  provided  with  an  index  ;  we  do  not,
above  all,  in  the  least  know  whether  Lk.  deemed  this
necessary,  or  whether  he  did  not  rather  acquiesce  all
too  willingly  in  the  suggestion  that  he  knew  the  matter
well  enough  already  without  verifying  it.  We  do  not
by  any  means  deny  that  Lk.  often  gives  way  to  fancies
which  a  careful  reading  of  Josephus  on  his  part  would
certainly  have  dispelled  ;  as  for  example  the  notion  that
two  men  could  be  high  priest  at  one  and  the  same  time
(Lk.  82)  or  that  the  census  under  Quirinius  which
Josephus  plainly  assigns  to  6-7  A.D.  could  have  coin
cided  in  date  with  the  birth  of  Jesus.  The  question,
however,  is  whether  Lk.  read  Josephus  with  so  much
attention  as  to  be  able  to  correct  these  errors  which  had
already  passed  into  his  flesh  and  blood.  If,  for  example,
as  has  been  with  probability  supposed  (see  CHKONOLOGY,
§§  59  /•  I  QUIRINIUS),  he  had  already  confounded  the
census  under  Quirinius  with  some  other,  it  could  not
of  course  make  any  great  impression  on  him  if  he  found
it  in  Josephus  mentioned  in  another  connection  than
that  in  which  he  had  already  in  his  own  mind  placed  it.

(e)  If  we  are  to  form  any  correct  judgment  as  to  Lk.  's
procedure  with  reference  to  sources  which  in  our  modern
view  ought  to  have  been  absolutely  authoritative  for  him,
it  will  be  our  duty  to  observe  the  manner  in  which  he
uses  the  Pauline  epistles.  He  leaves  so  much  of  their
contents  unnoticed  and  contradicts  them  to  so  large  an
extent  (cp  ACTS,  §§  4,  7,  14  ;  COUNCIL  ;  RKSURRI-X-
TION,  §§  16-18,  21,  23,  27  d,  etc.  ;  SIMON  PETER,  §  3  ;
SPIRITUAL  GIFTS,  §  $/.)  that  even  some  critical  theo
logians  have  supposed  he  was  entirely  unacquainted  with
them.  Yet  this,  if  he  wrote  about  100-130  A.  D. ,  is
almost  more  impossible  than  it  would  be  on  the
assumption  of  his  having  been  a  companion  of  Paul.
\Ye  could  imagine  that  not  every  companion  of  Paul
became  acquainted  with  the  contents  of  his  epistles
before  they  were  dispatched.  Yet  this  is  a  matter  of
indifference  here  ;  for  a  companion  of  Paul  became
acquainted,  from  his  own  observation  or  from  the  oral
accounts  of  eye-witnesses,  with  facts  of  which  but  a  small
number  is  known  to  us  from  the  epistles,  yet  in  sufficient
number  to  show  us  how  far  it  was  from  Lk. 's  intention
to  pay  serious  heed  even  to  these  authentic  sources  in
constructing  his  picture  of  the  apostolic  age.

(/)  To  return  once  more  to  Theudas,  it  is  clear  that
in  this  case  also  Lk. 's  divergences  (above,  §  ib]  from
the  account  in  Josephus  are  not  decisive  against  his  use
of  Josephus.  It  is  very  easily  possible  that  Lk. ,  as
Schiirer  thinks,  knew  something  about  Theudas  by
hearsay,  and  indeed  that  the  reported  number  of  his
followers  reached  him  in  this  manner.  With  this  it  is
not  at  all  irreconcilable  that  his  collocation  of  Theudas
with  Judas  of  Galilee  and  the  chronological  error  may
be  due  to  his  use  of  Josephus.  The  case  is  not  such  as
makes  it  possible  to  say  that  every  other  explanation  is
excluded  ;  but  the  explanation  here  offered  has  in  point
of  fact  a  probability  that  presses,  and  no  counterproof
can  be  brought  forward.  As  against  it  may  be  urged,
if  one  chooses,  the  contradiction  apparently  involved  in
the  fact  that  Lk.  is  found  accurately  reproducing  certain
words  of  Josephus  while  yet  altering  so  profoundly  the
general  contents  of  his  statements.  This  last  fact  seems
to  counteract  the  evidential  value  of  the  verbal  coinci
dences.  We  believe,  however,  that  this  difficulty  has
been  obviated  by  the  suggestion  that  the  words  in
question  come  from  Lk.'s  notes  of  Josephus  (see
above,  t}.

That Josephus  had been used by  Lk. was first affirmed

by  Holtzmann  (Zll'T, 1873,  pp.  85-03, and especially  £<)/. ',

l877, PP- 535-549)- See also Hausrath,

8.  Literature. NTliche  Zt.-gesch.W  4,  1877,  pp.  230-:.)-  :

Keim,  BL  5,  1875,  pp.  510-513,  and  Aus  eicm

Urchristftttltutii,  1, 1878,  pp. 1-27,  especially  18-21  ;  Clemen,

Chronol.  d. paulin.  Bric/e,  1893,  pp.  66-69,  and  Sf-  ^'r-  l895.  PP-

355-337  ;  and  Krenkel,  Josephus  n.  Lucas,  1804,  pp.  162-174 (very

thorough). Lk.'s  use  of  Josephus  was  denied  by  Sonntag,  St.

5056


THIMNATHAH

Kr.  1837,  pp.  622-652  ;  Wieseler,  Chronolog.  Synapse,  1843,  pp.
103-10;,  and  Bcitr.  zur  \Viirdigung  der  Evangclicn,  1800,  pp.
101-104;  Zuschlag,  Theudas,  1849;  Schiirer,  ZW1\  1070,  pp.
574-582;  Belser,  Tub.  tlicol.  Quartalschrift,  1896,  pp.  61-71;
Blass,  St.  Kr.  1896,  p.  459  /.,  and  Acta  apostolorum  .  .  .
secundumformam  Romanam,  Leipsic,  1896,  p.  xv\f.  (cp  Ada.
af>ostolorum edit.philologica,  Gottingen,  1895, adloc.);  Ramsay,
Was  Christ  born  at  BetkUheml  1898,  252-260;  Feine,  Tlieol.
Lit.-Blatt,  1900,  do/.\  Cross,  Exp.T,  1899-1900,  pp.  538-540.

P.  W.  S.

THIMNATHAH  (rm3DR),  Josh.  1943- See  TIMNAH.

THISBE  (0icBH  [BX],  6iBH  [A]),  the  native  place
of  Tobit  (Tob.  12).

It  was  situated  '  at  the  right  hand  ' — i.e.,  southward — of  KvSiios
[BX]  or  KvSi<av  [A]  (Kadesh)  in  Galilee,  and  above  a<r[<r]r)p
(Hazor?).  N  adds  that  it  was  oiricru  Svoyuui'  ^A.i'ou,  ef  apicrre-
puji'  </>oy<op.

So  far  on  the  hypothesis  that  we  have  the  Book  of  Tobit  in  an
approximately  original  form.  There  is,  however,  strong  reason
to  believe  that  the  stories  of  Daniel  (in  part),  Esther,  Judith,
and  Tobit,  have  been  systematically  altered  as  regards  their
historical  and  geographical  names  (see  Crit.  Bi'\).  Thus  the
addition  in  N  represents  "iiysn  ?MDiPD  3njfi2rj  "lrlN>  but  this  is  a
corruption  of  7XJ?OC''  3^J7  7RDTD*,  and  the  names  Naasson,
Rapkain,  Sephet  in  It.  Vg.  come  respectively,  (a)  from  J»13,  (b)
from  D'NSn  (see  REPHAIM),  and  (c)  from  riSIS.  S'Vi  and  ~iybl
are  liable  to  confusion  :  the  original  reading  was  probably  not
'Galilee'  but  '  Gilead ' — i.e.  the  southern  Gilead  in  the  Negeb.
'  Naphtah'  is  a  southern  district  so  called,  and  '  Asher '  repre
sents  the  southern  Asshur  or  Ashhur.  See,  however,  TOBIT,
and  on  another  reference  to  a  Thisbe  or  Tishbeh,  see  TISHBITE.

T.  K.  C.

THISTLE,  THISTLES  occur  in  AV  as  the  rendering

of  the  following  words  : — -

1.  -rrn, dardar (rpi/3o\ot, Gen.  3i8 Hos.  108f), a
word  also  found  in  Aramaic,  Arabic,  and  Ethiopic,  but
apparently  quite distinct from another word dardar
which,  in Persian  and  Arabic, denotes  the  '  elm  tree '
(see  Low,  gZff.}. Being  coupled  in  both  places  with
pp,  kos  ('  thorns  '  or  '  thorn-bushes,'  see  THORN),  dardar
has been reasonably identified both in ancient and
modern  times  with the  rpi/3o\os  of  the Greeks — i.e.,
either  a  thistle  or  more  probably  a  spinous  plant  of  the
knapweed kind, such as Centaurea Calcitrapa, L.
(Ascherson  ap.  Low,  427)  or  the  more  formidable  C.
verutum (Tristram, A7///? 426). Petermann (Reisen
im  Orient,  174)  reported  that  the  name  dardar  was  still
used  in  Syria  for  plants  of  the  thistle  kind.

2.  For  "1BN, atad, pauvos, EV 'bramble,'  AVmg. offers  in

T T'

Judg.  9  14  the  alternative  rendering  '  thistle.' See  BRAMBLE,  i.

3.  nin,  hoiih,  is  rendered  '  thistle '  in  2  K.  14  9  2  Ch.  25  18  Job
3140,  and  'bramble'  (AV  only)  in Is.  34  13, elsewhere  and  in
RVmg.  exc.  Is.  THORN  (?.?'.).

4.  Tpi'(3oAot  occurs  twice  in  NT  (Mt.  7  16  Heb.  6st)  ;  the  mean
ing  is  probably  the  same  as  that  of  OT  im.

Thistledown  appears  once  in  AVmg-  (Is.  17  13),  producing  as
the  result,  Mike  thistledown  before  the  whirlwind.'  But  if  a
definite  plant  is  required,  one  might  think  rather  with  \V.  M.
Thomson  !  of  the  globe-like  branches  of  the  wild  artichoke  (prob
ably  Cynara  syriaca).  When  ripe  and  dry  in  autumn  these
'  vegetable  globes '  are  carried  far  and  wide  by  the  wind.  AV,
curiously,  gives  in  the  text  of  Is.  (I.e.)  'a  rolling  thing,'  and  in
the  similar  passage,  Ps.  S3  13  [14],  '  a  wheel '  (see  WHEEL);  RV
in  both  passages  renders  'the  whirling  dust.'  The  analogy  of
Syr.  geltii,  Arab.yV//,  would,  however,  rather  recommend '  stubble'
as  the  true  meaning  of  *?3^3,  galgal,  in  these  two  passages.


THOCANUS  (OOKANOY  [B],  6coK.  [A]),  i  Esd.9i4
RV==Ezra  10 15,  TIKVAH  (q.v.).

THOMAS  THE  APOSTLE.  For  the  order  in  which
the  name  occurs  in  the  lists  in  Mt.  10  Mk.  3  Lk.  6
1  ThP  namP  Actsl-  see  APOSTLE,  §  i  (col.  264).  In
'•  the  Fourth  Gospel  the  name  occurs
seven  times,  thrice  with  the  addition  '  who  is  called
Didymus,'  6  \eyt>fj,evos  At'Si'/ttos  (Ili6  21124  '21 2  14s
2026^).  From  Jn.  this  addition  found  its  way  into
the  Greek  and  Latin  text  of  Lk.  in  cod.  D.  Formerly
the  name  was  read  also  in  Jn.  2029  by  the  TR  without
any  Greek  attestation  and  in  the  Vulgate  of  this  passage,

1 The  Land  and  the  Book,  563  =  5".  Palestine  and  Jerusalem,

112  f.

5057


THOMAS  THE  APOSTLE

though  none  of  the  MSS  collated  by  Wordsworth-
White  have  it  there.

The  spelling  of  the  name  is  without  exception  0w/xas,  in
Latin  Thomas  (only  two  MSS  of  Wordsworth-White  have  fre
quently  Tomas)  ;  in  Syriac  Thomd  (j^so  ~(  H)  according  to  Bar-
Hebrasus,  but  the  Nestorian  vocalisation  is  The'Sititl  (j£Oo(LX
preserving  the  consonantal  character  of  N  as  in  Hebrew  ;  the
Syro-Palestinian  writes  the  Grecised  t^jcaOGlJ*  (cod.  A,  Jn.

11 16  (XoJoOCii.),  and  f°r  AiSujuos  J^^^ao^!.  (co^  C,  2024
)^aO/i>  The  Syriac  appellative  for  twin  is  thama.  (Nes
torian  the'aina),  and  scarcely  differs  in  pronunciation  from
the  proper  name,  for  which  reason  the  explanation  6  A.eyo/j.ei'os
Ai'6.  was  omitted  in  all  three  passages  in  Syr.  Sin.  Syr.  Cur.  is
defective  in  all  passages  of  the  Gospels  where  Thomas  occurs.
But  in  both  these  Syriac  texts  the  name  Thomas  occurs  in  a
passage  where  it  is  not  found  in  the  original  Greek,  namely  Jn.
14  22 ;  instead  of  'lovSas  ov\  6  'loxaptuJTr/s,  Syr.  Sin.  gives
Thoma,  Syr.  Cur.  Juda-  Thoma  ;  Blass  gives  now  'IoiiSas[,  oi/x
6  an-b  KapuuJTOv].  The  Greek  AuSu/uos  has  been  preserved  as
Didymus  in  the  Latin  versions,  but  rendered  no  creszentz  or
dubitos  in  the  MSS  of  Lyon  and  Carpentras  of  the  Provencal
version  and  ein  zwcifeler  in  the  pre-Lutheran  German  Bible,  as
if  it  were  =  6c'i//ux°s  (see  .fV?-£(3J  3  66).  The  OS  translates  the
name  afivcrcros,  aKaTaArjn-TOS  /3a0vrr)s  =  Hebrew  tchoin  (cinri,  in
Pal. -Syr.  tnma),  and  SCSvfios.  The  meaning  '  twin '  is  certain,
but  the  original  form  of  the  Semitic  word  is  much  dis
puted  (see,  on  the  one  hand,  Olshausen,  §  i8ib,  Lagarde,
Ucbersicht,  144;  Barth,  182^,  n.  i;  Ges.-Buhl,  Lex.;  on  the
other  hand,  Siegfried-Stade,  Lex.;  Konig,  269 ;  Dalman,  Gramtn.
112,  n.  4).  The  question  is  whether  the  Hebrew  word  be  tfom
(rather  than  to' em)  or  to  dm  (in  Arabic  tauani).  Still  more  doubt
ful  is  the  relation  to  the  corresponding  Ethiopic  word.  The
spelling  tcyBin  in  the  Targums  is  merely  due  to  the  pronunciation
of  N  between  two  vowels.  No  example  of  the  use  of  the  noun  as
a  proper  name  older  than  the  NT  is  known  to  the  present  writer.
There  is  no  Thomas  for  instance  in  Josephus,  but  cp  Phoen.


m  CIS  1  no.  46,  where  also  ©a/no?  A/36oucnpov,
though  the  name  became  very  frequent  in  all  parts  of  Christen
dom  ;  for  modern  Syriac  instances,  see  Maclean's  Dictionary.

From  the  reading  '  Thomas '  or  '  Judas-Thomas  '  for
'Judas not Iscariot '  in  Jn.  1422, it  is  apparent  that
„,,  Thomas  was  identified  at  a  very  early

50n'  date  with  '  Judas  of  James '  in  the  lists
of  Lk.  6  and  Acts  1.  This  is  strange  enough,  since  the
name  Thomas  also  occurs  in  these  lists.  Yet  so  it  is,
and  this  identification  has  been  maintained  by  Resch
(Texte  u.  Unt.  x.  8824^),  who  explains  'Judas  of
James  '  as  brother  (not  son)  of  James,  and  finds  the  other
twin  in  James  the  son  of  Alphreus,  taking  Lebbivus-
Thaddoeus  to  be  different  from  'Judas  of  James'  (see
JUDAS,  7,  col.  2623).  This  '  Judas  of  James  '  has  been
identified  further  with  Judas  (or  Jude)  the  son  of  Joseph,
the  brother  of  Jesus,  and  thus  Thomas  has  been  made
brother  of  Jesus  himself.  On  the  latter  identification  see
especially  Th.  Zahn,  Forschungen,  6346^,  who  thinks
that  it  is  an  invention  of  the  author  of  the  Acts  of
Thomas.  A  Syriac  origin  for  these  Acts  has  been
maintained  by  Noldeke  and  supported  lately  upon  valid
grounds  by  Burkitt  (Joiirn.  Thcol.  Stud.  \?%off.  294/1).
The  name  Judas -Thomas  occurs  also  in  the  Syriac
Doctrine  of  Addai  (see  Lagarde,  Reliquice  Syriace,  p.
42  //.  i6f. ;  Greece,  p.  94  /.  35  ;  Cureton,  Documents,  33  ;
ed.  Phillips,  5;  Barhebrreus,  Chron.  £ccl.Zz),  and  it  was
doubtless  from  a  Syriac  source  that  Eusebius  got  his
'loi'Sas  6  Kal  Qu/Jias  (HE\  13,  where  the  Syriac  text  of
Eusebius  has  only  Judas  Thomas).  Ephrem  Syrus,
too,  called  him  Judas-Thomas  (616  F  of  his  works,
where  the  Roman  edition  printed  '  Thomas,'  see
Burkitt,  Texts  and  Studies,  vii.  24).  Others  make  Simon
Zelotes  a  brother  of  Judas  or  James  (see  the  Armenian
Commentary  of  Ephrem  on  Acts  in  Rendel  Harris,
Four  Lectures  on  the  Western  Text  of  Acts,  37),  and
from  this  combination  the  other  fact  may  be  ex
plained,  that  for  Lebbceus  also  Judas  Zelotes  is  found  in
Latin  MSS  in  Mt.  10 3,  in  Miinter's  Sahidic  version,  Jn.
1422  (see  Lipsius,  8163),  in  the  Latin  Chronicle  of  the
year  334  (ed.  Mommsen,  670,  ed.  Frick,  100,  who
wrongly  presupposes  a  lacuna  between  Judas  and
Zelotes).  For  the  question  whether  under  the  '  things

5058


THOMEI


THREE  TAVERNS


which  Judas  Thomas  wrote  from  India  '  (Lagarde,
Reliquice  Syr.  416;  Cureton,  Documents,  32)  the
epistle  of  Jude  is  to  be  understood,  see  Lipsius,  8194  ;
Za.hu,  l-orschungen,  5n6  122  6347,  n.  4.  The  'Gospel
of  the  Twelve  Apostles  '  (ed.  by  J.  Rendel  Harris,  190)
makes  him  a.  member  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  the
•Book  of  the  Bee'  (ed.  Budge,  1886)  of  the  tribe  of
Judah.

The  legends  that  gathered  round  this  apostle  are  of  the  most
fane.  ftil  kind  and  too  intricate  to  be  treated  at  length  here  ;  cp
the  Greek  edition  of  Bonnet,  the  Syriac  of  Wright,  and  its
supplement  by  F.  C.  Burkitt  in  Studio.  Sinai  'tica  'J  25-44,  and
the  treatment  of  these  Acts  in  Lipsius,  Die  Apokryphen  Apostel-
geschichtcn.

In  the  Clementine  Homilies  Thomas  has  a  twin  brother
Eliezer  (or,  Eleazar,  see  Lipsius,  Ergiinzungslieft,  24),  in
another  list  a  twin  sister  Lysias  (app.  ad  Cliron.  pasch.  '2  142,
ed.  Bonn).  In  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vi.  14  (173,  ed.
Lagarde)  the  name  Thomas  is  omitted  in  the  list  of  the  Apostles
by  the  MSS  ivx,  supplied  between  Bartholomew  and  Matthew
by  oyzt.

In  the  '  Apostolic  Church  order  or  Third  book  of  Clement's
Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  as  published  by  T.  P.
Arendzen  (in  /.  Theol.  Stud.  3  60)  the  order  is  (7)  James,  (8)
Nathanael,(9)  Thomas,  (to)  Kephas,  (n)  Bartholomew,  and  (12)
Judas  son  of  James  (the  Sahidic  version  has  '  brother  of  James,'
see  Arendzen,  74).  In  the  corresponding  text  (to  be  published
by  Mrs.  M.  D.  Gibson  in  Horn  Scmiticir,  1  20)  we  get  (7)
lames,  (8)  Judas  son  of  James,  with  (9)  Nathanael,  (10)  Thomas,
(n)  Bartholomew,  (12)  Matthias.  A  MS  in  the  possession  of
R.  Harris  agrees  with  the  text  of  Arendzen  (Gibson,  appendix).

In  the  History  of  Mary  (Budge,  ET,  105)  Thomas  is  said  to
have  preached  to  'the  Indians,  r.nd  the  Chinese,  and  the
Cushites,  and  (the  people  of)  all  the  islands  near  and  far  '  ...
His  day  in  the  Western  church  is  the  2ist  Dec.,  in  the  Greek
the  6th  Oct.,  in  the  Syriac  the  3rd  July  (see  Nilles,  Kalen-
dariuni).  On  the  22nd  Oct.  394  his  coffin  was  deposited  in  the
great  church  of  Edessa  ;  but  this  was,  perhaps,  only  a  removal,
as  other  sources  tell  of  his  grave  at  Kdessa  at  a  much  earlier
time.  On  the  church  of  the  Thomas-Christians  of  Malabar,
which  refers  its  origin  to  the  apostle  himself,  see  Germann,  Die
Kirche  der  Thoinaschristen  (1877);  on  the  character  of  the
apostle  see  the  Commentaries  on  the  Gospel  of  John  and
exegetical  and  homiletical  books.  That  the  legends  make  him
a  carpenter  and  builder  may  have  arisen  from  his  association
with  Jesus.  E.  N.

THOMEI  (60M6I  [A]),  i  Esd.  5  32  RV,  AV  Thomoi.
See  TKMAH.

THORN,  THORNS,  occur  in  AV  as  the  rendering  of
many  different  words.  It  is  in  nearly  all  cases  impossible
to  arrive  at  a  determination  of  the  particular  species
intended,  and  indeed  most  of  the  words  may  be  pre
sumed  to  be  of  somewhat  general  application.

1.  "I2.X1, atiiii  (see BRAMBLE), is  probably  some species of
Rhammus. MT  in  Ps.  58  9  [to]  where  IQN  occurs  is  probably
corrupt. [In  Cheyne's  restoration  the  'pots'  and  'thorns'  dis
appear  in  a  sentence  which  may  remind  us  of  Job  27  2oyC  Duhm
here  is  more conservative. Olshausen's  note, however, still
deserves  consideration.]

2.  p~m,  hed'ek,  is  rendered  '  brier  '  in  Mic.  V  4  (but  cp  (S),  and
'  thorns  '  in  Prov.  15  igt. See  BRIER,  6.

3.  rjin,  hoah  (2  K.  149  2  Ch.  25  18  Job314o  Prov.  269
Cant.  '22  Is.  34i3  (cp  ©)  Hos.  96),  rendered  in  AV  thrice
'thorn,'  thrice  'thistle,'  and  once 'bramble,'  is  a  word
which elsewhere denotes a 'hook' (Job  4026 [41  2]
2  Ch.  33  n)  J  ; the  D'mn,  h&vahlm,  of  i  S.  136f  is  pro
bably  a  corruption  (Dr.  ,  ad  loc.  ). ©  has  in  three  places
&KO.vOa.i  (  '  thorns  ')  and  once  Kvldrj  (  '  nettle  ')  ; in  2  K.
aKav  (accus.  a/<a.va[v~\  but O.KXO-V  [L])  ; in 2  Ch.  2f>i8
the  word is  merely  transliterated. 6  x°fc'-  T0"  aXol'X
[B],  6  oxof, rbv  ax-  [A],  6  OLKX^V  [L]. It  is  usually
taken  to  be  a  tall  and  strong  thistle,  such  as  Notobasis
syriaca  (  FFP  336),  whose  '  powerful  spines  '  (NHB  424)
would  explain  the  connection  with  the  meaning  '  hook  '  ;
but  some  other  thorny  plant  may  be  intended. Arab.
and Pers.  ha-wh  (  '  peach  '  or  '  plum  '  )  is  probably  quite
a  different word, and does not  justify  the rendering
'  sloe'  adopted  by  Celsius,  1478^ See  Low,  147^

4.  psy?, na'tisus  (o-irijAaioc Is.  7  19, trroi|3>j2 Is.  55  13!), is

1  On  the  reading  in  2  Ch.  see  MANASSEH.

2  This  word  appears  in  Dioscorides  (4  12)  as  the  name  of  a
common  plant. According  to  Pliny  (21  15,  §  54)  it  had  a  prickly

yn. PI.  Fl. Class. 78)  identifies  0roi/3>j  with

5059


probably  a  general  name  for  a  prickly  plant  or  bush,  r-.nd  con
nected  with  the  verb  vyj  (na'as),  to  'pierce'  or  'prick,'  which
appears  in  post-biblical  Hebrew  (see  Barth,  Nominalb.  213).

5.  C'TD, «>/>«(Eccles.76ls.34 13  Hos.2s[6]  Nah.l  iot),  denotes
'thorns,' 'thorny branches,' or 'thorny  bushes.' <5 has in
Eccles.  aKavOaL,  in  Is.  aicdi>0ii>a.£v\a.('!),  and  in  Hos.  oxoAoirct ;  in
Nah.  its  text  differs  from  MT,  which  is  corrupt  (see  Wellh.  ad
loc.). As  the  etymology  is  unknown,  no  nearer  speculation  is
possible.1 The  form  JllTD,  slroth,  in  one  place  denotes  '  hooks'
(Am.  4  2).

6.  jl'ro,  silldn  (Ezek.  28  24, oxoAoi^), and  C'jirO, sallonim,
7rapoi<7TpTJ<roii(n ?  (Ezek.  2 t). See  BRIER.

7.  D'W,  sinnlm  (Job  5  5 Prov.  22  st)  and  (8)  D'J'JX,  sininlm
(Nu.  3355 Josh.  23 13!),  are also general words for 'thorns.'
The  former  is  rendered  rpi'^oAoi  by  <B  (in  Prov.  22s);  the  latter
jSoAt'Sct. The Hebrew words are possibly connected with
rUi'JS,  sinseneth,  Aram. K3S,  Ar.  sinn,  which  all  mean  'basket.'
In  job  5  5  the  reading  of  MT  is  not  supported  by  ©  and  seems
suspicious  (see  Hoffmann,  ad  loc.).

9-  j'ip,  kos  (a<cac0<x,  Gen.  3  18  Ex.  22  5  [6]Judg.  8  7  16  2  S.  236  Ps.
118  12  Is.  32  13  33  12  Jer.  4  3  12  13  Ezek.  28  24  Hos.  lOst),  is  the
commonest  OT  word  for  '  thorn  '  or  '  thorns,'  but  is  also  (so  far
as  we  know)  quite  general  (Low,  198).

10.  snap,  ,£z/«/«<5/( Prov.  2431  Is.  34 13  Hos.  9&t).  See  NETTLE.

11.  n'E>,  sayith  (Is.56723^  9i7[i8]  10i7  2"4t),  a  word  which
only  occurs  in  Is.,  is,  in  all  the  seven  places  where  it  appears,
combined  with  TCE',  sdtinr,  and  is  probably  of  similar  meaning
(see  BRIER,  2). Dietrich  (Abhandl.  zur  sentit.  U'ortforsch.  73)
proposes  a  derivation  from  .INty,  sa'ah,  '  to  be  waste,'  but  this
is  unlikely.

12.  pa/u.i'os  occurs  Bar.  671  [70]. Cp  BRAMBLE.

13.  oTtoAoi^,  2  Cor.  12  7. See  above  (5),  (6). In  Ecclus.  4819
Heb.  is  TED- For  the  meaning  of  the  expression  see  PAUL,  §  32,
EYE,  DISEASES  OF,  §  4.  N.  M. — w.  T.  T.-D.


THRACE.  A  '  Thracian  '  horseman  (rwv
TLvbs  Opg.Kuv)  is  incidentally  mentioned  in  2  Mace.  12ss
as  one  of  the  bodyguard  of  Gorgias,  the  governor  of
Idumaea  under  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  The  opportune
arrival  of  the  Thracian  saved  Gorgias  from  capture  by
one  Dositheus.

Thrace  at  this  period  was  the  general  name  for  the
entire  region  included  between  the  Strymon  and  the
Danube,  embracing  a  variety  of  tribes  (cp  Herod.
5s).  With  the  death  of  Lysimachus  in  281  B.C.,  all
chance  of  Thrace  becoming  an  independent  kingdom
ceased.  The  country  became  a  recruiting  ground  for
all  who  needed  troops  and  could  pay  for  them.
Thracian  troops  were  chiefly  light-armed  infantry  and
irregular  horse  (Xen.  Anab.  i.  29  ;  Afemor.  iii.  92).
Frequent  references  are  made  to  them  as  an  element  in
Macedonian,  Roman,  and  other  armies  ;  probably  the
name  came  to  be  applied  to  indicate  a  certain  type  of
equipment  and  mode  of  fighting  rather  than  actual
nationality.

[For  00cucu>i'  of  ©A,  however,  (E5V*  reads  ©ap<ro«,  and  <pva
0ap<rou?  ;  and  it  is,  to  say  the  least,  quite  as  likely  that  the
Syrian  cavalry  was  drawn  from  Cilicia  as  from  Thrace  (cp
ARMY,  §  7).  As  to  the  possible  identification  of  Tiras  (Gen.  10  2)
with  Thrace,  see  TIRAS.]  W.  J.  W.

THRASEAS  or  (RV)  THRAS.ffiUS  (GpACAloy  [A],
OApCioy  [V*vid-],  6APC60Y  tva]-  thrasius  [Syr.]),
father  of  APOLLONIUS,  2  Mace.  85.  The  name  may
possibly  be  another  form  of  Tarsus.

THREAD  (^30,  etc.  ),  Josh.  2i8  etc. See  CORD.

THREE  CHILDREN,  SONG  OF  THE. See  DANIEL

(BOOK),  §  22.

THREE-STRINGED  INSTRUMENT  (K»W),  i  S.

186  EVmg- See  Music,  §  3[4].

THREE  TAVERNS  (TRICON  TABepNCON  [Ti.  WH];
Acts28ist,  AV  'The  three  taverns,'  RV  'The  Three
Taverns.  '  ).

Here  Paul  was  met  on  the  final  stage  of  his  journey

Poterium  spinosum,  a  low  herb  occurring  in  Syria,  the  branches
of  which  terminate  in  intricate  branching  spines.

1  atcavOa.  in  both  Greek  and  Latin  writers  was  undoubtedly
Acanthus  spinosus.  The  nearly  allied  A.  syriacus  is  abundant
in  Syria.

5060


THRESHING  INSTRUMENT

to  Rome  by  a  company  of  the  Roman  Christians.  It
was  a  station  on  the  Via  Appia  ;  evidently,  from  the
order  of  the  names,  lying  between  Rome  and  Appii
Forum.  From  Cicero  (Ep.  ad  Att.  2 12,  '  emerseram
commode  ex  Antiati  in  Appiam  ad  Tris  Tabernas '),  we
learn  that  it  stood  just  where  a  cross  road  from  Antiuni
on  the  coast  fell  into  the  Appian  Way  from  the  W.  Tres
Taberna?  stood  therefore  very  near  the  northern  end  of
the  Pomptine  marshes,  in  the  midst  of  which  Appii
Forum  actually  lay  (cp  Horace,  Sat.  i.  5 a/  ).  The  Ant.
Itin.  gives  17  R.m.  between  Aricia  and  Tres  Tabernae,
and  10  R.m.  from  Tres  Tabernas  to  Appii  Forum  ;
Aricia  stood  16  m.  S.  of  Rome.  These  distances  locate
Tres  Tabernas  at  about  3  miles  from  the  modern
Cisterna  on  the  Appian  road.  w.  j.  \v.

THRESHING  INSTRUMENT  (into),  28.2122.
See  AGRICULTURE,  §  8.

THRESHOLD.  This  is  the  rightful  rendering  of  (i)
pjp,  saph  (some  scholars  compare  Ass.  sup(p]u],  the  more

usual  term  (see  DOOR)  ;  (2)  JPES.  miphtdn,  is
1  Hebrew  T  '• '

probably  the  special  term  for  the  threshold

of  the  sanctuary  proper  (Thenius),  i  S.  f>4/.
(Dagon's  temple),  Zeph.  \g  Ezek.  9s  104  18  462  47  i  (cp
DAGON,  §3).  The  rendering  'threshold'  in  AV  of
i  Ch.  26is  17  needs  correction  (see  ASUPPIM).  We  also
find  the  plural  D'SD,  sippim,  '  thresholds.'  So  in  Is.  64,
1  And  the  foundations  of  the  thresholds  shook  at  the
sound  of  their  voices  '  (read  c'san  'JIN,  and  cp  Job  386).
We  are  probably  to  suppose  the  front  of  the  temple
divided  by  one  or  more  pillars  into  several  entrances.
So,  too,  in  Am.  9  i,  'Strike  the  capitals  (of  the  pillars)
that  the  thresholds  may  tremble. '  The  temple  at  Bethel
is  spoken  of.  These  '  thresholds '  had  special  keepers
(EV  'porters'),  iCh.  922  2  Ch.  234.  Elsewhere  the
phrase  is  '  keeper  (or  keepers)  of  the  threshold  '  (but  rp
may  be  used  collectively);  so,  e.g.,  Jer.  864  2  K.  224
284  etc.,  for  which  in  Esth.  22i  (5  gives  dpx'<rwMa7"0'
<f>ii\a.Kes,  taking  the  Hebrew  phrase  as  synonymous  with
'  Keeper  of  the  king's  head'  (i  S.  282,  C?  apxi-crufJ-a-TO-
(/>t''\ai;).  In  Ps.  84  ii  (if  the  text  is  correct),  a  psalmist
values  even  this  Levitical  office  highly  («jsinsri,  but  (5
irapapnrTe'iadai).  Gates  and  thresholds  being  sacred,
it  was  of  course  a  privilege  to  guard  them.  But  though
it  is  usual  to  quote  this  passage,  it  is  doubtful  whether
this  is  critically  justified.

Sacrifices  for  the  family  were  originally  at  the  entrance

of  the  home. According  to  Hommel,  the  Ass.  sup(p}ii,

„ , '  prayer,' is  a  denominative  form  sippu,

'  threshold. ' In  modern  Egypt  a  threshold
ness  of  the -,-

j.u i. u sacrifice  may  be  offered  to  welcome  the
threshold

,  incoming  master  of  the  house,1  and, in

'  '  ancient  times,  Herodotus  reports  that
every  Egyptian  sacrificed  a  hog  to  Osiris  before  the  door
of  his  house  (248).  Trumbull  makes  it  probable  that,
in  the  narrative  of  the  institution  of  the  Passover,  the
words  '  and  he  shall  take  a  bunch  of  hyssop  and  dip  it
in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bason  '  ( Ex.  1222)  misrepresent
the  true  meaning.  n03  might  in  fact  mean  either  '  in
the  bason'  or  'at  the  threshold,'  and  Trumbull  prefers
the  latter  rendering  (<5  irapa  rr\v  Bvpav,  Vg.  in  limine.}.
To  set  foot  on  the  threshold  in  a  careless  manner  was
probably  unlucky  ;  Trumbull  reports  that  even  now  in
Syria  'it  is  unlucky  to  tread  on  a  threshold,'  and  that
in  Upper  Syria  the  bride  is  sometimes  carried  across  the
threshold  of  the  bridegroom's  house  by  the  friends  of  the
bridegroom.  In  Egypt  it  is  the  bridegroom  who  does
this,  and  in  ancient  Greece  and  Rome,  also  in  ancient
India,  similar  customs  are  well  known  to  have  existed.
Obscure  passages  in  i  K.  1821  and  Zeph.  1  9  can  now  be
understood  ;  also  probably  the  name  of  the  Pesah  (EV

1  So  on  the  arrival  of  the  new  Khedive  at  his  palace  in  1882
(H.  Clay  Trumbull,  The  Tlireshold  Covenant  (1896),  7,  quoting
Folk-Lore  Journal,  192).

5061


THRONE

'  Passover ' ).  HDB,  pdmh,  means  '  to  leap,  to  dance.
The  Pesah  was  perhaps  so  called  because  the  Israelites
'  leaped '  over  the  threshold  after  the  special  sacrificial
rite  referred  to  had  been  performed  at  the  threshold  in
recognition  of  its  freshly  attested  sanctity,  or  performed
a  ritual  dance  near  it.

In  i  K.  18  21,  '  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  '  (AV),
is  admittedly  most  improbable.  The  revisers,  however,  not  being
allowed  to  correct  the  text  without  ancient  authority,  could  find
nothing  that  was  plainly  better.  But  Klostermann  has  provided
the  easy  and  natural  correction  D'SEil  (for  MT  C'SJi'En).  It  only
remains  to  interpret  the  reference  to  the  sippim  aright.  The
true  explanation  seems  to  be,  '  How  long  will  ye  leap  over  both
thresholds?'  —  i.e.,  enter  with  the  same  scrupulous  awe  the
sanctuaries  of  the  two  rival  deities,  Yah  we  and  Baal.  And  in
Zeph.  1  9  (reading  T.  gb  as  in  <B)  we  may  paraphrase,  '  And  on
that  day  I  will  punish  those  who,  though  they  leap  with  scrupu
lous  awe  over  the  sacred  threshold,  yet  bring  with  them  into
Yahwe's  house  hands  stained  with  cruelty  and  injustice '  (Che.
JQR  40568./:  [1898];  cp  Jastrow,  JBL\~\z»ff.  [1898]).  See
further,  Crit.  Bib.  Trumbull  has  already  explained  i  S.  61-5
by  the  light  of  the  same  archaeological  facts.  The  explanation  in
i  S.  5  5  is  of  course  an  uncritical  guess  akin  to  that  in  Gen.  32  32.

T.  K.  C.

THRONE. It  will  be  convenient  under  this  heading


1.  Terms.


to  deal  with  seats  in  general,  the  Hebrew


word  for  throne  being  applied  to  all  articles
of  furniture  of  that  description. The  terms  are  : —

1.  kisse (NB3, but  HE3  i  K.  10  19  Job2(i9t),  is  apparently
derived  from  the  Ass.  kussu  'seat,  throne,'  the  Aram,  equiva
lent  korse  (Np~l3  Dan.  5  20,  etc.,  cp  Syr.  kurscya),  from  which  is
borrowed  Ar. kurst 'chair,'  being  probably  an  earlier  form.1
Purely  colourless  are  the  two  terms —

2.  mdsab (32*10, i  S.  20  18, etc., EV 'seat,' lit. 'place of
sitting' from  ydsab), or scbeth (f3C') Am.  0  3, KV ib.t &
KadfSpa  ',  and

3.  tfkftnah  (rMOFI,  Job 23 3  'seat,'  lit.  'fixed  place'),  used  of
the  dwelling-place  of  the  Almighty.

4.  fifiiJ.a, Actsl22i (RVmg. '  judgment -seat '). Properly  a
raised  platform  (Lat.  tribunal,  cp  suggcstum)  upon  which,  as
Jos.  BJ\\.  li shows, the 6povo<;  (Lat.  sella)  was erected. In
Neh.  84  /Sjj^a stands  for  migdal, '  tower  ' — i.e.,  an  elevated  stand
or  pulpit.

5.  KaBeSpa, Ecclus.  7  4  (Heb. ttwsdb),  cp  Mt.  21  12  Mk.  11  5
(seat  of  the  dove-sellers).

6.  rrpiaroKaOfSpia, the first or chief seat in a synagogue
(Mt.  236  Mk.  1239,  etc.). Cp  SVNAGOGUE,  §  g/

7.  Bpovos  (in  (5  for  i  above),  Rev.  44  11  16,  etc.,  a  state  chair
having  a  footstool. Phi.  in  Col.  1  16  as  the  name  of  a  class  of
angels  ;  cp  Test.  Levi,  3,  where  they  appear  as  in  the  seventh
heaven. See  ANGEL,  §  i.

Such  pieces  of  furniture  as  chairs,  seats,  or  stools  are
unknown  to  the  ordinary  tent-dweller,  and  doubtless  the

0 ,, ,  Hebrews  first  came  to  use  them  after  they

a.  xveierences.  ,  /~\  -\  r  on

occupied Canaan  (see MEALS,  §  ^n).

It  is  true  that  in  the  representation  of  Sennacherib's
camp  before  Lachish  a  kind  of  seat  or  bench  is  to  be
seen  in  some  of  the  tents,  but  this  departure  from  the
ordinary  custom  is  doubtless  due  to  the  superior  culture
of  the  Assyrians  (see  TENT,  fig.  i).  As  in  Assyria,
Babylonia,  and  Egypt,  seats  were  no  doubt  to  be  found
in  every  house  in  Canaan,  and  together  with  a  bed,
table,  and  lamp  formed  part  of  the  equipment  of  a  well-
appointed  room  (2  K.  4io;  EV  'stool').2  The  word
used  in  this  passage  (kisse}  elsewhere  refers  to  the  seat
or  throne  of  Eli  the  priest  (i  8.1941318),  of  the
governor  '  beyond  the  River'  (Neh.  87,  see  Ryle,  Camb.
Bible,  ad  loc.],  and  of  the  throne  of  Solomon  (i  K.
10i8^,  2  Ch.  9 17^).

The  reference  to  Satan's  throne  at  Pergamos  (Rev.  213,  see
PERGAMOS,  §  2),  if  the  great  altar  of  Zeus  is  meant,  is  associated


1  According  to  another  view  the  r  in  the  Aram,  forms  has
been  inserted  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  the  doubled  j  (for  a
statement  of  the  views  see  Bevan,  Daniel,  104 yC). It  is  to  be
noticed  that  the  form  with  r  occurs  in  the  old  Aramaic  inscription
of  Bar-rekub  (Zenjfrll, 65, temp.  Tiglath-pileser  III.). The
same  form  appears to  recur in Phoenician inscriptions from
Cyprus  of  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  (C/Sl,  nos.
22,  44,  88),  where  Q'D13(n)  f^c,  '  interpreter  of  the  two  thrones,'
is  perhaps  the  dp^Tji'evnjs  (cp  Or.  inscr.)  between  the  rulers  of
Cyprus  and  Persia  (see  CA9  1  65).

2  But  note perhaps  that  the  hostess  is  said  to  have  been  a
'  great '  woman.

5062


THRONE

with  the  interesting  question  of  throne-worship.  That  there  is  a
very  close  connection  between  the  throne  of  the  deity  and  his  altar
appears  certain,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  were  originally
identical.  On  the  whole  subject  see  Reichel,  /  'orkclUn.  Gdtter-
culte,  $ff.  (Vienna,  1897),  with  Budde's  remarks,  Kxp.  T
$y)t>jf.;  and  Clermont-Ganneau,  Rec.  efArch.  Orient.  4  247  ff.
There  are  three  main  varieties  of  seats  to  be  noticed  :
(a)  the  seat  with  neither  back  nor  arms,  (6)  the  seat  with

3  Description  Strai8ht  back-  and  (0  the  straight-
a'  backed  seat  with  arms.  The  three
practically  correspond  to  the  classical  sella,  cathedra,
and  thronus  respectively.  The  first  of  these  is  frequently
represented  upon  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  seals,1  and
bears  a  general  close  resemblance  to  the  primitive
altars  and  table  upon  the  Assyrian  slabs.2  In  a  large
number  of  cases  it  is  shaped  like  a  square  stool,  often
with  several  cross-bars,  though  instances  are  by  no
means  wanting  where  the  legs  cross  transversely,  not
unlike  the  construction  of  the  modern  camp-stool.

These  shapes  are  found  in  the  ancient  classical  world  and  were
probably  borrowed  from  the  East.  The  Greek  term  for  them,
Gfypos,  is  used  by  <J5  to  render  kisse'  in  i  S.  1  9  4  13  18  2  K.  4  10,
and  in  accordance  with  Or.  usage  occurs  in  i  S.  28  23  to  render
ntitttih.  On  the  use  of  beds,  couches,  and  divans,  cp  BED,  §  3.

Representations  of  the  second  and  third  variety
are  likewise  found  in  Assyria  where  they  are  often
accompanied  with  a  footstool  ;  cp  the  analogy  of  the
Gr.  Opbvos  and  its  Opyvvs.

The  OT  references  to  the  footstool  (Iiiidi>in,  CT1,  (E5  viroiT6$t.ov,
always  metaphorical)  would  show  that  the  Hebrews  were  well
acquainted  with  seats  of  this  nature.  On  kebes  (t?53),  2  Ch.  9  18,
see  below,  n.  6.

The  two  last-mentioned  varieties  lent  themselves  to
decoration  and  elaboration  to  a  greater  extent  than  the
sella.  They  were  frequently  of  the  finest  workmanship
and  adorned  with  gold  and  plaques  of  carved  ivory  (see
IVORY,  §  s).3  An  overspread  or  baldachino  was  often
added,  and  a  reference  to  this  is  perhaps  rightly  seen  in
the  SaphrTr  (Kr. ,  but  Ktb.  -n-,s;y)  of  Jer.  43  io.4  A
common  form  of  ornament  was  the  representation  of
animals  or  men,  to  support  the  arms  or  seat.

If  Benzinger  is  correct  in  his  suggestion  that  Solomon's
throne  (situated  in  the  Porch  of  the  Throne,  i  K.  7 7)
was  the  work  of  Hiram,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  it
was  based  upon  the  familiar  Egyptian  or  Assyrian
models.  The  throne  was  decorated  with  ivory  and  gold,
and  was  approached  by  six  steps  (cp  Is.  6 1  'a  throne
high  and  lifted  up  '),  at  each  end  of  which  was  the  figure
of  a  lion.5  The  back  appears  to  have  been  adorned  with
heads  of  bulls.  The  second  Targ.  on  Esther  adds  many
fanciful  details  which  are  devoid  of  value.
^  On  the  text  of  i  K.  10  rtff.,  2  Ch.  9  IT  ff.,  see  the  Comtn.  of
Ki.  and  Benz.  In  i  K.  10  19  the  reading  'rounded  top'  (head
rest)  appears  obvious,  but  we  should  probably  read  S^j;  't?&n,
'the  heads  of  bulls '  (05  irporo^al  ^oaxtav).  In  2  Ch.  9  18  the
words  have  been  seriously  misunderstood.''

The  meaning  of  yddath,  EV  '  stays '  (lit.  hands,  <5>  xeipes,
titanus  [K.I,  aynS>vt*,  brachiola  [Ch.])  is  not  clear.  Jos.  Ant.
viii.  5  2  offers  enjAaroi',  which  means  (a)  the  slats  of  the  frame
work  of  a  bed,  (fi)  the  rungs  of  a  ladder,  and  (c)  axle-pins  (cp
i  K.  7  32).  Following  (a)  we  might  think  of  the  slats  forming
the  seat  of  the  throne,  but  the  idiomatic  '  on  either  side '  (.110
'"IJ'r')j  and  (P's  dy/cwi/es  in  Ch.  points  rather  to  the  arms.  Such
arms  are  represented,  e.g. ,  upon  the  throne  of  Asur-bani-pal
(Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Art  in  CJiald.  1  108,  fig.  28),  and  of
Sennacherib  before  Lachish  (//>.  2  105,  fig.  47,  cp  Ball,  Light
front  ttm  East,  193).  What  is  meant  by  the  '  two  lions  standing
by  (near)  the  stays'  is  also  obscure  ;  the  words  are  omitted  by
<5A  in  i  K.  10  19,  perhaps  rightly.  5.  A.  C.

1  See  Menant,  La  Glyptique  Orientale,  1,  and  cp  S.  I.  Curtiss,
Prim.  Sent.  Rel.  267-276  (1902).

2  Cp  the  table  in  TENT,  fig.  i.

3  For  details  see  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  Art.  in  Chald.  2313-321.

4  See  Hoffmann,  ZA  TlVt  1882,  p.  68,  and  on  verss.  see  Field,
ad  loc.

5  i  K.  1020  c"ixt  elsewhere  nviK- I"  a  Phoenician  inscrip
tion  from  Citium  in  Cyprus  (CfS\,  no.  10)  mention  is  made  of
the  offering  of  an  altar  and two  CTIN — ''•£•> perhaps  (on the
analogy  of  our  passage)  '  lions '  (DTIN).

6  i?33, footstool'  (©L  virowoSiov,  scabellttm)  is  for BO3, a
variant  of  73V  in  i  K.  (emended  text). See,  primarily,  Geiger,
Urschr.  343.

5063


THYATIRA

THRUM  (  if^l),  Is.  38  12  RV'R- See  WEAVING.
THUMMIM (DV2J-1), Ex.  283o. See URIM AND
THU.MMIM.

THUNDER  (Din,  Ps.  77  19  [18]  81  8  [7]  104  7  Job26i4

Is.  29  6  ;  /3poir>j  ;  also,  much  more  frequently, '«  ^ip, Ps.  29  3
F-x.  823,  or  QT^K  nVp Oz8;


Is.  30  30,  cp  Jer.  10i3,  plur.

I in  NT  <t><*vy Ppoi'-rfp, Rev.  (>  i  142196  (/Spoirwr),  <f>aWt icac
Ppovrai  Rev.  4  5  8  5  11  19,  etc.

This  most  sublime  of  natural phenomena  is  repre-

i sented  by  a  poetical  echo  of  primitive  myth  as  the  voice

' of  God, Ps.  1047  Job  37  4/-, 409  Ps.  18i3  [14],  and

j especially  Ps.  29. In Ps.  24a  (cp  v.  5a)  as  his laugh

; (see  Del.  and  Che.  Ps.  <-'>). When, however,  in  Ezek.

10s  the  sound  of  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  is  likened

tautologically to 'the  voice  of  El Shaddai  (EV  God

Almighty)  when  he  speaketh,'  we  naturally  ask  whether

this  is not some  error in  the  text, and the  result  is

j interesting,  for  it  opens  up  a  vista  of  possible  rectifica-

' tions of early mistakes  (see  SHAUDAI). And  if  we

I lose  the  traditional  reference  in  Ezek.  10s  (and  124),  we

I have  still  enough  to  show  that  thunder  to  the  ancient

Israelites  had  a  special  sanctity  as  the  expression  of  the

divine  omnipotence  (Ps.  293),  and  of  the  terrible  divine

vengeance (  i  S.  2  10 Ps.  1813  [14]  Is.  3030). Thunder

in summer-time was peculiarly awful (i S.  12  17),

though  perhaps  the  case  mentioned  is  but  a  poetical  way

of  stating  that  with  God  nothing  is  impossible  ;  Tristram

(NHP  33) says, 'it is  unknown in summer.' The

wise  men  of  later  times,  such  as  the  poet  of  Job,  were

well  aware  that  thunderstorms  did  not  occur  capriciously,

but  were  subject  to  laws  appointed  by  the  Creator  (Job

2826  8825,  cp  Ecclus.  4817).

'  Right-aiming  thunderbolts  '  (Wisd.  5  21)  has  been  changed  in
RV  into  'shafts  of  lightning  (/3oA.t'6es  a.<npa.ir<av)  with  true  aim.'
In  Ps.  7848  'hot  thunderbolts'  remains,  though  D'BCH  more
probably  means  here  '  burning  sicknesses  '  in  accordance  with
the  requirements  of  parallelism.  Another  peculiar  phrase,  '  in
the  secret  place  of  thunder  '  (Din  "U1D3,  fi/an-oitpvcJxoKaToiyiSos),
still  remains  in  the  RV  of  Ps.  81  7  [8].  Duhm  explains,  '  in  the
cloud  which  hides  the  thunder  and  at  the  same  time  veils  God
from  sight  (Job  22  I3./C).  '  This  is  no  doubt  a  worthy  explanation  ;
but  the  Hebrew  phrase  does  not  appear  to  suit  the  parallelism.
On  the  so-called  Bath-kol,  see  VOICE,  and  on  the  title  given
to  James  and  John,  and  rendered  'sons  of  thunder,'  see
BOANEKGES.

THYATIRA  (eY<vretp&  [Ti.WH],1  Rev.  In;  iv
Qvarelpoa  [Ti.WH],  Rev.  2i8  and  224;  7r6Xews  Qi'ct-
relpwv,  Acts  1614).

Thyatira  was  a  town  in  northern  Lydia,  so  close  to

the  indefinite  borderland  between  Mysia  and  Lydia  that

1 Position some Preferred to reckon it to Mysia

and  history.  <Strab,°'  6T2S'  *>"  M"<™  ^xdr^  TO*
*  <paffiv).  It  lay  east  of  the  Lycus,  a
tributary  of  the  Phrygius,  which  river  itself  falls  into  the
Hermus  from  the  north.  Thyatira  thus  was  placed
almost  exactly  midway  between  the  Caicus  (N.  )  and  the
Hermus  (S.  ),  on  the  great  rood  which  crossed  this  region
going  to  the  SE.  ,  into  the  valley  of  the  Mreander.  Its
geographical  position  is  the  key  to  its  historical  import
ance.  The  watershed  in  which  it  lay  was,  in  fact,  of
the  utmost  importance  strategically,  as  it  was  the  line
of  demarcation  between  the  territory  of  competing
sovereigns.  For  in  301  B.C.  Lysimachus,  king  of
Thrace,  and  Seleucus  I.  (Xicator),  king  of  Syria,  had
partitioned  Asia  Minor,  which  they  had  taken  from
Antigonus,  in  such  wise  that  Lysimachus  had  the  western
portion,  as  far  as  central  Phrygia,  whilst  the  remainder
fell  to  Seleucus  (see  SKLEUCID^G,  §  2).  When,  subse
quently  (from  283  B.C.),  hostilities  broke  out  between
the  two  monarchs,  the  district  in  question  would  be  of
great  military  importance  ;  and,  still  later,  when  in  277
B.C.  the  Gauls  (Galatia)  invaded  Asia  Minor  and  founded
their  robber  state  in  north-eastern  Phrygia  (cp  GALATIA,

1  Neut.  plur.,  TO.  ©vareipa  ;  but  the  v.l.  in  Rev.  In,  fi's
©vareipai',  is  'well  attested'  (WH  2  App.  163).  Cp  the  case  of
LYSTKA  (q.v.).  The  form  Thyateira  gradually  gives  place  to
Thyatira.  The  place  is  now  called  Ak-hissar,  'a  large  town
of  mud  houses'  (Murray,  Hdbk.  to  AM  84).

5064


THYATIRA

§  i ),  its  importance  was  enhanced.  Consequently,  we
find  established  here  a  group  of  so-called  '  Macedonian
colonies '  ;  and  Strabo  describes  Thyatira  as  such  a
colony  (625,  KdToiKia  Ma/ceSjj'WJ').1

The  word  Macedonian  in  this  connection  undoubtedly
implies,  firstly,  Macedonian  blood  and  descent,  and
secondly  the  nucleus  of  the  standing  armies  kept  on
foot  by  the  Seleucidfe,  Ptolemies,  and  other  kings.
This  nucleus  of  trusted  troops  was  in  reality  the  remnant
of  the  soldiers  of  Alexander  the  Great,  or  their  children,
their  numbers  being  continually  recruited  by  drafts  of
volunteers  from  Macedonia  itself.2

In  course  of  time  many  men  who  were  not  of  Macedonian
blood  would  doubtless  find  their  way  into  these  select  corps  of
guards.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  term  '  Macedonians '  is  used
in  2  Mace.  8  20  (see  MACEDONIA,  §  i  ;  THRACE).  It  is  abund
antly  clear  from  the  extant  inscriptions  from  the  region  in  which
Thyatira  stood  that  the  bulk  of  the  colonists  were  '  Macedonians'
both  in  the  sense  of  being  men  of  the  standing  army  and  also  as
being  of  Macedonian  blood. 3

The  date  of  the  foundation  of  Thyatira  as  a  military
colony  is  uncertain  ;  probably  it  was  subsequent  to  277
B.C.  The  name  is  a  compound;  -teira=  '  village  '  or
'  town,'  and  the  whole  name  signifies  '  the  town  of  Thya  '
(for  Thya,  cp  the  town-names  Thyessus,  Thyassus  [see
Ramsay,  Hist.  Geog.  114,  148,  437]).  We  are  told
that  previously  the  place  was  called  Pelopeia,  or  Semi-
ramis,  or  Euhippa  (Plin.  HN5y) — names  which  scarcely
sound  historical.  According  to  a  piece  of  false  ety
mologising  based  upon  mere  similarity  of  sound,  it  was
said  that  the  name  Thyatira  was  derived  from  Thygatira
(Qvyd.Tft.pa),  because  Seleucus  heard  here  of  the  birth
of  his  daughter  (Gvydrrip).  (See  Steph.  Thes.  s.  v. ;  and
cp  Rams.  op.  cit.  127,  note.)

The  town  became  of  importance  owing  to  its  favour
able  position  in  two  respects.

(a)  It  was  here,  for  example,  that  Antiochus the  Great  assembled
his  troops  for  the  campaign  which  ended  so  disastrously  for  him

at  Magnesia  (see SEI.EUCID^J, §  7)  a  few

2.  Importance  : miles  to  the  S. In  consequence  it  submitted

military. to  tne  Romans  as  a  matter  of  course,  and

was  included  within  the  territory  made  over

by  them  to  their  ally  the  king  of  Pergamus.  Then  followed  a
long  period  during  which  Thyatira  does  not  appear  in  history ;
not  until  the  time  of  the  empire,  in  fact,  does  it  seem  to  have
realised  to  the  full  the  natural  advantages  of  its  position  as  above
described.  Naturally  it  was  only  in  a  peaceful  direction  that
such  could,  under  the  empire,  make  themselves  felt,  as  it  was
not  until  the_  later  Byzantine  period  that  strategic  advantages
came  again  in  question.  A  glance  at  the  network  of  Roman
roads  in  western  Asia  Minor  is  sufficient  to  reveal  the  importance
of  Thyatira  at  this  time.  Starting  from  Pergamus,  an  important
road  ran  through  Germe  and  Nakrasa  48  R.  m.  to  Thyatira,
thence  36  R.  m.  to  Sardis,  and  so  through  Philadelphia  and
Hierapolis  to  Laodicea  on  the  Lycus  (Rams.  Hist.  Geog.  167).
When  we  take  into  account  the  fact  that  an  important  road  runs
northwards  along  the  coast  from  Ephesus  through  Smyrna  to
Pergamus,  we  see  that  the  order  of  names  of  the  seven  churches
is  capable  of  easy  and  rational  explanation,  quite  apart  from
any  question  of  political  or  ecclesiastical  precedence.  The
order  is  in  fact  simply  that  of  the  occurrence  of  the  towns  as  one
follows  the  main  road  from  Ephesus  in  a  great  loop  through
Pergamus,  and  so  down  to  Laodicea  (Rev.  1  n).

(b]  Thyatira  owed  its  importance  to  its  connection
with  the  wool  trade,  or  rather  the  manufacture  of

3.  Commercial,  *°°U  T/TfV^  Tvf-  especia,lly  to
that  of  dyed  fabrics. This  was  always

a  staple  industry  in  Lydia.4  The  'certain  woman
named  Lydia'  (so  EV  in  Acts  1614;  perhaps  'called
the  Lydian '  would  be  more  correct)  was  a  '  seller  of
purple,'  '  of  the  city  of  Thyatira' — that  is  to  say,  prob
ably  an  agent  of  some  great  house  of  dyers  and  manu
facturers  in  Thyatira  (Rams.  St.  Paul,  214).

The  dyers  and  other  handicraftsmen  in  Thyatira  were  united
in  guilds  (called  e'pyo.  in  inscr.  from  Thyatira,  epycurtai  else-

1  This  is  confirmed  by  inscriptions  ;  see  Bull,  de  Corr.  hell.,
1886,  p.  308  ;  1887,  p.  466^;  CIG  3496.

2  Cp  Diod.  Sic.  18  12,  e<nrdvi£f  KOL  r) MaxeSofta  orpaTieoTaii'
TroAiTiKuJi'  6ia  TO  TrArjfJos  raic  aTretrraA^iei/wi'  ei?  TY^V  "Acriai/  €?rl
£ia5o^r)i'TT)9o-TpaTias — speaking  of  the  time  of  AntigonusGonatas.

3  See  on  this  Schuchhardt,  '  Die  Maked.  Kolonien  zwischen
Hermos  und  Kaikos'  in  Mitth.Arch.  Inst.  zu  A  then,  1888,  p.  if.

4  Cp Horn. //.  4 141, <os &'  ore Tis  T'  e\e<f>avTa.  •yvrr; t^otViKi
ftiiji/T]  |  Mfloi/is  ije  Kaeipa. Cp  Claudian,  De  Raft.  Pros.  1  270,
'  non sic  decus  ardet  eburnum  j  Lydia Sidonio quod femina
tinxetit  ostro.'


THYINE  WOOD

where,  as,  e.g.,  at  Hierapolis),  as  was  the  case  at  other  Asiatic
towns  (e.g.,  Smyrna,  Ephesus,  and  Philadelphia).  The  Thya-
tiran  guild  of  '  dyers  '  (/Sonets)  is  known  to  us  from  inscriptions,
as  well_as  the  guilds  of  'cloak-makers'  (i/iareuo/iei/oi.),  'potters'
(fcepajitets),  '  brass-workers  '  (xaA/ceis),  and  numerous  others  (see
Clerc,  De  rebus  Thyat.  92,  quoted  by  Rams.  Cities  and  Bish.
of  Phrygia,  1  105  n.  2.  Cp  Bull.  Corr.  Jfcll.  10407,  and  1900,
p.  592/).

In  the  epistle  to  the  Thyatiran  church  (Rev.  2 18/ )
there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  reference  to  this  promi-

4  Rev  9i8  f.  nent  side  °^  tlle  ^e  of  the  town'  sucn  as
''  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  epistle  to  the

Laodiceans  (Rev.  3n /.).  Nevertheless,  in  Rev.  220
the  reference  to  '  that  woman  Jezebel ' 1  points  to  some
thing  distinctive  and  characteristic  of  the  place.  From
the  context  it  is  clear  that  under  this  figure  is  concealed
some  form  of  teaching  or  practice,  or  some  intellectual
movement,  which  presented  itself  as  a  rival  or  per
version  of  Christian  teaching.

The  following  interpretation  has  been  suggested.
Outside  the  city  there  stood  the  ~Za[j-fiadf1ov  or  sanctuary
of  Sambatha  (SajM.j8iJ07j),  a  Chaldean  or  Persian  Sybil
or  prophetess.2  Apparently  this  was  some  form  of
eastern  superstition,  of  great  popularity,  if  the  reference
in  Rev.  220  is  to  this  shrine.  '  Jezebel,'  if  (Schiirer  and
others)  a  definite  person,  must  be  the  Sibyl  of  some
shrine  connected  with  an  eclectic  (pagan- Hebrew -
Christian)  system.  It  appears  more  probable,  how
ever,  that  we  should  interpret  the  denunciation  more
broadly,  with  reference  to  the  prevailing  tone  of  Thyatiran
Christianity  rather  than  to  a  superstition  idolatrous  in
origin  and  general  content,  which  could  hardly  have
infected  the  majority  of  the  church.  In  other  words,  the
expression  in  the  message  obtains  full  significance  only
if  we  understand  the  church  of  Thyatira  to  have  developed
some  heretical  or  impure  form  of  belief  or  practice,  such
as  might  naturally  be  typified  by  a  notorious  figure  drawn
from  OT history  (cp  2  K.  922).  We  here  touch  upon  the
relation  of  the  Jewish  settlers  and  colonists  in  Phrygia
and  neighbouring  districts  to  the  mixed  population  amid
which  they  dwelt.  The  evidence  of  the  Talmud  is  clear,
that  these  immigrant  Jews  were  divided  from  their
brethren  and  failed  to  maintain  their  peculiar  religious
position  (see  Neub.  Gt'ogr.  du  Talm.  315  ;  and  Rams.
Cities  and  Bish.  of  Phrygia,  2674  f. ).  The  population
of  Asia  Minor  was  undoubtedly  attracted  to  the  religious
system  of  the  Jews  ;  but  the  other  aspect  of  this  fact  was
that  the  Jews  became  merged  with  them  (see  Rams.  St.
Paul  the  Traveller,  142  f.  ;  Coinm.  on  Gal.  189/1,
where  the  position  of  the  Jews  in  S.  Galatia  is  treated  at
length).  Such  syncretism  must  have  had  its  dangers
for  the  Christian  churches,  based  as  the}'  were  in  general
upon  proselytes  and  containing  a  more  or  less  large
admixture  of  Jewish  elements.  It  is  to  some  form  of
gross  degeneration  of  Jewish  practice  and  belief  that
reference  is  made  in  the  epistle  to  the  Thyatiran  church
(see  art.  by  Schiirer,  '  Prophetin  Isabel  in  Thyatira '  in
Abhand.  Weizdcker geividmet,  39  /". ).  In  Cyprus  (Acts
136)  and  Ephesus  (Acts  19 13)  also  we  find  that  certain
Jews  had  abandoned  themselves  to  the  practice  of  magical
arts  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law.

For  a  parallel  to  the  church  factions  produced  by  a  question
about  pagan  institutions,  cp  the  case  of  Corinth  (i  Cor.  10  i^f.',
cp  Ramsay,  Expos.  1900 f.\  Zahn,  Einl.'ifxj'&f.  [also  Nico-

LAITANS, col. 3411]). '  \V.  J. W.

THYINE  WOOD  (lyAoN  GyiON  [Ti.WH],  Rev.
18i2f)  is  mentioned  among  the  precious  wares  sold  in
the  market  of  the  apocalyptic  Babylon.  The  wood
intended  is  no  doubt  that  of  the  tree  called  6 via  or  dta.
by  the  Greeks,  and  citrus  by  the  Latins  (cp  Hehn,
Kulturpflanzen,  386).  The  former  name  would  seem
to  refer  to  the  fragrance  of  the  wood  ;  and  citrus  is
probably  a  corruption  of  K^dpos  and  so  points  to  a  tree
of  aromatic,  antiseptic  wood.

1  _Tt]V  yurauca_'Ie£aj3eA  [WH1 ;  -n\v  yvvouica.  aov  is  a  reading
which  led  to  the  interpretation  that  the  denunciation  was  directed
against  the  bishop's  wife.  Cp  JEZEBEL,  ad  fin.

_p  Cp  CIG  3509,  eiri  TOTTOU  KaQapov,  ovros  trpo  TIJS  TrdAecof  jrpbj
rep  'S.a.fj.fia.Otita  €i>  T<5  XaAcWou  Trepi/SdAcp.

5066


TIBERIAS

The  Ovia.  (or  citrus)  far  excellence  was  a  N.  African  tree
(Theophr.  03,  §  7,  Plin.  1815,  §  20),  probably  to  be  identified
with  Thuia  articulata,  Vahl.,  which,  according  to  Sprenger
(Erl&uterungen  zum  Tlieophrast.  205),  is  a  tree  resembling  the
cypress  and  growing  to  a  height  of  24  ft.  In  accordance  with
Pliny's  statement  (I.e.),  it  is  found  in  the  region  of  Mt.  Atlas.
In  the  days  of  Roman  luxury  the  citrus  was  much  used  in  the
making  of  costly  furniture  ;  the  phrase  'all  thyine  wood  '  (Rev.,
i.e.)  probably  alludes  to  the  great  variety  of  objects  constructed
from  it.

TIBERIAS  (riBepiAc).  on  a  narrow  strip  of  plain
under  a  hill,  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,
was  founded  by  Herod  Antipas,  apparently  not  before  26
A.  D.  ,  and  so  was  quite  a  new  place  at  the  time  of  the
public  life  of  Jesus  in  Galilee.  Its  founder  named  it  in
honour  of  his  friend  and  patron  the  emperor  Tiberius.
Though  it  became  the  capital  of  Galilee,  it  was  at  first  a
purely  Greek  city,  which  accounts  for  its  not  appearing
among  the  scenes  of  the  Galilean  ministry.  It  joined  in
the  war  of  liberty,  but  yielded  without  resistance  to
Vespasian,  and  was  restored  by  him  to  its  master
Agrippa,  on  whose  death  in  100  it  fell  directly  under
Roman  rule.  The  place  came  to  be  a  great  seat  of
Jews  and  Jewish  learning  ;  it  was  the  residence  of  R.
Judah,  the  editor  of  the  Mishnah  ;  and,  though  the
schools  of  Palestine  were  ultimately  overshadowed  by
those  of  Babylonia,  the  school  of  Tiberias  was  still
famous  in  the  time  of  Jerome.  On  Jn.  6123211  see
GALILEE,  SEA  OK,  §§  i,  4/

Half  an  hour  to  the  S.  of  the  modern  Tabarlyeh  (a
town  of  some  4000  inhabitants)  are  the  famous  hot
baths  (now  el-Ham  inch)  which  are  mentioned  by  Pliny
(//A'ois  [71];  Tiberiade  aquis  calidis  salubri)  and  by
Josephus  (TO?S  tv  Tifiepiddi  6fpfj.ols  vdaew,  BJ\\.  216).
In  Ant.  xviii.  2s,  BJ\\.  13  he  alludes  to  the  depfj.6.  as
not  far  from  Tiberias  and  as  being  called  'A/j./j.a6ovs,
'  which  being  interpreted  is  6ep/j.d.'  It  seems  to  be  the
Haminath  of  Josh.  1935.  See  HA.MMATH.  This
Hammath  is  mentioned  in  Egyptian  records  (see
PALESTINE,  §  15,  no.  16).  The  Talmud  of  Babylon
identifies  Tiberias  sometimes  with  the  biblical  Hamath,
sometimes  with  Raccath  (see  also  Talm.  Jerus.  ),  some
times  with  Chinnereth.  See  Neubauer,  Gdogr.  208  ;
Schiirer,  Gfl'W  'li-^ff.  ;  ET  ii.  li^f.


TIBERIAS,  SEA  OF  (  H  GAAACCA  THC
[Ti.  "VYHj),  Jn.  21  1. See  GALILEE,  SEA  OF.

TIBERIUS  (riBeplOC  [Ti.  WH])  is  mentioned  only
in  Lk.  3  1,  where  the  commencement  of  the  ministry  of
John  the  Baptist  is  assigned  to  the  fifteenth  year  '  of  the
reign  of  Tiberius  Cnssar'  (rfjs  Tiye/jLovias  Tipepiov
Kcucrapos).

Tiberius  Claudius  Nero  succeeded  Augustus  as
Emperor  of  Rome  in  14  A.  n.  ,  and  reigned  until  37  A.  D.
He  was  son  of  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero  and  Livia,  so
that  he  was  only  the  stepson  of  Augustus.  The  two
chief  authorities  for  his  life  are  Suetonius,  who  revels  in
court  scandal,  and  Tacitus,  whose  political  views  marred
his  historical  accuracy.  Hence  little  justice  has  been
done  to  Tiberius.  The  Annals  of  Tacitus  have  been  in
fact  maintained  to  be  '  almost  wholly  satire'  (Merivale,
Hist,  of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire,  ch.  64),
and  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  satiric  tendency,
'  to  take  extreme  acts  as  typical  of  the  man,  and  ex
treme  men  as  typical  of  the  age,'  is  a  conspicuous
feature  of  the  book.  Consequently,  his  portraiture  of
Tiberius,  the  most  elaborate  analysis  of  character  in  his
writings,  is  most  often  attacked  as  untrustworthy.  \Ye
have  in  fact,  in  accepting  the  picture  in  Tacitus  as
historical,  this  problem  before  us  —  to  explain  how
Tiberius,  who  up  to  the  age  of  fifty-five  (when  he
became  emperor)  had  shown  himself  a  commander  with
more  than  ordinary  talent,  an  orator  of  no  mean  calibre,
and  an  administrator  of  acknowledged  sagacity,  de
generated  from  the  moment  of  assuming  the  purple  until
he  became  that  monster  of  cruelty  and  vice  and
impotence  which  perhaps  for  all  time  he  is  in  the
imagination  of  mankind.  This  is  not  the  place  in  which

5067


TIGLATH-PILESER

to  attempt  to  review  either  the  private  life  or  the  public
acts  of  Tiberius.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  his  life
cannot  be  disposed  of  in  a  '  cascade  of  epigrams  '
(Beesly,  Catiline,  Clodius,  and  Tiberius,  115),  such  as
compose  the  summary  in  which  Tacitus  gives  his  most
deliberate  judgment  on  Tiberius  (Ann.  651).

Furneaux,  Annals  o/  Tacitus,  vol.  i,  Introd.  chaps.  4  and
8  gives  a  careful  review  of  the  evidence,  with  an  unfavourable
verdict.  Beesly's  Catiline,  Clodius,  and  Tiberius  is  a  vigorous
defence.  Champagny,  Les  Cesars,  an  unmeasured  invective.
See  also  Boissier,  L'  Opposition  sous  les  Cesars.  For  the
chronological  questions  in  connection  with  the  NT,  see  Ramsay,
II  'as  Clirist  born  at  Bethlehem  >  and  the  articles  CHRONOLOGY,
LYSANIAS,  (JL'IRINIUS,  etc.  \y.  I.  w

TIBHATH  (nrqp;  MeTABHXAC  [BN],  MATeBee
[A],  TABAA6  [L]  ;  Pesh.  tebah],  a.  city  of  Hadadezer,
i  Ch.  188.  See  TEBAH.

TIBNI  (*3?Jjl,  §  79;  see  below  on  meaning  ;  cp  Ass.
Tabni,  Tabne'a,  Phoen.  03371,  Tabnith;  6&/v\N[e]l
[BA],  6&BeNNei  [I-]  ;  Thebni),  b.  GlNATH,  a  com
petitor  with  Omri  for  the  throne  of  Israel  after  the  death
of  Zimri  (i  K.  1621  /f).  See  ISRAEL,  §  29,  OMKI

§'-.

Like  so  many  other  successful  adventurers,  including  his  rival
Omri  (  =  Imri  =  Jerahmeeli),  Tibni  seems  to  have  been  of  Jerah-
meelite  origin.  His  name  is  a  gentilic  in  form,  and  probably
should  be  read  -paa  (Nebatite)  or  v'3:  (Nebaiothite).  Cp
i  Ch.  5  15,  where  (in  the  original  form  of  the  text  ;  see  SHAPHAM)
Guni  is  a  clan-name  in  the  southern  Gilead  (temp.  Jeroboam  ii.).

TIDAL  (V!1?;  e^pr-AA  [EL],  e<\A|-.  [D?  and'  A
in  09],  6<\A|-A[A];  Pesh.  tdrll],  'king  of  Goiim,'  an  ally
of  Chedorlaomer  (Gen.  14  19).  Nothing  has  yet  been
made  out  either  as  to  a  king  called  Tid'al  (or  Tar'al)  or
as  to  the  '  Goiim  '  or  '  nations  '  over  which,  according  to
MT  and  ©,  he  ruled.  The  identification  of  Tid'al  with  a
supposed  ancient  name  in  a  very  late  cuneiform  tablet  is
in  the  highest  degree  precarious  (see  King,  Letters  of
Hammurabi,  1  p.  liii  ;  and  cp  Haupt,  note  on  Gen.  14  i  in
Ball's  Genesis,  Heb.  text,  SBOT).  Sir  H.  Rawlinson
thought  that  'Goiim'  was  a  corruption  of  Gutium,  the
situation  of  which  district  (see  KOA)  accords  well  with
the  mention  of  '  Goiim  '  after  Elam.  It  is  certain  (see
inscription  quoted  b}-  Rogers,  Outlines  of  Bab.  Hist.
10)  that  Gutium  was  early  subject  to  Babylonian
influence.  If  'Goiim'  comes  from  'Gutium,'  Tar'al
(if  we  may  follow  (SEL)  may  conceivably  be  a  Baby
lonian  name.  The  only  word  which  approaches  it,
however,  seems  to  be  targul,  'rudder'  (Deluge-story,
97),  which  is  sometimes  a  title  of  the  god  '  Ninib  '  (see
Jensen,  Kosmo!.  422).  But  'seductive'  as  Rawlinson's
theory  is,  it  is  too  hazardous  (see  Hal.  Rev.  sttn.  1894,
p.  279)  to  make  g  correspond  to  y  in  -cyS  (lagamari)
and  to  3  in  c"u  (=gutium?).

So  far  we  have  assumed  that  MT  and  <S  correctly  represent
the  original  text.  Hut  in  the  general  failure  of  critical  theories
based  on  this  assumption,  it  becomes  reasonable  to  suppose  that
Tidal  and  the  other  names  in  Gen.  14  1  are  deeply  corrupt,
that  *?jnn  (EV  Tidal)  is  a  corrupt  fragment  of  SxCnT  (Jerah-
meel)  and  that  c"U  (Goiim)  as  often  has  the  same  origin.  See
SODOM,  i.  T.  K.  C.


TIGLATH-PILESER  ODN'?S  n?JRaK.  15  29  16io,
Ip^B  rtan,  2  K.  167)  or  Tilgath-pllneser  (H^H

iDx^a,  i  ch.  56  2  ch.  2820,  ID:1??  na>>n.  i  ch.  526).

(P's  readings  are:  in  2  K.  1629,  aAyaft/jeAAacrap  [BA];  167,
&a\ya.0<t>.  [B],  om.  A;  16  10,  eaA^yaA^.  [B]  ;  a-yAa^aAAaaap  [A]  ;
<?e-yAa</>aAa<Tap  [I.]  throughout;  in  i  Ch.  56,  SnAya/Saraa-ap  [B];
8ay\a9'  <£aAi<a<rap  [A];  5  26,  6ayva(f>a.pa.<Ta.p  [B]  ;  Oay\a.8'.  <£aA-
vatrap  [A];  2  Ch.  28  20,  Oa\ya(f>e\\aSap  [B];  Oay\a8'.  <t>a\va.  \  (rap'.
[A]  ;  6ey\a6<j>a\a.<ra.p  [L]  throughout.

In the Zenjlrli-Inscriptions noSenSjn  and no^En^n.

Assyr. Tiikulti-apil-esarra, '  My help is the son of

„.  Esarra.  ' Esarra, '  the house of the

name.  mujt;tu(jei'  was  t]le  narne  of  theAtemple

of  Ninip,  who  was  therefore  called  '  the  son  of  Esarra.  '

The  strange  form  in  Chronicles  is,  according  to  Kittel

(Chron. Heb. SBOT  68), 'merely  an  accidental  cor

ruption of a familiar name at the hands of the

Chronicler  or  of  his  Midrashic  source.'

5068


TIGLATH-PILESER

The  biblical  Tiglath-pileser  was  the  third  of  the
Assyrian  kings  of  that  name,  and  came  to  the  throne

2  Possible in ?45 ac" Nothin«  is  known of  his

origin  and  parentage,  but  as  he  is  called

origin. in  the  Babylon,an  canon  Pulu  (PuL,  2  K.

15 19,  etc. ),  it  is  thought  that  he  was  not  of  royal  race,
but  was  probably  a  general  under  Asur-nirari,  his  pre
decessor,  and  that  he  called  himself  Tiglath-pileser  on
coming  to  the  throne  on  account  of  the  renown  attaching
to  this  royal  name.

The  chief  sources  of  the  history  of  his  reign  are  the
inscribed  slabs  found  in  the  remains  of  his  palace  at

- Calah, and  two  tablets which  appear

3.  Sources  of

,  . ,  j to have  been  copied  from  records  on

history,  and

•".  stone  similar,  in  some  respects,  to  the

accession.  sia^s_  \vhh  regard  to  the  latter,  several
of  them  are  only  known  from  squeezes  now  in  the  British
Museum,  where  also  the  clay  tablets  referring  to  his  reign
are  preserved.  The  chronology  of  his  reign  has  been
placed  beyond  a  doubt  by  the  Eponym  Canon  with
historical  references  (KB  1  212-213),  from  which  it  appears
that  he  mounted  the  throne  on  the  13111  of  the  month
lyyar  (April- May)  of  the  year  745  B.C.,  as  successor  to
Asur-nirari  (II. ) ,  in  the  last  year  of  whose  reign  there  was
a  rising  in  Calah  ;  not  improbably  Tiglath-pileser  seized
this  opportunity  to  assume  the  supreme  power.  Whether
the  fact  that  the  Eponym  for  the  next  year  was  the
governor  of  Calah  supports  this  supposition  or  not,  is  a
matter  of  opinion.

The  first  campaign  of  this  king,  which  took  place  in
the  year  of  his  accession,  is  stated  to  have  been  '  into

» TT-  t.  i the  midst  of  the  rivers  ' — -i.  e. ,  '  to  Baby-

4.  History  of , • , TT. ,  .  %_
,  . .J Ionia. His  object  was, not  so  much

The  AranSn  to  conquer  *e  ,country  as  to  breakf  £e
, .,  excessive  and  dangerous  power  of  the

Aramaean  tribes.  In  this  he  was  fully
successful,  and  the  Babylonians  themselves,  who  suffered
from  the  tribes  in  question,  thankfully  acknowledged  his
suzerainty.  Owing  to  this  success,  he  seems  to  have
assumed,  from  the  first,  the  title  of  '  king  of  Sumer  and
Akkad.'

The  next  year  (7448.0.)  Tiglath-pileser turned  his

attention to the mountainous district on the E. of

_ yr • Assyria, inhabited  by  wild  tribes  who  had

always been troublesome  to the Assyrian

kings. This district, which was called Namri (cp

ZIMRI  ii. ), he  wasted  with  fire  and  sword,  annexing  a

portion  of  it  to  Assyria.

In  743  B.C.  affairs  in  the  W.  claimed  his  attention.
The  state  of  which  ARPAD  (q.  v. )  was  the  capital,  sup-

fi A A Ported,  to  all  appearance,  by  the  king  of

iT-ii  •  *  Urartu  (ARARAT),  seems  to  have  thrown
Kullani,  etc.  &•  v  \  .  '  ,  .  ,  .

off  the  Assyrian  yoke  ;  it  had  to  be  re
duced  again  to  submission.  This  probably  gave  an
opportunity  to  Sar-durri,  king  of  Urartu,  to  march
towards  Assyria.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  put  off
the  subjection  of  Arpad,  and  proceed  against  the  northern
foe,  who  was  completely  defeated.  In  742  operations
against  Arpad  were  resumed,  and  in  741  (to  judge  from
the  Eponym-list)  the  city  was  taken,  though  the  Assyrian
army  remained  in  the  same  district  in  740  B.C.  One
result  was  the  annexation  of  Unki  (identified  by  Tom-
kins1  with'Arnk),  a  district  which  had  already  felt  the
Assyrian  might.

In  739  B.C.  Tiglath-pileser  carried  on  war  in  Ulluba,
on  the  N. ,  taking  several  cities  and  founding  another,
which  he  called  Asur-ikisa  ('Asur  has  presented').  It
was  apparently  during  this  period  that  the  Assyrian
subject-states  in  Syria  and  northern  Phoenicia  rebelled.
The  operations  into  which  the  Assyrians  were  thus  led
resulted  in  the  capture  of  Kullan? — i.e.  (according  to  P.
Rost),  the  CALNO  (q.v.)  of  Is.  lOg2  (738  B.C.).

1  '  Geography  of  Northern  Syria '  in  BOR  3  6. For  the  extent
of  Unki  see  Rost,  Tiglath-pileser,  1  p.  xxi,  n.  i.

2  With regard  to the  identification  there  given, it  may  be
noted  that  Kullani  would  seem  from  WAl\\.  53a«  to  be  one  of

5069


TIGLATH-PILESER

The  question  now  arises  whether  Azriau  or  Izriau
(Rost) — i.e.,  Azariah  of  Judah — came  into  touch  with
1  Azariah  T'S^atn~P''eser  on  tn's  occasion.  It  must
'  be  confessed  that  the  frequent  mention  of
his  name  in  the  exceedingly  mutilated  portion  of  the
annals  which  seem  to  refer  to  this  period  gives  Tiele
justification  for  replying  in  the  affirmative  (BAG  230/1
on  the  whole  question,  however,  see  UZZIAH).  All
the  princes  of  middle  and  northern  Syria  now  submitted
and  paid  tribute,  including  Rasunnu  (see  REZIN)  of
Damascus,  Menihimme(Menahem)  of  Samaria,  Hirummu
(Hiram)  of  Tyre,  and  others,  including  Zabibi  queen  of
Arabia  (see  OREB  and  ZEEB).  There  is  no  statement,
so  far  as  the  texts  are  preserved,  that  the  Assyrian  king
penetrated  as  far  S.  as  Samaria,  but  the  fact  that  he
received  tribute  from  that  country  (cp  2  K.  15  19^)  is  a
sufficient  indication  that  he  at  least  threatened  it,  and
had  to  be  bought  off  (see  MENAHEM).  The  policy  of
deportation  was  on  this  occasion  resorted  to  extensively.

The  following  year  (737  B.C.)  the  state  of  affairs  on
the  E.  called  the  Assyrian  king  to  Media  (mat  Madda)

8  Media  ancl  tlle  distr'cti  wnere  ne  set  up  images
and  Urartu  °f  himself>  and  Peace  aSain  reigned— at
•  '  least,  as  far  as  the  Assyrians  were  con
cerned.  This  left  Tiglath-pileser  free  to  march,  in
736  B.C.,  to  the  foot  of  the  Xal  mountains,  on  the  N.
of  Assyria,  where  he  took  a  large  number  of  cities,  thus
preparing  the  way  for  the  conquest  of  the  land  of
Urartu,  which,  in  the  following  year  (735),  he  pro
ceeded  to  carry  out.  He  penetrated  as  far  as  Sar-
durri's  capital,  Turuspa,  and  though,  on  account  of  its
naturally  advantageous  position  on  the  lake  Van,  he
was  unable  to  take  the  city,  he  nevertheless  broke  the
power  of  the  kingdom  of  Urartu  for  many  years  to
come.

For  the  year  734  B.C.  the  Eponym-list  has  this  entry  :
'  to  the  land  Pilista  ' —  i.e.,  'to  Philistia.'  Schrader  in

o r>v,,-iiof; 1878 (KCF  126), in consequence of
j.  IT  niiiSLia. 1 1  •  i  f  ,  -r  • , I,-

WA/L35,  n. i,  ir  ff.,  considered  this  to

involve  a  campaign  against  Judah,  Samaria,  Phoenicia,
etc.  Rost,  however,  thinks  differently,  contending  that
the  mere  reception  of  tribute  from  the  countries  men
tioned  in  WAI,  loc.  cit.,  would  sufficiently  account  for
the  references  to  the  southern  districts.  As,  however,
the  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser,  where  they  speak  of
relations  with  Judah,  have  no  date  (the  text  being
defective  at  the  important  points),  he  follows  the  indi
cations  of  the  Eponym-list,  which  makes  Philistia  (i.e.,
the  small  states  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean )  the
chief  object  of  the  campaign.  In  proceeding  thither,
Tiglath-pileser,  like  the  Assyrian  kings  in  general,
would  take  the  coast-road  from  N.  to  S.  The  name  of
the  city  which  was  first  threatened  is  broken  away,  but
Rost  conjectures  it  to  have  been  Ashdod  or  Ekron.  Its
prince  bought  his  reinstatement  only  by  means  of  heavy
tribute.  It  was  Hanunu  of  Gaza,  however,  who  was  to
all  appearance  more  especially  aimed  at  by  Tiglath-
pileser,  and,  feeling  this,  he  lost  no  time  in  seeking
refuge  in  Egypt.1  Gaza  then  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the
Assyrians  ;  its  treasure  and  its  gods  were  carried  away,
the  worship  of  Asur  was  introduced,  and  the  royal
throne  and  image  set  up  in  the  palace  of  Hanunu.

The  entry  for  733  and  732  B.C. is  'to  the  land  of

Dimaska ' — i.e., Aram-Damascus. No doubt it was

AVi part of  the king's plan to subjugate the

Z' states  of  the  W. ,  but  he  was  also  induced

to  make  this  campaign  by  the  appeal  of  Ahaz  of  Judah

for  help  against REXIX  and  PEKAH. The  appeal  was

supported  by  the  sending  of  gifts  in  acknowledgment  of

vassalage. It  would  seem  that  the  allied  kings  despaired

of  resisting  the  advance  of  the  Assyrians,  and  retreated

to their  own territories. They  thus played into  the


the  town.s  along  the  Taurus,  implying  an  extension  of  operations
in  that  direction.

1  For  another  view  see  Wi.  Musri,  $(>•$$/.,  and  cp  ISAIAH,
BOOK  OF,  §  12,  n.  i  ;  MIZRAIM,  §  26.

5070


11.  Rszin.


TIGLATH-PILESER

hands  of  Tiglath-pileser,  who  may  perhaps  refer  to  this
in  his  annals  (11  227 /.)  as  follows  : —

'  In  my  former  expeditions,  I  had  counted  (as  spoil)  all  the
cities  (of  Pekah)  and  had  carried  off  his  .  .  .  and  he  forsook
Samaria  alone  .  .  .  their  king  ..."

Rost  completes  the  last  phrase  '(they  overthrew  Pekah),  their
king,'  which  is  not  impossible,  and  is  supported  by  his  revised
text  of  WAI  3  10,  no.  2,  50  28.

Previously  to  this,  however,  as  it  would  seem,  the
king  paid  a  visit  to  the  Phoenician  states  to  assure
himself  of  their  fidelity,  and  on  this  occasion
he  may  have  annexed  wide  tracts  of  Israel,
including  'all  the  land  of  Naphtali '  (2  K.  1529).  No
reference  to  this,  however,  occurs  in  his  inscriptions
(though,  perhaps,  as  Hommel  suggests,  the  -li  of  1 7
of  \VAI  3,  pi.  10,  no.  2  may  be  the  end  of  that  word,
for  the  preceding  line  refers  to  Bit-Humria  or  Israel).
Rezin  of  Damascus  boldly  resisted  the  invader,  but
on  this  occasion  fortune  deserted  the  Aramaeans ;
Rezin  took  to  flight,  and  fortified  himself  in  Damascus.
A  siege  of  the  city  followed,  during  which  the  sur
rounding  country  was  completely  devastated.  A  suc
cessful  expedition  was  also  made  against  Samsi,  queen
of  N.  Arabia,  which  led  to  the  submission  of  other
tribes  of  that  region,  as  far  as  Sa'ba  (Yemen).  Damascus
itself  fell  at  the  end  of  73213.0.;  it  is  not  again
mentioned  as  an  independent  state.  The  fate  of  Rezin
is  related  in  2  K.  169.  See  DAMASCUS,  §§  io/. ;  REZIX.

The  relations  of  Hoshea, who  seized  the  crown  of
Israel, to Tiglath-pileser are treated elsewhere (see
T . HOSHEA). A  third  rebel  against  Assyria
Hfif6 now claims  Ollr  Attention, namely Mi-
tinti  of  Ashkelon,  who  had  been  joined  by
neighbouring  Metenna  of  Tyre According  to  Rost,
states. the  Assvrjan statement  is1  that  Mitinti
went  mad  on  realising  that  he  might  soon  have  to  share
the  fate  of  Rezin. His  son Riikipti  now  mounted  the
throne  on  account, as  it  would  seem, of  his  father's
mental  state,  and  hastened  to  reconcile  himself  with  the
Assyrian conqueror by means of tribute and gifts.
Tiglath-pileser  now  sent  his  rab-sakfi  (see  RAB-SHAKEH)
against  Metenna  of  Tyre,  who,  finding  no  other  course
feasible,  decided  to  submit  and  pay  tribute. The  rab-
sake  was  also  successful  in  bringing  about  the  submis
sion  of  Uassurmi, chief  of  Tabal, who, however,  was
deposed,  and  a  man  named  Hulli  set  in  his  place.

To  all  appearance,  affairs  in  the  W.  had  reached  a

satisfactory  settlement  for  the  Assyrians. Leaving  that

n ,. district in 732 B.C., Tiglath-pileser

13.  operations  found trouble awaiting him in the

in  Babylon.  following  year  in  Babylon,  owing  to
the  restlessness  of  the  Chaldreans  and  Aramreans.
Nabonassar  had  been  succeeded  by  his  son  Nabu-
nadin-zeri,  who  was  killed  after  a  reign  of  two  years.
His  murderer,  Nabu-sum-ukin,  made  himself  king,  but
was  deposed  after  rather  more  than  two  months'  rule  by
the  Chaldaean  prince  Ukin-zer  (Chinziros)  of  Bit-
Amukkani.  At  this  period,  the  Babylonians  proper  had
but  little  love  for  the  dominion  of  the  rough  Chaldasans,
and  probably  encouraged  an  Assyrian  intervention  in
order  to  get  release  from  a  thoroughly  distasteful  rule.
Tiglath-pileser  therefore  entered  Babylonia,  and  besieged
Ukin-zer  in  his  capital  Sapia,  but  without  result.  He
wasted  the  territory  of  the  other  tribes,  however,  and
carried  Zakiru,  prince  of  BH-sa'alli,  into  captivity.
According  to  the  Eponym  Canon,  the  Assyrian  king
did  not  engage  in  any  campaign  in  730,  but  remained
at  home  '  in  the  land.'  Apparently  his  army  continued
the  siege  of  Sapia,  which  fell  in  the  following  year.
The  result  was,  that  Ukin-zer  lost  his  throne,  and  the
other  Chaldnean  chiefs  submitted,  including  MERODACH-
BALADAN  (</.?'. ),  prince  of  the  land  of  Tamtim  ('the
sea-coast').  Tiglath-pileser  could  now  celebrate  one  of
his  greatest  triumphs.  He  proceeded  to  Babylonia  as
the  saviour  of  his  people,  and  was  universally  acknow
ledged  as  king  :  in  the  Babylonian  Chronicle,  and  on  at
1  The  preceding  passage  is  very  defective.
507*


TILE

least  one  contract  -tablet,  he  is  called  Tukuhi-upii-
esarra.  (This  has  a  bearing  on  the  question  whether
PUL  [g.v.  ]  was  his  official  name  at  Babylon,  or  not.)

The  next  year  (728  B.C.)  found  the  king  again  in
Babylonia,  performing  the  ceremony  of  '  taking  the  hand
....  of  Bel,'  which  would  thus  seem  to  have

j  j  fi,  been  a  yearly  duty  for  one  who  claimed
leatn>  to  be  ruler  of  the  land.  The  Eponym
Canon  mentions  the  name  of  a  city,  which  may  be  Dir  ;
it  may  be  surmised  that  a  rcljellion  had  taken  place
there.  It  is  probably  to  this  city  that  the  entry  in  the
same  document  with  regard  to  the  expedition  of  727
B.C.  refers;  after  which  it  is  stated  that  Shalmaneser  set
himself  on  the  throne.  The  death  of  Tiglath-pileser,  as
we  learn  from  the  Babylonian  Chronicle,  took  place  in
the  month  Tebet,  thus  closing  a  reign,  than  which  none
was  more  glorious  for  Assyria  or  more  fateful  for  Israel.'

Turning  now  to  other  signs  of  progress,  we  note  that
the  material  prosperity  of  Assyria  was  well  maintained,

_  _  ....  and  one  can  see  from  the  extant  sculp-

mgs.  tures  Of  tne  peri0(j  that  Assyrian  art,
too,  had  not  declined.  When  at  home,  the  king  seems
to  have  generally  resided  in  Calah,  but  also  in  Nineveh.
Being  more  of  a  warrior  than  a  builder,  he  apparently
contented  himself  with  rebuilding  and  changing  the
great  central  palace  at  CALAH,  which  had  been  founded
by  his  predecessor  Shalmaneser  II.,  copying  the  Hittite
style,  and  adorning  it  with  the  objects  sent  as  tribute
by  Hittite  and  Chaldaean  princes.1  Unfortunately,  this
building  was  for  the  most  part  demolished  by  Esar-
haddon,  so  that  the  sculptures  and  inscriptions  were
partly  destroyed,  partly  mutilated.  This,  added  to  the
ravages  of  time,  has  deprived  us  of  much  valuable
material,  rendering  the  records  of  Tiglath-pileser  very
fragmentary.  Happily  the  order  of  his  campaigns
is  well  preserved  by  the  Eponym  Canon  with  historical
references,  though  the  meagreness  of  the  entries  leaves
one  or  two  points  still  uncertain.

[As  in  the  case  of  the  articles  SARGON  and  SENNACHERIB,  it
is  necessary  to  warn  the  reader  that  the  basis  of  the  ordinary
representation  of  the  history  of  Israel  needs  to  be  tested  afresh
by  textual  criticism,  and  that  one  result  of  this  is  that  the  in
fluence  of  the  N.  Arabian  neighbours  of  Palestine  is  seen  to
have  been  at  least  as  strongly  felt  as  that  of  Assyria.  In  PRO
PHET,  §  35,  it  is  shown  that  the  captivity  foretold  by  Amos  was
most  probably  a  N.  Arabian  one,  and  the  region  which  was  to
bear  the  brunt  of  the  invasion  was  that  part  of  the  Negeb  which
was  in  Israelitish  occupation.  Similarly  in  2  K.  l.~>29  it  is  not
the  Assyrian  king  commonly  called  Tiglath-pileser,  but  Jerah-
meel  king  of  Ashhur  in  N.  Arabia  who  carries  away  captive  the
people  of  certain  places  and  districts,  which  places  and  districts
are  not  in  N.  Israel,  but  in  the  Israelitish  Negeb.  The  critical
proof  of  this  is  both  interesting  and  suggestive.  Itentirelv  clears
up  the  mystery  of  the  three  names,  Pul,  Tiglath-pileser,  Tilgath-
pilneser.  See  Crit.  Bil>.  —  T.K.C.]

Rost,  Keilxkrifttexte  Tiglat-PHesers  III.  (1893);  G.  Smith,

Assyria (Ancient History  from the Aloninnsnts), 74  ff.~,

Rogers,  Hist,  of  Bab.  and  Ass.  '2  104-138  ;

16.  Bibliography.  Murdter-Delitzsch,  Gcsch.  von  Bab.  u.
Ass.  177^(1891);  Hommel,  GBA  648j/.

(1885);  Schrader,  'Zur  Kritik  d.  inschr.  Tiglat-Pilesers  II.'
(A>/.  Pr.  Akad.  der  H'iss.  1881);  COT  I  213^'.  242  ff.\  KB
vol.  2.  T.  G.  P.


TIGRIS  (H.n),  Gen.  2  14  RV"^-,  Dan.  104  RV"'sr-  ;

EV  HlDDEKEL  (q.V.\

TIKVAH  (nipn  'hope,'  §  74  ;  eeKoye  [AL]—  *.*.,
TEKOA).

1.  Father  of  SH  A  LLU.M  (2),  2  K.  22  14  (Qeidcovav  [B],  -Kitoue  [A]).

Cp  TlKV'ATH.

2.  Father  of  JAHAZIAH,  Ezra  10  15  (eAiceta  [P.N]); in  i  Esd.
9  14  he  is  called  THEOCANUS,  RV  THOCANLS  (eoxavov  [K]  0<o.

[A]).

TIKVATH, RV  TOKHATH  (Jinpin,  Kt.  ; nnipFI,

kre),  father  of  SHAI.I.UM  (2),  2  Ch.  3422  (<ca0ouo.A  [I?],  daicova.9
[A],  0«a><-  [L]). See  TIKVAH.

TILE,  (i)  For  rm1?,  Men  ah,  nAiNOoc  (Ezek.
4  1  1),  see  BRICK.  (2)  For  /ce'pa^os  (Lk.  5  19),  see  HOUSE,  §  4.

1  According  to  Frd.  Delitzsch,  however,  the  palace  built  by
Tiglath-pileser  III.  was  on  the  W.  side  of  the  great  terrace  of
Calah,  beside  that  of  Shalmaneser  I.

5072


TILG-ATH-PILNESER

TILGATH-PILNESER  HOST'S  fl^FI),  i  Ch.
5626  2  Ch.  2820.  See  TIGLATH-PILESEK  (with  ap
pendix).

TILONO'l^R  Kt.  pill!  INCON  [B],  6iAcoN  [A]
GooAeiM  [L]),  son  of  SHIMON  a  Judahite  (i  Ch.  42of).

TIlVLffiUS  (TIMAIOC  [Ti.  WH]),  Mk.  1046  RV,
AV  Timeus.  See  BARTIM.EUS.

TIMBREL  (51R  tSpK),  Ex.  15  20,  etc.  Cp  TABRET,
and  see  Music,  §  3(1).

TIME.  See  CHRONOLOGY  ;  also  DAY,  MONTH,
WEEK,  YEAR.

TIMES,  OBSERVER  OF  (JJWO),  Dt.  18  10,  etc.
See  DIVINATION,  3  (2).

TIMNA  (Wlpn,  1HDPI,  §  54  ;  GAMNA  [BADEL])  in
Gen.  36  12  ranks  as  the  concubine  of  Eliphaz  b.  Esau
and  mother  of  Anialek  ;  but  in  i  Ch.  1  36  Timna  and
Amalek  are  among  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  (so  ©L  ;  but  <5B,
Kal  T/;s  6a.iJ.va  a^a\tjK  ;  (SA  6a/u.va  de  i]  iraXXa/fi?  eXt<£af
treKtv  avTr)  TOV  afj.a\-rjK).  Timna  appears,  however,  as
the  sister  of  Lotan  b.  Seir  (see  LOT)  in  Gen.  8622  i  Ch.
139  (ai\a0  Kal  va^va  [B],  d5eX<^7?  5£  Xurcu'  6a.iJ.va  [A],
Kal  d.X.d.  [L])  ;  and  as  an  Edomite  phylarch  or  rather
clan  in  Gen.  8640  i  Ch.  I5i  (8ai(M>>  [B],  Oapava  [A]  ;
in  Gen.  EV,  against  rule,  gives  TIMNAH).

These  inconsistencies  are  not  surprising  (see  GENEALOGIES,
§  i).  Perhaps,  however,  Gunkel  is  right  in  supposing  that  Gen.
30i2«  (Timna  a  concubine)  is  a  later  insertion  in  P.  Cp
AMALEK,  §  4.


TIMNAH  (n:pfi;  e*MN<\  [BAL];  also

Josh.  1943  Judg.  14  1  2  5  ; i.e.  ,  'allotted  portion')"

1.  A  town  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah,  in  the  same
group with Maon and Carmel  (Josh.  15  57  ; 6ajj.va6a
[B]),  and  therefore  not  to  be  identified  with  Tibneh.  or
Tibnah, 4 h. W. of  Bethlehem. There  must  have
been  a  Timnah  SE.  of  Hebron. Most  scholars  have
supposed this place to  be intended in  Gen. 8812-14
(daifiva [A] in v. 12  ; 6afivav [L] in v. 14), but
the  emended reading  of  the first  place-name  in  v.  14
(see  TAPPUAH, i)  favours  the  view  that the  Timnah
(see  below,  2)  of  Josh.  15  10  Judg.  14  1  is  meant. The
gentilic  of  this  Timnah, 'Timni,'  seems  to  occur,  mis-
written  as  TEMENI  (q.v.),  or  Tlmgni,  in  i  Ch.  46.

2.  (AV Timnath, and once, Josh.  1943, THIM-
NATHAH, where  <&  varies  as  in  15  57  [see  above]. In
Judg.  dapvaOa  [BAL]. The  gentilic  ':an,  <9a/zw  [B],
OauvaOaiov  [AL],  Timnite,  Judg.  156.) A  place  on
the northern frontier of Judah (Josh, loio, where
© has e-n-l \ij3a [BL], eiri vorov [A]), assigned to
Dan in Josh. 1943, but according to Judg. 14 in
habited by Philistines  in the pre-  regal period. The
latter  narrative  describes  most  graphically  an  occasion
on  which  Samson  'went  down  to  Timnah'  (ludg.  14  1)
from Zorah. The  Chronicler includes it among  the
cities  taken  from  Ahaz  by  the  Philistines  (2  Ch.  28  18  ;
om. <SI!), and the contemporary evidence of Sen
nacherib  in  the  '  Prism-inscription'  (KBIg-zf.)  records
that  king's  capture  of  Tamna  after  the  battle  of  Altaku
before  he  laid  siege  to  Amkaruna  or  Ekron. Timnah
is  now  represented  by  the  village  of Tibneh,  on  the  S.
side  of  the  Wady  Sarar,  2  m.  W.  of  'Ain  Shems  (Beth-
shemesh) and a little farther to the SW. of Sarah
(Zorah). The  site,  however,  has  been  robbed  of  three-
fourths  of  its  ruins by  the  builders of  a  neighbouring
village  (GueYin,  Jud.  23o  /  ). But  cp  ZORAH.

3.  A  third  Timnah  (possibly  the  same  as  TIMNATH-
HERES)  may  be  recognised  in  the  THAMNATHA  of
i  Mace.  9  50  (on  the  readings,  see  PIRATHON),  which
was  one  of  the  Judaean  cities  fortified  by  Bacchides.  It
is  doubtless  the  Thamna  mentioned  by  Josephus  (BJ
iii.  85)  and  Pliny  (HNv.  1470)  as  giving  name  to  one
of  the  toparchies  (the  Thamnitica)  of  Judrea,  and  in
correctly  described  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (OS  260  3
1566)  as  being  in  the  district  of  Lydda  on  the  road  to

5073


TIMOTHY

Jerusalem.  The  topographical  notices  in  Jos.  BJiv.  Si
confirm  the  view  that  this  Timnah  or  Thamna  is  the
northern  Tibneh,  a  village  about  10  m.  NW.  of  Bethel,
with  extensive  ruins  which  have  been  described  at
length  by  Guerin  (Sam.  289_^).  Cp  Clermont  Gan-
neau,  PEFQ,  1875,  p.  169;  Schilrer,  Gl'/2i3S.

TIMNATH-HERES  (Dnn  njpn,  as  if  'Portion  of
the  Sun,'  see  NAMES,  §  95;  Judg.  2  9  fla/ui/aSape?  [HI,]
8anva.0a.p- eta?  [A],  also  called  in  Josh.  19  50  24  30  Tinmath-
SOrah  (rnD  nrpjjt  ;  Sa^apXap^  [H],  ea^avapax  [Ha-mlf-],
0a^i<a0<ropa  [AJ,  0a;ai<a0aerap  [L]  in  19  50;  0aui/a0a0-aYap<x  [151.
fla^ao-axap  [A],  fla/ui>a6><r.  [L],  in  24  30).

A  locality  '  in  Mt.  Ephraim  on  the  N.  side  of  the
Mt.  GAASH  '  (q.v.).  According  to  the  book  of  Joshua
it  was  assigned  to  Joshua  at  his  own  request  ;  he
fortified  the  city,  dwelt  there,  and  was  buried  there.
The  place  has  been  identified  with  the  modern  Tibneh
(see  TIMNAH,  3),  where,  on  the  X.  slope  of  the  hill  to
the  S. ,  are  some  remarkable  tombs  described  by  GueYin
(Sam.  289-104).  This,  however,  assumes  that  there  is
only  one  Ephraim,  whereas  the  probability  is  that  there
was  a  second  Ephraim  (—  Jerahmeel)  in  the  Negeb.

The  alternative  identification  with  Kefr  Harith  (a  small
village  NE.  of  Tibneh),  proposed  by  Conde'r,  has  only  the
support  of  a  late  Jewish  and  Moslem  mediaeval  tradition  (see

C\  I3  -^  6-I9s  ft'  and  cp  Goldziher,  J'£FQ,  1879,  PP-
I93J/-)--  It  also  implies  the  correctness  of  -kercs,  whereas  Josh.
(ll.c.)  gives  -serali,  which  is  hardly  to  be  treated  as  a  deliberate
metathesis  (so  ^loore).

But  possibly  Din  (whence  by  error  mo)  comes  from  -\nv-i.e.,
TintrN  (this  also  accounts  best  for  '  Mount  Heres ').  This  will
become  still  more  probable  if  'Nun'  in  'Joshua  son  of  Nun'
should  really  be  Nahshonl  (apparently  a  Rehobothite  or  Jerah-
meellte  name).  Joshua  surely  represents  a  clan  of  the  Negeb  ;
see  JOSHUA.  It  is  also  important  that  Eleazar  son  of  Aaron  (appar
ently  a  kinsman  of  Joshua),  is  said  to  have  been  buried  in  Gibeath-
pinehas,  'which  was  given  him  [omit  ^3]  in  Mt.  Ephraim,'  for
/?[«<']//<*.?  is  not  improbably  another  corruption  of  Jerahme'el.
See  PHINEHAS.  T  K  c

TIMON  (TIMCON  [Ti.  WH]),  one  of  the  seven
deacons  (Acts  6 5).  He  has  a  Greek  name  and  was
perhaps  a  Hellenist.  Traditions  contained  in  Pseudo-
Dorotheus  and  Pseudo-Hippolytus  make  him  bishop  of
Bostra  in  Arabia,  and  according  to  the  former  lie
suffered  martyrdom  by  burning  at  the  hands  of  the
heathen.

TIMOTHEUS  (riMOeeoc  [ASV]).  i.  An  'Am
monite  '  leader  ;  whether  an  Ammonite  with  a  Greek
name,  or  a  Greek  who  had  been  put  by  the  Syrian
general  in  command  of  the  Ammonites  is  unknown.
He  was  defeated  on  various  occasions  by  Judas  the
Maccabee ;  first  in  the  campaign  which  resulted
in  the  capture  of  Jazer,  and  again  in  that  which
included  the  battles  of  Dathema  and  Raphon  and
the  relief  of  Bosora,  Bosor,  Alema,  Casphor,  Maked
and  Carnaim  (i  Mace.  06-1224-44).  He  is  also  men
tioned  in  2  Mace.  830  32  93  1024  32  37  122  10  18-21  24,
where  the  scene  is  transferred  to  Western  Palestine  and
a  chronology  implied  which  has  suggested  to  many
scholars  that  a  different  person  must  be  intended.  The
most  probable  explanation  of  the  discrepancies,  however,
is  that  suggested  under  MACCABEES  (SECOND),  §§2,3;
col.  2870  middle,  col.  2871,  viz.,  the  inadequacy  of  the
sources,  and  the  uncritical  character  of  the  compiler,  of
that  book.
2.  See  TIMOTHY.

TIMOTHY

Birthplace,  etc.  (§  :).  Journeys  (§§  3-5).

Circumcision  (§  a).  An  author?  (§  6).

Traditions  (§  7).

This  Hellenistic  name  (see  TIMOTHEUS)  is  in  the
NT  (TIMO06OC  [Ti.WH])  borne  by  one  of  Paul's
younger  companions  who  was  connected  with,  and
Drobably  born  at,  LYSTRA  (§  3)  in  Lycaonia,  where  the
apostle  first  came  across  him.

In  Acts  16  i  efcei  is  epexegetic  of  Ka.1  els  AuVrpar,  and  the  text


1  For  a  parallel  cp  "?n  in  y~X  Vn,  which  may  represent
ee  TEL -A  BIB.

5074


TIMOTHY

of  204  is  too  secure  to  justify  any  alteration  which  (GAIL'S,  2)
would  connect  AepjSaios  with  Tifj.66cos,  identifying  this  Gaius
with  the  Macedonian  of  the  same  common  name  (19  29)  from
whom  in  all  likelihood  the  epithet  Aep/3aios  is  expressly  intended
to  distinguish  him.  Cp  Holtzmarm,  Die  Pastoralbricfe,  65  /.
(1880).

The  diminished  strictness  of  local  Judaism  (PHKYGIA,
§  3)  is  betrayed  by  two  features  in  the  Lystran  house-
_. ,  . . hold  where  Timothy  was  brought  up  ;  his
,  , ".. Jewish mother had married a pagan,
an ami  7.  ajjowe(j  to  reach  man


hood  uncircumcised.  His  father,  it  has  been  con
jectured,  died  during  the  boy's  early  years  ;  this  is
corroborated  at  any  rate  by  the  absence  of  all  reference
to  him  as  well  as  by  the  strong  influence  assigned  in
reliable  tradition  to  the  lad's  mother  (EDUCATION,  §  5)
and  (maternal?)  grandmother,  even  though  we  hesitate
to  lay  stress  on  the  slight  textual  evidence  for  Eunice's
widowhood  (Acts  16  1,  add  x?Wxls  25  :  X-  f°r  'lovSalas,
gig.  fu.  ),  or  even  on  the  tense  of  virripxev  (fuerat,
Acts  16  3  ;  virdpxti  would  have  been  used,  had  he  been
alive  [Blass])  Whether  her  husband  was  among  '  the
men  that  worship  God'  (  <re/36/uevoi  rbv  Qtov]  or  not,
Eunice  (Acts  16  1,  cp  v.  15)  seems  to  have  become  a
Christian  at  Paul's  first  visit  to  Lystra  (Actsl46/I
20-22).  Later  notices,  embodying  a  tradition  which
there  is  no  reason  to  suspect,  indicate  that  her  mother
Lois  had  assisted  her  to  train  1  the  lad  in  the  knowledge
and  piety  of  the  OT  previous  to  their  joint  conversion
(2  Tim.  1  5  3  14  f.  ,  cp  i  Tim.  5  4)  ;  and  it  may  be  inferred
that  their  influence  subsequently  brought  Timothy  over
to  the  new  faith  some  time  before  the  return  of  Paul  a
couple  of  years  or  so  later.  Passages  like  i  Cor.  4  17
(contrast  v.  15),  a  Tim.  2  1,  etc.,  refer  to  kinship  of
spirit,  and  Phil.  2  22  expressly  identifies  Timothy's
'  genuine  sonship  '  with  his  loyal  service  to  Paul,  not
with  spiritual  parentage.  At  any  rate  his  intimate
connection  with  Paul  dates  from  the  latter's  second  tour
with  Silas,  when  he  found  the  young  Lystran  not  a
neophyte  but  a  full  member  (uadijTris)  of  the  local
church.

The  allusion  in  2  Tim.  3  TO  f.  (a  genuine  fragment)  simply
means  (Lk.  1  3)  acquaintance  with  the  facts  and  experiences
narrated  —  an  acquaintance  involving  moral  imitation  (i  Tim.
46)  —  and  does  not  imply  that  Timothy  accompanied  Paul  on  the
journey  described  in  Acts  13  14-14  20.  In  this  flight,  according
to  Acta  Petri  et  Pauli,  etc.  (ed.  Lips.  1891,  pp.  235^),  Paul  is
accompanied  by  Demas  and  Hermogenes  6  xaAicevs,  vrroicpio-eios
yeT-coiTey,  KGU  e^eAtrrapoui'  TOV  IlauAor  to?  ayaTrit>VT€S  O.VTOV.

The  language  of  Acts  16  1  (/ecu  I8ov,  cp  1  10  827  10  17
12?)  is  intended  to  denote  a  remarkable  and  happy

. _.  episode in the  tour (cp Hort, Christian

2.  Circum-  ,T , . n  /•  • T  •  , •  ,

. .  Ecclesia, 1787.). It  seemed  providential

that  another  youth  was  found  willing  and
fit  to  join  Paul's  company  and  enterprise,  after  the
defection  of  |ohn  Mark  and  Barnabas.  Characteristic
ally  (cp  63  1022  22  12)  an  excellent  reputation  is  singled
out  as  one  essential  feature  in  his  moral  equipment  ;
Actsl62  suggests  also,  though  it  does  not  necessarily
imply,  that  he  had  already  preached  in  the  neighbour
hood.  However,  as  his  father's  nationality  was
notorious  in  the  locality,  Paul  had  him  circumcised.
He  carried  out  this  long-deferred  rite  upon  the  eve  of
proceeding  farther  on  a  tour  among  the  Phrygian
churches  with  their  Jewish  surroundings  and  partially
Jewish  atmosphere,  his  object  being  to  prevent  people
taking  needless  offence  either  at  Timothy's  connection
with  Paul  or  at  his  entrance  into  Jewish  circles.

Acts  16  3^  is  often  taken  as  an  editorial  gloss  (e.g.,  Clemen,
Jiingst,  Hilgenfeld,  and  Wendt),  and  on  different  lines  the
last-named  critic  and  McGiffert  {Apostolic  Age,  232-234)  have
attempted  to  explain  the  whole  passage  as  the  popular  and
later  misstatement  of  an  actual  fact,  in  opposition  to  the
dominant  view  (cp  ACTS,  §§  4,  7)  which  —  apart  from  minor

1  As  the  nearest  synagogue  was  at  Iconium.  th«'  religious
instruction  of  the  child  devolved  on  Eunice,  who  probably
possessed  a  copy  of  some  part  of  the  OT  scriptures  is  well  as
the  little  parchment  rolls,  specially  for  the  use  of  children,  con
taining.'  e.g..  the  Shema',  the  Hallel,  the  history  of  Creation
down  to  the  Flood,  and  Lev.  1-8  (Edersheim,  Sketches  of  Jewish
Social  Life,  114-117).

5075


TIMOTHY

variations — generally  regards  the  story  as  an  invention  of  the
author,  introduced  in  order  to  illustrate  what  he  conceived  was
or  should  have  been  Paul's  deferential  and  conciliatory  attitude
towards  Jewish-Christian  scruples.  But  the  existence  of  a
strong  Timothy-tradition  in  the  later  church  makes  it  hard  to
believe  that  a  strange  story  like  this  could  be  spread  not  long
after  Timothy's  death,  if  it  did  not  correspond  to  fact.  And

Esychological  reasons  can  be  adduced  which  render  the  tradition
nrly  acceptable  (cp  Renan,  S.  Paul,  125,  313  ;  Hort,  Juii.
Christ.  &sf.).  Paul,  either  before  or  after  the  conference  at
Jerusalem,  was  independent  of  petty  scruples  against  or  for
circumcision,  which  he  probably  regarded  as  among  the
aiiiapkora  (i  Cor.  ~  18).  Particularly  in  the  case  of  a  half-caste
or  semi-Jew  like  Timothy,  where  no  principle  was  at  stake,
Paul  could  not  have  felt  bound  to  abstain  from  circumcision,  if
it  promoted  effectiveness,  any  more  than  to  insist  upon  it
uniformly.  His  liberal  views  (cp  Rom.  2  28/".  14  13-21)  left  him
free  to  act  upon  his  own  judgment  and  to  decide  any  case  upon
its  merits,  free  even  to  accommodate  himself  to  scruples  felt  by
Jews  when  such  accommodation  could  not  fairly  (yet  cp  Gal.
5  1 1,  and  Rams.  Hist.  Comni.  Galat.,  §  8)  be  misunderstood.
Timothy's  circumcision  was  a  matter  of  convenience,  not  of
principle ;  and  Paul  would  make  that  perfectly  clear  before
permitting  his  friend  to  become  legally  a  Jew  to  save  the  Jews.l
Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  there  is  a  distinct  case  to  be  made
out  on  behalf  of  the  historicity  of  this  paragraph,  as  against
the  plausible  but  somewhat  arbitrary  view  that  it  represents  a
make- weight  to  Gal.  2  ^f.  The  case  of  Titus  was  entirely
different.  And  it  is  one  thing  for  a  writer  to  omit  an  awkward
fact,  another  and  a  much  more  serious  thing — requiring  greater
motives  and  historical  justification  than  can  be  reasonably
brought  forward  in  this  case — deliberately  to  invent  a  story
which  hundreds  of  contemporary  Christians  (cp  Heb.  13  23)
could  have  readily  refuted.  This  forms  an  almost  insuperable
difficulty  in  the  way  of  accepting  the  ordinary  hypothesis  of
criticism  upon  Acts  1(5 1-3  ;  and  it  seems  therefore  more  natural
to  regard  Paul's  action  as  somewhat  exceptional,  though  it
depends  on  the  view  taken  of  the  date  of  Galatians  (cp  5  2)
whether  we  suppose  Paul  deliberately  made  this  exception
afterwards  (so  Weber,  A  bfassuugdes  GalattrMcfes,  nf.  [  1900]),
or  advanced  to  a  clearer  and  more  consistent  line  of  action.

In  sketching  at  a  later  date  some  personal  traits  of  Timothy,
the  author  of  the  pastoral  epistles,  either  drawing  upon  Acts  or
upon  independent  oral  tradition,  lays  characteristic  stiess  on
the  questions  of  good  character  and  reputation  as  a  requisite
for  the  ministry  (e.g.,  i  Tim.  87),  preserves  the  names  of  Eunice
and  Lois  (2  Tim.  1  5),  suggests  timidity  and  backwardness  as
qualities  of  Timothy  (2  Tim.  1  7  f.),  and  refers  to  several  cir
cumstances  attending  Paul's  selection  of  the  younger  man.
There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  substantial  accuracy  of  such
notices  or  of  the  tradition  that  this  momentous  event  (i  Tim.
1  18  4  14)  was  due  to  some  local  Christians,  possibly  including
Paul  himself,  who  felt  themselves  inspired  in  the  assembly  to
single  out  the  youth  as  a  fit  companion  for  Paul.  The  statement
agrees  at  any  rate  with  phenomena  such  as  those  noted  in  Acts
13  3,  etc.,  and  merely  implies  that  the  local  prophets  and  leaders
felt  themselves  divinely  guided  in  selecting  Timothy,  or  in
ratifying  Paul's  judgment  on  a  matter  which  may  have  already
occupied  his  mind.  But  ecclesiastical  tendency  of  a  later  age  is
felt  in  the  further  description,  throughout  these  passages  and
elsewhere  (e.g.,  2  Tim.  16,  cp  TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  [EPISTLES],
§  7),  of  a  supernatural  xapio-jua  due  to  solemn  ordination ;
although  the  fact  of  the  laying-on-of-hands  at  such  a  time  is  in
itself  quite  credible  (cp  Acts  13  3  14  23).

Accompanying Paul and Silas on their European
tour  (PAUL,  §  20),  Timothy  apparently  took  a  specially
_ __ ,  keen interest in the Macedonian

lla"  churches  which  he  helped  to  found
at  Philippi  and  Thessalonica,  although  it  is  remarkable
that  the  narrative  in  Acts  only  mentions  his  name  quite
incidentally  (Actsl7i4  18s).  \Yith  the  former  church
(Phil.  220-22)  his  relations  remained  singularly  close  and
warm,  but  it  is  impossible  to  see  him  (with  Volter,
Th.T,  1892,  p.  124)  in  a  second-century  allusion  (4s)
to  <rwfirye  (cp  SYNZYGUS).  His  subsequent  movements
between  Bercea  (BEREA,  3)  and  Corinth  are  not  quite
clear  owing  to  the  loose  and  general  statements  of  Acts
at  this  point.  The  probability  is,  however,  that  ( i  Thess.
82  being  parallel  to  3s)  Timothy  rejoined  Paul  soon  at
Athens,  and  was  sent  back  (perhaps  with  a  letter,  cp
Rendel  Harris:  Expos.,  5th  ser. ,  8  161  f.  401  f.}  to
Thessalonica  to  confirm  the  local  Christians  and  bring
back  news  of  their  condition  to  their  anxious  apostle.
Returning  from  this  errand  Timothy,  now  accompanied
by  Silas,  found  that  in  despair  Paul  had  gone  across
from  Athens  to  Corinth.  Cp  THESSALOXIANS,  §  i/.

1  Zahn  (Einl.  \  479^)  subtly  traces  an  allusion  to  this
characteristic  of  Timothy  in  the  Tjfteis  of  Phil.  3  3,  which  he
insists  on  taking  (as  in  v.  17)  as  a  reference  to  Paul's  coadjutor
(Phil.  1  i).  See  further  K.  Schmidt's  Ap.-gesch.  358 /.  (1882).

5076


TIMOTHY

The  'awkward  and  badly  constructed'  (Ramsay,  St.  Paul,
233)  narrative  of  Acts  17  10 f.  shows  that  the  author,  or  the
source  which  he  followed  here,  was  ignorant  of  this  Macedonian
mission  ;  he  offers  no  explanation  of  the  extraordinary  delay
which  —on  his  own  statement — transpired  between  17  13/1  and
IS  5,  imagining  that  Silas  and  Timothy  had  simply  remained
in  Beroea.  Whereas  it  is  probable  that  the  visit  of  Paul's
two  emissaries  extended  to  Philippi  as  well  as  to  Thessa-
lonica,  and  that  they  conveyed  from  the  former  church  to  Paul
(2  Cor.  11  9  ?  Phil.  4  15)  a  gift  of  money.

At  Corinth  and  throughout  Achaia,  Timothy,  as  an
'apostle' (i Thess.  1 1 26)  in  the  wider  sense  of  the
term  (cp  MINISTRY,  §  17  ;  McGiffert,


4.  At  Corinth
and  elsewhere.


Apostolic  Age,  6487.),  shared Paul's


pioneering  work  (cp  2  Cor.  1 19)  and
was  associated  with  him  in  the  epistles  (epistle?)  to
Thessalonica,  which  were  written  in  the  earlier  part  of
the  apostle's  stay  on  the  Isthmus — for  although  the
mention  of  Athens  (i  Thess  3i)  does  not  exclude  the
possibility  of  that  city  as  the  place  where  they  were
composed  (see  i  Cor.  1532  168),  it  is  plain  from  other
allusions  (cp  i  Thess.  1 8)  that  they  presuppose  the
apostle's  entry  into  Achaia.  From  Corinth  two  years
later  Timothy  seems  to  have  accompanied  Paul  as  far
as  Ephesus,  where  he  became  known  to  the  churches
in  the  neighbourhood  (Col.  li)  and  to  local  individuals
(Philem.  i).1  At  any  rate  (cp  CHRONOLOGY,  §  68)  towards
the  close  of  the  two  or  three  years  spent  by  Paul  in
Ephesus  and  the  surrounding  district,  Timothy  and
Erastus  (Acts  1922),  as  two  assistants  of  Paul  upon  the
spot,  were  despatched  to  Macedonia  and  Achaia  (possibly;
dav  ZXdy,  i  Cor.  16 10)  in  advance  of  their  leader,  who
intended  to  follow  up  his  letter  to  Corinth  (despatched
by  sea  after  March  5,  when  navigation  became  open)
by  a  personal  visit.  It  is  plain,  from  i  Cor.  417  16  io/!,
that  there  was  a  chance  of  Timothy  failing  to  arrive
until  after  the  letter  reached  its  destination  ;  for  Paul
bespeaks  a  courteous  reception  for  his  young  representa
tive.  The  absence  of  any  greeting  from  the  latter,  and
the  temporal  aorist  ^jrea^a  ('  I  have  sent,'  i  Cor.  4 17),
show  that  he  had  left  before  the  epistle  was  despatched.
His  instructions  were  to  return  with  some  other  Christians
directly  (i.e.,  by  the  sea-route)  to  Paul  at  Ephesus
(i  Cor.  16 n),  after  instructing  the  Corinthians  afresh
upon  Pauline  methods  and  views  (i  Cor.  417)  and
generally  consolidating  their  faith.

The  obscurity  of  the  Corinthian  episode  at  this  stage  (cp
TITUS,  §  2)  renders  it  difficult  to  decide  whether  Paul's  silence
in  2  Cor.  upon  the  mission  of  Timothy  and  any  results  attending
it  forms  a  tacit  proof  that  Timothy  did  not  manage  to  reach
Corinth  (so,  e.g.,  Lightfoot,  Weiss,  and  Ramsay),  or  that  he  did
arrive  and  then,  failing  to  cope  subsequently  with  the  fresh
trouble,  returned  to  Paul  or  simply  sent  him  word  of  the  crisis.
On  the  last-named  hypothesis  he  may  have  been  either  (so
Beyschlag,  Pfleiderer,  G.  G.  Findlay)  in  person,  or  with  Paul
on  the  latter's  painful  visit  (2  Cor.  -2  i  $f.),  actually  the  man
insulted  (oiSiKrjfJei's  ;  7  12)  by  the  recalcitrant  majority  at  Corinth.
On  the  whole  intricate  question  see  Schmiedel,  //Cii.  1  220-223.

Whatever  happened  to  Timothy  in  the  interval,  Paul
at  last  met 2  him  somewhere  among  his  favourite
Macedonian  churches  (2  Cor.  1 1  7s)  whither  he  had
retired  from  Corinth  probably  to  find  a  more  congenial
sphere  ;  unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  he  accompanied
Paul  thither  from  Ephesus.  Evidently  he  had  not
been  in  Achaia  lately  (2  Cor.  7s/  13).  But  when
Paul  went  on  to  Corinth,  Timothy  accompanied  him
(Rom.  1621),  and  formed  a  member  of  the  apostle's
entourage  on  his  return  to  Asia  in  the  spring  of  the
following  year.

Whether he accompanied Paul to Rome or was

_ , ,  summoned  by  him  afterwards,  the  scanty

'  . data  available  do  not  permit  us  to  deter  -

'  mine  ;  the  latter  conjecture  (cp  TIMOTHY

AND TITUS  [EPISTLES],  §  i2/)  fits  in  well  with  the

1  If  the  note  to  Ephesus,  incorporated  in  Rom.  16,  extended
(as,  e.g.,  Weizsacker  and  McGiffert  suggest)  to  v.  23,  the  mention
of  Timothy  in  •'.  21  would  be  highly  appropriate. But  the  note
probably contained w. 1-20 and no more. [Cp, further,
ROMANS,  §  13.]

2  Or,  sent  for him  ; if  one  plausible  reconstruction  of  the
period, based  on  a  critical  view  of  2  Tim.  4g  11-1820^  (see
TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  [EPISTLES],  §  12),  could  be  established.

162  5077


TIMOTHY

tone  of  2  Tim.  4 13-15  21-223  when  that  fragment  is
assigned  to  a  genuine  note  sent  by  Paul  either  late  in
the  Czesarean  or  early  in  the  Roman  imprisonment,
urging  his  friend  to  join  him.  At  any  rate  it  is  obvious
that  Timothy  did  stay  beside  him  at  Rome  for  a  con
siderable  period  (Col.  1 1  Philem.  i  Phil.  li).  Later
on,  however,  Paul's  concern  for  the  Philippian  Christians
led  him  to  arrange  for  the  disinterested  and  zealous
Timothy  paying  them  a  visit  (Phil.  219-22)  in  order  to
relieve  the  apostle's  mind  by  bringing  back  news  of  his
old  friends.  Timothy  had  a  tried  character  by  this
time  and  his  '  solicitude  for  the  Philippians  had  become
a  second  nature'  (Lightfoot).  Clearly  he  was  not  a
a  prisoner,  but  free  to  come  and  go.  His  journey  may
have  detained  him  ;  or  he  may  have  proceeded  farther
to  Ephesus.1  At  least  a  genuine  fragment  preserved
in  2  Tim.  1 15-18  46-12  16-19  shows  that  at  some  subse
quent  period  Paul  had  been  forced  to  abandon  his  hope
of  release  and  now,  in  view  of  a  martyr's  death,  wanted
to  have  Timothy  beside  him  again  in  his  isolation.
We  do  not  know  if  the  summons  was  obeyed  in  time,
or  at  all.  A  final  glimpse  of  the  envoy  is  afforded,
some  twenty  years  later,  by  a  casual  remark  in  an
epistle  apparently  addressed  to  some  Christians  at
Rome  (Heb.  1823),  from  which  it  would  appear  that
Timothy,  who  was  familar  to  this  circle  of  readers  (cp
Rom.  1621,  HEBREWS,  §  9),  had  been  recently  released
from  imprisonment  somewhere  and  might  possibly
revisit  Rome  in  company  with  his  friend  the  writer.

Apart  from  a  hypothesis,  which  needs  only  to  be  chronicled,

that  he  actually  edited  the  two  pastoral  epistles  bearing  his  own

name, three  lines  of  critical  reconstruction

6.  As  author, connect Timothy with authorship either

independently  or  as  an  amanuensis  of  Paul,
(i.)  Least  probable  of  all  is  Spitta's  ingenious  attempt  to  find  in
him  the  author  of  2  Thess.  (Zur  Gesch.  u.  Lift,  des  i'r-
christenthitnis,  1  22_/i),  an  epistle  written  by  him  in  the  name
of  his  companions  (2  Thess.  1  i) — hence  its  somewhat  formal
and  official  tone — and  saturated  with  apocalyptic  fantasies  of
Judaism  peculiar  to  himself  (cp  Acts  16  i  2  Tim.  3i$f.  i  Tim.
14  47)  See  THESSALONIAXS,  §  14.  (ii.)  When  2  Cor.  10-13  is
accepted  as  part  of  an  intermediate  letter  to  Corinth,  written
previous  to  2  Cor.  1-9,  it  is  natural  (Pfleid.  Das  Urchristenthunt,
io5yC)  though  far  from  necessary  to  suppose  that  these  four
chapters  were  preceded  by  a  part  (no  longer  extant)  written  by
Timothy  or  by  some  other  companion  of  Paul  interested  in  the
local  church.  On  this  view  the  avrbs  <5e  eyoo  IlaCAos  means  that
Paul  now  strikes  in  to  speak  alone  and  independently,  (iii.)  With
more  plausibility  the  composition  of  the  '  We-journal '  in  Acts
has  been  assigned  occasionally  to  Timothy  (e.g.,  by  Konigsmann,
Ulrich,  Beyschlag,  de  Wette,  Bleek,  and  ['?]  Weizsacker),
although  the  threads  of  positive  proof  are  extremely  subtle  (cp
ACTS,  §9^)  and  the  general  probabilities  point  rather  to  Luke
as  the  diarist.  Besides,  even  if  the  Bezan  reading  in  Acts  11  27_/C
be  rejected,  a  passage  like  Acts  20  4-6  (unless  we  are  to  suspect
a  serious  dislocation  of  the  text)  tells  against  the  composition
of  the  journal  by  Timothy.  Sorof,  however,  has  followed  a  modi
fied  form  of  Mayerhoff  s  theory  in  attributing  to  Timothy  the  task
of  editing  Acts  in  its  extant  shape  from  (a)  a  Lucan  sketch  of
early  Christianity  in  connection  with  Paul  and  (^)  a  rather
legendary  Petrine  source  (Die  Entstehnng  Jcr  Afi.-gcsch.  1890).
The  widespread  belief  of  Christian  tradition  (A  p.  Const.  746,
Euseb.  HE3$,  Photius,  Bil'l.  254),  that  Timothy  was  appointed
by  Paul  as  the  first  bishop  of  Ephesus,

7.  In  tradition, is  probably  nothing  better  than  an  infer

ence from the pastoral  epistles  (i  Tim.

1  •}/.),  which,  however,  may  echo  some  historical  relationship.
The  story  is  occasionally  improved  by  some  circumstantial
details:  e.g.,  that  he  was  succeeded  in  his  episcopate  by  the
apostle  and  the  presbyter  John,  suffering  martyrdom  (Jan.  22,
Greek  church  ;  Jan.  24,  Latin  ;  Sept.  27,  Ephesus)  during  the
former's  exile  at  Patmos  towards  the  close  of  the  first  century
A.D.  (see  Nicephorus  in  HEZ  n).  No  miracles  are  narrated  of
him  in  the  fifth  century  Ada  Titnothei  (ed.  Usener,  1877).
For  these  and  other  legends  see  further  Lipsius,  Apokr.  Af>.-
gesch.  (1884),  372-400,  and,  for  the  traditional  connection  of
Timothy  and  Ephesus,  Zahn,  Einl.  1  *,?(>/•  His  martyrdom

1  If  so,  this  would  be  the  basis  for  the  literary  setting  adopted
by  the  later  author  of  the  pastoral  epistles  in  his  third  com
position  (i  Tim.  1  if.,  cp  TIMOTHY  AND  Trrvs  [EPISTLES],
§  n).  The  casual  way  in  which  Timothy's  connection  with
Ephesus  is  assumed  there,  may  be  pure  fantasy ;  but  it  is  more
likely  that  it  may  reflect  some  actual  tradition  of  his  career  after
Paul's  removal ;  certainly  (although  the  far  from  exhaustive  or
accurate  nature  of  Acts  as  a  record  of  Paul's  later  life  does  not
make  this  an  insuperable  objection)  there  is  no  recorded  period
in  Acts  when  Paul  started  for  Macedonia  leaving  Timothy  to
superintend  matters  at  Ephesus.

5078


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


d  Tim.  G  12  f.)  is  connected  in  one  tradition  with  wild  orgies
in  vogue  possibly  at  the  local  festival  of  Diana,  the  mob  having
clubbed  him  to  death  for  protesting  against  their  licentiousness.

J.  Mo.

TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)

Contents  of  epistles  (§§  1-3).  Second  imprisonment  (§  10).

Period  and  object  (§  4).  Genesis  of  pastorals  (§  n).

The  errorists  (§  5).  Critical  analysis  (§§  12-14).

Paulinism  (§  6).  Order  of  composition  (§  15).

Sub-Pauline  elements  (8  7).  Author  (§  16).

The  faithful  sayings  (§  8).  Pseudonymity  (§  17).

Style  and  diction  (§  y).  Bibliography  (§  18).

These  three  epistles  commonly  form  a  group  :  in  the
NT  canon,2  and  the  general  similarity  of  their  diction,
aim,  and  atmosphere  makes  it  convenient  to  discuss
them  side  by  side.  Their  contents  are  as  follows  : —

i  Tim.  is  somewhat  loosely  knit  together  ;  the
contents  are  miscellaneous  rather  than  orderly,  as  if  the
_,.  writer  had  had  no  single  topic  dominant  in
his  mind.  But  in  spite  of  this  desultory
character  the  general  trend  of  the  epistle  is  not  obscure.
After  the  usual  greeting  (1  if.)  the  epistle  opens  by  describing
the  commission  already  given  by  Paul  to  his  lieutenant  at
Ephcsus  and  now  urged  afresh  upon  his  attention  that  he  may
be  able  to  counteract  local  errorists  of  antinomian  proclivities.
This  commission  enforces  sincerity  and  moral  earnestness,
according  to  the  Pauline  standard  presented  as  an  apostolic
trust  and  tradition  to  which  Timotheus  is  naturally  heir  (3-11).
Here  a  digression  occurs,  suggested  by  the  closing  words  of
?'.  ii  ;  Paul  claims  to  be  the  staunch  though  unworthy  representa
tive  of  this  evangelical  standard,  and  summons  Timothy  to
unflinching  loyalty  (12-20)  in  view  of  some  recent  instances  of
aberration  (HVMEN^«US  and  ALEXANDER).  The  epistle  then
passes  away  from  polemic  and  personal  allusions  into  the  first  of
its  two  sections  (2  _/".).  Directions  are  laid  down  for  the
regulation  of  church-life  in  general  :  («)  for  whom  (2  if.)  and
by  whom  (8)  prayer  is  to  be  offered  in  church — both  paragraphs
expanding  into  slight  digressions  upon  the  universality3  of
salvation  in  the  Pauline  gospel  (3-7)  and  upon  the  subordinate
place  of  women  (9-8  i).  The  writer  then  proceeds  from  Christian
worship  to  the  more  vital  question  of  (/>)  organisation,  laying

1  As  'personal'  letters  ('pro  affectu  et  dilectione,"  Murat,
Can.)  they  usually  share  with  Philemon  the  last  place  in  the
list  of  Pauline  epistles.  After  the  Murat.  Canon,  where  for
some  reason  Titus  precedes  the  other  two,  the  normal  arrange
ment  is  i  Tim.,  2  Tim.,  Titus.

-  The  allusions  and  citations  in  early  Christian  literature
simply  prove  the  existence  and  (by  no  means  unanimous)
acceptance  of  these  epistles  during  the  second  and  third  centuries.
Neither  their  rejection  by  writers  and  leaders  outside  the
catholic  church,  nor  their  welcome  within  it,  can  be  supposed  to
throw  independent  light  upon  the  question  of  their  actual  origin
and  authorship.  Errorists  usually  refused  to  admit  what  was
in  more  or  less  plain  conflict  with  their  own  tenets,  and  one  has
always  to  suspect  the  bias  of  moral  dislike  (Clem. Alex.  Strom.
2n)  behind  their  so-called  literary  verdicts  upon  authorship.
But  as  little  do  the  employment  and  the  approbation  of  such
writings  by  church -authors  tell  in  favour  of  their  reputed
authorship.  When  admitted  to  the  canon  as  documents  bearing
Paul's  name,  they  were  judged  healthy  in  religious  tone,
practically  serviceable  to  the  church  ('  in  honore  ecclesia
catholicse  in  ordinatione  ecclesiastics;  discipline  sanctificatae
sunt,"  Murat.  Can.),  and  generally  congruous  with  the  Pauline
tradition  and  temper.  Those  who  thus  stamped  them  with
approval  had  no  independent  knowledge  of  their  composition  ;
it  was  enough  that  the  epistles  contained  nothing  which  jarred
with  what  was  judged  to  be  apostolic  or  Pauline  ;  and  the  early
Christian  attitude  towards  '  Hebrews '  is  abundant  evidence  of  '
how  loose  that  judgment  could  be.  The  modern  critic  is  there-  i
fore  justified  in  going  behind  such  ecclesiastical  tradition  in  i
order  to  face  directly  problems  of  origin  and  authorship  which,  I
in  the  nature  of  things,  could  hardly  have  been  present  to  the
consciousness  of  those  who  with  sound  instinct  preserved  >
writings  handed  down  by  religious  usage  from  the  past.  No
one  would  dream  of  challenging  the  verdict  of  the  Homeric
\ioptfoi'Te«,  simply  because  in  common  with  antiquity  generally
Aristotle  (with  the  same  facts  before  him)  found  no  difficulty  in
treating  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey  as  products  of  the  same
mind.  And  the  identification  of  canonicity  or  worthiness  with
direct  apostolic  authorship,  which  tacitly  controlled  nearly  all
early  Christian  discussions  upon  the  primitive  literature  of  the
church,  is  a  literary  convention  which  it  is  needless  at  this  time
of  day  to  spend  space  in  refuting.  Consequently,  in  the  case  of
the  pastoral  epistles,  there  need  not  be  any  hesitation  in  con
centrating  attention  upon  their  internal  evidence  when  problems
such  as  pseudpnymity  are  raised.  This  is  just  one  of  the
instances  in  which  the  naive  presuppositions  of  early  Christianity
imposed  limitations  upon  its  judgment,  when  that  judgment  was
exercised  upon  the  remote  literary  and  historical  sources  of  its
treasures.

3  J.  Turmel,  '  Histoire  de  1'interpret.  de  i  Tim.  24'  (Revue
dllist.  et  de  Litt.  Rilig.  1900,  Sept.-Oct.).

5079


down  the  moral  criteria  (see  EDUCATION,  §§  idf.)  of  episcofi
(82-7)  and  diaconi  (8-13,  incidentally  deaconesses  are  included),
and  closing  the  whole  section  1  with  a  lofty  stanza  or  fragment
of  a  primitive  confession  upon  the  incarnate  Christ  (3  14-16;.

The  second  section  (4-ti),  which  resumes  the  tone  of  polemic,
is  thrown  into  the  form  of  rules  for  the  personal  conduct  and
ministry  of  Tim.  in  view  of  serious  moral  aberrations  fostered
by  the  ascetic  tendencies  of  certain  Christian  teachers ;  these
sophistries  and  superstitions  he  is  authoritatively  to  refute
(4  1-16).  He  is  further  advised  upon  his  attitude  to  the  practical
problems  created  by  differences  of  age  and  sex  within  the
membership  of  the  churches  (!>  i  /.),  and  some  space  is  devoted
to  the  maintenance  and  control  of  two  special  classes  of  officials —
widows2  (3-16)  and  presbyters  (17-25).  After3  a  word  on  the
relative  duties  of  slaves  and  masters  ((i  i /.),  the  epistle  comes
round  to  lash  the  errorists,  attacking  them  with  considerable
vigour  for  making  a  trade  of  religion.  Naturally  this  suggests
a  warning  to  Christians  in  general4  against  the  passion  for
money  (3-10),  and  with  an  impressive  charge  addressed  to  the
'man  of  God,'  the  epistle  dies  away  in  a  doxology  (n-i6).5  In
a  postscript,  some  words  to  rich  people  are  appended,  together
with  a  supplementary  warning  to  Timothy  against  contemporary
yccocri?  (17-21).

In  2  Tim.,  after  the  greeting,  Paul  gives  thanks  for  Timothy's

inheritance  and  experience  of  faith  (1  1-5). He  then  warns  his

friend  against  false  shame,  urging  his  own  life  and

2.  2  Tim. teaching  to  the  contrary  (6-14), 6  as  well  as  a  recent

example  of  energy  and  fearlessness  on  the  part  of
an  Asiatic  Christian  called  Onesiphorus  (15-18).  Especially  for
one  who  like  Timothy  is  heir  to  the  Pauline  trust  and  tradition,
endurance  for  Christ  s  sake  and  adherence  to  the  Pauline  gospel
(of  which,  indeed,  endurance  is  a  note)  form  a  pressing  duty  ;
the  former  is  certain  of  a  reward  (2  1-13),  whilst  the  latter  is  the
one  useful  and  honourable  course  of  action  open  for  a  Christian
teacher  (14-26)  amid  the  heightening  temptations  of  unpractical
controversy  and  immorality.  After  vigorously  exposing  the
principles  and  methods  of  these  errorists  (3  1-9,  see  J  ANNES  AND
jAMBREs),  Paul  bids  Timothy  maintain  the  principles  of  the
Pauline  gospel,  even  when  they  involve  suffering  and  obloquy,
and  at  the  same  time  adhere  to  the  OT  scriptures  (10-17)  •"  then
follows  a  resume  containing  his  final  charge  and  the  swansong
of  his  own  confession  (4  1-8).  Data  of  personal  information  and
private  messages  close  the  letter  (49-22).

After  a  somewhat  elaborate  greeting  (1  1-4),  the

3.  TltllS. epistle  to  Titus  opens  by  reiterating  Pauls  instruc

tions  with  regard  to  the  choice  and duties8 of


1  The  personal  reference  elsewhere  in  the  NT  (Gal.  29,  Rev.
812)  does  not  justify  Bois  in  bracketing  'which  is  the  church
of  the  living  God  '  (TJTIS  . . . <Ju)fTOs  : 814-16)  and  connecting
'  pillar  '  (crri/Aos)  with  the  subject  of  '  behave  '  (ayacrTpfV/ietrOai).

2  The  concern  to  keep  the  widow-class  under  the bishop's
control  is  thoroughly  sub-apostolic  (cp  Ignat.  ad  Polyk.  4,  5).
See  MINISTRY,  §  41,  and  Hastings'  DBlgibf.

3  The  interpolated  remark  (0  23),  if  not  an  aside  suggested  by
'pure'  (dyrdr),  may  have  originally  lain  between  43  and  4  4  or
4  12  and  4  13,  from  which  it  has  got  displaced  (instances  of  this
in  Hist.  New  Test.ft)  pp.  xxxix  676  ;  also  Jahn  on  Juv.3i2  16  and
Che.  on  Is.  38  22). Its  insertion  after  5  22,  which  must  have  taken
place  very  early,  would  thus  be  due  to  a  copyist  who  read  the
sentence  as  a  qualifying  definition  of  '  pure  '  (ayvuv)—  Christian
purity  being  no  Essene-like  abstinence. Epictetus  (I)iss.  3  22)
similarly  regards  bodily  health  as  a  necessary  part  of  the  true
Cynic's  religious  equipment  ;  '  for  if  he  has  the  appearance  of  a
consumptive,  pale,  and  thin  person,  his  testimony  has  not  the
same  weight.' Jiilicher  and Bacon  group  int.  23-25  together,
and  von  Soden  links  25  to  23,  24  to  22,  whilst  Calvin  plausibly
suggested  that  22023  was  a  marginal  note  of  the  author.

•*  In  particular  to  teachers  who  found  Christianity  a  lucrative
trade  (cp  Did.  n/I,  Barn.  10,  Ignat.  Ephes.  7,  Tit.  In).

5  The  absence  of  any  greetings  to  members  of  the  Ephesian
church,  together  with  the  paucity  of  personal  allusions,  shows
that  the  epistle  is  not  a  letter  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.
The  author  is  writing  with  his  eye  on  the  Christian  church  of


in  the  introduction.  Cp  also  the  variant  know
ye  yivtuCTxeTe  :  Lachm.)  in  2  Tim.  3  i.  The  alternative  open  to
the  traditionalists  is  the  gratuitous  assumption  that  passages
like  i  Tim.  2  i-3  13,  etc.,  were  meant  to  be  communicated  by
their  recipients  to  wider  circles  (Zahn)  ;  which  of  course  destroys
the  character  of  the  writings  as  private  letters.  Cp  i  Tim.  2  8
(i  Cor.  7  1 7).

6  On  the  contents  of  1  6  see  below  (§  7). But  even  if  '  us  '  in
v.  7  referred  to Paul and  Timothy  (which is not  absolutely
certain)  it  would  simply  allude  to  them  as  the  persons  immedi
ately  under  consideration,  not  as  officials. The  passage,  there
fore,  does  not  in  itself  betray  the  narrowing  of  the  Spirit  to  a
class ; and the contents  of  the  Spirit are  distinctly  ethical :
vigour  issuing  in  love  to  others  and  in  self-control.

7  On  813  cp  Aristides6i6  (Wendland,  Klicin.  Mus., 1894,
49  309).

8  The  curious  antipathy  of  the  writer  to  second  marriages  on
the  part  of  presbyters,  episcopi,  diaconi,  and  '  widows '  0(>?p«u,
see  WIDOW),  is  quite  un-Pauline,  but  corresponds  to  the  more
general  cast  of  feeling  prevalent  in  the  second  century  throughout

5080


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


4.  Period
and  object.


presbyters  or  episcopi  in  Crete,1  in  order  to  sharply  check
erroneous  teaching  and  immoral  practices  on  the  part  of  some
Judaising  propagandists  who  were  upsetting  the  churches
(S-ib).'2  Titus  is  then  instructed  how  to  enforce  the  moral
obligations  of  Christianity  upon  aged  men  ('2  if.),  aged  women,3
and  married  women  (3-5),  younger  men  like  himself  (6-8),  and
slaves  (gf.)-  Paul  insists  on  this  moral  life  as  an  essential  of  the
Christian  faith  (11-14,  see  PECULIAR  PEOPLE),  and  urges  Titus
to  press  home  the  positive  duties  of  obedience  to  authority  and
of  pure  conduct,  instead  of  wasting  time  over-controversialists  and
sectaries  (2  15-8  n  ;  cp  EXCOMMUNICATION,  §  3  ;  HERESY,  §  2).
With  some  brief  personal  notices  (12-15)  tne  epistle  closes  ;  the
mention  of  the  jurist  Zenas  and  the  evangelist  Apollos  is  perhaps
intended  to  suggest  that  it  was  conveyed  by  their  hands  to  its
recipient.

The  cluster  of  problems  offered  by  these  epistles  is
intimately  connected  with  the  dual  nature  of  their
contents.  Within  a  setting  and  alongside
of  material  which,  upon  all  available
criteria  of  internal  evidence,  must  be
pronounced  distinctly  sub- Pauline,4  the  reader  meets
passages  apparently  alien  which  have  high  claims  to  be
considered  as  directly  due  to  the  apostle  whose  name
the  letters  bear.  The  task  of  criticism  is  to  do  justice
to  both  of  these  elements.  The  sub-Pauline  element
is  primary,  and  in  view  of  it  any  reasonable  appreciation
of  the  whole  question,  not  merely  of  isolated  details,
leads  almost  inevitably  to  the  conclusion — one  of  the
best  established  in  NT  research — that  the  three  epistles
are  pseudonymous,  composed  by  a  Paulinist  in  Asia
Minor5  not  earlier  than  the  close  of  the  first  century,
and  not  later  than  the  second  decade  of  the  second
century,  based  in  part  upon  genuine  fragments  from  the
apostle's  pen  as  well  as  upon  more  or  less  reliable  oral
tradition,  and  intended  to  express  and  instruct  the
common  Christianity6  of  the  day  in  terms,  as  far  a!
was  possible  or  useful,  of  the  great  Pauline  tradition.
Substantially  they  were  written  and  circulated  early  in
the  second  century,  as  is  evident  from  their  employment
in  the  epistles  of  Ignatius  and  Polycarp.  During  the
period  90-120,  and  during  that  period  alone,  they  possess
a  career  and  object  which  corresponds  to  their  own

the  churches  (e.g.,  Athenagoras,  Leg;  pro  Christ.  33,  'respect
able  adultery,'  euvrpeTri)?  /aot^eta>  Herm.  Mand.  4  i  4  ;  Clem.
Alex.  Strom.  3  i).  See  Jacoby,  Neutest.  Etkik  (1899),  378-399.

1  The  concrete  and  bitter  description  of  the  Cretan  character
— with  its  prevalent  traits  of  falsehood,  avarice,  drunkenness,
and  restless  sedition — does  not  favour  the  ingenious  hypothesis
that  Cretans  in  this  epistle  are  an  allegorical  equivalent  for
Philistines  (Kprji-es,  cp  CRETE),  whom  tradition  occasionally
connected  with  the  island.  There  is  no  evidence  for  such
personification  in  the  pastorals  as  would  represent  the  church
under  the  figure  of  the  twelve  tribes  scattered  in  the  dispersion
(Jas.  1  i)  and  opposed  by  enemies  of  the  true  Israel.

-  In  i>.  16  o/j.o\oyovcriv  (KV  'profess')  is  (as  Heb.  11  13)  'to
make  public  avowal,'  especially  when  called  upon  (i  Pet.  815).
The  writer's  point  is,  not  that  the  errorists  made  extravagant
claims,  but  that  they  did  not  act  up  to  the  normal  profession  of
the  Christian  faith.


MINISTRY,  §  43).

•*  It  is  only  fair  to  the  ascertained  results  of  criticism  to  adopt
this  position,  although  one  still  meets  statements  like  the  follow
ing  :  '  It  may  be  asserted  without  fear  of  contradiction  that
nothing  really  un-Pauline  has  been  proved  in  any  of  the  dis
puted  epistles'  (Sanday,  Inspiration,  338_/T  363^?  379./C,  1896,
a  discussion  characterised  by  Dr.  Hincks  of  Andover  thus  :
'  General  assertion,  bolstered  up  by  the  opinion  of  those  like-
minded  —  this  is  not  the  way  in  which  an  intelligent  man,  who
has  solid  arguments  at  his  disposal,  maintains  an  imperilled
cause  ').

5  Cp  von  Dobschiitz,  Die  urchristlichen  Gemeinden,  127-139
(1902),  Harnack,  Ausbreit.  d.  Christ.  (1902)461/1

H  The  motto  of  the  pastorals  lies  in  a  sentence  like  (RV)  '  For
the  grace  of  God  hath  appeared,  bringing  salvation  to  all  men,
instructing  us  '  (Tit.  2  n,  eTre^afr;  yap  TT\  \apis  TOV  9eoO  cramjpio?
iracrti/  ayflpiuTroi?  TraiSev'ovtra  rjfias).  In  their  age  Christianity
had  to  fight  for  its  life  against  a  subtle  spirit  in  the  air  rather
than  against  civil  persecution  ;  visionaries  and  sophist?  were
more  deadly  than  proconsuls  and  lictors.  Thanks  to  the
moderation  and  steady  sense  of  writers  like  the  author  of  the
pastorals,  however,  ordinary  Christians  came  safely  through  the
struggle  with  four  truths  as  a  secure  possession  ;  the  unity  of
the  Creator  and  the  Redeemer,  the  unique  and  sufficient  value


internal  evidence  as  well  as  to  the  data  afforded  by
more  or  less  contemporary  literature.  The  latter  point
is  minor  though  real.  Their  literary  affinities  are
beyond  question  with  Lk.-Acts,1  Clem. Rom.,  Barnabas,
and  the  epistles  of  Jude  and  2  Pet. ,  as  well  as  with  the
fourth  book  of  the  Sibylline  oracles  (Asia  Minor,  circa
80  A.D.  )  which,  like  4  Maccabees,  reiterates  the  term
'  pious  '  (ei><re,i?7s).  Unlike  Paul,  the  author  also  makes
copious  use  of  the  vocabulary  of  2  Maccabees,  and,  at
least  in  Titus  and  i  Tim. ,  there  are  traces  of  acquaint
ance  with  i  Pet.

The  distinctive  element,  however — i.e. ,  the  promin
ence  assigned  to  Timothy  and  Titus,  is  intelligible  only
upon  the  supposition  that  the  author  had  specially  in
view  the  ulterior  end  of  vindicating  the  legitimate
evangelic  succession  of  contemporary  episcopi  and  other
office-bearers  in  provinces  where  this  was  liable  for
various  reasons  to  be  challenged.  The  pastorals  were
composed,  says  Tertullian,  to  expound  church  affairs
( '  de  ecclesiastico  statu  ' ).  The  craving  (visible  in  Clem.
Rom. )  for  continuity  of  succession  as  a  guarantee  of
authority  in  doctrine  (and  therefore  in  discipline2)
underlies  the  effort  of  this  Paulinist  to  show  that
Timothy  and  Titus  were  genuine  (yvrjcrioi)  heirs  of
Paul,  who  himself  (as  the  author  goes  out  of  his  way  to
repeat  and  assert)  was  a  divinely  commissioned  herald
of  the  gospel.  Inferentially,  the  successors  appointed
by  Paul's  lieutenants  possessed  the  true  central  deposit
of  the  faith.  Conscious  of  this  inheritance,  and  alive
to  its  value,  they  are  urged  even  as  novices  to  instruct  •'
the  churches  personally  upon  the  faith  in  a  peremptory
and  positive  manner,4  instead  of  allowing  converts  to
lie  exposed  to  unreliable  teachers  or  false  leaders.
Such  teachers  and  leaders  abound.  Indeed,  one  note
of  the  age  is  the  flaunting  confident  temper  of  the
errorists  (2  Tim.  2 23/  3i/  43/  Tit.  1  io/.  3io  i  Tim.
1?  4  i/  624  Acts  2629/1  Jude  8-10  12  19  Rev.  220  i  Jn.
4 1  5  2  Jn.  7  3  Jn.  9  ;  Ign.  Ephes.  7,  Trail.  6,  etc. ).

Open attempts, as well as cunning intrigues (2  Tim.  36

Jude  4),  are  on  foot  to  exploit  the  principles  of  the  faith,  and

the new tone of  overbearing petulance,  among

5. The other traits, answers to the tradition preserved

errorists. DV Hegesippus  (circa. 160 A.i>.)5 that such a

phase  occurred  first  of  all  during  Trajan's  reign

(Eus.  HE'S  32),  previously  to  which  the  church*  had  remained  'a


of
mo
God.


,

Jesus  for  redemption  and  revelation,  the  vital  tie  between
rals  and  faith,  and  the  secure  future  assured  to  the  church  of


5081


1  Cp  von  Soden, Theol.  Abhandlungen, 133-135  (1892). A
comparison  of  the  pastorals  with  Lk.-Acts,  etc.,  establishes  not
their  priority  or  literary  filiation,  so  much  as  the  relatively  late
period at  which all  were composed. Diction, ideas, stand
point — all  indicate  unmistakably  the  sub-Pauline  period,  with
its  stereotyped  expressions  and  current  phraseology.

2  The  concern  of  the  pastorals,  less  avowed  yet  none  the  less
real  than  in  Ignatius  and  Clement,  is  to  vindicate  the  authority
of  the  elders  or  bishops  over  the  enthusiasts  and  ascetics  in  the
church ; the second century reveals this perennial struggle
going  on  particularly  in  Asia  Minor. Hence  this  Paulinist  is
forward to  claim  Paul's  authority  on  behalf  of  the  organised
discipline  of  the  churches.

3  The  prominence  given  to  '  teaching '  qualities  shows  that
one danger of  the  contemporary  churches lay largely in the
vagaries  and  crude  speculations  of  unauthorised  teachers  (Did.
15  i). The  author's  cure  is  simple. Better  let  the  episcopus
himself  teach  ! Better let those in authority  themselves  be
responsible  for  the  instruction  of  ordinary  members  ! Evidently
teaching  was  not  originally  or  usually  (i  Tim.  5  17)  a  function  of
the  presbyters  ;  but  abuses  had  led  by  this  time,  as  the  Didaclte
proves,  to  a  need  for  combining  teaching  with  organised  church
authority. A contemporary spirit of contempt for young
episcopi  (Ignat. Magn.  3  etc.) is answered by the repeated
encouragements  of  Paul  in  2  Tim.  2  22/T  Tit.  2  6  f.  i  Tim.  4  nf.
5  i  ; these  are  effective from  the  writer's standpoint, though
such  a  tone  would  have  been  singularly  inappropriate  from  Paul
to  lieutenants  of  mature  experience. Here,  however,  they  are
types  of  loyalty  to  the  Pauline  gospel ;  that  is  all.

4  Timothy  (2  Tim.  4s),  eg:,  is  not  an  evangelist,  but  he  is  to
do  an  evangelist's  work  as  part  of  his  full  service. See  EVAN
GELIST, MINISTRY,  §  30^,  and  Dieterich  in  ZNTW,  1000,  pp.
336-338. The  whole  evidence  from  the  allusions  to  ecclesiastical
organisation  points  to  the  period  immediately  preceding  that  of
Ignatius  (MINISTRY,  §  54).

5  Also  to the statement of Clem. Alex. (Strom.  7  r7) that
Gnostic  heresies  first  became  threatening  about  Hadrian's  reign,
whilst the apostolic age and teaching ended with Paul's
ministry  under  Nero.

6  Emphasis  on the visible church  as  a  bulwark  of  morals

5082


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


pure  and  incorruptible  virgin  '  (mtpScvos  KaOapa.  KO.\  a&idtji0opo<;),
her  seducers  lurking  somewhere  in  obscurity  (ev  afiijAo)  TTOU
cr/corei).  This  comparatively  virgin  purity  of  the  church  lasted
not  merely  till  the  death  of  the  apostles,  but  till  the  close  of  the
next  generation,  'of  those  thought  worthy  to  be  immediate
listeners  to  the  very  words  of  the  divine  wisdom '  (riav  avrals
dicoats  TTJS  evBiov  <ro<f>ia.f  eTraicoGcrai  /caTTjfiiojitei'coi'),  when  the
deceit  of  teachers  of  other  doctrine  (TO>»  eTepo6ifiao-/taAui^,  cp

1  Tim.  1 3  1)3)  produced impious error in the communities.
'Since  none  of  the  apostles  survived, these [eT«po6iSd(r<caAoi]
now  attempted, unabashed and openly, to preach '  so-called
gnosis  '  (TTJC  <l/tvt<awnov  yvtatriv  ',  cp  i  Tim.  *>  20)  in  opposition  to

the  preaching  of  the truth  '  (TUJ  TTJS  aArjSei'a?  (cijpuy/maTt  ; cp

2  Tim.  4  17  Tit.  1  3). Of  these  Marcion  1  was  the  foremost.

In  the  pastorals,  as  in  Jude  and  2  Peter,  this  move
ment  in  its  incipient  stage  is  met  by  equally  frank
methods,  which  seem  denunciatory  merely  because  we
no  longer  possess  any  statement  of  the  other  side  and
are,  therefore,  prone  to  forget  that  such  rough  and
decisive  ways  are  at  times  the  soundest  method  of  con
serving  truth.  Popular  applications  of  gnosticism  were,
as  a  rule,  brilliant  and  poisonous  fungi.  Instead  of
writing  a  botanical  treatise  on  their  varieties,  this  writer
felt  the  simpler  and  more  practical  plan  was  to  make
people  either  avoid  or  destroy  them.  It  was  a  short
and  easy  plan,  and  probably  effective  at  the  time,
although  its  expression  in  literature  runs  the  natural
risk  of  being  reproached  for  containing  more  heat  than
light.  Firmness  and  even  ridicule  have  their  own  place
as  ethical  weapons  of  defence,  and  the  opening  of  the
second  century  offered  Christianity  some  admirable
occasions  for  their  use.

The  physiognomy  of  the  errorists  is  indistinct,  for
several  reasons.  The  author  had  to  preserve  the  veri
similitude  of  a  Pauline  situation,  for  one  thing  ;  and
the  desire  of  avoiding  undue  anachronisms  prevented
him  from  being  more  explicit  about  the  details  of  errors
which  had  arisen  in  his  own  later  age.  Besides,  the
errors  were  familiar  to  his  audience  and  might  be  taken
for  granted  on  the  whole.  It  is  even  probable  that  he
abstained  purposely  from  confining  his  range  to  any  one
set  of  visionaries  and  opponents,  inasmuch  as  his  letters
were  intended  (like  i  Peter,  James,  and  2  Peter)  to  be
manifestoes  to  the  church  in  general,  rather  than  homi
lies  for  any  local  audience.  The  numerous  forms  of
opinion  and  conduct  in  and  around  contemporary
Christendom,  which  by  a  sound  instinct  he  regarded  as
a  menace  to  the  faith,  had  certain  common  features  ;
and  to  describe  these  as  due  to  a  syncretism  of  Gnosti
cism  and  (Tit.  1  io/.  89  i  Tim.  ly)  Judaism,  is  to  go  as
far  as  the  evidence  of  the  pastorals  warrants.

The  environment  (as  in  Rev.  2_/C,  and  the  Ignatian  epp.)  is
marked  by  the  incipient  phases  of  what  afterwards  blossomed
out  into  the  Gnosticism  of  the  second  century  :  an  amalgam  of
tendencies  towards  dualism2  and  docetism  (i  Tim.  26  3  16,  as  in
i  In.),  the  multiplication  of  media  between  Clod  and  man
(i  Tim.  2  5_/i),  a  distinction  between  the  God  of  creation  and
the  God  of  redemption  (i  Tim.  4  3-5,  cp  Herm.  I  'is.  1  3),  a
depreciation  of  the  OT  (2  Tim.  3  16), •*  and  a  penchant  for  magic
and  superstition  (2  Tim.  3s  13  ;  cp. -Vets 89-24  19  11-19 for  Ephesus,
13  6-12  for  Cyprus).  These  tendencies  were  allied  to  ascetic  pre-

(2  Tim.  2  I9./C  etc.)  is  accompanied  by  its  elevation  to  the  rank
of  foundation  (#e/xe'Aios),  hitherto  reserved  for  Christ  (i  Cor.

3  n),  or,  at  least,  for  the  prophets  and  apostles  (Eph.  2  20). The
church now  takes  her  place  in  a  fairly  stable  wprld ;  the  old
anxious  outlook  for  an  immediate  return  of  Jesus  is  no  longer
central. The  really  pressing  questions  concern  not  the  next
world  but  the  present,  and  institutions  are  brought  forward  as  a
means  of  moral  discipline  and  religious  settlement.

1  Marcion's  omission  of  the pastorals  from his canon  tells
heavily  against  their  origin  as  preserved  in  tradition. Philemon
was  accepted  by  him,  though  far  more  of  a  private  note  than
any  of  the  pastorals  ;  and  the  presence  of  elements  antagonistic
to  his  own  views  need  not  have  made  him  exclude  them,  since
he  could  have  easily  excised  these  passages  in  this  as  in  other
cases.

2  Cp  von  Dobschutz,  180-187,  189.

3  The  lack  of  homogeneity  in  the  description  of  the  errorists
prevents this trait  from  telling  against  the  reference  (GENE
ALOGIES, §  4  ; Hort,  Judaistic Christianity, 135/1)  of the
'genealogies'  (•yei/eaAo-yuu)  in Tit.  3 9 i  Tim.  1  4 to  legendary
pedigrees  of  Jewish  heroes. But  the  phrase  came  to  have  a
conveniently  appropriate colour afterwards in view of the
interminable  series  of  aeons  and  emanations  developed  especially
by  Gnostic  sects  like  the  Valentinians. The  Jewish  legalism  of
Tit.  1 14  89  i  Tim.  1  -jf.  recalls  Cerinthus  decidedly.

5083


dilections  (like  the  prohibition  of  marriage  among  the  Encratites,
of  marriage  and  flesh  among  the  Saturninians  and  the  Mar-
cionites),  which  as  usual  bordered  on  antinomian  license,  to  an
aristocratic  exclusiveness  (opposed  in  non-Pauline  fashion,  i  Tim.
2  4_/;  4  10),  to  a  semi-philosophic  evaporation  of  primitive  beliefs
— e.g.,  on  the  resurrection  *  (2  Tim.  2  18  ;  so  Menander  and  Dosi-
theus),  to  indulgence  in  superficial  theories  and  rhetoric,  and  so
on.  To  our  author's  eye  these  errorists  were  heterogeneous.
'  For  there  are  many  insubordinate  people,  chatterers  and
cheats,  especially  those  who  have  come  from  the  circumcision '
(Tit.  1  10).  The  mischievous  feature  about  them  was  their
presence  within  the  churches  and  their  combination  of  plausible
errors  with  apparent,  even  ostentatious,  fidelity  to  the  principles
of  the  faith  —  a  trouble  elsewhere  reflected  (Acts  20  29^)  in
connection  with  the  Ephesian  church  towards  the  close  of  the
first  century.

Even  if  the  author  had  any  single  system  of  error  in
mind  (which,  in  view  of  the  contemporary  fusion  of

6.  Paulinism.  PaSanism  and  Judaism,  is  unlikely),
the  vague  and  somewhat  indiscriminate
fashion  in  which  he  endeavours  to  confute  their  pre
tensions,  renders  it  impossible  to  reconstruct  any
coherent  picture  of  his  opponents.  Several  traits
suggest  influences  similar  to  those  which  fostered
Essenism  ;  others  '2  recall  the  picture  of  Cerinthus
sketched  in  later  tradition,  others  again  the  errorists
Carpocrates,  Menander,  and  Dositheus.  The  two  in
disputable  facts  are,  that  the  collective  evidence  of  the
early  Christian  literature,  as  well  as  of  later  tradition,
places  the  origin  of  such  phenomena  (upon  any  con
siderable  scale)  not  earlier  than  the  close  of  the  first
century,  and  that  their  locus  was  primarily  Eastern,  in
Syria  and  particularly  Asia  Minor,  where  we  find  the
pastorals,  like  the  Ignatian  epistles,  pouring  a  scattered
fire  upon  manifold  forms  of  antagonistic  theosophy.

Against  the  seductive  influences  of  local  paganism,
with  its  ethical  miasma  and  religious  cravings,  the
author  assumes  a  moralistic  standpoint  based  upon  the
popular  conception  of  Paulinism.

No  writer  after  Paul's  death  could  maintain,  even  when — as
in  Marcion's  case — he  happened  to  sympathise  with,  the  deeper
aspects  of  the  apostle's  thought,  which  survived  mainly,  so
far  as  the  subsequent  literature  was  concerned,  but  in  altered
form  throughout  the  Fourth  Gospel.  As  a  general  rule
Paulinism  was  either  misunderstood  or  modified.  The  sub-
Pauline  epistles,  like  the  Roman  symbol  (Kattenbusch,  Das
Apostolische  Symbol,  2498^  596  f.  720  [1900]),  show  instances
of  both  attitudes,  and  the  pastorals  are  a  vivid  proof  of  how
even  a  devoted  Paulinist  had  to  alter  the  emphasis  at  many
points  of  his  master's  teaching  upon  religious  and  practical
topics  3  in  a  restatement  of  it  for  some  later  age — being  forced,
for  example,  to  meet  the  common  objection  to  Paul's  severe
view  of  the  Law,  and  to  admit  the  high  estimate  of  its  value
throughout  the  diaspora  as  an  ethical  code  and  check  (i  Tim.
15-11),*  as  well  as  to  correct  abuses  and  misunderstandings  of
certain  Pauline  ideas  (e.g.,  the  resurrection,  2  Tim.  2  is).

The  author  rightly  felt  that  Paul  was  essentially  anti-
Gnostic,  and  that  the  tenets  of  the  incipient  Gnostic
theosophy  would  have  been  repugnant


7.  Sub-Pauline
elements.


to  the  man  who  had  theoretically  and


practically  attacked  its  precursors  at
Colossoe.  But  his  own  practical  bent  and  prudent
sense  of  the  situation  prevent  him  from  developing  in
reply  Paul's  peculiar  theory  of  gnosis  as  a  special
endowment,  superior  to  faith,  and  mediated  by  the

1  This  notion  is  either  ultra-spiritualist  (cp  Jn.  624,  qualified
carefully  by  !J28f., etc.)  and due to Gnostic  tendencies,  or
chiliastic — the  reign  of  Christ,  eternal  life,  has  already  begun;
therefore  there  can  be  no  marrying  (Lk.  2035/1  i  Tim.  43).

2  If  Cerinthus and  Carpocrates  really rejected the virgin-
hirth  (Iren.  Adi',  liter.  i.  2t>  i  25  i),  it  is  strange  that  neither  the
author  of  the Fourth  Gospel  nor  the  author  of  the  pastorals
defended  this  point. The  former,  probably,  had  reasons  of  his
own  ;  but  the  latter,  who  had  no  semi-philosophic  christology
to state, seems to have omitted the virgin -birth from his
rhythmic summary (iTim.3i6_/) owing to his genuinely
Pauline  standpoint. This  adherence  to  the  older  view is  all
the  more  remarkable  side  by  side  with  the  eager  insistence  on  it
in  Asc.  fsaiif,  11  2-22,  and  Ignat.  ad  Eph.  19  (where  a  Pauline
citation  occurs,  i  Cor.  2  8),  both  contemporary  writings.

3  Note,  e.g.,  the  varying  proportion  of  the  two  currents — one
spontaneous  and  prophetic,  the  other  veering  towards  order  and
organisation. The  former  is  in  some  writings  of  this  age  almost
wholly subordinated to the latter  (Clem.  Rom. , Past., even
Ignat.) :  in  others  it  is  dominant,  almost  exclusively  important
(Barnabas,  i  Jn.,  Rev.,  Jude,  2  Pet.).

4  Antiphanes  (Fragm.  Coin.  Grace.),  '  He  who  does  no  wrong
needs  no  law '  (6  jUTjSep  aSiiciuv  ovfierbs  6f  ITCU  vonov).

5084


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


spirit.  Such  methods  would  not  have  been  appropriate.
Popular  Christianity  had  always  been  wider  and  more
varied  than  Paulinism,  even  during  Paul's  lifetime,  and
the  new  period  which  found  Christianity  in  fresh  re
lations  with  the  wider  empire  in  the  generation  following
Paul's  death,  stimulated  fresh  energies  and  fresh  methods
of  expression,  native  to  the  age  but  more  or  less  an
advance  upon  all  previous  conceptions.  To  the  author
of  the  pastorals,  loyal  to  the  apostolic  and  especially
the  Pauline  tradition,  but  none  the  less  free  to  interpret
afresh  his  Christian  consciousness,  God  appears — in
un- Pauline  fashion — as  a  Saviour  ;  Jesus  not  as  the  son
of  God  but  as  a.  mediator,1  or  rather  the  mediator  ;
baptism  (Tit.  3s)  as  almost  a  sacrament  of  salvation,
the  Law  simply  as  a  useful  code  of  morals.  Anthropo
morphism  is  carefully  avoided,  as  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  ;
God  is  the  Absolute — his  unity,  awe  (i  Tim.  616,  cp
En.  I4:2i f.),  and  eternity,  his  universal  purpose,  but
not  his  fatherly  love,  being  prominent.2  The  pressing
question  of  religion  is  the  consolidation  of  the  churches
rather  than  the  extension  of  the  gospel  to  those  as  yet
unreached.  We  are  in  the  age  of  the  Epigoni,  when
the  creative  genius  has  almost  disappeared  and  is
yielding  place  to  practical  activities  which  are  mainly
devoted  to  conserving  ground  already  gained.  The
spirit  of  defensiveness  has  increased.  Christianity  is
now  more  self-conscious  than  ever.  Her  outlook  is  not
eschatological  so  much  as  secular,  directed  to  a  useful
though  troubled  career  in  the  world.  The  church  has
behind  her  a  sound  body  of  religious  truth,  which  it  is
her  business  to  teach  and  enforce  ;  and  this  is  presented
by  the  writer  in  brief,  crystallised  phrases  and  para
graphs,  which  recall  the  incipient  liturgies  and  symbols
of  the  church.3  Faith  consequently  is  tending  to  become
more  than  ever fides  quce  creditur.  It  is  predominantly
the  confident  apprehension  of  the  truth  or  the  conviction
that  the  gospel-message  is  authentic,  sometimes  the
virtue  of  fidelity  ;  but  neither  the  author  nor  his  age  has
any  intelligent  sympathy  with  Paul's  characteristic  idea
of  faith  as  the  warm  tie  between  Jesus  and  the  re
deemed  Christian.  Nay  more,  the  old  Pauline  anti
thesis  of  faith  and  works  (like  the  idea  of  justification
by  faith,  or  of  salvation  from  sin's  guilt)  is  put  into  the
background,  evidently  as  misleading  or  apt  to  be  mis
understood.  'Piety,'  nourished  by  sound'*  teaching,
is  the  root  out  of  which  all  human  virtues  spring  ;  and
the  conceptions  of  reward,  a  good  conscience,  and  the
value  of  a  respectable  reputation,  come  to  the  front.
In  effect,  this  is  practically  the  ethical  result  of
Paulinism.  But  how  differently5  the  apostle  and  the
later  church  reached  even  the  same  conclusions  !  Here
eternal  life  is  the  boon  granted  to  good  works,  and
'faith'  (iriffris)  is  a  man's  relation  to  the  'truth'  of
'  the  teaching. '

1  Sub- Pauline  idea  (Heb.  86, etc.). In Test. Dan.  6,  the
angel  of  peace  is  the  mediator  between  God  and  man.

2  The  heaping  up  of  predicates,  especially  in  the  negative,
recalls  earlier attempts by  Jewish thinkers  (e.g., Philo and
Josephus)  to  define  God  semi-philosophically,  as  a  reaction  from
the  earlier  realism  and  its  love  of  theophanies. Passages  like
i  Tim.  1  17  6  16  mark  the  sub-Pauline  transition  from  this  to  the
later  efforts  of  the  Greek  spirit,  as  in  the  '  Preaching  of  Peter  '
and  Aristides. The  pastoral 'Trinity'  corresponds,  however,
to  the  apocalyptic  (e.g.,  Rev.  14  Lk.  826,  etc.)—  i.e.,  God,  Jesus,
and  the  angels  (elect);  while  Christ's  appearing  (i  Tim.  0  i\f.)
is  stated  in  Pauline  terms  of  subordination,  and  with  the  substitu
tion  of  epiphany  (eTrt^xxveta)  for  the  Pauline  parousia  (wapowia).

•*  The  pastorals,  like  Ephesians,  are  absorbed  in  an  un-
Pauline  devotion  to  the  church  which  ignores  the  local  churches.
This  trait,  absent  even  from  Ignatius,  significantly  illustrates
their  authorship  and  real  aim  as  tracts  for  the  officers  of  the
Catholic  church.  Timothy  and  Titus  are  portrayed  as  receiving
instructions  and  ideals  which  were  to  control  the  contemporary
teachers  and  other  office-bearers  of  the  author's  age.

4  This  un-Pauline  use  of  vyiaiveiv  in 8iSacnca.\ia  vyiaivovcra.
('  sound  doctrine  ')  is  anticipated  in  the  Philonic  phrases  '  sound
learning  '  (vyiaivovcra  |ud#T)<ris),  and  '  sound  words  '  (oi  vytai'j/orres
Aoyoi); it  tends  occasionally  to  become  almost  equivalent  to
'rational,'  or  '  sane.'

5  Paul  could  have  written  Tit.  21114;  but  he  would have
had something to say  also about peace with God and re-

5085


Similarly  the  church,  to  this  unmystical  author,  is  no  longer
the  bride  or  the  body  of  Christ  but  God's  building,  or  rather  a
fainilia  dei,  quite  in  the  neo-catholic  manner.  It  is  beginning
to  assume  the  place  occupied  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Paul's
theology,  the  latter  doctrine  having  become  liable  to  abuse  as
well  as  proving  too  profound  for  later  generations.  As  in  books
like  the  Apocalypse,  Jude,  and  2  Peter,  the  Spirit  in  the
pastorals  is  essentially  prophetic  ;  1  as  a  means  of  union  between
the  individual  and  Jesus,  it  is  almost  if  not  entirely  ignored.
The  exceptions  —  and  they  are  apparent  or  partial  exceptions  —
are  Tit.  3  syC  2  Tim.  1  14  ;  even  the  personal  relation  of  the
believer  to  Jesus  is  not  cardinal  (2  Tim.  1  12  'i  uf.).

These  and other items  of the  creed, now rapidly

crystallising in Rome  and  Asia Minor, are conveyed

_, partly in hymnal fragments- which, like

'.  .  .  . those  in  the Apocalypse of  John, sprang

,  from  the  cultus  of  the  churches  ; partly  in

y °  ' the  shape  of  aphorisms such as the  terse

and weighty  axioms  called the  five '  faithful  sayings  '

(cp  Ps.  111?/.  ). These  are  like  proverbs; they  mark

a comparatively advanced stage of experience, ex

pressing  in  concentrated  form  the  outcome  of  prolonged

reflection.

(i.)  2  Tim.  2ii-i3«.  —  Here  the  'faithful  saying'  (TTIO-TO?
Ao-yos)3  resembles  a  fragment  of  some  primitive  hymn  or  con
fession,  if  it  is  not  —  like  the  rhythmical  snatches  (cp  also  Rev.
215  226,  Adyoi  TTIOTOI)  in  the  Apocalypse  —  an  outburst  of  the
Spirit-raptures  in  the  early  church  (cp  Weinel,  Die  \l'~irk.  des
Geistes,  Zof.  [1899]).  (ii.)  Tit.  3s.  —  As  the  phrase  implies  a
condensed  and  pregnant  statement,  it  seems  better  in  Tit.  3s  to
find  its  contents  in  z'.  7  rather  than  in  4-7,  which  it  is  sometimes
supposed  (e.g.,  by  von  Soden,  Bernard,  Weiss)  to  recapitulate.
(iii.)  i  Tim.  1  15.  —  Here  the  phrase  not  merely  is  expanded  by
the  non-Pauline  addition4  'and  worthy  of  all  acceptation  '  (/cai
Trao-rjs  aTroSoxrjs  a£  to?  ;  as  in  4  9),  but  also  precedes  its  contents
which  are  in  this  instance  introduced  by  'that'  (on),  (iv.)
i  Tim.  3  i  —  The  use  of  the  phrase  in  this  verse,  which  of  course
refers  back  to  2  15  ('saved  in  child-bearing';  Chrysost.  Erasm.
etc.)  —  a  wife's  salvation  being  worked  out  in  her  own  sphere  of
motherhood  (despite  the  associations  of  Jewish  tradition),  not
in  ecclesiastical  position  —  is  remarkable  for  the  variant  (accepted
by  Zahn.  Einl.  1  482)  '  human  '  (avdpuiwivo';)  5  in  D*g  (Ambrosiast.
Sedul.).  In  1  15  as  here,  '  save  '  (<r<a$ei.v)  has  an  indirect  eschato
logical  reference,  (v.)  i  Tim.  4  9.  —  In  this  verse  (which  Bois  and


conciliation.  He  'could  no  doubt  have  said  all  this'  (i.e.,  Tit.
3  4-7)  also,  but  'probably  he  would  have  said  it  otherwise,  and
not  all  at  a  time.'  Practically  it  is  the  use  of  such  stereotyped
and  almost  formal  language  which  makes  it  reasonable  to  say
that  'St.  Paul  was  inspired,  but  the  writer  of  these  epistles  is
sometimes  only  orthodox  '  (Denney,  The  Death  of  Christ,  1902,
p.  203).

1  In i  Tim.  1  18 4  14, where a symbol  is trembling  into  a
sacrament  (cp  Acts  2028,  not  13  1-3  \\»hich  denotes  a  commission
for  some  special  service),  divine  inspiration  prompts  the  Christian
prophets,  of  whom  Paul  is  one,  to  select  men  for  office  in  the
church, and to confer upon them a supernatural charism
(xcipicrjiia) by means of  the rite of  imposition of  hands (see
HANDS,  LAVING  ON  OF,  and  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS,  also  MINISTRY,
§  37,  b,  c). The  idea  of  such  a  special  rite,  even  in  the  form  of
2  Tim.  1  6  (i  Thess.  5  igf.),  could  hardly  have  come  from  the  man
who  wrote  i  Cor.  124  (diversities  of  gifts),  u  (dividing  to  every
man),  and  represents  the  water-mark  of  later  Catholicism  ; the
semi-official  tinge  lent  to  a  primitive  ceremony  is  palpable  (see
Gunkel's  \Virkungen  des  heilig.  Geistes,(-}  j  [1899],  and  especi
ally  Weinel's  ll'irk.  des  Geistes  und  der  Geister,  140-142,  216-
218  [1899],  with  the  conveyancing  of  influence  through  physical
contact  as  traced  by  Volz  in  ZA  TIV  21  93_/T  [1901]). The  other
function  of  the  Spirit  in  the  prophets  —  i.e.,  prediction  of  woes
and  perils  (i  Tim.  4  if.  2  Tim.  3  \f.)  —  is  naturally  referred  by  the
sub-apostolic  age  (Acts  20  29  f.  Clem.  Rom.  44  i  Jude  i-jf.  2  Pet.
2  i)  to  the  apostles. They  foresaw  what  their  successors  suffer.
Hence the pseudonymous  pastoral  epistles credit Paul with
anticipations  of  the  errors  current  in  their  own  age.

2  In  i  Tim.  3  16  the  statement  of  the  resurrection  ('justified  in
the  spirit,'  eSixaiiaOr]  ei>  n-i/ev/ixaTi)  is  an  un-Pauline  development
of  Rom.  1  4  (cp  Iren.  ii.  32  3^)  after  T  Pet.  3  18  46  and  Jn.  16  10,
as  that  of  the  incarnation  is  un-Pauline  and  distinctly  Johannine
(i  Jn.  858,  cp i  Pet.  1  20); 'seen  by  angels'  is  a  sub-Pauline
development (Eph.  3  10 i  Pet.  1  12 3  i8_/C), 'world' ((edoyios)
appears  to  have  its  sub-Pauline  emphasis  of  'evil,'  and  'was
taken up  in  glory  '  (di/eA^i^r)  f  v  Sofrj), if  an allusion  to  the
Ascension,  is  thoroughly  un-Pauline. On  the  Messiah  as  the
copestone  of  this  new  temple  of  Truth,  see  Briggs,  Messiah  of
Apostles,  228-232  [1895].

3  The  reference  is  neither  to  v.  8  (Weiss)  nor  to  what  im
mediately  precedes  (Chrysost.),  but  to  116-130.  which,  like  Tit.
38  and  i  Tim.  49,  looks  out  directly  upon  the  future  and  final
hope  of  the  Christian  disciple. i3/>  is  probably  an  explanatory
comment  ;  but  there_  is  no  need  to  regard  13  (with  Ewald,  Hesse,
Hilg.)  as  a  gloss  or  interpolation.

4  Cp En.  l>4i, 'the  paths of  righteousness  are  worthy  of
acceptation.'

5  So  r  (kumanus),  1  15.


5086


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


Baljon  delete)  the  contents  of  the  '  saying  '  (Adyos)  might  be  either
•v.  8  (Chrysost.  Weizs.  Hilg.  Weiss,  von  Soclen,  Horton)  or  v.  10
(Bengel,  Schleierm.  Holtxm.,  cp  'for'  [yap]  and  ayuiv.  2  Tim.
2n).  It  is  noticeable  that  of  these  scntentiif  (i.)  alone  is  in
thought  anil  style  somewhat  parallel  to  Paul,1  who  never  as
sociates  '  heirship  '  or  '  hope  '  (as  Tit.  3  7/.)  with  '  eternal  life  '
(fior)  aiiovios).  The  colouring  of  (iii.),  as  of  Tit.  3  5  (2  Tim.  1  10
i  Tim.  24-  (i  ijy^  Tit.  1  if.  K>)  is  Johannine,  whilst  (iv.)  contains
the  pastoral  triad  u{ faith,  love,  and  soberness,  and  the  air.  Aey.
cliildbfaring,  which  is  besides  an  idea  generally  strange  to  Paul's
mode  of  thought  (particularly  if  childbirth  is  considered  as  a
means  of  salvation).  In  (v.)  characteristically  un-Pauline  terms
abound  (e.g.,  'bodily'  [erw^uiTiKos],  '  bodily  exercise  '  lyvuLvatria],
profitable '  [ot^e'Aipof],  7'.  7  f.  ',  niaTrjp  of  God,  Z'.  10).  The
'faithful  sayings,'  therefore,  not  merely  are  characteristic  of  the
pastorals,  but  betray  an  essentially  un-Pauline  conception  of  the
regvlafidei.*

This difference in ground-work  is  endorsed  by  the

difference  in  style  and  diction between Paul  and  the

„. . ,  author  of  the  pastorals,  an  argument  which

forms  a  cumulative  and  almost  final  proof

QlCLlOn.  r- t  f  •  f 1  -l

of  the  sub-Pauline  origin  of  the  epistles.
Out  of  the  176  hapax  legomena,  a  proportion  two  or  three  times
as  great  as  in  the  Pauline  epistles,  nearly  80  are  in  LXX  and  were
therefore  consciously  neglected  by  Paul.  Favourite  Pauline
phrases  and  words  are  totally  wanting  (e.g.,  'unjust'  [afiixos],
'  uncleanness  '  [aKaBaptria],  'adoption  '  [vio0ccria],  'our  Father'
[n-ar>)p  ijjuui'],  'covenant'  [6ia07jier)],  'reveal'  [aTroKaAun-Teiv],
'  free  '  [eAeutfepos]  and  compounds,  '  be  operative  '  [ei/epyety],
'perform  '  [Karepyd^ftrdai  ],  '  lioast '  [(cauvao-SaiJ,  'folly'  [fiuipia],
'tradition'  [napaSocn';],  'persuade'  [TruBeiv],  'abound'  [7repi<r-
<Tfvftv],  'do'  [irpa.va'eLi',  =  iroielv,  in  past.],  'perfect'  [re'Aetof],
'be  gracious '  [\apifea-0ai],  '  think' [fjtpovclv],  with  'ordinance'
[SiKautyia],  '  greater '  Oaeafiof],  'small'  |/ju/epo;],  'body'  [crw^a],
'good  '  [\pr)cTT6?],  etc.  ;  also  particles  like  '  then  '  [apa],  '  where
fore  '  [fiioj,  '  because  '  [fiiort],  '  then  '  [en-ftra],  '  still '  [en],  '  be
hold  '  [tfie,  iSov],  etc.,  etc.,  prepositions  like  '  with  '  [<rvv  =  fj.eTa  of
pastorals],  'instead  of '  [ai/Tt],  'until'  [dxpt],  ' before '[HiJLirpo<r6ev],
beyond  '  \irapd,  ace.]).  Many  fresh  terms  are  coined,  new  com
pounds  and  Latinisms  are  introduced,  whole  families  of  words
appear  for  the  first  time  (cp  those  in  a  privative,  SiSaovc-,  otico-,
<T<aij>p-,  <£iAo-,  etc.),  and  others  are  used  with  unwonted  frequency
(t'.£.,  icdA-).  The  extent  and  significance  of  this  change  in
vocabulary  cannot  adequately  be  explained  even  when  one
assigns  the  fullest  possible  weight  to  such  factors  as  change  of
amanuensis,  situation,  or  topic,  lapse  of  time,  literary  fertility,
or  senile  weakness  ;  for  the  wider  evidence  of  syntax  and  style,
to  be  felt  even  through  a  translation,  comes  in  to  verify  the
impression  already  made  by  the  vocabulary.  Particularly  where
the  writer  is  most  himself  and  least  dependent  on  previous  letters
(as  in  i  Tim.),  the  idiosyncrasies  of  his  composition  appear,
neither  accidental  nor  trivial  by  any  means.  The  comparative
absence  of  rugged  fervour,  the  smoother  flow,  the  heaping  up
of  words,  all  point  to  another  sign-manual  than  that  of  Paul.
In  short,  the  relative  proportions  of  likeness  and  unlikeness
(especially  to  Romans  and  Philippians)  between  the  style  of
Paul  and  the  style  of  these  three  letters,  are  explicable  only  upon
the  hypothesis  that  the  writer  of  the  pastorals  modelled  his
diction  in  part  upon  that  of  his  master,  but  not  slavishly —
certainly  not  to  the  prejudice  of  his  own  originality  and  cast  of
thought.  These  proportions  are  precisely  what  we  should  expect
in  such  a  literary  relationship.  Upon  any  other  hypothesis  they
do  not  seem  credible  or  reasonable.  Questions  of  style  are  pro
verbially  delicate,  but  the  linguistic  data  of  the  pastorals  and
the  Pauline  epistles  may  be  said  to  resemble  those  of  the  Apoca-
Ivpse  and  the  Fourth  Gospel  ;  both  ratify  the  conclusion  that  we
have  to  do  with  kinship,  not  identity,  of  authorship. •*

1  Yet  'deny'  (apvelcrOat)  is  non-Pauline,  and  the  stanza  reads
like  a  popular  version  of  Paul's  own  words,  adapted  to  the
requirements  of  a  martyr-period.  See  Denney,  202.

-  The  knowledge  of  God  or  of  the  truth  =  salvation  or  eternal
life(Jn.  17  vf.  17);  cp  Jn.  17  3  with  i  Tim.  '2  5,  the  same  combina
tion  of  monotheism  as  against  polytheism,  and  of  Christ's
unique  and  sufficient  position  as  against  Judaism  or  Gnosticism,
besides  ('  the  vian  Christ  Jesus  ')  a  Johannine  protest  against
the  Gnostic  or  Docetic  tendency  to  resolve  Christ  into  a  ph  -ntom
of  abstract  spirit.  On  the  Christology  of  the  epistles  (i  Tim.
3  16),  see  A.  Klopper  in  ZIVT (1902)  339-361.

'  No  possible  change  of  circumstances  could  make  Paul
oblivious  (through  three  separate  letters)  of  God's  fatherhood,
of  the  believing  man's  union  with  Jesus,  of  the  power  and
witness  of  the  Spirit,  or  of  reconciliation.  They  might  be  taken
for  granted?  But  surely  in  enforcing  the  ethical  requirements
of  the  pastorals,  Paul  would  never  have  demanded  the  blossom
without  urgently  pressing  the  need  of  these  spiritual  facts  as  its
root !

4  There  is  no  ground  for  the  idea  that  the  prosaic  tone  of  the
pastorals  is  due  to  their  preoccupation  with  the  practical  steps
of  organisation,  whilst  in  Paul's  earlier  letters  he  had  been  mainly
employed  in  sketching  the  ideal  of  the  church.  A  letter  like
i  Cor.,  to  say  nothing  of  passages  in  the  other  letters,  is  enough
to  refute  this  explanation  and  to  show  how  Paul  would  have
dealt  with  the  problems  of  organisation  and  church  order,  had
these  met  him  in  an  acute  form.  It  would  have  been  different
from  the  method  of  this  Paulinist,  for  Paul  ever  came  down  upon
ethical  tasks  from  a  spiritual  height.

5087


Still  further  proof  in  corroboration  of  their  un-Pauline
origin rlovvs in from the impossibility of  placing the
epistles  within  Paul's  lifetime. With


10.  The  second
imprisonment.


practical  unanimity1  defenders2  of  the
traditional hypothesis abandon all


attempts  to  fix  them  previous  to  Paul's  Roman  imprison
ment  ;  but  their  conjecture  of  a  release,  followed  by  a
further  extension  of  activity  and  a  second  imprisonment,
is  quite  gratuitous  and  hardly  furnishes  a  more  tenable
ground  for  the  pastprals.  It  is  not  indeed  bound  up
with  the  acceptance  of  their  Pauline  authorship  ;  the
two  positions  are  independent  and  maybe  held  separately.
Hut  even  apart  from  the  evidence  of  the  pastorals  (which
never  mention  Spain,  nor  allude  to  so  momentous  a  tour
in  the  Western  Mediterranean),  the  evidence  for  this
second  imprisonment  must  be  pronounced  inadequate
(CHRONOLOGY,  §  79/1,  PAUL,  §  31),  resting  mainly  on  a
vague  rumour  (Xtryos  ?xet)  reported  by  Eusebius,  and  the
allusion  in  the  Muratorian  Canon  (possibly  derived  from
apocryphal  Ada]  which  is  simply  an  expansion  of  Kom.
102428— the  devout  and  imaginative  fantasy  of  later
tradition  being  convinced  that  because  Paul  proposed  a
visit  to  Spain,  he  must  have  carried  it  out.  No  such
tradition  lingered  in  Spain  itself,  whilst  the  express  state
ment  of  Acts  2025  38  and  the  significant  silence  of  Clemens
Romanus  imply  that  the  tradition  nearest  to  Paul's  life
knew  of  no  return  to  Asia  Minor.  The  very  passage  in
Clemens  Romanus  (5),  which  has  been  supposed  to  refer
to  this  western  journey,  tells  against  it.  Charged  with
rhetorical  feeling,  as  Baur  pointed  out,  it  narrates  (like
Rom.  1619)  the  sweep  of  Paul's  career  from  Jerusalem
to  Rome  :  '  after  teaching  righteousness  to  the  whole
w-orld,  and  reaching  the  limit  of  the  West,  and  bearing
testimony  tefore  the  authorities,  so  he  left  the  world.'
Paul's  sun  had  ended  its  course  (Acts  1847).  Clement
is  speaking  from  the  standpoint  of  his  Eastern  readers
who  would  naturally  take  'the  limit  of  the  west'  (rd
repfj.0.  Trj<i  Srcrews)  as  the  Imperial  capital  (cp  'east'
[dvaToXrjs]  and  '  west '  [5wns]  of  Syria  and  Rome  in
I  gnat.  Kom.  2),  and  incidentally  clinches  the  proof  by
adding  that  the  Neronic  martyrs  of  64  were  '  gathered
unto  Paul  and  Peter,'  implying  that  the  latter  had
already  died.  Were  the  '  earlier  '  chronology  adopted,
which  brings  Paul  to  Rome  early  in  the  sixties  if  not
even  earlier,  space  would  of  course  be  won  before  64
for  the  two  or  three  years'  interval  required  by  the
traditional  hypothesis  of  the  '  pastorals'  (CHRONOLOGY,
§§  64-66).  Otherwise  no  time  is  left,  and  it  is  almost
incredible  that  the  '  pastorals,'  if  written  after  64,  should
breathe  no  hint  of  the  shock  produced  upon  the  Christian
consciousness  of  the  age,  especially  at  Rome,  by  Nero's
massacre  which  outraged  even  the  Roman  conscience.
But  even  chronological  resetting  only  makes  the  hypo
thesis  possible  ;  its  acceptance  or  rejection  rests  on  other
grounds,  and — to  put  it  mildly — these  do  not  seem  at
any  point  secure.

The  genesis  of  the  pastorals  is  therefore  sub-Pauline.

To  account  for  the  Pauline,  or  presumably  Pauline  ele-

_ . -  ment,  including  not  merely  phrases  and

esl.s  ° conceptions  such  as  could  be  gathered

pastorals. from  the  extant  ]etters  of  the  apostie

or  from  tradition,  but  also  private  details  and  personal
matters  affecting  about  sixteen  new  figures  (some  of
whom  are  not  mere  names) — recourse  must  be  had  to
theories  of  compilation,  whose  common  feature  is  the
presupposition  that  the  author  was  in  possession  of
genuine  reliquicc  Paulina1.  No  doubt  a  pseudonymous
writer  would  endeavour  to  stamp  his  figures  and  scenery
upon  the  reader's  mind  by  means  of  circumstantial

1  Bartlet,  Bowen  (Dates  of  Pastoral  Letters,  1000),  and  Lisco
(I'incula  Sanctorum,  1900)  are  the  chief  exceptions  recently.

2  Especially  Spitta  in  Ziir  Gesch.  und  Lift,  des  I'rchrist.
1  2-108  ;  also  Lightfoot  (Biblical  Essays,  215-233),  Zahn  (Einl.
1435/;), Steinmetz (Die aiueite riini. Gefang. des Apostels
J'aulus, 1897),  C. H. Turner  (Hastings, DB  1  421,  etc.),  and
Frey  (die  ziueite  rdm.  Gefang.  und  das  Todesjalir  des  Apostels
Paitlits,  1900).

5088


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


details,  especially  when  (as  in  this  case)  the  authentic
letters  would  suggest  the  introduction  of  a  certain
quantum  of  personal  matter — though  in  the  sub-Pauline
letters  (Eph. ,  Heb. ,  i  Pet.)  this  quantum  is  noticeably
small.  But,  while  it  is  conceivable  that  this  may  be
sufficient  to  account  for  i'1'iin.,1  it  fails  to  afford  an
adequate  rationale  for  2  Tim.  The  latter  is  flooded  with
items  which  by  no  means  fall  under  the  category  of
romantic  ornament  or  literary  vraisemblance,  and  lift  the
letters  quite  above  the  level  of  later  Pauline  romances.

Even  when  such  passages  do  not  part  from  their  context,  they
suggest  to  a  critical  inquirer  the  advisability  of  admitting  that
they  are  based  upon  authentic  tradition  and  that  they  reproduce,
with  more  or  less  freedom,  information  still  accessible  to  the
immediately  sub-Pauline  generation.  It  may  be  allowed,  still
further,  that  genuine  notes  have  been  incorporated,  although
these  cannot  any  longer  be  deciphered.  But  the  advocates  of
compilation  attempt  the  subtler  task  of  actually  separating
original  notes  from  the  strata  in  which  they  lie  embedded,2  upon
the  hypothesis  that,  whilst  the  author's  direct  aim  was  to  instruct
and  move  the  church  of  his  own  day  and  not  to  preserve  literary
relics,  he  was  able  to  use  certain  Pauline  notes  in  the  composition
of  2  Tim.  at  least  and  even  Titus.  The  preservation  of  such
letters  is  far  from  incredible.3  Paul  was  the  first  '  man  of  letters  '
in  early  Christianity,  and  the  extant  canonical  collection  repre
sents  only  a  part  of  his  actual  correspondence.  In  the  nature  of
things,  private  notes  would  be  more  likely  to  remain  overlooked
than  others,  unless,  like  the  letter  of  recommendation  to  Phcebe
(Rom.  1(3 1-20),  they  were  attached  by  late  editors  to  some  larger
epistle.

In  addition  to  this,  the  pastorals  have  suffered  accre
tion  as  church  documents,  and  thus  three  stages  of  their
composition  must  be  distinguished:  (i. )  the  primitive
notes  from  Paul's  lifetime,  (ii. )  the  incorporation  of  these
by  the  author  of  the  pastorals  in  his  epistles,  substantially
composed  about  forty  years  after  Paul's  death,  and  (iii. )
glosses  added  to  these  epistles  by  subsequent  copyists
to  render  them  more  suitable  than  ever  for  the  needs  of
the  second  century.  The  last-named  process  naturally
ceased  by  the  time  that  the  letters  passed  into  the  canon.

Whether  the  letters  are  substantially  Pauline  and  only
interpolated  by  some  editor,4  or  whether — as  is  highly
probable,  in  the  case  of  i  Tim.  at  any  rate — the  Pauline
element,  such  as  it  is,  has  been  submerged  in  later  work,
cannot  be  decided  till  each  letter  has  been  separately
examined  upon  the  principles  of  literary  morphology.
As  the  amount  of  presumably  authentic  material  is
obviously  largest  in  2  Tim.  and  least  in  i  Tim.,  it  will
be  advisable  to  discuss  the  epistles  in  that  provisional
order.

Second  Timothy. — Although  the  address  of  2  Tim.

12 2  Tim  • (lT/-).is fairly3 Pauline, the strange
. . ' ' emphasis  on  the  fact  and  purpose  or  stand-
anal  VS1S.  ,  •

ard  of  Paul  s  apostolate  ( '  according to

the  promise'  [/car1  eTrayyeXiai'])  in  a  letter  to  one  who

1  i  Tim.  1  T,f,  might  be  developed  from  the  hint  in  Philem.  22
(the  Asiatic  locus  being  shown  in  the  failure  to  use  the  companion
allusion  in Phil.  '2  24 to a return visit to  Macedonia). The
personal  matter  here  is  principally  meant  to  furnish  a  suitable
setting  for  an  epistle  dealing  with  general  questions  of  church
life  and  work  in  the  Asiatic  provinces,  and  reflecting  that  cardinal
importance  of  Ephesus  as  a  centre  of  early  Christianity  to  which
Lisco has rightly but extravagantly  called attention {Kama
Peregrina,  1901). Cp  Harnack,  Ausbreitung,  333  462  482.

2  Perhaps  2  Pet.  also  contains  material  worked  up  from  earlier
sources ;  certainly  it  has  incorporated  parts  of  Jude. And  the
canonical  2  Cor.  is  a  compilation  of  two  separate  letters  in  reverse
order. But  even  were  the  pastorals,  as  compilations,  without
any  analogy  in  the  NT  literature (cp,  further,  JAMKS  [RPISTLE],
*>  5),  this  would  not  of  itself  discredit  the  analytic  hypothesis.
Tlie pastorals present quite unique features,  and it is only
reasonable  that  the  complexity  of  their  structure  should  demand
somewhat  unique  and  exceptional  methods  of  treatment.

'A  Jt.g.,  the  correspondence  of  Cicero  and  Atticus,  the  letters
of  King  Agrippa  II.  (Josephus),  etc.  See  Peters,  Der  Brief  in
der  rSmischen  Litteratur  (rgoi),  27  f.  78  f.,  and  Wehofer,
'  Untersuch.  zur  altchristliche  Epistolographie  '  (SIl'A  W:  phil.-
hist.  Klasse,  143,  1901).

•*  Menegoz,  for  example  (Le  Pcchf  et  la  Redemption,  5  f.),
treats  them  as  authentic,  but  supposes  that  copyists  under  the
direction  of  bishops  subsequently  added  glosses  ;  these,  however,
affected  only  questions  of  discipline  and  order,  leaving  the
genuinely  Pauline  spirit  unimpaired.

5  The  insertion  of  '  mercy  '  between  '  grace  '  and  '  peace  '  (so
2  Jn.  3)isun-Pauline.  Deleting  it  among  other  phrases  Hausrath
(.Veutest.  Zeitgeschichte,  ET,  1895,  4160-163)  finds  a  genuine
letter  to  Timothy  in  1  \f.  15-18  4  9-18,  Sabatier  in  1  1-18  46-22.

5089


could  hardly  have  doubted  it,  at  once  reveals  the  real
genius  of  the  writing  and  corroborates  the  general
evidence  afforded  by  all  three  epistles,  especially  by
i  Tim.  and  Titus.  They  are  not  private  letters  at  all,
not  even  semi-private,  and  the  very  form  of  a  private
letter  is  not  strictly  preserved.  They  resemble  rather
'  pastorals '  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  term ,  and  find
their  real  audience  among  people  (primarily  teachers
and  officials,  it  may  be)1  inclined  to  doubt  the  validity
and  misunderstand  or  misapply  the  tenets  of  the  Pauline
gospel.  As  even  Liddon  admits  ( Kxplan.  Analysis  of
i  Tim.,  1897,  ad  loc.),  of  Paul's  apostolic  authority
'  Timothy  did  not  require  to  be  reminded  ;  St.  Paul  has
other  readers  of  the  epistle — perhaps  false  teachers2—
in  view.'  Behind  \y-6a  lies  a  tradition  of  Timothy's
temporary  absence  (Phil.2i9/i)  from  Paul  during  his
last  captivity  ;  but  neither  here  nor  elsewhere  is  it
feasible  in  13-14  to  disentangle  any  written  source.  On
the  other  hand,  1 15-18  is  perhaps  a  displaced  (after  4  10
M'Giffert,  4 13  Knoke),3  and  at  any  rate  a  genuine,
fragment,  probably  written  from  Paul's  Roman  captivity.
So  most  editors  and  critics  (Lemme,4  Hesse,8  and
Krenkel 6  omitting  rather  needlessly  15$  and  i8a).
Again,  2/.  hardly  seems  homogeneous"  (cp  2i6  813
with  89);  22  seems  a  gloss  (om.  Hesse,  Hilg.  ZWT,
1897,  pp.  1-86);  2i4/.  is  awkwardly  introduced,  and
the  thoroughly  un- Pauline  passage  3  1-9  may  well  be  a
later  insertion,  due  to  the  process  of  accretion.  810-12,
however,  is  an  interpolated  genuine  fragment  ;  its  iso
lated  position  and  contents  mark  it  off  from  the  surround
ing  context.  Furthermore,  the  bulk,  if  not  the  whole,
of  4  (6)  98-22  is  generally  allowed  to  have  come  directly
from  Paul's  own  hand  (9-18(7,  except  '  having  loved  this
present  world '  [a.ya-n-qa-a.^Tbvv'uva.i^va]  rou^.Bahnsen  ;!l
9-15  19-22,  Ewald  ; 10  9-18,  Immer  ; n  9-21,  Prleid.).  But
it  is  not  homogeneous  ;  evidently  na  and  216,  like  6-8
and  9-15,  reflect  different  situations  in  Paul's  life,  and
the  whole  passage  offers  an  admirable  proof  of  the
composite  character  of  even  the  directly  Pauline  strata
in  the  pastoral  epistles.  Following  the  various  dates
and  moods,  one  can  detect  approximately  in  1 15-18
46-12  16-19  a  note  (or  Part  °f  a  note)  written  after
Philippians  ;  the  situation  has  become  more  grim,  and
Paul  pines  in  loneliness  for  his  younger  ally.  Again,
413-15  2i-22rt  go  back12  to  a  still  earlier  period,  when

1  '  Les communautes vaudront ce que valent leurs con-
ducteur?  ;  voila  1'idee  generale  qui  se  degage  de  ses  instructions '
(J.  Reville).

2  Cp  Asc.  fs.Szof.  (before  100  A.D.)  for  the  contemporary
feeling  that  an  apostasy  would  precede  the  latter  days,  when  the
disciples of  Jesus would  desert 'the  prophecy  of  his twelve
apostles  and  their  faith  (cp  i  Tim.  1  19,  etc.)  and  love  and  purity
(i  Tim.  4 19),  and  there  shall  be  many  sects,  etc.'  (rrji/  npo^Tfiav
TWV  StaSfxa.  ajroo-ToAoii/  avroO  «ai  -rr\v  rriemv  [cp  i  Tim.  1  19,  etc.]
(cai  T\IV  ayaTriji'  O.VTMV,  icai  -rr]v  ayveiav  aiiTtav  [i  Tim.  4  12]  Kai
eVoi'Tcu  aipeVet;  TroAAai  K.T.A.).

3  Praktisch-thcol.  Conun.  zti  den  Past.  1887-1889.

4  Das  cchte  Ermahnungsschreibett'des  Ap,  Paulus  an  Tim.,
1882.

5  Die  Entsteh.  der  NT  Hirtenbriefe,  1889.

6  Heitr.  zur  Aufhcllung  der  Gcsch.  und  der  Brief c  des  Ap.
Paul-its,  3g5J4o8  [1890].

7  Chap.  U  contains  two  passages  paralleled  in  Epictetus  (Diss.
3  10,  '  God  saith  to  thee,  Prove  to  me  whether  thou  hast  contested
according to requirement' [et POjiu'/uios TJyAT)<ras]  =  2  Tim.  2  3
['good  soldier'];  and  822  where,  as  the  Cynic  is  in  an  army
arrayed  for  battle,  it  is  urged  that  he  should  not  be  'entangled1
[e/u.7re7rAeyju.eVoi']  but  wholly  devoted  to  God's  service — cp  2  Tim.
'2  4  ['  entangleth  himself,'  efiirAefceTat] — and  free  from  distraction  ;
aTrepio-TraoTios, i  Cor.  7  35). Five parallels to the  pastorals  in
Seneca  are  cited  by  Lightfoot,  Phili/>/>ians,  290.

*  Upon  the  difficulties  of  geography  in  v.  10,  see  CKESCENS,
DALMATIA,  GAI.ATIA  §  32. The  figurative  expression  in  i>.  17
is  paralleled  by  an  old  proverb  that  one  should  '  visit  the  poor
in  his  affliction  and  speak  of  him  in  the  Sultan's  presence  and  do
one's  diligence  to  save  him  from  the  mouth  of  the  lion  '  (Rendel
Harris,  Story  of  Ahikar,  p. Ixvii). The  conjecture  'Melita'
[MeAiVn]  for  '  Miletus  '  [VIiAtJTto]  is  neither  probable  nor  helpful.

*  //.  Timothcus  (-L^K).

10  Sieben  Sendschreiben  (1870).

11  T/ieologie  des  NT,  399  (1877).

12  These  '  commissions  and  cautions '  at  least  are  '  unlike  a  dying
man  ;  the  writer  is  in  a  hurry  for  Timothy  to  come  simply  because
he  is  old  and  lonely,'  not  because  he  fears  his  friend  will  be  too

5090


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


Paul  had  left  Troas  on  some  journey;  420  (cp  Acts
2129)  seems  to  belong  to  Acts  18  i8/".,  though  the  his
toricity  of  Acts  2129  is  not  above  suspicion  (cp  ACTS,
•;•  ii,  TKOPHIMUS  ;  with  J.  Weiss,  Ueber  die  Absicltt  n.
d.  literar.  Charakter  der  Ap.-gesch.  39  f.  [1897]).

A  dual  analysis  of  2  Tim.  has  been  carried  through  by  several*
critics  from  Credner  onwards.  Hesse,  e.ff.  (pp.  i-jof.),  regards
it  as  the  compilation  of  a  genuine  brief  letter  of  recall  (1  304  i6yC
istc  49-223)  with  a  later  pseudonymous  letter  (1 1-3^  5-10  '2^-Sa
14-26  3  1-8  136-17  4  1-5).  Lemme's  reconstruction  of  the  genuine
letter  underlying  2  Tim.  is  even  more  intricate  (see  O.  Holtz-
mann's  critique,  Z\\'l',  1883,  pp.  45-72)  and  less  convincing
(=li-9  except  'pity'  [eAeos]  2j?>tJ>,  'and  a  sound  mind'  [<cat
crujcJ>poi'i<j7xoGJ  7,  '  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began  '  [ef  .  .  .
nioji'ioji'l  9, 10,  except  'but  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  appearing'
|  l>a.i'epu>6(i<Ta.v,  .  .  .  nri^opctaf],  1 1  except  '  and  a  teacher  '  [<ai
i>'.Sa.<TKa\os],  12  except  'against  that  day  '  [ets  .  .  .  rmtpav],  14
except  'that  good  thing  which  was  committed'  [TTJI'  .  .  .  <j>v\.]
i5«  i6yC  i&fc  '2  i  3-5  8a  <)/.,  except  'with  eternal  glory'  |ju.era
56f>)«  aitaviov],  4&_^  except  iv  e<c.  r.  17.,  9-22),  while  Hilgenfeld's
analysis  of  the  epistle  into  two  sub-Pauline  notes  is  quite  in  the
air  (A  =  1  if.,  except  '  according  to  the  promise  of  life  which  is
in  Christ  Jesus'  [KO.T'  .  .  .  'IrjaoO],  30.  5-10,  except  'before  the
world  began  ;  but  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolished  death  and  hath  brought
life  and  immortality  to  light'  [irpb  \poviav  .  .  .  afflapaiav],  n
i2d  i6-i8a  2  i  3-8rt  9-12  19-26  3  1-4  10-12  14  f.  4  if.  6-8  19-22  ;  B  =
1  ib  3^-4  gc-io  12^-15  IB/'  'J2&5  13-18  3  5-9  13  i(>f.  4  3-5  9-18).  More
is  to  be  said  for  M'Giffert 's  hypothesis  that  the  epistle  is  a
redacted  version  of  one  written  by  Paul  towards  the  close  of  his
Roman  imprisonment  (1  1-12  2  1-13  4  if.  5-8  16-19  2I^  I0  1  J5'18)
(so  Clemen  for  115-18;  from  Rome  61  A.D.),  whilst  2  Tim.  4g
11-18  20-210:  represents  an  earlier  note  written  from  Macedonia
before  2  Cor.  which  was  composed  (1  i)  after  Timothy  had  obeyed
his  summons.  Similarly  Bacon  places  4  9  11-18  2o-2i«  22^  in  the
period  immediately  previous  to  2  Cor.  2  12  f.,  when  Paul  was  in
Macedonia,  whilst  von  Soden  takes  1  15-18  49-19  2i/>  22  as  a  note
written  after  Philippians  from  Paul's  Roman  captivity.  Hitzig
had  already  found  a  letter  of  Paul  written  about  58  A.D.  from
Caesarea  inlis4i3-i6  2o-22«(so  Clemen  :  49-18,  about  60  A.D.  '!),
and  another  letter  written  from  Rome  about  63  A.D.  in  4 6-12  19
1  10-18  4  22^  ;  whilst  Kartlet  recently  has  distinguished  (in  49-13
2i-22«)  a  note  written  between  Kphesians  and  Philippians,  the
rest  of  2  Tim.  being  the  swan-song  of  the  apostle.  Less  probably
Clemen  puts  4  19-21  into  57  A.D.  (from  Jerusalem,  previous  to
his  imprisonment),  dating  the  epistle  as  a  whole  slightly  earlier
than  Titus  (circa  100  A.D.),  which  again  preceded  i  Tim.  (100-
1 10  A.D.  Asia  Minor)  and  the  author's  interpolations  in  2  Tim.
(1  13/1  2  14-26  4  t-8)  and  Titus  (1  7-11  3  i-u).

Titus. — The  attempts  to  find  in  Tit.  1  1-4  a  genuine

address interpolated by  some redactor are  not con-

_ _  vincing. But,  even  when  the  epistle  as  a

' . '  whole  is  taken  as  sub- Pauline,  17-9  certainly

analysis. appears a further g]oss (so Q. Ritschl,

TL7.,  '85,  609;  Knoke  ;  Harnack,  Chroit.  710  f.  ;
Clemen,  and  M'Giffert).  The  sudden  transition  from
presbyters  to  episcopi,  and  the  general  contents  of
the  passage,  mark  it  off  as  the  insertion  of  some  later
editor  who  was  interested  in  promoting  the  monarchical
episcopate.  Hesse  and  Clemen  carry  the  gloss  on  to
the  end  of  n  ;  but,  although  10  connects  with  9  (which
partly  explains  the  insertion  of  the  gloss  at  this  point),
12  would  be  abrupt  after  6,  for  naica.  0.  are  not  an
antithesis  to  dwir. ,  nor  'slow  bellies'  (yaartpes  dpyai)
to  'riot'  (duwrias),  much  less  'liars'  (^ePcrrat)  to
'faithful'  (TTicrrd  which  here  =  believing,  not  reliable  or
trustworthy).  The  passage  7-9,  then,  was  inserted,  per
haps  from  the  margin,  in  the  original  text  which  ran  :
'unruly,  for  there  are  many  unruly'  (avvTroraKra.
Fjlfflv  yap  TroXXot  dvvir6Ta.KTOt,  K.T.\.).  No  man  could
discharge  a  presbyter's  duties  effectively,  if  the  members
of  his  own  family  were  tainted  with  the  local  disease  of
insubordination  and  profligacy.  2i-i4  and  215-87  are
somewhat  parallel  (cp  2s  and  82,  2 14  and  81)  ;  but  no
analysis  of  the  passage  into  a  Pauline  and  a  later  source
is  plausible.  The  'genuinely  Pauline  ring'  of  much  in
81-7  (M'Giffert)  is  not  very  audible,  though  Sabatier
detects  genuine  material  in  it  and  812-15.  The  latter
passage  certainly,  3 12-13  [14]  15^,  contains  an  authentic
fragment,  as  is  admitted  upon  almost  all  hands  (e.g. ,
Weisse,1  Ewald,  Krenkel,  Knoke,  Hesse,  von  Soden,
Clemen,  M'Giffert).  Hesse  (pp.  150/1)  finds  further
in  Titus  (1 1  f.  4-6  12-13(2  16  3 1-6  12  f.  15)  a  complete  letter

late  (G.  A.  Simcox,  Expos.  T  10430-432,  finding  in  Heb.  13  also
two  commendatory  letters).
1  riiilosiiph.  Dogmatik,  1 146.

5091


of  Paul,  written  shortly  after  he  left  Crete  ;  it  has  been
expanded  by  the  addition  of  passages  which,  although
rising  out  of  the  original  text  (with  the  possible  exception
of  2),  are  intended  as  a  proviso  against  heresy.  Simi
larly  M'Giffert  regards  the  canonical  epistle  as  a  redacted
version  of  some  letter  (1 1-6  partly,  81-7  12  f. }  written  to
Titus  before  Paul  reached  Corinth  in  Acts  202.  The
alternative  to  these  dual  hypotheses  is  to  reconstruct
(with  Krenkel)  out  of  2  Timothy  and  Titus  three  letters
of  Paul ;  (a)  one  written  to  Titus  at  Crete,  perhaps  from
Illyricum  during  Paul's  second  journey  to  Corinth  (Acts
20 1-3) -Tit.  3 12  2  Tim.  420  Tit.  813  ;  (d)  another,  from
his  Coesarean  imprisonment,  to  Timothy  at  or  near
Troas  =  2  Tim.  49-18,  subsequent  to  Colossians  and
Philemon;  (c)  a  third  =  2  Tim.  4ig  1 i6/'.  M  42i,
written  from  his  Roman  imprisonment  to  Timothy  at
Ephesus.  The  Caesarean  date  of  Colossians,  however,
is  untenable  ;  and  otherwise  this  ingenious  resetting  of
the  fragments  fails  to  explain  satisfactorily  how  such
notes  came  into  their  present  curious  position.

first  Timothy. — In  spite  of  its  unwieldy  anacoluthon
(cp  Rom.  1 1-7)  i  Tim.  1  is  probably  a  unity  as  it  stands,

i  m-_ modelled  on  Pauline  letters  and  tradition,
14.  l  I  im.  i.i  i

.  .  though  w.  12-17  resemble  in  part  some-
ana  ysis.  thing  more  definite.  Certainly  13-11  and
1 18-20  hang  together.  After  1  if.  a  thanksgiving  would
naturally  follow,  in  the  Pauline  manner  ;  but  when  the
thanksgiving  does  come  (v.  12-17)  it  is  occasioned  not  by
the  person  addressed  but  by  Paul  himself.  Even  the
'therefore'  (o$v)  of  2 1,  resuming  either  13-11  or  12-17
or  18-20,  forms  a  loose  transition  ;  but  it  illustrates  the
zigzag  course  of  the  epistle  rather  than  any  phenomena
of  compilation.  Similarly  with  subsequent  passages
like  26^-7,  which  has  a  poor  connection  with  its  context
and  only  repeats  the  protestation  of  1 12-17  (so  Holt/.m.,
Hesse,  Hilg. ),  2gf.  (the  odd  juxtaposition  of  rules  for
prayer  with  a  sumptuary  regulation  for  women)  4i-8
which  would  readily  part  from  its  context,  and  5  which
has  suffered  accretion  towards  the  close.  No  fragment
of  the  epistle  can  be  referred,  however,  to  the  apostle
himself  with  much  confidence.  The  incidental  allusions
to  Paul's  personality  (814/1  413)  merely  betray  the
writer's  consciousness  that  there  was  a  certain  awkward
ness  in  such  elaborate  commissions  and  instructions
upon  the  commonplace  regulations  of  a  Christian  com
munity  being  addressed  to  one  who  was  not  merely
himself  in  mature  life  but  ex  hypothcsi  separated  from
his  superintendent  only  for  a  short  time.  In  such
touches  we  feel  the  author's  literary  conscience  and  his
tactful  attempt  to  preserve  the  vraisemblance  of  the
situation  or  to  justify  the  existence  and  point  of  such  an
epistle.

As  it  stands,  in  fact,  i  Timothy  is  a  free  composition  ;
it  consists  of  a  sub- Pauline  letter  which  has  been  subse
quently  enlarged  by  interpolations,  especially  in  chap.  6.
617-21  is  plainly  an  addition  (Harn.),  in  thought  and
diction  perhaps  the  least  Pauline  paragraph  in  all  the
pastorals  ;  its  contents  and  context  are  against  it  as  an
integral  part  of  the  letter.  The  '  antitheses  '  of  620  are
not  the  casuistic  subtleties  of  dialectic  in  the  Halacha,
but  the  tabulated  passages  from  the  OT  and  the  gospel
arranged  by  Marcion  to  prove  the  diversity  of  the  two
dispensations  and  the  superiority  of  the  later.  Such
arguments  are  dismissed  as  secular  and  verbose  and
pseudo-scientific.  See  2  Tim.  3 16,  '  every  scripture,'  etc. ,
and  the  significant  collocation  of  an  OT  sentence  and
an  evangelic  saying  in  i  Tim.  5i8.  Another  un-Pauline
element  is  of  course  the  connection  between  eternal  life
and  almsgiving  (w.  17-19)  as  already  between  salvation
and  religious  work  or  personal  conduct  (2 15  813).
Hence,  like  Tit.  17-9  and  some  other  passages  in

1  The  motive  of  this  section  is  to  throw  the  glorious  gospel
into  relief  against  the  un  worthiness  and  weakness  of  its  original
bearers,  as  in  Harn.  09:  'he  chose  for  the  preaching  of  his  gospel
his  own  apostles  ovra<;  vnep  ira.a'av  a/uapriai/  ai-o/uiorepovs.  that
he  might  show  he  had  not  come  to  call  the  righteous  but
sinners.'  See  Wrede,  Das  Mcssiasgeheiinnis  (1901),  107  f.

5092


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)


i  Tim.  (3 1-13  *  5 17-20?)  or  even  2  Tim.  (220-26?),  617-21
shows  the  process  of  accretion  familiar  in  documents
bearing  on  church  organisation  and  discipline.

Here  again  Hesse,  admitting  (like  Schleiermacher)  the
irregular  course  of  the  epistle,  attempts  acutitts  quam  verius
to  disentangle  an  original  letter  of  commission  (1  i-io  18-20  4  1-16
63-16  20  f.)  containing  the  duties  and  rights  of  an  episcopus  at
Ephesus.  This  is  conjectured  to  have  been  enlarged  by  the
addition  of  independent  pieces  bearing  on  the  work  of  the
episcopate  :  e.g.,  1 1 1-17  (justifying  the  apostolate  to  the  Gentiles),
arrangements  for  the  worship  ('2, 66-7,  so  Hilg.,  and  2<)6-io,
glosses)  and  the  officials  of  the  church  (3 14-150:,  a.  further
insertion  to  justify  the  author  dilating  on  such  topics;  815^-16,
to  connect  with  4  i_/i),  a  general  mandate  for  bishops  (5:  623,
however,  being  genuinely  Pauline),  and  extracts  ('i  1-3  17-19) from
a  table  of  ethical  duties.  Knoke  pushes  the  epistle  much  nearer
Paul  by  his  hypothesis  of  two  letters  from  Paul's  pen,  one — an
instruction  (n-apayyeAta)  written  to  Timothy  from  Corinth  (1  -$f.
18-20  2i-io  4i2  61-3  4C-6  ii-is'2  19-23  24/1?),  another — more
doctrinal  in  character — composed  in  his  Cajsarean  imprisonment
(1  12-17  3  14-16  4  i -ii  13-16  2  12-15  5  if-  6  17-19  1  5-11  62016
zof.Y).  These  have  been  combined  with  an  un-Pauline  church-
directory  (3  i-io  i2yC  2  ii  f>g_f.  16  t,a  b  17  6  if.),  whilst  passages
like  3  ii  and  5  18  are  to  be  regarded  as  marginal  glosses.  It  is
not  easy,  however,  to  see  adequate  psychological  motives  for
this  sort  of  extensive  compilation,  and  the  criteria  of  style  are
by  no  means  equal  to  the  inferences  drawn  from  them.

Hypothetical  and  contradictory  as  such  conjectures
may  appear  to  be,  however,  a  not  inconsiderable  agree
ment  prevails  even  amid  the  most  independent  analyses
of  these  epistles.  All  partition-theories  presuppose  an
editorial  function  which  certainly  is  unexampled  in
previous  early  Christian  literature,  even  in  Acts  and  the
Apocalypse.  But  this  is  not  an  insuperable  objection  ;
and  whilst  it  is  idle  to  dogmatise  upon  the  particular
and  original  setting  of  verses,  or  at  every  point  to  dis
tinguish  precisely  between  redactor,  author,  and  source,
the  composite  nature  of  these  epistles  and  (within  general
limits)  the  main  strata  of  their  contents  have  been  sub
stantially  proved.  Such  analytic  criticism  is  upon  the
right  lines,  and  as  a  working  hypothesis  it  is  historically
superior  to  the  conjectures  which  attribute  the  writings
en  bloc  to  Paul  or  as  unpromisingly  set  down  the  Pauline
element  to  vague  tradition  or  the  inventiveness  of  a
literary  artist.

As  the  titles  formed  no  part  of  the  original  autographs,

the  early church naturally argued from the internal

_ , . evidence  that  2  Tim. ,  with  its  reflection

of  a  climax  and  rich  individual  references,

L0n'  represented  the  last  phase  of  the  apostle's

life,  and  that  i  Tim.  was  earlier. Rut  the  comparative

study  of  the  epistles  suggests  that  2  Tim.  is  the  earliest,

and  i  Tim.  the  latest  production  of  the  author.3

The  relative  amount  of  hapax  legomena  (46  in  2  Tim.,  28  in
Tit.,  74  in  i  Tim.),  the  increasingly  sub-apostolic  colour  of
'faith'  (TTICTTIS)  and  'saviour'  ((rwrjjp),  the  diminution  of  fresh
ness  and  intimate  feeling  in  the  allusions  to  Paul,  the  predomi
nance  of  ecclesiastical  interests  and  church  organisation  in  Tit.
and  i  Tim.,'1  the  gradual  shifting  of  emphasis  from  the  person-

1  Among  the  qualifications  of  the  Jewish  scliah  sMur  (rv 7B>
1'3'S, the  man who  on  any  given occasion offered common
prayer  in  the  synagogue)  were  :  '  to  have  many  children  and  no
money  ...  to  be  of  sound  age,  and  humble, popular, well-
mannered  ...  to  be  practised in the  study  of  the  law, the
prophets,  and  the  psalms ;  able  to  expound  the  allegoric  mean
ing, traditions, and histories, etc.' (R. Jehuda, quoted by
Selwyn.  Christian  Prophets,  208 f.).

2  The  difficulty  of  fj^avBavovcn  (?'.  13)  would  certainly  be  eased
by  the  adoption  of  the  attractive  conjecture  Aai/0ai>ou<7(.  (Hitzig,
Naber,  Baljon,  Clemen).

3  See  ACTS,  §  16,  and  MINISTRY,  §  31. Besides  Mangold,
De  Wette,  Reuss  {La  Bible,  T  2^f.  307 /.),  and  some  others,
-he  main  advocates  of  this  order  are  denoted  by  an  asterisk  in
the  bibliography  at  the  close  of  the  present  article. It  is  of
course  possible  that  the  author  himself  rearranged  the  epistles
in  this  order,  having  written  them  otherwise,  as  Vergil  is  said  to
have  composed  the  various  books  of  the  /Encid  irregularly  (e.g.,
the  third  before  the  second)  and  subsequently  placed  them.

4  The pronounced element of  '  ecclesiasticism ' in i  Tim.,
which  in  several  passages  is  simply  a  manual  of  church  order,
betrays  its  more  advanced  situation. For  some  not  insignificant
details  of  style,  see  '  certain  men  '  (rti/es  avBpunroi),  or  '  certain  '
(-rii/e's)  [7  times  in  i  Tim.,  never  in  others],  'faith'  (TTUTTIS)  in
objective  sense  (4  times  in  i  Tim.,  once  in  Tit.  14),  'saviour'
(<ro>Ttjp)  of  God  alone  in  i  Tim.  (in  the  second-century  piety  'no
one  could  any  longer  be  a  God  who  was  not  also  a  soter,"  Harn.,
Dogmeng.,  ET,  1 1 18) ;  cp  also  2  Tim.  2 17-20  as  preceding  i  Tim.

5093


ality  to  the  sheer  authority  of  the  apostle,  the  gradual  increase
of  severity  towards  errorists,  evident  as  the  epistles  proceed —
these  and  other  traces  form  a  cumulative  and  sufficient  argument
for  this  order  of  composition.  When  the  author  wrote  2  Tim.
he  had  considerable  Pauline  material  at  his  disposal.  Even  in
the  epistle  to  Titus,  he  falls  back  on  genuine  tradition,  and
Pauline  material  preponderates  though  to  a  less  degree.  But
in  i  Tim.  the  situation  has  become  more  advanced  ;  he  writes
more  freely  and  less  under  the  influence  of  his  master,  confutes
errorists  with  greater  sharpness,  assigns  more  dictatorial  powers
to  the  officers  of  the  church,  and  elaborates  the  various  ecclesias
tical  canons  with  unprecedented  care.  The  third  epistle  (i  Tim.)
is  thus,  as  Schleiermacher  was  the  first  to  point  out,  an  expansion
and  in  some  respects  a  repetition  of  the  others,  further  from  their
Pauline  background  of  reminiscences  and  tradition,  but  more
characteristic  of  the  writer  himself.  The  superiority  of  2  Tim.,
with  its  ample  personal  allusions  and  less  formal  tone,  is  quite
obvious ;  and  superiority  means  here  priority.  That  it  comes
from  the  same  pen  as  the  others,  need  not  be  doubted,  although
in  it  the  writer  is  more  of  an  editor  than  an  original  author.
The  general  sub-apostolic  style  and  spirit  of  all  three  is  fairly
uniform  and  affords  no  adequate  evidence  for  suspecting  a
plurality  of  writers.

Like  most  of  the  NT  writings,  the  pastorals  have  a
communal origin. In  them  a  current  of  the  age  be-

•. A ii- comes articulate, and hence the incon-
16.  Author. •  ,.

spicuous personality of their author L

cannot  be  rightly  deduced  from  his  writings.  It  was
an  age  when,  as  in  the  days  of  Haggai,  men  had  to
'  fetch  wood  and  build  the  house,'  while  others  had  to
encourage  and  direct  their  efforts.  To  furnish  such
inspiration  may  not  have  been  a  very  heroic  task,  de
manding  writers  of  exceptional  insight  and  pioneering
ardour  like  Paul,  but  it  was  timely  and  serviceable  ;  and
after  all  'edification'  (oiKodo/j.eiv)  was  the  criterion  and
aim  of  early  Christian  literature.  This  Paulinist  had
singular  capacities  for  the  labour  of  instructing  the
churches  of  his  day.  Thoroughly  convinced  that  he
had  a  message  for  it,  or  rather  that  in  Paul's  teaching
and  life  lay  the  pattern  for  true  doctrine  and  godliness,
he  addressed  himself  to  the  duty  of  curbing  and  stimu
lating  his  contemporaries  in  the  spirit  of  his  master,
writing  like  a  shrewd  and  experienced  man  of  affairs
who  feels  (unlike  his  contemporary,  the  prophet  who
wrote  Rev.  2f. )  that  the  moral  plight  of  the  age  de
manded  consolidation  —  consolidation  as  opposed  to
speculation  in  belief  or  looseness  in  organisation.  If
he  lacks  the  authority  of  intuition,  he  at  least  possesses
the  intuition  of  authority.  He  has  much  in  common
with  the  unconciliatory  element  in  Paul.  Unlike  the
later  apologists,  he  refuses  to  discuss  points  of  disagree
ment  or  to  meet  objectors  on  their  own  ground,  but  is
content  with  the  more  congenial  method  of  insisting  in
a  rather  dictatorial  fashion  upon  the  fixed  truths  of  the
faith.  In  this  he  is  a  precursor  of  Polycarp,  yet  in  all
likelihood  the  majority  of  his  opponents,  perhaps  even
of  his  readers,  were  none  the  worse  for  being  somewhat
sharply  reminded  that  the  ultimate  proofs  of  religion
lay  open  to  faith  and  the  moral  sense  ;  there  may  have
been  an  effectiveness  in  the  resolve  of  this  censor  to
assert  and  enlighten,  not  to  argue.  The  genuine  faith
is  to  him  a  'tradition'  (TrapdSocns)  or  a  'deposit'
(irapadriKr]),2  involving  'testimony'  (/j-aprvpia),  which
lays  a  moral  responsibility  upon  the  officials  of  the
church  especially.  The  tone  of  his  instructions  to  them
reminds  one  often  of  Butler's  famous  Charge  to  the
Clergy  (1751)  not  to  trouble  about  objections  raised  by
'men  of  gaiety  and  speculation,'  but  to  endeavour  to
beget  a  practical  sense  '  of  religion  upon  the  hearts  of
the  common  people. '  This  task  demands  moral  purity
above  all  things,  together  with  teaching  ability  in  the
higher  officials.  True  to  his  master,  this  mentor  is


1  20,  and  the  heightening  scale  of  2  Tim.  2  23  Tit.  891  Tim.  1  4,
of  2  Tim.  1  ii  and  i  Tim.  2  7,  of  2  Tim.  3  i  and  i  Tim.  4  i_/C,  of
Tit.  1  7  and  i  Tim.  3  2.

1  The  pastorals  in  fact  voice  a  tendency  of  popular  Christianity
rather  than  any  individual  writer's  cast  of  thought ;  cp  Wrede,
•ilher  A  ufga.be  und  Methode  der  sag.  NT  Theologie,  ^f.  (1897).
Authorship  is  here  quite  subordinate  to  function.

2  Cp  Herod.  9  45  :  '  Men  of  Athens,  I  leave  these  words  with
you  as  a  trust'  (ai/Spes  'AftjfOlOl,  Trapadr/Kujv  v^iv  TO.  ewea  raSe
riSffnai  K.r.A.)  with  2  Tim.  1  I2_/C,  etc.

5004


TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  (EPISTLES)

utterly  indifferent  to  the  sacerdotal  heresy  J  which  was
already  beginning  to  tinge  unhealthily  the  primitive
ideas  of  the  church  (MINISTRY,  §  59 a,  PRIEST,  §  8).
In  resisting  incipient  Gnosticism  with  its  attempt  to
Hellenise  the  faith  into  an  evaporated  intellectualism,
the  pastorals  refuse  to  employ  the  tendency,  which
ultimately  secularised  the  Catholic  church,  of  Hebraising
the  religion  of  Jesus  by  means  of  a  retrograde  movement
to  ritual  and  priestly  conceptions.  Indeed  the  impres
sion  made  by  these  letters  is  revealed  in  nothing  so  clearly
as  in  the  fact  that  they  came  to  be  cherished  by  those
who  more  or  less  unconsciously  were  either  ignoring  or
modifying  or  defying  their  principles  under  the  con
straining  influence  of  the  Zeitgeist.

Like  the  authors  of  Matthew's  gospel,  Barnabas,
Hebrews,  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  2  Peter,  the  author  of
17  Pseudo  l'le  Pastorfl's  l)elongs  to  the  great  anony-
'  -,  '  mous  period  of  early  Christian  literature.
^  '"  The  religious  life  of  the  primitive  church,
as  of  ancient  Israel,  was  '  at  certain  periods  very  intense,
and  at  these  periods  the  spiritual  energy  of  the  nation
expressed  itself  almost  impersonally,  through  men  who
forgot  themselves  and  were  speedily  forgotten  in  name
by  others'  (Uav.  Job,  Ixviii. ).  His  work,  too,  was
pseudonymous. a  To  write  under  Paul's  name  was,  for
a  Paulinist,  quite  a  legitimate  literary  artifice  ;  and  al
though  pseudepigrapha  in  the  second  century  —  that
period  rich  in  rhetorical  forgeries  (Jebb,  Homt-r,  87) — •
ranged  from  mere  fabrications  to  high-toned  composi
tions,  the  pastorals,  like  2  Peter,  belong  to  the  latter
class,  breathing  not  a  crude  endeavour  to  deceive  but
self-effacement  and  deep  religious  motives.  Hence  the
oblivion  in  which  the  writer  chose  to  work  and  has  been
allowed  to  remain.  It  was  clue  not  merely  to  the
necessity  of  throwing  a  certain  air  of  mystery  round  the
situation  in  order  to  secure  the  circulation  of  letters  long
after  their  putative  author's  death,  but  to  a  sort  of
Pythagorean  feeling  that  unselfish  piety  required  a
pupil's  work  to  be  attributed  to  his  master — a  canon  of
literary  ethics  not  unfamiliar  to  early  Christianity  itself
(Tertull.  adv.  Marc.  4s).  This  author  wrote  from  what
he  conceived  to  be  the  standpoint  of  Paul.3  Hut  it  would
be  unjust  to  estimate  him  by  the  measure  of  the  man
whose  spirit  he  endeavoured  to  propagate  and  apply  in
his  own  way.  The  correct  standard  is  to  be  sought  in
the  sub-Pauline  literature.  And  if  the  author  of  the
pastorals  is  inferior  to  the  genius  who  wrote  the  fourth
gospel,  even  in  appreciating  some  of  the  more  inward
aspects  of  Pauline  thought,  he  is  superior  in  range  and
penetration  to  those  who  wrote  Barnabas,  Jude,  the
Ignatian  epistles,  the  Christian  section  of  Ascensio  Jsniir,
and  2  Peter.  The  prevailing  deference  shown  to  the
apostles  and  to  Paul  by  contemporary  and  later  writers4
who  disclaim  all  pretensions  to  equality  with  them,  as
well  as  the  fact  that  mere  literary  ambition  was  utterly
foreign  to  the  early  Christian  consciousness  at  this
period,  may  serve  to  guarantee  the  ethical  honour  of  the
pastorals  and  to  corroborate  the  impression  left  by  them
selves  that  their  author  5  was  right  in  feeling  himself  not

1  T,ouw,  Ilct  ontstaan  van  het  Pritsterschaap  in  lie  Chris-
telijke  Kerk,  ^/.  fcf.  7g/.  110-126(1892).

2  See  EPISTOLARY  LITERATURE,  §4;  MINISTRY,  35  d;  and,
to  the  literature  cited  in  Hist.  New  Test.  597 f.,  619-624,  add
W.  Christ,  Philologische  Studien  zu  Clou.  A  lex.  30-39  (1900),
and  (for  the  pseud -epigrapha,  mainly  Gnostic,  of  the  2nd  cent.,
etc.)  Liechtenhan  in  7.XTW',  1902,  Hefte  3-4.

3  He  is  least  successful  in  reproducing  what  would  have  been
Paul's  tone  and  temper  to  colleagues  like  Timothy  and  Titus.  The
curt,  general  instructions  put  into  the  apostle's  mouth  are  often
incongruous  with  the  character  of  their  primitive  recipients  as
well  as  with  the  situation  presupposed  by  the  epistles  in  question.

4  K.g.,  Ignat.  Rom.  4,  '  I  do  not  order  you,  as  did  Peter  and
Paul  ;  they  were  apostles,  I  am  a  convict ' ;  also  Acta  Phoc.  4,
OVK  aTravTO/aoAo)  Tt)T  Ttav  aTrocrroAcoi'  TOV  ®eou  euapeerrtas.

5  His  success,  undoubtedly  deserved,  becomes  all  the  more
remarkable  where  failure  was  so  easy. The  Asiatic  presbyter
who  half  a  century  later  composed  the  Acts  of  I'a  ul  and  Thekla
no  doubt  acted  with  a  sincerity  equal  to  his  affection  (id ' se  antore
Panli  fecisse),  but  failed to  appreciate  the  vital elements  of
Paulinism  and was deposed  —  not for  using an illegitimate


TIN

merely  justified  but  obliged  to  sanction  and  support  his
message  by  his  master's  name.  iVot  long  before,  another
'  Paulinist '  had  composed  speeches  for  Paul  which
were  based  on  oral  tradition  and  yet  were  indubitably
free  products  of  a  historian  who  had  skill  and  sympathy
enough  to  give  fairly  faithful  transcripts  of  the  situation
in  question  (Acts  13i6-4i  1722-31  20i8-3s,  etc.).  It  was
but  a  step  from  this  to  the  other  recognised  method  cf
literary  impersonation,  which  chose  epistolary  rather
than  historical  expression  to  &ain  its  religious  end.

Since  Schmidt  and  Schleiermacher  almost  a  century  ago  sug
gested  a  sub- Pauline  date  for  i  Tim.,  a  conjecture  which  Eich-
...  horn  amongst  others  speedily  (1612)  extended  to

18.  liltera-  all  three  epistles,  there  has  been  a  remarkable
ture.  continuity  of  criticism,  starting  from  *F.  C.
Baur  (Die  sogenannten  Ptutoralbritft  ties
Apostels  Paulas,  1835).  For  the  critical  work  up  to  1880  see
*H.  J.  Holtzmann,  Die  Pastoralhriefe  kritisch  itnd exegetisch
behandelt  (1880),  a  monograph  which  is  far  from  being  super
seded.  Subsequent  contributions  in  general  support  of  Baur
and  Holtzmann,  with  modifications  and  adaptations,  have  come
along  three  main  lines  :—  (a)  editions  :  *H.  von  Soden  (HC  iii.
1 155-254. (2'  1893);  *Moffatt  (Histor.  New  Testament. V\  556-575
[1901]);  O.  Cone  (/nit-mat.  Ildbks.  to  NT,  vol.  3  [1901]).  (b)
monographs  and  essays  on— (i)  general  criticism  of  epp. :  Kenan


test.  Letterkunde,  i888,(a)  66-78)  ;  van  Manen  (Oi.D-C'HRiST.
LIT.,  PAUL);  *Bruckner  (Die  Clironol.  Rcihenfolge  der  Briefs
des  NT,  277-286  [1890]);  Prof.  E.  Y.  Hincks,  J  BL,  1897,  pp.
94-117,  Reville  (Lcs  origines  de  fcpiscopat,  l2f>2/.),  and  the
NT  introductions  by  Hilgenfeld  (1875);  H.  J.  HoltzmannlS)
(272-292  [1892]);  *S.  JJavidson,(3)  1-75  [1894];  B.  \V.  Bacon
(127-139  [1900]);  Baljon,  Gescliiedenis  v.  d.  Bb.  d.  NT  (1901)
150-174;  *Jiilicher  ((•>)  136-156  [1901])  and  Sabatier,  art.
'  Pastorales,'  L'ency.  Sciences  re/.,  10  v^of.  (2)  textual  features  :
Henri  Bois,  //'/'  (1888)  145-160  '  zur  Exegese  der  Pastoral-


organisation  :  See  under  MINISTRY  and  add  (to  lit.  there  cited)
defences  of  conservative  standpoint  in  Hort,  Christian  Ecclesia
(1898),  189-217,  and  J.  W.  Falconer  From  Apostle  to  Priest,
109-146(1900):  against  Kiihl  (Die  Gemeinde-ordnung  in  den
Pastornlbriejen,  i88s)see  Hilgenfeld  (Zl\'T,  1886,  pp.  456-473);
and  on  their  connection  with  Apostol.  Constitutions,  Harnack,
Texte  und  L'ntcrsuch.  ii.  b$()f.  (ii.)  the  errorists ;  Hilgenfeld
(Zil'T,  1880,  pp.  448-464):  Havet,  Le  Christianisme  et  ses
es,  4  371  ,-380  (1884);  and  Bourquin,  Etude  critique  stir


past,  cpitres,  51-64(1890). ijii.)  general setting  and religious
standpoint: Hatch (l-'.BW, articles  'Paul'  and  'Pastorals');


Harnack,  Dogmengeschichte  (ET)1  156-162  189-192  215^  223,7?,
and  Wernle,  Die  Anfiinge  unserer Religion,  347-368, 38o_/C (1901).
Although  the  general  critical  position,  outlined  in  these  con
tributions,  is  unquestionable,  it  is  unhappily  not  unquestioned.
The  traditional  view  survives,  with  more  or  less  hesitation  and
a  far  from  uniform  presentment,  in  the  editions  of  Rolling  (1882-
1887  ;  on  i  Tim.),  Weiss  (-Meyer,  (G)i893,  also  Die  Paulin.  Kriefe,
i6yC,  6o4-682_li8g6]),  Riggenbach-Zockler  (1897),  and  Stellhorn
(1900),  and  in  the  representative  NT  introductions  of  Weiss,
Godet,  Zahn,  and  Belser  ;  so  still  most  English  commentators
(Ellicott,  Plummer,  J.  H.  Bernard,  Horton,  J.  P.  Lilley),
writers  on  NT  introduction  (Salmon,  Gloag,  and  Adeney),  and
others,  e.g.,  G.  G.  Findlay  (appendix  to  ET  of  Sabatier's
L'apttre  Paul,  341-402  [1891],  Hastings'  D  B  3  714-716),  and
Rams.  Church, &)  248^,  EJ:/>OS.  4th  ser.  8no_/T,  etc.  Add
Bertrand  (!-:ssai  critique  sur  [authenticity  des  cpitres  Past.,
i88b),  Ruegg  (Ans  Schri,  t  und  Geschichte,  59-108  [1898])  ;  Roos
(Die  Briffe  des  ap.  Paulus  und  die  Redcn  des  Herrnjesii,  156-
202),  G.  H.  Gilbert's  Life  of  Paul,  225-232(1899);  and  G.  T.
Purves,  Christianity  in  Apostolic  Age,  170-176  (1900).  Also
(published  since  this  article  was  written)  Lock's  studies  in
Hastings'  DB  4  on  the  epistles.  i.  MO.

TIN  ( 7H2,  bcdil,  lit.  '  that  which  is  separated  '  [from
precious  metal],  see  Is.  1  25,  where  render  'alloy'  [RV"'!,'.  Che.,
see  Ip] ;  Kacr<riVepos  [4  times],  |u6Ai£(6]os  [twice],  staiir.uiii),  Ezek.
22  18  20  (Israel  to  be  cast  into  the  furnace  like  one  of  the  baser
metals),  27  12  (exported  from  Tarshish),  Zech.  4  10  (material  of
plummet,  /cacraiTepu'os),  Nu.  31  22  (cleansed  by  passing  through
fire).


method  so  much  as  for  employing  it  to  promote  notions  which
the  common-sense  of  the  church  rejected  as  palpably  alien  to  the
faith.  Pseudo-Pauline  epistles  ('ficta;  ad  ha^resim  Marcionis ',
were  widely  circulated  during  the  second  century  ;  the  superiority
of  the  pastorals  to  all  such  is  A  difference  of  degree  rather  than  of
kind.

5096


Being  a  component  of  bronze,  tin  was  used  as  a  metal
from  a  very  early  date  (see  COPPER).  A  ring  from  a
tomb  at  Dahshur  (dated  about  the  third  dynasty)  contains
8.  2  per  cent  of  tin  ;  a  vase  of  sixth  dynasty  5.  68  per
cent  of  tin.  When  the  unalloyed  metal  was  first
introduced  cannot  be  ascertained  with  certainty.  All
we  know  is  that  about  the  first  century  the  Greek  word
Ka.<T<riTfpos  designated  tin,  and  that  tin  was  imported
from  Cornwall  into  Italy  after,  if  not  before,  the  invasion
of  Britain  by  Julius  C;esar.  From  what  Pliny  says
(HN  34  16  389),  it  appears  that  the  Romans  in  his  time
did  not  fully  realise  the  distinction  between  tin  and
lead  ;  the  former  was  called  plumbum  album  or
candidum  to  distinguish  it  from  plumbum  nigrum  (lead
proper).1  The  word  s/annum  definitely  assumed  its
present  meaning  in  the  fourth  century.  (See  Jer.  on
Zech.  4io.


TINKLING  ORNAMENTS  (D'DDi;),  Is.  3i8  AV,
RV  ANKLETS  (q.v.  }.

TIPHSAH  (npppl  ;  wanting  in  the  true  @  but
pA({>ei  [R]  'n  *  K.  246  f.  ;  6&Y,\  [A];  tahpls  —  i.e.  ,  Tahp-
anhes  [Pesh.]  ;  tkaphsa  [Vg.  ]).

i.  A  place  in  the  Eber-han-nahar  (see  EBER)  men
tioned  as  the  NE.  boundary  of  Solomon's  empire  (i  K.
424  [64]),  corresponding  to  Gaza  in  the  SW.  It  is
generally  held  that  Tiphsah  is  the  ancient  Thapsacus,
and  that  Solomon's  occupation  of  this  place  was  con
nected  with  his  commercial  enterprises,  Thapsacus
being  the  great  zeugma,  or  place  of  passage,  of  the
river  Euphrates  alike  for  caravans  and  for  invading
armies.

It  was  there  that  the  Ten  Thousand  first  learned  the  real
object  of  the  expedition  of  Cyrus  the  Younger,  and  crossed  the
stream  (Xen.  A  nab.  i.  4  n).  There  too,  Darius  Codomannus
crossed  after  the  fatal  battle  of  Issus,  and  Alexander  after  him.
In  the  sixth  century  A.D.  it  passed  out  of  knowledge.

The  true  site  was  identified  about  the  same  time  by
J.  P.  Peters  (.\ation.  May  23,  1889)  and  B.  Moritz
'(Her.  der  Deri.  Akad.,  July  25,  1889)  with  K'.ifat
Dibse,  a  small  ruin  '  at  the  bend  of  the  stream  where  it
changes  from  a  southerly  to  an  easterly  course,  8  m.
below  Meskene,  and  6  below  the  ancient  Barbalissus.  '
Among  other  points  in  which  the  situation  of  Dibse
agrees  with  the  statements  of  Xenophon  and  Strabo  is
the  existence  of  a  camel-ford  at  this  very  spot.  There
is  no  philological  objection  to  this  combination,  but
excavations  still  wait  to  be  made  (cp  Peters,  Nippur,


At  the  same  time,  there  are  good  reasons  for  testing  this  theory
afresh.  The  realm  of  Solomon  was  not  as  extensive  as  a  tradi
tion  based  on  incorrect  readings  of  the  text  has  represented  (see
SOLOMON,  §  9).  Tiphsah  and  'Azzah  are  most  probably  places  on
the  frontier  of  Solomon's  dominion  in  the  Negeb.  The  former
may  come  from  Tappuah  (  =  Nephtoah),  the  latter  may  perhaps
represent  the  strong  city  Zarephath.  These  points  are  doubtful.
2.  A  town  in  Ephraim  which  opposed  the  pretensions
of  Menahem,  and  was  punished  by  him  (2  K.  15i6f),
identified  by  Conder  with  A'/i.  Tafsah,  on  an  old  site  6  in.
SW.  of  Shechem  (PHFMem.  2  169).  The  'Tiphsah'
of  MT  is  as  much  conjecture  as  the  '  Tirzah  '  (depua.)
of  <5U  (Oaipa  [A]).  The  right  reading,  as  many  think,
is  that  of  (S1-—  viz.  TAPPUAH  (ra^we).  So  Thenius,
Klostermann,  Renan  (Hist.  2450),  Kohler  (Bibl.  Gesch.
8399),  Guthe.  There  were  at  least  three  places  called
Tappuah  (or  Nephtoah).  Whether  this  Tiphsah  or
Tappuah  was  really  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Shechem,
and  not  rather  in  the  Negeb  (cp  i),  is  one  of  the  most
recent  critical  problems.  See  Crit,  Bib.  on  2  K.  15i6.

T. K.  C.

TIRAS  (DTfl;  9[e]lp&c[BADEL]),  son  of  Japheth,
mentioned after Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan,

.  n^^m  Tubal, and Meshech, Gen.  Kb (P),
1.  A  northern „, n T. .  „

, 9 i  Ch.  15. It  is  usually  assumed  that

he must be the representative of a
northern folk. The  older  commentators  mostly  think

1  So  in  ©  the  distinction  between  Ka(r<rtTep09  and  jixoAi/3os  is
uncertain.

5097


TIRHAKAH

of  the  Thracians  (9/>a£  ;  Jos.  Ant.  i.  61).  But  after
removing  the  Gk.  nom.  suffix  s,  we  get  a  form  which
has  no  similarity  to  Tiras.  Hence  Tuch,  Noldeke
(HL  Ssig/. ),  and  W.  Max  Miiller  (As.  u.  Eur.  382/1 )
think  of  the  Tyrseni,  who  are  spoken  of  not  only  as
Etruscans  but  also  as  pirates  on  the  ALgean  Sea  (cp
TARSHISH,  §  6,  and  note  quotation  from  E.  Meyer  on
the  probable  distinction  between  the  Etruscan  Tyrseni
and  the  Turusa  of  the  Egyptian  inscriptions).  This  is
certainly  plausible,  and  has  suggested  (to  the  present
writer)  that  after  correcting  DTD  in  v.  2  into  DTin,  the
latter  word  should  be  substituted  for  srenn  in  v.  4.  The
order  of  the  names  in  v.  4  seemed  to  favour  this,  and
granting  that  '  Tarshish '  is  the  Hebrew  name  for
Tartessus  or  S.  Spain,  no  better  course  seems  to  be
open,  for  one  cannot  expect  Tartessus  to  be  inclosed
between  Elishah  (i.e.,  S.  Italy  and  Sicily  [Lag.,  Di. ,
Kau.]),  and  Kittim  (i.e.,  Cyprus?).  The  Tyrseni,
however,  might  naturally  enough  be  so  grouped.  How
easily  Tiras  (or  Tures?)and  Tarshish  might  be  con
founded  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  in  Judith  223  [13]
Vg.  actually  gives  Jilios  Tharsis  where  Vet.  Lat.  gives  •
filios  Thiras  et  Rasis.  Cp  ROSH.  A  better  view,
however,  can  possibly  be  found  (see  §  2).

Jensen  connects  Tiras  with  the  Hittite  T(a)rs  =  Tarzi
(so  Shalmaneser  II.  )  =  Tarsus  (Jensen,  TLZ.,  4th  Feb.
1899,  col.  70),  but  see  TARSHISH,  §  6.

The  increasing  evidence  (see  Crit.  Bib.)  that  many  parts  of
the  OT,  which  came  down  to  the  late  editor  or  editors  in  a
2 A  rnrrii corrupt  form,  have  been  manipulated  by  him  in
• .  COrrup-  accordance  with  incorrect  views  of  geography
tlOH  Of and  history,  compels  us  to  consider,  as  we  pass
Asshur  ? through  the  Table  of  Nations,  what  may  have
been  the  original  form  of  each  ethnic  or  place-
name  that  we  find  there. It  has  already  been  suggested  by
others  (see  JAPHETH)  that  Japheth  in  the  original  legend  meant
either  the  Phoenicians  or  the  Philistines. It  may  be  added  here
that  there  is  great  reason  to  doubt  whether  either  the  J  portions
or  the  P  portions  of  Gen.  10  in  their  original  form  extended  their
range  beyond  Palestine  and  Arabia.

It  is  a  characteristic  of  P's  lists  (and  to  P  TV.  2-4,  according  to
the  critical  analysis,  belong)  that  he  in  naive  ignorance  repeats
the  same  name  in  different  corrupt  and  independent  forms.
Thus  'Tiras 'in  ?'.  2  is  ultimately  the  same  as  'Tarshish'  in
7:  4  ;  '  Gomer,'  '  Magog,'  '  Madai,'  '  Javan,'  and  '  Togarmah  '  are
all  most  probably  corrupt  and  independent  forms  of '  Jerahmeel. '
'Tubal'  (cp  TABEAI.),  as  the  connection  in  which  the  name
occurs  in  Ezek.  3226  ought  sufficiently  to  show,  is  a  Palestinian  or
rather  a  N.  Arabian  name.1  'Meshech'  (TJire)  should  be
'Cusham'  (CJ'2)— i.e.,  the  N.  Arabian  Cush  (see  CUSH,  2).
'Elishah'  in  i>.  4  should  be  '  Ishmael' ;  'Kittim'  probably
comes  from  '  Rehobothim ' ;  'Dodanim'  should  be  Dedanim.
If  these  emendations  are  in  the  main  right — and  the  evidence
referred  to  above  would  seem  to  make  this  a  reasonable  contention
— it  follows  that  'Tiras'  as  well  as  'Tarshish'  (see  TARSHISH,
§  7),  _is  most  probably  a  corruption  and  distortion  of  the  N
Arabian  ethnic  name  Ashhur  or  Asshur  (  =  Geshur).  Cp
GESHUR,  2.  -r-_  x.  C.

TIRATHITES  (D'ninfi),  i  Ch.  25s. See  JABEZ.

TIRE.  i.  D'Ohnb*,  sahanmim.  Is.  3i8  Judg.  82126
RV  'crescents.'  See  NECKLACE,  2.

2.  -IN2,  pe'er,  Ezek.  24  17  (AV),  23  (EV)  ;  see  TURBAN,  2.

3.  lity, si-s; Ezek.  16 10 RVmg- translates '[a tire  of] fine
linen.' A  headtire  seems  to  be  meant. See  TURBAN,  2.

4.  fj-i-rpa. Judith  10  3' 10  8 (AVmjf. 'mitre') Bar.  5  2 (EV
'  diadem  '). See  DIADEM.

TIRHAKAH (H^rnF!  ;  GAPAKA  [A  in  2K., B  in

Is-]. 9Ap0AK  [L],  -pA  [ft  in  aK.],  -p&6A  [NAQ*  in

1 Name ^S'^'  ^  ^' Tharaca). According  to Is.  37 9

=  2  K.  19  9,  the  Assyrian  general  (rab-shakeh)

had  heard  that  Tirhakah,  king  of  Ethiopia  (<5  of  [the]

Ethiopians),  was  coming forth to fight against the

Assyrian  armies occupying  Judah  before  the  siege  of

Jerusalem  (701  B.C.)  in  order  to  assist  Hezekiah.

This  is  the  third  king  of  the  twenty-fifth  (or  Ethiopian)
dynasty  of  Egypt  (EGYPT,  §  666). .  His  name  is  written

1  '  Elam  '  of  course  should  be  '  Jerahmeel '  (as  probably  always
in  OT),  and  most  probably  (if  not  certainly)  '  Zidonians  '  should
be  '  Misrites.'

5098


TIRHAKAH

in  Hieroglyphic  signs  Ta-h-ru-k.1  The  vowels  (a  and
u)  are  written  quite  constantly,  although  they  appear  to
us  unintelligible  and  useless.  The  cuneiform  tran
scription  is  Tarkii.  Manetho  gives  Tarkos  or  Tarakos,
Strabo,  i.  821,  Tearko  (he  strangely  makes  the  king  a
great  conqueror,  who  reached  the  pillars  of  Hercules  ;
cp  Megasthenes,  Fragm.  20,  in  Strabo,  686).  The
biblical  rendering  would  seem  to  need  a  transposition  ;

Teharko,  Teharka  (npinn).

The  king  seems  to  have  been  an  usurper,2  who
legalised  his  crown  afterwards  by  marriage  with  the
2  Dat  %v'dow  °f  king  Shabako.  When  the  usurpa
tion  took  place,  can  be  determined  with
certainty  (see  So).  Tirhakah  reigned,  according  to  a
stele  of  the  Serapeum,  twenty -six  complete  years  ;
according  to  Assyrian  sources  he  died  in  668/67  ; a
consequently  his  accession  to  the  throne  was  in  694/93
B.C.  This  shows  at  once  that  in  the  biblical  account
there  is  an  impossible  conjunction  of  facts.  Either  the
original  form  of  the  text  did  not  give  the  name  of  the
'  king  of  Ethiopia '  referred  to — later  scholars  would
then  attempt  to  identify  the  king  and  insert  Tirhaka-
Taharko  instead  of  Shabako  who  reigned  in  701  (see,
however,  So  on  the  improbability  of  Shabako's  attack
ing  the  Assyrians) — or  Taharko  was  mentioned  as  the
Ethiopian  governor  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  the  later  re
cension  made  him  a  king.  Otherwise,  we  should  have
to  acknowledge  a  confusion  of  the  events  of  701  with
others  of  the  time  between  693  and  676  B.C.  The  first

3 Assyrian  exPcdition  of  the  Assyrians  against  Egypt,
, /  in  676,  was  in  all  probability  caused  by

such  a  provocation  as  military  aid  from
Egypt  to  Palestinian  rebels  against  Assyria.  Esarhaddon
mentions  indeed  that  Ba'al,  the  king  of  Tyre,  was  in
duced  to  rebellion  by  Tarkii.  This  may  have  occurred
earlier  ;  but  693  is,  as  has  been  said,  for  Tirhakah  the
superior  chronological  limit.

Tirhakah,  however,  could  not  really  play  the  part  of
an  aggressor  in  Syria.  The  difficulty  of  maintaining
Egypt  and  keeping  the  nomarchs  in  subjection  must  as
a  rule  have  absorbed  his  whole  strength.  An  Assyrian
army  penetrated  into  Egypt  in  676  and  seems  to  have
occupied  a  considerable  portion  of  it,  but  in  675
was  annihilated.4  In  his  tenth  year,  671,  king  Esar
haddon  secured  the  road  to  Egypt  by  an  expedition
against  the  Arabs,  invaded  (then,  or  by  another  army?)
Egypt  by  way  of  a  city  in  the  desert  called  .Magdali  or
Migdol  (see  MIGDOL),  and  met  and  defeated  the  forces
of  Taharko  near  a  place  called  Ishupri.  The  Ethiopian
king  had  finally,  after  losing  the  third  battle,  to  withdraw
from  Egypt.  The  Assyrians  marched  as  far  as  Thebes,
which  capitulated  and  was  mildly  dealt  with.  The
country  was  divided  among  twenty  nomarchs,  descend
ants  of  Libyan  generals.  Some  of  these  may  have  called
in  the  Assyrians  to  tree  them  from  the  Ethiopian  yoke,
and  submitted  to  the  Assyrian  supremacy  without  resist
ance.  Nevertheless  we  read  of  a  conspiracy  with
Taharko  against  the  Assyrians  by  the  three  most  influ
ential  leaders  (Niku-Necho  I.  of  Sais  and  Memphis,
Sarludari  of  Tanis  and  Pakruru  of  Pi-saptu}.  Evi
dently,  they  felt  too  weak  to  resist  the  Ethiopians  when
these  threatened  to  invade  Egypt  again,  and  therefore
tried  to  maintain  good  relations  with  them.  In  point
of  fact  Taharko  invaded  Egypt  again  in  669.  Esar
haddon  hurried  to  the  rescue  of  his  vassals,  and  died  on
the  expedition.  His  army,  nevertheless,  entered  Egypt,
defeated  Taharko's  army,  coming  from  Memphis,  at


c


ra


2  See  Maspero,  Histoire,  8361,  on  this  point. The  words  of
the  inscription  of  Tanis  (de  Roug6  in  Melanges  if  Archfologie
Egyptienne,  1  21, etc)  'he  went  to the  Delta at the  age  of
twenty  years  '  do  not  point,  however,  to  a  revolution  necessarily.

3  Cp  Winckler  in  KAT(^  93. Why  he  places  (p.  87  and
AOF  1  482)  his  accession  to  the  throne  in  691,  does  not  appear.

4  SeeA'A  7"(3)88,for  the  report  of  the  '  Babylonian  Chronicles."

5099


TIRSHATHA

Karbanit  (near  Canopus?),  and  forced  him  to  retreat  as
far  as  Thebes.  The  cities  Sais,  Mendes,  and  Tanis
were  cruelly  punished  for  joining  the  Ethiopians  ;  prince
Necho,  however,  when  sent  to  Nineveh  as  a  prisoner,
obtained  a  pardon  and  his  dominion.  Evidently,  the
Assyrians  needed  his  influence.  They  even  gave  the
city  of  Hathribis  to  his  son  Psametik  and  thus  furthered
the  rise  of  the  next  dynasty  (the  Saitic).  Taharko,  in  the
meantime,  fortified  a  camp  near  Thebes  and,  while  the
Assyrian  troops  were  engaged  in  the  Delta,  forced  this
city  to  surrender.  At  first,  the  prince  of  Thebes  seems
to  have  closed  the  door  to  the  fugitive  Ethiopian  king.
Preparing  for  a  new  invasion  of  northern  Egypt,
Tirhakah  died  there.  His  step-son  Ten(wa)t-Amon
(Tandamani  of  the  Assyrian  reports),  son  of  Shabako,
became  king,  and  made  the  last  attempt  to  expel  the
Assyrians  (668/67).!

On  the  Egyptian  monuments,  nothing  of  this  warlike
activity  of  the  king  can  be  observed.  Tirhakah  left
4  Etrvrjtian  many  builclings  and  restorations,  especi-
data  '  ally  in  his  residence  Napata  (mod.
Gebel-Barkal)  and  at  Thebes.  North
of  Thebes,  the  difficulties  caused  him  by  the  nomarchs
seem  to  have  prevented  him  from  building  much  ;  but
inscriptions  bearing  his  name  have  been  found  at  Tanis,
and  at  Memphis  his  name  is  represented  at  the  burial  of
an  Apis  bull  in  his  tenth  and  twenty- fourth  year  (directly
before  the  Assyrian  conquest?).  Nominally,  also,  the
two  years  following  668/7  seem  to  have  been  counted
to  him  in  Egypt,  so  at  least  later  by  Psammetichus  I.
At  Thebes,  the  nomarch  Mont(u)-m-he't  was  in  the  time
of  the  Assyrian  invasion  practically  independent  (he
built  considerably  at  Karnak)  and  does  not  seem  to
have  always  been  faithful  to  his  suzerain  in  Napata  (see
above).

A  (rather  conventionalised)  portrait  of  Tirhakah  is
given  elsewhere  (ETHIOPIA,  fig.  i,  right-hand  picture)  ;
the  Negro  blood  is  more  strongly  indicated  in  several
other  portraits  ;  the  full  Negro  type  on  the  Zinjirli-
stele  of  Esarhaddon  is  therefore  no  caricature.

[The  view  expressed  elsewhere  (SENNACHERIB,  §  5)
as  to  the  possibility  of  a  confusion  between  an  Assyrian
and  an  Asshurite  (N.  Arabian)  invasion  of  Juclah  may
possibly  require  a  reinvestigation  of  the  meaning  of
tm  t^D  in  2  K.  19  9=Is.  37g.  '  Cush  '  may  be,  not
Ethiopia,  but  a  region  in  N.  Arabia  (see  CUSH,  §  2).
If  so,  npmn  (Tirhakah)  will  have  to  be  admitted  into
the  group  of  personal  names  which  have  (according  to
the  new  theory)  been  modified  by  redactors  to  suit  their
own  limited  historical  knowledge.  See  Crit.  Bib.  on
2  K.  19g  and  other  parts  of  2  K.]  \v.  M.  M.

TIRHANAH  (narnn ;  GARAM  [B],  GARXNA  [A],
6ARAANA  [L]),  a  son  of  Caleb  by  his  concubine
Maacah  (i  Ch.  248).

TIRIA  ({-ryri ;  om.  B,  GHRIA  [A],  eGpiA  [L]),  the
name  of  a  son  of  Jehallelel  ( i  Ch.  4 16),  may  have  arisen
from  -irr  in  the  following  verse.

TIRSHATHA  (NJU';"in  ;  either  =  tarsata,  Pers.
partic.  =  '  feared  '  [Meyer,  Ryssel,  and  most  scholars],
or  an  official  title  from  Old  Pers.  antare-kshathra,  '  royal
representative  in  the  province,'  Lag.  Symmicta,\(x>\
A6ARAC0AC  [L  generally]),  a  title  like  '  Your  Excellency'
(Meyer),  or  an  official  title  (Lag.,  Stade)  of  the  Persian
governor  of  Judah,  or  perhaps  a  corrupt  form  of  a
personal  name,  or  of  a  gentilic,  of  Semitic  origin.  The
article  is  always  prefixed.

(a)  Ezra 2 63  (afleptraa  [B],  -crafla  [A],  -a<r0a;  [L])  =  Neh.  765
(ao-eptrafla  [R],  aOcp.  [NA])=  i  Esd.  5  40  (see  next  small  type);
(b)  Neh.  7  70(0111.  B,  a.6ap<raoa  [tfc.a  mg.  A])  ;  (c)  S  9  ;  (if)  lo'i  [2].

The  sense  in  (a)  Ezra  2 63  =  Neh.  765=1  Esd.  640  and
(/>)  Neh.  7  70  depends  on  the  critical  view  adopted  as  to
the  origin  of  the  list  of  '  sons  of  the  province.'  If,  with
Meyer,  we  admit  it  to  be  a  list  of  exiles  who  returned

1  So  far  after  Winckler's  arrangement,  KA  T(3)  90-94.
5100


TIRZAH

with  Zerubbabcl,  the  Tirshatha  will  of  course  be  Zerub-
babel  ;  to  Kosters,  however,  it  is  a  list  of  post-exilic
residents  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and  the  Tirshatha  is
Nehemiah.

Cp  i  Esd.  040  (=  Ezra  2  63),  where  we  find  v.  [o]  Kai  uT#<x/xas
(BA),  <XTapao-0aS  [L],  ATH  ARIAS,  RV  ATTHARIAS).

In  (c)  Neh.  89=1  Esd.  9  49  and  (d)  Neh.lOi  [2],
Nehemiah  is  mentioned  by  name  as  the  Tirshatha,  but
is  it  certain  that  the  text  is  correct?  Guthe  (SBOT)
points  out  that  i  Esd.  949  (  =  Neh.  89)  gives  simply  /ecu
elirev  aTTO.pa.Ti]  ([B],  ar^apar???  [A],  adapaaOas  [L],
ATTHARATKS)  —  i.e.,  'and  the  Tirshatha  said,'  and
infers  that  N?n  rram  's  a  g'°ss.  Smend,  however  {Listen,
18),  prefers  to  omit  'that  is,  the  Tirshatha'  (so  ©
[BNA]  in  Neh.),  whilst  Meyer  (Entst.  200}  omits  both
'  Nehemiah  '  and  'Tirshatha.'  In  (</)  Guthe  (SBOT)
and  Wellhausen  (GGN,  1895,  P-  I77}  om^  '  tne  Tir
shatha,  '  because  it  separates  the  proper  name  from  the
patronymic  (<5!iNA,  but  not  <SL,  supports  this).  Very
possibly  here  as  well  as  in  (c  }  both  '  Nehemiah  '  and
'  Tirshatha  '  are  intrusive  (cp  Marq.  Fund.  34).  The
two  laymen,  Nehemiah  and  Zedekiah,  are  very  isolated
just  before  the  names  of  priestly  classes  (see  ZEDEKIAH).
Nehemiah's  usual  title  is  nns,  'governor.'  It  is  not
certain  that  Nehemiah  had  yet  returned.  To  this  it
may  be  replied  that  Nehemiah's  change  of  title  may  be
connected  with  a  limitation  of  his  jurisdiction  during
his  second  period  of  office  to  matters  connected  with
3.  religious  reformation.  For  the  grounds  of  this  hypo
thesis  see  NEHEMIAH.  On  the  name  see,  further,  Crit.
Bib.  T.  K.  C.

TIRZAH  (nV~in?  'agreeable,'  §102;  0epc<\[BAL];


but  in  Josh.  12  24  0ap<ra  [BF],  Oeppa.  [A],  in  i  K.  14  17  •yrji/  <ra.pi.pa.
[A  ;  see  ZAKETHAN],  in  2  K.  15  14  6ap<rei.\a.  [B],  OepcrtAo,  [A],  in
Cant.  G  4  evSoiaa.  [BNA],  in  Targ.  NrTjnrY).

i.  An  ancient  city  of  Mt.  Ephraim  (see  below)  which
had  a  king  of  its  own  before  the  Israelitish  conquest
(Josh.  1224),  and  was  the  residence  of  the  N.  Israelitish
kings  from  Jeroboam  to  Omri  (i  K.  14  17  15  21  166  8/^
15  17  23).  According  to  Klostermann's  emendation  of
has-Seredah  in  i  K.  1126  (and  of  the  crapeipa  of  ©  in

1  K.  12),  Jeroboam  was  a  native  not  of  '  Zeredah  '  but
of  Tirzah,  which  place  he  fortified  while  still  nominally
in  the  service  of  Solomon  (see  JEROBOAM,  i,  ZARETHAN,
§  2). Shortly  afterwards  we  read  (i  K.  12  24/1)  that
on Jeroboam's  return from Egypt he built a castle
(xa/>a/ca  =  N3n3) at Sarira. Whether Klostermann is
right  in  holding  Tirzah  to  be  the  original  form  of  the
name  of  Jeroboam's  city,  will  be  considered  later  ;  at
any  rate, we may  follow him in his statement that
Zeredah  (rrns),  or  has-S6redah,  crapeipa,  and  Tirzah  are
fundamentally  the  same. The  next fact  recorded of
Tirzah  is  that,  when,  after  a  reign  of  seven  days,  Zimri
saw that he could not hold Tirzah, he burned the
citadel, and himself perished in the flames (i  K.
1617  18)  ;  the  usurper  Omri  then  took  up  his  abode  in
Tirzah. Even  after  Samaria  had  supplanted  Tirzah  as
the capital, it continued to  be  a  fortress  of  strategic
importance. Menahem  b. Gadi  won  Tirzah  first  and
then  Samaria, when  he  slew  Shallum b. Jabesh  and
mounted  the  throne  of  Israel. From  the  context  (on

2  K.  15  16  see  TIPHSAH)  Tirzah  appears  to  have  been
not  far  from  Tappuah  (in Ephraim,  but  on  the  border
of  Manasseh). In  the  Book  of  Judges  too  there  is  one
more  reference  in  the  narratives,  which,  if  based  on  fact,
should  come  first  in  chronological  order. Nor  must  we
omit  a  famous  poetical  reference  in the  ordinary  text.
In  Cant.  64,  as  given  by  MT  (<5,  however,  has  ws  evdoKia),
we find the Shulammite compared to Tirzah. But
whether  a  methodical  criticism  can  accept  this  reading,
is  doubtful  (see  CANTICLES,  §  14,  and  cp  ROSE). We
need  not  therefore  discuss  the  question  whether  Tirzah
really  was  as  beautifully  situated  as  the  ordinary  text  of
Cant.  64  seems  to  imply. It  is  enough  to  find  out  where
this  northern  city  lay.

SIOI


TITHES

There  are  three  current  identifications.  ( i )  Robinson
and  Van  de  Velde  thought  of  Talluza,1  a  picturesque
village  on  a  hill  2040  ft.  above  the  sea-level,  E.  of
Samaria,  and  slightly  N.  of  Mt.  Ebal.  The  phonetic
resemblance,  however,  is  but  slight,  and  the  description
of  Thersa  quoted  by  Robinson  from  Brocardus  ( '  on  a
high  mountain,  three  leagues  from  Samaria  to  the  E. ')
suits  Tubas  (Thebez?)  better  than  Talluza.  (2)  The
Midrash  represents  Tirzah  as  Tir'an  (cp  CANTICLES,
§  14,  note)  and  the  Targum  as  Tar'itha.  Hence  Buhl
(Pal.  203)  suggests  that  Tirathana,  a  village  close  to
Gerizim  (Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  4i),  may  be  intended,  and
he  (doubtfully)  identifies  this  with  et-Tireh,  on  the  W.
side  of  the  plain  of  Makhneh.  But  this  is  not  a
sufficiently  important  site.  (3)  Conder  (PEFM  2216)
suggests  the  village  Teyasir,  n  m.  N.  of  Shechem,  and
12  m.  E.  of  Samaria  (see  ASHKK,  2).  The  site  appears
not  unsuitable  ;  but  nothing  can  be  based  on  the  name.

But  is  the  name  Tirzah  really  the  correct  form?  Is  it  likely
to  have  been  corrupted  into  Zeredah  or  has-seredah  ?  And  is  it
the  most  natural  name  for  an  important  fortress?  Add  to  this
that  another  corrupted  form  of  the  same  original  may  be  ZARE
THAN  (y.  z>.).  The  problem  is  to  find  a  name  out  of  which  all  these
forms  can  have  been  corrupted.  Such  a  name  is  "VIS  JV3  '  Beth-
zur  '  (see  col.  2405);  such  a  name,  too,  is  rlSlS,  'Zarephath.'  It
so  happens  that  all  the  OT  passages  referred  to  above  most  prob
ably,  in  their  original  form,  referred  to  the  Negeb  (Cant.  64  of
course  is  excluded).  It  will  therefore  be  safer  to  pronounce  in
favour  of  Zarephath.

2.  One  of  the  five  daughters  of  ZELOPHEHAD — the  fifth  (Nu.
2633  27  i  [om.  L]  Josh.  17s),  or  the  second  (©HI.  the  first),
Nu.  30  it,  perhaps  =  Zarephath.  T.  K.  C.

TISHBEH  OF  GILEAD  (nifa  »3C»n  ;  CK  Gee  BOON
THC  p  [RA1.  o  eK  SecceBtoN  THC  p  [L])'  I  K.  I7i
RVmtr-,  AV  'inhabitants  of  Gilead,'  RV  '  sojourners  of
Gilead. '  See  TISHBITE  and  reff.

TISHBITE  CgP'Fl;-  6ecB(e)lTHC  ;3  Thesbites},i.e.,
a  native  of  Tishbeh,  i  K.  17i  211728  2  K.  13  8  9  36.
See  ELIJAH,  §  i,  and  n.  i  ;  JABESH,  §  i  ;  and  especi
ally  PROPHET,  §  6,  and  Crit.  Bib.,  where  it  is  conjec
tured  that  Elijah  and  Elisha  both  came  from  Zarephath
in  the  Negeb,  then  perhaps  the  extreme  limit  of  the
southern  dominions  of  N.  Israel.  Cp  THISBE.

TITHES4  pb'lJP, pi. nnb'M?:  Ae«<vm;  decima}.

, m  The  tenth,  as  a  rate  of  taxation,  secular

.  lerms  :  ,  •  • • ,

... 'or  religious, is  found  among  many  ancient
history.  ,

J peoples.

See  Ryssel,  PREP)  Vl^sf.,  and  for  the  Greeks,  Pauly-
Wissowa,  Real-Encycl.  42423_/C;  Romans,  il>. ,  2306^;  Cartha
ginians,  Diod.  Sic.  20  14  ;  Justin,  18  7  ;  Egyptians,  Maspero,
Struggle  of  Nations,  312  (spoil  of  war,  tribute,  etc.,  to  Ainon) ;
Syrians,  i  Mace.  10  31 11  35  ;  Sabaeans,  Plin.  TV// 12  63  ;  Lydians,
Herod.  l8g;  Nic.  Damasc.  frg.  24  (FHG3  371) ;  Babylonians,
Jastrow,  Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  668  ;  Chinese,
Legge,  Chinese  Classics,  1  119,  etc.

The  oldest  use  of  the  word  seems  to  have  been
secular,  designating  a  tax  or  tribute  in  kind  levied  by  a
ruler  from  a  subject  or  vassal  people,  or  from  his  own
countrymen.  The  obligatory  offerings  to  the  gods  were
cnrapxai,  primitia:,  Heb.  resith,  bikkurim.  When
these  offerings  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  tribute  due  to
the  deity  as  the  ruler  or  the  proprietor  of  the  land,  the
name  '  tithes '  was  applied  to  them  also.  The  dedica
tion  of  a  tithe  of  the  spoils  of  war,  an  early  and  wide
spread  custom,  may  have  contributed  to  this  extension
of  the  use  of  the  term.

The  'tenth,'  doubtless,  originally  roughly  expressed
the  proportion  exacted  ;  and  in  later  times  also,  for
example  in  Sicily  under  Roman  rule  ( Pauly-Wissowa,
42307  ff.},  was  the  actual  rate  of  taxation  ;  but  fre
quently  the  notion  of  tax  or  tribute  predominated,  so
that  the  term  '  tithe '  might  be  used  in  cases  where  the

1  Probably  the  Tarlusa  of  the  Talmud  (Neub.  Gtogr.  268).

2  Kcinig  (E xp.  T  12  38?  [1901])  explains  the  'in  the  Gileadite
place-name  'ajj-n  as  a  radical  (\/'3Bf)

3  A  om.  in  i  K.  17  i,  BAL  om. i  K.  21  28  ;  <S  has  ee<rj8(e)iTr)«
also  in  i  K.  18  27  [BAL],  29  [L]  Mai.  4  4  [3  23]  [BNAQr].

4  The  tithe  in  relation  to  other  sacred  dues  is  discussed  else
where  (see  TAXATION  ;  see  esp.  §§  <)ff.,  to  which  the  present
article  is  supplementary).

5102


TITHES

rate  was  different — as  in  Moslem  law  the  '  tithe '  is
sometimes  7>^  or  ^ls— -or  where  there  was  no  fixed  per
cent.  Thus  in  the  religious  sphere  dirapxal  and  Of  Karat
are  often  synonymous:  so,  e.g.,  in  Dion.  Ha'.ic.  l23/i,
cp  SeKarevcris,  ib.  24,  for  the  payment  of  a  vow  of  first
lings  ;  so  Philo  calls  the  tithe  which  was  to  be  paid  the
priests  out  of  the  Levites'  tithe,  dTrapxijs  a.ira.px.'n  (De
mutat.  notn.  1607,  Mangey).

Similarly  in  the  OT  :  to  exact  a  tithe  from  the  grain-
fields,  vineyards,  and  flocks  is  a  royal  prerogative  (i  S.
81517).  The  oldest  laws  prescribe  that  the  aparch;e
(resit h)  of  the  first  fruits  of  the  land  shall  be  brought  to
the  house  of  Yahwe  (Ex.3426,1  cp  Dt.  184  262  Ezek.
4430).  The  term  'tithe'  was  in  use,  however,  in  the
northern  kingdom  in  the  eighth  century  for  religious
dues  (Am.  44,  cp  Gen.  2822,  E).  In  Dt.  the  word
occurs  repeatedly  (1261117  \±™ff.  28/  26i2^);  the
tithe  of  grain  and  wine  and  oil  is  to  be  brought  to
Jerusalem  and — as  in  Amos — used  for  a  feast  ;  in  the
third  year,  however,  a  tithe  is  to  be  reserved  for  charity
(see  TAXATION,  §§  9/. ).  Together  with  the  tithes
Dt.  1261117  names  the  Urilmah  (tcrumath  vddka  ;  EV
'  heave  offering  '  ;  more  accurately  '  reserved  portion  '),
by  which  it  is  commonly  thought  that  the  first  fruits  are
intended  (see  Dillm.  in  loc. ),  but  this  is  doubtful  ;  more
probably  the  terms  are  to  be  taken  as  synonymous  ;
cp  XTu.  1824.  In  Ezekiel  we  find  resilh  and  tiriimdh
(2040),  which  are  assigned  to  the  priests  for  their
support  (4430);  but  no  mention  of  tithes.  There  is
nothing  on  the  subject  of  tithing  in  II.

It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  name  '  tithe '
was  employed  at  some  sanctuaries  in  the  period  of  the
kingdoms,  while  elsewhere  other  names  were  in  use.
It  is  not  improbable,  moreover,  that  the  nature  and
quantity  of  the  obligatory  offerings,  and  the  use  made  of
them,  differed  at  different  places  as  well  as  times.
When  the  fragmentary  remains  of  old  sacred  laws  were
brought  together  with  later  rules  (P)  in  one  code,  these
various  terms  were  treated  as  so  many  different  dues,
and  combined  in  one  system  of  religious  taxation.
The  critic,  on  the  other  hand,  sometimes  falls  into  the
hardly  less  serious  error  of  assuming  that  all  the  laws
lie  in  one  serial  development.

Until the aparchre were offered  to God, the  crop

might  not  be  used  by  men  in  any  way  (see,  e.g. ,  Lev.

T- , 2814). The  presentation was the natural

'  .  ,  occasion  of  a  feast  at  the  holy  place.  This
'ne>  is  the  use  of  the  tithe  in  Dt.  (126  14 23).
The  portion  dedicated  to  the  deity  may  at  some  time
have  been  actually  consumed  upon  the  altar ;  or,  as  in  the
case  of  the  voluntary  minliiih,  a  representative  part  may
have  been  thus  consumed  ;  but  in  the  rituals  we  possess
the  offering  is  symbolical  (cp  the  wave  sheaf  and  the
two  loaves,  Lev.  289^  15  ft)',  God  ceded  his  share  to
the  priest  (Xu.  18  n).  At  the  feast  given  by  the  offerer
the  priest  had  a  place  by  custom  ;  and  thus  from  early
times  the  offerings  of  first-fruits  or  tithes  indirectly
contributed  to  the  support  of  the  clergy.  The  poor,
also,  shared  in  the  feasts  by  a  religious  guest-right.

The  dcuteronomic  reformers  foresaw  that  the  sup
pression  of  the  village  high-places  would  deprive  both
the  country  priests  and  the  poor  of  the  community  of  no
small  part  of  their  living.  They  provided,  therefore,  that
every  third  year  the  land-owner,  instead  of  taking  his
tithe  to  Jerusalem,  should  set  it  aside  for  charity  at  his
own  home.  Here,  again,  it  is  not  improbable  that  they
found  a  precedent  in  earlier  custom  ;  there  are  many
examples,  e.g. — -among  the  Arabs  —  of  sacrifices  left
wholly  to  the  poor,  this  being  a  work  of  superior  piety.

The  new  model  of  Ezekiel  provides  for  the  support  of
public  worship,  including  the  feasts  at  the  great  seasons,
by  the  prince,  out  of  the  proceeds  of  a  general  tax
(tfriimak,  45 13^)  at  a  fixed  rate.  The  old  resith
bikkurlm  and  tttitmdh,  are  all  assigned  to  the  priests

1  Ex.  23  19  is  brought  over  by  a  rt  dactor  from  34  26
5103


TITHES

for  their  support  (4430).  Ezekiel's  programme  was
never  put  into  operation,  but  in  the  Persian  period  the
tithe  seems  to  have  been  converted  to  the  use  of  the
temple  (Mai.  88-10).  Some  such  provision  must  have
proved  necessary,  not  only  for  the  support  of  the  priests
but  also  for  the  maintenance  of  public  worship.

In  P  all  sacred  dues,  under  whatever  name,  go  to
the  support  of  the  ministry  (Nu.  188-20);  the  'tithe'  is
specifically  the  portion  of  the  Levites  (vr.  21-24) ;  of  it
they  in  turn  make  over  a  tithe  to  the  priests  (ii:  25-32).
See  NUMBERS,  §  n.  According  to  Xeh.  IQ^ff.
(Chronicler),  the  plan  was  for  the  Levites  to  collect  their
tithe  in  all  the  cities  and  villages,  under  the  supervision
of  a  priest,  and  then  deliver  the  tithe  of  the  tithes  into
the  storehouse  in  the  tern  pie  for  the  priests.  There  is  com
plaint,  however,  that  the  tithes  were  not  paid,  so  that
the  Levites  had  to  support  themselves  (Xeh.  13 1°  ff.}.

It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  this  system  was  ever
actually  worked.  It  is  often  inferred  that  Neh.  10.37^".
represents  the  practice  of  the  Chronicler's  own  time  ;
but  it  is  quite  as  likely  that  it  is  one  of  the  many  pia
dcsideria  which  he  projects  into  his  '  history  as  it  ought
to  have  been.'  The  fortunes  of  the  Levites  in  these
centuries  are  involved  in  dense  obscurity  (see  LEVITKS,
§  7).  What  is  certain  is  that  at  the  beginning  of  the
Christian  era  the  tithes  were  collected  by  the  priests  for
themselves  (Jos.  Vita,  12  15;  Ant.xx.S8  92>.  This
departure  from  the  law  is  recognised  in  the  Talmud  :
Ezra  took  the  tithe  away  from  the  Levites  because  so
few  of  them  were  willing  to  return  to  Palestine  (Ktthii-
bdth,  z6a  ;  Ylbanwth,  86a  b  ;  Hullln,  131^,  etc.).

The  deuteronomic  laws  name  grain,  wine,  and  oil
as  subject  to  tithe  (12i7,  cp  1422  Xu.  1827);  Lev.  2/30
3  Things  's  more  Seneral :  '  a.11  the  tithe  of  the  soil,

t'th  d  whether  of  the  seed  of  the  ground  or  the
fruit  of  the  tree,  is  Yahwe's. '  The  general
rule  of  the  Mishna  is  :  '  Everything  that  is  eaten  and  is
watched  over  and  grows  out  of  the  ground  is  liable  to
tithe'  (.17.  Mausi*rC'(/i,\i).  The  scrupulosity  of  the
Pharisees  in  matter  of  garden  herbs — '  mint,  anise,  and
cummin' — is  commented  on  in  the  NT  (Mt.  2823  Lk.
1142);  the  Mishna  and  the  Palestinian  Talmud  go  into
minute  details  and  discussions  of  what  should  be  tithed,
and  when,  and  how.  The  tithe  of  agricultural  products
paid  to  the  Levites  or  to  the  priests,  is  called  by  the
Jewish  writers  on  the  law  '  the  first  tithe.'

Lev.  27  32_/i  puts  by  the  side  of  the  tithe  of  seed  crops
and  fruit  (vv.  30  f.  )a  tithe  of  animals  of  the  flock  or  herd  ;
every  tenth  one,  as  the  flock  is  counted,  shall  belong  to
Yahwe.  The  complete  parallel  between  vv.  30 f.  and
•ytf.  naturally  suggests  two  inferences  :  first,  that  it  is
the  increase  of  the  year  that  is  to  be  tithed  (so  M.
BUkdroth,  93/^,  etc.);  and,  second,  that  the  tithe  of
cattle,  like  that  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  was  to  go
to  the  priests.  This  is  the  view  of  Philo  (De  praamiis
sacerdot.  §  2,  2234,  Mangey  ;  De  carit.  §  10,  2391)  ;
so  also  Tob.  16  (cod.  X)  and — what  seems  not  to  have
been  noted — Jubilees,  32 15  (on  Gen.  2822) :  '  all  tithes  of
neat  cattle  and  sheep  shall  be  holy  to  God  and  belong
to  his  priests,  who  eat  them  year  by  year  before  him.'
On  the  other  hand,  the  legal  authorities  unanimously
take  the  whole  passage,  Lev.  2730-33,  to  refer  to  the
1  second  tithe '  ;  the  animals  were  sacrificed  by  their
owners  as  thank  offerings  (toddli),  or  as  '  jovous  peace
offerings  '  (fa/me  simhdh}  at  the  feasts.1  Modern  critics
generally  assume  that  the  chapter  is  a  late  supplement
to  the  '  Priests'  Code,'  and  that  the  tithe  is  therefore  to
be  understood  in  accordance  with  Xu.  1821^  But  if,
as  is  more  probable,  it  be  a  supplement  to  a  body  of
law  which  included  Dt. ,  the  rabbinical  interpretation  is
equally  possible  (cp  vv.  9-15).  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  Mishna  and  Siphre  represent  in  this  particular
the  practice  of  the  first  century.  And  it  is  not  difficult

1  Sif>hre,  Dt.  §  63:  M.  Hagtgak,  1  4  ;  M. ^Mendhdth,  1  5,
etc.  See  Schurer,  GJVft)2*$i  n.  So  also  Maimonides,  Rashi,
and  the  Mishna  commentaries.

5104


TITLE

to  conceive  that  the  claim  of  the  priests  to  all  the
firstlings — once  the  accompaniment  of  the  tithe  of  corn
and  wine  and  oil  (Dt.  126,  etc. )  —made  it  necessary  to
make  some  other  provision  for  the  sacrificial  feasts  ;  the
tithe  of  cattle  is  a  natural  form  for  this  provision  to
take.  It  is,  therefore,  not  so  certain  as  has  sometimes
been  thought,  that  Lev.  27  32  f.  is  the  last  monstrous
demand  of  a  greedy  priesthood  or  the  fiction  of  an
imaginative  scribe.

On  the  basis  of  the  Pentateuch  as  a  whole,  the  system

included  three  tithes  : the '  first tithe,' a  tax of  one

tenth  of  all  edible  vegetable  products  collected  by  the

4 Jewish  m'mstry  f°r  its  own  support  (Nu.  1821-24) ;

system  of  l^e  ' secon<^  l'tne °f  tne  same  products,

titbinff wh'ch'  together  with  the  cattle  tithe  (Lev.

°' 2732/1 ),  furnished  a  feast  for  the  owner  and

his  guests at  Jerusalem  (01.1422-27); and  the 'poor

tithe,'  set  apart  every  third  year  for  charity  (Dt.  14 28^".

2612). The  last,  in the  original  intention of  the  law

probably  only  a  particular  use  of  the  tithe  every  third

year, was in later times made, at least by  some, a

'  third  tithe '  falling  twice  in  every  seven  years,  in  the

third  and sixth  years of  the  Sabbatical  cycle  (Tobit,

I?/; Jos. Ant.  iv.  822; Trg. Jer. Dt.  26 12/); see

Geiger,  Urschrift,  176 /.;  Schurer,  (7//'(3)  2252.

Spencer,  De  legibus  ritualibus,  lib.  3,  diss.  i,cap.  10  ;  Selden,

History  of  Tithes;  Reland,  Antiquitatcs  sacra-,  lib.  3,  cap.  9,

reprinted  with  extensive  notes  by  the  editor

5. Literature, in Ugolini Thesaurus, 2  1031  ff.  ; J. C.

Hottinger,  De  decimis  Hebrteorum,  also  in

Ugolini Thesaurus, 20  283-490  (valuable for its Rabbinical

erudition); Riehm, HIVR,  art. 'Zehnten';  Ryssel, 'Zehnten

bei  den Hebraern,1  PR  Eft  17  428^  lit.  ib.  444);  A.  S.  Peake,

'Tithe'  in  Hastings'  DB^-j^off.;  \V. R.  Smith,  Kef.  Sem.P)

•2i,\ff.  \  Nowack  and  Benzinger,  HA  ;  Schurer,  GJ^(3>  250^

G.  F.  M.

TITLE, i.  |VV.  siyyiin,  2  K.  23 17  RV  '  monument.'
See  MASSEBAH,  §  i  (e)

2. rtrXos,  Jn.  19  igf. See  CROSS,  §  4.

TITUS  (TITOC  :  on  the  accentuation  see  Winer-
Schmiedel  Gramm.  Th.  i.,  §  62)  is  the  name  of  a  rather
enigmatic  minor  figure  in  the  apostolic  age,  who  is  known
almost  entirely  from  Paul's  allusions  to  him  (in  Gal.
and  2  Cor. )  as  a  friend  and  trusty  lieutenant.  He  is
not  associated  with  Paul  in  the  address  of  any  extant
epistle,  and  nothing  is  known  of  his  birthplace,  age,  or
nationality,  except  that  he  was  a  pagan  by  birth  ("EXX?/!/
uv)  and  apparently  a  native  of  Asia  Minor  (cp  Gal.  2 1-5).
Later  tradition  (Tit.  14)  may  be  correct
in  hinting  that  he  was  brought  over  to
Christianity  by  Paul  himself.  At  any
rate  he  appears  at  an  early  stage  of  the  apostle's  public
career  (possibly  in  49  A.D.  ;  cp  CHRONOLOGY,  §  74,
PAUL,  g  16)  as  a  private  individual  who  accompanied
Paul  and  Barnabas  (cp  Acts  152)  at  the  former's  request
upon  their  visit  to  Jerusalem,  evidently  to  represent  the
success  of  the  Pauline  gospel  outside  Judaism.  The
burning  question  at  the  conference  of  Jerusalem  was  the
value  and  validity  of  Christian  faith  if  unsupplemented
by  circumcision,  and  (as  Paul  had  foreseen)  the  case  of
Titus  inevitably  came  up  for  discussion.  Whether  it
was  made  a  test  case  or  not,  it  led  to  bitter  feeling
between  the  conservative  party  and  their  challengers.
Paul  and  Barnabas,  however,  stood  their  ground  against
the  orthodox  centre  and  repudiated  any  compromise  in
volving  their  companion;  'not  even  Titus,'  says  Paul
triumphantly,  'was  obliged  to  get  circumcised  ' — much
less  (as  the  Judaising  Christians  appear  to  have  insisted)
Gentile  Christians  in  general,  who  were  not  (like  Titus)
in  direct  daily  touch  with  a  circumcised  Christian.
Nothing  is  said  of  what  Titus  himself  thought  and  felt.
His  attitude  is  passive.  The  natural  inference,  however,
is  that  he  left  himself  in  Paul's  hands,  sharing,  or  at
least  sympathising,  with  that  '  inward  impulse  '  of  Paul's
spiritual  nature,  which  '  went  straight  to  the  results  of
its  principles  .  .  .  and  thus  carried  him  past  a  form  of
Christianity  which  was  simply  another  form  of  Judaism  '
(Baur).  Cp  COUNCIL  OF  JERUSALEM.  §§  4,  7.

5105


1 At
'


TITUS

Tiie  textual  problem  raised  by  the  omission  of  o!«  ovSe  (Gal.
'2  5)  in  some  western  MSS  is  not  serious  (cp  Lightf.  Gal.  121-123,
and  Klostermann's  Probleme  im  Apostel-textc  [1883],  54  ./O;
besides,  even  were  the  external  evidence  more  considerable,  the
internal  probabilities  of  the  case  put  the  matter  beyond  doubt,
'ihe  curious  silence  of  Acts  upon  this  notorious  controversy
(ACTS,  §  4)  is  due  to  the  irenical  tendency  of  the  author  or  of  the
sources  which  he  edited  at  this  point  of  his  story.  Even  if  he
did  not  know  the  Pauline  Kpistles,  Titus  must  have  been  familiar
to  him,  as  familiar  at  any  rate  as  several  of  the  minor  figures
who  flit  across  his  pages.  But  by  the  time  he  wrote,  the  circum
cision-question  was  obsolete,  and  he  probably  deemed  it  prudent


the  name  of  Titus  because  he  was  his  relative  (St.  Paul,  ..

Further,  the  disinclination  to  report  so  discreditable  and  un-
edifying  an  episode  as  that  of  the  local  dispute  at  Corinth  natur
ally  led  to  the  omission  of  any  later  reference  to  Titus,  who  thus
had  the  misfortune  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  special  aims  and
interests  of  the  first  historian  of  the  early  church.


con

2


Three  or  four  years  elapse  before  Titus  reappears,  in
nnection  with  the  Corinthian church.1 His  lack  of
A*  r"«~!,,4.v, circumcision would naturally prevent

.  At  u011n611. i  • r  i- •  ,

him  from  being  a  suitable  companion


during  Paul's  second  tour  (49'52  A.  D. )  which  embraced
as  a  rule — for  so  much  is  visible  even  under  the  religious
pragmatism  of  Acts — an  initial  attempt  upon  the  syna
gogues  in  almost  every  city.  But,  since  Titus  is  found
at  Paul's  disposal  in  Ephcsus,  it  is  possible  that  the
apostle  took  him  from  Antioch,  after  the  dispute  with
Peter  (Gal.  2n-2i),  upon  his  third  tour  through  Galatia
and  the  Phrygian  highlands  as  far  as  the  Asiatic  metro
polis — a  'carefully  planned  stroke  of  policy,'  accord
ing  to  Ramsay,  which  effectually  answered  the  unfair
deductions  drawn  by  Judaisers  in  favour  of  Judaic
Christianity  from  Timothy's  circumcision  previous  to
his  promotion.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  keenest  interest
shown  by  Titus  was  in  the  Achaian  Christians,  an  interest
only  equalled  by  that  of  Paul  himself  (2  Cor.  816),  who
stamped  him  as  '  my  comrade  and  fellow-worker  in  your
interest'  (2  Cor.  823),  'my  brother'  (2  Cor.  213),  and  a
colleague  actuated  by  the  same  high  motives  (2  Cor.
12 18) — an  estimate  borne  out  by  the  record  of  what
transpired  during  the  Corinthian  episode,  where  Titus
proved  himself  a  prudent,  active,  and  reliable  com
missioner  of  Paul.  His  connection  with  the  Achaian
Christians  appears  to  have  begun  upon  the  occasion  of
a  visit  paid  either  at  the  despatch  of  i  Cor.  (which  he
may  have  carried ,  as  one  of  'the  brothers  '  :  i  Cor.  1 6  1 1  ;
cp  2  Cor.  12 18)  or  shortly  afterwards,  when  he  set  on
foot  arrangements  for  a  local  contribution  to  the  great
collection  (cp  Rendall,  Expos.W  8321-336,  and  E.  Lom
bard,  Rev.  d.  Tht!ol.  el  Philos. ,  1902,  p.  ii3/  )  on  behalf
of  the  Judoean  Christians  which  Paul  was  negotiating
throughout  the  Gentile  churches,  partly  as  a  timely  act  of
charity,  partly  as  a  tangible  evidence  of  sympathy  between
the  two  branches  of  the  church,  and  partly  to  show  his
own  belief  and  interest  in  their  unity.  Acquainted  with
the  instructions  already  given  by  Paul  to  the  Galatians  in
this  matter  of  the  Xoyia  (i  Cor.  16i),  Titus  was  well
adapted2  for  this  financial  work,  which  began  in  the  year
previous  to  that  in  which  2  Cor.  8  10  92  were  written.

1  On  the  movements  of  Titus  and  Timothy  at  this  period
see  especially  and  variously  Lightfoot  (Bibl.  Essays,  273  f.),
Schmiedel  (//Cii.  182-86267-269),  Heinrici  (Der  ziueite  Brief  an
i/ie^A'ar.  [Meyer, 1900],  46-51), and  A. Robertson  (Hastings'
DB  1  492-497). The  scantiness  of  the  available  data  renders  any
outline  rather  hypothetical  at  more  than  one  point;  upon  the
whole  the  most  satisfactory  view  of  the  episode  in  general  and
of  its  extant  literary  evidence  seems  to  lie  somewhere  among
those  which  are  based  upon  an  acceptance  of  2  Cor.  10-13  as  the
'  intermediate  letter '  (literature  in  MofFatt's  Hist.  New  Testa
ment^-)  1901,  p.  1747:).

2  In  describing  the  collection  of  temple  tribute  among  the
Jews,  a  custom  which  no  doubt  suggested  to  Paul  the  idea  or
at  least  the  form  of  this  collection,  Philo  notices  the  periodical
assignment  of  the  funds  in  each  district  '  to  men  of  good  standing
whose  duty  it  is  to  convey  them  to  Jerusalem. For  this  purpose
it  is  always  men  of  the  highest  rank  who  are  chosen,  as  a  kind
of  guarantee  that  what  forms  the  hope  of  every  Israelite  may
reach  the  Holy  City  untampered  with  '  (De  monarcftia,  §  3,  cited
by  Schiir.  Hist.  ii.  2  289). Evidence  for  such  collections  in  Egypt
is  displayed  by  Wilcken,  Griech.  Ostraka  (1899),  1253^  615^
See  DISPERSION,  §  16,  and  Harnack's  Ausbreitung,  133-135.

5106


TITUS

As  the  context  implies  (2  Cor.  12  15-17),  2  Cor.  12  IT/.  (ew\eo-
ve'icTTjcra)  refers  to  the  collection  ;  neither  in  person,  nor  by  my
agents  (Paul  retorts),  did  I  overreach  you.  In  view  of  this  it
seems  inadequate  to  deny  (with  Zahn,  Einl.  1  244  /.)  that  the
collection  is  the  topic  of  2  Cor.  86.  As  Titus  had  previously
made  a  beginning  (n-poei^pf  arc)  with  this  bounty,  so  (Paul  urges)
let  him  complete  it  now  in  addition  to  (<eai)  the  other  local  tasks
— such  as  that  of  acting  for  Paul  during  the  estrangement —
which,  as  2  Cor.  1-9  implies,  he  had  brought  to  a  happy  issue.

Then  and  there  he  won  the  esteem  of  the  Corinthians.
Along  with  some  other  agent,  he  supported  himself  as
Paul  had  done,  thereby  putting  his  disinterested  zeal
beyond  suspicion  ;  as  Paul's  language  indicates  (2  Cor.
12 18),  he  was  evidently  the  last  man  in  the  world  whom
the  Corinthians  would  have  dreamed  of  accusing  (cp
J.  H.  Kennedy,  The  Second  and  Third  Epistles  of  Paul
to  the  Corinthians,  1900,  p.  119).  The  business  of  the
collection  prospered  famously  (2  Cor.  9  if.).  But  it  was
rudely  interrupted  by  the  painful,  discreditable,  and  con
temptible  affair  which  led  to  a  rupture  beween  Paul  and
the  Corinthian  church.  At  this  outbreak  of  bad  feeling
Titus  in  all  likelihood  returned  to  Ephesus,  although
this  is  one  of  several  details  which  are  far  from  luminous
or  coherent.  It  is  possible  that  he  contented  himself
with  simply  reporting  the  crisis.  At  any  rate,  he  seems
to  have  borne  somewhat  later  to  Corinth  from  Ephesus
the  vehement,  severe  letter  (preserved  in  whole  or  part
in  2  Cor.  10-13 10)  which  Paul  precipitately  wrote  with
caustic  and  passionate  indignation,  his  aim  being  to  test
their  loyalty  and  bring  them  to  their  senses  (2  Cor.  2 13
76  f.  13  f.).  The  misgivings  and  apprehensions1  of
Titus  on  this  errand  proved  happily  unfounded.  He
was  received  and  obeyed  heartily  by  the  majority,  and
eventually  found  himself  able  to  rejoin  Paul  with  good
news  of  the  Corinthians'  repentance  and  affection.  Some
delay  occurred,  however,  and  meantime  the  outbreak  at
Ephesus  (PAUL,  §  25)  had  driven  the  apostle  to  Troas.
Dismayed  to  hear  at  Corinth  of  the  grief  produced  by
his  sharp  letter  (2  Cor.  78),  he  felt  driven  by  restless
eagerness  for  further  news  across  to  Macedonia.  There
at  last  he  met  his  friend  returning  by  land,  and  in  an
access  of  delight  and  relief  at  his  favourable  report  com
posed  2  Cor.  1 1-9  13 11-13,  which  he  concludes  by  planning
to  have  the  collection  resumed  and  completed  under
charge  of  Titus  accompanied  by  two  anonymous  but
able  subordinates.  The  former  was  not  only  willing
but  eager  to  return  to  Corinth  (2  Cor.  8  16  23),  so  satisfied
had  he  been  with  his  recent  experience  of  the  church's
temper  (2  Cor.  7  6/1  13-15).  Thus  Titus  disappears  from
the  scene.  He  probably  returned  with  the  letter  to
Corinth  and  reorganised  the  Xoyi'a  or  voluntary  assess
ment  throughout  Achaia.  For  although  no  Corinthian
deputies  are  mentioned  among  those  named  in  Acts  204,
it  is  evident  from  Rom.1526  that  the  long-promised
liberality  of  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  PS)  had  not  been
withheld,  and  that  the  financial  labours  of  Titus  (2  Cor.
8692)  were  crowned  with  success.  Curiously  enough,
among  the  virtues  of  the  Corinthian  church  celebrated
some  forty  years  later,  liberality  (ijdiov  didovres  f)  Xo,u-
fidvovTfs)  is  reckoned  as  one  of  its  leading  and  traditional
characteristics  (Clem.  Rom.  1 1  2i).

The  genuine  fragment  incorporated  in  Tit.  3  i2_/C  (cp  CHRON
OLOGY,  §§  (>&f.,  TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS  [EPISTLES],  §  13)  probably

belongs  to  the  period  after  the  composition  of

3.  Later 2  Cor.  1-9,  written  either  from  Macedonia  (see

traditions. NICOPOLIS,  §  3)  when  Paul  was  on  his  way  to

Corinth  or  on  his  way  back  (Acts  20  3).  How
the  connection  with  Crete  arose,  and  whether  Titus  managed  to
rejoin  him  or  not,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  The  only  light  thrown

1  As  a  personal  friend  of  Paul  and  as  a  Gentile  Christian  over
whom  an  acrimonious  feud  had  been  already  waged  (Gal.  2  jf.),
Titus  cannot  have  felt  comfortable  at  the  prospect  of  confronting
the  Jewish  Christian  intriguers  who  were  busy  at  Corinth.  Prob
ably  it  was  dislike  of  them,  if  not  their  active  malice,  that  had
driven  him  away.  At  the  same  time  his  diplomatic  qualities,  no
less  than  his  organising  capacity,  made  him  evidently  a  more
capable  man  than  Timothy  to  deal  with  a  difficult  situation  of
'


TOB

upon  his  subsequent  movements  is  afforded  by  a  remark  two  years
later  in  a  genuine  Pauline  fragment  preserved  in  2  Tim.  4  10,
from  which  it  appears  that  Titus,  who  must  have  turned  up
during  Paul's  captivity  in  Rome,  had  left  (on  a  mission?)  for
DALMATIA  (q.v.).  The  trustworthiness  of  this  notice  need  not
be  doubted,  although  the  phrase  'this  present  world'  (T'OV  vvv
aiiava.,  cp  i  Tim.  tl  17)  is  un-Pauline.  Nor  is  a  substantial  basis
to  be  denied  to  the  tradition  (reflected  in  Tit.  1  5)  that  links
Cretan  Christianity  to  Titus  at  any  rate  (whatever  may  be
thought  of  the  allusion  to  Paul),  although  the  tendency  and
object  of  the  sub-Pauline  author  is  naturally  to  suggest  that  the
anarchic  condition  of  the  local  Christians  '  was  one  considerable
cause  of  the  evidently  low  moral  condition  to  which  they  had
sunk'  (Hort,  Christian  Ecclesia,  176),  and  characteristically  to
lay  stress  upon  organisation  as  a  safeguard.

Titus  has  been  occasionally,  but  unconvincingly,  regarded  as
the  author  of  the  '  We-journal'  in  Acts  (ACTS,  §  <)b)—e.g.,  by
Krenkel,  Kneucker,  Seufert,  Jacobsen,  O.  Holtzmann  (ZW7 ,
1889,  p.  409),  and  Bartlet  (Apost.  Age,  69,  100  [1900]).  But
all  that  the  curious  silence  of  Acts  enables  us  to  adduce  in  favour
of  such  a  conjecture  is  the  wholly  inadequate  fact  that  Titus  was
a  companion  of  Paul,  possibly — though  only  possibly— during
part  of  the  time  covered  by  the  diary  in  question.  Besides,  it
is  significant  that  no  writing,  canonical  or  extra-canonical,  is
assigned  to  him  in  tradition,  which  is  content  to  elaborate  his
connection  with  Crete  and — by  a  strange  shift  of  fortune,  after
the  Venetian  regime  —  with  Venice.  The  meagre  allusion  to
Crete  which  happens  to  occur  in  the  Epistle  to  Titus,  may  quite
well  rest  upon  a  nucleus  of  historical  fact  ;  but  the  luxuriant
fancy  of  later  generations  proceeded  among  other  developments
to  make  him  the  first  bishop  appointed  by  Paul  over  Crete  (Ap.
Const.  "46,  Euseb.  HE  84,  Theod.,  Theophylact,  Jerome,  etc.),
dying  indeed  at  Candia,  as  archbishop  of  Gortyna,  in  his  ninety-
fourth  year  (Fabric.  Cod.  Apocr.  NT '2831  f.).  Cp  Tozer,
Islands  of  the  Egean,  (t^f.  In  the  Roman  legends  of  the  gnostic
Trpcif  ei5  II  av'Aou,  Titus  is  connected  with  Paul,  and  plays  along  with
Luke  a  role  in  the  J'assio  sancti  J'auli  Apostoli  and  Martyrium
Pauli,  114-117  (cp  Lips.  Acta  Apost.  Apocryph.,  1891,  123-44).
Like  Timothy  he  is  of  course  reckoned  among  the  seventy
disciples  by  Chron.  Pasch.  420  (ed.  Bonn),  and,  according  to
Acta  J'auli  et  Theclee,  vf.,  he  gives  information  regarding  Paul
to  Onesiphorus  at  Iconium.  One  of  the  epistles  of  the  pseudo-
Dionysius  Areopagita  is  addressed  to  Titus  as  bishop  of  Crete.
The  rather  slight  contents  of  the  Acta  Titi  (see  Lips.  Apocr.
Ap.-gesch.  8401-406)  are  as  legendary  as  the  panegyric  on  Titus
pronounced  by  Andreas  of  Crete  (ed.  Paris,  1644).

Like  Timothy,  Titus  also  has  had  some  ado  to  preserve  his
individuality.  But  it  seems  needless  to  do  more  than  chronicle
even  the  attempts  made  to  identify  him  (see  Wieseler)  with  the
Titius  (TtVov  [NE])Justus  of  Acts  187  or  with  Silas  (Silvanus) ;
against  the  latter  as  advocated  especially  by  Zimmer,  see  the
conclusive  statement  of  Jiilicher,  JPT,  1882,  pp.  528-552!,  also
SILAS,  §  5/.].  j.  MO.

TITUS  (EPISTLE).  See  TIMOTHY  AND  TITUS
(EPISTLES).

TITUS  JUSTUS  (TITIOC  loycroc  [Ti.  WH]),
ActslS?  RV,  AV  JUSTUS  (</.f.,  ii.).

TITUS  MANLIUS,  RV  Titus  Manius  (TITOC
MANIOC).  2  Mace.  11 34.  See  MANLIUS.

TIZITE  rynri;  o  leAcei  [BN],  o  ecoc^ei  [A],  o
[L] ;  Thosaites\Vg.'},  all  presupposing  the  form
;  a  gentilic  attached  to  the  name  JOHA  (i  Ch.
1145).  David's  warriors  were  presumably,  like  himself,
from  the  Negeb.  'Shimri,'  the  name  of  John's  father,
also  favours  this.  If  TIRZAH  (q.v.)  was  really  a  place
in  the  Negeb,  we  might  suppose  corruption  from  -ni^n
'  a  Tirzathite.'  T.  K.  c.

TOAH  (niPl),  i  Ch.  634  [19] ;  in  i  S.  li,  TOHU.

TOB  (3112  ;  rcoB  [BAL]),  a  region  in  which  Jephthah
'the  Gileadite  '  took  refuge  (Judg.  1135),  and  whence
the  Ammonites  obtained  allies  in  their  war  against
David  (2  S.  1068,  RV  ;  cp  ISH-TOB).  Sayce  plausibly
identifies  it  with  Tubi,  a  place  conquered  by  Thotmes
III.,  and  mentioned  a  little  before  Astiratu — i.e..  Tell
'Astera  (KP&  645  ;  cp  Maspero,  AZ,  1881,  p.  124).  This
does  not,  however,  suit  the  original  story  which  underlies
Judg.  11 1-33  (see  JEPHTHAH);  a  district  of  Hauran
is  not  to  be  expected  here.  Tubihi  is  much  more
appropriate  (see  TlBHATH)  ;  this  very  ancient  city  was
probably  in  the  Lebanon  district,  NW.  of  Damascus.
The  identification  also  suits  the  mention  of  Tob  in  2  S.
1068  in  connection  with  ZOBAH  (q.v. ).  The  same
region  may  be  meant  by  the  land  of  TUBI  AS  (AV  TOBIE;
<S  Toi'/Stoi')  in  i  Mace.  5 13,  the  people  of  which  appear
to  be  called  TUBIENI  (2  Mace.  12 17  ;  see  CHARACA)  —

5108


TOB-ADONIJAH


TOBIT


i.e.,  the  men  of  Tub  or  Tob.  These  identifications,
however,  only  suit  a  fairly  conservative  view  of  the  MT.
If  the  Gilead  originally  meant  in  Judg.  11  and  in
i  Mace.  5  be  a  southern  Gilead  in  the  Negeb,  and  if  the
Zoba  originally  meant  in  2  S.  10  be  Zarephath  in  the
Negeb,  we  must  consider  whether  310  may  not  be  a
mutilated  form  of  ^am  (see  TUBAL).

The  n  in  the  Gk.  and  Syr.  forms  (roujSeicov?  [A],  Tov/3iacous

[V],  jkl*2>aJ)is  clearly  not  radical.  See  GASm.  HG  587,  n.  5,
who  agrees,  it  may  be  added,  with  Conder  (fft'th  and  filoab,
176)  in  identifying  Tob  with  mod.  et-Tayyibeh,  NE.  of  Pella.

T. K.  C.

TOB-ADONIJAH  (Pl»3n*«  3iO;  TU)B6.AcoBei<\[B],
-A  IONIA,  [AL]),  a  Levite  temp.  Jehoshaphat  (2  Ch.
178).  Note  that  Pesh.  omits  the  name  and  that  of  the
preceding  Adonijah  and  Tobijah  ;  <51!A  omits  the  second.
If  not  a  corruption  (e.g. ,  for  ITHDJ?  or  DIN  naj; — y  and
13  are  very  similar  in  Samaritan  script)  the  name  should
probably  be  omitted  ;  a  scribe  may  have  begun  to  re
write  irraia  and  then  invented  the  most  suitable  name
he  could  think  of.  [But  cp  Crit.  Bib.,  ad  loc.~\

S.  A.  c.

TOBIAH  (rVTlD),  Ezra26o;  see  TOBIJAH,  2.

TOBIAS  (TooB[e]i  <\C— *.<?•,  n»aiU).  i.  The  son  of
TOBIT  (q.v.}.

2.  The  father  of  HYRCANUS  (?.?'.).

TOBIE  (royBiOY  [A^v]).  i  Mace.  5 13  AV,  RV
TUBIAS.  See  Ton.  ,

TOBIEL(TO)BlHA[BKA]— *.«.,  ?K*3'lt3  ;  cpTabeel),
the  father  of  TOBIT  (Tob.  1 1).  Cp  TOBIJAH.

TOBIJAH  (rVTlD,  once  -irPintt,  '  Yahwe  is  good,'
§  28,  but  ultimately,  like  TOBIKL,  perhaps  from  Tubali,
'  a  man  of  TUBAL  ' ;  TtoBiAC  [AL]).

1.  A  Levite  temp.  Jehoshaphat  (2  Ch.  178  ;  in'aip  ;  om.  BA).
All  the  associated  names  in  2  Ch.  (I.e.)  admit  of  being  traced  to
Negeb  ethnics  or  gentilics.

2.  EV TOBIAH, a post -exilic family, unable to prove its
pedigree:  Ezra  2  60  (rw/Seia  [B],  rov/Siou  [L])  =  Neh.  "62  (Tu>/3ia
[BXA])  =  i  Esd.  5  37  where  the  name  is  corrupted  to  BAN,  RV">B-
BAENAN  (/Saerai/  [B],  fiav  [A]),  and  he  appears  as  the  father  of
Ladan  (sea  DEI.AIAH). See  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  3,  and  note  the
place-names in Ezra  259  =  Neh.  7  61  =  i  Esd.  5  36  (e.g., TEL-
MELAH,  TKL-HARSHA),  all  of  which  may  plausibly  be  viewed  as
Negeb-names.

3.  One  of  a  party  of  Jews  from  Babylon  (?),  temp.  Zerubbabel
(Zech.  ti  10 14 ; & translates  ^P1)a'tVta"/ [•<"£] <*VTI)S  [-w>/],  i.e.,
rrsm). See  ZERUBBABEL.

4.  EV  TOBIAH  (the  form  Tw/3[e]ta  is  a  constantly  re
curring  form  for  no.  4  instead  of  rujiia.!.  The  form  rwpis
[N*]  occurs  in  Neh.  43  [9]).  An  '  Ammonite,'  one  of  the
chief  opponents  of  the  fortification  of  Jerusalem  by
Nehemiah  (Neh.  2io,  etc.).  Whether  'Ammonite'  is  a
race-name  (cp  AM.WON,  §  8)  or  means  '  native  of  Chephar-
Ammoni'  (see  BETHHORON,  §  4)  is  uncertain.  The  latter
view  is  superficially  plausible  through  Tobiah's  connec
tion  with  leading  Judoeans  (Neh.  6 17-19),  from  one  of
whom — the  priest  Eliashib — -he  received  a  chamber  in
the  temple  formerly  used  by  the  Levites,  for  his  own
special  purposes.  But  we  incline  to  think  that  'Ammon
ite,'  as  often,  =  '  Jerahmeelite  ';  a  connection  between
nobles  of  Judah  and  Jerahmeelites  is  historically  probable.

The  title  '  the  servant '  given  him  in  Neh.  2  10  19  ('  the  servant,
the  Ammonite '),  but  nowhere  else,  is  explained  as  meaning  '  the
officer  of  the  government '  (Ryssel),  or,  '  one  who  had  formerly
been  a  slave  '  (Rawlinson).  Both  explanations  are  forced.  7iyn
is  almost  certainly  corrupted  from  'myn,  'the  Arabian,"  which
the  scribe  in  Neh.  2  19  (®B*  omits  Tobias  altogether)  wrote  as
a  gloss  on  'joj?n,  '  the  Ammonite. '  From  this  passage  it  made
its  way  into  Neh.  2  10  (through  the  harmonising  of  an  editor),
most  probably  also  into  Neh.  4  i  [7] ;  if  n^Dynl  D'311'ni  (regarded
by  Guthe  as  an  addition  of  the  Chronicler,  or  a  later  gloss)  is
miswritten  for  -joyn  'mj/'n-  In  Neh.  2  1019  the  senseless  'mjn
became  -nj;n  !  in  4  i  [7]  (as  we  have  seen)  it  went  through  another
transformation.  Later,  in  4i,  mnc'Nni  (not  in  ©HM*A)  was
added,  not  by  an  ill-timed  reminiscence  of  Neh.  13  23,  but  (read
ing  'IIB'Nn,  '  the  Asshurite  '),  as  a  second  gloss  on  '3DJ?n.  Here,
as  in  Neh.  (/.c.).  not  Ashdod,  but  Asshur  (Ashhur),  the  name  of
a  N.  Arabian  district,  is  most  probably  referred  to.  Cp  Che.
Das  Relig.  Lchen  nach  dem  Exile  (by  Stocks),  appended  note.

T.  K.  C.


163


SI09


TOBIT

Various  recensions  (§  i).  III.  Conjectural  reconstruction

I.  Interpolations  (§§  2-10).  (§  137^).

Ahikar  additions  (§  2).  Reconstruction  (§  13).

Hist,  of  Ahikar  story  (§3).  Hist.: time of greatest
Various  forms  (§  4).  vogue  (§  14).

Common  matter  (§  5).  IV.  Ultimate  sources  (|§  15-20).

Stages  of  growth  (§  6).  Final  redactor  (§  15).

Story  foreign  (§  7).  His  work  (§  16).

Ultimately  mythical  (§  8).  Basis  in  folk-lore  (§  17).

Didactic  additions  (§  9).  Armenian  form  (§  18).

Summary  (§  10).  Feature  common  (§  19).

II.  Uninterpplated  text(§  nf.).  Foreign  origin  (§  20).

Not  original  (§  n).  Bibliography  (§  21)

How  redacted  (§  12).

Tobit  (TO)B[e]iT  [BA],  rcoBeiG  [N] ;  Tobias)  is  one
of  the  books  of  the  OT  APOCRYPHA  (q.v.,  §  5,  3).  In
the  first  sentence  of  the  work  itself  it  is  called  '  Book  of
the  words  [  =  doings  :  see  CHRONICLES,  §  i]  of  Tobit,
son  of,  etc.'  (/3t/3\os  \byuv  Tu/3eir  [BA  ;  N  -pert]}-
More  than  in  the  case  of  the  other  apocryphal  writings
of  the  OT  the  investigation  is  complicated  by  our  having
various  groups  of  texts.

1.  To  begin  with,  there  are  three  Greek  forms:  (a)  that  o
©BA  which  the  Syriac  [Syr.  ]  follows  down  to  7g;  (b)  that  of

, Tr -  <?5N,  which  is  for  the  most  part  that  followed

1. VariOUS by  the  retus  Latina  [Vet.  I,at.] ;  and  (c)  that

recensions, of  Codd.  44,  106,  107 (Tob.  69  13  $). From

1  i  to  68  the  text  of  these  codices  agrees  with

©AIi ; and the  continuation  of  the  Syriac  version  (from  7  10

onwards)  coincides  with  it  exactly.

2.  Jerome's version is independent  of  all  these  ;  he  tells  us
that  he  made  it  from  an  Aramaic  original  (pr<rf.  in  vers.  libri
'fob.). Here  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  whole  story  of  Tobit  is
told  in  the  third  person.

3.  The  same  is  the  case  with  an  extant  Aramaic  text  edited
by  Neubauer.l This  text,  however,  to  judge  by  its  language,
would  appear  to  be  recent2  and  cannot  therefore be  identified
with  the  MS  used  by  Jerome,  but is  to  be  classed  with  three
Hebrew  versions  which  are  also  extant,  as  productions  of  a  later
date.

The  recent  essay  by  Margarete  Plath  '  Zum  Buche
Tobit'  (in  -S7.  Kr. ,  1901,  pp.  377-414),  which  gives  an
analysis  of  the  book  with  special  reference  to  its  stylistic
peculiarities,  will  be  found  singularly  helpful  towards  a
right  understanding  of  Tobit.  As,  however,  it  simply
takes  <SA  for  its  basis  without  any  discussion  of  the
originality  of  that  text,  this  essay,  which  otherwise
might  be  regarded  as  final  on  the  stylistic  features  of
the  book,  as  a  matter  of  fact  is  valid  only  for  one  of  the
traditional  forms  in  which  it  has  reached  us.  Before
entering  upon  an  analysis  of  style,  therefore,  it  will  be
necessary  to  go  into  the  question  as  to  the  original  form
of  the  book.  In  the  first  place  we  must  examine  the
versions  and  seek  to  ascertain  the  form  of  text  to  which
they  carry  us  back  ;  next,  this  form  will  have  to  be
examined  with  a  view  to  testing  whether  it  be  original
or  whether  rather  it  does  not  show  traces  of  having  been
worked  over  ;  the  approximately  original  form  will
then  have  to  be  analysed  ;  and  finally  the  ultimate
source  of  the  materials  will  have  to  be  considered. 3

I. INTERPOLATIONS

In  the  first  place  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Ahikar-
episodes  do  not  belong  to  the  original  form  of  the  book.

(a)  In  l2owe  are  told  that  all  Tobit's  goods  were
forcibly  taken  away  and  there  was  nothing  left  to  him

.... save  his  wife  Anna  and  his  son  Tobias. In

V'.-}-ar"2i,  however,  we  read  that  on  his  return
a  1  ions.  foQme  ^ese  two  were  restored  to  him.  The
contradiction  is  manifest,  but  becomes  explicable  if  we
consider  how  it  arose  :  this  good  deed  also  had  been
attributed  to  Tobit's  protector  ;  and  the  supplementer
has  betrayed  himself  by  his  incorporation  of  the  Ahikar-
episode.  The  original  sequence  in  l2i,  though  it  has
been  smoothed  down  in  <5A,  is  observed  in  <§N  :  '  And
Sacherdonos,  his  son,  reigned  in  his  stead — and  in  the
reign  of  king  Sacherdonos  I  returned  to  my  home.'

1  The  Book  of  TMt,  a  Chaldce  Text  from  a  unique  MS  in
the  Bodleian  Library,  ed.  by  Neubauer,  Oxford,  1878.

2  So  Dalman,  Gramm.  des  jud.-palastin.  Arnntdisch,  27-79.

3  [On  some  special  points  relative  to  the  original  form  of  the
text  of  Tobit,  see  Crit.  Bib.,  and  cp  THISBE.]

5110


TOBIT

Underlying  this  we  have  the  truly  oriental  idea  that  a
new  accession  generally,  an  accession  after  a  revolution
always,  brings  with  it  a  complete  change  of  system.
By  X,  Ahikar  is  represented  as  having  been  cupbearer
and  keeper  of  the  signet,  steward  and  overseer  of  the
accounts,  as  early  as  in  the  time  of  Sennachereim
(Sennacherib,  705-682),  whilst  @A  and  ©b  have  it  that
he  first  received  his  appointments  from  Sacherdonos
(Esarhaddon,  682-669).  N  has  the  older  reading  ;  that
it  is  the  older  is  shown  by  the  whole  structure  of  the
sentence.  In  the  other  Greek  text  the  statement  that
Ahikar  was,  even  in  the  reign  of  Sennachereim,  the  most
influential  person  in  the  kingdom  has  been  deleted  so
as  to  avoid  making  Ahikar  in  any  way  responsible  for
the  expedition  against  judasa  and  the  resultant  cruelties
of  the  Assyrian  against  Ahikar's  own  people.  Thus  we
perceive  that  the  original  story  of  Ahikar  needed  a
rectifying  hand  in  order  to  connect  it  with  the  story  of
Tobit  with  as  little  inconsistency  as  possible  :  again  a
proof  that  it  was  not  from  the  first  an  integral  part  of
it.  Our  opinion  of  the  text  offered  by  Jerome  may  be
a  poor  one,  yet  when  we  note  that  to  all  appearance  the
story  of  Ahikar  seems  to  have  had  no  place  in  the
authority  that  lay  before  him,  we  may  perhaps  venture
to  say  that,  even  if  it  has  been  greatly  manipulated,
Jerome's  text  still  points  back  to  a  form  of  the  text
which  had  not  yet  passed  through  the  hands  of  the
supplemented

(b)  Ahikar, the protector, afterwards becomes the
supporter of the blind Tobit. Here the episode is
brought in  to  lead  up  to an  effective  climax  ; first  a
relative  takes  care  of  the  unfortunate  man,  afterwards
his  wife  has  to  support  him  by  doing  work  for  strangers.
In  K  even  the  duration  of  this  period  is given  ; it  is
two years. In the same text, all his brethren are
represented  as  sorrowing  for  Tobit,  though  to  judge  by
the  scorn  shown  by  the  neighbours  at  his  burying  of  the
dead  we  should  rather  expect the  opposite. In fact,
the original story itself  seems to have  been so con
structed as to exclude the notion of compassion by
outsiders. Mis toiling wife is the  blind man's only
support,  and  when  even  she  turns  against  him  he  longs
for death. This Ahikar feature also is wanting in
Jerome.

It  ought  not  to  surprise  us  if  even  so  secondary  an  authority
should  still  be  able  to  show  us  something  original.  In  other
cases  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  present  book  it  will  gradually
come  to  be  recognised  that  we  must  emancipate  ourselves  from
the  gratuitous  assumption  that  all  forms  of  an  extant  text  can
always  ultimately  be  traced  back  to  one  of  these  which  must
accordingly  be  regarded  as  the  original.

(c)  Ahikar appears  again  in 11 18, this time  as a
wedding- guest along with his nephew Xasbas. N
mentions  Ahikar  and  Xabad  as  Tobit' s  nephews. That
some  wedding-guests  should be  specified  ought  not  to
seem  strange  in  a  book  that  deals  so  lavishly  in  names  ;
and  if  we  consider  how  insecure  the  tradition  of  names
is,  we  cannot  lay  much  stress  on  the  fact that  one  of
the  wedding-guests bears the same name  as  Tobit's
quondam  protector  and  supporter. Moreover,  Jerome
gives  Achior,  like  Syr.  (124,  >o*«*/)- Perhaps,  there
fore, the mention of two wedding- guests by name
may  be  original, one  of  them, however, having been
transformed  into  that  of  Tobit's  patron  and  supporter.

(d)  Lastly,  the  story  of  Ahikar  is  introduced  in  order
to give  Tobias an example of  what compassion can
accomplish. So  ©A  Syr. and  Yet. Lnt.  adduce  it  as
showing  the  depravity  prevalent  at  the  time  in  Nineveh.
N  has  it  in  both  connections. One  sees  from  this  that
uncertainty  was  felt  as  to  the  purpose  of  the  story  in
Tobit's discourse to his son, and that various con
jectures were made. The story was, therefore, no
original part of the organism. Here again Jerome
supports  our  inference.

The  wording  of  his  version  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  possibly
it  goes  back  to  a  form  of  the  text  which  bore  no  traces  of  the
work  of  the  Ahikar  supplemented  If  we  arrange  the  text
recensions  by  reference  to  their  attitude  towards  these  inter-


w.  ,  .


TOBIT

polations,  we  shall  find  that  Jerome's  original  stands  in  contrast
with  that  of  all  the  others.  The  latter  already  has  the  Ahikar
interpolations.  Whilst  the  paths  by  which  A  and  B  on  the  one
hand,  and  Syr.  and  Vet.  Lat.  on  the  other,  were  reached  are
quite  independent,  K  seems  to  represent  a  union  of  the  divergent
forms  of  the  text  at  a  certain  stage  of  the  development.

The  introduction  of  the  Ahikar  episodes  shows  that
his story  was widely  known  ; it  was  possible  to  add
weight  loan  admonition  by  a  reference

to  what  had  happened  to  him. Like
{he  story  of  Tobit( that of  Allikar

relates  to  the  period  of  the  exile.

The  present  writer  has  elsewhere  !  endeavoured  to  show  that
among  the  lews  of  the  exile  there  gradually  arose  a  cycle  of
exilic  legends.  The  individual  legends  belonging  to  this  cycle
have  reached  us  not  in  original  but  in  revised  form  ;  the  persons
figuring  in  them  who  of  old  maintained  their  fidelity  amidst  the
most  trying  circumstances  are  exhibited  by  the  various  editors
to  the  people  of  their  own  time,  in  circumstances  of  renewed
distress,  as  conspicuous  examples  of  Jewish  piety  and  of  Jewish
patriotism.  Our  attitude  indeed  may  well  be  sceptical,  as
regards  the  sources  again  and  again  cited  —  in  Esther  the
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Media  and  Persia,  in  Tobit  the  relater
of  the  wonderful  experiences  in  12  20—  but  we  are  not  thereby
justified  in  refusing  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  widely  circulated
collections  of  legends  from  which  the  present  texts  had  their
origin,  especially  when  we  bear  in  mind  the  passion  for  writing
which  characterised  those  times.

The  peculiar  way  in  which  the  stories  of  Tobit  and
of  Ahikar  are  worked  together  points  also  in  the  same
_,  . direction. The  supplementer  has  made

^s  v  inous  out  the  two  men  to  have  been  kins
men  ;  this  was  all  the  easier  as  Tobit
himself  is  represented  as  having  once  upon  a  time  held
an  important  position  at  the  Assyrian  court.  So  also
Ahikar,  the  son  of  Anael,  is  represented  as  already  cup
bearer,  keeper  of  the  signet,  steward  and  overseer  of  the
accounts  under  Sennachereim,  and  confirmed  in  his
offices  by  Sacherdonos.  N  makes  mention  of  his
journey  to  Elymais  (Elam)  ;  A  and  B,  which  make
Tobit  go  there  himself,  present  an  unwarranted  altera
tion  of  the  text,  and,  we  may  be  pretty  certain,  are
hardly  to  be  corrected  in  conformity  with  Vet.  Lat.  with
which  they  otherwise  in  these  episodes  have  but  little
affinity.  Perhaps  the  circumstance  may  be  taken  as  an
indication  that  both  forms  of  the  text  come  from  a  region
where  the  allusions  to  Ahikar  would  have  been  unintel
ligible,  his  story  being  unknown.  The  chief  event  of
Ahikar's  life  is  touched  on  in  chap.  14  10.  It  will  be  of
interest  to  place  in  juxtaposition  the  various  forms  in
which  it  is  given.


SYR.

VET.  LAT.

B(A)

M

So,  my  son,

But  now,  my

Bury me

And  now,  my

afterthou  hast

son, do thou

decently and

child, leave

buried  me  and

leave  Nineveh,

thy mother  thou  Nineveh,

thy mother,

and tarry no

with me, and  1  and tarry  not

do  thou  leave

longer here,

dwell ye no

here. On the

Nineveh, for

but  on  the  day

Ion  ge  r in

day  thou  hast

there are

that  thou  hast

Nineveh. Be

buried thy

many un- buried thy

hold,  my  child,

mother  beside

righteous  per- mother beside

what Adam

me, on that

sons there.  ,  me tarry no

(Haman) did

same  day  stay

For there longer within

to  Achiacharns

no longer in

'Akab evilly

her territory  ;

that  nourished  t  her territory.

requited  'Aki-

for  I  see that

him, how  out

Kor  I  see  that

kar who had

there  is  much

of light he

there  is  much

nourished  him

unrighteous

brought him

unrighteous

for happi

ness  there  and

into darkness

ness  in  her  and

ness (?)  : for

much decep

and how he

much decep

no cause did

tion is prac

requited him  ;

tion is prac

he bring  him

tised,  and her

and  indeed,  he

tised,  and  they

down  into  the

people  will  not

saved (there

are  not  asham

earth. And

be moved

was saved)

ed. Behold,

'Akab des

therefrom.

Achiacharus,

my  child,  what

cended into

Behold, my

but  that  other

Nadab  did to

darkness,  and son, what

had  his  recom

Achikaruswho

'Akikar went  i  Nadab  did to

pense,  and  he

had  nourished

forth  into  light Ahikar who

himself went

him  ; was he

out of the had  nourished

down into

not brought

snare which

him,  whom  he

darkness.

alive down

1  Die  Purimsage  in  der  Bibtl:  Untersuchungen  tiber  das
Bitch  Ester  und  der  Estersage  z>envandte  Sagen  dm  sfatercn
judentums  (IQOO),  45-59.

SII3


TOBIT


SYR.

VET.  LAT.

B  (A)

N

'Akab  had  set

brought  down

Manasseh

into  the  earth?

for him, anil alive to the practised

And God re

this  one  went earth. But mercy  and  es-
down  into  the  1  God requited caped the

quited his  in
famy to his

earth.

that man's snare  of  death

face; and

wickedness  be- which  he had

Achikarus as

fore his own

set for him,

cended into

face, and

but Adam

light, and

Ahikar went

(Haman) fell

Nadab des

forth  into  light,

into  the  snare

cended into

but Nadab

and perished.

eternal dark

went down

And  now, my

ness, because

into eternal

children, be

he  had  tried  to

darkness, be

hold what

kill  Achikarus.

cause Nadab

mercy does,

Since he

had  sought  to

and how

showed  mercy

kill  Ahikar.

righteousness

to me,  he es

doth  deliver.

caped  the  snare

of  death  which

Nadab  had  set

for him, and

Nadab  fell  into

the snare of

death,  and  he

(death) de

stroyed him.

And now,  my

children, see,

what mercy

does,  and  what

unrighteous

ness  does,  for

it  kills.

The  various  recensions  agree  in  the  following  points  :

Ahikar brings up  a youth  who, however, drives  him

_, . down  into  the  earth  (darkness). Ahikar  in

the  end  is  saved,  and  the  other  has  to  suffer

the  fate  he  had  contrived  for  his  benefactor.
matter. ,r,  ,  . .  .

1  he  young  man  s  name  is  given  variously  :

'Akab,  Nabad,  Nadab,  Adam,  Haman.  A  and  B  un
expectedly  call  Ahikar  Manasseh.  'Akab  is  probably  a
corruption  of  Nakab  and  may  perhaps  go  back  to  one
or  other  of  the  forms  Nabad,  Nadab,  as  also  may
Adam.  On  the  other  hand  the  names  Manasseh  and
Haman  point  to  a  separate  tradition  which,  to  all
appearance,  first  came  out  in  A  and  B.  In  this  the  intro
duction  of  the  story  of  Ahikar  has  its  motive  in  the  refer
ence  to  the  value  of  mercy.  The  characteristic  phrase
of  this  variant  is  :  '  the  snare  of  death  which  was  set. '
This  phrase  must  have  had  a  definite  meaning  in  the
narrative  as  well  as  that  which  occurs  in  the  first :  '  he
was  brought  to  the  earth  (darkness).'  This  is  shown
by  the  fact  that,  doubtless  independently  of  A  and  B,
the  other  variant  has  also  found  its  way  into  N  ;  this
becomes  evident  if  we  consider  that  here  it  is  plainly
not  original.  It  has  already  been  brought  into  con
nection  with  the  story  of  Tobit  ;  what  is  accentuated  is
that  the  showing  of  compassion  has  brought  deliverance
to  Tobit.  Moreover,  the  original  names  have  given
place  to  those  which  we  now  find.  Along  with  this
variant  the  new  motive  for  referring  to  the  Ahikar
episode  has  made  its  way  into  the  X  text.  Accordingly
,_  we  shall  have  to  imagine  the  steps  in  the

,  process of interpolation somewhat as

of  rowth  follows-  With  the  formu1^ :  '  Behold,
my  child  ! '  a  supplementer  introduces  a
Nineveh  story  with  which  he  is  acquainted.  Afterwards
it  is  endeavoured  to  bring  it  into  connection  with  the
book  of  Tobit,  first  by  means  of  the  moral  it  supplies
'Such  wickednesses  are  done  in  Nineveh,'  and  next
(with  the  view  of  securing  a  still  closer  connection)  by
introducing  a  variant  which  lays  stress  upon  the  virtue
of  compassion.

Whilst  the  first  variant  deals  with  the  ungrateful  youth
and  with  the  punishment  of  his  ingratitude,  what  is
emphasised  by  the  other  is  that  an  act  of  compassion
saves  him  who  is  lost.  The  two  are  not  mutually  ex
clusive  ;  both  may  have  their  origin  in  one  and  the  same


TOBIT

story  though  in  different  aspects  of  it.  The  important
thing  to  observe  is  that  they  are  taken  from  different
forms  of  this  story,  and  in  point  of  fact,  as  the  introduc
tion  of  the  various  separate  elements  occurred  at  differ
ent  dates,  we  are  thus  enabled  to  gain  an  insight  into
the  history  of  the  story  amongst  the  Jews.  First  we
find  the  story  which  tells  of  Ahikar  and  Nadab.  The
names  are,  to  all  appearance,  foreign,  and  show  at  once
that  this  material  had  been  appropriated  by  Judaism
comparatively  recently.  Next,  the  names,  and  especially
that  of  the  hero,  give  place  to  Jewish  ones,  and  so  the
process  of  appropriation  is  completed.  Nor  are  the
new  names  insignificant  or  chosen  at  random  ;  Manasseh
is  the  name  of  the  husband  of  the  brave  heroine  of  the
Book  of  Judith,  Haman  is  that  of  the  notorious  enemy
of  the  Jewish  race.  By  the  alteration  of  the  names  of
the  chief  actors  the  story  of  Ahikar  itself  received  a  new
stamp  of  nationality,  and  so  became  an  integral  part  of
the  cycle  of  exilic  legends.

That  the  story  of  Ahikar  is  not  native  to  Jewish  soil
is  shown  by  its  wide  diffusion  (cp  the  literature  of  this

7  Ahikar-storv  subJect  in  The  Story  °f  Ahikar  by
I.  AniKai y  R  c Conybeare j Rendel  Harri

of  foreign  origin.  and  A  Sm[th.LewiJs>  Londoni  lW

It  is  found  in  Syriac,  Armenian,  Arabic,  Greek,  and
Slavonic  redactions,  and  is  to  be  met  with  in  the  Arabian
Nights  and  in  the  fables  of  ^Esop  (cp  ACHIACHAKUS).
It  runs  somewhat  as  follows  : — •

The  vizier  and  privy  councillor  of  the  Assyrian  king  Sen
nacherib,  Ahikar  by  name,  having  no  child  of  his  own,  brings
up  his  nephew  Nadan  and  receives  from  the  king  the  assurance
that  Nadan  will  be  his  successor  in  the  offices  that  he  holds  so
advantageously  for  the  kingdom.  Nadan  receives  from  his
uncle  in  wise  discourse  the  ripe  fruits  of  a  rich  experience.
Soon,  however,  he  Begins  to  abandon  himself  to  a  loose  and
dissipated  life,  so  that  Ahikar  finds  himself  compelled,  with  the
king's  permission,  to  disinherit  him.  Nadan  then  begins  to
intrigue  for  the  overthrow  of  his  uncle,  and  at  last  with  success  ;
by  means  of  forged  letters  Ahikar  is  made  to  appear  a  betrayer
of  his  country.  The  deluded  Sennacherib  condemns  his  faithful
vizier  to  death  and  charges  an  executioner  to  carry  out  the
sentence  in  front  of  Ahikar  s  own  house.  But  with  the  help  of
his  devoted  wife  the  vizier  is  able  to  induce  the  executioner,  who
is  grateful  for  a  former  act  of  kindness,  to  spare  him,  and  to
substitute  a  criminal  slave  in  his  place.  He  himself  is  hidden
in  a  cavity  beneath  the  door  of  his  house,  and  secretly  fed  by
the  executioner  and  his  own  wife,  whilst  overhead  his  ingrate
nephew  begins  a  reckless  life.  At  this  juncture  the  king  of
Egypt  sends  a  letter  to  Sennacherib  in  which  he  challenges  him
to  solve  a  problem.  In  the  event  of  his  succeeding,  the  king  of
Egypt  will  pay  him  tribute  ;  should  he  fail,  Assyria  is  to  become
tributary  to  Pharaoh.  Sennacherib  is  to  get  a  palace  high  up
in  the  air  built  for  him  in  Egypt  (the  same  motive  is  found  also
among  the  Suaheli  in  a  story  of  Abunawas).!  In  Assyria  every
one  is  helpless  ;  if  only  Ahikar  were  still  alive  !  Whereupon  the
executioner  comes  forward  and  tells  the  king  the  truth.  Sen
nacherib  is  overjoyed.  Ahikar  is  fetched  from  his  den  and
brought  before  the  king  ;  his  unshorn,  unkempt  hair  reached
down  to  his  shoulders,  and  his  beard  to  his  breast.  His  nails
were  like  eagle's  claws,  and  his  body  had  become  withered  and
disfigured.  The  fashion  of  his  countenance  was  changed,  and
was  like  ashes  (cp  Dan.  430).  Carefully  tended  he  is  speedily
restored,  takes  the  problem  in  hand,  and  sets  out  for  Egypt,
where  he  is  able  to  meet  cunning  with  cunning  and  Pharaoh  is
compelled  to  acknowledge  defeat.  Crowned  with  glory  the
hero  returns  home,  and  now  condign  punishment  overtakes
Nadan.  First  he  is  scourged,  and  next  he  is  thrown  into  a  foul
den  near  his  uncle's  door  :  and  as  often  as  Ahikar  went  in  and
out,  he  railed  at  him,  his  words  of  chastisement  still  taking
proverbial  form.  '  As  Nadan  heard  these  words,  in  that  same
moment  he  became  inflated  like  a  leather  bottle,  all  his  members
and  bones  swelled,  and  he  split  open  and  burst.  Thus  he  came
to  his  end  and  died  '  (cp  as  to  this  manner  of  death  the  account
of  Marduk's  triumph  over  Tiamat  in  the  Babylonian  creation-
myth  ;  Jensen,  Ass.-bab.  Mythen  «.  Epcn,  Berlin,  1900,  p.  26
ff-)-

The  manner  in  which  the  story  is  told  in  the  Book  of
Tobit  points  very  clearly  beyond  the  legendary  form  in

o TTH.-_ 4.  i which  it  has  been  handed  down  to  an

8.  Ultimately .  . , ... u-u-.  .u  i • i

.,  . .  * original  which exhibited  mythological

^  ' motives. Some  one  is  delivered  from

the  snare  of  death — so  a  legend  says.  This  is  the  latest
shape  the  material  receives  ;  it  is  at  the  same  time  also
a  new  interpretation  and  explanation.  We  meet  with

1  Lieder  und  Geschichten  der  Suaheli,  transl.  and  introd  by
Biittner,  Berlin,  1894,  p.  89^

S"4


TOBIT

the  characteristic  colouring  of  myth,  however,  when  we
read  of  someone  being  brought  down  from  light  into
darkness,  how  he  reascends  to  light,  and  how  his
adversary  is  plunged  into  eternal  night.  These  are
characteristic  features  of  the  original  form  which  first
are  gradually  smoothed  down  and  then  continue  to  be
carried  along  as  a  metaphorical  manner  of  speaking  for
a  considerable  length  of  time,  but  finally  the  bold  myth
is  toned  down  till  it  becomes  a  mere  illustration  of  a
popular  proverb  :  '  He  who  digs  a  pit  for  others  falls
into  it  himself,'  or:  'Behold,  what  mercy  does,  and
how  righteousness  delivers,'  or:  'Mercy  delivers  from
death,  and  will  not  suffer  him  who  practises  it  to  go
into  darkness.'

The  appropriation  of  this  story  by  Judaism  through
a  change  of  names,  depends  on  a  primary  affinity  of
material  which  made  it  possible  and  easy.  Manasseh
in  the  Book  of  Judith,  who  is  struck  down  by  a.  burning
wind  in  the  days  of  the  barley-harvest,  and  so  deeply
lamented  by  his  widow  (Judith  82/),  and  Haman  the
persecutor  of  the  Jews  are  both  of  them  figures  which
Judaism  found  and  appropriated  in  foreign  lands.  They
afterwards  became  typical  figures  for  the  whole  cycle  of
exilic  legends  ;  but  originally  it  was  between  mythical
figures  that  the  struggle  lay  as  to  which  should  thrust
the  other  down  into  everlasting  darkness.

From  the  fact  that  the  Book  of  Tobit  contains  refer
ences  to  the  story  of  Ahikar,  \se  must  not,  with  M.
Plath,  draw  the  inference  that  the  Tobit  material  is  the
later  :  '  The  story  of  Tobit  is  set  forth  in  full  detail
whilst  the  other  may  be  taken  for  granted  as  known
already.'  On  the  contrary  we  here  see  in  operation  the
natural  desire  to  bring  the  characters  of  legend  into
relation  with  each  other  and  with  contemporary  life.
In  this  way  Judaism  is  exhibited,  even  by  its  legends
dating  from  those  days  of  oppression  which  had  become
classical  for  subsequent  post-exilic  times,  as  a  close  and
mutually  coherent  community  in  which  each  individual
helps  his  neighbour.  It  is  in  a  similar  manner  that,  on
German  soil,  the  figures  of  Siegfried  and  Dietrich  have
been  brought  into  relation  with  each  other  in  the  'Great
Rosen-garden.'  But  whilst  the  Jews  help  one  another
the  German  heroes  are  at  war.  The  former  sort  of
legend  circulates  among  a  people  that  finds  itself  in
adversity,  the  later  in  a  nation  that  finds  its  delight  in
battle  and  tournament.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  didactic  portions  of
Tobit  have  also  received  interpolations  ;

9.  Didactic this  is  evident  from  the  extant  texts.

additions.  Chap.  4,  which  contains  Tobit's  exhortations
to  his  son  before  his  departure,  is  shortest  in
N,  fuller  in  Jerome,  most  copious  in  A,  B,  and  Vet.  Lat.
Whilst  in  Jerome  there  is  prefixed  an  exhortation  to  attend  to
what  is  about  to  be  said,  and  lay  it  to  heart,  in  the  other  MSS
Tobit,  starting  from  the  actual  situation,  begins  with  an  ad
monition  to  Tobias  to  attend  to  his  father's  burial  and  care
suitably  for  his  widowed  mother.  This  admonition  is  all  the
more  effective,  and  eo  ipso  shows  itself  to  be  an  integral  portion
of  the  story,  because  shortly  before  the  blind  old  man  has
had  to  listen  to  bitter  reproaches  which  almost  drove  him  to
despair  from  the  very  wife  whom  he  now  so  thoughtfully
remembers.  Natural,  too,  in  like  manner  is  the  admonition,
generalising  as  it  were  the  fundamental  thought  of  what  pre
cedes,  to  be  pious  and  to  keep  God's  commandments.  The
prospect  of  a  happy  life  is  held  out  as  a  reward  for  such
conduct.

The  climax  of  the  exhortation  having  thus  been  reached,  the
conclusion  we  expect  is  '  Remember  these  commandments,  and
suffer  them  not  to  be  effaced  from  thy  heart  ! '  Only  x,  how
ever,  closes  thus  ;  assuredly  it  represents  the  original  rounded
form.  We  cannot  suppose  any  omission  or  shortening ;  for
elsewhere  x  >s  much  the  more  detailed  and  copious.

The  other  texts  have  forcibly  introduced  into  this  rounded
text  manifold  pieces  of  good  advice  :  (i)  Practise  compassion,
for  this  will  give  the  best  results  ;  (2)  Live  chastely  and  marry
within  your  own  people  as  the  patriarchs  did,  for  this  brings
great  blessing  in  its  train  ;  (3)  Be  not  proud,  above  all  not  to
any  of  your  own  people  :  pride  brings  ruin  ;  (4)  Give  the  hireling
his  wages ;  be  well-bred  in  all  your  actions,  and  refrain  from
doing  to  others  what  would  be  unpleasing  to  yourself;  (5)  Be
ware  of  drunkenness  ;  be  compassionate ;  (6)  Walk  with  the
righteous  and  the  wise.

Jerome  has  a  like  number  of  separate counsels,  but they


TOBIT

are  more  concisely  worded,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  advice
to  marry  within  one's  own  kin  is  absent.

Thus  there  has  been  a  gradual  interpolation  of  this
apparently  favourite  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Tobit.
People  liked  to  read  how  the  old  man  instructs  the
youth.  More  and  more  words  were  put  into  his  mouth,
<>f  the  sort  which  the  various  redactors  would  like  to
impress  upon  the  minds  of  readers.  It  is  interesting  to
see  that  the  Ahikar  story  also  exhibits  the  same  mixture
of  the  epic  and  the  didactic  styles.  Certain  of  the  actual
words  too  in  the  rules  of  wisdom  it  contains  echo  those
of  Tobit.  The  following  examples  are  among  the  most
noticeable  : —


AHIKAR
STOKY.

VET.  LAT.

JEROME.

A  and  B.

My  son,
pour  out  thy
wine  on  the
tombs  of  the
just,  rather
than  drink  it
with  wicked

Pour  out
(funde)  thy
wine  and  thy
bread  on  the
tombs  of  the
just,  and  give
it  (illud)  not

Place  thy
wine  and  thy
bread  upon
the  tomb  of
the  just  ;  but
eat  and  drink
not  of  it  with

Dispense

freely  thy  food
at  the  burial
of  the  just  ;
but  give  not
to  sinners.

people.

to  sinners.

sinners.

The  original  meaning  of  this  saying,  which  has  refer
ence  to  libations  at  sepulchres,  has  gradually  been
toned  down  until  at  last  what  has  come  out  of  it  is  an
exhortation  to  prepare  a  funeral  repast.  Thus  we  can
clearly  see  that  the  counsels  which  by  degrees  found
their  way  into  Tobit's  exhortation  have  in  part  at  least
been  taken  from  the  general  oriental  stock  of  quota
tions.  On  the  other  hand  the  accentuation  of  definite
Jewish  precepts  of  morality  is  deliberate.  The  time,
from  which  their  introduction  dates,  loved  to  inculcate
them  at  every  possible  opportunity.  Apparently  it  had
every  need  to  do  so.

The  peculiar  circumstance  that  the  advice  to  marry
within  one's  kin  is  wanting  in  {<  and  Jer.  raises  the
question,  whether  this  element,  upon  which  much  weight
is  sought  to  be  laid  in  the  history  itself,  be  original.

There  is  the  further  fact  that  in  t>  16  [N]  Azariah  reminds
Tobias  of  it,  although  the  admonition  itself  has  not  been  pre
viously  recorded  in  this  form  of  the  text.  The  verse  in  question
must  therefore  have  been  introduced  by  way  of  correction  from
the  other  forms  of  the  text.  We  are  confirmed  in  this  infer
ence  when  we  observe  that  Jerome  makes  no  mention  at  all
of  Azariah 's  reminder.  But  as  in  the  dialogue  between  Azariah
and  Tobias,  he  deviates  much  from  the  other  MSS,  his  evidence
would  not  be  so  weighty  as  it  is  if  we  did  not  read  in  the  third
Greek  recension  simply  these  words :  '  Dost  thou  not  remember
all  thy  father's  commandments?  '  thus  without  express  allusion
to  the  particular  exhortation  now  in  question.

Further,  the  statement  that  Tobias  is  related  to  Raguel
disturbs  the  whole  structure  of  the  story.  If  Raguel  would
indeed  become  by  the  Mosaic  law  guilty  of  death  should  he  give
his  daughter  to  any  other  than  Tobias, — an  assertion  of  the
angel's  which  in  point  of  fact  is  not  correct, — then  it  becomes
inconceivable  how  the  narrator  could  possibly  have  found  any
excuse  for  his  having  already  previously  betrothed  her  to  seven
suitors  in  succession.  Sara  herself,  before  abandoning  herself
to  despair,  must  surely  have  had  some  thought  of  the  one  possi
bility  of  escape  from  her  sad  predicament — that,  namely,  of
being  married  by  the  man  whom  the  law  required.  Her  praj-er
must  have  been  that  God  should  send  her  this  deliverer.  Nor
is  it  possible  that  Tobit  in  receiving  his  daughter-in-law  into  his
house,  could  have  failed  to  recall  the  ties  of  kinship  that  united
them.  Raguel  himself  must  have  given  thanks  to  God  not
merely  '  for  having  had  mercy  upon  two  only  children  '  ;  he
would  also  have  had  every  reason  for  pointing  out  how  a  faithful
keeping  of  the  law  had  found  its  reward.

Finally,  the  scene  which  above  all  others  must  determine  as  to
the  relationship  between  the  two  families,  that  namely  in  which
Tobias  enters  the  house  of  Raguel,  is  not  always  rendered  in
the  same  way.  According  to  one  version  of  the  story  the  two
travellers  first  meet  with  Sara  and  are  afterwards  led  by  her  to
the  house,  and  according  to  another  they  first  find  Raguel
himself  sitting  at  his  house  door,  and  are  hospitably  welcomed
by  him  ;  according  to  the  one  Tobit's  loss  of  sight  is  already
known  to  those  in  Raguel's  house,  whilst  according  to  the  other
they  first  hear  of  it  from  the  travellers.  Also,  N  shows  a  much
greater  interest  than  A  and  B  in  the  relationship  (cp  6  18  and
7  10),  although  it  does  not  contain  the  exhortation  mentioned
above.  The  editor  therefore,  we  may  be  quite  certain,  would
not  have  omitted  it  if  he  had  found  it  lying  before  him.

This  want  of  agreement  shows  clearly  the  smoothing

5116


TOBIT

touches  of  later  hands.  It  is  plausible  to  conjecture
that  without  all  arriving  at  one  and  the  same  result
they  all  sought  to  incorporate  the  discovery  by  Raguel
and  his  family  that  their  new  arrival  was  their  nearest
kinsman.  This  addition,  intended  to  exhibit  in  con
crete  form  by  means  of  the  story  of  Tobit  the  blessing
which  such  marriages  of  kinsfolk  bring,  must  have  been
made  in  a  time  which  was  trying  to  set  aside  this
ancient  Jewish  custom.  People  '  turned  away  with
haughty  minds  from  the  sons  and  the  daughters  of  their
own  nation,  nor  took  they  wives  from  amongst  them  '
(4  13  [A]).  '  In  pride — such  was  the  teaching  of  this
addition — lies  destruction  and  much  confusion.'  On
the  other  hand  the  progeny  of  those  who  are  true  to  the
customs  of  their  forefathers  '  inherits  the  land. '  We
see  that  political  and  religious  hopes  were  believed  to  be
affected  by  such  deviations  from  traditional  practice.

If  we  take  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  work  that
has  been  expended  upon  the  Book  of  Tobit,  so  far  as
10  Summarv  can  ^e  -)ucl§e^  from  tne  extant  forms  of
of  foreeoimf  the  text>  k  becomes  Plain  that  the  intr°-
discussions  duction  of  certain  episodes  points  to  a
'  heightening  of  the  didactic  character  of
the  story,  and  to  a  desire  to  give  it  more  and  more  the
character  of  a  family  tale.  In  other  respects,  though
the  various  MSS  vary  from  each  other  in  many  ways,
they  never  do  so  to  such  an  extent  that  the  course  of
events  is  changed.  But  copyists  and  translators  seem
to  have  treated  their  text  with  a  good  deal  of  arbitrari
ness  ;  they  might  almost  be  called  redactors.  They
have  fully  exercised  what  they  deemed  their  own  pro-
prietory  rights  in  copy  or  translation.  The  various
forms  of  text  thus  produced  were  again  compared  at  a
distinctly  later  period,  and  here  and  there  we  find  un
mistakable  attempts  to  harmonise  them.  It  is  therefore
difficult  to  define  in  any  brief  formula  the  nature  of
their  mutual  relationship.  We  can  do  so,  however,
quite  definitely  so  far  as  their  attitude  towards  the  Ahikar
episode  is  concerned.

II. UN  INTERPOLATED TEXT

At  this  stage  there  arises  at  once  the  question
whether  the  text  to  which  the  various  extant  MSS  go

i  -KT~4.  ,-~:  ~i  back  presents  us  with  the  original
11.  Not  original.  f  r  .u  r>  r  ^  ,.  ,  °

form  of  the  Book  of  Tobit. In  the

opinion  of  the  present  writer  it  does  not.  Various
indications  go  to  show  that  what  it  offers  us  is  a  redac
tion  of  a  story  previously  fixed  in  writing.

In  the  speech  in  which  the  angel  makes  himself  known  he
declares  the  part  he  has  taken  in  the  events  in  the  life  of  Tobit
(12  12  ff.).  He  it  was  who  brought  the  memorial  of  his  prayer
before  God  ;  who  was  by  his  side  when  he  buried  the  dead  ;
likewise  when  he  did  not  delay  to  rise  up  and  leave  his  dinner
in  order  to  go  and  cover  the  '  dead '  (sing,  in  x,  pi.  in  A).  The
allusion  to  Tobit's  activity  in  burying  the  dead  in  the  times  of
oppression  caused  by  Sennacherib  is  abrupt  ;  to  say  the  least  it
stands  in  the  wrong  place,  the  events  being  enumerated  in
reverse  order  of  their  occurrence.  It  has  the  appearance  of
being  an  element  that  has  been  introduced  at  a  late  stage  into
the  text  with  the  effect  in  y.  13  of  making  '  the  dead  man'  into
'  the  dead '  (pi.).  If  this  impression  be  correct,  the  originality
of  the  introduction  would  then  come  into  question.  And  in
point  of  fact  it  is  given  as  the  hero's  own  account  of  himself  in
the  first  person  whilst  everywhere  else  the  book  is  written  in  the
third  person.  At  a  very  early  date  this  difficulty  was  felt.
Jerome  and  the  Aramaic  (ed.  Neubauer)  give  the  introduction
in  the  third  person.  M.  Plath  indeed  points  to  the  similar
change  between  the  first  and  the  third  person  in  the  Aramaic
version  of  the  story  of  Ahikar.  In  the  latter  case,  however,
it  would  seem  as  if  we  had  to  deal  with  an  oversight  or  slip  of
the  Chronicler  rather  than  with  a  peculiarity  of  style.  '  If  the
editor  of  the  Book  of  Acts,  skilled  in  literature  as  he  was,
placed  in  immediate  juxtaposition  the  we-passages  and  those
written  in  the  third  person,'  his  intention  was  that  the  impression
of  dependence  on  ancient  sources  which  gives  his  narrative  the
stamp  of  authenticity  might  be  left  unimpaired.  Thus  M.
Plath's  reference  to  Acts  goes  rather  to  prove  the  opposite  of
what  is  intended  ;  the  inference  is  that  here  also  as  well  as  in  the
Book  of  Acts  the  manner  in  which  the  subject  is  presented
enables  us  to  discern  the  traces  of  a  second  hand.

Again,  the  mention  of  the  various  Assyrian  kings,  and  the
references  to  the  history  of  that  period  altogether  are  quite  tin-
called  for  so  far  as  the  remainder  of  the  narrative  is  concerned.
Only  at  the  very  close  of  the  narrative  are  similar  allusions  at


TOBIT

all  met  with  ;  but  here  too  the  various  versions  do  not  agree
(f.g.,  as  to  the  ages  of  the  persons).

Once  more,  Tobit's  loss  of  sight  is  given  as  the  sole  reason  for
his  impoverishment.  After  the  return  from  the  flight  be-fore
Sennacherib  he  can  afford  to  have  a  rich  meal  prepared  ;  thus
his  poverty  is  not  the  consequence  of  the  confiscation  of  his
goods  by  Sennacherib.

Lastly,  it  is  left  wholly  unexplained  why  it  is  that  the  neigh
bours  say  on  the  burial  of  the  dead  man  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost
that  Tobit  '  was  no  more  afraid  to  be  put  to  death  for  this  matter.'
No  mention  has  previously  been  made  that  the  Jew  referred  to
had  been  slain  by  King  Sacherdonos.  The  corpse  is  lying  in  the
market  place  ;  but  the  Jews  put  to  death  by  Sennacherib  are
not,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  left  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  town  ;
they  are  thrown  outside  the  walls  of  Nineveh.  The  saying  of
the  neighbours  just  cited,  therefore,  being  irreconcilable  with
the  narrative  itself,  and  presupposing  impossible  conditions,
cannot  be  original.  If  not  original,  the  things  to  which  it
alludes,  the  Sennacherib  story,  are  also  brought  into  question.

We  shall  be  safe,  therefore,  in  excluding  from  the
original  text  of  the  Book  of  Tobit,  both  this  Sennacherib-
Story  and  the  reference  to  the  burials  of  the  dead.
What  we  have  here  is  simply  a  later  reduplication  of  one
and  the  same  motive — viz. ,  that  of  the  burial  of  the  dead
man — just  as  in  the  story  of  Esther  the  feast  is  redupli
cated.  In  Esther  the  object  is  to  interweave  the  Mordecai
episodes  by  means  of  which  the  book  read  at  the  1'urim
festival  was  brought  into  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the
age  ;  we  may  well  suppose  a  similar  motive  to  have
been  at  work  in  the  case  of  the  Book  of  Tobit.  Preiss1
has  placed  its  date  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century
A.  D. ,  that  is  to  say,  immediately  after  the  suppression
of  the  Jewish  revolt,  and  the  annihilation  of  all  their
national  hopes.  If  now  we  endeavour  to  represent  to
ourselves  what  it  was  that  the  redactor  of  the  original
text  of  the  book  of  Tobit  (possibly  written  in  Hebrew)
aimed  at  and  has  accomplished  we  shall  arrive  at  some
such  conclusion  as  the  following  : —

The  story,  such  as  the  redactor  found  it  already
reduced  to  writing,  as  an  edifying  tale  of  family  life,

12  Ho  Was  ^a'^  m  l'le  ^ss.vr'an  times.  The
J  t  A  redactor  shows  himself  to  be,  for  his  time,
a  man  possessed  of  a  certain  degree  of
historical  knowledge.  He  was  acquainted  with  the
almost  legendary  story  of  Sennacherib's  fruitless  ex
pedition  against  Judah  ;  and  this  he  blended  with  the
story  of  Tobit,  perhaps  after  having  first  put  it  into  a
Greek  dress.  With  the  adoption  of  so  free  a  treatment
is  explained  also  the  stylistic  character  of  the  Greek  text,
which  led  Xoldeke  to  maintain  its  originality.2  The
redactor  had  along  with  his  contemporaries  passed
through  the  bitter  experiences  of  the  suppression  of  the
Jewish  revolt  against  Rome.  It  had  been  a  life-and-
death  struggle.  '  In  this  conflict  of  races,  that  ended
in  135  with  the  complete  subjugation  of  the  Jews,  the
fields  were  strown  with  dead  bodies  ;  nay  (as  Graetz  has
it)  "  the  whole  Jewish  nation  lay  like  one  huge  corpse  on
the  gory  fields  of  its  native  land  "  and  in  Media  alone
was  peace  any  more  to  be  found '  ( Preiss ).  These
ghastly  experiences  were  introduced  by  the  redactor  into
an  old  tale  of  family  life.  He  threw  them  back  into  the
Assyrian  time  ;  and  thus  the  old  book  with  its  limited
horizon,  with  its  personages  who  are  '  no  heroes  in
deeds,  but  heroes  in  suffering'  (M.  Plath)  was  adapted
to  the  times  for  which  he  wrote.

Tobit  who,  braving  the  wrath  of  the  king,  buries  the
slaughtered  brethren,  thus  receives  a  touch  of  the  heroic  valour
of  the  fighters  of  Bar  Kochba's  time  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  by
his  resignation  and  by  his  quiet  patience  and  persistent  hopeful
ness  he  could  also  become  a  conspicuous  example  to  the  Jews  of
those  days,  disheartened  as  they  were  by  the  failure  of  their
effort  to  shake  off  the  Roman  yoke.  As  they  read  the  new
introduction  to  the  old  book,  their  hearts  were  captivated  by
this  bold  kindred  spirit,  to  be  guided  by  him  forthwith  along  the
only  road  on  which  they  could  possibly  find  healing  for  their
grievous  wounds.  Perhaps  therefore  it  was  psychologically  a
very  skilful  touch  on  the  part  of  the  redactor  to  introduce  this
man  at  the  outset  as  speaking  in  propria  persona.  Possibly  he
allowed  himself  here  to  be  guided  by  his  own  feeling.  In  any
case  his  intervention  has  impaired  the  compactness  of  the  older
narrative.

1  'Zum  Buche  Tobit'  mZWT,  1885,  pp.  -nff.
2  MBBA,  1879,  PP-  ttff-

5118


TOBIT

The  introduction  of  passages  from  general  history  into
such  a  tale  as  this,  dealing  with  events  so  domestic  and
private,  strikes  us  as  out  of  place  ;  \ve  instinctively  feel
that  here  some  extraneous  element  has  been  imported
into  an  already  completed  unity,  that  we  have  to  do
with  the  work  of  some  editor,  that  a  local  and  temporary
interest  is  at  work  which  has  no  universality  in  its
appeal.

Our  account  of  the  redactor's  interference  with  the
older  narrative  is  not  yet  finished.  In  1220  the  angel,
when  taking  his  departure,  bids  Tobit  commit  to  writing
all  that  has  happened.  The  reader  notes  that  the
matter  is  exhausted,  and  what  he  expects  next  to  hear
is  that  Raphael's  command  has  been  carried  out.
Perhaps  afterwards  the  deaths  of  Tobit  and  Anna  might
have  been  added,  and  the  removal  of  Tobias  into  Media,
— a  removal  that  considered  in  itself  seems  quite  natural
when  we  remember  that  his  wife's  relations  live  in
Ecbatana  and  are  possessors  of  great  wealth  which  Sara
and  her  husband  are  destined  one  day  to  inherit.  But
instead  of  any  such  natural  conclusion  as  this  we  have
in  the  first  instance  a  thanksgiving  prayer  of  Tobit's,  of
which  we  are  told  in  A  and  B  that  it  was  put  into
writing  by  Tobit  himself.  The  Syriac  version  has  the
same  prayer  in  a  shorter  form.  The  other  versions,
however,  make  Tobit's  discourse  rise  to  a  climax  in  an
apocalyptic  prophecy  of  the  upbuilding  of  the  heavenly
Jerusalem.  According  to  this  discourse  God's  tabernacle
in  Jerusalem  is  for  the  present  destroyed,  and  thus  the
city  taken  away  from  the  nation  and  from  its  God.

Tobit  appears  of  course  to  speak  from  his  own  proper
standpoint,  which  has  in  view  the  destruction  of  Jeru
salem  by  Nebuchadrezzar.  It  need  hardly  be  said,
however,  that  in  reality  the  prophecy  relates  to  the  time
of  the  author.  Now  it  might  not  be  impossible  to  think
of  the  oppression  of  Jerusalem  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.
The  glowing  colours,  however,  with  which  the  rebuild
ing  of  the  holy  city  is  depicted  suggest  a  period  when  a
speedy  natural  restoration  of  the  city  and  its  worship
was  hardly  to  be  expected.  At  such  a.  period,  when  it
is  plainly  seen  that  self-help  is  of  no  avail,  men  cling
to  the  hope  of  some  miraculous  intervention.  Heavenly
powers  shall  build  up  Jerusalem  (13i6)  '  with  sapphires,
and  emeralds,  and  precious  stones,  her  walls  and  towers
and  battlements  with  pure  gold  ;  and  her  streets  shall
be  paved  with  beryl  and  carbuncle  and  stones  of  Ophir. '
A  joyful  expectation  of  this  sort  takes  us  beyond  the
times  of  the  Maccabees.  And  as  the  opening  of  the
book  most  probably  emanates  from  one  who  had  lived
through  the  struggles  of  the  second  century  A.D.  it  will
be  to  him  that  we  ought  most  probably  to  attribute  not
only  the  placing  of  the  story  in  a  similar  historical
background,  but  also  the  introduction  into  it  of  those
ardent  wishes  and  hopes  regarding  the  future  which  at
the  time  of  writing  were  stirring  his  own  heart.  By  this
supposition  we  are  best  able  to  understand  on  the  one
hand  the  interest  shown  in  events  in  the  far  East  in  the
introduction,  and  on  the  other  in  the  rebuilding  of  Jeru
salem  and  the  restoration  of  its  worship  at  the  close.
For  a  contemporary  of  the  Maccaboean  struggles
Palestine  alone  would  have  come  into  consideration.

The  interest  felt  at  one  and  the  same  time  in  the  far
East  and  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  finally  reaches  pointed
expression  in  the  parting  speech  of  Tobit  to  his  son
(chap.  14).  'For  a  time'  Jerusalem  shall  be  desolate
and  God's  worship  be  suspended  there.  During  this
period  '  in  Media  there  shall  rather  be  peace  for  a
season.'  But  at  last  the  fulness  of  time  shall  be  ac
complished,  the  Jews  shall  be  restored,  and  the  gentiles
turn  from  their  idolatries.  Jerusalem  shall  rise  in  glory
and  with  her  the  house  of  God,  '  but  not  like  unto  the
first.'  This  prophecy  clearly  refers  to  the  last  times.
The  temple,  which  is  to  be  built  anew,  will  not  be  the
production  of  human  hands,  but  in  contrast  to  the
first  will  be  God's  own  workmanship.  Jerusalem  will
be  the  splendid  city  of  the  latter  days,  the  heavenly

5"9


TOBIT

Jerusalem,  the  temple  of  God's  glorious  building,  not  to
lie  likened  to  any  building  of  former  times,  not  even  to
that  of  a  Herod.  It  is  therefore  a  mistake  to  attempt
to  determine  from  this  passage  the  historical  standpoint
of  the  writer  as  if  he  had  lived  sometime  within  the
period  between  the  post-exilic  building  of  Zerubbabel
and  the  work  of  Herod  (so  Schiirer  in  PKE^  1 644 ).
Rather  are  all  temples  of  former  times  brought  into
contrast  with  this  splendid  structure  destined  to  be
raised  in  the  end  of  the  ages.  The  writer  of  this
prophecy  discloses  himself  by  his  simultaneous  interest
in  the  far  East  and  in  the  West.  A  characteristic  note  is
that  he  takes  pains  to  make  out  the  events  of  the  future
as  fulfilment  of  prophetic  prediction.  We  can  perceive
from  this  how  important  the  time  in  wrhich  he  lived  must
have  been  for  the  text  of  our  prophetical  books.  In  par
ticular  we  must  attribute  to  it  a  large  share  in  the
enlargement  by  way  of  commentary  of  our  book  of
Jeremiah,  the  Hebrew  text  of  which  is  much  more
copious  than  that  of  the  Greek  translation.1

This  peculiar  method,  of  filling  out  the  ancient  story
with  the  prophecies,  hopes,  and  interests  of  a  later  time,
strikes  the  reader  just  as  much  as  does  the  introduction
of  universal  history  into  a  tale  of  family  life.  The
mixture  of  styles  resulting  from  this  combination  is
neither  elegant  nor  pleasing.  Beautiful  or  attractive  it
can  have  been  only  to  an  age  which  found  reflected  in  it
its  own  expectations  and  wishes.  Here  once  more  we
come  to  the  conclusion  that  a  redactor  has  been  at  work
whose  inherent  weaknesses  escaped  notice  for  but  a
short  time.  The  moment  the  interest  which  has  dictated
the  procedure  relaxes,  we  inevitably  perceive  the  violence
it  has  done  to  the  ancient  story  by  the  improbabilities
which  it  has  forced  upon  it.

III.  CONJECTURAL  RECONSTRUCTION

If  we  pursue  our  inquiry  as  to  the  original  form  of

_  the book of Tobit which lay before the

"  redactor  and  was  operated  on  by  him,  we

°n>  shall find the story to be somewhat as

follows  :  —

In  Nineveh  there  lives  a.  pious  man,  Tobit  by  name,:  his  wife
is  Anna,  and  his  son  Tobias.  He  is  one  of  the  Jewish  exiles.
On  a  certain  occasion,  at  Pentecost,  just  before  sitting  down  to
meat,  he  sends  out  his  son  to  invite  any  needy  one  from  among  his
brethren.  Tobias  returns  with  the  news  that  a  Jew  who  has  been
strangled  is  lying  dead  in  the  market-place.  Tobit  buries  the
body,  and  as  incidental  to  this  loses  his  eyesight.  He  thus  be
comes  dependent  on  his  wife  ;  on  one  occasion  a  misunderstand
ing  arises  between  them  and  she  casts  his  alms  and  his  righteous
deeds  in  his  teeth.  Deeply  stirred,  he  falls  into  great  sadness
and  prays  for  death.  In  Ecbatana,  Sara  the  daughter  of  Raguel
is  cherishing  the  same  wish.  An  evil  spirit,  Asmodeus,  has
slain  seven  successive  husbands  of  hers  on  the  wedding-night.
Her  father's  maidservants  reproach  her  with  having  herself  put
her  husbands  to  death.  In  answer  to  the  prayers  of  Tobit  and
Sara  God  sends  forth  the  angel  Raphael  to  cure  Tobit  of  his
blindness,  and  bring  about  a  union  between  Tobias  and  Sara  and
thus  deliver  the  virgin  wife  from  the  evil  spirit.

Such,  in  brief  outline,  is  the  scheme  of  the  story  ;  the
scene  is  laid  at  Nineveh  and  Ecbatana,  and  the  theme  is
the  deliverance  from  undeserved  misfortune  of  two
families  living  in  these  two  places.  The  solution  is
brought  about  by  the  direct  intervention  of  God  and
Raphael,  the  powers  of  the  celestial  world.

The  occurrences  in  Nineveh  are  related  at  some  length,  but
only  one  scene  is  devoted  to  the  story  of  Sara.  At  Nineveh  we
are  first  of  all  introduced  to  the  pious,  benevolent  Tobit.  His
benevolence  leads  him  to  show  an  act  of  mercy  to  a  dead  man
and  this  act  of  mercy  in  turn  becomes  the  cause  of  misfortune
to  himself.  The  development  of  this  scene  indicates  that  Tobit's
misfortune  is  wholly  undeserved.  A  pious  man  such  as  this— so
the  reader  is  given  to  understand  from  the  very  beginning —
cannot  possibly  remain  unhappy,  if  there  is  a  righteous  God.

In  the  second  scene  we  see  how  poverty  comes  on  the  back  of
misfortune.  Tobit's  wife  becomes  dependent  for  her  own  and
her  husband's  support  upon  the  kindness  of  aliens.  And,  strange
to  say!  to  the  benevolent  Tobit  who  now  finds  himself  in  the
same  position  as  those  whom  he  has  so  often  formerly  befriended
there  never  occurs  the  thought  of  any  possibility  that  his  former
kindnesses  may  now  be  requited  to  himself  and  to  his  house.
In  the  end  Tobit,  after  the  misunderstanding  with  his  wife,

1  Cp  Erbt,  Jercmio.  und  seine  Zcit,  1902,  and  see  JEREMIAH
ii.,  §  21.

5120


TOBIT

finds  himself  completely  isolated.  Where  is  he  to  look  for  either
comfort  or  support?  _  The  good  deed  which  has  been  the
outward  occasion  of  his  misfortune  is  cast  in  his  teeth.  Musi
he  remain  an  innocent  sufferer  throughout  all  the  rest  of  his  life  ?
His  prayer  is  the  answer  to  either  question ;  it  is  thus  of  vital
importance  for  the  course  of  the  narrative.  Forsaken  by  men,
Tobit  turns  to  God  from  whom  alone  comfort  and  help  can
come.  He  prays  that  death  may  come  to  his  rescue.  We  are
deeply  moved  by  the  spectacle  of  the  aged  sufferer.  Any  other
man  would  have  prayed  for  recovery.  Thus  our  feelings  are
kept  in  tension.  In  what  way  will  God  intervene?

The  composition  of  the  two  scenes  at  Nineveh  can
almost  be  characterised  as  faultless.  We  are  greatly
moved  as  we  see  this  pious  man  brought  to  misfortune
by  an  act  of  kindness.  In  the  train  of  the  original
calamity  comes  poverty.  It  is  the  indirect  cause  of  a
misunderstanding  between  Tobit  and  his  loyal  wife.  A
venial  fault  leaves  the  old  man  absolutely  friendless  ;  it
instantly  brings  its  own  punishment,  but  at  the  same
time  drives  him  into  the  arms  of  Him  who  alone  can
help.  For  the  time  being  we  are  reassured,  and  free  to
turn  our  attention  to  the  other  scene  of  action.

Sara  scourges  her  maids,  whether  with  reason  or  without,  we
are  not  told,  nor  does  it  matter.  Her  maids  know  how  to
avenge  themselves  on  her  passionate  temper.  They  reproach
her  with  her  undeserved  misfortune.  Misfortune,  scorn,  and
open  contempt ;  we  are  touched  by  the  maiden's  fate.  She
would  fain  lay  down  life's  burden ;  another  proof  of  her
passionate  nature.  The  aged  man  bears  his  troubles  quietly ;
only  when  they  pass  the  limits  of  endurance  does  he  pray  to
God  to  take  away  his  life.  For  a  moment  Sara  thinks  of
ending  her  troubles  with  her  own  hand  ;  but  it  is  only  for  a
moment  :  she  is  too  good  a  daughter ;  she  remembers  her
father.  In  the  one  case,  Tobit's  difference  with  his  wife  throws
him  into  the  arms  of  God  ;  in  the  other  case,  the  same  effect  is
wrought  by  the  daughter's  reflection  on  what  would  be  the
sorrow  of  her  father.

The  narrator  relieves  the  fatiguing  similarity  of  the
two  scenes  by  contrasting  the  motives.  Sara's  prayer
is  framed  after  the  same  model  as  Tobit's  :  invocation
and  adoration  ;  petition  for  deliverance  from  distress.
Whilst,  however,  the  prayer  of  the  old  man  moves
quietly  towards  its  climax,  Sara's  emotion  is  manifest
throughout.  Thus  her  prayer  is  much  more  concrete.
She  had  just  been  on  the  verge  of  suicide,  and  now  she
implores  God  to  let  her  die.  But  again  the  image  of
her  father  rises  before  her  eyes.  The  love  of  life  breaks
in  once  more  upon  this  passionate  nature,  the  secret,
unuttered  wish  that  God  may  help  her  in  some  other
way.

Thus  the  narrator  has  still  further  prepared  us  for
the  divine  intervention.  The  scene  that  follows  is  laid
in  heaven — God  sends  down  Raphael  to  deliver  the  two
petitioners  out  of  their  distress.  The  reader  at  once
perceives  how  the  business  is  to  end.  Our  story  is  no
drama  that  gradually  unfolds  itself  before  the  eyes  of
the  spectator  ;  the  various  personages  henceforth  lose
their  dramatic  interest,  for  we  know  what  the  end  must
be.  All  that  remains  still  unknown  is  merely  the
working  out  of  the  details.  With  disclosure  of  the
final  issue  the  question  is  at  the  same  time  started  as  to
how  God  will  bring  it  about.  To  this  the  reader  is
intended  to  give  his  undivided  attention.  God's
•wisdom  has  to  show  itself  in  the  skill  with  which  the
result  is  effected  ;  from  this  point  onward  the  story  will
be  an  illustration  of  the  wisdom  of  divine  providence.
And  the  illustration  being  so  naive,  our  interest  in  it  is
but  small.  The  art  of  the  narrator,  which  we  were
able  to  admire  in  the  opening  chapters,  seems  to  leave
him.  This,  however,  is  only  because  he  has  attempted
too  ambitious  a  task  and  not  kept  within  the  bounds  of
his  limited  abilities.  He  laboriously  seeks  to  keep  up
our  interest  by  a  succession  of  minor  artifices.

Tobit  sets  his  house  in  order  before  his  death  to
which  he  is  looking  forward.  At  Rages  in  Media  he
has  deposited  a  sum  of  money  with  Gabael,  and
Tobias  must  go  and  fetch  it.  We  are  not  now  able  to
say  whether  this  element  figured  in  the  original  form  of
the  Book  of  Tobit.  In  the  present  text  we  have  word
of  it  as  early  as  in  1 14.  To  Rages  the  way  lies  through
Ecbatana  ;  we  are  thus  able  to  divine  that  God  is  about
5121


TOBIT

to  make  use  of  the  journey  of  Tobias  for  fulfilment  of
his  plans. But  we  must  have  patience.

First  the  father  has  to  give  wise  instructions  to  his  son  ;  they
are,  he  may  well  believe,  the  last  words  he  will  ever  speak  to
Tobias.  We  for  our  part  know  that  Tobit  is  to  be  rendered
happy  once  more  by  this  journey,  and  thus,  touched  by  the
old  mans  love,  we  are  titled  over  the  delay  in  the  action
Next,  the  father  provides  for  the  safety  of  his  son  as  best  he
can  :  he  chooses  for  him  the  most  trustworthy  travelling  com
panion  he  can  find.  Again  the  narrator  discloses  too  much.
I  he  companion  is  no  other  than  Azaria,  the  angel  Raphael  in
human  shape.  It  is  touching  to  read  how  strictly  Tobit
examines  the  stranger,  so  strictly  that  he  has  almost  to  apologise
for  his  zeal,  ^ylth  our  minds  fixed  on  the  blind  father  and  his
affectionate  solicitude,  we  again  forget  that  we  are  being  detained.
At  last  an  agreement  is  come  to,  even  in  the  matter  of  wages!
A  start  can  be  made  at  last.  The  father  gives  his  blessing,  and
wishes  that  the  angel  of  God  may  go  with  his  son.  We  smile
to  ourselves,  knowing  that  the  father's  prayer  is  already  fulfilled.
\Vith  the  narrator,  the  religious  interest,  that  of  showing  his
readers  how  God  guides  the  destinies  of  men  beyond  all  human
thinking,  predominates  over  the  aesthetic  interest  which  should
have  taught  him  not  to  relieve  the  tension  prematurely.  At  the
parting,  there  are  tears;  the  blind  old  man  has  faith  in  God
and  remains  calm,  but  not  so  the  mother,  whose  one  thought
is  that  her  only  child  is  leaving,  and  when  she  reflects  that  some
sacrifice  has  to  be  made  if  the  money  is  to  be  recovered,  she
deems  the  present  one  too  great ;  '  We  have  enough  to  live'  on.'
Has  the  narrator  forgotten  that  Tobit  is  reduced  to  poverty?
Or  is  it  his  intention  to  touch  us  still  more  deeply  by  putting
into  Anna's  mouth  the  sentiment  that  she  would  rather  go  on
with  her  present  life  of  care  and  toil,  if  only  her  dear  son  might
stay  at  home?  Tobit  attempts  to  divert  his  wife  from  her
sorrow  by  'gently  trying  to  excite  her  pity  for  himself;  thine
eyes  shall  see  him  !  He  himself  is  blind  :  even  should  he
survive  till  his  son's  return,  still  he  will  not  see  him!'
(M.  Plath).

We  see  how  the  author's  main  endeavour  is  to  keep
up  the  reader's  interest  by  touching  his  heart.  He
tries  to  reach  his  audience  where  it  is  most  susceptible  ;
it  is  one  of  the  artifices  he  employs  to  maintain  the  life
of  a  narrative  which  has  lost  the  element  of  suspense.

The  departure  in  its  various  scenes — the  decision,
the  parting  instructions,  the  choice  of  a  companion,  the
farewell — occurs  in  Xineveh.  The  next  scenes,  describ
ing  the  journey,  naturally  are  laid  in  a  variety  of  places  ;
the  most  important  are  the  encampment  by  the  Tigris,
and  the  stay  at  Raguel's  house,  so  important  that  the
original  object  of  the  journey,  the  recovery  of  the  money
entrusted  to  Gabael  at  Rages,  becomes  a  mere  episode,
appended  to  the  scene  in  Ecbatana.  We  know  before
hand  the  real  providential  purpose  of  the  journey,  and
thus  are  not  surprised  at  the  turn  it  takes.  But  that  in
the  end  the  angel,  not  Tobias,  should  fetch  the  money,
seems  a  small  but  charming  variation  :  '  things  fall  out
quite  differently  from  what  we  imagine'  (M.  Plath).

Before  going  to  sleep  one  night  young  Tobias  bathes
in  the  Tigris.  A  fish  leaps  out  upon  him  and  snaps  at
his  foot.  A  and  B  have  aggravated  the  natural  situation,
in  order  to  make  the  story  as  marvellous  as  possible.
With  them  the  fish  threatens  to  swallow  the  youth.
And  yet,  at  the  angel's  bidding,  he  is  forthwith  able  to
seize  hold  of  it  and  to  cast  it  on  the  bank  so  that  there
is  no  real  danger.  At  Raphael's  request  he  takes  with
him  the  heart,  the  liver,  and  the  gall  of  the  fish.  The
pair  continue  their  journey  and  draw  near  to  Media,
the  true  goal  predetermined  by  God.

The  decisive  stay  at  the  house  of  Raguel  is  led  up  to
by  two  preparatory  scenes — conversations  between  the
angel  and  Tobias  in  the  course  of  their  journey — and  is
followed  by  two  others  relating  to  the  recovery  of  the
money  from  Gabael,  and  the  arrival  of  the  fatter  at
Ecbatana.  The  two  dialogues,  on  the  borders  of
Media,  before  Ecbatana  is  reached,  are  intended  to
shorten  the  long  story  of  the  journey  and  to  relieve  the
reader.  Again  the  artist  deprives  us  of  all  the  pleasure
of  suspense  by  elaborately  describing  beforehand  every
thing  that  is  going  to  happen.

Tobias  himself  gives  occasion  for  this  before  Media  is
entered  (so  « ;  A  and  B  less  effectively  have  substituted
Kcbatana)  by  his  question  as  to  the  object  in  carrying  with
them  the  heart,  gall,  and  liver  of  the  fish  they  had  killed  on  the
evening  _of  their  first  day's  journey.  When  we  learn  that  an
:vil  spirit  can  be  driven  away  by  the  fumes  of  this  liver  and
heart,  we  at  once  perceive  exactly  how  it  is  that  Sara  is  to  be

5122


TOBIT

delivered.  All  that  remains  in  doubt  is  as  to  whether  Tobias
will  make  up  his  mind  to  marry  her,  and  whether  Raguel  is
going  to  give  him  his  daughter  in  marriage.  That  the  son,
however,  should  not  think  at  once  of  his  blind  father  when  he
hears  that  with  the  gall  the  malady  Tobit  is  suffering  from  can
be  cured,  astonishes  us,  especially  when  we  see  later  how
mindful  Tobias  is  of  his  father  :  '  My  father  counts  the  days  ! '
are  the  words  with  which  he  sends  the  angel  to  Gabael.  Nor
does  he  linger  with  his  parents-in-law  an  hour  beyond  the  exact
time  he  had  promised.  Clearly  the  narrator  took  no  special
interest  in  the  characterisation  of  his  various  personages  ;  his
main  interest  is  in  exhibiting  and  proving  the  wise  governance  of
God:  'God  rules  supreme  and  rules  all  things  well"  is  his
central  theme.

The  way  having  been  prepared  by  an  explanation  of
the  healing  virtues  of  the  various  parts  of  the  fish,  the
angel  proceeds  to  disclose  his  plans.  They  are  now
before  the  gates  of  Ecbatana  (A  and  B  again  read,
wrongly,  Rages).  Their  next  lodging-place  is  to  be
Raguel's  house.  He  has  but  one  child,  a  daughter,
who  is  fair  and  wise.  Azaria  will  speak  to  her  father
that  she  may  be  given  in  marriage  to  Tobias.  The
wedding  will  be  held  after  the  return  from  Rages.
('  Afterwards  things  turn  out  differently  from  what  had
been  thought.')

To  Tobias,  more  than  to  any  other,  does  the  right  of  inheritance
belong.  This  proposition,  which  doubtless  originally  simply
meant  that  Tobias,  the  son  of  a  poor  but  pious  father,  was  the
husband  chosen  for  the  girl  by  the  wise  counsel  of  God  ('  she  is
appointed  unto  thee  from  the  beginning,'  (5  is)  was  only  at  a  later
date  thought  out  in  the  manner  of  commentary  to  the  effect
that  the  two  were  nearly  related,  and  their  marriage  as  near
relations  would  be  well-pleasing  to  God  and  to  the  Jewish
nation.

Had  Tobias  known  nothing  of  Sara's  misfortune,  he
would  now  have  consented  on  the  spot.  As  it  is,  he
pleads  that,  being  the  only  son  of  his  parents,  he  dare
not  lightly  risk  his  life.  In  itself  considered  the  plan
which  the  angel  unfolds  is  not  to  be  rejected.

He  is  already  strongly  prepossessed  in  favour  of  it.  The
young  man's  love  for  his  parents  is  most  touching.  He  thinks
only  of  their  sorrow,  and  does  not  fear  the  evil  spirit  except
on  their  account.  That  Sara's  story  should  be  known  even  in
Nineveh,  presupposes  a  lively  intercourse  between  the  two
places.  And  such  there  may  have  been,  not  only  in  the
narrator's  own  time  but  also  in  former  days ;  we  must  not  fall
into  the  error  of  underestimating  the  trade  of  antiquity.

To  repel  his  scruples,  the  angel  reminds  the  youth  of
his  father's  injunctions.  Unquestionably  his  reference
at  present  is  to  the  one  injunction  which  bade  him
marry  a  woman  of  his  own  kindred.  Originally,
perhaps,  no  such  reminiscence  may  have  stood  in  this
place.

Or  possibly,  as  is  also  supported  by  tradition,  the  reference
may  have  been  simply  to  the  father's  injunctions  generally.  In
that  case  we  shall  perhaps  have  to  think  of  some  such  precepts
as  those  in  x  '•  '  They  who  practise  sincerity,  shall  be  blessed  in
their  works  ;  and  to  all  that  work  righteousness,  God  shall  give
good  counsel.'  In  this  case  the  angel  will  have  seen  an  act  of
righteousness  in  the  deliverance  of  Sara.  To  the  present  writer
this  explanation  seems  the  best.

The  argument  brought  forward  by  the  angel  consti
tutes  the  main  point  to  which  the  whole  dialogue  leads
up  ;  the  means  exist,  by  which  the  evil  spirit  can  be
driven  away.

Once  more  we  get  a  description  of  the  virtue  that  lies  in  the
heart  and  liver  of  the  fish.  The  narrator  tries  to  make  it
interesting  by  giving  Tobias  at  the  same  time  precise  directions
as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  remedy  is  to  be  applied.  Tobias
now  changes  his  mind  ;  he  is  in  love  with  Sara,  or,  we  should
say,  he  finds  the  proposed  marriage  with  the  fair  and  wise
daughter  of  the  rich  man  most  acceptable.  Such  sentiments  to
the  ancient  conception  furnish  foundation  enough  for  a  happy
union.

The  second  scene  before  the  stay  at  Ecbatana  represents
a  dialogue  of  persuasion,  the  first  one  of  instruction.
Judged  from  our  oesthetic  standpoint  the  whole  of  the
preliminary  scene  ought  to  have  been  given  in  the  form
of  a  single  dialogue  of  persuasion.  The  narrator's
tendency  is  to  break  up  the  action  into  as  many  scenes
as  possible.  In  the  discussion  as  to  the  derivation  of
the  material,  we  shall  have  to  keep  this  consideration
in  mind  (§  16).

There  is  no  agreement  in  the  rendering  of  the  principal
scene,  that  at  Ecbatana.  All  that  can  be  clearly  seen

5I23


TOBIT

from  the  varying  versions  of  it  is  the  emphasis  that  is
everywhere  laid  on  Kaguel's  hospitality.  In  the  end
the  betrothal  comes  about  as  planned  by  the  angel.

Here  again,  according  to  A  and  B,  which  may  reproduce  the
oldest  reading,  Azaria  takes  the  most  important  part,  inasmuch
as  it  is  he  who  communicates  to  Raguel  the  wish  of  young
Tobias.  In  N,  where,  exceptionally,  in  these  scenes  the  relation
ship  between  Sara  and  Tobias  is  particularly  dwelt  upon,
Raguel  overhears  the  young  man  talking  to  the  angel  about  the
marriage,  and  is  at  once  captivated  by  the  idea.

A  marriage  contract  is  drawn  up  in  writing.  There
upon  Edna  prepares  the  bridal  chamber  for  her
daughter.  Again  tears  are  shed  ;  the  intention  is  to
move  the  heart  of  the  reader ;  there  is  something
pathetic  about  the  lot  of  the  maid  who  has  already
buried  seven  spouses.  The  effect  of  the  scene,  however,
has  been  destroyed  from  the  outset  as  we  already  know
of  the  impending  happy  issue.  In  the  bridal  chamber
Tobias,  at  last,  makes  use  of  the  angel's  prescription.
The  fumes  put  the  demon  to  flight.  That  he  should
be  fettered  by  the  angel  in  Upper  Egypt  is  something
we  were  not  prepared  for.  From  all  we  have  been
told  so  far,  we  should  have  expected  the  mere  fumiga
tion  to  suffice  for  complete  deliverance  from  the  evil
spirit.  The  prayer  the  young  man  now  offers  is  specially
Jewish.  In  arrangement  it  resembles  those  previously
recorded.

Meanwhile  Raguel  is  digging  a  grave  for  his  daughter's
betrothed.  The  bridal  is  to  be  in  secret  ;  the  unhappy
man  dreads  his  neighbours'  evil  tongues.  This  pro
ceeding  shows  that  Sara's  latest  betrothal  does  not  differ
in  any  way  from  those  which  preceded  it.  No  relation
ship,  therefore,  between  the  couple  is  presupposed.
Eor  the  rest,  we  are  at  a  loss  to  understand  the  feelings
of  the  actors  now  before  us  who  with  cold  hearts  dig
graves  out  of  fear  of  their  neighbours,  who  send  a
maidservant  quickly  into  the  bridal  chamber  to  see
whether  the  grave  shall  be  needed  ;  nor  yet  the  feelings
of  the  readers  who  felt  edified  by  the  prayer  of  thanks
giving  offered  immediately  afterwards  by  the  digger  of
the  grave.  Instead  of  a  funeral  there  is  now  a  wedding.
In  the  end  it  is  the  angel  who  has  to  collect  the  money
for  the  happy  bridegroom.  Gabael  himself  comes  to
Ecbatana  to  the  wedding.  It  is  probable  that  N  has
here  the  more  original  text  ;  in  A  and  B  the  phraseology
is  so  curt  as  to  be  almost  unintelligible.

Gradually  the  story  draws  to  an  end.  Two  scenes
prepare  for  the  close.  Again  the  narrator  keeps  his
readers  waiting.  He  takes  us  first  to  Nineveh.  The
old  people  are  awaiting  their  son's  return  in  vain.
Whilst  Tobit  is  patiently  resigned,  the  mother  in  her
anguish  spends  her  nights  in  weeping  and  her  days  in
watching  the  road  along  which  her  son  had  passed.
At  Ecbatana,  on  the  other  hand,  the  son  amid  all  his
happiness  has  not  forgotten  his  lonely  parents.  Vainly
does  the  hospitable  Raguel  press  him  to  tarry.  Amid
the  blessings  of  his  new  relations  Tobias  takes  his
departure  along  with  his  wife  and  the  angel.  After  he
has  given  his  blessing,  the  father  reminds  his  daughter
of  her  duty  to  her  parents-in-law.  The  mother,  on  the
other  hand,  urges  her  son-in-law  to  be  kind  to  his  wife.

Shortly  before  Nineveh  is  reached  the  angel  once
more  takes  the  part  of  a  faithful  adviser  ;  again,  he
gives  instructions  to  Tobias  how  to  heal  his  blind  father.
In  a  touching  way  the  narrator  brings  before  our  eyes
the  helplessness  of  the  blind  old  man  before  he  is  healed.
The  cure  accomplished,  Tobit  praises  God,  and  to  the
great  astonishment  of  the  neighbours,  himself  goes  out
to  bring  his  daughter-in-law  home.  A  seven  days'
wedding  follows.  At  this  point,  now  that  the  angel
has  brought  Tobias  safely  back,  rescued  his  wife,  re
covered  his  money,  and  healed  his  father,  his  task  seems
done,  and  we  expect  him  to  take  his  leave.  But  first
he  must  carry  out  his  role  as  travelling  companion  to
the  end.  As  trusty  guide  he  must  receive  his  wages.
Tobias  proposes  to  share  equally  with  him  the  wealth
he  has  acquired.  Now  at  last  the  angel  reveals  to  them

5I24


TOBIT


TOBIT


his  true  nature.  In  a  long  discourse  which,  as  M.
Plath  has  observed,  recalls  the  style  of  the  psalms  and  of
Sirach,  he  makes  himself  known  after  declaring  that  he
had  been  a  witness  to  the  burial  of  the  dead.  They
are  bidden  praise  God  and  commit  everything  to  writ
ing.  '  After  the  angel's  command  to  write  in  a  book
all  the  things  that  have  happened,  what  we  expect  to
read  is  :  And  they  wrote  everything  down,  and  here  is
the  book'  (M.  Plath).

(a)  On  a  survey  of  the  book  and  its  history,  it  be-
_. , comes  clear  in  the  first  place  that  it  must

' , y  have  greatly  interested  the  reading  world.
ot  story: This  js  showil  hy  the  varying  MSS.

, , Each  individual possessor, copyist, and

gre< e translator has by the introduction of

° ' certain  turns  and  small  alterations  which

commended  themselves  to  him,  given  expression  to  his

sympathy  with  the  lot  of  those  pious  people  who  are  the

subjects  of  our  story.

(&)  Next  we  are  carried  back  to  a  time  in  which  this
material  was  read  with  peculiar  eagerness  ;  the  time,
namely,  about  150  A.  D.  The  failure  of  the  Jewish
rebellion  presented  a  temptation  to  abandon  Jewish
peculiarities  and  the  ancient  manner  of  life  altogether.
It  was  at  this  time  that  the  pious  exhortations  of  Tobit
were  amplified,  and  the  duty  of  cohesiveness  was  insisted
upon  since  pride  towards  one's  own  brethren  brings  only
confusion.  Quite  recently  these  days  of  woe  had  been
made  to  throw  their  dark  shadows  on  the  very  pages  of
the  book.  Tobit  the  faithful  Jew  of  the  unhappy
Assyrian  days,  the  pious  sufferer  in  evil  times,  was  the
man  to  speak  an  earnest  word  to  those  of  the  Jews  who
had  escaped  the  oppression  of  the  revolt.  At  the  same
time  he  could  also  give  them  a  word  of  comfort,  by
telling  them  about  the  Jerusalem  of  the  final  future.  In
such  manner  was  the  original  form  of  the  book  modified
so  as  to  adapt  it  to  the  needs  of  the  time.

(c  )  The  original  form  must  at  one  time  have  had  a
separate  existence  —  perhaps  in  a  collection  of  legends,
since  it  represents  a  complete  story,  artfully  constructed.

IV. UI.TI.MATI-:  SOURCES

The  form  of  a  book  depends  on  three  ractors  : the
character  of  the  material,  the  personality  of  him  who
gives  it shape,  and  the  wants  of  him

wh°  reads' There  must  have  been  a
, ,  public  to  welcome  it  if  we  find  here  a

melting  story,  with  characters  doomed
to  suffer  and  to  bear,  to  whom  angels  from  heaven  are
familiar  beings,  whose  lives  are  spent  in  prayer  and
pious  contemplations.  The  readers  rejoice  over  those
who  are  compassionate,  but  only  heaven  can  reward
them.  The  story  is  not  written  for  the  rich  but  for  the
poor.  These  do  not  undertake  long  journeys  ;  but  they
like  to  hear  about  them.  They  know  well  what  anxiety
a  son's  journey  can  cause  to  a  father  and  mother.
To  be  sure,  everyone  has  heard  of  people  who  have
travelled  ;  these  will  be  welcome  as  companions  should
necessity  for  travelling  arise.  Such  things  as  these  are
not  the  staple  in  stories  that  circulate  among  traders  and
merchants.  In  those  stay-at-home  circles  there  is  belief
in  magical  medicaments  such  as  are  supposed  to  be
found  in  foreign  lands.  In  the  great  rivers  of  distant
lands  swim  fish  whose  heart  and  liver  can  exorcise
evil  spirits,  whose  gall  can  heal  blindness  (cp  §  6).
Such  readers  are  at  the  same  time  rigorously  exacting.
Each  marringe  has  to  be  preceded  by  a  written  con
tract  ;  money  is  not  handed  over  without  a  document.
A  reading  public  of  this  sort  could  have  been  found  in
Palestine,  but  in  Egypt,  as  also  in  Babylonia,  the  Jews
were  doubtless,  for  the  most  part,  engaged  in  trade.
Moreover,  the  knowledge  of  the  regions  of  Mesopotamia
is  by  no  means  exact,  and  we  read  that  the  evil  spirit  is
chained  in  Upper  Egypt.  Only  a  writer  living  sufficiently
far  off  could  think  of  that  country  as  the  battlefield  for

5*25


contending  spirits.  Yet  the  men  address  their  wives  as
•sister,'  in  the  Egyptian  manner.  Thus  the  flourishing
period  of  Palestinian  history  under  the  rule  of  the
Ptolemies  about  300  B.C.,  and  the  influence  they
wielded,  must  have  previously  made  itself  felt.  The
year  200  B.  c. ,  therefore,  may  be  suggested  as  the
approximate  date  of  the  original  form  of  our  book.

In  the  analysis  given  above  (§13)  allusion  has  already
been  made  to  the  tendencies  shown  by  the  individual
who  gave  its  final  shape  to  the  material  before  him.
He  is  fond  of  breaking  up  the  story  into  short  separate
scenes,  of  sharp  contrasts,  of  elaborating  particular
scenes.  Let  us  now  try,  on  the  basis  of  these  observa
tions,  to  ascertain  what  was  the  nature  of  his  work  upon
the  material  handed  down  to  him,  and  so  to  obtain
approximately  some  idea  of  the  story  as  it  was  when  he
found  it.

First  of  all  then,  our  attention  is  claimed  by  the
artistic  composition  of  the  opening  of  the  story.  A

16  His  work  P°Pular  legend  does  not  deal  in  so
complicated  a  manner  with  two  separate
scenes  of  action.  The  artful  parallel  composition  of  the
scenes  in  Nineveh  and  in  Ecbatana  is  the  narrator's  own
work.  The  elaborate  parting  scenes  in  which  we  see
the  old  man  giving  wise  advice,  the  young  man  looking
out  for  a  travelling  companion,  the  anxious  father,  the
weeping  mother,  cannot  be  imagined  otherwise  than  as
a  narrative  definitely  fixed  in  writing  ;  it  is  impossible
to  regard  it  as  a  tale  popularly  handed  down  by  word
of  mouth.  The  dialogues  between  the  two  travellers
are  also  highly  artificial  compositions.  The  waiting
parents  as  contrasted  with  Raguel  hospitably  pressing
his  guests  to  tarry,  seem  also  to  have  been  introduced
by  the  narrator.  There  remain,  accordingly,  only  the
following  elements  (which  perhaps,  however,  might  be
still  further  reduced)  to  be  noted  as  appertaining  to  the
material  upon  which  the  narrator  has  operated,  (i)
The  burial  of  a  dead  body,  and  the  blinding  of  a  head
of  a  family;  (2)  impoverishment,  so  that  the  blind  man's
wife  has  to  work  for  their  living;  (3)  a  son,  accom
panied  by  a  stranger,  makes  a  journey  to  recover  money;
(4)  on  the  way  they  have  an  adventure  with  important
consequences  ;  (5)  a  marriage  with  a  rich  heiress,  whose
lot  has  been  made  intolerable  by  the  jealousy  of  an  evil
spirit  who  will  not  suffer  her  husbands  to  live  ;  (6)  the
healing  of  the  blind  father  ;  (7)  the  stranger  declines  to
accept  the  acknowledgement  offered  to  him  (half  of  the
entire  estate)  in  order  at  last  to  disclose  himself  to  be  an
angel  who  has  been  a  witness  of  the  burial  of  the  dead.
Since  the  appearance  of  Simrock's  work  Der  gute
Gerhard  und  die  dankbaren  Todten  (Bonn,  1856)
_  •  •  zealous  efforts  have  continuously  been

„' ,. ,  made  to  trace  back  the  raw  material  of

folk-lore. ., r> , f  ^  ,  •

the Book of Tobit to a widely-spread

story  of  the  gratitude  of  a  departed  spirit,  of  which
several  versions  are  collected  by  Simrock.  A  similar
Armenian  story  has  also  been  unearthed  (originally
published  by  A.  v.  Haxthausen  in  his  Transcaucasia,
Leipsic,  1333^,  and  recently  again  by  M.  Plath).  In
dealing  with  the  question  whether  the  story  of  Tobit
goes  back  to  a  tale  of  this  sort,  we  have  to  bear  in  mind
that  all  the  kindred  stories  hitherto  brought  forward,
whether  from  Germany,  Holland,  France,  Italy,  Den
mark,  or  Armenia,  have  in  every  case  passed  through  a
long  development.  They  have  been  current  in  many
lands,  and  been  told  in  many  tongues.

The  Armenian  tale  knows  nothing  of  the  father  of  the

hero. The  hero  pays  the  dead  man's  debts  with  a  view

.  . to  his  burial  and  finally  is  himself  re-

1 Armenian  duced  to  poverty. Here'the  impoverish-
lorm  of  tale.  •  ,,  ,  r

ment  is  not  so  well  accounted  for  as  in

the  Book  of  Tobit.  Just  as  in  our  tale  the  Armenian  hero
also  wins  a  rich  but  unfortunate  heiress  in  marriage.
He  is  aided  in  this  by  a  man  who  afterwards  makes
himself  known  as  the  spirit  of  the  dead  man  whom  he
had  buried.  To  him,  too,  half  of  the  estate  is  assigned;

5126


TOBIT

but,  full  of  gratitude,  he  declines  to  accept  the  gift.
Here,  plainly,  the  tale  is  essentially  simpler.  There  is
no  journey.  This  last  feature  may  have  been  intro
duced  by  preference  in  places  where  people  liked  to  hear
about  such  journeys  into  foreign  countries.  Elsewhere
tills  feature  of  the  story  came  to  be  forgotten.  In  the
Armenian  tale  the  inner  connection  of  the  parts  is  not
so  close  ;  oral  tradition  is  not  so  strict  about  details  as
one  who  writes  down  his  stories.  The  spirit  fights  with
his  sword  against  a  serpent  that  on  the  wedding-night
conies  out  of  the  bride's  mouth  and  seeks  to  kill  the
bridegroom.  The  serpent,  we  may  safely  take  it,  re
presents  an  evil  being.  A  reminiscence  of  a  similar
struggle  is  found  also  in  the  Book  of  Tobit  ;  Raphael
binds  the  evil  spirit.  We  are  therefore  led  to  the  con
clusion  that  two  variations  can  be  shown  ;  in  the  one  the
hero  wins  the  bride  by  conflict  with  an  evil  spirit,  in  the
other  it  is  by  a  magical  charm.  The  interest  in  magical
effects  was  particularly  strong  among  the  Babylonian
Jews.1  Possibly  the  tale  may  have  acquired  this  feature
in  the  course  of  its  journey  westwards  from  the  regions
of  the  Euphrates.  A  third  variation,  of  a  specially
Jewish  character,  tells  of  the  hero's  effective  prayer  on
the  night  after  his  wedding.  This  variation,  the  most
important  from  the  Jewish  point  of  view,  has  not  been
able  to  supplant  the  other  two  in  the  Book  of  Tobit.
In  the  Armenian  tale  the  blind  father  is  forgotten.
Popular  tradition  has  thought  only  of  the  hero,  whilst
in  the  Hook  of  Tobit  the  narrator  who,  we  might  almost
say,  is  constantly  occupied  with  the  endeavour  to  find  a
motive  for  each  separate  incident  in  the  narrative,  has
endeavoured  also  to  account  for  the  father's  loss  of
sight  ;  possibly  it  was  he  who  gave  to  the  story  the  turn
by  which  the  father  who  buries  the  dead  man  is  made  to
become  blind.  In  that  case  we  must  suppose  him  to
have  attributed  the  meritorious  work  of  burial  to  the
old  man.  The  son  it  is,  indeed,  who  obtains  the
reward,  but  the  old  man  recovers  his  sight,  and,  accord
ing  to  a  truly  Jewish  notion,  is  rewarded  in  his  son.
An  important  element  may  have  been  lost  in  transit — the
payment  of  the  dead  man's  debts.  But  M.  Plath  is
right  in  pointing  out  that  the  Jews,  who  were  painfully
punctilious  about  such  things,  may  have  found  them
selves  unable  to  take  any  special  interest  in  this  feature
of  the  story.  Thus  the  Jewish  narrator  may  willingly
have  dropped  the  point,  seeking  instead  to  explain  the
hero's  impoverishment  in  another  way — namely,  as
caused  by  his  loss  of  sight.

The  stories  collected  by  Simrock  have  one  more
feature  in  common  :  the  hero  runs  the  risk  of  losing  his
newly-won  wife.  She  is  restored  to  him
by  the  aid  of  the  spirit.  What  we  have
here  is  simply  a  favourite  method  of
amplifying  stories  by  repetition  of  the
same  motive.  People  listened  with  such  interest  to  the
story  of  the  manner  in  which  a  wife  was  won,  that  they
were  eager  to  hear  it  again  and  again.  Hence  the
hero  has  to  be  in  danger  of  nearly  losing  his  wife  ;  by
some  one — often  a  previous  suitor,  or  several  of  them
(here  we  find  the  circumstance  still  preserved  that  the
maid  had  many  suitors) — the  attempt  is  made  to  kill
the  hero,  drown,  wound,  burn  him.  Frequently  it  is
only  at  the  crisis  of  these  perils  that  the  grateful  deceased
is  brought  into  action,  and  helps  in  restoring  the  lost
wife  to  the  hero  by  whom  she  has  previously  been  won
single-handed.  To  the  first  successful  effort  to  win  the
maid  there  was  added  another,  and  it  was  sought  to  make
the  repetition  attractive  by  introducing  variations.  In
doing  so,  no  hesitation  was  felt  in  omitting  the  spirit's
share  in  the  exploit  if  this  was  thought  desirable.  The
influence  of  Christianity  also  occasionally  makes  itself
felt.

In  one  form  of  the  story  the  rebuilding  of  a  ruined  church  of
St.  Nicholas  takes  the  place  of  pious  burial  of  the  dead. The

1  See  J iitiisch-Babylonlsche  Zaubertcxte,  ed.  Stiibe  (Halle>
1895).

5127


19.  Feature

common

to  all.


TOBIT

saint  afterwards  plays  the  part  usually  assigned  to  the  helpful
spirit.

In  many  forms  of  these  stories  the  aged  father  of  the
hero  is  retained,  only  he  does  not  come  so  much  to  the
front  as  in  the  Book  of  Tobit.  It  is  he  who  sends  the
son  forth  on  a  journey.

Also  the  trait  which  represents  the  old  man  as  blind
and  recovering  his  sight  by  the  skill  of  the  departed
spirit,  occurs  in  one  of  the  stories.  We  may  con
jecture  this  point  to  have  been  a  characteristic  one
in  the  old  story.  As  the  adventures  of  the  son  were
added,  the  father  easily  fell  more  and  more  into  the
background  ;  the  same  interest  was  no  longer  felt  in  his
fortunes,  he  became  a  secondary  character,  until  he
finally  disappeared  altogether  in  many  variants  of  the
tale.  In  Tobit  the  development  has  tended  in  precisely
the  opposite  direction.  The  wife  reduced  to  toiling  for
strangers  is  also  a  favourite  figure  in  these  stories  ;  only
it  is  the  wife  of  the  hero,  often  represented  as  reduced
to  poverty  in  winning  her.

Finally,  the  spirit  of  the  departed  does  not  always
appear  in  human  shape  ;  some  of  the  stories  introduce
him  as  a  mere  ghost.  In  one  of  them  '  a  vast  figure '
supports  the  hero,  in  another  a  tiny,  wrinkled  mannikin,
in  a  third  a  bird,  in  a  fourth  a  raven,  in  a  fifth  a  swan,
in  a  sixth  a  talking  wolf.  In  the  Book  of  Tobit  the
rescuer  appears  in  human  shape  ;  there  are  traces,
however,  which  might  seem  to  indicate  that  an  animal-
form  appeared  in  one  of  the  variations.

A  dog  follows  the  youth  on  his  journey  to  and  fro — in  a
meaningless  way,  one  might  almost  say.  Surely  it  would  be
exaggeration  at  least  to  call  this,  as  M.  Plath  does,  'a  charming
touch  of  naive  miniature-painting.'  We  should  at  least  expect-
on  the  homeward  journey,  that  the  dog  would  go  before  and
make  known  the  travellers'  return.  It  was  only  in  a  late  redac
tion  that  this  natural  expectation  was  gratified  (so  Syr.  and
Jer.).  Now,  just  as  in  the  account  of  the  maiden's  rescue  from
the  evil  spirit  traces  are  to  be  found  of  an  older  tradition,  it  is
possible  that  here  also  we  have  a  trace  of  the  same  sort.  The
dog  which  accompanies  the  hero  when  he  starts  may  have  been  in
one  of  the  variations  of  the  tale  the  spirit  of  the  dead  man.  In
another,  which  has  a  more  historical  air,  there  survives  only
a  feeble  recollection  of  this  feature,  to  which  afterwards  increased
importance  came  once  more  to  be  attached.

If  we  choose  to  lay  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  demon
bears  the  name  of  Asmodeus,  which  comes  from  the
Persian  Aeshma  daeva,  wemight  find  further  confirmation
of  the  conjecture  just  offered  when  it  is  reflected  that  with
the  Persians  a  certain  power  over  evil  spirits  was  assigned
to  the  dog.  Thus  we  get  four  variations  in  the  story  of
the  winning  of  the  maiden,  somewhat  as  follows  : —

(a)  The  myth  of  the  fight  of  a  radiant  heavenly  l)eing
with  a  demon  (cp  on  Persian  soil  the  Sraosha's  combat
against  Aeshma  daeva)  ;  (b)  the  story  of  a  dog  as  a
faithful  protector  and  travelling-companion  (cp  the  wolf
in  Simrock);  (c)  the  story  of  the  magic  remedy  against
the  impure  spirit ;  (</)  the  edifying  tale  of  the  pious  prayer
on  the  wedding-night.  Cp  ZoROASTRiANlSM,  §  22.

We  shall  therefore  have  to  attribute  to  the  Tobit
legend  a  foreign  origin.  Nor  shall  we  lie  going  too  far
_  .  if  we  suppose  that  abroad  numerous
oreign  varjatjons  were  a]ready  afloat.  In  the
°  '  story  as  it  spreads  by  word  of  mouth,  the
separate  features  get  displaced  ;  many  are  forgotten,
new  things  are  added.  One  idea,  however,  is  firmly
held  :  the  idea,  namely,  that  to  have  pity  on  the  un-
buried  dead  is  a  meritorious  work  ;  it  is  sure  of  its
reward  ;  the  buried  one  is  grateful.  The  history  of  the
Book  of  Tobit  shows  us  how  even  in  remote  times  the
nations  learned  from  each  other,  and  how  they  worked
up  the  material  they  had  thus  acquired,  each  in  its  own
way.  The  Jewish  nation  also,  which  we  are  erroneously
in  the  habit  of  regarding  as  so  exclusive,  takes  up  a
foreign  legend,  goes  on  repeating  it  until  it  has  got  it
into  fixed  oral  form,  in  order  next  to  pass  it  on  to  some
story-writer  who  is  able  to  shape  it  into  an  edifying
household  tale,  capable,  in  subsequent  adaptations
suited  to  the  requirements  of  each  successive  time,  of
ministering  comfort  to  many  succeeding  generations.

5128


TOCHEN

The  most  important  modern  commentaries  are  those  of  Ilgen,
Die  Geschickte  Toby's  nack  drey  verschiedenen  Originalen,  dent
Griechischen,  dent  I.ateinischen  des  Hier-
21.  Literature,  onyiims  und  einem  Syrischen,  etc.,  1800;
Fritzsche  in  KGH ',  1853  ;  Wace  in  Speaker  s
Comnt.,  1888;  and  Zockler  in  KGH,  1891.  On  the  Ahikar
story  see  the  literature  cited  under  ACHIACHAKUS,  especially
The  Story  of  Ahikar  from  the  Syriac,  Arabic,  Armenian,
Ethiopia,  Greek,  and  Slavonic  Persians,  by  F.  C.  Conybeare,
J.  Rendel  Harris,  and  Agnes  Smith  -Lewis.  Nestle,  review  of
The  Story  of  Ahikar,  Ex  p.  T  10  [1899]  276/1,  and  '  Zum  Buche


March  1900,  pp.  257-260.

TOCHEN  (jD'n  ;  9oKK<\  [B],  -XX&N  [A],  eN6eKeM
[  =  'n  J*l??]and  iex9e/V\,  perhaps  a  doublet,  [L]),  a  village
in  Judah  assigned  to  SIMEON  (§  10),  i  Ch.  432.  It  corre
sponds  to  the  Ether  of  ||  Josh.  19  7,  which  is  probably  a
corruption  of  ATHACH  (q.  i'.}.

In  Josh.  (Ac.)  (BH  inserts  Qa.\x.a.  (var.  in  cursives  Oaaic,  Oa.a\)  —
i.e.,  Tochen,  —  before  ledep  —  t'.e.,  Ether.  Bennett  (SBOT,
'Josh.,'  Heb.)  follows  <515,  but  the  insertion  must  be  due  to  a
later  correction,  pn  is  perhaps  a  corruption  of  ^ny-  See
ATHACH.

TOGARMAH  (nCTtiH  Gen.  10  3  [P],  elsewhere
nonjin:  ffopya^a  [HQZJsilEL],  Sepya^ia  [B  in  Ezek.  38  6  ;  but


Oaipya/na  in  27  14  ;  Q  in  Ezek.  and  A  everywhere  except  i  Ch.
16  9oppajj.]  ;  Thogormah  in  Gen.,  elsewhere  Thogonna,  Pesh.
tugarina).

Togarmah  appears  in  Gen.  10s  i  Ch.  16  as  third  son
of  Gomer,  son  of  Japheth  ;  also  (as  Beth-Togarmah)  in
Ezek.  27  14  as  a  people  trading  with  Tyre  in  horses  and
mules,  and  in  386  as  representing  the  far  north,  and
forming  part,  with  Gomer,  of  the  army  of  Gog.  Josephus
thought  of  the  Phrygians,  who  were  famous  for  their
horses  (Horn.  //.  8185);  the  Armenians,  however,  in
later  times  claimed  Haik  the  son  of  Thorgom  for  their
ancestor.  The  name  has  been  identified  by  Delitzsch
and  Hal^vy  independently  with  Tel-garimmu,  a  city
(mentioned  by  Sargon  and  Sennacherib)  situated  on
the  border  of  Tabali  (see  TUBAL).  That  I  (^  had  be
come  o  in  the  document  from  which  P  drew,  surprises
Schrader  (A'ATW  85),  nor  can  we  blame  him.  The
truth  probably  is  that  here,  as  elsewhere  in  Gen.  10,
corruption  and  reconstruction  are  jointly  the  causes  of
the  present  form  of  the  Table  of  Nations.  '  Gomer  '  is
one  of  the  current  corruptions  of  '  Jerahmeel  '  ;  Ashkenaz
is  a  combination  of  Asshur  and  Kenaz  ;  Riphath  is  a
corruption  of  Zarephath  (the  southern  Zarephath),  and
Togarmah  represents  either  Gomer  simply  or  Beth-gomer
{  =  Beth  -jerahmeel).  This  throws  light  on  Ezek.  27  14
386.  See  Crit.  Bib.

See  Del.  Par.  246  ;  Calwer  Bib.-Lex.  906  ;  Hal.  R  EJ  13  13  ;
Lag.  Armenisclie  Studien,  §  865.  T.  K.  C.

TOHU  (-inPl),  b.  Zuph,  a  name  in  the  genealogy  of
Samuel  (i  S.  1  1,  6oK6  [B],  0OOY  tA],  6<jOe  [I-]),  cor
responding  to  NAUATII  (nru  ;  K<MNA9  [B],  K.N<\6[A],
N<\<\9  [L]  ;  nahdth  [Pesh.])  in  i  Ch.  626  [u],  and  to
TOAH  (niPI;  eeie  =  rVn  [B],  eooye  [A],  NAA6  [L];
lahu  [Pesh.];  Thohu  [Vg.  ]  as  in  Sam.)  in  v.  34  [19].
The  second  of  these  forms  (nm)  may  have  arisen  out  of  nnn
by  a  scribe's  error.  But  this  is  not  certain,  for  Xahath,
in  Gen.  8613,  is  the  son  of  Re'  uel  =  Jerahmeel  (Che.).
Most  (e.g.  ,  Klost.  ,  Dr.  ,  Bu.  ,  Ki.  )  adopt  the  form  Tohu  ;
but,  on  the  assumption  that  Zuph  is  really  an  Ephraimite
place-name,  some  prefer  jnn  or  nnn  (cp  We.  Prol.M
220  ;  Marq.  Fund.  12,  and  see  TAHATH,  EPHRAIM,

§12).

[The  subject,  though  small,  is  intricate,  and  the  correct  reading
of  the  text  can  only  be  decided  as  a  part  of  a  larger  inquiry,
which  includes  the  question  whether  Samuel  was  not  really  of
a  Jerahmeelite  family,  belonging  perhaps  to  Benjamite  territory
in  the  Negeb.  Textual  criticism,  too,  has  to  be  practised  com
prehensively.  Cp  RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM.  —  T.  K.  c.]

TOI  Cm  eoyoy  or  eooy  [B],  e&ei  [AL],  2  S.89/  ),
or  TOU  (WH  660*.  [BX],  900Y  [A],  6oA<\  [L]  ;  Pul,
king  of  the  men  of  Antioch  [Pesh.],  i  Ch.  18g/.  ),  king  of
Hamath,  who  sent  his  son  Joram  (or,  as  Ch.  ,  HADORAM)

5129


TOLA

to  'salute'  David  (i.e.  ,  to  recognise  his  suzerainty)  and
to  offer  presents  of  silver,  gold,  and  bronze,  after  David's
victory  over  Hadad-ezer.  If  the  text  is  correct,  Toi's
Hamath  cannot  be  the  great  Syrian  city  of  Hamath,
whose  king  was  too  powerful  to  mind  David,  and  indeed
was  not  one  of  David's  neighbours,  but  a  second  Hamath,
on  the  W.  of  Zobah,  which  formed  a  state  on  the  same
minute  scale  as  Maacah  (  =  Geshur).  So  Winckler  (GI
2209  f.  ).  More  probably,  however,  both  here  and
wherever  a  Hamath  is  spoken  of  as  on  the  border  of
Israel,  ron  (MT  Hamath)  should  be  royD  (Maacath).

It  is,  to  say  the  least,  uncertain  which  of  the  two  Maacahs  is
intended  here  (see  MAACAH).  The  Hadad-ezer  defeated  by
David  may  have  been  king  of  Zarephath  (not  ZOBAH).  In
this  case  '  Maacah  '  may  be  another  name  for  the  territory  of
REHOBOTH  (/j.v.~),  and  <j;n  will  perhaps  be  a  corrupt  form  of
'D^rii  TALMAI  (f.v.).  Cp,  however,  Driver  and  Budde  [SBOT]
on  2  S.,  I.e.  T.  K.  C.


TOKHATH


,  krd},  2  Ch.  3422  ;  see  TIKVATII.


TOLA  (i/?in,  ecoAA  [BADFL]),  b.  Puah,  b.  Dodo,
an  Issacharite,  a  deliverer  of  Israel,  who  dwelt,  and
finally  was  buried,  at  Shamir  in  '  mount  Kphraim'  (Judg.
10  i  f.  )  ',  the  name  also  occurs  with  Puvah,  Job  (or
Jashub),  and  Shimron  as  a  clan-name  of  Issachar  (Gen.
46i3:  eooAAN  [L];  Nu.  2623  i  Ch.  7i  /.  :  eoAACK,
GoAe,  etoAAei  [B]  ;  cp  Tolaite,  Nu.  I.e.,  6ooAA[e]i
[BAFL]).  On  these  'minor  judges'  in  general,  see
JUDGES,  §  9;  and  on  the  difficulties  arising  out  of  (i)
the  designation  'son  of  Dodo,'  (2)  the  description  of
Tola's  home  as  in  Mt.  Ephraim,  and  (3)  the  reading
Kapie  (or  Kapije)  in  eight  minuscules  which  are,  with
one  exception,  without  the  reference  to  Issachar,  see
ISSACHAR,  §§  2,  7  ;  lastly,  on  the  coincidence  between
Tola,  'crimson  worm,  cochineal,'  and  Puah  (n.xir),  a
plant  from  which  a  red  dye  was  obtained,  see  Moore,
Judges,  273  (cp  NAMES,  §  68).  All  these  questions  are
still  open.

The  problems  may  seem  small  ;  bat  they  are  not  insignificant.
To  understand  '  Tola  '  we  must  revise  our  notions  respecting
Abimelech,  Jair,  and  Jephthah,  between  whom  'Tola,  b.  Puah,
b.  Dodo'  is  introduced.  In  reality  the  three  former  heroes  all
belong  to  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb,  Abimelech  to  Cusham  (see
SHECHEM),  Jair  and  Jephthah  to  '  Ir-gil'ad  '  or  '  Ir-jerahme'el.'1
The  personal  names  too  have  suffered  change  ;  here  the  alteration
was  to  a  great  extent  caused  by  the  wearing  down  of  the  old  names
in  the  mouth  of  the  -people.  'Abimelech,'  which,  superficially
regarded,  appears  to  mean  'the  heaven-god  is  father,'  maybe
a  modification  of  '  Arfib-Jerahmeel'  ;  'Jair'  of  'Jether,'  'Jeph
thah'  of  'Naphtoah.'2  On  the  analogy  of  these  and  similar
restorations,  we  are  methodically  bound  to  read  thus  in  Judg.  10  i,
'  Eshtaol,  b.  Ephrath,  b.  Dodi,  b.  Jerahmeel,  a  Zarhite  ;  he  dwelt
in  SHAMIR  (<?.v.)  in  the  highlands  of  Jerahmeel.'  The  least
obvious  of  these  restorations  is  VlKWN  (Eshtaol)  for  ySin  (Tola).
The  emendation,  which  is  at  any  rate  plausible,  is  suggested  by
the  combination  of  Zerah  and  Shaul  in  Nu.  2613  (Gen.  46io).
Eshtaol  —  i.e.  ,  virtually  Shaul  —  is,  in  fact,  a  N.  Arabian  clan-name
of  the  Negeb  ;3  indeed,  in  i  Ch.  253  the  Eshtaolites  are  expressly
connected  with  Kirjath-jearim  —  i.e.  (as  one  can  now  see),  Kirjath-
jerahmeel.  Kapie  or  /caprje  should,  according  to  sound  method,
represent  rpp  (Kareah  or  Korah),  and  this  is  probably  the  ex
pansion  of  a  fragment  of  Jerahmeel,  which  came  to  be  adopted  as
the  name  of  one  of  the  Jerahmeelite  clans.  That  Shemer  is  a
N.  Arabian  clan-name  could  easily  be  shown  at  length,  but  is
plain  enough  from  the  combination  of  names  in  2  C'h.  24  26  (2  K.
122i).  That  there  is  a  southern  Ephraim  (  =  Jerahmeel)  has
been  repeatedly  maintained  by  the  present  writer  (cp  MlCAH,  i).
As  to  the  historical  kernel  of  Judg.  10  if.,  it  is  enough  to  remark
that,  though  genuine  historical  evidence  is  wanting,  it  is  at  any
rate  probable  that  king  Saul  was  not  the  first  member  of  the  Saul-
clan  to  strike  an  effective  blow  for  Israel,  and  that  the  earliest
achievements  of  this  clan  were  not  in  Benjamin  but  in  the  Nt-geb.

The  same  emendation  (mt  for  n2C'E")  should  possibly  be
made  in  Judg.  5  15  (see  Crit.  Bid.).  T.  K.  C.


1  '  Kamon '  in  Judg.  10  5  might  come  from  '  Mahanaim  '  (cp
KAMON), but  also  from '  Jerahmeel '  (which rs  moreover the
probable  original  of  '  Mahanaim  '  and  '  Karnaim  '). nv^j  'iv  in
127  can  hardly  in  the  present  state  of  inquiry  be  regarded  other
wise than as a  corruption  of  i^j  Tj;. There  seems to  the
present  writer  to  be  evidence  of  a  southern  Gilead  (another  name
for  Jerahmeel  ?).

2  Or,  vice  versa,  Naphtoah  (cp  Naphtuhim)  is  a  modification
of  Jiphtah  ;  cp  Nathan  and  Ethan.

•  '  Eshtaol '  is  probably  a  modification  of  the  clan-name  Shaul ;
the  t  is  a  transition-consonant— /.£.,  it  facilitates  the  transition
from  o:ie  articulation  to  another  (cp  Kon.,  Lehrg.  '2  i,  p.  472).


TOLAD


T7IP1),  i  Ch.  429  ; in  Josh.  1630  ELTOLAD.


TOLBANES

1024>  TELKM.

TOLL  (rn»,  Ezra  4  20  ;  H^p,  Ezra  4  13  7  24).  See
TAXATION,  §  7  n.  ;  cp  TRADE',  §  83  (/)  (2).

TOLMAN  (roAMAN  [A]),  i  Esd.  5  28  RV  =  Ezra242,
TALMUN.

TOMBS.1 As already observed  (see DEAD, § i,

col. 1041),  the  regular  practice  of  the  Hebrews  was  to

_  .. . bury  their  dead, the  instances  in  which

they  burned  them  being  exceptional  and

'ns<  extraordinary.2 The explanation is  to

be  sought  in  the  idea  that the  human  soul  remained

even  after  death  in  some  kind  of  connection  with  the

body  ;  in  the  case  of  unburied  persons,  as  long  as  the

body  found  no  resting-place,  the  soul  also  had  none.

The spirits of  such departed ones  wander  restlessly

about, and  even  in  the  world  of  the  dead, in  Sheol,

must  hide  themselves  in  holes  and  corners  (Ezek.  8223

Is.  14  15,  etc.).

These  views  being  held,  one  would  expect  to  find  the
Hebrews  not  only  attaching  great  importance  to  burial
but  also  giving  special  care  to  making  their  tombs  as
splendid  and  artistic  as  possible.  It  was  by  similar
views,  in  point  of  fact,  that  the  Egyptians  were  led  not
only  to  preserve  —  one  might  almost  say,  for  ever  —  the
bodies  of  their  dead  by  embalming  them,  but  also  to
build  magnificent  resting-places  for  them,  dwellings
resembling  those  of  the  living,  and  furnished  with  every
thing  in  which  the  soul  when  in  life  took  most  delight.
Thus  it  was  in  the  construction  and  adornment  of  its
tombs  that  the  art  of  Egypt  found  its  most  welcome
tasks  and  the  widest  field  for  its  development.  With
the  Israelites,  however,  the  case  was  quite  different.
With  them,  apart  from  cases  where  Greek  or  Roman
influences  interfered,  the  places  of  sepulture  were  always
of  the  simplest  description,  without  any  resort  to  the
arts  of  the  painter  or  the  sculptor.  The  cause  of  this
is,  naturally,  to  be  sought  in  the  first  instance  in  the
Hebrews'  notorious  deficiency  in  artistic  endowment  ;
in  none  of  the  fine  arts  did  they  ever  make  any  im
portant  contribution  of  their  own.  Cp  COLOURS,  §  i.
In  the  present  case,  however,  we  ought  probably  to
take  account  also  of  the  operation  of  a  religious  motive
which  prevented  the  Israelites,  while  borrowing  from
the  Phoenicians  in  other  respects,  to  imitate  them  in  the
architectural  beauty  and  monumental  grandeur  of  their
tombs.  The  religion  of  Yahwe  from  the  outset  set
itself  against  every  kind  of  worship  of  the  dead  with  the
utmost  emphasis.

However  we  may  explain  it,  the  fact  is  undeniable  that
Yahwism  had  at  times  to  contend  with  a  very  strong  inclination
towards  this  form  of  worship.  This  could  not  fail  to  have  its
influence  on  the  outward  form  given  to  places  of  burial.  Every
thing  that  was  fitted  to  promote  worship  of  the  dead  in  any  form
must  have  been  antipathetic  to  Yahwism.  And  as  the  worship
of  the  dead  on  the  one  hand  led  directly  to  the  sumptuous
adornment  of  the  places  where  they  lay,  so  on  the  other  hand
beauty  and  luxury  displayed  in  these  could  not  fail  to  promote
that  form  of  worship.

It  was  entirely  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of
Yahwism  that  the  graves  of  the  dead  —  though  with  all
reverent  piety  towards  the  dead,  and  notwithstanding
the  existence  of  the  view  stated  above  —  were  kept  as
plain  and  simple  as  possible.

The  whole  of  Palestine  is  rich  in  ancient  burying-

places. It  would  be  natural,  therefore,  to expect full

and  accurate  information  as  to  the

2.  Subterranean  andent  Hebrevr  practjce. This  ex-

lreSg  pectation,  however,  is  not  fulfilled  ;
those  which  are  known  to  us  are  far  from  having  been
sufficiently  examined  with  respect  to  their  origin  and

1  [For  the  various  Hebrew  and  Greek  terms,  see  below,  §  9.]

-  [Recent  investigations  at  Ge/er  seem  to  show  that  crema

tion  was  regular  among  the  earliest  inhabitants  of  that  district

at  least. But  it  is  impossible  to  speak  more  decidedly  until  the

excavations  are  completed  ;  see  PEFQ,  1902,  pp.  347^]

5131


TOMBS

date,  so  that  we  are  often  unable  (for  example)  to
distinguish  Christian  from  Jewish  tombs.  It  lies  indeed
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case  that  there  should  be
difficulty  in  dating  these  ;  by  reason  of  their  very
simplicity  they  show  no  very  characteristic  architectural
forms  by  which  their  period  could  be  fixed,  and
inscriptions,  too,  are  almost  wholly  wanting.  It  is  not
possible  therefore  to  describe  the  sepulchral  styles  of  the
various  ages  in  the  order  of  successive  periods, — in
other  words  to  sketch  the  development  and  history  of
this  department  of  art.  We  must  rest  content  with
describing  the  ancient  sepulchres  still  extant,  classifying
them  according  to  the  differences  they  show  and  deduc
ing  from  these  the  characteristic  features  of  this  class
of  structure  in  the  Hebrew  domain.

The  first  generalisation  which  presents  itself  is  that
they  are  all  of  them  rock-tombs,  that  is  to 'say,  hewn
out  of  the  living  rock.  Nowhere  do  we  find  any  trace
of  built  sepulchres.  Of  tombs  above  the  level  of  the
ground  —  mausoleums  in  which  the  sarcophagus  was
placed — no  trace  has  reached  us  from  ancient  times  nor
do  we  hear  of  any  such,  any  more  than  we  hear  of
sarcophagi  or  coffins.  With  the  Phoenicians,  also,
tombs  above  the  surface  are  the  exception,  not  the  rule;
but  they  are  frequent  in  Syria  in  the  Hellenistic  period
(cp,  for  example,  the  sepulchral  towers  of  Palmyra).
In  so  far  as  tombs  above  the  surface  occur  in  Palestine
at  all,  they  belong  to  the  Hellenistic  period  ;  and  even
then  the  characteristic  examples  of  this  type  of
sepulchre  are  not  buildings,  but  are  hewn  out  of  the
solid  rock.  The  same  holds  good  of  the  subterranean
tombs.  Nor  does  the  OT  contain  any  hint  of  built
sepulchres  though  this  has  often  teen  supposed.1  This
is  connected  with  the  physical  character  of  the  country ;
the  soft  limestone  of  the  mountains  of  Palestine  pre
sented  many  natural  caverns  which  in  the  early  period
were  used  in  the  first  instance  as  burial-places  (see
below).  In  particular,  it  was  easily  wrought,  so  that
the  excavation  of  vaults  and  chambers  in  it  presented
no  difficulty  too  great  for  the  technical  skill  of  the
Israelites  to  overcome.

There  are  indeed  in  Palestine  (as  already  indicated)
some  examples  of  tombs  above  the  surface.  The  best
known  are  those  of  the  Valley  of  Kedron  ;  the  so-called
Tomb  of  Absalom  and  the  Pyramid  of  Zacharias.
These  two,  however,  show  quite  clearly  in  their  ornamen
tation  the  influence  of  Greek  and  late-Egyptian  art  ;
moreover,  they  too  have  been  carved  out  of  the  living
rock,  and  their  arrangement  is  so  analogous  to  that
of  the  subterranean  tombs  as  to  make  it  quite  clear
that  it  has  been  copied  from  these.

A  solitary  exception  would  seem  to  be  the  so-called  monolith
of  Siloam  which,  according  to  the  unanimous  judgment  of
archaeologists,  dates  back  to  the  pre-exilic  period  ;  but  this
great  rock  'die'  of  6.10  metres  in  length,  5.60  in  breadth,  and
about  4  in  height  is  also  cut  out  of  the  living  rock.  It  bears
evidence  of  Egyptian  influence,  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is
no  trace  of  the  Greek  style.  Perrot  and  Chipiez,  however  (Hist,
of  Art  in  Jud.  1  275^.),  question  for  weighty  reasons  whether
this  monument  really  was  originally  and  from  the  first  intended
as  a  tomb ;  more  probably  its  purpose  was  formerly  quite
different  (perhaps  to  serve  as  site  for  an  altar)  and  the  burial
chambers  and  niches  within  must  have  been  excavated  later.

The  model  which  served  for  the  Hebrew  tomb  was
unmistakably  the Phoenician not  the Egyptain type,
alike  as  regards  single  sepulchres  and


3.  Phoenician
models.


collective  groups. Here  also  a  leading


characteristic  of  Phoenician  architecture
comes  clearly  into  the  foreground  (cp  PHOENICIA,  §  8)  :
the  great  part  which  is  assigned  to  the  perpendicular
rock-wall.  The  individual  tombs  as  well  as  the  larger
burial  places  were  hewn  by  preference  in  steep  rock-
faces  where  nature  offered  these.  For  this  purpose
ready  use  was  made  of  the  walls  of  the  caverns  which
are  of  such  frequent  occurrence  in  Palestine  and  which
already  furnish  natural  sepulchres  (see  below).  Thus
for  example  the  hollow  under  the  Haram  of  Hebron —

1  On  Job3 15,  see  below,  §  9  [;].
5132


TOMBS


TOMBS


which  has  not  as  yet  been  explored  with  any  detail — is
a  cave  sepulchre.  The  finest  example  of  a  system  of
rock-hewn  sepulchres  of  the  type  indicated  is  supplied
by  Petra,  the  '  City  of  Tombs. '  There  can  be  seen  the
most  magnificent  tombs,  series  upon  series,  with
sumptuous  portals,  hewn  at  almost  inaccessible  heights
in  the  perpendicular  wall.  These  tombs,  it  is  true,
belong  all  of  them  to  the  later  period,  but  thus  they
bear  witness  merely  to  the  persistent  survival  of  the
practice.  If  no  natural  rock  wall  was  available,  then
such  a  wall  was  artificially  made  by  excavating  from
the  surface  downwards  in  a  rocky  bed  a  rectangular
space  with  perpendicular  walls.  A  quite  characteristic
example  of  this  kind  of  burying-place  is  to  be  seen  in
the  so-called  '  Sepulchres  of  the  Kings '  at  Jerusalem
(fig.  i),  though  these  also  belong  to  the  later  period
(ist  cent.  A.D.  ).  Here  we  find  a  great  enclosure
(28  x  25.3  metres)  excavated  to  a  depth  of  8  metres  in
the  solid  rock,  and  reached  from  the  surface  by  a  wide
stair.  The  portal  to  the  place  of  graves  properly  so-
called,  is  on  the  western  wall  (see  below).

On  the  other  hand,  no  example  has  yet  been  found
in  Palestine  of  the  shaft-tombs  (tombs  reached  by  a
narrow  perpendicular  shaft),1  so  frequently  met  with  in
Egypt  and  so  characteristic  for  this  branch  of  architec
ture  there.  Yet  it  does  not  follow,  of  course,  that  this
type  of  tomb  was  wholly  unknown  in  Palestine  in  the
olden  time.

As  regards  the  form  of  sepulchre  proper  in  Palestine,
the  Phoenician  type  is  closely  followed.  The  extant

. p  examples  fall  into  four  classes  : (i)  Pigeon-

f't  OI'h1 llole tombs' usually called kokim, '^ rect-

1  S'  angular  recesses  driven  into  the  wall  at  right

angles  to  the  face,  and  measuring  about  5-6  ft.  in  length

by  ii  ft.  in  breadth  and  depth. Into  these  the  body

was  thrust  lengthways. (2)  Sunken  tombs  which  like


0 2 4 K S 10

FIG.  i. — Plan  of  the  tombs  of  the  kings.

our  modern  graves  were  hewn  out  on  the  upper  surface
of  the  rock  and  closed  with  a  flat  stone.  (3)  Shelf
tombs,  that  is  to  say  benches  or  shelves  on  which  the
bodies  were  laid.  These  shelves  either  ran  at  a  height
of  about  2  ft.  round  one  or  more  walls  of  a  sepulchral
chamber,  or  else  were  hewn  lengthways  as  niches  in  the
rock  wall  (about  i^  ft.  square,  and  of  the  length
required  for  the  body)  ;  in  the  latter  case  they  were  as
a  rule  provided  with  an  arch  above.  (4)  Trough  tombs,

1  [Two  examples  of  the  shaft-type,  however,  have  been  found
at  Tell  ej-Judekleh.  A  cylindrical  shaft  over  2  metres  deep  is
hollowed  in  the  rock,  and  at  the  bottom  a  small  doorway  leads
to  an  irregular  chamber  about  1.80  metres  by  1.50  (Bliss  and
Macalister,  PEF Excavations.  1898-1900,  p.  igoyC  (190?).]

[2  With  the  post-biblical  D'313  (Dalman  D'313),  are  connected
the  pniJ  and  pnCJ  °f  Nabatean  and  Palmyrene  inscr.  respec
tively  :  ultimately  the  word  seems  to  come  from  the  Ass.
kimahhit.  For  a  discussion  of  other  Nabatean  terms,  see  De
Vogfi6.  'Notes  d'ltpigraphie  arameenne,'  1175^,  /.  As.
(extrait),  1896.]

5133


troughs  hewn  out  of  the  perpendicular  rock-wall,  i.1,  ft.
wide  and  of  the  length  of  the  body,  some  2^  ft.  above
the  level  of  the  floor.  These  also  are  invariably  arched.
They  thus  represent  a  combination  of  the  shelf  tomb
with  the  sunken  tomb  :  a  shelf  tomb  is  hewn  into  the
rock-wall  and  in  this  shelf  a  sunken  tomb  or  mould
like  a  coffin  is  hollowed  out.

The  observed  departures  from  these  four  types  are
unimportant  and  in  no  case  alter  the  fundamental  type
but  relate  principally  to  the  measurements.  In  the
kokim  double  resting-places  are  met  with,  that  is  to  say,
kokim  of  twice  the  ordinary  width  in  which  two  bodies
could  be  laid  side  by  side  ;  down  the  middle  runs  a
little  channel-like  hollow  about  a  handbreadth  wide
separating  the  two  resting-places  (see  fig.  i)  ;  there  are
instances  also  of  double  benches  for  the  reception  of
two  bodies,  though  these  are  of  rarer  occurrence  (see
fig.  i  H).

In  the  trough-tomb  class  an  interesting  peculiarity  is  seen  in
a.  tomb  near  Haifa.  Here  the  trough-tombs  are  not,  as  is
usually  the  case,  like  shelf-tombs  hewn  out  lengthways  along
the  wall,  but  like  koklin,  at  right  angles  to  its  surface.  In  this
case  also  double  tombs  occur  corresponding  to  the  double  kokim
mentioned  above  ;  a  narrow  slit  nearly  i  foot  wide  separates  the
individual  resting-places.  Each  pair  of  these  is  connected
breadthways  by  a  semicircular  arch.

The  tombs  just  described  were  not  simply  hewn  out

of  the  rock  without  further  preparation. Even  when  it

5 Form  of Was 'JUt °ne Srave  f°r a  single person

sepulchral that  was in cluestion' il  was not the
' practice  to  excavate  in  the  rock-surface  a
ciiciiii  uers i i, i- i

and  groups  hoUow  llke  the  Sraves  vve  use  =  b>*  Pre-
of  chambers  ^erence  a  l'u'e  subterranean  chamber  was
'  made,  and  the  grave  was  made  in  the
floor  or  in  the  wall  as  the  case  might  be.  At  first  sight
we  might  feel  inclined  to  connect  this  general  preference
for  subterranean  sepulchral  chambers  with  the  original
custom  of  using  caves  for  purposes  of  burial.  There
was  yet  another  element,  however,  which  contributed  to
this  result,  namely  the  desire  to  keep  the  dead  members
of  a  family,  or  clan,  still  united  even  in  the  grave.  In
such  a  sepulchral  chamber  many  graves  of  all  the
different  kinds  could  easily  be  brought  together.  Subse
quent  stages  were  the  adding  of  a  second  chamber  to
the  first,  or  several  chambers  might  be  connected  by
passages,  or  great  subterranean  constructions  made.
Thus  the  places  of  burial  fall  into  three  distinct  classes  :
( i )  simple  chambers  for  one  body  only  which  is  buried
in  a  sunken  tomb  in  the  floor.  These  burial  chambers
are  frequently  unclosed.  (2)  Single  chambers  with
several  graves  of  the  different  sorts  mentioned,  particu
larly  kokim  and  shelf  tombs.  (3)  Larger  complexes
embracing  several  chambers.  Examples  of  all  three
classes  are  numerous  in  Palestine.  To  the  first  class,
that  of  single  chambers  with  only  one  grave,  belong


FIG 2. — Plan  of  the  tombs  of  the  judges.

many  of  the  tombs  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  Valley
of  Hinnom.  In  agreement  with  the  purpose  they  serve,
these  chambers  are  for  the  most  part  rather  small.
Amongst  these,  on  the  side  of  the  Hill  of  Evil  Counsel,
are  also  some  belonging  to  the  second  class  :  single
chambers  with  several  graves.  For  a  fuller  account  of
these  see  Tobler  (op.  cit.,  §  n  below).  Very  instructive
examples  of  the  third  class  of  larger  complexes  are
found  in  the  so-called  Sepulchres  of  the  Kings  and  of
the  Judges  in  Jerusalem.  Both  examples  indeed  are  of
late  date,  but  the  Hellenistic  influence  (so  far  as  it

5134


TOMBS


TOMBS


appears  at  all)  is  shown  only  in  the  ornamentation,
particularly  in  the  portal,  not  in  the  arrangement  of  the
complex  as  a  whole.  The  Sepulchres  of  the  Kings
display  best 'the  quite  regular  type.  From  the  porch
with  a  portal  in  Greek  style  a  quite  low  narrow  passage
which  was  closed  by  a  disk  of  stone  leads  into  the
approximately  cubical  antechamber  which  has  no  graves.
Opening  out  of  this  on  three  sides  are  the  three
sepulchral  chambers  proper — also  approximately  cubical,
with  shelf  and  shaft  tombs.  Each  of  these  chaml^ers
has  a  side-chamber  also  ;  of  these  two  (fig.  i  o)  are  at
a  lower  level  and  partly  go  under  the  principal  chamber
— plainly  on  account  of  the  configuration  of  the  site.


I'' ic,.  3. — Plan  of  the  tombs  of  the  prophets.

This  difference  of  level  in  the  various  chambers  is  the
characteristic  feature  of  the  sepulchres  of  the  Judges.
These  (see  fig.  2)  are  on  two  different  levels  and,  besides,
in  the  upper  sepulchral  chamber,  above  the  graves  on
the  ground  level  at  a  height  of  about  3  ft.  from  the
surface,  there  is  a  second  set  of  chambers  and  graves.

A  complete  departure  from  this  regularity  is  shown  in  a  very
interesting  way  by  the  so-called  Sepulchres  of  the  Prophets  on
the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  hitherto  are  quite  unique  among
the  tombs  of  Palestine.  They  belong  to  the  ancient — that  is  to
say,  at  least  pre-Grecian  —  period,  and  exhibit  no  trace  of
Hellenistic  influence.  Their  original  feature  (see  fig.  3)  is  that
instead  of  various  chambers  of  square  or  rectangular  plan
opening  into  each  other,  two  semicircular  passages  round  a
rotunda  are  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  connected  with  one
another  and  with  the  rotunda  by  means  of  ray-like  passages
radiating  from  the  rotunda.  In  the  wall  of  the  outermost
passage  are  27  kok'un  arranged  in  ray-fashion,  hewn  out  of  the
solid  rock.  Connected  with  this  passage  moreover  are  two  side-
chambers,  also  with  kfikitit.

The  principal difference between  single  tombs  and
family  sepulchres  is  to  be  sought  not  so  much  in  com-
. - parative  size (for  even the  single  tomb
, , ' °  can  have  its  antechamber,  etc. ,  as  well  as

tn3'  its  chamber  proper)  as  rather  in  the
number  and  description  of  the  separate  resting-places.
So  far  as  we  are  at  present  in  a  position  to  judge,  the
single  tombs  (i.e.,  tombs  with  room  for  one  or  at  most
two  occupants)  have  either  shelf  or  trough  tombs,  and
according  to  the  pretty  generally  accepted  opinion  of
Tobler,  Mommert,  and  others,  such  tombs  are  to  be
regarded  as  ancient  Jewish.  On  the  other  hand,
according  to  the  same  authorities  the  single  burying-
place  with  grave  hollowed  in  the  ground  is  not  to  be
dated  earlier  than  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,
No  instances  are  known  of  sepulchral  chambers  with
only  one  or  two  kokim.  This  is  easily  accounted  for  :
the  use  of  this  description  of  tomb,  which  demanded  the
smallest  amount  of  space,  was  only  desirable  or  necessary
where  the  problem  was  to  provide  a  relatively  large
number  of  resting-places  within  the  same  sepulchre.  In
the  case  of  a  single  tomb  even  the  smallest  sepulchral
chamber  was  always  able  to  furnish  room  for  a  trough
or  shelf  tomb  (or  alternatively  a  sunken  tomb).  Kokim
Are  thus  peculiar  to  family  sepulchres,  which  in  other

5I3S


respects  have  the  same  characteristics  as  single  graves.
The  sunken  tomb  is  also,  in  the  case  of  family  burying-
places  for  the  most  part  regarded  as  a  sign  of  a  relatively'
late  date.  Until,  however,  all  the  known  tombs  shall
have  been  systematically  examined,  this  question  ought
not  to  be  regarded  as  definitely  settled.  So  also  the
other  questions  as  to  the  age  of  the  shelf-,  niche-,  and
shaft-tomb,  and  the  frequency  of  their  occurrence
respectively  at  the  different  periods  remain  open.

Of  one  form  only,  namely  of  the  kokim,  can  it  be
definitely  affirmed  that  it  was  already  extensively  in  use
in  the  older  period,  as  we  can  also  say  that  the  single
chambers  (mentioned  above  under  §  5  [2])  are  shown  by
the  excavations  to  be,  properly  speaking,  the  oldest,  and
at  all  times  the  most  usual  type  of  tomb  among  the
Israelites.  These  kokim  placed  at  right  angles  to  the
wall  surface,  take  up  least  room  and  permit  the  intro
duction  of  a  large  number  of  bodies  into  one  chamber.

This  arrangement  appears  as  that  most  commonly  in  use  in
the  Mishna  also,  where  it  alone  is  mentioned  and  precise  regula
tions  are  laid  down  as  to  its  size  and  the  like  (Btiba.  Bat/tra,  6s).
The  sepulchral  chamber  ('"H^'p,  nif'  'ilriih,  see  CAVES)  has  to  be
4  cubits  in  breadth  and  6  in  length  ;  the  entrance  is  to  be  on  the
short  side  ;  the  other  short  side  is  to  have  two  kokitn,  each  of
the  longer  sides  three,  making  eight  in  all.  It  need  not,  however,
cause  any  surprise  to  discover  that  the  sepulchres  which  have
been  explored  do  not  accurately  answer  these  prescriptions  (the
nearest  approach  to  them  is  found  in  a  tomb  at  ed-I)uwcimeh
and  another  on  the  Hill  of  Kvil  Counsel)  ;  practical  necessities
were  stronger  than  prescriptions,  and,  in  particular,  the  number
of  resting-places  in  each  tomb  greatly  varies.  In  reality  no  rule
is  observable,  but  complete  freedom  prevails,  as  in  the  instances
already  cited.

That  we  may  safely  assume  for  the  older  period  the
employment  of  large  complexes  is  made  evident  by  the
fact  that  the  kings  of  Judah  had  two  great  burial-places
of  this  description.  In  the  first  and  oldest  of  these  were
buried  the  kings  down  to  Hezekiah's  time  ;  Manasseh
appears  to  have  prepared  a  new  sepulchre  of  the  Kings
(2  K.  4i8).  \Ye  may  safely  suppose  these  tombs  to
have  been  of  great  extent,  yet  simpler  lhan  those  of
later  date,  and  without  much  elaboration  of  ornament.

Not  each  separate  resting-place  was  closed,  but  only
the  entrance  to  the  sepulchral  chamber.  The  sunken

7 Protection  tom^s  on  tne  surface  of  the ground
' , ,  were  doubtless  as  a  rule  covered  with

1  S'  a  flat  stone,  but  the  kokim  on  the  other
hand  were  often  left  open.  At  the  same  time  there  was
no  special  difficulty  in  this  case  also  in  closing  the
entrance  with  a  stone,  and  this  may  frequently  have
been  done.  In  the  case  of  bench  tombs,  however,
shutting  up  was  impossible,  for  there  the  bod}',
enveloped  only  in  grave-clothes — coffins  were  not  usual
— was  simply  laid  upon  the  shelf.  All  the  more  care
fully  therefore  in  these  circumstances  must  the  sepul
chral  chambers  have  been  closed  and  protected  agaimt
the  entrance  of  wild  beasts.  The  passages  to  these
chambers  are  therefore  for  the  most  part  very  low  and
narrow,  so  that  in  entering  one  has  to  creep  rather  than
walk.  Even  in  the  case  of  great  sepulchres  with  fine
large  porches,  as  for  example  in  the  Sepulchre  of  the
Kings  (see  fig.  i),  the  accesses  are  of  this  narrow  sort.
The  external  opening  in  such  cases  was  closed  either  by
a  regular  stone  door  turning  on  hinges,  or- — the  more
frequent  case — by  a  round  stone  disk  which  could  be
rolled  and  placed  before  the  entrance.  Such  a  disk
closed  for  example  the  entrance  to  the  Sepulchres  of  the
Kings  and  is  still  preserved.  For  this  purpose,  naturally,
large  and  heavy  stones  were  employed,  such  as  one  man
alone  could  hardly  move  (cp  Mt.  2?6o  :  'he  rolled  a
great  stone').  In  order  to  ensure  against  slipping,
another  large  stone,  and  doubtless  also  an  underpin
was  frequently  placed  against  the  stone  that  properly
constituted  the  door  (ZDPl',  1878,  pp.  n  f.  14  ;
1890,  p.  177).

Such  a  method  of  closing  served  to  guard  the  tomb
against  the  ravages  of  wild  beasts,  but  not  against
human  visitants.  This  last  protection,  however,  was

5136


TOMBS

quite  as  necessary  as  the  other.  For  nothing  was  so
much  dreaded  as  the  desecration  of  the  tomb  by  wilful
violators — a  dread  which  is  easily  explained  from  what
has  been  said  above  (§  i).  And  yet,  it  was  not  mere
plundering  of  the  graves,  which  often  contained  things
of  more  or  less  value,  or  yet  injury  to  the  bodies  or
their  disturbance  (Jer.  81  2  K.23i6)  or  even  the  total
destruction  of  the  tomb,  that  was  feared.  For  the
Hebrews  it  was  already  a  great  and  wicked  outrage  if  a
corpse  not  belonging  to  it  was  laid  in  a  grave,  the  dead
body  of  one  who  did  not  belong  to  the  family.  Against
such  desecration  at  human  hands  full  protection  was
certainly  difficult.  In  some  cases  it  was  possible  to  hew
out  the  sepulchre  at  an  inaccessible  height  on  the  steep
rock  wall  (Is.  22 16).  But  generally  speaking  it  was
found  necessary  to  rely  simply  on  the  power  of  established
custom  which  condemned  any  such  wickedness  in
the  strongest  possible  way.  In  another  direction
protection  was  sought  by  means  of  an  inscription
invoking  the  severest  curses  on  any  who  should  disturb
the  repose  of  the  sleeper  or  introduce  a  strange  body
into  the  grave.1

With  the  Phoenicians  it  was  a  frequent  custom  to
mark  the  site  of  a  subterranean  tomb  by  the  erection  of

8.  Monuments.  a  memorial . abo^  ground- Various
very  interesting  Phoenician  monuments

of  the  kind  are  still  extant.  On  the  other  hand  we  have
none  that  date  from  Old  Hebrew  times,  and  nowhere  in
the  OT  is  any  such  practice  indicated.  The  custom
existed  indeed  of  piling  a  heap  of  stones  over  the  body
in  cases  where  it  had  been  simply  covered  with  earth  ;
the  purpose  of  this,  however,  was  merely  to  protect
from  wild  beasts  (cp  2  S.  18  17).  The  pillar  in  the  Valley
of  Kedron  which  Absalom  raised  for  himself  in  his  life
time  to  keep  his  name  in  remembrance  (2  S.  18  18)  was
not  strictly  speaking  a  monument  but  rather  a  pillar
(ma^sebdh}  having  a  religious  purpose.'-2  The  memorial
also  at  the  grave  of  the  anonymous  prophet  spoken  of
in  2  K.23i7  may  also  have  the  same  meaning.  That
the  Hebrews  at  a  later  date  adopted  foreign  customs  in
this  respect  also  is  shown  by  what  we  read  of  the
magnificent  mausoleum  of  the  Maccabees  at  Modin
(i  Mace.  1827 ff.}.  See  MODIX,  §  3.

Hitherto  little  account  has  been  taken  of  the  notices
of  the  subject  contained  in  the  OT.  These  also

•0-L.y  .  leave  us  quite  in  the  dark  as  to  the  form
and  description  of  the  sepulchres  of  the

Cl£ttct.  T  T •

Hebrews.

[The  following  Hebrew  and  Greek  terms  require
mention  : — -

1.  kcber,  "I3p,  EV  'grave,'  the  commonest  term,  Gen.  -3 4,
etc.  (Is.  22  16  with  mn<  pre-supposing  a rock  -  hewn  sepulchre
[cp  HANDICRAFTS,  §  i]);  cp  KIUKOTH-HATTAAVAH.

2.  kt'bnrciJi,  "^rp,  EV  'grave,'  Gen.  35  20,  etc.

3.  g,l:iJs,  !?'•!:,  Job 21  32 1  (see  BDB ;  <ro>p<k).

4.  «  'surim  (  !  no.  i  in  Is.  t'>.">  4)  AV  '  monuments,'  ©  cr7r>;Acuof
suggests  a  burial-cave,  but  RV '  secret  places  '  is  preferable.

5.  horaboth, niDnn, Job  3  15  f, 'desolate' (RV 'waste')
'places.' Che. (Exfi.T, Apr. 1899)  reads nilllp,  following
Hitz.,  Btidde,  Duhm,  etc.,  who  see  an  allusion  to  the  treasures
in  royal  sepulchres. The  view  that  the  pyramids  in  particular
are  referred  to,  is  maintained  by  Budde  and  Duhm,  but  contro
verted  by  Che.  in  Expositor, 1897  fr,  407. Ol. and formerly
Che.  read  ni3!21K>  'palaces.' But  the  reference  seems  to  be  to
the  splendour  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Kings  (so  at  least  Budde,
Che.,  etc.,  but  not  Di.  Davidson).

6.  T(i(/)o?(in  Ecchis.30  18=^1^,  a  stone  placed  over  a  grave),
Mt.  23  29  AV  '  tomb '  (RV  '  sepulchre,'  and  so  EV  in  ?'.  27),  etc.

7.  jurrJMi,  Mk.  .5  5  Lk.  S  27.

8.  ni-weloi-, Mt.  232Q KV  (AV 'sepulchre'), 1~  ^  f.  (AV
'grave  '),  //'.  6^a  (in  (x>b  AV  '  sepulchre  ').


1  Cp,  for  example,  the  inscription  in  the  Esmunazar
sarcophagus,  /.  6,  and  various  Nabata;an  inscriptions  (Euting,
Nabatiiische  Inschriften  aus  Arahien  [Berlin,  1885],  no.  2)  ;  or
the  inscription  of  Darius  Hystaspis.  Unfortunately  no  ancient
Hebrew  tomb  inscriptions  have  come  down  to  us.

a  For  tnassi'bilh  (in  Ph.  '  gravestone ')  see  col.  2975,  and  for
fiyyiin  (?r!s),  2  K.  23  17,  etc.  (RV  '  monument '),  col.  2978  (e).

5*37


TOMBS

Nos.  6-8  are  frequently  used  by  ©  indiscriminately  to  translate
kcber  and  kcbftriih.\

The  data  supplied  establish  before  aught  else  the
great  importance  that  was  attached  to  having  the
members  of  the  same  family  united  even  after  death  in
a  common  tomb.

(Cp  Gen.  15  15  2  S.  17  23  i  K.  431  15s  24  2251  2  K.  1638,  and
often.)  Barzillai  desires  to  die  beside  the  grave  of  his  father  and
mother  (2  S.  19  38  [37]);  David  in  his  magnanimity  causes  the
bones  of  Saul  to  be  buried  in  the  tomb  of  Saul's  father  Kish
(2  S.  21  14) ;  Nehemiah  gives  it  as  his  reason  for  wishing  to  go
to  Jerusalem  that  the  fathers  are  buried  there  (Nell.  2  5).  Jacob
and  Joseph  lay  upon  their  descendants  an  oath  that  they  will
bring  their  bones  to  the  sepulchre  of  their  fathers,  in  the  cave  of
Machpelah  at  Hebron  (Gen.  Vtwf.  49 29^  50  25).  Hence  P's
constantly  repeated  phrase  'to  be  gathered  to  one's  fathers'
(Gen.  25  8  17  8029  Nu.27  13  3]  2  Dt.32  50)  with  the  corresponding
expression  of  Kings  ('  he  slept  with  his  fathers  '  (i  K.  1431  158
24  22  51  2  K.  15  38,  etc.),  expressions  both  in  the  first  instance  to
be  understood  literally  of  their  being  gathered  to  the  sepulchre
of  their  ancestors.

Not  to  be  buried  with  one's  ancestors  is  a  great  hard
ship,  a  punishment  with  which  conspicuous  offenders  are
threatened  by  God  ;  as  witness  the  case  of  the  dis
obedient  prophet  (i  K.  1822),  of  Ahaz  (i  K.2124),  and
others.  Poor  people,  indeed,  who  had  not  the  means  to
procure  family  graves  of  their  own,  strangers  from  a
distance — pilgrims,  for  example — as  also  criminals,  had
to  be  content  to  find  a  last  resting-place  in  the  common
public  burial-place  (2  K.  23  6  Is.  53  9  Jer.  2623  Mt.  27 7).
In  family  tombs  naturally  none  but  members  of  the
family  came  to  be  laid  ;  to  bury  in  it  a  stranger  who
had  no  title  to  the  privilege  was  equivalent  to  desecrat
ing  it  (see  above).  At  the  same  time,  on  this  point  the
views  of  a  later  age  seem  to  have  grown  laxer,  and
instances  are  not  wanting  in  which  a  stranger  \\as
admitted  to  the  family  tomb.  But  it  is  always  a  great
sacrifice  and  a  token  of  special  esteem  or  regard  for  the
deceased  or  for  his  people  that  is  implied  (Gen.  236
i  K.  133o/:  2  Ch.24i6  Mt.276o).

These  family  tombs  were  made  in  the  oldest  times  on
the  family  property  in  the  vicinity  of  the  family  abode,  an
arrangement  which  is  easy  to  understand  in  view  of  the
fact  that  community  of  family  life  was  held  to  continue
after  death.

Thus  Samuel  is  buried  beside  his  house  in  Ramah  (i  S.  25  i),
Joab  in  his  own  house  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah  (i  K.  2  34).
The  sepulchres  of  the  kings  of  Judah  lay  quite  close  to  the
palace  within  the  citadel  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the
temple,  as  we  see  from  Ezekiel's  sharp  rebuke  (cp  Ezek.  43  7).
From  Manasseh  onwards,  the  kings  were  buried  in  the  'Garden
of  Uzza'(see  UzzAii.);  the  old  burying-place  was  probably  full,
but  of  course  the  new  one  was  made  not  far  from  the  old.  The
'Garden  of  Uzza '  (if  Uzza  =  Azariah)  may  well  have  been  a
garden  laid  out  by  that  king  within  the  citadel,  and  thus  the
allusion  may  be  to  a  palace  built  by  Manasseh  in  the  garden  of
Uzza,  in  or  near  which  he  also  prepared  his  burial-place.

It  will  be  readily  understood,  however,  that  this  very
soon  became  an  impossibility  in  the  towns,  and  that  for
10  Imnuritv  Pract'ca^  reasons  the  sepulchres  had  to

' s  ,  ^  , y  be  placed  outside  the  walls.

oi  tombs. ,{,,  • ,  ,,  .,

This  became  the  case  all  the  more  as

with  a  later  age  the  idea  of  the  impurity  of  sepulchres
came  into  increasing  prominence.  The  law  of  P  enacts
that  everyone  who  has  come  into  contact  with  a  dead
body  or  with  a  bone  of  a  man,  or  even  with  a  grave,
shall  be  unclean  for  a  period  of  seven  days  (Nu.  19i6).
Since,  as  remarked  above  (§  8),  the  underground
tombs  of  the  Israelites  were  for  the  most  part  not
marked  out  by  means  of  monuments  above  ground,
and  it  was  not  altogether  easy  at  once  to  recognise
from  a  safe  distance  a  sepulchre  or  the  entrance  to  one,
the  custom  arose  of  white-washing  afresh  the  stone  at
the  door  every  spring.  In  this  manner  a  grave  was
made  recognisable  from  afar  and  the  passer-by  could
guard  himself  against  defilement  (Mt.  2827).

Descriptions  of  particular  tombs  are  to  be  met  with  in  almost

all  books  of  travel  in  Palestine. Of  researches  of  scientific  value

the most important will be found in the

11.  Literature,  works  named  below. Titus  Tobler,  Go/gotha,

1851, and Zwei  Biicher Topographic  Ton

Jerusalem,  esp.  2227^; Robinson, BR  ; Sepp,  Jerusalem

und  das  heilige  Land,^)  1873,  esp.  2273^:  ; Karl  Mommert,

5138


TONGS

Golgotha  und  i/as  heilige  Grab  zu  Jerusalem  (1900);  The
Survey  of  Western  Palestine,  1881  ff.  Copious  material  is
also  supplied  by  the  journals  devoted  to  Palestine  exploration  :
J'Efi'QSt.  (1873^!),  27}/T(i878  Jf.\  Mittheilttngcnu.  Nach-
richten  d.  Dcutschen  Pal.-l'ereins  (1895  ff.),  Revue  biblique
triinestrielle  (1882^).  For  description  otthe  more  important
individual  tombs  see  further  Baedeker-Benzinger,  Pal.  (p.  cxi.),
and  for  Phoenician  and  Syrian  tombs  de  Vogue,  Syrie  centrale
(1865),  1  103-110  270-97.  I.  B.


TONGS  (i)  D^nO,  miUkahdyim,  Is.  66,  etc.,  EV
rightly.  See  COOKING  UTENSILS,  §  4,  and  CANDLESTICK,
§  2.  (2)  1SJ?S,  ina'iisiid,  Is.  44  12,  AV  wrongly.  See  AXE.


TONGUES, CONFUSION OF.

[TOWER  OF].


See BABEL,
TONGUES,  GIFT  OF. See  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.


TOPARCHY  (TOTTAPXI&  [AN^-V]),  i  Mace.  1128
AV,  RV  PROVINCE  (<j.v.).

TOPAZ  (i~np3,  TOTTAZION)-  The  precious  stone
called  pitdah  occurs  in  the  list  of  stones  on  the  high
priest's  breastplate  (Ex.  2817^  =39io^);  also  in  the  list
(derived  by  an  interpolator  from  that  in  Exodus)  of  the
gems  with  which  the  king  of  Tyre  (lis)  or  perhaps
Missur  (iHfp  ;  see  PARADISE,  §  3)  is  said  in  a  prophetic
poem  to  have  been  adorned  in  Eden  (Ezek.  2813).
Lastly,  a  TOTra'ftov  (EV  'topaz')  is  represented  as  one
of  the  foundation-stones  of  the  wall  of  the  New  Jerusalem
(Rev.  21 20).

Strabo  (16  770)  describes  the  topaz  as  diaphanous  and

emitting  a  gold-like  light  (\i6os  . . . 5ia(f>ai>r)s  xpvao-

1 To a f^fs d.TroffTi\j3u>v  <f>fyyos), not  easily

c  ai_.v..  j  scen  in  the  davtime  for  it  is  outshone
of  Strabo  and  , .

Rev  •?!  '  (VTrepavyeirat  yap),  and  as  obtained
only  in  the  Ophiodes  island  off  the
Troglodytic  coast  of  the  Red  Sea,  about  the  latitude  of
Berenice.  *  The  monopoly  was  carefully  guarded  by  the
Ptolemies.  Pliny  (HN  378,  cp  634)  describes  the  stone
as  green,  meaning  doubtless  olive  green  (e  virenti
genere),  and  calls  the  island  Cytis  or  Topazus.  This
agrees  with  the  Targum's  rendering  xpT  nSjTDi  '  yellow-
green  gem,'  in  Job  28  19,  and  with  the  phrase  c'a  rrrcs,
' pitdah  of  Ethiopia,'  in  the  (traditional)  Hebrew  text  of
this  passage.

The  stone  intended  by  the  Greek  geographers  was
almost  certainly  the  transparent  variety  of  olivine  now
generally  known  as  peridote,  which  is  usually  some
shade  of  olive-pistachio  or  leek-green  (on  the  yellow
variety  see  CHRYSOLITE,  TARSHISH  [STONE]).  The
topaz  of  modern  mineralogists  (yellow,  blue,  or  colour
less)  was  unknown  to  the  ancients.

This  may  no  doubt  be  a  correct  identification  of  the
Toirdfrov  of  Rev.  21  20.  It  is  much  less  certain  whether

2 Assyrian '  t0paz ' (exPlained  as above) is the

hipinduin  .\* the

v OT  theory  more than a superficial con

jecture,2  based  on  the  metathesis  of
/  and  t  ?  Can  we  give  any  satisfactory  philological
account  of  pitdah?  A  Sanskrit  etymology  (pita,
yellowish,  pale;  von  Bohlen)  is  still  to  be  found  in
some  books  of  reference  ;  but  for  such  a  case  there
is  no  sure  analogy  (np-Q  is  surely  not  a  Sanskr.
loan-word  ;  see  EMERALD),  and  no  tradition  mentions
India  as  the  home  either  of  the  Toira.£iov  or  of  the
pitdah.  Experience  leads  us  to  suspect  that  there  may
be  a  transcriptional  error,  and  if  so  it  is  reasonable  to
look  to  Assyria  for  a  word  out  of  which  ,-nns  may  have
been  corrupted.  Using  this  key  we  may  very  plausibly

1  Cp Diod. Sic.  3  39  : At'Oo?  SiafyaLvontvos ejriTepTrtJs,  vdAco
«-<xpe/i4>epr)s  KO.I  0avft.a(TTrir  iyxpverov  7rp6<roi//ii>  Trape^dfxei'os — '  a
stone  of  a  pleasing  diaphanous  ["glowing,"  see  L.  and  S. ]  char
acter,  somewhat  like  glass,  and  presenting  a  wonderful  golden
appearance.'

2  Precisely  such  a  guess  led  to  the  rendering  of  13  by  Toird£i.ot>
in <B Ps.  1111127, unless  indeed TOTT. there  is  a  corruption  of
jraf But  in  (B  Cant.  5  n,  13  is  transliterated  as  </>af.

SI39


TORMAH

assume  that  mBB  is  an  early  corruption  of  -^sn — i.e. ,
hipindu,  or  perhaps  of  *hipitdu  (whence  *hipiddu,
hipindu).

This  is  the  name  of  a  precious  stone  referred  to  in  the  Ass.
inscriptions  (see  Del.  and  Muss-Arnolt,  s.v.),  and  explained
there  by  aban  isati—i.e.,  not  literally  'a  stone  of  fire,1  but  'a
flashing  stone  '  =  PK  J3K,  'then  'esh,  in  Ezek.  28  14  (||  rn/T  |3N
=  ' precious  stone,'  v.  13).!  Not  only  in  Exodus  and  Ezekief,
but  also  in  Gen.  2  12  (in  the  penultimate  form  of  the  text),-  in
Nu.  117,  and  in  Is.  54  12  a  thorough  textual  criticism  permits  us


the  word  -nan  (Ass.  hipindu).  In  the  first  of  these
passages,  the  statement,  '  there  is  bdellium  and  the  onyx-stone,'
certainly  misrepresents  the  writer's  meaning.  As  the  text  stood
at  a  comparatively  early  period  it  must  have  referred  rather  to
the  hipindu  and  the  sohantfl  In  the  second  passage,  we  are
bound  to  hold  that  the  appearance  (*,'y)  of  the  manna  was
likened,  not  to  any  resinous  substance  like  BDELLIUM  (y.v.),
but  to  something  which  would  at  once  strike  the  imagination!
A  precious  stone  like  the  hipindu  satisfies  this  condition,  •»
and  we  may  plausibly  adopt  the  view  of  <B  that  crystal  is
intended  ;  the  transparence  of  rock-crystal  (see  CRYSTAL)  would
make  it  an  appropriate  comparison.  In  the  third,  we  can
hardly  rest  satisfied  with  the  purely  conjectural  rendering
'carbuncles'  for  rnpN  'J3K  !  experience  of  corruption  elsewhere
leads  one  to  emend  the  first  of  these  words  into  ij2n  (,hipindu\
disregarding  the  second  as  a  corruption  of  a  "dittographed
"ID1D  (see  z1.  I2<z).  Read,  therefore,  in  Is.  54  12,  i:£ni?  Y~i'B%
'and  thy  gates  of  hipindu.'  It  only  remains  to  be  added  that
in  Job  28:9,  l?13TnUB  also  probably  presents  two  corruptions
—  i.e.,  not  only  has  n~l£B  come  out  of  132n,  but  B*53  is  a  mutilated
and  corrupt  form  of  E'VpSrW  'and  halmis  (see  TARSHISH,
STONE  OF),  where  halmis  may  perhaps  be  the  white  sapphire,
a  suitable  stone  to  be  combined  with  the  hipindu,  which
seems  to  be  the  rock-crystal  (see  above).  If  this  correction
be  accepted,  together  with  the  correction  of  V.  i8a  given  under
TARSHISH  [STONE],  §  3,  it  will  be  plausible  to  identify  the
'  Edomite  stone  '  mentioned  in  7>.  i8a  with  the  /////nrife-stone
referred  to  in  ?'.  19^.  It  is  also  at  any  rate  possible  that  the
/^/;Wtt-stone  should  displace  the  very  questionable  '  apes  and
peacocks  '  in  i  K.  10  22  (see  OPHIK).

R  Y"1^-  '  topaz  '  for  (arsis  in  Cant.  5  14  can  hardly  be  justified,
except  as  a  warning  of  the  Revisers  not  to  be  sure  that  tarsis'is
rightly  rendered  '  beryl.'  See  BERYL,  TARSHISH  (STONE  OF).

TOPHEL  pSfr  ;  TO^O\  [BAL]),  a  locality  near
the  wilderness,  mentioned  with  Laban,  Hazeroth,  and
Di-zahab  (Dt.  1  if).  See  SUPH,  WANDERINGS,  §  10.

TOPHET,  TOPHETH  (Hahn),  Is.  3033  Jer.  73i  etc.
The  Aramaic  connection  (see  MOLECH,  §  3),  rejected
by  Delitzsch  (Isaiah,  ET,  240)  has  been  brilliantly
defended  by  Robertson  Smith  (in  j??5'2)  377  n.  ).  We
must  not,  however,  lay  too  much  stress  on  the  supposed
description  of  a  Topheth  (nnfin  becomes  in  EV
'Topheth')  in  Is.  8033,  for,  as  well  as  its  context,  it  is
(not  incurably)  corrupt  ;  see  Crit.  Bib.  ,  ad  loc.  The
ancient  etymologies  (from  rh,  'tympanum'  or  nns,
'  aperuit  ')  need  only  bare  mention.  Cp  MOLECH,  §  3.

T.  K.  C.

TORCH  (TS?,  lapprd;  AAMTTAC)-  Nah.  24[5]  Zech.
126  Jn.  183  (A&MTTAc).  Cp  LAMP.  The  military  use
of  torches  was  common  in  ancient  warfare  ;  cp  Statius,
Theb.  iv.  6.

On  rrn|?S,  flladoth,  Nah.  2  3  [4],  see  IRON,  §  2.


TORMAH  HEnri  ;  for  ©  see  ARUMAH,  and  cp
Moore,  'Judges,'  SBOT\^\.&\).  ]),  mentioned  in  the  story
of  ABIMELECH  (q.v.  ),  Judg.  931  EVms-  Moore  and
Budde  identify  it  with  ARUMAH  (q.v.  }.

Very  possibly  both  rtOIN  (Arumah)  and  Tormah  (ncin)  are
corruptions  of  ^MCriT-  Underlying  the  present  story  of  Gideon,
who  was  of  Ophrah  near  Shechem  (so  Moore),  there  seems  to
have  been  an  earlier  tale  with  different  geography.  The  dis
tricts  of  Ophrah  and  Cusham  -  jerahmeel  were  among  those
which  the  '  children  of  the  East  '  (or  rather  [col.  1719,  n.  4]  the
Amalekites)  devastated,  and  which  Gideon  set  free  from  their


1  See  CHERUB,  col.  742,  n.  2.  The  same  transition  from
1  burning  '  to  '  flashing  '  occurs  in  the  use  of  haniatu,  (i)  to  burn,
(2)10  flash.  Cp{ii>ntu,  'bright,  shining."  See  Del.  Ass.  ////"/>.

-  For  the  most  probable  original  form  of  the  text,  see  PARA
DISE,  §  5.

3  Read  cneril  IJSnn x  CP- Cp  GOLD,  §  i  ;  ONYX. (B,  it


is  true,  gives  av8pa£,  perhaps  reading  rnpN  instead  of  nVlS-

4  i.e.,  for  nSian  »jn  read  -uenn  -jn-


5140


i"  2


«


O


c_  •& w  '-w


a  w


oo-o 7300


w

OJ

—•

H

»— «

2
O

3=
O

cc

H

u,

o


i .  1

i "<3 §

s  S  1


2 •=


d- -

M O


*• OOd333  Kai  •£> *£ $ Zi £ SI *T-. i1 -^r

C— MD3CQCQK03 UU ^QQQQQ-liQQ


.


fl


th
h


gem
-  '


n
a
e

'


1  1  w.-i

-a  •§  -7  V  rf  15

§ S  -3  "<  S  ^

o-  <r .  r  "S  -9

<< ^  13  < a


U

h
W


•J

o
o


ffi


E

CQ
C/f

>— I

H
H- i

O

E
U


COO

h

0

ENES,  COUNTRY  OF

-

M eoo  "To coo
«» ^  coo w-

E !£ Em

§ is 1  g

"10
an

<
S
>
U)

N
»0<

an

S
1

W

M

a
<

lO

1

X

,-

u ° u

Sa'sa,  €2  (PHARPAR)
Sauwarah,  £3  (TRAC

1.  Semachonitis,  A3
w.  Semak,  A4  (GERA

tulul  esh-Shahibat,  E

O

r

<

-
w"

-
«3

?-^i H
*l|?t%4

.*  £  1 =  W  ^  <  «  -o
fe  J.  w  i.  4 . -  S  -

iiUf  3.S  t!-8

SslS'Ss-S'^ig

8  H  £  £  £  £  ^  «  .22,

Tabakat  Fahl,  A6

f  E

--i?

u ^

>, 4)

'5  >^

11
h-  *

I-S

^1

E
?

a;

fr*

icS <
^

1?
3 3

N J-

03 <

if  .§

Pi

•s  P
„  ^

41

vO

<

"8

P
.-

P

Trachon,  04

-t

Q
.**

0

H

z

o

£,

VO Tf

5  1  1

H  3' ^

JS

K  N

e" S

13 ^,
N .Ji,

2

<;

.  —  .

.j:

o

^-

l/

O

an .  —  .

ro vo -  —  -

'

LO

"<~

a

^  «"  c^  g ^  w  ^r

,^.

—  T^

g

T+-

^  _^

£  z -  z -^TCOO^J

55

S < ro

^
g

•"'
^

1

N

shari'at-el  Manadireh,  AB.
jebel  el-Mani',  D2

<

X

a
aa

•*

< N

Is

,rt

rt 0)

S  S

"3  "3

:
_

JL

-T

U

IM

L

Miryamin,  A6

P < - 2 - - t 9

zgtg eoo j£ z ^

O?Z< .HOu

a^,oS M s = w

S°5H- 2g<E
Sxo< h rH OK

H  <  *  r^ ss  <  H  r

—  ' . H fa ui J*-^<N

«  --  ~^  .  -  U ^ ^ ,<?  U

QS^-^. 5^—  WM

ire P C .a * .

j=  'a* - g 'C ,t  Q  -g cs
«  5  "3  ^  '3 u -  7=  J2-

Ml!  it?!

^-< t/l ^r-1 __j .—  < ^-y ^ U G

>§ IS,  *5 ^3 W Z<HT31>

w1

Q

"o
o

1

cr

< VO
. <

| _c|

rt "3
OH 0-,

ro

Q

i

1

CH

3

«

Q
U

10

03

M

« 03
icd

al  ,cs

si

1  1

er-Remthch,  €5

•-

W

Q

-r
-
:

C

i

J
:
U

•*

03

~
-

g  J  "!

i  ^  |

1  -  §

-t  ,c  "

H

-rt ^. ro  fa

W2 u Q

5 1 a"  "§

1  1  1  1

Salchad,  £5
Samakh,  A5
es-Sanamen,  03

B

--.

OH

coo .  —  .

2 H


— • 3

in! vD "5


a -3

2 E


o  o

5~Q  §

03  a

- s  H

.rt is  ~—


U — g u.


s  .2  3 S S  -a


ir,


R
T


jf  I" ^ H

S  03  CQ  —

•3  . - W

^  f«  s  a


2  «.  2  «•  5- 1

^  "3  .H>  "3  "3  ^


.  G 1


-3X* J-3^Sii


KM — i
- } —


03 rt Q


_  to  «5j

vO  ^

W  <  ja

a  4  i

«  «  s

,js  P  e

S  P  c«

E  c  >r.

rt  rt  *•


Z.  S-


C -  ^i

o'  "g  '3

-^  £•  "3 d  03'


X-  1  K


-  W


.«? -  03


3 "T"  = •  r


TORTOISE

raids,  and  Mt.  Jerahmeel  (not  Gilboa,  see  SAUL,  §  4)  was  the
place  where  the  hero  encamped.  Cusham-jerahmeel  was  the  city
of  which  Abimelech  made  himself  kiHg,  and  Jerahmeel  (or
rather,  no  doubt,  some  popular  shortened  form  of  it)  was  the
name  of  the  place  (in  the  Jerahmeelite  region)  where  Abime
lech  resided  when  Zebul  sent  word  to  him  of  Gaal's  intrigues.
Cp  SHECHE.M.

It  is  important  to  notice  (i)  that  P  knows  of  Gideoni
as  a  Benjamite  name  (NTu.  In,  etc.),  (2)  that  the  list  of
David's  heroes  (2  S.  2827)  contains  the  name  of  Abiezer
the  Anathothite,  and  (3)  that  an  Ophrah  is  known  to
have  existed  in  the  land  of  Benjamin  ;  Gideon  was,  upon
this  theory,  a  hero  of  S.  Palestine.  Cp  MEONENIM,
MOREH.  T.  K.  c.

TORTOISE  py,  sd6;  o  KpoxoAeiAoc  o  xep-
CAIOC  I  crocodilus).  The  Heb.  word  thus  rendered  by
the  AV  in  Lev.  11 29,  has  been  supposed  by  some  to
mean  a.  kind  of  crocodile  (cp  @  Pesh.,  etc.),  whilst,
according  to  the  Talmudists,  it  denoted  a  'toad.'
Most,  however,  take  the  word,  like  its  Ar.  equivalent
dabb,  to  mean  some  kind  of  LIZARD  (q.v. );  RV  renders
GREAT  LIZARD.

The  tortoise,  which  AV  preferred,  belongs  to  that  group  of
the  Reptilia  called  the  Chtlonia,  which  is  represented  in
Palestine  by  two  species  of  land  tortoise,  and  several  aquatic.
Testudo  il>cra,  the  Mauritania!!  tortoise,  is  the  commonest
species  ;  it  is  widely  distributed  independent  of  soil,  and  is
found  from  Mogador  to  Persia.  In  S.  Palestine  its  place  is
taken  by  T.  leiihii,  which  prefers  a  sandy  soil.  The  terrapins,
Clemmys  ccisfica,  var.  riimlata,  are  frequent  in  the  streams
and  pools  of  Palestine,  and  Kmys  or/ucularis,  a  synonym  for
E.  europiea,  is  found  in  the  lakes  of  Gennesaret  and  Huleh.
The  Egyptian  soft  tortoise,  Trionyx  triunguis=  T.  tegypiiacits,
an  African  species,  has  been  taken  in  the  Lltani  and  the  Nahr-
el-Kelb.  A.  E.  S. — S.  A.  C.

TORTURE  (eTYMTTANicGHCAN),  Heb.  11 35.  See
MACCABEES  (SECOND),  §  8.

TOU  (Wh),  i  Ch.  18g/;  in  2  S.  89  Toi.

TOW.  (i)  rtPKJ'S,  pisteh.  Is. -13 17,  RV  FLAX.  (2)
rnj'J,  nforeth,  Judg.  169  Is.  1  31  ;  i/~\yi,  'to  shake,'  so 'that
which  is  shaken  off'  from  the  flax  (see  BDB).

TOWER.  The  psalmists  compare  God  to  a  lofty,
impregnable  tower  or  fort  ;  3|t"p,  misgdb,  and  PITIED,
mtsiiddh,  occur  in  combination,  18  3  [2],  also  separately.
Misgdb  conveys  the  idea  of  height  ;  Mcstlddh  that  of
ambush  (David's  rmss,  EV  'hold,'  may  have  suggested
the  application  of  the  term1).  But  the  ordinary  word
for  '  tower '  is  VtjC,  migddl,  an  old  Canaanitish  term,
also  found  as  a  loan-word  in  Egyptian2  (see  MIGDOL,
and  cp  NAMES,  §  106).  Towers  were  used  both  for  the
defence  of  cities  (see  FORTRESS,  §  5)  and  for  the  pro
tection  of  flocks  and  vineyards  (see  CATTLE,  §  i,  and
cp  '  tower  of  the  watchmen,'  3  2  K.  17g  ;  '  tower  of  the
flock, 'Mic.  48,cpEDER).  These  protecting  towers  were
probably  adjoined  by  the  rude  houses  of  peasants,  and
out  of  these  groups  of  dwellings  larger  places  would
arise.

The  towers  of  Babel  (Gen.  11  4),  Penuel  (Judg.  8917),  Shechem
(Judg.  946^),  and  Siloam  (Lk.  184,  Trupyos)  are  especially
mentioned  ;  also  in  AV  of  2  K.  5  24,  a  tower  which,  from  v.  8,
we  might  believe  to  be  that  of  Samaria.  But  though  7Sy,
'ophel,  will  bear  the  meaning  'tower'  in  Is.  32  14  (||  [n3),  the
primary  sense  of  the  word  is  'hill'  (lit.  'swelling').  Hence
RV  renders  'hill.'  The  versions  all  render  as  if  they  read
7jHt,  'tfhcl  (e.g.,  Tg.  'D3  "IfwS,  'to  a  secret  place';  (P  et?  ro
<rKOTfL>'6v).  Pesh.,  however,  implies  ~nrr  72N"'?X.  Cp  OTHEL.
We  also  hear  of  a  '  tower  of  David  '  (Cant.  4  4),  which  may  be  a
slip  for  '  tower  of  Solomon  '  (cp  i  K.  7  2),  and,  at  least  in  the  EV,
of  the  '  tower  '  of  SYENE  (q.v.),  and  cp  MIGDOL.

1  In  i  Ch.  11  7  128  16,  we  find  1iD  (EV  'hold,'  except  in  11  7,
where  AV  'castle,'  RV  'stronghold');  the  'city  of  David'  is
meant,  for  which  28.  67  has  miSID  (EV  'strong  hold  ').

2  It  also  exists  in  Lihyan  (an  offshoot  of  Sabaean),  and  in  MI ;
but  there  is  no  trace  of  it  in  Assyrian.

3  The  difficult  phrase  rendered  in  EV  'as  a  besieged  city'
(Is.  Is)  means  rather,  as  Hitz. and  Ges. (Thes.)  suppose, 'a
watch-tower '  (misj  Ty  =  D'"lXJ  SIM)- Nearly  so  thinks  Duhm.
But  this  has  no  solid  basis. Perhaps  we  shoud  read  ninvy  I'l'i
'  a  forsaken  city,'  or  the  like  (see  '  Isaiah,'  SB OT  (Addenda).

164  5141


TRACHONITIS

A  third  word  for  '  tower '  is  '112,  bdhan,  Is.  32  14  (RV  '  watch-
tower'),  or  pna  (Kr.  pna),  Is.  2813  (of  siege-towers),  and  a
fourth  is  tiyD,  nui'dz,  which  unites  the  meanings  of  'fortress'
and  '  refuge  '  (Ps.  27  i  31  5  [4],  etc.) ;  see  Del.  on  Ps.  31  5  [4].

TOWN  in  EV  sometimes  corresponds  to  (i)  Ttf,  '/>
(see  CITY) — e.g.,  in  '  unwalled  town'  (Dt.  85  RVmg.  'country
town '  ;  Esth.  9  19),  or  '  town  [RV  city]  in  the  country '
iS.27s(mvB:n  "iy  nnN3);  also  to  four  of  the  terms  [(2),
(3),  (4).  (8)1  also  rendered  VILLAGE  (g.v.).

TOWNCLERK  (rp&MMATeyc),  Acts  19  35.  See
EPHESUS,  §  2.

TRACHONITIS.  The  name  of  the  region  surround-
ing  and  including  the  'Trachon,'  a  remarkable
1  Name  vo'camc  formation,  beginning  about  25  in.
S.  of  Damascus,  and  40  m.  E.  of  the  Sea  of
Galilee,  mentioned  in  the  Bible  only  once,  Lk.  3 1  (T^J
'Irovpalai  KO.L  Tpaxuviridos  xupas),  as  part  of  the
'tetrarchy'  of  Philip,  one  of  the  sons  of  Herod  the
Great  (see  vol.2  col.  2033/1,  2041/1 ).  The  word
itself  is  a  derivative  of  Tpdxw,  the  name  given  by  the
Greeks  to  the  '  rough  '  and  rugged  areas,  formed  by  lava
deposits,  which  are  characteristic  of  the  region  S.  and
E.  of  Damascus  (see  Fischer's  Map  of  this  district  in
ZDPV  12  [1889]  H.,  4).  Strabo  (xvi.22o)  speaks  of  two
'  hills  '  called  Tpaxw^es  beyond  Damascus  (viripKfii>Ta.i
5'avTrjs  Svb  \ey6/j.evoi  \6(f>oi  Tp&xuvfs) :  the  more  remote
and  easternmost  of  these  is  the  rugged  basaltic  area,
bare  and  uninhabited,  now  called  Tulftl  es-Safd  ( '  the
hills  of  stone'),  55  m.  SE.  of  Damascus:1  the  other
is  the  nearer  and  better  known  '  Trachonitis  '  of  Philip,
corresponding  to  the  modern  Leja  (i.e.,  lajaali,
refuge,  retreat),  so  called  because,  from  its  physical
character,  it  forms  a  natural  fortress  or  retreat,  where
bandits  could  feel  themselves  secure,  or  which  could  be
held  by  a  small  body  of  defenders  against  even  a
determined  invader. "

The  entire  region  S.  and  SE.  of  Damascus  was  once
actively  volcanic,  and  the  SE.  corner  of  the  Leja  is
contiguous  to  the  X\Y.  end  of  the  Jebel
Haurdn  range — called  also  now,  from  its
having  been  largely  colonised  by  Druses
migrating  from  Lebanon,  the  Jebel  ed-Druz — with  its
many  conical  peaks  (Ps.  6Si6/~.  [is/I]),  the  craters  of
extinct  volcanoes  ;  and  it  is  to  the  streams  of  basaltic
lava,  emitted  in  particular  by  the  G  hard  rat  el-Kib-
liyeh,  and  the  neighbouring  Tell  Shihdn  (see  view  in
Merrill,  15),  at  the  N\Y.  end  of  this  range,  that  the
Leja  owes  its  origin.  In  shape,  the  Leja  resembles
roughly  a  pear  ;  it  is  about  25  m.  long  from  N.  to  S.
and  19  m.  broad  from  E.  to  W.  ;  and  it  embraces  an
area  of  some  350  sq.  m.  It  rises  to  a  height  of  from
20  to  40  ft.  above  the  surrounding  plain,  so  that  it
looks  from  a  distance  like  a  rocky  coast  ;  its  surface  is
rugged,  and  intersected  by  innumerable  crevices  and
fissures.  'In  its  outline  or  edge  the  bed  is  far  from
being  regular,  but  sends  out  at  a  multitude  of  points,
black  promontories  of  rock  into  the  surrounding  plain.
Through  this  rugged  shore  there  are  a  few  openings
into  the  interior,  but  for  the  most  part  it  is  impassable,
and  roads  had  to  be  excavated  to  the  towns  situated
within  it.'  The  appearance  of  the  Leja  is  very  strange.
1  Its  surface  is  black,  and  has  the  appearance  of  the  sea
when  it  is  in  motion  beneath  a  dark  cloudy  sky,  and
when  the  waves  are  of  good  size,  but  without  any
white  crests  of  foam.  But  this  sea  of  lava  is  motionless,
and  its  great  waves  are  petrified.  In  the  process  of
cooling  the  lava  cracked,  and  in  some  cases  the  layers
of  great  basalt  blocks  look  as  if  they  had  been  prepared
and  placed  where  they  are  by  artificial  means.  In  other

1  See  Wetzstein,  Hauran,  f>ff.\  Porter,  Damascus,1?}  \yt/.\
Burton  and  Drake,  Unexplored  Syria  (1872),  1  207-250 ',  v.
Oppenheim,  J'om  Mitttlmeer  zu»t  Pers.  Calf  (1899X1229-33
(with  photographs).

-  In  1838,  6000  Druses  defended  it  successfully  against  Ibrahim
Pasha,  who  lost  20,000  men  in  the  attempt  to  force  it.


2.  Descrip
tion.


TRACHONITIS

cases,  the  hillocks  have  split  lengthwise,  or  sometimes
into  separate  portions  ;  and  thus  seams  have  been
opened,  forming  great  fissures  and  chasms  which  can
not  be  crossed.  Elsewhere  again  the  lava  bed  has  not
been  broken  into  such  small  hillocks,  but  has  more  the
appearance  of  what  we  call  a  rolling  prairie.  There  are
between  the  hillocks,  and  also  in  the  rolling  parts,  many
intervals  of  soil,  free  from  stones,  which  are  of  surpris
ing  fertility'  (Merrill,  E.  of  Jordan,  nf.).  The  soil  in
these  depressions  is  still  cultivated  in  parts,  and  affords
pasture  for  flocks  :  remains  of  ancient  vineyards  have
also  been  found  in  them.  At  many  points  (ibid.  14)
there  are  copious  springs,  though  not,  apparently
(Rindfleisch,  15),  in  the  interior.  Besides  the  seams
and  fissures  that  have  been  spoken  of,  there  are  also
many  caves,  which  have  been  occupied  as  dwellings.
Bands  of  robbers  lurk  in  them  at  the  present  day  (cp
how  Porter  was  attacked,  Damascus, W  273 ff.}.  Out
laws  from  the  settled  portions  of  the  country  flee  hither,
and  are  comparatively  safe.  In  the  vicinity  of  Dama.
(the  highest  point  in  the  Leja)  '  so  rough  and  rugged  is
the  country,  so  deep  the  gullies  and  ravines,  and  so
lofty  the  overhanging  rocks,  that  the  whole  is  a  laby
rinth  which  none  but  the  Arabs  can  penetrate  '  (Porter,
283).!

It  is  worthy  of  note  how  closely  these  descriptions
agree  with  Josephus.  He  says,  in  connection  with  the
order  given  by  Augustus  (see  below,  §  4)  to  check  the
depreciations  of  the  Trachonites,  how  difficult  it  was  to
do  this  : —

'  For  they  possessed  neither  cities  nor  fields,  but  lived  together
with  their  cattle  in  subterranean  retreats  and  caves.  They  had
however,  constructed  reservoirs  for  water,  and  granaries  for
corn,  and  being  invisible  could  long  resist  a  foe.  The  entrances
to  the  caves  are  narrow  even  for  persons  entering  one  at  a  time,
whilst  within  they  are  incredibly  large  and  made  spacious.  The
ground  above  the  dwellings  is  not  high,  but  as  it  were  a  plain.
The  rocks  are  everywhere  rugged  and  difficult  to  find  a  way
amon.j,  except  when  a  guide  points  out  the  paths  ;  for  even
these  are  not  straight,  but  have  many  windings  '  (Ant.  xv.  10  i).

But,  though  this  was  the  character  of  the  population

of  the  Leja  in  Josephus' time,  before  long  it  changed

„ p.,.  , (see  §5):  civilisation  entered,  and  cities

'. ...  were  built,  the  remains  of  which  are  in

civilisation.

many cases standing to the present

day.  Thus  on  the  X. ,  just  within  the  Leja,  we  have
Burak  (Porter,*2)  164  /);  then  (going  southwards)
on,  or  a  little  outside,  the  E.  edge,  es-Suwarah
(P.  169),  el-Hazm,  and  (inside  the  Leja)  Sahr  (Heber-
Percy,  31-39,  43  f.  :  p.  32  '  the  track  to  Sahr  winds
amongst  the  fissures,  gaps,  holes,  and  waves  of  the
lava,  that  now  extends  in  an  undulating  unbroken
sheet  for  a  few  yards,  and  then  is  cracked  and  broken
up  into  every  conceivable  form.  Even  the  semblance
of  a  track  soon  faded  away'),  Der  Nileh  (HP  47),
and  Shuhbah,  between  the  Leja  and  J.  Hauran
(P.  igoff.  ;  HP  59  J?:)  ;  on  the  S. ,  Xejran  and  Busr
el-Hariri  (P.  266^);  on  the  SW.  Ezra  (P.  271;
Merrill,  26  ff.}  ;  on  the  W. ,  Kirateh,  Mujeiclel,  Khubab
(Chabeb),  and  Kureim  (P.  279^  ;  M.  24-32)  ;  on
the  XW. ,  Mismiyeh  (M.  16-22,  with  illustration  of
temple :  the  ruins,  according  to  Porter,  284,  are
3  m.  in  circuit,  and  contain  many  buildings  of  consider
able  size  and  beauty) ;  and  in  the  heart  of  the  Leja,
Dama  (or  Damet  el-'Alya,  Wetzst.  25),  the  largest
town  in  the  interior,  with  about  300  houses,  mostly  in
good  preservation  (Burckh.  no).2

Mismiyeh  (the  ancient  Pha-na-}  is  interesting  on
account  of  an  inscription  found  there  by  Burckhardt  in
1810  (Travels  in  Syria,  1822,  p.  117;  also  Merrill,
p.  20,  and  Waddington,  No.  2524),  which  demonstrates
the  identity  of  the  Leja  with  the  Trachon.  Julius
Saturninus,  consular  legate  of  Syria,  under  Alex.
Severus,  issues  a  public  notice  informing  the  inhabitants

1  The  soil  of  Hauran  outside  the  Leja,  it  should  be  remarked,
is  singularly  rich  and  fertile  (cp  BASHAN,  §  2).

2  See  further  the  list  of  places  in  Hauran  (including  the  Leja),
with  explanatory  remarks  in  ZDPV,  1889,  p.  278^

SH3


TRACHONITIS

that,  there  being  temporary  barracks  in  the  place,  they
are  not  liable  to  have  soldiers  billeted  upon  them  ;  and
the  inscription  begins  :  'louXios  'S.a.Tovpvtvos  "bcuv-qaiois
fj.7)TpOKW[j,ig.  rod  Tpaxwco?  xcupetj/.  Two  other
lj.rjTpoKWfj.iai,  or  capital  cities,  of  the  Trachon  are  also
known,  viz.  popfxa.0,  now  Bureikeh  (Wadd.  2396),
and  Zorava,  now  Ezra'  (Wadd.  2480,  cp  2479).

It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  such  cities
are  peculiar  to  the  Leja.  The  entire  region,  including
the  slopes  of  the  J.  Hauran,  and  the  plains  bordering
on  the  Leja,  is  studded  with  deserted  towns  and  villages,
testifying  to  a  once  flourishing  and  prosperous  civilisa
tion.  Thus  we  have  Hit,  HC-yat,  Butheneh,  Shuka
(Shakkft,  ~a.KKa.ia),  E.  of  the  Leja  ;  Suleim,  Kanawat,
Si'  (with  an  inscription  on  a  statue  erected  to  Herod
the  Great  :  Wadd.  2364),  'Atil,  Suweda,  Hebran,
'Ire,  Kureiyeh,  and  Sal  had,  with  its  great  castle  (see
SALCAH),  on  the  W.  and  SW.  slopes  of  J.  Hauran  ;
the  important  city  and  fortress  of  Bosra,  20  m.  S.  of
the  Leja,1  described  by  Porter  (173-189,  zooff.,  218-
239,  248^)  and  Merrill  (32-58);  Der'at  (see  EDKEI)
20  m.  SW.  of  it ;  as  well  as  many  other  places  (Wetz-
stein  says  there  are  300  on  the  E.  and  S.  slopes  of
J.  Hauran  alone).  The  general  character  of  all  these
deserted  places  is  the  same :  the  Leja  supplied  the
building  material  ;  and  this  determined  the  style  of  the
architecture.  The  dwellings  are  constructed  of  massive
well -hewn  blocks  of  black  basaltic  lava,  with  heavy
doors  moving  on  pivots,  outside  staircases,  galleries,
and  roofs,  all  of  the  same  material  (see  the  descriptions
just  quoted,  and  the  photographs  in  Heber- Percy,
frontispiece,  41,  46,  61,  65,  69,  etc.).  Many  of
these  cities  are  in  such  a  good  state  of  preservation  that,
as  Wetzstein  observes  (49),  it  is  difficult  for  the
traveller  not  to  believe  that  they  are  inhabited,  and  to
expect,  as  he  walks  along  the  streets,  to  see  persons
moving  about  the  houses.  The  architecture  of  these
deserted  sites  (which  include  temples,  theatres,  aque1
ducts,  reservoirs,  churches,  etc. )  is  of  the  Grasco- Roman
period,  and  is  such  as  to  show  that,  between  the  first
and  the  seventh  century  A.  D. ,  they  were  the  home  of  a
thriving  and  wealthy  population.

The  Targums  of  Onkelos  and  Jonathan,  followed  by  some
moderns(as  Porter,  Merrill,  and  Heber-Percy),  identify  Trachon
with  the  '  region  of  Argob '  (Dt.  3  4  13  f.  i  K.  4  13).  See,  against
this  view,  ARGOB  and  BASHAN  (col.  497),  above  ;  also  Driver  on
Dt.  345,  and  '  Argob '  in  Hastings'  L>B.

Trachon,  or  the  Trachonitis,2  is  mentioned  frequently
by  Josephus, chiefly  in  connection  with  the  predatory
practices  of  its  inhabitants. In  25  B.C.


4.  History.


one  Zenodorus, a  bandit-chief,  held,  on


payment  of  tribute  to  Cleopatra,  the  former  domain  of
Lysanias  (see  col.  2841)  ;  and  he,  to  increase  his
revenues,  so  encouraged  the  lawless  Trachonites  in
their  raids  upon  the  people  of  Damascus,  that  the  latter
appealed  to  Varro,  the  governor  of  Syria,  to  lay  their
case  before  Augustus.  Augustus  sent  back  orders  that
this  'robbers'  nest'  (\ya-T-f) piov)  should  be  destroyed;
and  Varro  accordingly  made  an  expedition  against
them.  Afterwards,  in  order  more  permanently  to
reduce  them  to  order,  Augustus  placed  the  country
under  the  control  of  Herod  the  Great,  who,  with  the
help  of  skilful  guides,  successfully  invaded  it,  and
secured,  at  least  for  the  time,  '  peace  and  quietness  for
the  neighbouring  people"  (Ant.  xvi.  10 1  cp  3;  more
briefly,  BJ\.  264).  The  Trachonites,  however,  dis
satisfied  with  being  obliged  to  '  till  the  ground  and  live
quietly,'  and  finding  also  that  it  rewarded  their  labours
but  meagrely,  took  advantage  of  Herod's  absence  in
Rome  (about  9  B.C.)  to  revolt,  and  resumed  their  raids
upon  the  more  ferflle  territory  of  their  neighbours.
Herod's  generals  inflicted  a  defeat  upon  them  ;  but
about  forty  of  the  robber-chiefs  escaped  into  '  Arabia '

1  Both  Eus.  (OS  268  269  298)  and the  Talm.  (see  Schurer,^)
1  353,  (3)  1  426)  speak  of  Trachon  as  in  the  neighbourhood  of,  or
bordering  on,  Bosra.

2  Josephus  uses  both  terms.

5144


TRACHONITIS

(i.e.  Nabataea,  S.  of  Hauran),  whence  they  raided  both
Judnea  and  Coele-Syria.  Herod,  upon  his  return  to
Syria,  finding  himself  unable  to  reach  the  robbers
themselves,  invaded  Trachon  and  slew  many  of  their
relations  there,  in  retaliation  for  which  they  still  more
harassed  and  pillaged  his  territory  (Ant.  xvi.  9i).  In
the  end,  Herocl  threw  2000  Idumasans  into  Trachonitis
(it.  2),  and  placed  a  Babylonian  Jew  named  Zamaris,
a  leader  of  mercenaries,  in  command  of  the  surrounding
districts.  Zamaris  built  fortresses,  and  a  village  called
Bathyra,  and  protected  the  Jews  coming  up  from
Babylon  to  attend  the  feasts  in  Jerusalem  against  the
Trachonite  robbers.  The  consequence  was  that,  till  the
end  of  Herod's  reign,  the  country  around  Trachonitis
enjoyed  tranquillity  (Ant.  xvii.  2 1-2).

Upon  Herod's  death,  his  son  Philip  (4  B.C. -34  A.D.  )
received,  by  his  father's  will,  the  '  tetrarchy '  of
Gaulanitis  (Jaulan),  Batanaua  (the  '  Bashan '  of  the
OT),  Trachonitis,  and  Auranitis  ('Hauran'),  as  well
as  a  part  of  the  former  domain  of  Zenodorus  (Ant.
xvii.  8 1  114  ;  cp  xviii.  46  54  BJy\.  63).  Under  Philip's
just  and  gentle  rule  (Ant.  xviii.  46)  the  same  tranquillity
was  no  doubt  maintained  ;  for  Strabo,  writing  about
25  A.  D. ,  says  (xvi.  220)  that  since  the  robber  bands
under  Zenodorus  had  been  put  down,  the  country  round
had,  through  the  good  government  of  the  Romans,  and
as  a  result  of  the  security  afforded  by  the  garrisons
stationed  in  Syria,  suffered  far  less  from  the  raids  of
the  barbarians.  After  Philip's  death  (34  A.D.  ),  as  he
left  no  sons,  his  tetrarchy  was  attached  by  Tiberius  to
the  province  of  Syria  (Ant.  xviii.  46).  In  37  A.D.  ,
however,  Caligula  bestowed  it  upon  Herod  Agrippa  I.
(Ant.  xviii.  6  10  end;  BJ\\.  96),  who  held  it — as  an
inscription  commemorating  his  safe  return  from  Rome
(41  A.  D.  ),  found  at  el-Mushennef,  shows  (Wadd.  2211) —
as  far  as  the  E.  slopes  of  the  Jebel  ed-Druz.  The  rule
of  Agrippa  seems  to  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new
stage  in  the  civilisation  of  the  entire  district  :  Greek
inscriptions  now  begin  to  multiply,  and  we  have  many
records  in  stone  of  the  building  of  public  edifices.
Agrippa  I.  died  (Actsl22s)  in  44  A. D.,  and,  as  his  son
was  still  a  minor,  Trachon  and  the  neighbouring  parts
were  administered  by  a  procurator  under  the  governor
of  Syria.  From  53  to  100  the  old  tetrarchy  of  Philip


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

formed  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Herod  Agrippa  II.  (Acts
25 13/-),  inscriptions  and  buildings  dating  from  whose
reign  are  numerous  both  in  the  Leja  itself  and  in  other
parts  of  Hauran.1  The  most  important  step  in  the
history  of  the  civilisation  of  this  entire  district,  however,
was  taken  in  106,  when  Trajan  created  it  into  the  new
province  of  '  Arabia, '  with  Bo.sra  as  its  capital.  Trajan's
agent  in  accomplishing  this  was  Cornelius  Palma,
governor  of  Syria  from  104  to  108,  whose  work  in  bring
ing  an  aqueduct  into  Kanata  (now  Kerak)  is  com
memorated  in  an  inscription  found  at  el-'Afineh  (Wadd.
2296-2297  ;  cp  2301,  2305).  It  does  not  fall  within  the
scope  of  the  present  article  to  pursue  the  history  further  :
it  may  therefore  suffice  to  remark  generally  that  the  direct
influence  of  the  Romans  began  almost  immediately  to
make  itself  felt :  roads  and  aqueducts  were  constructed  ;
during  the  second  and  third  centuries  basilicas,  temples,
theatres,  and  other  buildings  rapidly  multiplied  ;  in
scriptions,  sepulchral,  dedicatory,  architectural,  become
more  abundant  ;  and  a  new  and  unique  civilisation,
externally  Roman,  but  including  within  it  a  strange
combination  of  Greek  and  Semitic  elements,  is  the
result  (see  further  details  and  references  in  GASm.  HG
624 ff.).  A  Roman  road,  it  may  be  added,  starting
from  Damascus,  runs  through  the  Leja,  passing
Mismlyeh  in  the  N. ,  and  Bureikeh  in  the  S.  ;  and  going
on  to  Bosra,  Philadelphia  (Rabbath  Ammon),  Moab,
etc.  (cp  Rindfleisch,  24).

Burckhardt,_  as  cited  above,  ^\ff.  (Haurun),  \\off.  (the  Leja)  ;
J.  G.  Wetzstein,  Reisebericht  uber  Hauran  «.  die  Traclionen,
1860  (epoch-making),  especially  pp.  25^;
5.  Literature.  Porter  (  =  P,  §  3),  Five  Years  in  Damascus  (2) ;
Merri!J(  =  M,  §  3),  E.  of  Jordan,  and  Heber-
Percy  (  =  HP,  §  3),  A  I  isit  to  Bashan  and  Argob,  1896,  as
referred  to  above  ;  the  account  of  Stiibel's  '  Reise,'  with  map,  in
ZDPl',  1889,  pp.  225-302  (important)  2 ;  Rindfleisch,  '  Die  Land-
schaft  Hauran  in  romischer  Zeit  u.  in  der  Gegenwart,'  in  ZDPl',
1898,  pp.  1-58  (on  the  Leja,  5-7  14^  17  24  45)  ;  v.  Oppenheim,
op.  cit.  1  KT  ff.  (chaps.  3  5  on  Hauran  generally  ;  chap.  4  on  the
Druses).  The  standard  authority  on  the  architecture  of  Hauran
is  de  Vogue's  fine  work,  Syrie  Ccntrale,  Architecture'  Civile
et  Religieuse  du  i'  au  vii'  sieclc  (1867),  containing  150  plates,
with  explanatory  descriptions  (though  little  relating  specifically
to  the  Leja) ;  see  more  briefly  GASm.  HG  629  ff.

For  inscriptions  (from  Haurfm  generally,  as  well  as  the  Leja)
see  the  works  cited  under  BASHAN,  §  5  ;  and  add  Burton  and
Drake,  op.  cit.  2  379-388.  s.  R.  D.


TRADE AND COMMERCE

WITH TRADE ROUTES

CONTENTS

I.  GENERAL  CONDITIONS  AND  PROGRESS  OF  TRADE  IN  WESTERN  ASIA  DOWN  TO  1000  B.C.  (§§  1-27).

Introductory  (§  i).  No trading classes  ; tribal monopolies  Barter,  standards  of  value  (§  20).

Conditions  of  trade  in  W.  Asia  (§  2). (§§  12-16).  Trade  and  Religion  (§§  21-24).

Varieties  of  soil  and  fertility  (§§  3-6).  Trade  of  W.  Asia  with  India  and  Europe  Syrian commerce and industry; Amarna

Distribution  of  stones  and  metals  (§  7). (§  17  f.\  Letters  (§§  25-27).

Great  empires  and  trade  ;  political  effects  Means  of  carriage  by  land  and  sea  (§  IQ).
(§§  8-n).

II.  TRADE  ROUTES  OF  WESTERN  ASIA  (§§  28-40).

Natural  lines  of  traffic  ;  Egypt  (§  28).  Egypt  to  Syria  (§  32).  Northern  Syria  (§  39).

.). Cross-routes:  Desert  of  Till,  Negeb  (§  33). Assyria  and  Babylonia  (§  40).
Main  and  cross  routes: Palestine  (§§  34-

38).

III. HISTORY  OF  TRADE  IN  ISRAEL  (§§  41-81).

Periods  (§  41).  Early  monarchy  ;  Saul  to  Solomon  (§§  48- Exile  and  Persian  period  (§§  55-62).

Early  traditions_(§  42./C)  50).  Greek  period  (g§  63-67).

Arrival  in  Palestine  ;  trade  under  'Judges' Aramaeans  ;  divided  kingdom  (§  5  if.).  Roman  Period  (§§  68-73).


Nile  and  Red  Sea  ;  Indian  Ocean
Arabia  (§  31).


(§§  44-47).


General  features
Bibliography  (§  84).

When  Israel  settled  in  Palestine  they  came  into  touch
with  lines  and  movements  of  commerce  which  had  been
extant  throughout  Western  Asia  from  a  remote
antiquity.  The  economic  development  of  the  nation
— apart  from  their  adoption  of  agri
culture —  consisted  in  their  gradual
engagement  in  this  already  ancient,  elaborate,  and
world-wide  system.  Many  of  its  consequences,  as  seen

5145


Eighth  and  seventh  centuries  (§  $•$/.)  Antipater,  Herod,  and 'later  (§§  74-78).

In  NT  literature  (§§  79-81).

IV.  TERMINOLOGY  OF  TRADE  IN  OT.

82).  Detailed  vocabulary  (§  83).

Maps  :  Trade-routes— i.  Hither  Asia  (opp.  col.  5160),  ii.  Palestine  (opp.  col.  5164).

in Egypt or Babylonia, repeat themselves in  Israel ;
indeed  at  some  periods  they  are  the  only  evidence  we


1.  Introductory.


1  For  a  list  of  inscriptions  naming  Herodian  kings,  see  Wadd.
2365  end.

2  See  also  the  map  of  Hauran  and  Jebel  ed-Druz,  accompany
ing Schumacher's '  Das' siidliche Basan ' in  ZDPl'IQ  (1897)
67-227. In  both  these  maps,  however,  there  is  an  error  in  lat.
and  long.  :  Damascus  is  placed  correctly  ;  but  by  a  fault  in  the
triangulation  the  whole  of  Hauran  and  surrounding  parts  are


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

have  of  the  presence  of  commerce  as  a  factor  in  the
national  life.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  reriew  the
rise,  progress,  and  fashions  of  trade  in  W.  Asia  —  with
its  relations  to  religion  —  down  till  the  end  of  the  second
millennium  B.  c.  ,  or  just  as  Israelite  commerce  began  to
develop.

I.  TRADE  IN  WESTERN  ASIA

From  the  most  remote  epochs  there  were  present
throughout  W.  Asia  the  conditions  not  only  of  local
_  ....  exchange,  but  also  of  a  wide  inter-
2.  Conditions  national  commerce>  viz.  :  (a)  the
Ot  trade.  great  differences  of  soili  fertility,  and
animal  and  vegetable  products  (§§  3-6)  ;  (fi)  the  unequal
distribution  of  stones  and  metals  (§  7)  ;  (c)  the  rise,  at
the  two  extremes  of  the  region,  of  empires  of  vast  wealth
and  culture  (§§  8-1  1  )  ;  (d)  the  specialisation  of  commerce
by  particular  tribes  and  nations  (§§  12-16)  ;  (e)  the
central  position  of  W.  Asia  between  the  Indian  Ocean
and  the  Mediterranean  —  India  and  Europe  (§  17  /.  )  ;
(f)  the  existence  of  natural  lines  of  traffic  both  by  land
and  by  sea  (§§  9,  28  /.}  ;  (g]  the  development  of  the
means  of  carriage  (§  19)  ;  and  (h)  the  rise  of  common
standards  of  value  (§  20).  To  our  survey  of  these  it  is
necessary  to  add  some  consideration  of  (?)  the  relation
of  commerce  to  religion  (§§  21-24)  ;  as  well  as  a  sketch
of  (k)  those  political  movements  which  so  powerfully
influenced  the  trade  of  Syria  just  before  Israel  settled  in
Palestine  (§§  25-27).

(u)  \\. Asia is unsurpassed in any  quarter  of the

globe  for  its  extraordinary  contrasts  of  soil  and  fertility  :

„ .. , between the Syrian and the Arabian

' P.1 * desert on the  one  hand, and  the  river-

ertiiity. valleys and deitas Of Babylonia and

Egypt,  with  the  garden  lands  of  Syria  and  S.  Arabia,
on  the  other  ;  whilst  most  of  the  ordinary  contrasts
—  between  sea-coast  and  '  Hinterland,'  lowlands  and
highlands,  with  very  different  temperatures  and  soils,
pastoral  and  arable  regions  —  were  also  present  through
out.  All  these  formed  different  grades  and  necessities  of
human  life,  between  which  the  currents  of  commerce
were  as  inevitable  as  the  winds  which  pass  between
spheres  of  differing  temperature  in  the  world's  atmo
sphere.  The  various  populations  of  W.  Asia  were
dependent  on  each  other  for  some  of  the  barest  necessaries
of  life,  as  well  as  for  most  of  its  simpler  comforts  and
embellishments,  and  such  dependence  was  the  beginning
of  trade.  At  the  same  time,  we  must  be  careful  not  to
exaggerate  either  the  amount  of  the  trade,  or  its  influence
on  the  minds  of  men  at  so  early  a  period.  Had
commerce  then  been  a  dominant  feature  of  human  life,
we  should  have  found  more  traces  of  its  influence  on
religion  than  we  shall  be  able  to  discover  (§  21).

The  elements  of  early  commerce  between  the  deserts

and the  fertile lands  are easily determined from the

.TM  .  conditions  of  to-day. There are  still

01  nomads  who  live  for  months  or  even
commerce.  mj]k  and  flcsh  (  Palmer>  Desert


of  the  Exodus],  varied  by  dates  from  the  oases  in  the
centre  of  Arabia  (Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  ,  passim}.  From
the  earliest  times,  however,  the  need  of  cereal  foods
must  have  drawn  the  Bedouins  into  commerce  with  the
agricultural  populations  ;  and  this  need  would  increase
with  the  settlement  of  nomads  from  the  interior  of
Arabia  on  the  borders  of  fertility.  From  Syria,
Mesopotamia,  and  Egypt  the  nomads  would  seek
grain,  fruit  (e.g.  ,  almonds),  cloth,  oil,  and  (after  its
invention)  pottery,1  with  (in  course  of  time)  weapons.2

shifted  unduly  S.  and  W.,  so  that  Bosra  is  32°  30'  5  N.,  and  36°
263'  E.,  instead  of,  as  it  ought  to  be,  32"  33^'  N.  and  36°  32'  E.
(see  MNDPV,  18915,  pp.  12-14).  This  error  has  been  corrected
in  Fischer's  Handkarte  von  Pal.  1899,  and  also  in  the  map
in  the  present  article  (which  is  based  upon  the  three  maps
named).

1  As  they  do  now  from  Gaza  and  Damascus.

-  To  the  early  Egyptians  the  nomads  were  the  people  of  the
boomerang.  But  the  story  of  Senuhyt  proves  that  during  the

ST47


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

In  exchange  they  would  give  dates,1  curdled  milk,
wool,  occasionally  cattle,  honey,  salt,  alkali  (obtained
from  the  ashes  of  the  Kilu  and  other  plants),-  'Mecca
balsam'  (BALSAM),  and  other  medicinal  herbs.  Com
merce  between  Syria  and  Egypt  included  oil,  mastic
(BALM),  wool,  etc.  (EGYPT,  §  8),  and  (later)  Syrian
manufactures  ;  whilst  traffic  Ixjtween  Babylonia  and
Egypt  was  frequent  even  in  pre-  historic  times  (ib.
§43).  Trade  in  SALT  (q.v.  )  was  not  only  local  —  as
from  the  salt-pans  N.  of  Pelusium,  in  el-Jof,  and  else
where,  or  from  the  deposits  at  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead
Sea  ;  —  probably  also  rock-salt  was  exported  to  a  distance
as  to-day  :  e.g.  ,  from  W.  Kaseem  in  Arabia  (Palgrave,
Centr.  and  E.  Arab.  180  [ed.  1883]).

The  most  isolated  of  the  fertile  lands  of  W.  Asia  lies
on  the  S.  of  Arabia  under  the  monsoon  rains. Arabia

_,  Felix (Ar. 'el-Yemen'  —  i.e., 'the

o.  A  ne  incense  .  ever been famous for


country.  fertjiitVi  and  was  the  seat  of  the
Mincean  and  Sabsean  civilisation  (below,  §  14).  Its
chief  repute,  however,  was  for  frankincense  (see  FRANK
INCENSE,  where  its  late  appearance  in  the  OT  is  noted,
and  its  probably  earlier  use  in  Egypt).  Erman3says
this  was  common  under  the  Old  Empire.  Sprenger
calls  the  incense-country  '  the  heart  of  the  commerce  of
the  ancient  world'  (Geog.  Alt.  Arab.  299).  Theodore
Bent  (Xinetecnth  Cent.,  Oct.  1895,  pp.  595^!  )  describes
'the  actual  libaniferous  country,'  Dhofar,  as  'perhaps
not  now  much  bigger  than  the  Isle  of  Wight,'  and
'  probably  in  ancient  days  not  much  more  extensive.'
It  lies  on  the  coast  some  800  m.  NE.  from  Aden,
about  half-way  to  Muscat.  9000  cwt.  of  the  gum  are
exported  annually  to  Bombay.  Other  products  are
cocoanuts  and  cocoanut  fibre  (not  yet  identified  under
any  ancient  Semitic  name),  myrrh,  ghee,  fruits,  and
vegetables.  Pasturage  is  rich.  Dates  and  weapons
are  imported.  There  is  a  fine  harbour,  perhaps
Moscha  of  the  Periplus  (§  32),  and  numerous  Saba?an
remains.  Camels  are  the  animals  used  for  carrying
purposes  ;  horses  are  unknown.  Cp  SEPHAR.  On
another  incense  country  see  §  8.

At  times  primitive  commerce  in  the  necessaries  of
life  must  have  been  enhanced  by  local  famines,  though
in  the  less  settled  conditions  of  early  history  these  would
result  not  so  much  in  increased  trade  as  in  migrations
of  tribes.  Such  migrations,  however,  would  also  stimu
late  trade  by  communicating  across  the  region  a  better
knowledge  of  its  remoter  parts,  as  well  as  familiarity
with  the  various  routes  thither.  We  shall  see  that  most
of  the  great  trading  tribes  had  been  immigrants  to  the
districts  which  became  the  centres  of  their  flourishing
commerce.

The  early  distribution  of  woodland  in  W.  Asia  is
uncertain  ;  but  from  Syria  into  Egypt,  as  well  as  from

_.,...  the  wooded  districts  of  Palestine,  not
6.  Distribution  Qnly  to  the  tree]ess  desert  borders  but

ol  timber.  algo  tQ  Babylonifli  there  was  always
some  traffic  in  timber.  Cedar  was  brought  from  '  the
West  '  to  Babylonia  in  the  reigns  of  Sargon  I.  and
Gudea  (4th  mill.),  and  rafts  of  other  woods  must  have
descended  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris.4  Round  the


Middle  Empire  the  Egyptian  weaponsmiths  carried  their  goods
on asses  among the Asiatic nomads: WMM, As. it. Eur.


utensils,  clothing  from  Damascus,  etc.

2  Cp  7.DPV  208g  for  present  export  of  alkali  from  steppes  S.
of  Hauran  to  the  soap  factories  of  Nfiblus.

*  'Life  in  Anc.  Eg.  (tr.  by  Tirard  :  1894).  p.  507.

4  E.g:,  under  Ur-nina  of  Lagash  (BABYLONIA,  8  44):  cp
Radau,  Early  Baby.  Hist.  [1900],  and  Howorth,  £ng.  Hist.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Persian  Gulf  there  is  said  to  be  no  timber  for  ship
building.  For  the  period  between  the  Old  and  the
Middle  Empire  in  Egypt  see  Erman,  op.  cit.  452.

(b}  The  distribution  of  useful  stones  and  metals
through  \V.  Asia  is  now  tolerably  clear.  The  marble
7  Of  t  e  anc'  a'abaster  found  in  early  Babylonian

'  ,  ,  ,  deposits  came  from  the  Assyrian  hills,
'  the  diorite  from  Arabia  (BABYLONIA,
§§  1  8,  2I).1  The  basalt  of  Hauran  must  always,  as
to-day,  have  been  used  for  millstones  for  all  Syria.
Egypt  was  without  copper,  which  it  brought  from  Sinai
and  the  Lebanons  (COPPER).  Gudea  imported  copper
from  Kimas  in  N.  Arabia  (Hommel  in  Hastings'  BD
1225;  cp  Gen.  1023,  and  see  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  17221).
Cyprus  was  a  later  source  ;  on  bronze  see  below,  §  17.
Iron,  copper,  and  lead  were  found  in  the  hills  W.  of
Nineveh  (see  ASSYRIA,  §  6),  and  iron  in  parts  of  Syria
and  Central  and  S.  Arabia  (Doughty,  Ar.  Des.}.  Iron,
however,  except  in  Babylonia,  does  not  appear  till  the
close  of  our  period  (see  IRON).  There  was  a  little  gold
in  the  desert  E.  of  Egypt  and  in  Nubia  (see  EGYPT,  §  50)  ;
but  its  chief  sources  were  in  Arabia,  on  the  E.  of  Sinai,
and  on  the  far  S.  coast2  (see  GOLD,  OPHIR).  Silver,
which  was  rare  in  Egypt  till  1600  B.C.,  came  from  Asia
(EGYPT,  §  38).  Precious  stones  (turquoises,  etc.)  were
found  in  Sinai.  Cp  STONES.  The  love  of  ornament  is
one  of  the  earliest  motives  to  barter  among  primitive
peoples,  and  we  may  assume  that  traffic  in  metals  and
jewels  had  begun  in  \Y.  Asia  even  before  the  rise  of
the  great  civilisations  in  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia.

(c)  It  is,  however,  in  the  growth  and  organisation  of
these  great  civilisations  that  we  must  seek  for  the
most  powerful  of  the  factors  of  ancient


„ _,.  ,

8.  The  great
°


^ , ,

commerce. Trade  always  advances  by
J


empires. ,  , , , ,

leaps and bounds where two great

states  face  each  other  (cp  the  sudden  increase  between
the  Hittites  and  Egypt  after  their  treaty  in  the  reign  of
Ramses  II.  [Erman,  537]).

By  the  end  of  the  fifth  millennium  B.C.,  both  Baby
lonia  and  Egypt  possessed  a  developed  civilisation,  for
the  growth  of  which  we  must  assume  many  centuries
if  not  some  millennia  (see  BABYLONIA,  §  46);  both  had
elaborate  systems  of  writing,  always  a  proof  of  and  a
help  to  commerce.  That  between  them  there  were
close  communications,  is  proved  by  the  strong  Baby
lonian  elements  in  pre-historic  Egyptian  culture  (see
EGYPT,  §  43).  The  rapid  rise  of  their  wealth,  doubtless
largely  due  to  discoveries  of  new  sources  of  the  precious
metals,  must  have  increased  trade  throughout  W.  Asia,
and  complicated  it  beyond  previous  conditions.  The
monument  (discovered  at  Susa  by  De  Morgan)  of  Manis-
tu-irba,  ruler  of  Kis  (4th  mill.  B.C.),  records  his  pur
chase  of  lands,  grain,  wool,  oil,  copper,  asses,  and  slaves,
which  were  paid  for  in  silver  ;  and  among  the  officials
mentioned  are  'a  mariner,'  'scribe,'  'surveyors,'  'miller,'
'jeweller,'  and  'merchant'  (Damkar).*  The  growth  of
wealth  hastens  the  demand,  not  only  for  articles  of
luxury,  but  also  for  better  qualities  of  food-stuffs.  For
example,  both  the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates  valley  produce
dates  ;  but  if  then,  as  at  the  present  day,  the  Arabian
oases,  including  Sinai,  produced  a  special  quality  of
dates,4  these  would  be  imported  into  Egypt  and  Baby
lonia  then  as  now  (see  above,  §  4,  third  note).  The
records  of  the  kings  of  Lagas  (BABYLONIA,  §  44)  report


.Rev.  177. For  Gudea's  imports  see  FSBA  11, R PW  l
and  Rogers'  Hist.  1  370.

1  The  diorite  of  Gudea  and  Ur-bau  was  brought  from  Magan
on  the  NE.  coast  of  Arabia  (Amiaud,  RP&  2  15  n.  takes  it  to  be
Sinai)  ;  but  see  note  to  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  17  211  for  another  source.

-  Burton,  Land  of  Alidian.  2  Ch.  36,  speaks  of  'gold  of
O'na,  which  Glaser  (Skizze,  1  347)  identifies  with  el-Farwarri
mentioned  by  Hamdfini ;  cp  Sprenger,  Alt.  Arab.  49-63.  Gudea
brought  gold-dust  from  N\V.  Arabia  and  Khakh  SE.  of  Medina
(Hommel  in  Hastings'  BD  1  225  ;  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  17  221).

»  Howorth,  Eng:  Hist.  Rev.  17  i\ff.

4  The  fine  dates  of  el-Hasa  (E.  Arabia)  are  still  exported — to
Mosul,  Bombay  and  Zanzibar,  Palgr.  Cent,  and  E.  Arab.,  ed.
1883,  pp.  364,  383.

5149


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

the  building  of  storehouses  beside  the  temples,  and  the
construction  of  canals.

With  the  increase  of  wealth  came  the  expansion  and
consolidation  of  empire.  It  is  not  always  possible  to
decide  whether  objects  of  foreign  origin  found  in  early
Egyptian  or  Babylonian  remains  were  fruits  of  conquest
(spoil  or  tribute),  or  of  trade,  though  probably  they  are
mostly  due  to  trade  ;  even  where  the  records  boast  of
tribute  this  is  really  the  fruit  of  barter.  *  Even  if  any
of  the  early  expeditions  from  Egypt  and  Babylonia  were
for  conquest  (which  is  very  doubtful  ;  see  note),  they
found  their  motives  in  a  previous  trade ;  and  they
would  open  up  routes  and  increase  commerce.  The
expeditions  of  Sargon  I.  and  Gudea  to  '  the  west'  for
timber,  and  to  Arabia  for  stone  and  metal  (above  §  6f. )
were  repeated  by  other  monarchs  (see  BABYLON  I  A,  §  i52) ;
and  the  various  conquests  of,  and  immigrations  into,
Babylonia  by  fresh  tribes  must  have  powerfully  developed
trade.  To  the  NE.  lay  Elam,  a  seat  of  culture  by  the
fourth  millennium  B.C.,  with  avenues  of  traffic  into
central  and  eastern  Asia  ;  and  Elam  overran  Baby
lonia.  Again,  the  Canaanite  supremacy  synchronised
with  a  growth  of  commerce  especially  under  Ham
murabi  (see  BABYLONIA,  §  543  ;  though  there  was  an
increase  of  trade  preceding  this,  at  Ur,  §  50  4) ;  while  the
rapid  subjection  of  the  Canaanite  dynasty  to  a  Kassite
is  proof  of  the  luxury  consequent  on  commerce  under
the  former  power.  From  Egypt  expeditions  were  sent
in  the  earliest  times  to  secure  the  copper  and  turquoise
mines  of  Sinai — e.g. ,  Dyn.  III.,  Zoser  (EGYPT,  §  44);
Dyn.IV. ,  Snefru(i)  (§45  :  about  3000 B.C.  ;  but  ace.  to  Fl.
Petrie,  3998-3969  B.C.),  and  Hufu  (Petrie,  Hist,  of
Egypt,  1  42) ;  Dyn.  VI. ,  Pepy  I.  '  the  founder  of  Memphis
proper'  (EGYPT,  §  47).  There  were  also  early  expedi
tions  to  Nubia  for  gold,  to  the  Sudan,  the  W.  oases,
and  above  all  down  the  Red  Sea  to  Punt — either
Somali-land,  or  the  coast  between  Suakim  and  Mas-
sowah).0  Erman  (op.  cit.  507)  mentions  the  picture  of
a  native  of  Punt  as  early  as  Hufu  (Dyn.  IV. ) ;  but  the
'  earliest  recorded  expedition  to  Punt '  was  under  Assa,
Dyn.  V.  (EGYPT,  §  48,  Fl.  Petrie,  100) ;  Pepy  I.
(Dyn.  VI.)  sent  to  the  Sudan  and  farther  (EGYPT,
§  47);  S'anh-ka-re'  (Dyn.  XI.)  by  Koptos,  Koser,  and
the  Red  Sea  to  Punt  ;  and  several  kings  of  Dyn.  XII.,
the  Amenemha'ts  and  Usertesens,  to  Nubia,  the  Sudan,
and  Punt.  Under  this  dynasty  (2800  Fl.  Petrie,
2100  W.MM)  trade  flourished  exceedingly.  The  Hyksos
migration  and  conquest  of  Egypt  must  have  developed
her  Asiatic  commerce  ;  but  this,  especially  with  Syria,
reached  its  height  after  the  conquests  of  the  New
Empire.  For  lists  of  the  many  Syrian  products  intro
duced,  see  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  (chaps.  1,  etc.),  and
Erman  (516^),  who  remarks  :  '  we  almost  feel  inclined
to  maintain  that  really  there  was  scarcely  anything

1  See the  instance given  by  Erman, 512  ; and  cp  Naville,
Deir  el  Bahari  (Eg.  Expl. Fund),  Pt. III.,  n. Referring  to
the same expedition to Punt, W. E. Crum (Hastings' DB
1  66o/<)  says  :  Queen  Ha'tsepsut's  '  fleet  had,  like  its  predecessors
from  the  6th  dynasty  onwards,  solely  a  commercial  object." So,
too, Budge, Hist, of  Eg. (1902), 411144158. Similarly  in
Babylonia  under  Gudea,  who  according  to  Hommel  (Hastings'
DB\  225/7),  did  not  conquer  the  distant  regions,  but  by  treaties
secured  passage  for  his  caravans  with  their  products.

2  En-anna-tuma I. of Lagas imported cedar '  from the
mountain  ' ;  Radau,  72.

3  See  also  L.  W.  King,  Letters  and  Inscr.  of  Hammurabi
about  B.C.,  2200,  i.,  Introd. and Text,  iii., Translation  ;  and
G.  Nagel  '  Die  Briefe  H.'s  an  Sin-idinnam '  in  Beitr.  z.  Assyr.
4434  ff.  with  notes  by  F.  Delitzsch  483 .//C

4  On  the  favourable  position of  Ur  for  commerce, on the
Euphrates, near  the  W. Rummein  (which  connected  it with
Central  Arabia),  and  with  a  road  to  Sinai,  see  Rogers,  Hist,  of
Bab.  and  Ass.  1  yjiff-

5  So  Naville  (Deir  el  Bahari,  Pt.  III.  n  ;  Eg.  Expl.  Fund),
who  says  that  in  any  case  Punt  lay  N.  of  the  Straits  of  Bab-el-
Mandeb  : '  not  a  definite  territory,'  but  a  vague  geographical
definition. Some  include  under  the  name  both  sides  of  the  Red
Sea. '  The  region  which  produces  frankincense  is  situated  in
the  projecting  parts  of  Ethopia  and  lies  inland  (i.e.,  from  Adulis
on  the  Red  Sea)  but  is  washed  by  the  ocean  on  the  other  side  ' ;
Cosmas,  Christ.  Topog.  Bk.  II,  ET  by  M'Crindle,  51.

5150


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

which  the  Egyptians  of  this  period  did  not  import  from
Syria.'  Syrian  slaves  were  a  constant  subject  of  traffic
(Erman,  517  /,  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.}.  The  New
Empire  also  opened  up  Nubia,  and  elaborated  the
trade  with  Punt,  and  that  with  Cyprus  (see  EGYPT,
§§  53-6i)-  For  the  trade  of  Ramses  III.  with  fleets  on
the  Mediterranean  and  Red  Sea  see  the  Harris  Papyrus
(end)  and  the  summary  in  Budge,  Hist,  of  Eg.  5 159  ff.

From  the  third  millennium  there  is  evidence  of  a
royal  service  of  despatches  into  Asia  (WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.

9  Security  ^^  the  re&ulation  of  imPorts  b7  the
',,  ,y  Egyptian  government;  the  making  of
roads  ;  and  the  supply  of  desert  routes —
e.g. ,  that  between  Koptos  on  the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea
(below,  §  29  ) — with  water  (by  MentOhotep,  Dyn.  XI.
[Erman,  506]). J  It  was  easy  and  safe  for  even  in
dividuals  to  travel  to  tribes  as  far  as  Edom  and  the
'Arabah  :  witness  the  tale  of  Se-nuhyt,  which,  whether
historical  or  not  (see  EGYPT,  col.  1237),  must  have
been  founded  on  a  knowledge  of  the  actual  conditions
of  travel.2  In  short,  by  the  third  millennium  travel
must  have  been  frequent  and  tolerably  secure  (of  course
with  interruptions)  from  the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea  and
the  Sudan  to  the  Euphrates  ;  and  the  commercial
activity  and  wealth  of  Babylonia  in  at  least  the  second
half  of  that  millennium,  can  hardly  have  failed  to  create
similar  conditions  for  much  of  the  rest  of  W.  Asia.  Cp
§  26,  end.

We  must  not  suppose,  however,  that  all  this  pro
duced,  even  for  intervals,  anything  like  a  parallel  to
what  prevails  in  modern  times,  or  even  to  what  was
achieved  under  the  Roman  Empire.  The  roads  of
W.  Asia  were  never  so  secure  as  under  the  Pax
Romana,  nor  were  they  so  well  laid  down.  In  the
period  with  which  we  deal  there  were  frequent  inter
regna  ;  the  nomads  of  Arabia  often  burst  the  frontiers
of  civilisation  ;  and  even  in  peaceful  times  the  well-
developed  habits  of  traffic  cannot  have  produced  such
order  or  sense  of  safety  as  we  find  at  the  beginning  of
tha  Christian  era.

Before  we  pass  from  the  influence  of  the  great
empires  on  commerce,  three  other  phenomena  require

„ _ ,  ,  to  be  noticed. One  is  the  effect  of  the

10.  Trade  and

.... . exigencies  of  commerce  in  the  transfer

P  of  political  power  within  the  empires

T)owor

from  one  site  to  another,  and  the  rapid

growth  of  new  capitals.  Of  this  both  Egypt  and
Babylonia  furnish  instances.  The  centre  of  govern
ment  in  Egypt  came  down  the  Nile,  from  positions
commanding  the  highways  to  the  S.  and  the  Red  Sea,  to
Memphis  3  at  the  neck  of  the  Delta,  where  great  trade-
routes  converge  from  all  quarters.  We  find  a  similar
case  under  the  New  Empire,  when  the  increase  of  trade
0:1  the  Syrian  frontier  drew,  for  a  time,  the  centre  of
the  political  power  from  Thebes  into  the  Eastern  Delta.4
On  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  the  same  causes  worked
in  an  opposite  direction — upstream.  The  central  posi
tion  of  Ur  with  regard  to  commerce  is  well  known  ;
how  elaborate  that  commerce  was  is  proved  by  the
titles  of  the  third  dynasty  of  Ur,  and  the  number  of
contract  tablets  from  their  time.5  The  transference  of
power  from  the  lower  Babylonian  cities  to  Babylon
itself  and  the  independence  of  that  great  centre  from
about  2400  B.C.,  was  probably  assisted  by  commercial
influences,  for  Babylon  proved  its  fitness  as  a  centre  for
trade  by  the  extraordinary  persistence  of  its  commerce
and  wealth,  in  spite  of  frequent  political  disasters,  for

1  Also  '  it  is  probable  that Set!  I.  caused  a  series  of  water
stations  to  be  established  from  the Nile  to  Berenice'  (Budge,
HEJtio);  and  Ramses  III.  built  a  fortified  well  between  Mt.
Casius  and  Raphia  (ibid.  150)  ;  on  Ramses  IV.  ibid.  187.

2  Under  Dyn.  xii.  ;  cp  '  Travels  of  an  Egyptian  '  under  Dyn.
xix.,  xx. E  f  in  RP  2  102^

3  Under  Menes,  4500  or  4000  B.C.,  and  his  successors  :  EGYPT,
IS  44,  47  ;  MEMPHIS. See  also  Fl.  Petrie,  HE,  vol.  i.

4  Cp  Erman,  516.

£  Cp  for  references  Rogers,  Hist,  of  Bab.  and  Assyr.  1  377.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

nearly  2000  years  (cp  Is.  47);  and  it  is  possible  that
some  memory  of  the  city's  early  fame  as  a  gathering
place  for  men  of  all  tongues  may  lie  behind  the  Hebrew
story  of  the  founding  of  Babel  (Gen.  11).  One  has
only  to  look  at  the  map  to  see  how  much  more  advan
tageously  Babylon  lies  for  the  trade  through  Elam  into
Persia,  than  do  the  cities  which  preceded  her  in  power.
The  rise  of  Assyria  was  doubtless  aided  by  her  com
mand,  closer  than  that  of  Babylon,  over  the  lines  of
trade  to  the  W. ;  the  transference  of  the  Assyrian
capital  from  Asur  to  Calah  and  Nineveh  was,  in  fact,
one  from  a  less  to  a  more  suitable  centre  for  commerce,
both  with  N.  and  W.  These  are  but  instances,  which
will  doubtless  be  multiplied  as  our  knowledge  of  ancient
history  is  increased.

Another  phenomenon  to  be  noted  in  the  commercial
development  of  the  Great  Empires — we  shall  find  some-
11  Mercenaries-  thing  anal°g°us  in  Israel— is  the
roval  traders  '  excnanSe  of  natlve  militia,  proper  to
•^  agricultural  conditions  of  life,  for  a

mercenary  soldiery,  which  generally  followed  a  great
increase  in  trade.  The  soldiers  of  the  Middle  Empire
in  Egypt  were  such  a  militia ;  but  after  the  great
growth  of  trade,  especially  with  Asia  under  the
dynasties  of  the  New  Empire,  the  Egyptian  armies
were  mainly  composed  of  mercenaries  (Erman,  542).
The  same  thing  happened  in  Egypt  under  Psametik.
It  happened  also  in  Babylonia  under  Asur-bani-pal  and
Nebuchadrezzar.

Again,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  initiative  of  the
great  commercial  expeditions  from  Babylonia  and  from
Egypt  is  recorded  on  the  monuments  as  due  not  to
private  enterprise,  but  to  the  reigning  monarch.1  This
is  no  pretence  of  royal  arrogance  or  of  the  court  scribe's
flattery.  We  see  the  same  motive  at  work  in  the
great  explorations  and  commercial  expeditions  of  the
Middle  Ages  from  Spain  and  Portugal.

(</)  The  earliest  societies  of  men  did  not  contain  a
special  class  or  profession  of  traders ;  farmers  and
TOT  t  d'  manufacturers  exchanged  their  own
"'  N0  tramn&  goods.  In  the  story  of  Se-nuhyt  the
0  '  weaponsmith  himself  carries  his  goods
to  the  Asiatic  nomads.  As  we  shall  see  (§  21 ),  trade  did
not  exercise  any  influence  on  the  formative  period  of  the
religions  of  W.  Asia  ;  a  proof  that  it  was  not  then
specialised  as  a  separate  vocation.  There  is  no  mention
of  trade  in  the  proverbs  of  Ptah-hotep  (from  the  4th
mill. ),  and  when  they  appeared  in  Egypt  '  sailors,
merchants,  and  interpreters  of  foreign  origin  were
despised'  (EGYPT,  §  31);  that  is  to  say,  the  special
class  was  a  late  and  a  foreign  upstart  in  that  civilisation.

The  rise  of  international  commerce,  however,  and
the  peculiar  character  of  the  deserts  which  separated
T  "h  1  l'le  centres  °f  civilisation  favoured  —  in
«  place  of  the  growth  of  special  classes  of
op  .  trajcrs  within  those  centres — the  gradual
absorption  of  whole  tribes  outside  them  in  the  business
of  trade  and  the  carriage  of  goods.  Especially  was  this
the  case  with  certain  Arabian  nomads,  whose  familiarity
with  the  desert  and  possession  of  the  means  of  crossing
it,  furnished  them  with  the  price  (in  their  trading  services)
for  purchasing  the  products  of  civilisation.  Thus,  in  the
OT,  some  of  the  earliest  names  for  traders  are  tribal :
Ishmaelite  (Gen.  372527 /.  39i,  —  all  J),  Midianite  (the
parallel  E  passages ;  Gen.  37 ^8a  36),  and  (later)  Canaan-
ite,  of  which  the  first  two  were  Arabian  and  the  last  the
inhabitants  of  that  land  which  is  well  described  as  the
'  bridge '  between  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia.  This
evidence  is  confirmed  by  the  Egyptian  records.  Part
of  the  contempt  of  the  Egyptians  for  traders  was  prob
ably  due  to  the  traders  being  foreigners.  The  Beni-
Hasan  paintings  represent  thirty -seven  Asiatics  from
the  desert,  traders  from  near  Sinai  (see  EGYPT,  §  50  ;

1  Similarly  the  letters  of  Hammurabi  (above,  §  8  n.)  show
how  that  king  personally  superintends  the  internal  trade  of
Babylonia.

SIS2


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  36).  So,  too,  Hannu  the  leader
of  the  expedition  to  Punt  under  S'anh-ka-re'  of  the
eleventh  dynasty  (EGYPT,  §  48)  appears  to  have  a  Semitic
name  (cp,  however,  Erman,  506).  Thus,  by  the  third
millennium  B.  c. ,  the  Semites  from  their  central  position
between  the  two  most  ancient  civilisations,  their  com
mand  of  the  lines  of  communication,  and  their  frequent
migrations,  had  developed  those  habits  of  trading  which
distinguish  them  to  the  present  day.1  Among  the
Semites,  again,  there  were  especially  four  families  which
concentrated  the  racial  adaptableness  and  tenacity  upon
commerce,  and,  not  content  with  the  share  in  that
which  their  central  positions  brought  to  them,  devoted
themselves  to  the  pursuit  and  organisation  of  many  lines
of  traffic,  till  they  developed,  in  the  case  of  one  of  them
at  least,  a  wider  commercial  influence  than  the  world
ever  saw  till  the  most  recent  epoch.  These  were  the
Minasans,  the  Aramaeans,  the  Phoenicians,  and  the
Nabataeans,  of  whom  the  first  three  had  begun  to
develop  their  commerce  within  our  period— the  Minreans
and  the  Aramreans  by  land,  the  Phoenicians  by  sea.

It is  only upon indirect and somewhat  precarious
evidence  (summarised  by  Weber, Arabien  vor  Islam,

14  Minseans  22-^>'2  that  to  the  Min£ean  kingdom
a  date  is  assigned  so  early  as  the  second
half  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.  The  centre  of  the
Minaean  power  lay  in  the  S.  part  of  Arabia — not  in  the
incense-bearing  regions  of  Kataban  and  Hadramot
(above,  §  5),  though  it  commanded  these,  and  by  its
hold  on  the  central  Arabian  routes  (below,  §  31)  and  its
colony  in  Musrfin  or  Musri  (i.e.,  Midian)  and  north
wards  (MlZRAIM,  §  3)3  possessed  the  Arabian  land
traffic,  and  sent  its  caravans  by  Ma'an  and  Petra  to
Gaza.  The  capital  was  Karnawu,  the  Kama  of
Eratosthenes,4  in  immediate  connection  with  the  ports
of  the  S.  coast.  Thus  Minasan  trade  extended  at  least
from  the  Indian  Ocean  to  the  Levant.  But  see  §  17.

After  what  has  been  said  elsewhere  (ARAM,  ARAMAIC
LANGUAGE  ;  cp  PIKKNICIA,  §  7)  it  is  only  necessary  to

15.  Aramseans.  say'hat  »»  the  second  millennium  B.C.
we  nnd  the  Aramaeans  succeeding  the
Hittites  in  a  country  on  the  upper  Euphrates  which  is
the  meeting-ground  of  many  trade-routes — from  Syria,
Asia  Minor,  Armenia,  and  Babylonia  (below,  §  y)f. ).
They  gradually  extended  over  N.  Syria,  a  land  more
suited  for  trade  than  for  agriculture  or  industries,6  and
embraced  Damascus,  the  principal  Syrian  'harbour,'  a
depot  of  the  Arabian  Desert  (Hist.  Geogr.  642  f. ).  The
earliest  notices  reveal  Aramaeans  as  nomads,  perhaps
traders,  in  Mesopotamia  ;  in  Syria  the  small  states  they
founded  round  cities  were  such  as  those  founded  by  other
trading  peoples.  The  strongest  proof  of  their  commerce
is  the  gradual  spread  of  their  dialect  till  it  became  the
lingua  franca  of  W.  Asia.  In  Babylonia  it  was  spoken
in  daily  life  from  the  eleventh  to  the  ninth  century
{\Yi.  Volker  Vorderasiens,  n)  ;  by  the  tenth  it  had

1  The  Syrians  depicted  on  the  tomb  of  Hui,  about  1400  B.C.
(see  Budge,  HE  4  144),  are  traders. Cp  Strabo  xvi.  423  on  the
commercial  qualities  of  the  Arabs.

2  None  of  the  S.  Arabian,  so-called  Himyaritic,  inscriptions
are  dated  before  second  century  B.C. For  a  detailed  argument
against  the  high  antiquity  claimed  for  the  Minasan  kingdom,  see
Budge,  HE  (5,  Preface,  x\\ff. His  conclusion  is  that  Glaser's
Inscr. 1155  belongs to the time of  Cambyses and  that  'the
Minrcan  kingdom  cannot  be  shown  to  be  older  than  the  sixth
century  B.C.,'  p.  xxii.

3  The strong reasoning of  Budge  (HE Oxxi ff.) against
Winckler's  frequent  identification  of  the  biblical  Mizraim  with
the  Arabian  Musr  is  not  conclusive  against  the  existence  of  the
latter. For if, as generally admitted, Ghazzat of Glaser's
Inscr.  1083  be  Gaza,  the  Minaean  caravans  from  S.  Arabia  would
scarcely  pass  through  Egypt  to  Gaza,  or  through  Gaza  to  Egypt
(notwithstanding Budge's  note  on  p.  xxii). The  mention  of
Gaza,  therefore,  is,  so  far,  evidence  in  favour  of  a  N.  Arabian
Musri. Cp  also  SIMF.ON,  §  6. Even  if  the  Musri  of  the  Assyrian
and  Minaean  inscriptions  be  proved  to  be  Egypt,  this  only  means
an  extension  of  the  Minsan  trade.

4  Or Karnana  : Strabo  (xvi.  42)  who  mentions  besides  the
Sabneans  at  Mariaba,  the  Kattabanians  at  Tamna,  the  Chatramo-
titai  at  Sabata.

5  M'Curdy,  Hist.  Profit.  Man.  1 155.

5153


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

taken  the  place  which  Babylonian  held  in  \Y.  Asia  in
the  fifteenth,  and  was  used  as  far  as  Egypt  as  a  com
mercial  tongue  (WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  234).  How  long
and  how  far  this  commercial  supremacy  of  the  language
lasted  is  proved  by  inscriptions  in  Teimaand  Nabatsean
towns  up  to  100  A.u.  It  was  the  Aramitan  trade,  from
the  Tigris  to  the  Levant,  which  formed  the  temptation
to  the  Assyrian  campaigns  in  the  ninth  and  following
centuries  (below,  §  52).  Cp  SYRIA,  §§  16  ff.

The  commercial  influence  of  the  Phoenicians  appears
to  have  risen  at  an  earlier  period  than  that  of  the
ic  •Piir^n^.i-n,^  Aramaeans  ;  but  how  early  it  is  im-

16.  Phoenicians.  possible  to  say The  abs>nce  of  aU

reflection  of  trade  not  only  from  the  names  of  their
earliest  cities — these  may  have  been  named  before  the
Phoenician  occupation  ] — but  also  from  all  except  pre
sumably  late  strata  of  their  religion2  (see  below,  §  22),
is  significant.  The  coincidence  between  a  great  influx
of  Canaanite  population  and  religion  into  Babylonia
(about  2500  B.C. ),  and  the  rise  of  a  '  Canaanite  '  dynasty
there,  with  a  great  increase  of  commerce  and  wealth,  is
interesting  as  indicative  of  a  racial  capacity  for  trade.
On  the  whole,  however,  we  may  assign  the  rise  of  the
commerce  of  the  Phoenicians  to  a  period  subsequent  to
their  arrival  on  the  coast  between  Lebanon  and  the
Levant,  somewhere  in  the  third  millennium  B.C.,  and
therefore  subsequent  to  the  appearance  of  international
commerce  in  W.  Asia  ;  and  we  may  trace  it  to  the
central  position  of  that  coast,  to  the  mines  and  forests  of
the  neighbourhood,  and  to  the  greater  facility  for  traffic
by  sea  than  by  land,  between  the  various  Phoenician
settlements.  Probably  the  Phcenicians  did  not  invent
ships  as  the  Greeks  were  led  to  suppose  from  their  subse
quent  supremacy  in  navigation  ;  for  the  first  boats  must
have  been  invented  by  a  people  with  long  slow  rivers.
But  the  Phoenicians,  with  their  towns  near  to  large
forests  and  disposed  within  a  day's  sail  of  each  other  on
a  coast  full  of  obstacles  for  land  traffic,  must  have  been
early  forced  to  the  improvement  of  the  means  of  naviga
tion  ;  whilst  the  harassing  land  march  across  the  desert
to  Egypt  must  have  led  to  a  speedy  extension  of  that
navigation  to  the  Egyptian  delta.  So  great  an  adventure,
if  it  did  not  produce,  amply  proves  the  existence  of,
those  qualities  of  hardihood  and  enterprise,  which  w<  re
to  lift  Phoenicia  to  the  command  of  the  world's  trade.
The  less  adventurous  Egyptians,3  who  had  in  the  earlier
periods  of  their  history  reached  Punt  by  their  own
merchants,  had  left  the  trade  through  Nubia  to  negroes
(Erman,  498)  ;4  and  now  nii^ht  be  easily  tempted
to  resign  a  commerce  which  they  disliked  (§  13)  to  the
peaceful  invaders  of  the  Delta.  The  process  may  have
been  hastened  during  the  Hyksos  supremacy.  In  any
case,  from  the  beginning  of  the  second  millennium  H.C.
the  trade  of  Egypt  appears  to  have  been  in  Phoenician
hands.  In  the  fifteenth  century,  according  to  the
Amarna  Letters  they  had  fleets  of  merchant  ships,  nnd
a  fresco  in  a  Theban  tomb  depicts  them  as  importers
of  goods  from  Asia  (Budge,  HE  4 163)

(c]  The  ancient  trade  of  W.  Asia,  however,  was  not
confined  within  that  region.  "\Y.  Asia  lies  between  the

__ p . Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean  ;

, ', _ ... both  of  which,  the  one  by  its  regular  winds

_ ,'.  the  other  by  its  islands,  offer  easy  access

to sources of  wealth  beyond  them. In

the  later  Phoenician  and  the  Greek  epochs  of  trade  both

seas  were  regularly  navigated,  and  the  far  East  united

with  the  far  West  (§§  63,  71).

1  Sidon,  usually  understood  as  '  Fishertown '  (but  see  PHOE
NICIA,  §  12);  Tyre  =  rock  ;  Beyrout  =  springs,  etc.  Contrast
the  Philistine  Ashkelon  and  the  Canaanite  Kiriath-sepher,  the
former  of  which  certainly,  and  the  latter  possibly,  has  a  com
mercial  origin.

-  The  chief  Phoenician  gods  do  not  differ  from  those  of  other
Canaanites.

•*  Cp  the  commercial  superiority  of  Syrians  at  the  present  day
to  Egyptians.

4  Cp  inscription  of  Pepy  of  the  sixth  dynasty.

SIS4


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Whether  in  the  period  we  are  now  treating  there  was
already  a  trade  with  India  is  a  question  to  which  we  can
get  only  probabilities  in  answer.  It  was  quite  possible.

The rcripltis  of  the  Erythnean  Sea1  (ist  Christian  cent.)  lays
down  the  line  of  a  coasting  voyage  along  the  S.  of  Arabia,  across
the  mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  so  (in  the  direction  opposite  to
that  taken  by  Nearchus,  the  admiral  of  Alexander)  to  the  Indus,
and  thence  down  the  Malabar  coast.  It  adds  (§  39),  however,
that  a  speedier,  though  more  dangerous,  voyage  may  be  made  by
those  who  set  out  to  sea  from  Arabia  with  the  Monsoons  (/xera
T'OV  'IvStKuiv  sc.  erqo-iW).  These  winds  blow  across  the  Indian
Ocean  from  the  S\V.  from  April  to  October,  from  the  NE.  from
October  to  April,  and  make  the  voyage  possible  for  vessels  even
of  a  primitive  type.

By  the  seventh  century  B.  C. ,  if  not  long  before,  there
was  in  India  a  developed  and  organised  trade  ;  great
ships  were  already  built,  and  long  sea-voyages  under
taken.  From  the  very  earliest  times  merchants  had
been  held  in  high  repute  (Lassen,  Ind.  Altcrthumskun.de,
2573576579).  The  island  of  Sokotra  has  a  Sanscrit
name  (ib.  580).  The  Babylonian  Nimrod  epic  reflects
a  journey  through  Arabia  to  Sabaea  ;  and  Sokotra  has
been  suggested  as  the  island  which  was  its  goal  ( Hommel,
Hastings'  DB  \2i6a).  On  the  reliefs  of  Deir-el-Bahri,
Punt  is  pictured  as  a  place  of  barter  where  several
nationalities  meet  and  deal  with  the  Egyptians  in  differ
ent  sorts  of  goods.  It  is,  therefore,  more  than  possible
that  Indian  traders  met  those  of  W.  Asia  at  the  mouth
of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  ports  of  S.  Arabia  during  our
period.  Weber  indeed  (Arab,  vor  Islam,  22  ;  cp  23)
calls  the  Minreans  the  intermediaries  of  the  Indian  as  well
as  of  the  S.  Arabian  trade,  and  dates  the  origin  of  this
trade  before  1300  B.C.  (more  than  a  millennium  before
the  later  Ptolemies).  But  see  §  14.  It  is  remarkable  that
no  Indian  faces  or  goods  are  found  pictured  on  the  reliefs
of  Deir-el-Bahri  ( Naville,  op.  cit.  \izff.  and  the  correspond
ing  plates),  nor  have  any  Indian  products  been  discovered
in  Egyptian  remains.  As  for  Babylonia,  the  earliest
Sumerian  deposits  (BABYLONIA,  §  18)  contain  both  ivory
ornaments  and  bronze.  The  ivory  may  have  been
taken  from  elephants  which  were  extant  on  the  Euphrates
till  towards  the  close  of  our  era.2  But  for  the  tin,  needed
to  make  the  bronze,  no  source  is  known  at  that  time
save  India,3  and  some  have  derived  the  Phoenician  name
for  the  metal  from  the  Sanscrit.4  This,  however,  is  a
precarious  ground  on  which  to  found  a  conclusion  with
regard  to  so  early  an  epoch  ;  for  reasons  for  the  opposite
view — that  there  was  no  sea-trade  between  W.  Asia  and
India  till  the  seventh  century  B.C. — see  INDIA  and
Oi'iiiR,  §  2;  cp  also  Sprenger,  Alt.  Geog.  Arab.,  §§  51-
60,  139.  We  must  not  forget  the  possibility  of  land-
trade  between  Babylonia  and  India  through  Elam  and
Persia. 5

As  for  the  trade  of  W.  Asia  with  Europe  in  this  era,
that  is  much  less  problematical.  Cyprus,  which  lies  in

18  Wtri S'S^1  °f  tne  Syrian  coast  (HG,  pp.  22  135),

_  '  was  reached  by  some  of  the  earliest  Baby-

"  '  Ionian  monarchs  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the
second  millennium  B.C.  was  in  frequent  communication
both  with  Egypt  and  with  Syria  (Budge,  HE^i^f.}  ;
and  Cyprus  can  hardly  ever  have  been  out  of  touch
with  the  islands  to  the  W.  Evidence  of  an  extremely
early  knowledge  of  Europe  in  Egypt  is  given  in  WMM,
As.' u.  Eur.  ch.  28. 6

1  TTepi'n-Aovs  TTJ?  'EpuOpa?  OaAacraqs. Anonymous,  but  attri
buted  to  an  author  named  'Appiavos- Geogr.  Gru-ci  Minores  by
C.  Miiller,  ed.  Paris,  1882,  vol.  i.  257^,  cp  p.  xcv.

2  Thotmes  III.  killed  elephants  on  the  Euphrates;  Naville,
op.  cit.  17;  Budge,  HE\i,o\%.

3  The  islands  of  the  Persian  Gulf  were  visited  by  Rabylonians
at  a  very  early  period  ;  and  thence  the  coasting  (!)  voyage  to
India  was  not  difficult.

•*  Giitz,  Die  I  'crkehrswege  i>n  Dienste  dcs  Wdthandels,  10 i
_ff.  This  is  not  certain  ;  cp  O.  Schrader,  Hamiclsgcscliichte,
etc.,  71,  quoted  by  Gcitz.

8  For  imports  and  exports  of  W.  Asiatic  trade  with  India  in
Roman  times  see  Pcriplus  (of  Erythraean  Sea),  §§  49,  56.

6  According  to  the  American  explorers  of  Nippur  (Peters,
Nippur,  '2  i33yC)some  evidence  of  trade  with  Greece  (Eubrea)
was  found  in  remains  of  the  fourteenth  century  B.C.  ;  cp  Budge,
HE  \\ixff.  177.

5155


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

(/)  For  the  natural  lines  of  traffic  and  trade-routes,
see  below,  Part  II.  of  this  article  (§§  28-40).

(g]  The  various  means  of  carriage  in  the  ancient
world  having  been  for  the  most  part  dealt  with  else-

19  Means  wnere'  tns  treatment  here  may  be  brief.
of  carriaee  Porterage.  the  employment  of  human
'  beings  for  the  carriage  of  burdens  both
for  building  purposes  and  for  trade  (as  we  find  it  still  in
Central  Africa),  was  common  in  early  Egypt  according
to  the  monuments.  It  was  not  altogether  confined  to
local  traffic.  Under  one  of  the  Amenemha'ts  (middle
of  28th  cent,  according  to  Fl.  Petrie  ;  but  2100  accord
ing  to  W.  M.  Miiller)  200  men  with  only  50  animals
were  employed  for  carrying  stone  through  the  desert.1
From  the  earliest  times,  however,  the  ass  and  the  bullock
were  in  common  use,  and  (especially  the  ass)  consti
tuted  the  principal  means  of  conveyance.  The  ass  was
employed  for  distant  desert  journeyings  ;  cp  the  Beni-
Hasan  pictures  (under  the  I2th  dyn. ).  The  camel  was
apparently  unbred  and  unused  even  to  a  late  date  in
Egypt,  but  must  have  appeared  early  in  Arabia.  The
horse  and  the  mule  came  much  later  ;  the  horse  not  till
the  time  of  the  Hyksos  and  then,  for  long,  only  for
fighting  and  hunting  ;  the  mule  from  Pontus  not  till
towards  1000  B.C.  (see  Ass,  CAMKI.,  HOKSE,  MULE,
CATTLK,  §  8;  BABYLONIA,  §  5;  EGYPT,  §  9).  The
carrying  power  of  these  animals  was  increased  by  the
invention  of  pack-saddles,  open  litters  (already  during
the  4th  dyn.),  sleighs  or  draw-boards,  and  carts — first
with  solid,  and  then  with  spoked,  wheels.  A  luxurious
chariot  with  horses  appears  in  the  Izdubar  legend
(Tab.  6)  about  2000  B.C.  Still  less,  however,  than  at
the  present  day,  were  the  wheeled  vehicles  suited  for
distant  carriage,  which  was  mainly  performed  on  the
backs  of  animals  (CHARIOT,  §  2).  There  were  practi
cally  no  international  roads  for  carriages  till  the  Persian
Empire.  Carriage  by  water  arose  first  in  timber
rafts  or  constructions  of  reed  coated  with  bitumen,
on  rivers,  especially  the  Euphrates  (  BABYLON',  §  6;
early  legends).  From  these  developed  rowing  and
sailing  boats,  with  which  ventures  were  made  through
liver-mouths  into  the  sea  ;  and  so  arose  coasting  voyages
in  the  Persian  Gulf,  the  Levant,  and  the  Red  Sea  (Snip).
By  the  time  of  Thutmosis  I.  (about  1560  B.C.)  and
Queen  Ha'tsepsut  (EGYPT,  §  53)  the  Egyptians  had
developed  elaborate  ships  with  oars,  rigging,  and  sails
for  the  Punt  voyages  (cp  SHIP).  The  ships  of  this  (i8th)
dynasty  were  not  mere  fighting  galleys  ;  they  were  trans
ports  carrying  considerable  cargoes  (Xaville,  Temple  of
Deir  el  Bahari,  3,  with  plates).

(h)  Early  trade  consisted  of  barter,  in  which  various

communities  or  states  of  culture  exchanged  the  neces-

20 B t •  sar'es  or  embellishments  of  life.2 When

, '  a  superior  civilisation  met  an  inferior  it

paid  for  solid  goods,  as  at  the  present  day,

with gaudy trinkets and ornaments, as for instance

the  Egyptians  in  their  commerce  with the  negro  and

other  tribes  whom  they  met  in  Punt3  (Naville,  op.  cit.}.

Gradually,  however, there  arose  common  measures  of

value: e.g. , cattle, slaves, or metals, especially the

precious  metals.4 As  among  other  early  races5  orna-

1  For  porterage  in  Babylonia,  cp  a  letter  of  Hammurabi,
Beitr.  z.  Assyriologie,  4474.

a  In  the  East  barter  has  always  survived  alongside  well-
developed  systems  of  money  and  finance.  Cp  under  Cambyses,
Beitr.  z.  Assyr.  4429,  §  9.  Palgrave  (Central  and  E.  Arab.
ed.  1883,  p.  368)  found  barter  more  common  'throughout
Arabia  .  .  .  among  the  villagers,  and  even  the  poorer  towns
men,  than  purchase.'

3  For  an  account  of  curious  methods  of  barter  in  this  region
in  Greek  times,  cp  Cosmas  Indie.,  Christ.  Topogr.,  Bk.  II.,  1 P
by  M'Crindle,  52.

4  In  the  4th  mill,  silver  was  used  as  currency  in  Babylonia.
Cp  above,  §  8,  on  ManiS-tu-irba. In  the  time  of  Hammurabi
both  barter  and  money  were  extant ;  cp  his  letters  above.  §  8,
fifth  note. For  electron  in  Egypt  and  silver  see  EGYPT,  §  38,
and  n.  2,  col.  1229.

5  Babelon,  Les Origines  de  la  Monnaie ; W.  W.  Carlile,
Tlie  Evol.  of. Modern  Money,  Pt.  II.  especially  chap.  2.

5156


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

ments  and  the  material  for  ornament  displaced  the  useful
metals  and  other  commodities  as  the  favourite  media
of  exchange  and  standards  of  value.  In  aid  of  this,
there  was  not  only  the  common  and  universal  passion
for  ornament,  but  also  its  convenience  for  hoarding,1
the  family's  wealth  being  most  easily  'saved'  in  the
form  of  its  women's  ornaments,  even  after  money
proper  came  into  existence ;  and  in  W.  Asia  the
process  would  be  further  hastened  by  the  prevailing
custom  of  purchasing  a  wife,  for  an  instance  of  which
in  Israel,  cp  Gen.  24,  and  see  below,  §  43.  These
primitive  'moneys,'  however,  were  not  always  actually
given  in  exchange  for  goods  ;  but  the  value  of  the
goods  exchanged  was  reckoned  in  terms  of  them.  For
this  usage  in  the  case  of  copper  wire2  see  Erman
(494^?),  and  later  of  silver  and  gold,  EGYPT.  §  38.
Stamped  weights  of  the  precious  metals  were  in  early
use  in  Babylonia  ;  but  money  proper  appears  m  WT.
Asia  first  in  the  Persian  period.  For  further  details
see  MONEY,  and  the  articles  and  books  quoted  there.

(i)  The  most  interesting  of  all  the  questions  arising
in  connection  with  the  commerce  of  W.  Asia  during

, _ ,  ,  this  early  period  is  that  of  its  relations

21.  Trade  and  to  rdigion go  far  ag  -s  known  to  thg

°  '  present  writer  there  exists  no  adequate
treatment  of  this,  nor  even  a  full  appreciation  of  its
significance.  The  hint  has  already  been  given  (§§  12,  16)
that  trade  appears  to  have  exercised  no  influence  on  the
human  mind  during  the  formative  period  of  the  different
religions.  In  Egypt  and  Babylonia,  or  among  the
Syrian  and  other  Semites,  there  were  gods  who  reflected
or  sympathised  with  every  other  human  activity.  The
memory  of  the  various  peoples  went  back  to  divine
or  semi-divine  kings,  lawgivers,  physicians,  teachers,
hunters,  and  fishers  (PHOENICIA,  §  12),  artisans  (cp  the
Egyptian  Ptah  and  the  attribution  of  the  invention
of  pottery  and  metal -working  to  various  gods),  and
musicians.  But,  except  for  certain  isolated  and  ap
parently  late  instances,  to  be  noted  presently  (§22),  there
seems  to  have  been  no  god  or  hero  who  was  a  trader.
This  cannot  have  been  due  to  dislike  of  trading  habits,
such  as  prevailed  in  Egyptian  society  (§  13)  ;  for  the
want  was  not  confined  to  Egypt  ;  nor  was  it  due  to  any
of  the  moral  objections  to  trade,  which  are  so  common
in  modern  times.  There  is  only  one  explanation  :  in
the  formative  period  of  the  religions  of  W.  Asia,
commerce  was  not  yet  specialised  as  a  separate  vocation  3
(§  12).  Perhaps  the  most  striking  proof  of  its  want  of
religious  influence  at  an  early  period  is  found  among
the  Phoenicians.  Their  most  ancient  deities  were  practi-
_  cally  identical  with  those  of  the  general
'  U  Canaanite  stock  (Pietschmann,  Gesch.  dcr
Phon.  190).  When  at  last  the  Phoenicians
took  to  the  sea  they  invoked  for  their  new
occupation  the  blessing  of  their  accustomed  deities,  and
principally  of  the  various  local  forms  of  'Astart.  The
other  divine  beings,  who  appear  connected  with
Phoenician  ships,  and  in  later  times  were  credited  with
the  discovery  of  navigation,  the  Kabiri,  were  of
secondary  rank  in  the  Phoenician  pantheon,  and  had
been  originally  connected  with  the  mining  and  working
of  metals  (Ib.  188,  190  ;  but  see  PHOENICIA,  §  n,  col.
3774,  with  footnote).  The  legends  which  attribute
distant  travels  to  the  Tyrian  Herakles  and  divers  gods
are  of  late  origin  (Pietsch.  191).  The  only  other
possible  instance  of  a  trading  Canaanite  deity  is  that
concealed  under  the  ambiguous  name  1300  (PHOENICIA,
y  12,  IssACHAR,  §§  3,  6).  Similarly  in  Egypt  the
expeditions  to  Punt  under  the  eighteenth  dynasty  were
commended  to  the  patronage  of  Amon  of  Thebes,  who

1  Carlile,  op.  cit.

"  As  in  Calabar  and  other  parts  of  Africa,  probably  for
ornament ;  Carlile,  op.  cit.  240.

8  For  an  illustration  of  the  very  opposite  take  Buddhism,
which  '  was  a  merchant  religion  par  excellence ;  there  are  few
parables  or  birth-stories  in  which  a  Buddhist  merchant  does
not  figure';  JRAS,  1902,  p.  387.

5157


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

gave  the  conquest  and  tribute  (i.e.,  as  we  have  seen,
§  8  n.  3,  the  trade)  of  that  distant  land  to  his  own  people,
and  was  thanked  by  them  for  help  in  the  exploration
and  opening  up  of  roads  (Naville,  Deir  el  Baharl,  pt.
iii.  14,  19  ft).  We  may  assume  that  other  nations  of
W.  Asia  when  they  took  to  trade  also  dedicated  it  each
to  their  own  tribal  deity.  But  once  this  was  done,  the
reaction  upon  their  conceptions  of  their  deity  must  have
„„  Rat'  been  one  of  the  most  considerable

of  trade  forces  in  the  transformation  of  the
on  religion  Primitive  religions.  The  deity,  origin
ally  local  and  identified  with  purely
local  phenomena  (PHOENICIA,  §  n),  must,  when  carried
abroad  by  his  people,  have  expanded  in  their  belief  to  an
identification  with  the  principal  cosmic  forces,  especially
those  of  the  sea  and  the  heavens.  It  may,  therefore,
be  to  trade  that  the  religions  of  W.  Asia  partly  owe  the
association  of  their  gods  with  the  stars — always  the
guides  of  travellers — as  well  as  their  identification  with
the  natural  forces,  or  even  with  the  gods,  of  distant
lands.1  But  besides  thus  enhancing  the  power  of  native
deities,  the  foreign  trade  of  their  worshippers  brought
back  the  cults  of  other  gods.  This  is  very  evident  in
Egypt.  A  number  of  instances  are  given  by  Erman.
Usertesen  III.  (Dyn.  xii. )  dedicated  a  temple  on  the
S.  frontier  to  the  Nubian  god,  and  only  in  the  second
place  to  Hnum  the  Egyptian  (500)  ;  Besa,  honoured
by  the  New  Empire  'as  a  protecting  genius,'  probably
owed  '  his  introduction  to  Egypt  to  this  (incense)  trade '
(514) ;  and  consequent  upon  the  great  increase  of  Asiatic
commerce  under  the  eighteenth  and  the  nineteenth
dynasty  a  number  of  Syrian  divinities  were  admitted  to
the  Egyptian  pantheon  (517).  Similarly  there  was  an
export  of  the  gods  of  W.  Asia  to  Europe  by  Cyprus  :
'  merchants  of  Citium  brought  the  cult  of  their  goddess
with  them  to  Athens  '  (PHOENICIA,  §  n),  and  the  general
influence  of  Phoenician  traders  on  the  religion  and
mythology  of  Greece  is  notorious.  Again,  gatherings

_  to  religious  centres,  great  or  small,

24.  sanctuaries  have  ahvays  been  convcnient  for  trncie

'  — as  we  see  even  in  mediaeval  and
modern  times.  Stated  and  famous  markets  grew  about
the  sanctuaries  of  W.  Asia  and  festivals  became  fairs.
Where  trade,  as  in  N.  Syria  and  Arabia,  had  to  pass
through  many  tribal  territories,  treaties  were  necessary
and  were  accompanied  by  religious  rites  at  border  (or
other)  sanctuaries,  at  which  it  would  be  natural  to  ex
change  goods.  In  our  period  and  that  which  followed
it,  Babylon,  Carchemish,  Bethel,  Sinai  (perhaps),  Mecca,
and  various  Egyptian  towns  are  instances.2  Exchanges
were  effected  under  religious  direction  ;  it  was  the
interest  of  the  guardians  of  the  sanctuaries  to  prescribe
forms,  and  fees  to  the  temple  were  charged.3  The
supervision  by  priests  of  Babylonian  commerce  is  evident
from  a  multitude  of  contract  tablets  ; 4  and  the  rise  of
priestly  families  and  castes  to  kingly  power,  both  in
Babylonia  and  in  Egypt,  was  made  possible  by  the
wealth  which  accrued  to  them  from  their  direction  of
commerce.

Before  we  proceed  to  Israelite  commerce  one  other

study is necessary. We have seen that  during the

„ . New Empire and especially  under the

oyria. e;gnteentn  anti  nineteenth  dynasties  there

was  a  great  increase  of  trade  between  Syria  and  Egypt,

in  which  Syrian  products  and manufactures  played  a

very  important part (above, § 8). We are now to

examine  the  details  of  this,  happening  as  it  did  on  the

eve  of  Israel's  settlement  in  Palestine. The  first  evidence

1  For  an  identification  of  Hathor  with  the  deity  of  the  anti
or  incense  of  Punt,  see  Naville,  op.  cit.  20.

2  For  another,  cp  ISSACHAR,  §  2  ;  Dt.  33  18.

3  WRS,  Rel.  Sent.  441.

4  Delitzsch in a  note to  No.  28  of  Nagel's  translation  of
Hammurabi's  letters  to  Sin-idinnam  (Beitr.  z.  Assyr.  4458  493)
illustrates  the  Babylonian  custom  of  making  valuations  '  before
God' — i.e.,  in  presence  of  the  priests — and  compares  Ex.  216


5158


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

is  found  in  the  records  of  Thutmosis  III.  (1503-1449 ).1
Coats  of  mail  do  not  appear  in  his  reign  till  he  takes
200  from  the  Canaanites  at  the  sack  of  Megiddo.  The
Syrian  chariots  are  the  finer,  and  generally  Syrian
artisans  appear  more  skilful  and  artistic  than  those  of
Egypt.  Large  numbers  of  them  are  transported  to
Egypt.  In  the  same  reign  there  are  records  of  importa
tions  of  grain  into  Egypt ;  these  cannot  all  have  been
tribute  (above,  §  8  n.  3) ;  also  of  oil,  wine,  honey,
dates,  incense,  timber  for  masts  and  beams,  and  cattle.
It  is  in  the  period  after  Thutmosis  III.,  however,  that
we  obtain  our  fullest  evidence  of  the  commercial  condi-

0  .  tion  of  Syria  before  Israel  entered  it. The

Jib.  -/YllliiriltL .  i \  i

,. ,,  Amarna  Letters  (1400  onwards)  reveal,

if  by  no  more  than  the  cuneiform  script
in  which  they  are  written,  the  already  prolonged  and
close  commercial  intercourse  between  Babylonia  and
Egypt  across  Syria.  Their  contents  are  still  more  sig
nificant.2  The  kings  of  Babylonia  and  Egypt  propose
an  exchange  of  the  products  of  their  lands.  Gold  is
sent  from  Egypt  to  Babylonia,  '  painted  wood,'  golden
and  wooden  images,  and  oil.  From  Babylonia  to  Egypt
come  manufactured  gold,  precious  stones,  lapis  lazuli,
enamel,  skins,  wooden  chariots,  horses,  and  slaves.
Some  of  these,  of  course,  pass  as  presents  between  the
kings  ;  but  that  they  are  also  articles  of  commerce  is
proved  by  the  complaint  of  one  of  the  Babylonian  kings
that  his  merchants  (dam-gar u,  dam-karu  or  tamkaru  :
cp  Del.  Ass.  HWD,  Aram,  taggdr,  whence  Arab,  tdgir,
tuggdr)  had  been  plundered  in  the  territories  of  the
Pharaoh.  Letters  from  Alasia,  either  Cyprus  (Winckler)
or  the  extreme  N.  of  the  Syrian  coast  (Petrie,  WMM),
tell  of  the  exportation  from  that  country  of  copper,
bronze,  ivory,  ship-furniture,  and  horses  to  Egypt,  and
the  receipt  of  silver,  oil,  and  oxen.  Merchants  go  from
Alasia  to  Egypt  by  ship  ;  a  writer  begs  the  king  of  Egypt
not  to  allow  them  to  be  injured  by  his  tax-gatherers  (no.
29).  The  king  of  Alasia  complains  of  the  Lukki,  a  pirate
people  who  disturb  the  Mediterranean,  and  invade  his
land  (28).  A  prince  of  N.  Syria  sends  slaves  and  begs
for  gold  (36).  The  letters  from  Egyptian  tributaries
and  officials  in  Palestine,  during  its  invasion  by  the
Haiti  and  Habiri,  ask  for  wheat  from  Egypt  for  be
sieged  towns  and  districts  that  have  not  been  able  to
grow  their  own  corn  (cp  the  story  of  Jacob  and  Joseph) ;
or  report  the  sending  of  timber,  oil  (cp  Hos.  122  [i]),
honey,  cattle,  and  slaves.  One  letter  (122)  asks  for
myrrh  as  a  medicine.  Another  (124),  but  obscurely,
speaks  of  purple  (?).  Abd-hiba  of  Jerusalem  complains
that  he  cannot  prevent  the  plundering  of  the  King  of
Egypt's  caravans  in  Ajalon  (180).  Horses  and  asses
are  supplied  to  travellers  (51),  and  provisions  to  the
royal  caravans  (242)  and  troops  (264,270).  One  letter
reports  payment  of  '  300  pieces  of  silver  to  the  Habiri,
besides  the  1000  into  the  hand  of  the  king's  officer'
(280).  We  read  of  no  passage  of  glass  either  way,
though  glass  had  been  known  in  Egypt  from  3300  B.C.
and  was  also  made  in  Phoenicia  from  an  early  date.  It
was  immediately  after  the  period  of  the  Tell-el-Amarna
Letters  —  i.e.,  in  the  fourteenth  century  B.C. — that
Kadasman-Harbe  (BABYLONIA,  §  57)  of  Babylon,  being
shut  off  from  Harran  and  the  upper  Euphrates  by
Assyria,  opened  a  direct  route  across  the  desert  to
Phoenicia  (Wi.  Politische  Entwickel.  Bab.  u.  Assvr.

IS)-

Egyptian  records  confirm  the  frequent  importation  of

27 Oth slaves  from  Syria into Egypt, where the

E  ' . . girls were prized in  the  harems, and, in

°^  , addition  to  articles  mentioned  in  the  Amarna

Letters, indicate  that Syrian pottery  and

metal  work  were  prized  ;  also  ointments  for  embalming,

1  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  24  ;  Flinders  Petrie,  HEIi^ff.

2  The  following  facts  are  taken  from  the  German  translation
(with  transliteration  of  the  original  into  Roman  characters)  hy
Hugo  Winckler,  Die  Thontafcin  von  Tell  el-Amarna,  Berlin,
1896 : for some corrections see Knudtzon in Beitr. zur
Assyriologie,  iv.  2  3.

5159


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

oils,  wine,  woollen  cloths,  and  embroideries.  The
characteristics  of  Syrian  clothing  as  depicted  on  the
monuments  were  embroidery,  tassels,  and  fringes.  There
is  an  extremely  interesting  account  of  an  expedition
sent  about  noo  B.C.  by  Her-heru  of  dynasty  twenty-one
to  Lebanon  for  cedar  in  one  of  the  Gol£nischeff  Papyri
(Recueil  de  Trav.  21  T$ff.  ;  cp  WMM,  As.  u.  Eur.  395;
Budge,  HE 613 /.}.

II.  TRADE  ROUTES  IN  W.  ASIA

We  may  now  indicate  the  physical  facilities  for  com
merce  in  W.  Asia,  and  trace  the  main  lines  of  trade  and

28  L'  of  cross  routes  by  land  and  sea.  On  the
trade  •  Effv  t  niaf  l'le  eye  at  once  niarks  the  follow-
•  &yP  •  jng  natural  directions  of  traffic  :  two
long  and  navigable  rivers,  the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates  ;
two  long  narrow  seas  with  more  or  less  harboured
coasts,  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Persian  Gulf ;  whilst  from
the  most  westerly  point  touched  by  the  Euphrates,  a
fertile  and  well-populated  country,  passable  on  several
lines  through  Syria,  stretches  to  the  Nile  Delta,  with
one  break  of  desert  about  six  or  seven  days'  march
from  Gaza  to  Pelusium.  Inside  all  these  lie  the  great
Arabian  deserts,  isolating  the  fertile  Arabia  Felix  from
W.  Asia ;  but  even  across  these  deserts,  lines  of  oases
and  valleys,  in  which,  though  there  is  no  cultivation,  water
is  procurable,  render  passage  possible  by  land  from  the
Indian  Ocean  to  the  Levant.  The  many  routes  created
along  and  across  these  natural  lines  we  shall  take  in
order  as  they  lie  from  the  south  northward,  and  we  shall
include  the  directions  of  traffic  with  India.

Egypt's  inland  trade,  and  her  traffic  with  Nubia,  the
Sudan,  and  farther  south,  went  up  the  Nile  by  Yebu
(Elephantine,  'ivory  island')  and  Suenet  (Syene,
Aswan:  'commerce,'  Erman,  op.  cit.  ^g8f.),  at
which  exchanges  were  made  with  the  barbarians.  '  It
is  difficult,'  says  Erman  (479),  '  to  find  a  word  in  the
language  which  means  to  travel;  the  terms  used  were
(iont  —  \.o  go  up  stream,  and  hod=\.o  go  down  stream. '
The  river  flows  northwards  ;  but,  as  if  in  compensation,
the  prevailing  winds  are  in  the  opposite  direction.
From  Memphis  by  the  Fayoum,  or  from  the  present
Assiout  and  other  Nile- ports,  caravans  reached  the
western  oases  (6acns  from  Eg.  ua/i  =  station).

So  far  as  concerned  the  trade  with  Punt,  the  Nile
and  the  Red  Sea,  running  nearly  parallel  for  some
thousands  of  miles,  and  at  one  point  only
90  m.  apart,  wonderfully  supplemented
each  other's  defects.  As  on  the  Nile,
the  prevailing  winds  in  the  Red  Sea  are  from  the  north:
in  the  upper  half  the  N.  wind  seldom  flags,  and  the
Gulf  of  Suez  is  often  stormy.  The  Egyptians,  therefore,
divided  their  route  from  the  Delta  to  Punt  and  back
again  between  the  river  and  the  sea.  Their  traffic
southward  was  borne  on  the  Nile1  as  far  as  Koptos,2
and  then  struck  E.  over  the  desert  about  90  m.  to
Sauu,  at  the  mouth  of  the  W.  Gasils,3  a  little  to  the
N.  both  of  the  later  Greek  harbour  Leukos  Limen,4
and  the  modern  el-Koser  (Erman,  586).

1  Naville  (pp.  cit.  16)  points  out  that  the pictures  of  Ha't-
Sepsut's Punt expedition on Deir-el-Bahri,  which  show the
Punt  goods  arriving  at  Thebes  by  ship,  suggest  that  there  was
'an  arm  of  the  Nile  in  communication  with  the  Red  Sea,' at
that  time  ;  and  that  the  same  ships  carried  cargo  all  the  way.
But  the  picture  may  only  intend  the  short  passage  from  Koptos
to  Thebes.

2  To-day  not  Kaft  (Koptos)  but  the  neighbouring  Keneh  is
the  starting-place  for  el-Koser.

3  The way is almost waterless (cp above, g 9), but the
present  writer  knows  it  for  only  a  day  E.  from  Keneh. This
road  was  supplied  with  reservoirs  by  many  Pharaohs  (p.1

§§  9  19  n.).  It  was  much  used  for  trade  in  the  reign  of  Xerxes
(Budge,  HE"!  75)  and  in  Roman  times.  It  is  of  interest  that  in
1801  Major  General  Baird  and  his  army  took  16  days  from
el-Koser  to  Keneh  (Anderson,  Jovrn.  of  Sccr.  E.\ped.  to
Medit.  and  Eg.,  London,  1802,  p.  357).

4  Also  called  Myos  Hormos  by  the  Periplus,  i,  and  by  Strabo
(xvi.  424  xvii.  1  45),  apparently  through confusion  with Myos
Hormos  on  the  Gulf  of  Suez. Cp  Agatharchides. De  Mart
Et'ythr.  in  Ceagr.  Gr.  Min.  1  167  ff.  with  Tab.  VI.  in  Atlas.

5160


29.  Nile  and
Red  Sea.


C/3


W
ffi

H
»—  i

E


03

w

H

D
O
ft!

W


g


~


o
cc

U4

Q

S


h-  =


v^  ^


-


:


H «


23 C3


— — ^ P, ,"1


^•HHhhHhE-HHh


CQ S-


a

i*

s  &.


-
o

CX5


1  I


i3 3 3 3 >^  COO


,  C4

budd


P.  1.1  I 1°§

zoizzz odo


o ,2


u.
O


- C J5

: o rt

t; >»


.  TJ  t:

^ c  E  £  o  -o

rt ctf  rt  u  u  cj

K-  DC  E  E  S  E


— '1


" c^
COO

- a


M-  -

O SS-

O


•a  -c  s  ^

a  a  «  "7

S  S S "o


(E
82


C  S  -° cj  >,  O

fe  3  «* x  o  •-

•8  -o  JJ1  JJ  c  c

<  <  <  <;  <  ^


2 ^  S  •= X

S  J2 tC  =2 2


fe  U


mann'SAna uu


.  W


w  a


S  S  fc

It C4 O

o  o  o


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Other  harbours  on  the  S.  coast  of  the  Red  Sea  were  Myos
Hormos  at  the  mouth  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez,  about  120  m.  from  the
Nile,l  probably  used  in  the  early  period  for  sea  traffic,  more
frequent  than  the  land  traffic,  with  Sinai  ;  the  Ptolemaic  Here-
nike  clue  E.  from  Syene  but  usually  reached  by  caravan  from
Koptos — twelve  days'  journey  according  to  Pliny  (HN,  6  26)  ;
Ptolemais  (17  riav  0>jpu)i>  KaAovneVi)  :  J'oipl.  §  3)  near  the  modern
Massowah  ;  Adulis'^  (id.  §  4),  etc.  ;  with  Muza  and  Okelis  on
the  Arabian  coast  just  inside  the  Straits  of  Bub-el-Mandeb
(hi.  §§  nff.  ^ff.\

If  we  reckon  by  the  voyages  of  Arab  dhows,3  it  would
take  the  Egyptian  ships  about  a  month  to  sail  from
el-Koscr  to  the  Straits  of  Bab-el-Mandeb.  Pliny  (I.e.]
gives  thirty  days  from  Berenike  to  Okelis,  but  Hero
dotus  (2n)  only  forty  for  the  voyage  down  the  whole
Red  Sea.4

In  the  Indian  Ocean  the  routes  down  the  E.  coast  of
Africa  and  up  the  Arabian  coast  were  known  and
_  ,.  mapped  in  Greek  times.  For  the  African
'  ncllal1  coast  see  the  Atlas  to  Geogr.  Gr.  Min.  xii.
The  Arabian  coast  route  is  described
in  the  Periplus.  From  Okelis  to  Arabia  Felix  (Aden),
to  Moscha  (Zofar)  and  the  Syagros  promontory
(Ras  Fertak)  would  take  at  least  a  month,  with  probably
twenty  days  more  to  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulf.
Thus  the  whole  voyage  from  'Akabah  or  Suez  to  the
mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulf  cannot  have  occupied  less
than  three  months.  Thence  to  the  mouth  of  the  Indus
and  down  the  Malabar  coast  the  ports  and  distances
are  described  in  the  Periplus.  For  the  voyage  direct
from  Okelis,  'ad  primum  emporium  Indise,  Muzirim,' 5
Pliny  (//TV 6 26)  gives  forty  days,  and  adds  that  a  ship
leaving  Berenike  about  the  end  of  July  reached  Muziris
about  the  middle  of  October,  and  leaving  again  in  the
end  of  December  or  January  returned  to  Egypt  within
the  year.  The  coasting  voyage  from  Babylonia  down
the  Persian  Gulf,  and  so  to  the  Indus,  may  be  followed
in  the  Periplus  (§§  35^),  or  in  Arrian's  Hist.  Indica

(§§20^).6

Coming  now to Arabia, we  find in the Mincean
. .  . inscriptions hints, and in the Greek
a geographers data, of the long trade
routes,  which  traversed  the  peninsula.

Sprenger  (A lie  Gcogr.  Arab.,  chap.  2)  describes  nine  of  these
routes,  with  Ptolemy's  map  of  Arabia  ;  and  Wiistenfeld  (Die  van
Medina  auslauf.  Hauptstrassen,  and  Die  Strasse  fon  Bafra.
nac/i  Alekka ;  Gott.  1862  and  1867  with  maps)  has  laid  down
the  routes  in  the  N.  half  of  Arabia  from  the  data  of  the  Arabian
geographers.

The  principal  roads  were  those  by  which  frankincense
was  brought  to  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  from  the
Sabrean  country.

Pliny  (HN\1  33  ed.  Delph.)  gives  the  distance  from  Thomna
to  Gaza  as  sixty-five  daily  marches  for  camels.''  The  route
held  to  Mecca,  from  remote  antiquity  a  great  centre  of  trade.
There  it  divided.  One  branch  turned  NE.  through  Nejd  (a
present  pilgrim-route)  and  again  divided,  one  arm  E.  through
el-Hasa  to  the  ancient  Gerra,  or  other  port  on  the  Bahrein  Gulf,s
the  other  NK.  towards  Basrah.  The  main  branch  from  Mecca
continued  N.  to  Medinah  (whence  a  tolerably  watered  road

1  At  Keneh.  For  the  route,  past  granite  and  porphyry
quarries  with  Greek  and  Roman  remains,  sea  Baedeker's  £g.(*)
348.  Myos  Hormos,  now  Abu  Sar  el-K.ibli,  lay  in  the  hit.  of
Manfalut,  and  from  there  or  Assiut  was  about  150  m.  distant.

"  Or  Adule  (near  Annesley  Bay)  the  port  for  Axum,  120  m.
distant  ;  in  the  Gk.  period  the  market  for  trade  with  Central
Africa,  '  much  frequented  by  traders  from  Alexandria  and  the
Elanitic  gulf — Cosmas  Indicopleustes,  Christ.  Topogr.  (6th
cent.),  Bk.  II.  ET  by  M'Crindle,  54.

3  Cp  Burton,  Pilgrimage  to  Al-HIed.  and  KTccca,  chap.  11.

•*  This  appears  also  to  have  been  the  datum  of  Timosthenes,
the  Ptolemaic  admiral,  in  Pliny,  HAr/o^  ed.  Delph.,  where
for  tfiiatridui  read  quadraginta  dicrum.

6  Muziris,  on  the  Malabar  coast,  either  Calicut,  or  more
probably,  Mangalore;  see  the  Feriphis  and  Ptolemy.  For
voyages  to  different  ports  in  India,  cp  Sprenger,  Alte.  Geog.
A  ra/>.  98  ff.

6  Gfosr. Gr.  Min.,  ed. Miiller, Paris, 1882,  vol.  i.,  284  ff.
332  jf.  with  Tabb.  XI.  and  XIII. -XV.

7  Palgrave  (144)  gives  his  day's  march  as  twelve  to  fourteen
hours,  at  about  5  m.  an  hour,  '  the  ordinary  pace  of  a  riding
camel.' This  seems  even  for  such  rather  much, and  freight
camels  certainly  go  more  slowly.

8  Palgrave  (369)  gives  the  time  for  the  Persian  pilgrims  from
Abu-Shahr  (Bushire)  across the gulf and through Nejd to
Mecca  as  two  months.

5161


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

strikes  NE.  by  'Aneyza1  and  the  Lower  Kaseem  to  Basra  on
the  Euphrates)  and  Hijr  (Egra),-  where  it  divided  into  one  NE.
by  e1-Teima  (Thaima),  round  the  northern  Neffid  and  along  the
Wfidy  Sirhfin  to  Bosra  for  Damascus3  (or  to  Tadmor),  and
another  NNW.  to  Ma'an,  Petra,  and  Gaza;  with  a  branch
doubtless  to  Elah  on  the  Gulf  of  'Akabah.  A  Minsean  inscrip
tion  (Glaser,  1155;  Halevy,  535)  mentions  a  caravan  route
from  Ma'an  to  Ragmat,  probably  the  OT  RAAMAH  (g.v.),  either
'Pry/io.  on  the  Persian  Gulf  or  the  seat  of  the  'Po/n/naciroi
of  Strabo  (xvi.  4  24)  near  Mariaba  in  Saba:a.  From  Gerra
(Ger'a),  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  one  route  swung  round  by  'Oman
to  the  incense  country  on  the  S.  coast  ;  another  crossed  prob
ably  by  el-Hasa,  Nejd,  and  Lower  Kaseem  to  Kheybar  and
Teyma  for  Syria  (or  from  Kaseem  crossed  more  directly  by
Ha'il  and  el-Jof  to  Ma'an  ;  Palgrave  [p.  2]  gives  the  distance
from  the  Jof  to  Ma'an  at  200  m.  as  the  crow  flies).  Forder  (145)
gives  the  present  population  of  the  Jof  at  40,000  (!).  The  town  is
2  m.  long,  i  m.  wide;  three  rainfalls  annually;  water-supply
good  from  deep  springs ;  warm  sulphur  springs ;  clothing,
cooking-utensils,  coffee,  etc.,  by  caravan  from  Mecca,  Baghdad,
and  Damascus.  Another  route  across  N.  Arabia,  probably
used  by  Babylonian  expeditions  to  Musri  and  Sinai,  led  from
the  Euphrates  to  the  Jof  and  so  by  Ma'fin  to  'Akabah  ;  but  the
longer  route  given  above  —  Basra-'Aneyza-  Teyma  -'Akabah —
was  easier  and  less  dangerous.  On  the  S.,  easy  routes  connected
the  interior  of  the  Minaean  territory  with  the  ports  on  the  Red
Sea  and  the  Indian  Ocean.  So  much  for  Arabia.

We  have  now  to  trace  the  routes  from  Egypt  across
32 Eevnt Syria towards Damascus for the
through  Syria. Euphrates Of  these  there  are  in
the  main  four.

1.  E.  of  Jordan.—  The  first,  from  the  E.  westward,
left  the  Delta  by  Suez  for  Nakhl,  on  the  plateau  of  Tih,
and  thence  reached  Elath  at  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of
'Akabah,4  where  it  joined  the  routes  S.  and  E.  through
Arabia. From  'Akabah  it  turned  up  the  W.  el-lthm  to
the  E.  of  Edom  (Israel's  track)  and  struck  Ma'an  (where
it  crossed  the  route  Mecca  to  Petra). From  Ma'an  it
is  ten  journeys  to  Damascus  (Doughty,  Ar.  DCS.  148)  ;
the  present  Hajj  route  keeps to  the  E. of Moab, to
avoid  the  deep  canons  (for  routes  through  Moab,  see
MOAB,  §  8)  to  Kal'at  ez-Zerka,  on  the  upper  waters  of
the  Zerka,  the  biblical  Jabbok. Thence it holds due
N.  to  Rimthehand  el-Muzerib,  thence  upon  the  west  of
the  Leja  to  Damascus. An  older  branch  struck  from
the  Zerka  NE.  to Bosra  (to  which  other routes  came
up from  Arabia), Kanatha,  and so by  the  E. of  the
Leja  to  Damascus.

2.  Up  the  ' Ardbah. — The  second  route,  from  Elath  to
Damascus,  followed  the  great  trench  of  the  'Arabah  by
the  foot  of  Mt.  Seir  to  the  Dead  Sea,  and  then  up  its
west  coast  and  the  Jordan  valley. This  has  great  disad
vantages in  heat and  want of  water  ; but the  traffic
along  it  (at  least  as  far  as  the  Dead  Sea)  was  consider
able  in  the  early  Mohammedan  period,  and  the  same
stretch  of  it  may  have  been  used  by  Jewish  trade  with
Elath  in  the  days  of  the  kings.

3.  By  Hebron. — A third line of  road from Egypt
through Syria — perhaps  that  called  the  way  of  SHUR
(ij.v., Gen.  16;)  —  started from the middle of the
Isthmus, struck E. through the desert till it crossed
lebel Magharah,5  turned  N. round  J. Helal, crossed
W.  el-'Arish  (from  which  onwards  there  are  not  a  few
wells  and  waterpits), passed  el-Birein,  Ruhaibeh, and
Khalasa  to  Beersheba  and  Hebron  (PALESTINE,  §  20).

4.  By maritime  plain. — The fourth route left the
Delta at Pelusium or some station near the  present
el-Kantara  on the canal, for Rhinokolura  (el-'Arish),
Raphia, and Gaza  —  six to seven  marches from the
Delta.6 Thence  by  Ashdod  up  the  Maritime  Plain.

1  So  Doughty.  For  the  mercantile  qualities  of  the  inhabit
ants,  see  Palgrave,  117  (Oneyza  ;  v.  Oppenheim  [-54],  'Oneze).

-  Or  Medam  Salih.

;i  Palgrave.  A  description  of  the  route  between  the  Jof  and
Bosra,  along  the  VV.  Sirhan  is  given  by  Forder  (With  Arabs  in
Tent  and  Tozun,  chaps.  5-8).  It  is  apparently  5^  days  from
the  Jof  to  Ithera  ;  thence  four  hours  to  Kaf,  thence  6  days  to
Orman,  thence  i  to  Bosra.

•*  Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus ;  Trumbull,  Kadesh  Barnea;
consult  Palmer  also  for  routes  from  Suez  to  Sinai.

5  To  the  N. of  Jebel Yeleg  : see Drake Holland's Map,
PKFQ,  1884,  p.  4.

6  Napoleon, Guerre  d 'Orient: Campagncs  d"Egypte  et  de
Syrie, vol. ii.  ; Wittmann's Travels, 128  ff. Archduke  Sal-

5162


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

These  four  roads  from  Egypt  to  Syria  were  crossed  by

others  from  Arabia to the Levant and  S. Palestine.

. ,,  The direction of these, across the

OO. 1/rOSS-  ,  r rr,.,  1  I  XT  1

t •  T'h t'esert °' *"* anc* tne Negeb, must


„ ,


have  varied  according  to  season  and
rainfall. This desert, so important


both  in  the  wanderings  and  in  the  trade  of  Israel,  is  in
the  main  a  high,  hard  plateau,  the  Plateau  of  Tih,
bearing  short,  irregular  ranges  of  hills,  and  is  mostly
barren,  but  its  valleys  contain  alluvial  soil.  The  rainfall
in  January  and  February  is  considerable,  and  then  there
is  much  grass.  Perennial  springs  are  infrequent  ;  but
in  the  longer  wadies  water  can  nearly  always  be  had  by
digging.  Horses  may  be  taken  everywhere,  provided
camels  accompany  them  with  water-skins  for  the  long
intervals  between  wells  (Wilson,  PEFQ,  1887,  pp.  38^).
The  ruins  of  vineyards  and  villages,  with  forts,  in  the
NEGEB  (q.v.  )  prove  that  it  was  once  easy  of  traverse.
The  most  inaccessible  portion  is  immediately  W.  of  the
'Arabah  and  S.  of  the  Palestine  frontier  —  some  60  m.
N.  and  S.  by  50  E.  and  W.  —  steep  ridges,  the
home  of  the  wildest  of  the  Arabs  of  this  region,  the
'Azazimeh.  This  part  throws  the  roads  between  Pales
tine  and  the  Red  Sea  to  the  W.  and  E.  of  itself.  These
naturally  bend  to  the  best  sources  of  water,  of  wnich  we
may  note  the  following  :  —  'Ain  el-Weibeh1  in  the  Arabah,
about  80  m.  from  Elath,  and  30  from  the  Dead  Sea  ;
15  m.  N.  ,  'Ain  Hasb  ;  2  S.  of  the  'Azazimeh  country,
well-  watered  wadies  round  the  famous  'Ain  Kadis
(KAUESH,  i)  ;  but  this  district  is  so  shut  off  by  Jebel
Magrah  and  other  hills  that  it  is  not  visited  by
through  roads  ;  wells  at  Hathirah,  Birein,  el-'Aujeh,  and
elsewhere  afford  a  well-watered  line  of  travel  N.  and
S.  on  which  most  of  the  routes  converge  ;  N.  of  the
'Azazimeh  country,  'Ain  el-Mureidhah,  W.  el-Yemen,
and  Kurnub.  Taking  these  facts  with  the  evidence  of
the  ancient  geographers  and  of  travellers  like  Robinson,
Palmer,  Clay  Trumbull,  Holland,  and  Wilson,  we  can
determine  the  following  lines  of  traffic  across  the  desert
of  Tih  and  the  Negeb.

1.  The  chief  line  of  traffic is that  which  from  the
head of  the  Gulf  of  'Akabah strikes NW. over the
plateau of Tih to the conspicuous mountain 'Araif
en-Nakah,3  and  bending  X.  coincides  near  Birein  with
the  trunk  road  from  the  middle  of  the  Isthmus  of  Suez
to Hebron. It leaves the trunk road again near
Ruhaibeh  and  strikes  NW. on  Gaza. Eor  camels it
is  about  eight  days'  journey  by  this  route  from  'Akabah
to  Gaza. To  the  E.  of  the  S.  half  of  it,  but  coinciding
with its N. half, are several pilgrim routes between
Sinai  and  Gaza  much  used  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  4  it  is
ten  days  from  St.  Catherine's  Convent  to  Gaza.5

2.  The  route  from  Ma'an  and  Petra  to  the  Negeb
descends  by  Petra  and  the  W. el-Abyad, crosses the
'Arabah NW. to  'Ain  el-Weibeh, and thence  strikes
up through the hills by several branches, the best
known  being  that  which  leaves  the  'Arabah  a  little  to
the N. of  'Ain el-Weibeh, passes 'Ain el-Mureidhah
and 'Ain el-Khuran to the great mountain barrier,
pierced  by  the  Nakb  el-Yemen,  Nakb  es-Sufah  (thought
by  some  to  be  ZEPHATH  or  HORMAH,  through  which
Israel  attempted  Palestine  from  the  S.  , Nu.  1445  21  3
Dt.l44  Judg.  Ii7)  and  Nakb  es-Sufey.6 Still  another
pass  to  the  W.  of  Nakb  el-  Yemen  is  said  to  carry  a  road
to  Gaza. On  the  high  region  to  the  N.  of  these  passes
the  routes  reunite,  and,  passing  a  little  to  the  E.  of  Kur-


vator, Die Karawanenstrasse  von A?, nach  Syr. (Prague.
1879;  ET,  London,  1881).

1  Robinson,  BR  2580  Jf.

2  V.  Raumer,  Paldsiina,  480  ff.; Clay  Trumbull, Kadcsh
Burnca,  207  etc.

3  Another branch strikes from 'Akabah up the 'Arabah,
ascends  the  plateau  by  the  W.  el-Beyfineh  and  joins  the  main
road  near  W.  el  Ghudfighid  (Robinson),  S.  of  J. 'Araif  en-
Nakah.

4  For  a  list  see  Robinson,  BR  1  561  ff.

5  Felix  Fabri,  Enagatorium,  and  other  mediaeval  travellers.
8  Large  Map  to  Clay  Trumbull's  Kadesk  Barnea.

5163


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

nub1  and'Ar'arah,  the  road  divides  into  two,  one  N".  of
Beersheba  to  Gaza,  the  other  by  Kh.  el-Milh  to  Hebron.
By  this  road  from  Ma'an  to  the  Negeb  pilgrims  and
supplies  from  Gaza  and  Hebron  meet  the  Hajj  at
Ma'an,  and  it  is  probable  that  from  Hebron  to  'Ain
el-Weibeh  and  thence  down  the  'Arabah  the  same  road
carried  the  trade  of  the  kings  of  Israel  to  Elath  or
Ezion-geber.2

3.  Finally,  there  was  a  less  important  line  of  traffic
from  Gaza  along  the  S.  frontier  of  Palestine  and  round
the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  Kerak.

For  the  main  and  cross  routes  through  Palestine
„.  p  ,  ,  itself,  see  PALESTINE,  §  20,  to  which
e-  may  be  added  the  following  :—

1.  From  Dead  Sea. — The  great  'Arabah road and
the  salt  deposits  at  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  were
connected  with  Jerusalem  by  a  route  through  el-Milh  and
Hebron,  by  another  which  left  the  Dead  Sea  at  Engedi
and deployed  up  the  W. Husasah to  Jebel Fureidis
(Herodium), or crossed W. Ghuweir and  ascending
W.  Jerfan  struck  NW.  to  Jerusalem. The  second  of
these  is  a  very  bad  road. To-day  the  salt-carriers,  in
preference  to  both, follow the Dead  Sea  coast to  a
point  N.  of  Engedi  before  striking  up  to  Jerusalem.

2.  Across  W.  range. — N.  of  the  Dead  Sea  the  routes
across  the  W.  range  were  two  :  first,  that  mentioned  in
PALESTINE,  §  20,  by  the  Beth-horons, past  the  great
sanctuary  and  market  at  Bethel,  down  to  Jericho  ;  'Ain
ed-Duk on one branch  of  this route is probably  a
Philistine  station  (DAGON,  Docus)  of  the  days  when  the
Philistines  commanded the  traffic  on  this  line  (it  was
also  used  by  the  Crusaders,  who  did  not  hold  Gaza,
for  their  traffic  with  Moab,  Edom,  and  'Akaba  ;  Rev,
Lcs  Colonies  Franques  dans  les  XII.  et  XIII.  Siecles  :
ch.  9) ;  second,  the  road  which,  ascending  NW. from
Jaffa, crosses  the  watershed  at Shechem in the  pass
between  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  and  descends  the  wadies  el-
Kerad  and  Fari'ah  to  the  ford  at  ed-Damieh. That  the
trading  Philistines  also  used  this  route  is  certified  by
the  presence  to  the  E.  of  Shechem  of  a  Beit  Dejan — •
i.e., Beth-Dagon. So also  Vespasian marched (Df
iv.  81).

Carmel  was  turned  by  four  routes  N.  from  Sharon.

( i )  The  most  westerly  follows  the  coast  ; it  connected

„.  , the Phoenician  settlements  S.  and  N.

' ,  laron °  of  Carmel,  and  in  later  times  Cassarea

isaraeion.  with  Ptolemais.  (2)  A  road  leaves
the  N.  end  of  Sharon  and  strikes  N.  by  Subbarin  and
E.  of  Carmel  to  Tell  Keimun  ;  it  is  the  shortest  line
from  Egypt  to  the  Phoenician  cities.  (3)  Another
leaves  Sharon  at  Kh.  es-Sumrah,  strikes  NE.  up  the
\V.  "Arab  to  'Ain  Ibrahim  and  enters  Esdraelon  at
Lejjun  (Megiddo),  from  which  roads  branch  to  Naza
reth,  Tiberias,  and,  by  Jezreel,  to  Beth-shan  and  the
Jordan.  (4)  The  fourth  leaves  Sharon  by  the  W.  Abu
Nar,  emerges  on  the  plain  of  Dothan,  and  enters
Esdraelon  at  Jenin  (En-gannim)  ;  for  the  Jordan  valley
and  the  road  to  Damascus  across  Hauran  it  is  shorter
than  the  route  by  Lejjun  (cp  Gen.  8825).  On  these
roads  and  their  significance  see  HG  150^

The  valleys  of  S.  Galilee,  disposed  E.  and  W. ,  carried
some  of  the  most  famous  roads  of  Palestine.  These
_  „  ...  started  from  Akko  (PTOLEMAIS).  (i)
lee'  One  struck  SE.  by  another  Beth-
Dagon,3  climbed  to  Sepphoris,  passed  nenr  Nazareth,
and  descended  by  the  \Y.  esh-Sharrar  to  the  Jordan  at
the  Roman  bridge,  Jisr  el-Mujaini',  the  main  Roman
road  to  the  trans-Jordanic  provinces.  (2)  Another
crossed  by  the  valley  N.  of  Sepphoris  and  descended
on  Tiberias.  (3)  Another  climbed  E.  probably  by
W.  Wasriyeh,  held  along  the  foot  of  Upper  Galilee  to
Ramah,  from  which  one  branch  descended  to  join  a

1  The  biblical  Tamar. See  §  50.

2  So too, perhaps, ran one of  the Roman roads between
Hebron  and  Elath.

3  Dok  of  the  Crusading  Chronicles  (f.sr.,  L' Estoire  iff  la.
Guerre  Sainte,  1897,  11.  3987,  4071);  now  Tell  Da'ouk  or  Dauk.

5164


Trade  Routes

in
PALESTINE  &  PHOENICIA.


Natural  Scale.  1:1,965,000.
English  Wiles


Kilometres

30 40 co 60 70 80 go ic


Longitude  East  35°of  Greenwich


-4


ENCYCLOPAEDIA EIELICA  1903.


Walker  ftCockonU  sc.


37.  Tyre  and
Sidon.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

N.  and  S.  trunk  road  at  Capernaum,  whilst  a  second
proceeded  by  Safed  to  the  present  Bridge  of  the
Daughters  of  Jacob  across  Jordan.  These  are  probably
the  roads  reflected  in  the  parables  of  Jesus  (HG  425^!  ).
The  most  northerly  is  the  most  natural  (or  easiest)
route  for  traffic  from  the  sea  -coast  to  Damascus

(PTOLEMAIS, §  3).

More  difficult  roads,  however,  crossed  the  highlands
behind  Phoenicia  :  —  (i)  from  Tyre,  by  Burj  el-Alawei
through  the  valley  near  Abrikha  (where
pavement  is  still  found)  down  to  the
X.  of  Rubb  Thelathln,  across  the
Hasbany  to  Banias  ;  (2)  from  Tyre,  or  (3)  from  Sidon,
to  the  elbow  of  the  Litany  and  so  down  to  the  Hasbany
bridge  and  Banias.  The  importance  of  these  roads  is
testified  by  the  lines  of  crusading  castles  upon  them.

On  the  E.  of  Jordan  (N.  of  Moab)  the  cross-routes
are  best  illustrated  by  the  position  of  the  cities  of
5a  T1  of  TnWlaT,  DECAPOLIS  (q.  v.  ).  From  the  Jordan
a'  opposite  Scythopolis  (Bethshan)  start
three  roads  :  —  (  i  )  one  to  the  S.  by  Pella  (with  a  variation
a  little  to  the  N.  )  and  thence  SE.  over  the  hills  of
Gilead  (by  the  lost  Dion)  to  Gerasa  and  Philadelphia
(with  branches).  (2)  A  second  climbed  to  Gadara,
and  thence  along  the  ridge  to  Abila  of  the  Decapolis,
and  by  Abila  to  Kanatha  or  by  Edrei  to  Bosra  and
Jebel  Hauran.  (3)  A  third  climbed  from  the  E.  coast
of  the  Lake  of  Galilee  by  Hippos  (Susiya  opposite
Tiberias)  and  crossed  Jaulan  and  Hauran  by  Nawa
(with  variants)  to  Damascus.  To  the  N.  of  these  ran
other  two  :  (4)  from  the  Bridge  of  the  Daughters  of
Jacob  by  el-Kuneitrah,  and  (5)  from  Banias  by  Kefr
Hawar  —  both  to  Damascus.

The  lines  of  trade  through  N.  Syria  from  Damascus
and  Phoenicia  to  the  Euphrates  are  determined  by  the
on  TJ  q  .  desert,  the  long  parallel  lines  of  hills,
U  and  the  Orontes  valley.  The  shortest
route  from  Damascus  to  Mesopotamia  is  NE.  by  the
Palmyra  or  TADMOR  oasis  ;  but  its  difficulties,  due
to  the  want  of  water  and  the  wild  character  of  the
nomads,  diverted  the  main  volume  of  traffic  through
the  settled  country  to  the  E.  of  Jebel  Ansariya.  Here
the  road  from  Damascus  struck  due  N.  on  the  E.  of
Anti-libanus,  by  Riblah,  Hemessa  (Horns),  Hadrach,
to  Hamath  (Hamat),  where  it  was  joined  by  a  road
from  the  Phoenician  coast  up  the  Leontes  and  down  the
Orontes  valleys.  From  Hamath  the  routes  were  two  :
one  NE.  to  Tiphsah  (Thapsacus),  'the  ford,'  on  the
Euphrates  ;  the  other,  and  more  frequent,  N.  by
Halwan  (Haleb,  Aleppo)  and  Arpad  (Tell  Arfad)  to
Carchemish  (Jerabis),  a  great  sanctuary  and  market.1
From  this  rafts  descended  the  Euphrates  to  Babylon,
and  a  road  travelled  E.  by  HARAN  [i/.w.]  (Harran),
again  a  famous  sanctuary  and  market,

and  Nisibis  (Na?!bln>  to  the  TiSris  at
Nineveh. On  Carchemish  and  Harran

converged  routes  from  Asia  Minor  and  Armenia  ;  upon
Nineveh  from  Armenia  by  the  Upper  Tigris  and  from
the  Caspian  by  the  Greater  Zab  and  other  valleys.
On  the  Mesopotamian  routes  with  their  extensions  into
Asia  Minor,  Persia,  and  farther  E.  ,  see  below  §§  58
(Persian  Imperial  roads),  63  (Greek),  and  69  (Roman).
The  Euphrates  is  navigable  for  1200  m.  from  its  mouth,
nnd  is  said  to  be,  as  high  up  as  its  junction  with  the
Khabur,  18  ft.  deep,  a  depth  that  sometimes  falls,
lower  down  its  course,  with  the  dissipation  of  its  waters,
to  12  ft.  (Rogers,  Hist,  of  Bab.  and  Ass.  1  271  ff.}.
The  Tigris,  much  more  rapid,  and  of  more  uncertain
volume,  is  less  fitted  for  navigation  ;  but  to-day  small
steamers  proceed  as  far  up  as  Baghdad,  and  boats  even
to  Mosul  (Nineveh).2  The  convenience  of  Babylonia

1  See  map  to  ASSYRIA,  between  cols.  352  and  353.

2  From  Mosul  to  Baghdad,  by  raft down  the  Tigris,  takes
from  five  to  six  days  according  to  the  state  of  the  river  ;  from
Baghdad  to  Mosul  a  caravan  takes  twenty  to  twenty-two  days
(The  Pioneer,  May  29,  1902).


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

for  trade  through  Elam  with  the  interior  of  Asia  has
already  been  noticed.  For  the  land  routes  from  India
to  Babylon,  see  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumskunde,
2529;  for  the  ancient  sea  route,  Arrian's  "IvSiK-r).  §§
20  ff.  For  both  under  Babylonians,  Persians,  Greeks,
and  Romans,  see  below,  §§  56,  58,  63,  71.

III.  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  IN  ISRAEL

In  Part  I.  (§§  1-27)  we  have  surveyed  the  vast  and
intricate  system  of  commerce  which  prevailed  throughout

41  Periods  ^'°  ^s'a  ^v  tne  c'ose  °f  the  second  millen
nium  B.C.  On theirsettlement  in  Palestine,
between  1300  and  1150  B.C.,  Israel  came  into  contact
with  this  system  upon  two  of  its  most  ancient  and
crowded  pathways  through  Syria :  between  the  Euphrates
and  the  Nile,  and  between  Arabia  and  the  Levant.
Before  we  follow  the  details  of  their  gradual  engage
ment  in  this  system,  we  have  to  examine  (i)  the  tradi
tions  which  they  brought  with  them,  or  adopted  from
the  Canaanites,  in  order  to  discover  what  reflection  of
trade  these  may  contain  (§  42  f. ).  We  shall  then
(§§  44^)  treat  of  the  history  of  Israel's  own  trade  under
(2)  the  Judges  (§  46 / )  ;  (3)  the  early  monarchy  (Saul
to  Solomon,  §§  48-51)  ;  (4)  the  divided  kingdom  till  the
end  of  the  ninth  century  (§§  51-53) ;  (5)  the  eighth  and
seventh  centuries  till  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  in  586  (§§
53-57)  ;  (6)  the  exilic  and  Persian  Period  till  332  B.C.
(§§58-62);  (7)  the  Greek  Period  (§§63-67);  and  (8)
the  Roman  Period  till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
by  Titus  (§§  68-8 1).

It  is  interesting  that  the  earliest  Hebrew  traditions  of
primitive  man  are — with  a  few  doubtful  exceptions — as

.  _  .  destitute  of  references  to  trade,  as  we  have
,  ',.,.  ^  found  those  in  W.  Asia  in  general  to  be.
According  to  JE  passages  in  the  early
chapters  of  Genesis,  the  founders  of  civilisation  were
hunters,  shepherds,  tillers  of  the  soil,  inventors  of
weapons  and  musical  instruments,  and  builders  of  cities.
There  is  no  recognition  of  a  special  class  of  merchants  ;
nor  is  there  any  reflection  of  such  in  Israel's  earliest
conceptions  of  the  Deity.  This  agrees  with  the  results
of  an  examination  of  other  religions  (§§  23-27).  Certain
of  the  stories,  however,  appear  to  take  for  granted  the
existence  of  commerce  among  early  men.  As  in  early
Egypt  the  weaponsmith  himself  carried  his  goods  abroad
for  sale  (§  12),  so  the  Kain  of  Gen.  4,  perhaps  the
'  forger,'  is  the  founder  of  the  first  city — i.e. ,  market  or
centre  of  trade  (see  CAINITES,  §  5  /. ) — and  it  is
possible  to  trace  the  mixed  story  of  the  Kain  of  Gen.  4
— an  agriculturist  who  became  a  wanderer — to  (among
other  sources)  an  attempt  to  describe  the  origin  of
commerce  ;  for,  except  for  commerce,  agriculturists  do
not  take  to  travel  (but  see  CAIN  for  other  explanations).
Again,  some  reflection  of  Babylon's  early  position  as  a
world  market  has  already  (§  10)  been  suggested  in  the
story  of  the  tower  of  Babel.  Whatever  significance  in
this  respect  we  assign  to  such  traditions — the  very
doubtful  exceptions  alluded  to  above — we  may  see  in
the  fate  imputed  to  Babylon  a  symptom  of  that  horror
of  building  and  of  cities  which  marks  the  unsophisticated
nomad,  and  is  observable  among  the  desert-bred  portions
of  Israel  to  a  comparatively  late  period  (e.g.  in  Amos).

The  tales  of  the  fathers  of  Israel  assign  to  the  people
an  Aramaean  origin — that  is  to  say,  among  a  people,  and

, in a land in  which trade flourished
43.  Patriarchs.  from  an ear]y  period (§ l6) No

mercantile  pursuits  are  imputed  to  the  patriarchs  by
the  JE  passages  ;  but  these  take  for  granted  the  exist
ence  in  their  days  of  a  developed  commerce  (e.g. ,  Gen.
20  16,  '  1000  silver  pieces' ;  24  22,  '  shekels '  as  weights  ;
and  the  position  of  the  '  cities  of  the  plain  '  on  a  well-
known  knot  of  traffic  at  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  ;
cp  the  importance  of  Zoar  as  a  trading  centre  in  early
Mohammedan  and  crusading  times  :  MOAB,  §  9) — an
assumption  which  the  data  given  in  Part  I.  (esp.  S<j
2-20)  assure  us  is  not  anachronistic.  A  price  paid  to

5168


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Abraham  is  estimated  in  the  most  primitive  forms  of
currency,  cattle  and  slaves  (Gen.  20  14;  cp  212?,
perhaps  as  blackmail).  A  wife  is  purchased  with
precious  metals,  in  the  form  of  ornaments  (24)  ;  a  kid
is  given  as  a  harlot's  wage  (8817)  ;  and  silver  is  paid
by  Jacob's  sons  for  corn  in  Egypt,  and  also  by  the
Egyptians  till  it  fails,  when  the  price  is  paid  first  in
cattle  and  then  in  land  (47  M^)-  Thus  the  JE  stories
of  the  Patriarchs  present  us  with  instances  of  practically
every  stage  in  the  primitive  evolution  of  money.

The  passage  of  Israel  northwards  to  Palestine
brought  them  along  and  across  ancient  and  much-
frequented  lines  of  commerce  (§§  31-34),
whilst  the  traditions  of  their  early  con-
quests  an(j  settlements  in  Palestine  relate
their  inheritance  of  the  fruits  of  the  rich  Babylonian-
Egyptian  trade  which,  as  we  have  seen  (§§  25  27),
filled  Syria  on  the  eve  of  their  arrival.  Cp  '  the  goodly
Babylonish  mantle,'  '200  shekels  of  silver,'  and  'the
gold  ingot  of  50  shekels  '  among  the  spoil  of  Jericho
(Josh.  7  21,  JE),  and  the  Dt.  tradition  that  besides  the
fruits  of  the  long-developed  agriculture  of  Palestine  the
incoming  Israelites  inherited  '  houses  full  of  all  goods  '
(Dt.  6io/.  Josh.  24  13  Neh.  9z5).

Yet  these  accounts  abstain  from  asserting  that  Israel
at the same  time  entered on  the carrying trade of

_.  ,  Canaan. Israel was confined to the

45.  Distance


'
01  isra .


'


hi]ls None  of  the trjbes reached the


sea  coast  except  Asher,  and  the  probably
sarcastic  reference  in  Deborah's  song  (Judg.  5  17)  to  his
'  creeks  '  (AV  '  breaches  ')  is  borne  out  by  the  harbour-
less  character  of  the  coast  between  Accho  (held  by  the
Phoenicians)  and  Ras  en-Nakurah.  The  fact  is  that,
down  almost  the  entire  length  of  Israel's  history,  a.  belt
of  foreign  territory  separated  the  people  from  the  sea  :
nor  did  the  spectacle  of  the  sea,  breaking  on  what  was
generally  a  lee  shore,  and  entirely  without  natural
harbours,  excite  any  temptation  to  reach  it.  The  first
coast  town  taken  by  Israel  was  Joppa,  and  that  not  till
144  H.C.  In  Hebrew  literature  down  to  exilic  times
and  even  later,  the  sea  is  only  used  (i)  for  the  W.
horizon,  (2)  as  a  symbol  of  arrogance  against  God  (Is.
17  it  ff.  and  Pss.  ),  and  (3)  as  a  means  to  attempt
escape  from  him  (Am.  9  3  ;  Jonah).  The  word  for
harbour  in  (the  late)  Ps.  107  30  is  a  general  term  for
'  refuge  '  :  in  Hebrew  there  is  no  word  for  '  port,'  and  the
later  Jews  had  to  borrow  one  from  the  Greeks  —  limen
(see  HG  ch.  7).  Even  if  Ps.  107  refers  to  Israelites,
it  describes  merchants,  not  sailors.  It  is  remarkable
that  even  to  this  day  Jews,  who  have  risen  to  eminence
in  every  other  department  of  the  life  of  nations  among
whom  they  have  settled,  have  never  been  known  to
fame  as  admirals  or  ship-captains,  and  are  very  seldom
found  as  sailors  (so  far  as  the  present  writer  knows,
only  in  the  Black  Sea).1

Inland  waters.  •  —  As  for  inland  waters  :  the  Dead  Sea
was  not  navigated  till  the  time  of  the  Romans  ;  there
were  only  fishing  boats  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee  ;  2  and  on
the  Jordan  only  a  ferry  (2  S.  19  19  [18])  or  two  [cp  FORD].
Boats  on  the  Jordan  are  not  mentioned  till  the  Talmud.

Early  Israel  was  not  so  wholly  shut  off  from  the  lines

of  land  traffic  which  traverse  Palestine. The  Canaan-

_ , ites  continued  to  hold  positions  command-

' ~ ing  these  —  like  Bethshan,3  and  even  others

(sometimes in  a  line) across  the  Western

Range  (Gezer,  Gibeon,  Jerusalem);  while  the  Philistines

entered  on  possession  of  Gaza  and  the  S.  end  of  the

maritime plain. Still the comiubium which Israel

indulged  in  with  Canaanites  (Judg.  3s/l 'substantially

J,' Moore)  and Philistines (Samson) certainly proves

1  Jos.  (/?/  iii.  02)  mentions  Jewish  pirates  at  Joppa. There
was  a  Jewish  naval  officer  in  the  U.S.  civil  war  ; Spectator,
Jan.  3,  1003.

2  And  in  Greek  times  galleys. Cp  the  galley  on  some  of  the
coins  of  Gadara.

3  The  list  in  Judg.  1  contains  a  number  of  towns  on  the  main
routes.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

commerce.  The  possession  of  old  Canaanite  sanctuaries
on  the  cross-routes  would  carry  with  it  the  superiority
of  the  markets  connected  with  them  (§  24) ;  thus  we  find
Ephraim  at  Shechem.  or  the  neighbouringGilgal  (Juleijil),
Benjamin  at  Bethel,  and  Judah  at  Hebron— one  of  the
great  markets  for  the  desert.  But  other  tribes  gradually
settled  across  the  chief  lines  of  through  traffic — Issachar,
Zebulun,  and  Dan  ;  and  these  are  the  only  tribes  to
whom  any  portion  of  OT  literature  that  can  be  called
early,  appears  to  assign  any  international  trade.
Issachar,  on  Esdraelon,  is  described  as  the  guardian
of  some  great  fair  (Dt.  33i8  /  :  ISSACHAK,.  §  2);
and  Zebulun  farther  W.  as  commanding  the  coast-
trade  (Gen.  49  13  Dt.  33  19  ;  ZKBULUN)  ;  while  some
interpret  Deborah's  reference  to  Dan  of  their  con
nection  at  Laish  \\ith  Sidon  (cp  DAN,  §  3).  However
that  may  be,  Dan's  position  there  commanded  one
great  line  of  traffic  N.  and  S.  and  another  E.  and  W.
Further,  it  is  interesting  that  some  of  the  battles  and
expeditions  under  the  Judges  were  on  the  line  of  these
and  other  ancient  lines  of  traffic — lisdraelon,  Dan,
Jericho  (3  12^! ),  and  the  route  from  Jordan  into  Arabia,
Succoth,  Jogbehah,  on  which  it  is  Ishmaelites  with
ear-rings  of  gold  (in  other  words  traders)  whom
Gideon  defeats  (8  ;  cpf.  24).  There  is,  too,  a  possible
mention  of  pearls  (ma'Bjri,  £'.  26  ;  cp  Moore's  note,  p.  233),
as  well  as  one  of  purple  (?).  In  10  12  are  mentioned  the
Maonites,  probably  the  Minasans  ;  even  if  we  should
read  with  (5  Midian,  it  is  traders  who  are  meant.
Along  with  these,  the  reference  to  the  disturbance  of
travel  in  the  land  in  Judg.  5  (v.  6f.)  must  not  be  over
looked.  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  distinction  already
observed  between  trading  and  non-trading  communities
in  the  case  of  Laish  (187).  Laish  on  a  small  scale
illustrated  the  military  carelessness  which  rendered  (e.g. )
the  great  trading  dynasties  of  Babylonia  so  easy  a  prey
to  the  nomadic  hordes  who  conquered  them.

The  elements  of  trade  in  the  period  of  the  Judges
must  have  been  simple  ;  still,  we  are  not  warranted  by
47  Th  l'le  c'ata  m  minimising  them.  Salt  would
,  _  '  ,  ,  come  from  the  Dead  Sea,  and  asphalt  ;  fish
°  '  from  the  coast  towns.  That  the  useful  metals
came  from  the  outside  is  clear  both  from  their  absence
from  Israel's  earlier  possessions  and  from  the  Philistine
policy  (i  S.  13 19)  of  banishing  from  among  them  the
smiths.  That  is  to  say,  metal-work  was  not  familiar  to
the  Israelites  themselves  ;  it  was  probably  pursued,  as
in  so  many  parts  of  Syria  and  Arabia  at  the  present
clay,  by  certain  nomadic  families.  A  little  gold,  prob
ably  in  the  shape  of  small  rings  and  other  ornaments,
would  be  bought  from  the  .Arabian  caravans  (Judg.  8
and  10  as  above)  ;  and  silver  pieces  are  mentioned
(94  16s  Yizff.  10).  In  exchange,  the  Hebrews  could
give  their  surplus  wool  and  oil,  figs,  raisins,  and  perhaps
wine  (Judg.  9 13  ;  cp  the  early  use  of  the  phrase  'every
man  under  his  own  vine  and  fig  tree'  :  i  K.  Ss).1
But  the  foreign  character  of  the  international  trade  of
this  period  is  seen  in  the  use  of  gentilic  names  for
merchants  alluded  to  above  (§  13)  and  in  the  meaning
of  the  earliest  Hebrew  terms  for  trader  (ina  and  ^3T  =
traveller).2

It  is  usually  assumed  by  modern  writers  that  Solomon
was  the  real  father  of  trade  in  Israel  ;  yet  the  conditions,
_ . actual  symptoms,  and  consequences  of  a
,  * considerable  commerce  are  present  from
'" the very  beginning of  the monarchy —
which  by  all  W.  Asian  analogies,  would  itself  be  suffi
cient  proof of  the  organisation  and  rapid  increase  of
Israel's  trade. The  Philistines  not  only  held  the  main
line of commerce between Egypt and Phoenicia-
Babylonia  ; their  encounters  with  Israel  at  Michmash
and  Gilboa  (cp  Bet  Dejan  E.  of  Shechem,  and  Dagon
near  Jericho,  §  34)  appear  to  imply  a  struggle  for  the

1  Cp  Buhl,  Die  socialcn  Verhaltnisse  dcr  Israeliten,  12.
-  Note  the  sanctuary  as  the  treasury,  and  the  hire  of  mer
cenaries  (Judg.  9  4).

SI70


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE


cross-routes  to  the  E.  as  well.  In  connection  with
Saul's  earlier  successes  over  the  Philistines  on  one  of  these
routes,  David's  praise  of  him,  that  '  he  brought  up
adorning  of  gold  on  the  garments '  of  the  daughters  of
Israel  (2  S.  1  24)  is  very  significant.

In  W.  Asia  the  rise  of  a  power  like  David's  always
means  an  intentional  increase  of  commerce,  of  which  a
very  good  illustration  is  found  in  Palgrave's  description
of  the  policy  of  Telal  ibn-Rasheed  of  Hayil,  who  by
the  security  of  his  dominions  and  the  surrounding  desert,
by  liberal  offers  to  merchants  at  a  distance,  and  the
introduction  of  good  commercial  families,  created  a
considerable  external  trade  among  his  people  (Central
and  E.  Arab.,  93  112  133  [ed.  1883]).  David  united,
pacified,  and  partly  organised  all  Israel ;  finally  threw
off  the  Philistine  yoke  (and  perhaps  carried  his  power
into  Philistia  itself)  ;  subdued  the  Canaanites  who  had
hitherto  held  several  of  the  towns  in  Hebrew  territory  ;
and  founded  a  capital  whose  population  must  (as  Buhl
points  out,  p.  16)  have  been  dependent  on  commerce
for  their  livelihood.  He  stamped  shekels  used  in
weighing  (2  S.  1426),  which  we  may  take  as  evidence  of
other  regulations  of  commerce.  The  considerable
number  of  foreign  names  among  his  servants  is  partly
significant  of  trade ;  but  if  they  were  all  military
mercenaries,  we  have  seen  (§  n)  that  in  W.  Asia  the
substitution  of  such  for  a  native  militia  (ARMY,  §  4) —
and  this  is  the  first  appearance  of  mercenary  troops  in
Israel  (yet  cp  Judg.  94) — was  always  the  consequence  of
an  increase  of  trade.  David  subdued  Moab,  Ammon,
and  Edom  (with  command  of  the  SE.  trade  routes)  ;
extended  his  influence  as  far  X.  as  Hamath  (DAVID,
§§  7-9)  ;  and  made  an  alliance  with  Hiram  of  Tyre,
with  whose  help  he  built  a  royal  house  of  stone  and
cedar.  On  these  data,  some  of  which  are  conclusive,
we  may  assume  that  in  David's  reign  trade  in  the  real
sense  of  the  word  had  already  begun  to  grow  in  Israel.

It  was  under  Solomon,  however,  that,  as  in  the
building  of  the  temple  so  in  the  organisation  of  a  con
siderable  commerce,  the  full  consequences
of  David's  policy  were  first  realised.  The
mixed  and  much  edited  records  of  the
reign  of  SOLOMON  [^.v.]  have  behind  all  their  later
additions  the  facts,  not  only  of  an  increase  of  wealth  in
Israel  (i  K.  813),  which  was  comparatively  enormous,
but  also  of  foreign  enterprises  and  of  internal  provisions
for  trade  which  can  alone  account  for  such  increase.
David's  alliance  and  commerce  with  Hiram  of  Tyre  were
continued.  Whatever  historical  value  be  assigned  to
the  story  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba's  visit  to  Jerusalem
(i  K.  10 1-13),  there  is  at  the  bottom  of  it  at  least  the
fact  of  a  land  trade  with  the  S.  of  Arabia  ;  whilst  the
inherent  probability  of  the  record  of  voyages  down  the
Red  Sea  (on  the  state  of  the  text  of  i  K.928  10  u  see
Benzinger)  is  obvious  from  Solomon's  position  between
Phoenicia  and  Arabia  and  the  command  which  his
father's  conquest  of  Edom  gave  him  of  the  route  to
Elath.  Without  Solomon's  aid  the  Phrenicians  could
not  have  voyaged  from  the  Gulf  of  'Akaba  to  Ophir.
That  the  sailors  and  ships  are  described  as  Phoenician,
not  Israelite,  proves  that  the  story  has  not  been  at  least
wholly  idealised  by  Inter  writers.  If  Ophir,  as  is  most
probable,  lay  on  the  S.  coast  of  Arabia  (see  OPHIR), khree
months  would  amply  suffice  for  the  voyage  there,  and
the  expedition  would  be  back  within  a  year  ;  the  datum
of  the  record  that  a  voyage  was  made  only  every  third
year  is  another  symptom  of  the  absence  of  exaggeration.
It  is,  indeed,  a  difficulty  with  many  scholars  that  the
small  kingdom  of  Israel  had  too  little  to  furnish  in
exchange  for  the  vast  and  valuable  imports  described  as
coming  from  Ophir  ;  and  the  reporters  are  at  a  loss  to
name  the  gifts  from  Solomon  to  the  Queen  of  Sheba  in
return  for  hers  to  him  (i  K.I 013).  But  it  must  be

1  The  most  recent  proposal  for  Ophir  is  the  Malay  peninsula,
where  there  are  ancient  and  deserted  gold  mines.  See  The  Pilot,
Oct.  1902.

SI7I


49.  Foreign
trade.


kept  in  mind  that  the  king  of  all  Israel  could  always
pay  in  the  assurance  of  security  for  the  Arabian
Phoenician  traffic  across  his  dominions,  and  that  when
this  service,  and  Israel's  surplus  corn  and  oil  (i  K.
625  [n]  :  20,000  kor  of  wheat  and  20,000  bath  of  oil
annually  to  Hiram)  and  perhaps  wool,  failed  to  meet  the
value  of  the  timber  and  other  imports  from  Phoenicia,
Solomon  paid  the  balance  in  land  (i  K.  9n  ff.}.  Buhl
(77)  thinks  it  doubtful  that  the  expeditions  to  Ophir
were  undertaken  for  trade.  But  for  what  else
could  they  have  been  undertaken  ?  Early  Egyptian
and  Babylonian  expeditions  to  distant  lands  had
no  other  aim  (§  8,  third  note).  We  have  seen  that
some  products  of  Europe  were  in  Babylonian  shops  by
1400  n.  c.  ;  the  Phoenician  ships  may  have  carried  these
or  others  to  Ophir.  There  were  also  Syrian  dates,  and
corn,  the  Syrian  woven  robes,  the  Tyrian  purple,  and
Phoenician  modifications  of  Babylonian  and  Egyptian
art,  weapons  and  perhaps  silver  ;  whilst  we  have  also
seen  (§  20)  that  the  early  Egyptians  exchanged  trinkets
(as  civilised  peoples  do  to  this  day  among  barbarian
tribes)  for  the  valuable  products  which  they  found  in
the  markets  of  Punt.  Solomon's  servants  may  have
done  the  same  with  the  unsophisticated  natives  of
Ophir  ;  and  we  have  seen  that  dates  and  weapons  are
still  imported  to  the  S.  coast  of  Arabia  (§5).  i  K.
1028  f.  records  Solomon's  trade  in  horses.  The  text
restored  from  <5  J  is  to  be  read  :  '  The  export  of  horses
for  Solomon  was  out  of  Musri  and  Rue  :  the  dealers  of
the  king  brought  them  out  of  Kue  for  a  price.'  Musr  is
the  N.  Syrian  state  of  that  name  (MIZRAIM,  §  2  a)  ;  Kue
is  Cilicia  (see  CILICIA,  §  2).  Horses  came  from  N.  to  S.
in  W.  Asia  :  probably  first  from  Asia  Minor  into  Syria.
The  Hebrew  text  which  introduces  them  to  Palestine  from
Egypt,  is  impossible  :  horses  were  not  indigenous  in
Egypt  nor  were  the  pastures  there  sufficient  for  breeding
and  rearing  them  for  export.  Yet  notice  the  reference
in  Dt.  17  16  which  implies  that  some  horses  came  to  Israel
from  Egypt,  i  K.  10  15  (see  Benzinger,  for  the  correct
_  ,  text)  states  that  Solomon  derived  part

eo.  Duties,  etc.  of  his  vvealth  from  tolls  levied  on  the

transit  trade  between  Arabia  and  the  Levant.2  If  i  S.
815^  be,  as  is  probable,  of  post-Solomonic  date,  and
therefore  reflect  the  evils  of  a  monarchy  already  experi
enced,  it  is  notable  that  nothing  is  said,  among  the
taxes  imposed  on  native  Israelites,  of  one  imposed  for
trade.  But  this  will  only  mean  that,  as  in  early  Egypt
(§  n)  and  partly  in  Hayil,  when  Palgrave  was  there  in
1863,  the  trade  of  Israel  was  directly  carried  on  by  the
king  himself  through  his  servants  :  it  was  not  private
enterprise  but  part  of  the  royal  administration  (cp  i  K.
1028  'the  dealers  of  the  king').  Further,  Solomon  is
said  to  have  '  built  '  or  fortified  cities  on  trade  routes
(9i7/i)  :  '  Gezer,  Beth-horon  the  nether,  Baalath,  and
Tamar  in  the  wilderness,  and  all  the  store-cities  (•'•y
ni:2D8n  ;  cp  CITY  [/],  STORE-CITIES)  which  Solomon
had.'  TAMAR  (q.  "<•'•}  is  most  probably  Tamara  to  the
S.  of  Judah,  on  the  route  to  Petra  or  Elath.  Other
signs  of  Solomon's  far-spread  commercial  influence  are
his  alliance  with  Egypt,  which  carried  with  it  the
possession  of  Gezer  that  commands  more  than  one  line
of  traffic  (3i^  Oi?/.  )  ;  the  description  of  his  dominion
as  stretching  from  Tiphsah  (  '  the  crossing  '  )  on  the  X.
Euphrates,  to  Gaza  (424  [04]),  with  dominion  over  all
the  kings  beyond  the  river,  which  can  only  mean  com
mercial  influence  ;  and  the  datum  '  the  entering  in  of
Hamath'  (865)  —  i.e.,  the  issue  from  Israel  between  the
Lebanons  towards  the  most  important  mart  in  N.  Syria.
There  is  no  allusion  to  trade  in  Solomon's  prayer  toYahwe

1  After  Wi.  A  T  Unters.  \(*%ff.  \  cp  MIZRAIM,  §  2  a  ;  HORSE,
§  i  (5)  ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  CHAKIOT,  §  4,  col.  726  n.  i. [On
i  K.  10?8yC  see  also  Crit.  Bib.,  and  cp  SOLOMON',  §  8].

2  [Kittel  also  touches  the  MT  ;  but,  like  Benzinger,  he  may
appear  to  some  to  be  almost  too  moderate. Cp  SOLOMON,  §  7,
on 'the  singular  statement1 in i  K.10I4./:, and  Crit. Bib.
That  ani?  should  be  read  instead  of  3^V  is  undeniable  (Che.X]


SI72


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

(ch.  8)  ;  but  in  the  exigencies  of  foreign  trade,  and  the
introduction  of  guilds  or  groups  of  foreign  merchantmen
we  may  see  the  cause  of  the  multiplication  of  altars
to  strange  gods  in  Jerusalem,  especially  Phoenician,
Moabite,  and  Ammonite  (2  K.  2813).  With  this  com
pare  the  universal  custom  illustrated  in  §§  21-24.  [Cp
SOLOMON,  §§  4,  8/.]

In  David's  and  Solomon's  time  the  land  trade  of
N.  Syria  as  far  S.  as  Damascus  was  already  in  the
Th  hands  of  the  Aramaeans  (as  we  have  seen,
A  C,,  §  I5)i  a  people  still  in  their  early  vigour

and  therefore  unlikely  to  rest  content
under  the  commercial  supremacy  which,  as  we  saw
above  (§  49,  on  i  K.  424  and  865),  Solomon  had
established  as  far  as  Hamath  and  the  Euphrates.  It
was,  therefore,  from  the  Aramaeans  that  the  first  blow
came  to  Solomon's  wide  empire  (1123);  and  this
happened  even  before  he  had  passed  away.  The
disruption  of  the  kingdom  after  his  death  would  cause  a
further  shrinkage  of  Hebrew  trade  from  its  distant
extremities,  as  well  as  lead  to  a  severe  competition
between  Israel  and  Judah  for  the  possession  of  so  much
of  it  as  crossed  Palestine.  In  this  the  N.  kingdom  had
all  the  advantage  :  in  its  neighbourhood  to  Aram  and
Phoenicia,  the  possession  of  Gilead  and  of  all  the  routes
across  W.  Palestine — even  that  by  Ajalon,  Beth-horon,
and  Bethel,  which  lay  just  within  its  S.  frontier.
Bethel  and  Dan,  and  even  Jericho,  with  entrance  to
Moab  and  the  SE.  routes,  were  thus  in  its  possession.
Against  all  this  Judah,  already  impoverished  by  the
invasion  of  Shishak,  had  almost  nothing  to  offer  ;  and
Baasha  of  Israel  sought  by  the  building  of  Ramah  to
create  a  blockade  against  his  southern  neighbours
(15  i6/.).  It  was  Judah's  constant  effort  to  push  this
frontier  N.  beyond  Bethel  (see  HG,  ch.  12,  '  The  History
of  a  Frontier  ').  During  peace  with  Israel  Jehoshaphat
attempted  to  resume  Solomon's  trade  with  Ophir  ;  but
his  ships  were  wrecked  at  Ezion-geber  (224148).  These
commercial  ambitions  had  been  started  by  Omri's
commercial  alliances  with  Tyre  (in  connection  with
which  the  capital  of  N.  Israel  was  removed  across  the
watershed  to  Shomeron,  on  the  W.  esh-Sha'ir,  with  its
issue  to  the  coast  [1624]  ;  the  site  was  purchased  by
Omri  for  two  talents  of  silver),  and  with  Damascus
(20341);  and  but  for  Jehoshaphat's  misfortune  the
extent  of  Solomon's  trade  from  the  N.  Euphrates  to
the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea  might  have  been  recovered.
In  2  K.  5  17  mules,  hitherto  described  only  as  used  in
riding  (2  S.  1 89,  etc. ),  are  mentioned  as  beasts  of  burden.
The  revolution  of  Jehu  meant  the  triumph  of  the
Puritan  party  in  Israel,  who  detested  the  foreign
idolatries  which  the  commercial  alliances  of  Omri's
dynasty  had  introduced  ;  and  Israel's  trade  must  have
shrunk  with  Jehu  and  then  collapsed  under  the  weight
of  the  Aramaean  invasions,  which,  with  the  instincts
of  that  race,  followed  the  great  lines  of  traffic  by  Dothan
(2  K.  613),  and  Aphek  in  Sharon  (i  K.  202630  2  K.
1817),  to  Philistia  (2  K.  1217),  and  even  included  a
siege  of  Samaria  itself  (2  K.  624^  ).

Meantime  the  Assyrians  were  gradually  robbing  the
Aramaeans  of  the  trade  through  N.  Syria.  Ramman-

52  Advance  (Adad)-nirari  m-  (see  ASSYRIA,  §  32)
'  .  .  had  reached  the  Mediterranean  and
0  ssyria.  Besieged  Damascus  by  the  end  of  the
ninth  century.  His  successor  opened  the  roads  towards
the  Caspian  and  Iran.  Nineveh's  central  position  had
already  made  her  the  political  capital  (§  10)  :  by  850
B.C.  Syria  was,  therefore,  now  in  communication  with
Central  Asia,  under  the  shield  of  one  political  power —
the  invariable  cause  of  a  great  increase  of  commerce.
Tiglath-pileser  III.  (745^)  and  his  successors  were  to
confirm  and  extend  this  empire  to  the  Persian  Gulf

1  Aram's  right  to  bazaars  in  Samaria,  and  Israel's  in
Damascus.  We  see  from  this  that  a  conqueror  earned  the
claim  to  the  active  and  foremost  part  in  trade  between  himself
and  his  rival.

165  1:173


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

(over  Babylonia),  to  the  borders  of  Egypt  and  into
Arabia,  all  before  the  end  of  the  eighth  century  ;  and
by  670  Esarhaddon  had  taken  Memphis.  Thus,  for
the  first  time  since  the  fifteenth  century,  \V.  Asia  lay
under  one  political  power,  yet  the  lingua  franca  which
prevailed  throughout  was  not  that  of  her  conquerors
but  of  the  Aramaeans  (§  15).  For  the  internal  business
of  Assyria  at  this  time,  see  Johns,  Ass.  Deeds  and  Docu
ments  (Camb.  1901) :  a  large  collection  chiefly  of  seventh
century;  also  RP\  \y)ff.  1 'm  /.

The  advance  of  Assyria  in  the  ninth  century  enabled
N.  Israel  not  only  to  recover  her  lost  territories  from

53  Eiffhth Aram> ^)Ut also' along w'th Judah, to
,  °  revive  her  trade  and  carry  it,  through  the

'"  long  contemporary  reigns  of  Jeroboam  II.
and  Uzziah,  to  a  pitch  of  wealth  and  luxury  which  the
Hebrews  had  not  before  reached.  The  economic
difference  between  the  time  of  Elisha  (died  about  797)
and  Amos  (fl.  dr.  755)  is  vast  ;  and  the  annals  of  the
two  kingdoms  in  the  interval  enable  us  to  explain  it.
Amaziah  of  Judah  had  once  more  defeated  Edom
(2  K.  14?);  and  Jeroboam  II.  restored  N.  Israel's
influence  from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  to  the  Dead
Sea  and  in  Damascus  (142528).  Uzziah  took  Gath
(2  Ch.  266),  subdued  the  Arabians  of  Gur-Baal  and  the
Meunim  (v.  7),  fortified  the  roads  on  the  S.  frontier  of
Judah  (v.  10),  and  held  Elath  (2  K.  1422).  The  Hebrew
prophets  from  Amos  onward  bear  witness  to  an  extra
ordinary  increase  of  trade,  and  to  the  tempers  which
grow  with  it.  There  is  in  all  of  them  proof  of  the  widen
ing  geographical  knowledge  and  acquaintance  with  the
internal  life  of  other  peoples  which  commerce  brings.
Amos  himself  was  probably  a  wool-seller  as  well  as  a
wool-grower,  and,  Judaean  as  he  was,  learned  the  state
of  the  N.  kingdom  by  his  journeys  to  its  markets,
especially  Bethel.1  He  condemns  its  covetousness  and
zeal  for  trade,  which  threatened  the  new  moons  and
sabbaths  instituted  among  the  people  when  they  were
almost  purely  agricultural  (84^".).  Hosea  calls  Israel
a  very  'Canaanite' — i.e.,  'trader'  (12/  ;  cp  78  810);
and  Isaiah's  references  show  that  Judah  was  not  in  this
respect  much  behind  her  sister  :  Judah  is  '  filled  from
the  East  and  strikes  hands  with  the  children  of  strnngers  '
(26),  'full  of  silver  and  gold,  neither  is  there  any  end
of  their  treasures  ;  their  land  also  is  full  of  horses
neither  is  there  any  end  of  their  chariots'  (7)  ;  'ships
of  Tarshish '  are  mentioned  among  the  triumphs  of
their  civilisation  (16)  ;  caravans  are  described  (306) ;
yet,  in  conformity  with  what  we  have  seen  in  other
nations,  trade  is  not  noticed  among  the  principal
professions  of  the  national  life  (81-3).  Besides  the
texts  already  quoted  (there  are  others  :  e.g. ,  Am.  ^nf.
Hos.  128)  indicative  of  an  increase  of  wealth,  there  are
others  which  speak  of  the  popular  enterprise  in  building
— always  a  sure  proof  of  commercial  prosperity  (Am.
815  5n  Hos.  814  Is.  2 15  9 10  [9],  etc.  ;  cp  2  Ch.  269/. ).
The  (foreign?)  name  armon  (PALACE,  §  i  [3]),  hitherto
used  of  royal  castles,  is  applied  to  private  dwellings
(Bk.  of  Twelve  Prophets,  i.  p.  33,  n.  3)  ;  and  the
builder's  plummet  is  used  as  a  religious  figure  (Am.  IT/.,
cp  Is.  28 16  30 13).  Again,  the  old  agricultural  economy
is  disturbed  ;  farmers  give  place  on  their  ancestral
lands  to  a  new  class  of  rich  men,  who  can  only  have
been  created  by  trade  ;  and  the  rural  districts  are  partly
depopulated  (Is.  58^  Mic.  21-59).  The  sins  of  trade  :
covetousness,  false  weights,  and  the  oppression  of
debtors  and  of  the  poor,  are  frequently  castigated  (Am.
26  4i  84/i  Hos.  127_  Is.  35i5523  Mic. 2  and  3).  In
certain  passages,  particularly  in  Amos  and  Micah,  such
condemnation  of  the  trading  classes  is  no  doubt  partly
due  to  the  conservative  zeal  of  the  desert  shepherd  and
agriculturist,  against  the  growth  of  a  new  economy.2
But  in  Isaiah  this  is  associated  with  a  real  sympathy  with

1  See  GASm.  Book  of  the  Twelve  Prophets,  1  79.

2  It  is  from  the  shepherd  village  of  Bethlehem  that  Micah
predicts  the  coming  of  Israel's  saviour  (5  i  \i.\ff.).

5174


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

the  serviceableness  of  commerce,  and  appreciation  of
its  bigness  and  even  of  its  Serviceableness  to  religion  :
cp  Isaiah  on  Cush  (ch.  18),  on  Egypt  (19),  and
especially  on  Tyre  (23)  '  whose  merchants  are  princes,
whose  traffickers  are  the  honourable  of  the  earth  '  (v.  8),
and  who,  although  likened  to  a  harlot  in  commerce
with  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  may  yet  bring  her
merchandise  and  hire  as  holiness  to  the  God  of  Israel.

The  public  works  of  Jotham,  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah
indicate  considerable  wealth  and  activity  ;  but  it  must
q  th  hnve  been  under  Manasseh  that  Judah
,  first  benefited  commercially  by  the  great

•'  extension  of  the  Assyrian  empire  (see
above,  §  52),  and  the  comparative  security  of  trade
from  the  Caspian  and  Persian  Gulf  to  the  Red  Sea  and
Memphis  under  one  power.  The  Assyrian  influence
upon  the  ritual,  and  probably  the  literature,  of  Israel
under  Manasseh,  is  significant  of  close  and  frequent
intercourse  with  Mesopotamia.  Zephaniah  describes
the  Phoenician  quarter  in  Jerusalem,  the  Fish  Gate,
and  a  new  or  second  city  (MAKTESH,  MiSHNEll).  Cp
the  multiplication  of  gates  on  the  walls  (JERUSALEM,
§§  23  f-  )•  The  most  conclusive  proof,  however,  of  an
increase  of  trade  in  Judah  during  the  eighth  and  the
seventh  century  is  found  in  a  comparison  of  the  Book  of
the  Covenant  with  the  Deuteronomic  code.  The  Book  of
the  Covenant  makes  no  provision  for  trade.1  Deutero
nomy  contains  a  considerable  number  of  regulations.
To  begin  with,  there  are  the  regulations  necessitated  by
the  main  Deuteronomic  law,  the  centralisation  of
worship  at  Jerusalem  (1424^),  which  must  have  meant
a  great  increase  of  trade  in  that  city  at  the  seasons  of  the
three  annual  festivals  (v.  26).  Pilgrims  from  a  distance
had  to  turn  some  of  their  goods  into  money  before
leaving  home,  and  purchase  at  Jerusalem  the  materials
for  sacrifice.  Then  there  are  regulations  for  debt  (15  i)  ;
interest  may  be  taken  from  a  foreigner  but  not  from  a
fellow-Israelite  (23?o[ig]/. ).  International  banking  is
provided  for  (156/1)  ;  and  among  the  divine  blessings
to  be  bestowed  upon  the  people  in  reward  for  their
obedience  to  the  Law  is  one,  that  they  shall  lend  to
many  nations  but  not  borrow — as  it  is  phrased,  they
shall  be  '  the  head  and  not  the  tail '  in  their  trade
(28  I2/". ,  cp  43  f. ).  Hebrews  are  not  to  become  objects
of  the  nation's  slave  trade  (24y)  ;  and  the  enfranchise
ment  of  any  that  have  fallen  through  debt  into  slavery
is  provided  for  (15  12).  Unjust  weights  and  measures
are  condemned  (25 13-16).  Hired  labourers  must  not
be  oppressed  (24 14^ ).  Most  significant  of  the  extreme
contrasts  between  wealth  and  poverty  which  the  trade
of  the  eighth  and  seventh  centuries  has  produced  are
the  regulations  for  the  treatment  of  the  poor  (15i-n).
The  king  is  not  to  multiply  horses  or  silver  and  gold
(17  i6/.),  another  echo  of  the  prophetic  teaching.  Yet
indicative  as  all  these  laws  are  (when  contrasted  with
their  absence  from  the  Book  of  the  Covenant)  of  the
commercial  development  of  Israel,  it  is  remarkable  that
no  money  dues  are  yet  prescribed  for  the  priests  (18  1-8)
nor  are  fines  permitted  in  expiation  of  murder  (\§\ff.
21 1-9).

To  the  pre-exilic  period,  though  written  after  the  fall
of  Jerusalem,  belongs  Ezekiel's  description  of  Tyrian

fi>5 F7PkiPl'a commerce C26  /•}• Ic °Pens (262)
oo.waiu.VL* wjth an interestmg epithet of the

lyre,  etc.  jucjasan  capital  as  the  'gate  of  the
peoples,'  justified  by  the  fact  that  the  pre-exilic  Judah
lay,  as  we  have  seen,  across  the  nearest  path  of  the
Phoenician  trade  with  Arabia,  over  which  Manasseh,  as
the  tributary  of  Assyria,  may  well  have  held  a  supremacy
which  Josiah,  in  part  at  least,  continued.  According  to
Ezekiel  Phoenician  trade  extended  from  Tarshish  (27 12)
and  the  coasts  of  Greece  (Elishah,  v.  7)  in  the  W.  to
Sheba  (v.  22)  in  the  E. ,  and  from  Tubal-Meshech  (cp
the  Moschi  and  Tibareni  of  Herod.  894)  between  the

1  In  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  there  are  laws  of  deposit  (22  7),
and  of  the  lending  of  money  (-2  25)  Fines  are  paid  in  shekels.

5175


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Black  Sea  and  the  Caspian  in  the  N.  to  Egypt  and
Phut  (or  Punt)  in  the  S.1  Tarshish  sent  silver,  iron,
tin,  and  lead  (12)  ;  Greece,  coloured  stuffs  (7)  ;  the
isles  of  the  Levant,  inlaid  ivory  (6)  and  ivory  and  ebony
articles  (from  Rodan  =  Rhodes,  15).  From  Ionia  and
Tubal-Meshech  came  slaves  and  copper  vessels  (13)  ;
from  Beth-Togarmah,  probably  Armenia,  horses  and
mules  (14).  Egypt  furnished  fine  embroidered  linen.(7).
Cypresses  and  cedar  were  to  hand  in  the  Lebanons  (5),
and  oaks  in  Bashan  (6).  The  Aramaeans,  in  command
of  the  land  trade  immediately  behind  Phoenicia,  brought
a  great  variety  of  goods :  carbuncles,  purple,  embroidery,
fine  linen,  pearls  (from  the  Persian  Gulf)  and  jasper
( 16  :  see  Toy's  note,  SBOT;  cp  STONES,  §  21 )—  evidently
the  wealth  of  the  Babylonian  markets — with  Helbonwine,
white  wool  and  other  wares  from  Damascus  (18).  From
Israel  came  only  natural  products :  wheat,  spicery.
wax  (MINNITH,  PANNAG),  honey,  oil,  and  balm  (17).
Arabia  supplied  wrought-iron,  cassia,  and  calamus  from
UZAL  (19);  saddle  cloths  from  DEDAN  (20) ; 2  lambs,
rams,  and  goats  from  KEDAR  (21)  ;  the  best  spices,
precious  stones,  and  gold  from  Sheba  and  RAAMAH  (22).
The  trading  centres  on  the  N.  Euphrates  (where  it
begins  to  be  navigable),  HAKKAN  and  EDEN  (qq.v.
round  Birejik  between  Edessa  and  'Ain-tab),  Assyria
itself,  and  Canneh  or  CALNO,  and  CHILMAO  in
Babylonia,  furnished  dyed  mantles,  and  stuffs  with
skeins  of  wool  (?  23 /. ).  The  shipbuilders  and  sailors
were  native  Phoenicians  (%f.  n) ;  but  Tyre  had  also  a
mercenary  army  (cp§§  n,  48) — Ethiopians  (read  COD  for
C'~tS,  PARAS),  Lybians,  and  men  of  Phut  (10).  It  is  an
imposing  catalogue,  and  worthy  of  the  enthusiasm  of
the  prophet :  the  fruit  of  centuries  of  enterprise  and
organisation  for  Assyrian  trade  ;  see  Johns,  op.  cit.

The  destruction  which  Ezekiel  beheld  as  imminent
on  Tyre,  fell  immediately.  In  572,  after  a  siege  of
.,  ,  .  ,  thirteen  years,  Nebuchadrezzar  took  the
e  c  a  island  city  (cp  NEBUCHADREZZAR,
:ezzar.  TvKF).  ]t  was  tne  final  triumph  of
a  policy  sustained  through  many  annual  campaigns
to  the  Levant,  designed  to  divert  the  rich  trade  with
the  E.  from  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Arabian  land-routes
to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  Euphrates.  Proofs  of
this  are  found  not  only  in  Nebuchadrezzar's  own
annals,  but  also  in  the  Greek  accounts  of  great  works
in  Babylonia  which  are  most  probably  attributed
to  the  son  of  Nabopolassar.  Famous  as  a  soldier,
Nebuchadrezzar  was  still  more  eminent  as  a  builder
and  organiser  :  his  peaceful  labours  bulk  in  his  own
records  over  his  military  expeditions.  He  cleared  the
mouths  of  the  two  great  streams  of  Babylonia  into  the
Persian  Gulf,  and  deepened  their  channels,  so  that  they
were  still  navigable  for  sea-going  vessels  in  the  Greek
period.  Arrian  (Anab.  Alex.  7 7)  reports  that  the  ships
of  the  Gerrheeans  (from  the  Arabian  coast  of  the  Gulf)
sailed  up  the  Tigris  as  far  as  Opis  :  and  Gotz  (  Verkehrs-
wege.  151)  is  justified  in  assigning  the  measures  which
made  this  possible,  as  well  as  the  founding  of  Derodotis,
a  port  at  the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates,  to  Nebuchadrezzar.
The  two  great  rivers  were  connected  by  a  system  of
canals  which  in  Xenophon's  time  (Anab.  24)  were  still
navigable  by  great  grain-ships  ;  the  largest,  the  Nahar
Malka,  is  still  in  use.  By  campaigns  against  '  Kedar
and  the  kingdoms  of  HAZOR  [f.v.]'  (Jer.  49  28),
Nebuchadrezzar  ensured  the  security  of  the  desert
routes  S.  of  Babylonia  ;  and  he  himself  on  one  occasion
used  the  short  but  difficult  road  from  Syria  to  Babylon
by  Tadmor.  Yet,  these  Arabian  campaigns  must  have

1  In  the  close  of  the  seventh  and  opening  of  the  eight  centuries
the  trade  of  Egypt,  both  internal  and  foreign,  was  very  prosperous,
especially  under  Psametik,  Necho II.,  Apries  (Hophra),  and
Amasis II. Coincident  with  this was the usual increase  of
mercenaries. Greek  commerce,  which  had  founded Milesion
about  700  (Hall,  Oldest  Civilisation  of  Greece,  271)  took  a  firm
hold  of  the  Delta. Amasis  II.,  besides  encouraeing  the  Greeks,
entered  into  a  close  alliance  with  Cyrene. Cp  Herodotus,  2  182.

2  Cp  saddle-bags  exported  from  el-Jof  to-day  ;  §  4,  third  note.

5176


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

had  as  their  end  not  so  much  the  use  of  the  desert
routes  (except  perhaps  to  Egypt)  as  the  diversion  of  the
Arabian  and  eastern  traffic  up  the  Gulf  to  the  Euphrates,
and  so  to  the  Levant,  whose  coasts  were  now  an
integral  part  of  the  Babylonian  empire.  We  have  seen
the  Gerrhaean  ships  far  up  the  Tigris  :  they  brought
incense  for  the  temples  in  Babylon.1  But  sea-trade
with  India  may  also  have  been  at  this  time  in  full
course  ;  it  has  to  be  noticed,  however,  that  no  SILK
(if.  v. )  is  mentioned  in  the  commercial  lists  of  the  period.-
From  India,  then,  to  Tarshish,  and  from  Egypt  to
Central  Asia  (through  Persia  and  the  Mecles),  the  trade
of  the  world  now  centred  in  Babylon.  Hence  the  vast
increase  of  the  city's  size  and  wealth  so  wonderful  to
the  Greek  writers  (Herod.  1 178^  ;  Diod.  Sic.  2z).  The
exilic  passage  Jer.  50  mentions  its  '  storehouses '  (v.  26)  ;
its  '  mingled  people '  and  '  treasures  '  (37)  ;  and  Is.  47  15
'  those  that  have  trafficked  with  thee  from  thy  youth. '
Throughout  these  prophecies  there  is  the  same  imputa
tion  of  'wisdom'  and  'enchantments'  and  'sorceries,'
which  we  find  imputed  by  Israel  to  other  commercial
peoples — the  'sons  of  the  East,'  the  Edomites,  and  the
Philistines.  The  recent  discovery  and  deciphering  of
Babylonian  documents  from  the  end  of  the  Babylonian
period  and  the  beginning  of  the  Persian  have  revealed
an  organisation  of  commerce  so  thorough  that  J.  Kohler
justly  declares  it  to  exhibit  the  greatest  similarity  to  the
conditions  of  modern  banking  and  exchange,  and  to
have  been  the  origin  of  the  commercial  system  which
has  descended  to  modern  times  through  the  Greeks  and
Romans  (Bcitr.  z.  Assyr.  4430).  He  has  given  in  the
volume  just  cited  a  number  of  interesting  instances  (in
addition  to  those  given  in  Kohler  and  Speiser,  Aus  dem
Babyl.  Rechtslcbcn,  etc.,  and  Bab.  I'ertrage}.  There
were  banks  and  banking  firms  (the  most  famous  of
which  was  the  house  of  Egibi— cp  RP\\].  '  Anwei-
sungen  ('assignments,'  '  bills  of  exchange  ')  und  Zahlung
des  Angewiesenen  an  den  Anweisungsempfanger  waren
das  tagliche  Brod  des  Babyl.  Verkehrs. '  Money  was
paid  into  the  agencies  of  a  bank,  and  by  its  head  office
or  other  agencies  paid  out  again  to  the  assignee,  exactly
as  by  our  system  of  cheques.  Discount  was  known.
Property  was  pledged.  In  cases  of  sale  or  debt  surety
ships  were  accepted  (again  cp  Johns,  op.  cit. ).  Sales
were  made  on  approval.  Partnerships  were  formed
between  freemen,  and  between  freemen  and  slaves — i.e.,
between  capital  and  labour.  Money  was  still  reckoned
by  weight.  The  depreciation  in  use  of  metal- pieces
was  understood  and  accounted  for  (cp  Hrozny,  '  Zum
Geldwesen  der  Babylonier,'  Bcitr.  z.  Assyr.  \^ff.}.

At  the  heart  of  this  commercial  empire  the  best  part
of  the  Jewish  people — including its  industrial classes

57  Jews  in  ( '  craftsmen  and  smiths': 2  K.  24 14)—
_  ' . . were  established, and  probably  found  a
y  ' large  number  of  their  own  race  already

intimate  with,  and  benefiting  by,  the  trade  of  the  land
(see  DISPERSION,  §  4).  They  must  have  taken  the
advice  of  Jeremiah  to  settle  into  the  life  of  their  new
surroundings,  their  comparative  independence  in  which
his  letter  takes  for  granted  (Jer.  294^- ).3  That  many
of  them  became  engaged  in  Babylonian  commerce
needs  no  argument.  After  fifty  years  the  great  prophet
who  arose  to  announce  to  them  their  return,  not  only
promised  the  restoration  of  their  command  of  the  trade
from  Egypt  and  Arabia  (Is.  45 14,  cp  v.  3),  but  seems  to
have  found  it  difficult  to  tear  them  from  the  profitable
conditions  of  Babylonian  life  (cp  his  many  calls  '  to  go
forth,'  and  in  particular  his  appeal  552:  'Wherefore
do  ye  weigh  your  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread
and  your  earnings  for  that  which  satisfieth  not '  ;  cp

1  Herod.  1  183  reckons  the  amount  used  annually  at  the  chief
temple  of  Babylon  at  1000  talents.

2  The  earliest  mention  of  silk  appears  to  be  by  Aristotle  in
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century.

3  Cp the present writer's '  Is.  40-46 '  577?!; Nikel, Die
Wiederhtrstettung des jiidisch. Geineinwcsens nach dent
babyt.  Exit,  1900.

5177


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Buhl,  Soc.  Verhdltn.  88,  n.  i).  Whether  few  or  many
returned  when  Cyrus  opened  the  way  (see  DISPERSION,
§  5),  those  who  remained  in  Babylon  were  the  prosperous
and  wealthy  (Zech.  6  \off. ).  They  must  have  been
introduced  to  the  thorough  Babylonian  methods  of
doing  business,  though  it  is  striking  that  (as  we  shall
see,  §  60)  the  Priestly  Code  bears  no  reflection  of  the
Babylonian  subjection  of  commerce  in  its  smallest
details  to  priestly  regulations,  nor  of  the  temples  as
registering,  banking,  and  appraising  centres  (Johns,
op.  cit.  3  254).  New  horizons,  however,  appear  in
Hebrew  literature  ;  and  the  Jews'  knowledge  of  the
world  was  immensely  widened  (GEOGRAPHY,  §  18).

With  the  rise  of  the  Persian  empire  all  these  processes,
from  Babylon  as  the  centre,  were  quickened  and  ex-

58  Persian  tended  (DISPERSION,  §  6).  The  con-
errmire  cluests  of  Cyrus  in  Asia,  and  of  Cambyses
in  Africa,  were  thoroughly  organised  by
themselves  and  their  successors  and  chiefly  by  Darius
Hystaspis  before  515.  The  empire  was  divided  into
provinces  and  the  policy  was  to  connect  these  by  as
speedy  means  of  conveyance  as  were  possible.  Some
of  the  ancient  lines  of  traffic  were  made  into  solid  roads,
capable  of  carrying  two-  and  four-wheeled  carriages,
and  new  lines  were  opened  up,  especially  through  Iran
to  Eastern  and  Central  Asia.  The  greatest  of  all  the
roads  for  which  we  have  now  exact  data  was  that  from
Susa  the  capital  to  Sardis  ;  see  the  careful  survey  and'
argument  of  Gotz  (Die  lrerkehrswege,  165-184).  He
reckons  the  distance  at  sixty-five  daily  stages,  which
with  eight  days  of  rest  on  the  way  occupied  seventy-
three  days  in  all.

The  road  led  NW.  from  Susa,  past  the  now  deserted  Nineveh,
crossed  the  N.  stretches  of  the  Tigris,  and  the  Euphrates  (the
latter  a  little  to  the  N.  of  the  later  Samosata)  and  so  through
Cilicia  by  Ancyra  to  Sardis,  whence  it  was  a  short  journey
either  to  Smyrna  or  Ephesus.

Another  road  from  Susa  led  N.  by  Ecbatana  (Hamadan)  to
Rhagae  (close  to  Teheran)  where,  in  the  ninth  century  after
Christ,  lay  the  Levant  market  for  Chinese  silk  ; !  thence  to
Hekatonpylos2  (probably  the  present  Shahrud :  Gotz)  where  it
divided  into  one  branch  by  Magaris  (Merv)  to  Marakanda
(Samarcand)  the  capital  of  Sogdiana,  and  another  to  Herat.

A  third  road  from  Susa  led  K.  to  Persepolis  and  Aspadana
(Ispahan).  Susa  was,  of  course,  directly  connected  with  Babylon,
from  which  the  land  road  up  the  Euphrates  was  freshly  laid
down  and  furnished  with  bridges  over  the  canals.

Greek  sources  (Xenophon  and  Herodotus)  give  us
for  the  first  time  exact  data  for  this  ancient  line  of
traffic  between  Babylon  and  the  Gulf  of  Issus  (above,
§39/)-

It  was  8  days  from  Babylon  to  Hit,  thence  20  to  the  mouth  of
the  Hfibur,  thence  5  to  Tiphsah  or  Thapsacus  (Rakka)  where
the  road  crossed  to  the  S.  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  thence  to
Balis  3,  to  Aleppo  3,  and  to  the  coast  4,  or  43  in  all  (not  73 :
Gotz,  190)  from  Babylon  to  the  coast.

From  the  coast  the  Phoenicians,  according  to  Marinus
of  Tyre  (Gcitz,  190),  carried  their  goods  to  Hierapolis
(Bambyke)  near  the  Euphrates,  and  thence  direct  to
Ecbatana  and  Hekatonpylos  for  the  Central  Asian
markets.  There  was  also  a  road  from  the  Gulf  of  Issus
to  Tarsus  (12  days);  thence  through  Cilicia  to  Iconium
(see  further  Ramsay,  Hist.  Geog.  of  Asia  Minor}.

Persian  roads  were,  according  to  the  Greeks,  well
supplied  with  stations,  furnished  with  horses  and  khans
for  travellers  (Herod.  552  898),  and  with  a  government
service  of  swift  couriers  (Id.  and  Xen.  Cyrop.  8i8),3
which  is  said  to  have  accomplished  the  distance  between
Susa  and  Babylon  in  a  day  and  a  half,  and  that  between
Susa  and  Sardis  in  10  (Gotz,  198).  Cp  Esth.  813  814.
Whilst  the  Persians  thus  organised  and  accelerated  the
land-traffic,  they  suffered  the  water-traffic,  developed
by  Nebuchadrezzar  (§  63),  to  fall  into  disuse.  Nebu
chadrezzar's  port  at  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  gulf
decayed,  and  it  is  even  doubtful  whether  the  Periplus

1  Heid,  Gesch.  des  Lcvantchandch  itit  Mittt'lalter,  Stuttgart,
1879,  i.  p.  2  :  in  French  (much  enlarged),  1885-1886.

'-  Up  to  Hekatonpylos  it  was  good  for  carriages,  Gotz,  186.

3  Cp  ayyapeveti/  in  NT  from  ayyapos,  Herod.  898,  a  Persian
word  =  courier.

5178


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

of  Skylax  (Geogr.  Gr,  Min.  1,  ed.  Muller)  round  Arabia
to  the  Red  Sea  occurred  as  asserted  in  the  time  of
Darius  (thirty  months  is  the  time  assigned  to  it).  See
Gbtz,  203^  Darius  attempted,  without  success,  to
carry  out  the  plan,  which  Necho  II.  is  said  to  have
initiated,  of  connecting  the  Red  Sea  with  the  Nile
( Herod.  2 158  4  42). l  Further,  we  have  under  the  Persian
kings  the  first  appearance  in  W.  Asia  of  MONEY  (q.v. )
in  the  true  sense  (see  also  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES).
The  present  writer  has  purchased  several  darics  and
also  silver  coins  of  Siclon  under  Artaxerxes  Ochus  which
were  found  in  N.  Palestine.

The  trade  of  Syria  must  have  enormously  benefited

by  all  this  policy  of  the  Persian  kings  ; not  only  in  the

_ . ... security  ensured — though  this  was  not

Jerusalem0  Perfect <CP the  note  of  Ezra  on  the
journey  from  Babylonia  to  Jerusalem  :

Ezra  8  21/31) — but  also  in  the  means  taken  by  the
satrap  of  Memphis  for  furnishing  the  desert  route
between  Gaza  and  the  Delta  with  water  (Herod,  iii.  46).
Incorporated  in  the  Persian  empire,  and  still  without
rivals  in  the  Delta,  the  Phoenician  ports  continued  to
flourish  (cp  their  coinage  of  Aradus  and  Sidon  under
Persia;  Head,  Hist.  Num.  666,  671).  Damascus
and  Gaza  flourished  with  them;  but  Gotz  (164)  is
wrong  in  adding  to  this  list  Jerusalem,  to  which  we
now  turn.  The  destruction  in  586  had  reduced  Jeru
salem  and  her  people  to  the  '  off-scouring  and  refuse  in
the  midst  of  the  peoples'  (Lam.  845).  Her  'breach
was  great  like  the  sea  '  (2 13) ;  the  luxury  of  former  days
had  become  starvation  (4 1  ff- ,  etc.);  the  people  had  to
buy  even  their  wood  and  water  (56,  cp  vv.  9  13).  The
Edomites  and  Arabians  recovered  the  transit  trade.
The  exiles  who  returned  in  537  were  a  weak  and  starve
ling  community.  The  statement  that  they  bought  for
the  temple  timber  from  the  Tyrians  who  brought  it  to
Joppa  in  return  for  meat,  drink,  and  oil  (Ezra  87)
belongs  to  the  less  authentic  portion  of  the  Book  of
Ezra,  and  seems  a  reflection  of  Solomon's  trade.  It  is
difficult  to  see  how  the  hunger-bitten  colony  raised  wine
and  oil  for  export.  Haggai  and  Zechariah  tell  a
different  story.  There  was  no  hire  for  man  or  beast
(Zech.  810);  no  thrift  (Hag.  16);  a  blight  lay  upon
agriculture  (ib.  n).  The  silver  and  gold  were  still  in
the  hands  of  Yahw6  (28),  and  other  nations  had  not  yet
brought  their  'desirable  things.'  Timber  for  building
the  temple  was  hewn  by  the  Jews  themselves  in  the
neighbouring  hill-country  (1  8).  What  gold  and  silver
arrived  in  Jerusalem  came  as  contributions  from  rich
exiles  in  Babylon  (Zech.  69^).  Agriculture  was  only
partially  resumed  ;  its  prosperity  was  still,  after  twenty
years,  a  thing  of  promise  (Zech.  3 10).  In  Malachi
there  is  no  reflection  of  trade.  The  connubium  practised
with  the  surrounding  heathen  and  semi-heathen  implies,
of  course,  a  certain  amount  of  local  traffic  ;  and  this
would  gradually  increase  with  the  resumption  of  Jewish
life  in  '  the  cities  of  the  Negeb'  (Neh.  11).  Nehemiah
pictures  corn,  wine,  grapes,  figs,  etc. ,  brought  into
Jerusalem  from  the  country  (13  15^),  and  fish  sold  by
the  Tyrians  (16);  on  the  Sabbath  the  gates  have  to  be
closed  against  these  traders  (20).  But  there  was  no
through  traffic,  as  in  olden  times.  Indeed,  according  to
Ezra  4  20,  one  of  the  objections  made  by  the  enemies  of
the  Jews  against  rebuilding  Jerusalem  was  that  it  would
resume  the  customs  and  toll  which  were  formerly  im
posed  by  Jewish  kings  and  made  them  great — a  very
interesting  glimpse  into  the  pre-exilic  trade  of  Judah.
The  Jews  were  themselves  subject  to  the  general  imposts
of  the  Persian  kings  (Ezra  4 13  20  Neh.  64)  who,  however,
in  pursuance  of  their  usual  policy,  exempted  from  duty
the  goods  required  for  the  temple  (Ezra  724  ;  see  EZRA-
NEH.  ,  §  5,  col.  1480).  In  spite  of  their  poverty  the
Jews,  with  the  new  horizons  which  the  exile  and  the
increased  extent  of  the  trade  of  their  Phoenician  neigh-

1  On  the  various  canals  and  attempted  canals  with  this  aim,
see  Budje,  HESziq/.  V63/.

5*79


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

bours  opened  to  their  eyes,  indulged  vaster  hopes  than
ever  of  the  mastery  of  the  world's  trade.  Not  only
would  the  wealth  of  Arabia  return  to  them  (Is.  606/.  :
Midian,  Sheba,  Kedar,  Nebaioth) ;  the  new  coasts  of
the  West  should  send  them  tribute  (8f. ) ;  from  foreigners
and  the  sons  of  the  Diaspora  alike  (9-17).  It  is  remark
able  that  in  this  passage  Jerusalem,  the  mother  of  far-
scattered  and  wealthy  sons,  is  represented,  not  in  her
inland,  secluded  position,  but  as  standing  on  the  sea
shore,  the  abundance  of  the  seas  and  the  wealth  of  the
nations  drifting  to  her  feet  (60s  ;  cp  G.  A.  Smith,  Bk.
of  Isaiah,  II. ).  Contrast  the  picture  given  above,
§  45.  So  much  had  the  Persian  roads  and  Phoenician
ships  achieved  in  the  scattering  of  trading  Jews,  and
the  widening  of  the  mercantile  hopes  of  the  people.
On  Is.  65  ii  see  FORTUNE.

At  this  point  we  may  conveniently  take  the  attitude
to  trade  of  the  Priestly  Narrative  and  Code.  Between

60  Pri  tlv  these  two  m  l^'s  resPect  there  is  a  dis-
'  „  ,  ^  tinction.  Whilst  P's  stories  of  primitive
man  are  as  destitute  of  any  reflection  of
trade  as  those  in  JE  (§  42),  its  narratives  of  the  patri
archs  contain  more  allusions  to  commerce  than  JE  does.
Abraham,  bargaining  in  the  usual  oriental  fashion,1
buys  Machpelah  for  400  silver  shekels  (Gen.  23  is/. );
Hebron  is  thus  pictured  as  it  always  was — a  market  and
'  harbour '  for  the  nomads  to  the  south.  The  treaty  with
Hamor  (348^)  covers  settlement,  connubium,  and
commerce — the  last  definitely  stated  (vv.  1021).  The
distances  of  the  marches  in  the  wilderness  are  suitably
given,  not  in  the  daily  stages  achieved  by  traders,  but
in  those  (4  to  6  or  7  m. )  of  nomad  camps  (Nu.  33).
The  rich  offerings  for  the  tabernacle  imply  a  people  of
far  trade  as  well  as  one  skilled  in  handiwork  (Ex.  203-7,
etc.  ;  cp  the  oblations  of  the  princes  in  Nu.  7).  Incense
is  for  the  first  time  mentioned  in  the  Hebrew  ritual  (Ex.
3022^  etc.;  cp  Jer.  620);  along  with  sweet  calamus
(REEU),  myrrh,  CINNAMON,  storax  (?),  ONYCHA,  GAL-
BANUM.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Priestly  Law  is  very
meagre  in  references  to  trade  ;  puzzlingly  so  in  contrast
with  Deuteronomy  (above,  §  54),  when  we  consider  the
intervening  residence  in  Babylon.  The  laws  against
fraud  in  money  matters,  loans,  and  deposits  (Lev.  6  iff. ),
and  false  measures  and  balances  (1935^  ),  are  similar  to
the  warnings  of  post-exilic  prophecy.  There  are  laws
for  the  selling  of  land  (25  i4/.  23^),  against  interest
(v,  36),  and  concerning  foreign  and  native  slaves  (v.  39  :
H  ;  cp  Dt.  23  Jf. ).  No  ransom  is  allowed  for  the  life  of
a  murderer  (Nu.  35 31).  On  transactions  necessitated  by
the  restorations  of  the  Jubilee  Year,  see  Jos.  Ant.  iii.
123.  But  these  are  almost  all  that  have  to  do  with
commerce.  Unlike  those  of  Deuteronomy,  the  blessings
and  curses  pronounced  in  connection  with  the  Law-
contain  no  reference  to  trade  (Lev.  26).  The  priests
value  land  (etc. )  used  for  sacred  purposes  (27) ;  but  their
revenues,  unlike  those  of  Babylon  and  Egypt,  appear
to  include  none  derived  from  trade  (Nu.  18).  The
religious  feasts  (Lev.  Isff. )  are  purely  agricultural  ;  there
is  no  inclusion  of  the  directions  for  farmers  at  a  distance
selling  their  produce  and  buying  material  for  sacrifice  at
the  central  sanctuary,  such  as  we  sa%v  in  Deuteronomy
(§  54).  On  the  whole,  the  comparative  silence  of  the
Priestly  Code  as  to  trade  is  to  be  explained  either  by
the  effort  of  the  compilers  to  hold  themselves  to  the
wilderness  conditions,  or  else  by  the  sadly  diminished
trade  of  the  post-exilic  Jews  as  compared  with  the  com
merce  which  flourished  in  the  deuteronomic  period.
On  the  monetary  standards  of  P,  see  SHEKEL,

§3/

The  Book  of  Joel  (about  400  B.C.)  reflects  a  purely

1  Forder  (/I-V/A  Arabs  in  Tent  and  Tou>n,  219^)  illustrates
the  details  of  Abraham's  purchase.  'In  buying  land  from  the
Arabs  some  such  terms  as  the  following;  are  used  : — "  A  buys
from  B  land  in  such  a  place,  also  all  that  can  be  seen  on  the
land,  trees,  and  stones,  also  all  that  shall  be  found  under  the
ground."  This  custom  makes  Abraham's  action  very  under
standable."

5180


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

agricultural community  with  no  resources when  their
_,. harvests fail. Their children are the
' victims  of  the  Phoenician  slave-trade  to
Fb t  Ionia  (3[4]6): they  shall  have revenge

'  some  day  in  selling  Phoenicians  to  Sheba.
Instead  of  commanding  the  transit  trade,  Jerusalem  is  un
willingly  overrun  with  foreigners  (3  [4]  17).  Cp  Zech.
142i :  '  no  more  a  trafficker  in  the  house  of  Yahwe. '  We
have  here  traces  of  the  feeling  against  association  with
foreigners,  which  the  new  legalism  continued  to  enforce
through  subsequent  centuries,  and  which  must  have
seriously  hampered  any  revival  of  trade  in  Judah.
Compare  the  account  which  Palgrave  gives  of  the  effect
of  the  Wahabi  religious  rigour  on  commerce.

Of  course,  there  were  other  tempers  in  post-exilic
Judaism,  and  these  appear  in  the  Wisdom  literature.
With  all  its  reproof  of  greed  of  gain  (lig,  etc.),  the
Prologue  to  Proverbs  employs  the  methods  and  tempers
of  commerce  to  illustrate  the  ideal  of  man's  search  for,
and  intercourse  with,  Wisdom  (814  82^  i%ff.  ;  cp
2823).  Like  so  much  else  in  the  Books  of  Wisdom,
this  also  reappears  in  the  parables  of  Jesus  (below,  §  79).
The  temptress  in  Prov.  7  is  the  wife  of  a  merchantman
on  a  long  journey  ;  it  is  interesting  that,  at  the  present
day,  among  the  Syrians  of  Lebanon,  such  immoralities
are  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  wives  of  men  trading
abroad.  We  see  in  this  another  cause  of  the  dislike  of
conservatives  in  Israel  to  trade  ;  cp  Pr.  27  8  :  '  as  a  bird
wandering  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth
from  his  place.'  There  is  also  in  the  Prologue  the
strong  warning  against  suretyship  (6ijf.).  But  its
most  striking  feature  is  the  recognition  of  the  highest
divine  Wisdom  as  identical  with  that  which  appears  in
the  common  ways,  bazaars,  traffic,  and  concourse  of
men.

In  Job  the  references  to  trade  are  very  few.  The
land  of  Liz  is  on  the  path  of  the  men  of  Sheba  ;  they
are  represented  as  marauders  (lis).  Mention  is  made
of  desert-journeys  of  the  caravans  of  Teyma,  and  the
companies  of  Sheba  (6i8/l);  of  the  Egyptian  ships  of
reed  (926);  of  (gold  of)  Ophir  and  silver  as  the  reward
of  righteousness  (2224  '28 16  ;  contrast  8124);  of  beryl,
sapphire,  gold,  glass,  coral,  crystal,  pearls,  and  the
topaz  of  Ethiopia  (28i6j^;  see  STONES,  PRECIOUS) —
an  interesting  list  of  what,  at  the  time  the  book  was
written,  were  regarded  as  precious  metals  and  stones  ;
and  in  28 iff.  there  is  the  vivid  picture  of  mining,  and
in  21 29  an  appeal  to  the  wide  experience  of  travellers.
As  a  whole  the  book  shows  a  knowledge  of  the  far
world  and  its  wonders,  only  to  be  derived  from  the
situation  of  the  writer  on  the  line  of  a  widespread  com
merce.

In  Ecclesiastes  there  is  hardly  any  allusion  to  trade
among  all  the  ambitions  and  labours  of  men  :  but  see
28  :  '  I  gathered  silver  and  gold  and  the  peculiar  property
of  kings  and  princes  I  made  for  myself. '

Apart  from  the  prologue,  the  Book  of  Proverbs  prob
ably  reflects  the  life  of  many  centuries  in  Israel  ;  yet
even  here  the  possible  references  to  trade  are  pro
portionately  few:  warnings  against  suretyship  (11 15
17i8  20i6  2226  27 13),  false  balances(lli  16n,  weights
and  balances  are  the  work  of  Yahwe,  201023),  bad  ways
of  gain  (11 18),  greed  of  gain  (1627  ;  it  brings  bad  luck
to  a  house  :  jjsa  Jteia  irva  lay  I  2820  22  25),  the  withhold
ing  of  corn  (from  the  market?)  (1126),  and  sluggishness
in  business  (22 13  :  the  reference  is  to  the  bazaars)  ;  some
satire  on  oriental  methods  of  bargaining  (20 14),  notes
on  the  helplessness  of  the  debtor  (22 7),  on  wealth  from
wisdom  in  trade  (244),  and  on  the  deep  contrasts
between  rich  and  poor  and  the  woefulness  of  poverty
which  appear  only  in  commercial  communities  (194?
227,  etc.).  26 10  is  an  obscure  verse  on  hiring.  The
picture  of  the  strong  woman  portrays  her  searching  for
wool  and  flax  ;  she  is  like  '  a  merchant  ship  that  bringeth
goods  from  afar  ' ;  '  she  perceives  that  her  merchandise
/iTino)  is  profitable '  and  she  delivers  the  linen  and  the

5181


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

girdles  made  by  her  household  to  the  Canaanite — i.e.,
Phoenician  pedlar  or  trader — a  glimpse  into  the  home-
industries  of  Israel  (31 13/.  18  24).

By  the  end  of  the  Persian  period  (about  340)  the  trade
of  the  civilised  world  reached  the  following  limits.  In
co  c,,«  -, .  tne  east  ^e  Persian  roads  were  in  com-

O4.  oullllliul  y  .  . .  .  , . ..

onH  nf  Por-aian mUnlCatl0n Wlth Indla. and It IS CX-

epoch  trernely  Probable  that  the  Chinese  silk.

'  Seric  stuff,'  which  the  Greeks  found  in
325  in  Afghanistan,  was  already  there.  The  Arabian
land  routes  were  still  regularly  used.  CINNAMON  came
from  the  east  beyond  Media,  and  GALBANUM  from
Persia  (?).  In  the  south  the  Egyptians,  if  it  is  not  certain
that  they  had  circumnavigated  Africa  (in  Necho's  time),
were  at  least  in  communication  with  the  E.  coast  of
Africa  (so  much  basis  must  we  allow  to  the  story),
traded  with  Nubia,  with  the  W.  oases,  and  Cyrene.
Egypt  began  to  send  large  supplies  of  corn  across  the
Mediterranean  (Diod.  Sic.  xiv.  794).  In  the  N.  the
Greeks  had  opened  up  the  Black  Sea  ;  in  the  W.  and
NW.  the  Phoenicians  had  long  exploited  the  mines
of  eastern  Spain  and  the  Rhone  region  with  its  com
munications  with  N.  Gaul  and  perhaps  Britain.  They
had  also  penetrated  the  Atlantic,  whilst  Carthage  had
reached  Lake  Tchad  and  the  Niger.  Massilia  was  a
flourishing  depot,  soon  to  send  out  Pytheas  (about  300
B.C.)  to  the  sources  of  amber  round  the  Baltic  (cp
AMBER,  §  3),  and  to  the  N.  of  Scotland  (for  the  truth  of
the  tale  see  Gotz,  291).  How  far  across  this  enormous
sphere  of  communication  Jews  were  scattered  it  is  im
possible  to  say  —  probably  everywhere  in  the  Persian
empire  as  traders  and  settlers,  and  in  Greece,  Italy,  and
Carthage  as  slaves  (cp  Joel,  as  cited  in  beginning  of
§  61),  some  of  whom  might  regain  their  freedom,
and,  like  their  kind,  take  up  some  form  of  industry  or
commerce.  Except  in  the  Semitic  names  of  slaves,  and
in  a  tale  told  by  Aristotle,  and  reported  by  Claudius  of
Soli  (Jos.  c.  Ap.  I  22  ;  cp  Frag.  Hist.  Grtpc.,  ed.  Muller,
2323),  Jews  do  not  appear  in  Greek  literature  before
the  very  end  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.

With  the  conquests  of  Alexander  the  Great a new
epoch  began  in  the  trade  of  the  world. The  land-traffic
which  the  Persians  had  developed  was


63.  Alexander
and  successors.


sustained and their roads extended


eastward.  There  was  little  change  in
the  lines  of  traffic  ;  but  new  cities  were  founded  upon
them — e.g. ,  LAODICKA  ;  and  both  Alexander  and  the
Diadochoi  increased  the  speed  of  marching  (Gbtz,  191,
etc.).  The  Persian  neglect  of  the  rivers  (§58)  was
rectified  ;  Alexander  cleared  the  Tigris  of  its  dams  and
weirs,  founded -a  new  port  at  its  mouth,  Alexandria,
later  Charax,  and  redug  the  canals.  The  foundation
of  Seleucia  on  the  Tigris  was  a  great  blow  to  Babylon,
which  began  to  decay.  For  reasons  why  the  Tigris  dis
placed  the  Euphrates  as  a  line  of  route,  see  Gotz,  411
ff.  On  sea  the  changes  were  enormous.  Hitherto  the
Phoenicians  had  encountered  powers  whose  resources
were  confined  to  the  land,  to  whom  their  sea-power  was
indispensable,  and  by  the  growth  of  whose  empires  the
trade  and  wealth  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  only  the  more  in
creased.  But  the  Greeks  were  a  people  who  were  of
equal  maritime  capacity  with  themselves,  and  had  long
been  preparing  for  the  mastery  of  oriental  trade  by
their  occupation  of  the  sea-boards  of  Asia  Minor,  and
their  settlements  in  the  Delta,1  who  had  fleets,  and
knew  how  to  found  new  harbours  and  establish  colonies.
Alexander  rivalled  his  land  march  to  the  Indus  by  the
naval  expedition  which  he  sent  back  from  there  up  the
Persian  Gulf,  thereby  reopening  (if  not  for  the  first  time
founding)  direct  maritime  communication  between  India
and  Babylonia  (Geogr.  Gr.  Afin.  ed.  Muller,  i).

It  was,  however,  his  foundation  of  the  Egyptian  Alex
andria  which  made  the  greatest  change,  and  in  this  Tyre
and  Sidon  found  their  first  successful  rival.  For  with

1  There  were  Greek  mercenaries,  soldiers,  and  scribes  in  Egypt
under  Psametik,  and  Greek  settlements  and  trade  since  Amasis.

5182


64.  Nabataeans.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

the  exploration  of  the  Red  Sea,  already  intended  by
Alexander  and  carried  out  by  Ptolemy  II.,  and  the
founding  of  new  harbours — at  Arsinoe  near  Suez,  Leukos
Limen  near  el-Koser,  Berenike,  and  others  (see  above,
§  29),  there  was  opened  a  new  route  (or  an  old  one  was  re
opened)  to  S.  Arabia  and  India  which  must  have  drawn
away  some  proportion  of  the  land-traffic  through  Arabia
and  the  sea-traffic  up  the  Persian  Gulf,  on  which  Tyre
and  Sidon  depended.1  The  Greeks  had  now  a  line  of
their  own  from  Europe  to  Hindostan  all  the  way  on  sea
except  for  the  small  stretch  of  land-traffic  through  what
was  now  a  Greek  kingdom.  Alexandria  was  its  main
depot  and  exchange  ;  and  in  proportion  as  Alexandria
flourished  Tyre  and  Sidon  grew  less.  The  doom,  there
fore,  which  Zech.  9 1  ff.  saw  imminent  upon  Hamath,
Hadrach,  Damascus,  Tyre,  and  Sidon  was  pregnant
with  more  than  the  merely  military  overthrow  which
is  all  that  the  writer  seems  to  perceive  in  it.  As  the
Seleucid  power  grew,  the  Phoenician  ports  and  Damascus
found  themselves  threatened  by  northern  in  addition  to
their  southern  rivals.  The  growth  of  ANTIOCH  (g.  v. )  has
always  meant  the  diminution  of  Damascus  (HG  643,
647,  and  article  '  Antioch '  by  the  present  writer  in
Hastings'  DB]  ;  and  the  new  Seleucid  ports  in  N.  Syria
must  have  diverted  the  Euphrates  trade  from  Tyre  and
Sidon.  The  usual  result  of  a  wealthy  commerce  appears
in  the  large  mercenary  armies  of  the  Seleucids  (e.g. ,  Jos.
Ant.  xii.  10 1,  and  other  passages).

One  of  the  earliest  of  the  Seleucid  campaigns  was
that  undertaken  in  312  B.C.  and  repeated  later  against
the  NABAIVKANS  (q.v. ,  cp  Schiir.  GVI
i  app. )  who  had  become  possessed  of
the  seats  of  the  Edomites,  and  had  already  filled  Petra
with  wealth  derived  from  the  transit  trade.  The  new
Red  Sea  commerce  did  not  wholly  destroy  the  land-
traffic  in  Arabia  ;  and  the  Nabatteans — successors  both
to  the  Aramaeans,  whose  language  (though  themselves
Arabs)  they  adopted,  and  to  the  Edomites — made  them
selves  masters  of  all  the  routes  from  Teyma  and  Egra
(Medain  Salih)  (the  S.  limit  of  their  inscriptions)  to
the  Persian  Gulf,  Babylon,  Damascus,  Gaza,  Elath,  and
Egypt  (§§  29-33).  But  they  had  also  industries  of  their
own.  The  first  appearance  of  SE.  Palestine  in  Greek
letters  is  made  by  the  Dead  Sea  as  a  source  of  asphalt ;
and  it  is  to  the  Nabatasans  that  Diodorus  Siculus  (248)
ascribes  the  collection  of  asphalt  and  its  conveyance  to
Egypt.  The  Seleucid  campaign  of  312  had  had  for  one
of  its  aims  the  possession  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  its  asphalt
(Diod.  19ioo).  The  Nabatasans  must  also  have  grown
dates,  and,  when  they  came  into  possession  of  Hauran,
wheat  sufficient  for  export.  These  with  camels,  the
Arabian  incense,  coral  and  pearls  from  the  Gulf,  alkali,
medicinal  herbs,  and  what  proportion  of  goods  from
Africa  they  were  able  to  draw  to  Elath,  would  form
their  exports  to  the  W.  Their  port  for  this  was  the
harbour  of  Gaza,  with  perhaps  Anthedon — other  new
rivals  to  Tyre  and  Sidon.  The  Nabatasans  were  land
traders  ;  but  three  of  their  inscriptions  from  the  first
decade  of  the  Christian  era  have  been  found  in  Puteoli
and  Rome  (CIS  Pt.  II.  vol.  i. ,  Nos.  157-159).

These  then  were  the  new  commercial  currents  within
which  the  Jews  lay  during  the  Greek  period.  The  con-

1  For  Ptolemy  II. 's  policy  in  regard  to  trade,  and  the  trading
expeditions  he  sent,  see  the  inscription  on  the  '  Stone  of  Pithom  '
in  Naville,  The  Store-city  of  Pit 'tout,  etc.,  also  /.  12  of  the
Philae  inscription  of  the  same  king  (translated  by  Budge,  HE
1 209^7).  The  trade  of  Egypt  was  very  prosperous  under  the
Ptolemies,  and  the  consequence  is  seen  in  the  apparently
inexhaustible  wealth  of  that  royal  house.  Their  mercenary
armies  were  always  easily  raised  ;  their  expenditure  on  build
ings  was  enormous.  Of  late  years  a  considerable  number  of
commercial  documents  of  the  Ptolemaic  and  Early  Roman
period  have  been  discovered  in  Egypt.  Those  given  by  Messrs.
Grenfell  and  Hunt  (The  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  pts.  i.  and  ii.  ;
Fayfim  Tmvns  and  their  /'«/>/.;  etc.)  comprise  appeals  for
justice  against  trade  defaulters,  bankers'  receipts,  acknow
ledgements  of  loans,  declarations  of  sales,  and  registrations  of
contracts,  sales,  loans,  mortgages  etc. — for  which  registration
there  were  special  officials  in  each  nome.

5183


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

tests  of  the  Diadochoi  must  at  first  have  ruined  trade
65  Je  '  h  m  ^vr'a-  Soon  we  find  Jewish  settlers
trade  receiving  civil  rights  from  the  Ptolemies
in  Alexandria  and  from  the  Seleucids  in
Antioch  and  other  N.  Syrian  cities.  These  settlers  were
probably  for  the  most  part  merchants.  There  was  con
stant  intercourse  between  Jerusalem  and  Egypt  and  N.
Syria — both  Greek  powers  bade  for  Jewish  friendship  by
granting  at  various  times  remission  of  dues  on  goods
into  Jerusalem  (e.g. ,  Jos.  Ant.  xii.  83),  or  by  regulating
trade  to  suit  Jewish  religious  laws  (ibid.  4).  The
financial  abilities  of  individual  Hebrews  found  individual
opportunity  in  the  farming  of  the  Syrian  taxes  for  the
Greek  kings  and  were  great  enough  to  form  almost
legendary  stories  (id.  4?;  cp  Schiirer,  ET,  ii.  1 160).
Thus  the  nation  grew  in  affluence  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  4  10).
Ecclesiasticus  finds  it  necessary  to  make  many  warnings
against  fraud  in  trade  (especially  2620^,  cp37n  and
7 15;  813294^  i4/:41i8423).  Then  came  the  over
throw  of  Jerusalem  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (169  B.C.),
and  the  bitter  struggles  of  the  Maccabees  during  which,
at  first,  Jewish  trade  must  have  been  utterly  destroyed.
Weread  of  merchants  (probably  Phoenician)  accompany
ing  Syrian  troops  against  Judaea  to  purchase  the  captives
(Ant.  xii.  7s).  The  friendliness  of  the  Nabatasans  to
the  Jews  is  noted  twice  (ibid.  xii.  83  xiii.  12).  In  the

66  Maccabees  camPa'gns  of  Judas  and  Jonathan  the
'  '  regard  paid  to  lines  of  trade  and  con
spicuous  centres  upon  them  is  manifest ;  the  wonder  is
that  it  has  not  been  noticed.  Bacchides  fortified  Jericho,
Bethhoron,  Emmaus  (xiii.  1 3) ;  then  Jonathan  garrisoned
Michmash  (6) ;  the  three  toparchies  which  Demetrius  the
younger  presented  to  the  Jews  were  all  necessary  to  the
command  of  trade  ;  they  were  accompanied  by  remission
of  dues  on  saltpits,  etc.  ;  as  soon  as  Jonathan  cleared
Judaea  of  the  Syrians  he  took  Ashdocl  and  made  treaties
with  Ashkelon  and  Gaza  (5s).  Then  he  turned  against
the  Ammonites  and  the  Nabatasans,  while  Simon  fortified
a  line  of  places  as  far  as  Ashkelon,  and  broke  to  the  sea
at  Joppa  (5io).  How  much  this  meant  for  the  com
mercial  ambitions  of  the  little  Jewish  state  is  seen  in  the
eulogy  on  Simon,  i  Mace.  14s  :  '  With  all  his  glory  he
took  Joppa  for  a  haven,  and  made  an  entrance  to  the
isles  of  the  sea. '  At  last  Judah  had  a  port.  Beside  it
the  small  river  harbour  of  Jamnia  (JABXKEL)  was  also
occupied,  and  Gezer  fortified  in  connection  with  both.
The  increased  wealth  brought  about  by  these  means  is
seen  in  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  which  followed  (Ant.
xiii.  5io).  In  142  B.C.  Simon  set  Judaea  free  from
Seleucid  tribute,  and  commercial  documents  were  dated
from  that  year  (67).  Jewish  coinage  began.  The
campaigns  of  Judas  into  Gilead  had  not  been  so  successful
in  restoring  communication  between  the  Jewish  settle
ments  there  and  Judaea — he  had  to  bring  the  Jews  away
with  him  (i  Mace.  5) — whilst  between  Galilee  and  Judaea
lay  Samaria  (Ant.  xiii.  102^)  which  John  Hyrcanus
subdued,  and  opened  the  way  to  the  S.  desert  routes
by  Hebron  through  the  subjection  of  the  Idumoeans
(xiii.  9 1 ).  When  Simon  appealed  to  the  Romans  it  is
significant  that  he  asked  for  the  restoration  of  'Joppa,
the  havens,  Gezer,  and  the  springs  (?  of  Jordan)'  (ibid.
2).  During  the  subsequent  years  of  peace  John  amassed
an  immense  sum  of  money  (ibid.  10 1) ;  in  so  barren  a
land  as  Judah  it  must  have  come  from  trade  and  dues
on  trade.  Josephus  reports  as  much  as  3000  talents
in  money,  deposited  in  the  tombs  of  David  (DJ\.  2s).
Tombs  were  a  usual  place  of  deposit.  Aristobulus  added
part  of  the  Iturasan  country  (Ant.  xiii.  11s)  with  the
entrance  to  the  Hamath  route  (cp  HG  414,  n.  4) ;  but
it  is  in  the  campaigns  of  Alexander  Jannasus  that  we
see  most  proof  of  commercial  ambitions.  He  took
Gadara  (?),  Raphia,  Anthedon,  Gaza  (which  was  dis
appointed  in  help  from  its  Nabatasan  ally  Aretas  ;  Ant.
xiii.  183),  Moab,  and  Gilead  (but  had  to  give  them
back  to  the  Nabataeans  ;  14 2),  held  Samaria  (15 4)  with
its  command  of  routes  to  the  coast,  and  made  a  treaty

5184


67.  Jews  and
Greeks.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

with  the  Nabatreans  (152).  The  lines  of  positions  held
by  Jannoeus  as  laid  clown  by  Josephus  are  very  signifi
cant  ;  first  along  the  coast  from  Rhinokolura  to  Straton's
Tower  (afterwards  Cnesarea)  and  then  through  Esdraelon
from  Mt.  Carmel  by  Tabor  and  Bethshan  to  Gadara
with  a  number  of  cities  E.  of  Jordan  (104).  Both  he
and  his  widow  aimed  at  Damascus  (163).  Later,  the
Nabatoeans  retaliated  by  a  siege  of  Jerusalem  (xiv.  2i)  ;
Josephus  describes  them  as  '  no  very  warlike  people '
(ibid.  3).  All  the  later  Hasmonaean  kings1  had
mercenaries  in  their  army — another  sure  proof  of  their
commerce.

Meantime  Jewish  settlements  abroad  increased  in  all
the  great  towns  ;  but  they  do  not  appear  to  have  excited
remark  from  the  greatness  of  their
trade.  Their  business,  except  in  the
case  of  a  few  prominent  individuals,
must  have  been  petty  and  parasitic.  The  Nabatteans
appear  better  known  to  the  Greeks,  whose  earliest  notices
of  the  Jews  are  confined  to  their  hatred  of  men  (Posi-
donius  of  Apamea,  born  about  135  B.C.,  Fr.  Hist.  Gr.,
ed.  Miiller  :  through  Diod.  Sic.  34,  fr.  i  ;  Apollonius
Molon  a  teacher  of  Cicero,  Fr.  Hist.  Gr.  111213;  cp  Eus.  !
Prcep.  Evang.  9  19).  Apollonius  also  charges  them  with
making  no  useful  invention  (quoted  by  Jos.  c.  Ap.  2  15).
With  the  civil  rights  granted  to  them  in  so  many  large
cities  (Jos.  Ant.xu.3z,  etc.),  however,  they  must  have
risen  to  considerable  commercial  power,  especially  in
Antioch,  Alexandria,  and  Gyrene  (for  the  last  cp  Strabo
quoted  by  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  7-2}.  The  Jews  of  Asia  Minor
deposited  in  Cos  800  talents,  about  ^292,000  (see
Reinach's  n.  2  on  p.  91  of  his  Textes  d'auteurs  Grecs
et  Rom.  relatifs  au  Judaisme).

We  now  pass  to  the  last  of  our  periods — the  Roman.

The  effects  of  Roman  policy  on  the  trade  of  the  world

„  were  more  revolutionary  than  those  of

. '  r"  _  any of the empires which preceded

P  '  '  them,  and  may  be  summed  up  under

the  following  five  heads  : —

(i. )  The  centre  of  trade  was  shifted  from  W.  Asia  to
the  other  end  of  the  Mediterranean  and  fixed  at  Rome.
This  was  rendered  inevitable :  politically  by  Rome's
rank  as  the  capital  of  the  Roman  state  ;  commercially
by  the  Phoenician  and  Greek  exploitation  during  the
previous  periods  of  the  W.  Mediterranean,  N.  Africa,
Spain,  and  Gaul  ;  geographically  by  the  position  of
Rome  well  down  the  great  Italian  promontory,  which
runs  so  far  out  upon  the  Mediterranean,  with  its  attend
ant  isle  a  day's  sail  from  N.  Africa,  and  its  SE.  cape  a
few  hours  from  Greece.  Even  in  Republican  times
Rome's  central  character  had  been  assured  both  by  the
roads  which  gathered  to  her  from  all  parts  of  the  penin
sula,  and  by  the  sea-traffic  which  filled  her  harbour  of
Ostia  or  came  up  the  Tiber  to  herself  (even  triremes  and
penteremes  reached  the  city  under  the  Republic,  and
under  Augustus  ships  of  78  tons  ;  Gotz,  319).

(ii. )  Above  all  the  nations  which  preceded  them,  the
Romans  excelled  in  the  making  of  long  lines  of  firm
_  roads — first  in  Italy,  towards  Gaul,  and

.  Oman  gpam  ancj  tneni  as  tnejr  empire  extended,
roaas.  tQ  thg  middle  of  Scotland  in  the  N. ,  and
to  the  farthest  borders  of  Mesopotamia  and  the  Arabian
province.  By  Cassar's  time  sixteen  paved  roads  led  into
Rome — the  oldest  the  Via  Appia  S.  by  Capua  with
branches  to  PUTEOLI  (APPII  FORUM,  THREE  TAVERNS),
RHEGIUM  (q.v.),  and  Brundisium.  From  Dyrrhachium
(another  branch  from  Apollonia)  the  great  route  to  the
E.  made  for  THESSALONICA  with  a  continuation  to
Byzantium.  For  the  Roman  system  of  roads  through
Asia  Minor  from  Byzantium,  Ephesus,  and  Smyrna,  see
Ramsay,  Hist.  Geog.  As.  Min.  and  the  summary  with
map  in  Miss  Skeel's  Travel  in  First  Century  after  Christ
(Cambr.  1901);  also  ASIA,  CAPPADOCIA,  CILICIA,
EPHESUS,  GAI.ATIA,  LAODICEA,  PHRYGIA,  SMYRNA,

1  Josephus  (/?/  i.  1 5)  says  that  John  Hyrcanus  was  the  first  to
have  mercenaries.

5185


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

etc.  From  Asia  Minor  to  the  Persian  Gulf  the  lines
were  little  altered  from  those  of  the  Greek  period  (§  69).
The  Euphrates  was  bridged  at  Samosata,  and  there  was
a  bridge  of  boats  at  Zeugma  (Bir)  (Tac.  Ann.YLi?'}.
From  the  Euphrates  as  from  Byzantium  the  Pontus  was
more  easily  reached.  Antioch  grew  in  influence  as  a
knot  of  trade-routes.1  The  road  by  Palmyra  to  the
Euphrates  was  more  frequently  used.  Charax  was  still
the  port  on  the  Persian  Gulf.  The  distances  were
approximately  these  : —

From  Tarsus  to  Antioch  5  to  7  days ;  thence  to  Zeugma  6 ;
thence  to  Seleucia  (Ctesiphon  the  Parthian  capital)  23  or  24 ;
then  to  Charax  13  ;  Seleucia  to  Artaxata  (for  Central  Asia)  over
32  ;  to  Trapezus  (Trebizond)  over  40 ;  from  Antioch  by  Emesa
(Horns)  to  Palmyra  9  days  ;  thence  to  the  Euphratesat  Circesium
5  or  6  (to  Vologesias,  lower  down  the  river,  16,  and  thence
to  Charax  29  or  30) ;  Antioch  to  Damascus  7  to  9  ;  thence  to
Palmyra  5  or  6  ;  Bosra  to  Charax  across  the  desert  5  to  6  weeks  ;
Damascus  to  Petra  9  days,  to  Gaza  7  (at  least)  ;  Petra  to  Gaza  not
less  than  5  ;  to  Elatn  3  or  4  ;  and  to  Leuke  Koine  n  or  12.  Gaza
to  Pelusium  was  6  or  7  days  (Gotz  5)  ;  Pelusium  to  Alexandria,
5  or  6  by  land,  i  to  2  by  sea;  Alexandria  to  '  Babylon '  (later
Cairo)  4,  to  Arsinoe  (Suez)  6,  to  Cyrene  20. a

In  Syria  and  Palestine  the  ancient  routes  were
followed  with  no  important  variations  ;  and  here  we
must  remember  that,  with  the  possible  exceptions  of  a
few  short  stretches  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Colonize
and  other  centres,  none  of  the  characteristic  Roman
roads  were  laid  down  till  the  times  of  the  Antonines,
nor,  so  far  as  the  present  writer  has  been  able  to
examine  them,  was  the  structure  consistently  so  perfect
as  in  the  Roman  roads  of  Italy  and  the  W.  (for  these
latter,  see  Gotz,  3227^;  and  Skeel,  45).  Along  these
roads  an  imperial  service  of  post-horses  and  carriages
was  developed  by  Augustus ;  later  known  as  the
'  cursus  publicus,'  which  civil  officials,  returning  or
emigrating  veterans,  and  of  the  soldiery  all  who  carried
special  passes,  had  the  right  to  use.  Each  of  the
mansiones  or  chief  stations  was  supplied  with  an  inn,3
stables,  and  about  forty  horses  ;  the  intermediate  muta-
tiones  had  about  twenty  (Gotz,  336^;  cp  Skcel,  4,jf.}.
The  variety,  capacity,  and  speed  of  wheeled  vehicles
was  greatly  increased  ;  and  it  is  to  the  Romans  that  we
owe  the  first  real  development  of  the  carriage  of  goods
on  wheels,  though  pack  animals,  camels,  mules,  asses,
and  even  oxen,  were  still  generally  used  (cp  Jos.  I'it.
2426).  Horses,  mules  (cp  Horace's  journey  to  Brun
disium,  Sat.  Is),  and  asses  were  employed  for  riding.
On  the  breeding  of  horses,  for  different  purposes,  the
Romans  bestowed  great  care.  The  security  of  the
roads  was  a  constant  matter  of  trouble  to  the  pro
vincial  governors.  In  semi-independent  principalities
(as  we  shall  see  under  the  Herods,  §  75),  brigandage
was  always  more  rife  ;  but  even  under  purely  Roman
government  it  frequently  reappeared.  Yet,  on  the
whole,  the  security  of  land-travel  at  the  beginning  of
the  empire  had  immensely  improved  :  cp  Strabo,
vi.  42  ;  Pliny,  HN11 i,  who  calls  the  '  immensa  Romanes
pacis  majestas,'  '  velut  alteram  lucem  .  .  .  rebus
humanis. '

(iii.)  At  sea  the  greatest  change  was  the  reduction  of

the whole of the Mediterranean under one  political

power. Then  followed  its  clearance  of

70.  Mediter-  pi]..UeS| first  hy  Pompey  and  then  by

ranean.  Augustus  (who  also  cleared  the  Red
Sea  from  the  same  pest).  The  consequence  was  an
enormous  increase  of  the  Mediterranean  traffic,  which
is  described  by  many  writers  of  the  period  in  glowing
terms  (Juvenal,  14 278^,  'the  sea  as  thronged  as  the
land  '  ;  'Philo,  De  Leg.  21  :  '  filled  with  merchantmen  ').
Perhaps  the  most  significant  illustration  is  found  in  the
contrast  between  the  Hasmonnsan  princes,  who,  till
after  Jannreus,  never  set  foot  on  shipboard,  and  the

1  Josephus  (/?/iii.  24)  reckons  it  the  third  city  of  the  Roman
empire.

2  Calculated  from  the  Antonine  Itinerary  and  the  Peutinger
Table  ;  Gotz,  424^  gives  slightly  different  calculations. Titus
took  only  5  days  to  march  from  Pelusium  to  Gaza  :  BJ  iv.  11  5.

3  For  inns,  used  mostly  by  poorer  travellers,  see  Jos.  Ant
xvi.  5  i.

5186


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Herods  who  were  constantly  passing  to  and  from  Italy.
See  below,  §  75.  But  this  applies  only  to  the  summer
season;  ships  were  laid  up  (even  in  the  middle  of  a
voyage)  from  November  to  March.  Philo  (De  Leg.  29)
explains  the  exceptional  character  of  a  winter  voyage
(cp  Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  2  i).1  The  size  of  the  ships  was  con
siderably,  and  their  speed  somewhat,  developed.  War-
vessels  and  the  lighter  (mostly  private)  passenger  ships
carried  many  oars  ;  cargo-transports  had  but  a  few  oars,
chiefly  to  turn  the  head  of  the  ship  in  its  tacking,  and
depended  on  sails.  They  also  carried  passengers  :
Josephus  went  to  Rome  in  a  ship  with  600  souls  on  board
(l-'it.  3);  and  over  200  were  reckoned  on  Paul's  ship
(Acts  2/37  I  see,  however,  SHIP,  §  8).  For  a  further
description  see  Skeel,  81  ff.

The  three  principal  ports  on  the  Mediterranean  were
Rome  (with  Ostia  and  Puteoli,  the  latter  the  goal  of  the
grain  ships  from  Egypt),  Alexandria,'2  and  Carthage.
Smyrna  with  the  Asia  Minor  trade,  as  well  as  some  from
Central  Asia,  came  next.  Delos  was  the  great  centre
of  the  slave  trade;  Strabo  (xiv.  62)  mentions  10,000
slaves  there.  Rhodes  maintained  the  flourishing  con
dition  ascribed  to  it  by  Ezekiel  (27 15):  it  lay  on  the
Alexandria-Byzantium-Black  Sea  line.  THESSALONICA
(q.v. )  had  grown  since  the  time  of  Alexander,  and  now
increased  through  its  connection  with  Dyrrhachium.
Byzantium  commanded  the  Black  Sea,  though  much
of  the  traffic  from  the  E.  portion  of  this  went  by  land
across  Asia  Minor.  Corinth  and  Athens  rather  fell
behind  ;  but  Corinth  grew  again  under  Trajan.  On
the  Syrian  coast  Berytus,  a  colonia  of  Augustus,  grew
into  prominence  (see  below,  §  75);  PTOLEMAIS  (q.v. )
became  the  chief  port  for  Rome — especially  for  the
soldiery,  but  also  for  commerce  ;  and  Herod  founded
Coesarea  (75);  Gaza  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  Anthedon
still  flourished  with  the  Nabatcean  trade  from  the  far
E.  The  importance  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  was,  therefore,
relatively  (though  not  absolutely)  diminished.

Strabo  (iii.  2s  x.  4s,  etc.),  Pliny  (HN  1029  19i,  etc.),
Acts  (20-28),  Lucian  (Navig.  1-6),  and  others,  furnish
us  with  data  as  to  the  time  occupied  by  Mediterranean
voyages.  If  we  take  the  sea  from  W.  to  E. ,  from  Gades
to  Ostia  was  7  days,  from  Carthage  2  to  3,  from  Puteoli
to  Alexandria  9  days,  from  Athens  to  Smyrna  '2\.  These
may  be  taken  as  express  or  even  '  record '  voyages.
For  cargo  boats  with  favourable  winds  we  may  add
25  to  50  p.c.  Even  when  storms  did  not  intervene,  it
must  have  taken  the  grain  ships  of  Alexandria  well  on
to  a  fortnight  to  reach  Puteoli.  From  Cyprus  to  Tyre
and  Sidon  (to  judge  from  the  voyages  of  mediaeval
galleys)  24  hours  would  suffice  ;  the  Syrian  ports  were
mostly  within  12  hours  of  each  other.  But  the  un
certainties  were  great.  Herod  sailing  from  Alexandria
to  Pamphylia  was  driven  by  a  storm,  with  loss  of  the
ship's  cargo,  to  Rhodes,  where  he  built  a  three-decked
ship  and  sailed  to  Brundisium  for  Rome  (Jos.  Ant.
xiv.  13s).  Lucian,  who  reached  Cyprus  from  Alexandria
in  7  days,  took  63  more  (having  been  driven  to  Sidon)
to  reach  the  Piraeus  (Navig.  1-6).  For  winds  on
the  Mediterranean,  see  Pliny,  HN^-i^ff.;  Smyth's
Medifer.  230  ft

(iv. )  The  trade  down  the  Red  Sea  and  across  the

Indian  Ocean  was  immensely  increased  ; 3  and  indeed

_ , it  is  to  this  period  that  we  owe  the  first

.,' T ,. approximately  exact  data  with  regard  to
,11  India. u  (Strabo  6o  B  c  to  about  2I  A  D  .  Pliny

senior,  23-79  A- D-  >  and  the  anonymous  Periplus  of  the

1  Cp  Jos.  5/vii.  1  3  (last  clause).

2  Cp ibid. iv. 10  5. See, too, The Mediterranean by
Admiral  Smyth  (London,  1854),  pp.  27  46.

3  This  was  partly  due,  of  course,  to  the  obstructions  to  trade
raised  upon  the  Mesopotamian  and  Persian  Gulf  route  to  India,
by  the  rise  of  the  Parthian  empire  and  its  frequent  wars  with
Rome. Had  the  Seleucids  continued  to  hold  all  Mesopotamia,
the  trade  down  the  Red  Sea  in  the  Ptolemaic  period,  and  the
consequent  wealth  of  the Ptolemies,  could  not  have  been  so
great  a;  it  was.


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Erythrcean  Sea,  ist  cent.  ;  Ptolemy,  fl.  circa  140).
But  even  though  the  discovery  of  the  '  monsoons '  was
attributed  to  Hippalus,  of  the  time  of  Augustus,  we  must
not  suppose  that  these  had  not  been  employed  by  navi
gators  in  earlier  periods  (above,  §  17).  The  E.  coast  of
Africa  was  known  as  far  as  Madagascar.  The  way  to
India  was  fairly  opened  up  (Horace,  Epp.  i.  145/. ).
Ceylon  had  been  known  before  the  geographer  I'om-
ponius  Mela  (about  150  B.C.),  and  now,  with  its
markets  for  the  farther  E. ,  became  quite  familiar
(Strabo,  2i,  Ptol.  7s);  an  embassy  came  from  it  to
Claudius  (Plin.  HN\\.  24s).  The  time  required  from
the  Malabar  coast  to  Alexandria  was  90  days.  The
Tiber  and  the  Indus  were  thus  less  than  3^  months
distant.  PJiny  (HNYA+i)  estimates  that  every  year
'India,  Seres,  peninsulaque,' — i.e.,  Arabia  —  withdraw
from  the  Empire  100,000,000  sestertii  (about  ,£885,416).
When  Strabo  went  up  the  Nile  with  ^lius  Gallus  he
learned  that  120  ships  left  Myos  Hormos  (?  Leukos
Limen  ;  see  §  29,  n.  4)  for  India,  as  contrasted  with
'extremely  few  under  the  Ptolemies'  (Geogr.  ii.  012).
Yet  these  regular  voyages  did  not  destroy  the  Arabian
land-traffic.  For  reasons  for  this  (e.g. ,  the  preference
of  the  age  for  land-routes  and  the  loss  to  the  value  of
incense  and  spices  when  on  the  sea),  cp  Gotz,  436^
We  are  now  able  to  appreciate  the  growth,  under  the
Romans,  of  Alexandria.  The  bulk  of  the  Indian  trade
passed  through  its  warehouses,  as  well  as  that  from  inner
Africa.  Besides  its  exports  of  Egyptian  grain,  paper,
linen,  and  glass  to  Rome,  it  sent  proportional  quantities
(except  of  grain)  to  Syria,  especially  to  Antioch,  and  in
times  of  famine  supplied  Syria  with  food-stuffs.  These
were  also  brought  thither  from  Cyprus.1

(v. )  The  civilised  world  found  itself  for  the  first  time

under a  common system of  law — administered with

_  western  consistency  ; and  even  a  maritime

'  ' law  began  to  exist. With  the law there

.  ^' spread  a  common  coinage. Less  extensive

°  °  '  was  the  use  of  the  Latin  language.  Except
in  the  names  of  the  coins,  official  designations,  and  a
few  other  terms,  it  did  not  in  W.  Asia  displace  Greek  ;
the  Periplus  is  written  in  Greek,  the  harbours  on  the
Red  Sea  continue  to  have  Greek  names.  We  shall  see
a  similar  state  of  affairs  among  the  Jews.

Thus  though  the Romans, unlike  the  Phoenicians,

and  the  Greeks, did  not increase the  bounds of  the

_  known  world, for they were  not  ex-

73.  {summary  :  plorers they  reduced  it  to  peace,  and

by  this  and  their  thorough  administra
tion  of  every  department  of  life,  enormously  increased
its  commerce  and  wealth.  The  life  of  the  world  is
everywhere  found  in  the  most  rapid  circulation,  against
the  throng  and  change  of  which  voices  from  an  older
day  appeal  in  vain.  The  mixture  of  nationalities  on  all
the  main  lines  and  centres  is  bewildering.  Wealth  and
luxury  increase  by  leaps  and  bounds.

The  Roman  arms  came  into  touch  with  the  Jews  on

the  arrival  of  Pompey  at  Damascus  64-63  B.C. Among

...  the  first  results  were  several  which  are

74.  Antipater.  properly  commercial. The  Greek  cities
E. of  Jordan  had been  founded  on the main trade
routes  with  a  connection  by  Scythopolis  with  the  sea.
Under  Roman  protection  they  were  able  for  the  first
time  to  carry  out  a  trade-league,  such  as  was  already
instanced  by  Greek  cities  in  Europe. See  DKCAPOLIS,
§§  i/. Pompey  also  appears  to  have  been  attracted  by
the trade of the Nabatasans (Jos. Ant.  xiv.  3s/),
with  whom, as  we  have  seen, the  western  world  was
already  more  familiar  than  it  was  with  the  Jews. An
expedition  to  Petra  ended  in  a  treaty  with  the  Nabataeans
(ibid.bi). Josephus  (ibid.  4i)  also  notes  already  the
palms  and  balsam  of  Jericho. Gabinius  rebuilt  cities
on trade  lines  which  had been  destroyed  (63). The
policy  of  Antipater (cp HEROD, FAMILY OF, § 2)

1  The  Crusaders  also  used Cyprus  as  a  base  of  supplies;
/.' '  Estoire  de  la.  Guerre  Sainte,  zioojf.  2367^

5188


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

included  treaties  with  N'abatreans,  Gaza,  and  Ashkelon
(la/i  73),  and  he  supplied  the  army  of  Gabinius  with
corn,  weapons,  and  money  (62,  cp  5i).  The  wealth
not  only  of  the  temple,  through  the  contributions  from
Jews  of  the  Diaspora,  but  also  of  Jerusalem  and  Judcta
as  a  whole,  was  considerable  (7i/.  with  quot.  from
Strabo).  A  limited  freedom  from  taxes  was  granted
to  the  Jews  (85  106;  cp  10 10),  anil  Hyrcanus  was
allowed  the  dues  on  corn  (20,675  modii  every  year)
exported  through  Joppa  to  Phoenicia  (106).  The
Senate  restored  to  the  Jews  possessions  taken  from
them  by  the  Phoenicians  (106).

Herod's earliest efforts (cp HEROD, FAMILY OF,
§§  3-5)  as  governor  of  Galilee  were  directed  towards

75  TT  A  l'le  d'spersion  °f  brigands  (9  2  154)  who
made  the  conveyance  of  even  the  neces
saries  of  life  a  difficulty  (162).  From  the  first  Herod
continued,  and  after  each  of  his  reverses  he  renewed,
the  policy  of  his  father.  When  he  sought  a  loan,  it
was  to  the  Nabatasans  that  he  turned  (14i  ;  BJ\.  14  i):
he  sought  their  friendship  ;  but  on  the  extension  of
his  power  E.  of  Jordan,  he  and  they  became  bitter
rivals  (xvi.  92).  When  Antony  had  given  Cleopatra
the  revenues  of  Jericho,  Herod  farmed  them  for  her
(xv.  42).  He  got  the  coast-towns  from  Cnssar,  with
Gadara,  Hippos,  and  Samaria  (all  trade  centres,  7s);
and  having  fortified  and  embellished  Samaria,  he  created,
25  m.  distant  from  it  at  Straton's  Tower,  C.^SAREA
(q.v. ),  the  one  real  port  between  the  Delta  and  Ptole-
mais  (8596).  Thus  the  line  across  the  Samarian
mountains  was  in  his  hands  ;  at  its  farther  end  lay
Phasaelis  (and  in  the  next  reign  Archelais)  with  palm-
groves  reaching  to  Jericho,  and  easy  fords  across
Jordan,  commanded  probably  by  the  fortress  Alex-
andrium  (Jos.  BJ  \.  65;  Strabo,  xvi.  2  41  ;  cp  HG
352^).  Further,  Herod  built  ANTIPATRIS  (on  the  line
Cassarea-Jerusalem  as  well  as  on  the  inland  route  N.
and  S.  over  the  maritime  plain)  (xvi.  02),  and  greatly
improved  the  fertility  of  the  Jordan  valley  (ibid.}.  The
trade  of  W.  Palestine,  at  least  S.  of  Carmel,  thus  lay
in  his  hands  ;  at  Gadara,  and  Hippos,  and  Jericho  he
intercepted  the  trade  of  E.  Palestine,  but  there  his  hold
was  precarious  and  temporary  ;  whilst  at  Gaza  he  held
the  tolls  for  Arabia  via  Petra,  and  for  Egypt.  Herod
mightily  increased  his  opportunities,  both  of  wealth l
and  of  expense,  by  his  many  voyages  to  the  W.  (see
above,  §  70)  :  (a]  to  Rome,  Anf.xiv.  142  ff. ,  and  back
to  Ptolemais,  15  i  ;  (b]  to  Italy  for  his  sons,  xvi.  12  ;
(c]  to  Ionia  to  M.  Agrippa,  2i  ;  \d}  by  Rhodes,  Cos,
Lesbos,  Byzantium,  to  Sinope,  to  Agrippa,  returning
through  Asia  Minor  to  Ephesus  and  thence  by  Samos  '  in
a  few  days  to  Csesarea,'  22-4  ;  (<?)  to  Italy  to  accuse  his
sons,  and  back  by  '  Eleusa,'  off  Cilicia,  and  Zephyrium,
4  i/.,  BJ  i.  23  4  ;  (/)  to  Italy  (1  Ant.  xvi.  9i)  ;  (g]  to
Berytus  to  the  trial  of  his  sons  and  back  to  Caesarea
(xvi.  11 2  ff.}.  Herod  was  able  to  estimate  the  re
sources  of  his  countrymen  of  the  Diaspora,  and  no
doubt  to  draw  upon  these  in  return  for  services
rendered  them  (e.g. ,  xvi.  5  3).  He  also  received,  among
other  imperial  donations,  the  revenues  of  copper  mines
in  Cyprus  (4s).  But,  on  the  whole,  as  Josephus  points
out  (04),  Herod's  expenditure  constantly  exceeded  his
income.  He  would  send  money  and  provisions  for  the
imperial  armies,  and  provide  water  (no  doubt  with  the
help  of  the  Nabatreans)  on  the  desert  marches  between
Egypt  and  Palestine  (xv.  67),  and  an  auxiliary  2  regiment
(e.g. ,  xv.  9s).  His  lavish  gifts  to  foreign  cities  resemble
the  donations  of  an  American  millionaire  (xvi.  5s).  At
home,  besides  rebuilding  the  temple  in  eighteen  months
(xv.  Hi),  and  constructing  other  public  edifices  on  a
western  scale  (81,  etc.),  he  had  to  bring  corn  from

Egypt,  not  only  for  bread  for  the  cities  of  Jerusalem,

1  Cp  the  large  sums  obtained  later  by  the  Pseudo-Alexander
from  Jews  in  Crete  and  Melos  (Ant.  17  12).

2  Herod's  foreign  mercenaries  are  frequently  mentioned  ;  e.g.,
BJ'\.  IS  3.

5189


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

but  also  for  seed  for  the  peasants  on  the  occasion  of  a
famine  (92).  While,  no  doubt,  his  policy  increased
the  trade  of  his  dominions,  he  must  at  the  same  time
have  hampered  trade  by  his  growing  exactions.  On
this  Josephus  speaks  cautiously  but  emphatically
(xvi.  64);  cp  the  complaint  of  the  Jewish  embassy
to  Augustus  after  the  accession  of  Archelaus  (xvii.  11  2) l
and  the  many  seditions  both  in  Herod's  life-time  and
later  (10  4^)-

Commercial  events  and  processes  under  the  Roman
procurators,  or  under  the  descendants  of  Herod  (see
76.  Procurators,  HEROD  FAMILY  OF,  §§  6-13).  do

later  Herods.  "ot  ca"  f°r  spec.al  mention,  beyond
these  facts.  Herod  Antipas  by  his
domains  in  Perea  was  brought  into  special  relations
with  the  Nabatoeans  and  the  Decapolis ;  and  his  build
ing  of  Tiberias  must  have  increased  the  traffic  of
Galilee.  The  policy  of  Agrippa  I.  was  milder  towards
the  Jews  than  that  of  Herod  ;  his  revenues  were
about  three-fourths  of  Herod's  (xix.  82).  He  sailed
from  Anthedon  for  Alexandria,  and  thence  to  Puteoli
(xviii.  63).  The  completion  of  the  works  on  the  temple
created  a  large  number  of  unemployed  for  whom
work  had  to  be  found  (xx.  9?) — a  striking  instance
of  the  complications  brought  into  Jewish  life  by  the
Hellenic  policy  of  the  Herods.  Josephus  gives  an
interesting  account  of  the  trade,  wealth,  and  finance  of
the  Babylonian  Jews  (xviii.  9  ;  xx.  23).  Queen  Helena  of
Adiabene  brought  food  from  Egypt  and  Cyprus  for
Judaea  during  a  famine  (2s).  As  the  troubles  with
Rome  drew  to  a  head  (from  60  A.u. ),  brigandage  in
creased  (04  85  Qifr,  etc.).

As  to  the  conditions  of  Syrian  trade  in  the  first
Christian  century,  we  may  say,  in  general,  that  it


77.  Syrian


suffered everywhere for periods, and in


'  y,  some  of  the  more  desert  parts  always,  from
robbers;2  and  that,  besides  the  exactions
noted,  it  was  greatly  hampered,  especially  among  the
Jews  of  Judasa,  by  the  strictness  of  the  Law,  and
above  all  by  the  provisions  relating  to  the  Sabbath  and
to  things  clean  and  unclean  (for  a  list  of  these
see  Schurer,  GJT,  ET,  ii.  2g(>/.,  106  /.}.  The
Sabbath  prohibitions  reflect  almost  wholly  an  agri
cultural  people  ;  yet  those  against  writing  and  carrying
and  putting  a  value  on  anything  on  the  Sabbath
(ibid.  102)  must  have  made  trade  on  that  day  im
possible  except  by  desperate  subterfuges.  The  laws
against  unclean  things  affected  trade  more  deeply  ;  for
trade  everywhere  brought  Jews,  in  any  large  ways  of
doing  business,  into  contact  with  the  Greeks  and  other
foreigners.  In  spite  of  themselves,  however,  Hellenism
poured  into  their  life  through  commercial  channels.
For  the  very  large  list  of  trading  terms  and  names
of  objects  of  trade  borrowed  by  the  mixed  Hebrew
of  the  time  from  the  Greek  language,  see  Schiirer,
GJl',  ET,  ii.  Iss/  36  ff.  Inns,  different  names  for
dealers,  foreign  provisions  and  materials  for  dress,
some  raw  stuffs,  and  vessels  for  eating,  carrying,  etc.,
are  Greek.  So  with  some  of  the  coins  ;  the  rest  are
Roman  (PENNY,  etc.);  but  the  superscription  —  for  the
Greek  cities  had  their  own  coinage  with  Caesar's  image  —
was  mostly  in  Greek.  The  large  number  of  very  small
coins  in  use  (ibid.  }  betrays  the  great  poverty  of  the  bulk
of  the  population.  Yet,  here  and  there,  very  rich
individuals  outside  the  official  classes  were  found  (e.g.  .
Ant.  xiv.  13s).

It  is  easy  to  form  an  idea  of  the  objects  of  trade.
The  transit  trade  from  Arabia  to  the
Levant'  and  from  ES.vPt  to  N.  Syria,


f  t H
Oi  trade.


.
avojdecj  Judcea  (hence  the  ambition  of  the


Herods  for  coast-towns  from  Gaza  northward),  but  was

1  He  embellished  foreign  cities  at  the  expense  of  his  own  ;
and  '  filled  the  nation  with  poverty.'

2  Under the procurator.ship of Cumanus they seized the
furniture  of  '  a  servant  of  Cscsar  '  on  the  Beth-horon  Road  (.BJ
ii.  122;  cp  1836).

5190


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE


frequent  and  heavy  across  Galilee,  especially  between
Ptolemais  and  the  Greek  cities  beyond  Jordan.
Josephus  ( Vit.  26)  describes  the  wife  of  Ptolemy,  the
kind's  procurator,  as  crossing  Esdraelon  with  '  4  mules'
lading  of  garments  and  other  furniture '  ;  a  '  weight  of
silver  not  small,'  and  '500  pieces  of  gold.1  Palestine
continued  to  export  from  the  Jordan  valley  dates  and
the  balsam  of  Jericho  (the  passages  already  cited  from
Jos.  Ant.  ; l  Diod.  Sic.  Il48a  ;  19984  ;  Uioscorides  1 18;
Plin.  1225;  Theophr.  Hist.  Pla?tt.Q(>}.  Whether  the
flax  of  Beth-shan,  later  so  famous  ('  Totius  Orbis  Descr. '
in  Geogr.  Gr.  Min.,  ed.  Muller,  2513^),  was  already
grown  there  is  uncertain.  Wheat  and  oil  were  also
exported  to  Phoenicia;  but,  lavish  as  Josephus  describes
the  fertility  and  agriculture  of  Galilee  to  have  been,  it
was  not  thence  but  from  Egypt  and  elsewhere  that
Judrea  brought  her  food  and  seed  in  times  of  famine.
In  66  A.  D.  John  of  Gischala  had  the  monopoly  of
exporting  oil  from  Galilee,  by  which  he  made  great
sums  of  money  (Z?/ii.  21  2).  Josephus  mentions  artificial
snow  (/>'./iii.  lOy).  There  was  also  exportation  of
pickled  fish  from  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  as  far  as  Italy
(Strabo,  xvi.  2  45).  Tarichens,  the  chief  port  on  the
Lake,  means  '  pickling-places '  ;  Josephus  describes  it
as  full  of  artizans  and  of  materials  for  shipbuilding  (BJ
iii.  106).  The  temple  of  Jerusalem  was,  even  on
ordinary  days,  an  immense  centre  of  trade  ;  incense,
spices,2  priests'  garments,  and  the  supplies  for  the
daily  sacrifices  (cp  Schur.  Hist.  ii.  1269  298)  alone  necessi
tated  enormous  markets,  largely  in  the  hands  of  the
priesthood  (Keim,  Life  of  Jesus,  ET,  5 117  _/".).  The
temple-finances — not  only  the  sacred  revenues3  but  also
private  deposits 4 — were  managed  by  special  officials
(Schtir.  id.  261).  All  this  business  was  heightened
enormously  at  the  time  of  the  great  festivals — when
food  (largely  pickled  fish  from  the  Lake  of  Galilee  and
the  Levant)  had  to  be  supplied  for  the  incoming  multi
tudes  ;  and  no  doubt  much  private  business  also  was
transacted.  Among  the  traders  of  Jerusalem,  Josephus
enumerates  those  in  wool,  brass,  cloth  (BJ\\  81),  timber
(ii.  19  4),  and  all  kinds  of  artisans.

In  the  NT  there  is  a  considerable  reflection  of  all  this
life. The Gospels, relating large  catches of fish in
the Lake, which must in that climate


79.  Trade  in


have  been  immediately  cured,  are  curiously


the  Gospels.  si[ent  about  the  convevance  Of  the  nsh
for  this  purpose  by  the  Jewish  fisherman  to  the  Greek
curer.  Hut  of  other  business,  so  thriving  in  Galilee,
they  give  us  many  glimpses.  One  of  the  disciples  keeps
toll  on  the  transit-trade  at  Capernaum  (Mt.  9g).  Many
of  the  hearers  of  Jesus  are  publicans  ( PUBLICAN).
Zacchreus  was  probably  farmer  of  the  state  revenues  of
the  balsam  gardens  of  Jericho.  The  use  of  the  objects,
means,  and  tempers  of  trade  by  Jesus  is  very  instruc
tive  (cp  above,  on  Proverbs,  §  61).  The  parables
reflect  the  roads  and  journeys,  mostly  of  Galilee  but
also  of  Judrea :  a  merchant  seeking  goodly  pearls  ;  a
Samaritan  traveller,  rescuing  a  Jew  fallen  among  thieves,
and  paying  for  him  at  an  inn  ;  the  prosperous  farmer
and  his  new  barns  ;  the  woman  with  her  little  store
of  silver  ;  the  rich  man  and  his  steward  ;  the  farming
of  estates  to  husbandmen  by  absentee  landlords  ;  and
other  of  the  economic  relations  of  the  time.  In  the
light  of  what  we  have  seen  in  previous  periods
(§§  ii  48 /. ),  it  is  interesting  that  the  Parable  of  the
Pounds  imputes  trade  to  kings  through  their  servants.
From  the  early  Pharaohs  to  the  Herods  trade  had  always
been  a  royal  business.  And  the  teaching  of  Jesus  is  full

1  Also  BJ\.  66  ;  cp  Hor.  Ef>.  ii.  2  184.  For  the  farming  of  the
groves  by  the  Romans,  see  W.  Pressel's  Priscilla  an  Sabina.

a  '  Sweet-smelling  spices  with  which  the  sea  replenished  it ' :
BJ\.  5  5.  There  were  thirteen  kinds.

3  BJ\\.  3  3  vi.  62.

4  Such  are  mentioned  in  BJ\.  13  9  iv.  5  2,  etc. There  were
also  the  public  treasures  (cp  §  66)  held  in  the  royal  palace  (BJ
i.  13  9, iv.  3  4), where  also  business  contracts were deposited
(ii.  176).

5191


of  appreciation  of  the  bigness  of  its  methods  and  of  the
brave  tempers  required  in  it  (Mt.  1345/.,  Lk.  169^).
He  frequently  likens  to  its  pursuit  the  search  after  the
true  riches.  At  the  same  time  his  warnings  are  many
against  covetousness  and  the  temper  of  the  trading
Gentiles.  Galilee  was  a  place  where  a  man  might  gain
the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul.  The  temple
courts  had  become  a  fraudulent  market  —  the  house  of
God  a  den  of  thieves.

On  the  social  life  of  the  early  Christian  societies  see
COMMUNITY  OF  GOODS,  DKACON,  etc.  The  progress
80  At  a  d  °^  l^e  new  faitn  was  a'°ng  tne  lines  of

Em  tie  trade  an<3  in  the  great  trade  centres  —
P  '  LYDOA,  JOPPA,  C«SARF.A,  ANTIOCH,
DAMASCUS,  the  cities  of  ASIA  MINOR,  THESSALOMCA,
CORINTH,  ROME.  Paul  worked  at  his  own  trade  (Acts
183  20  y$ff-},  and  other  commercial  pursuits  are  men
tioned  among  the  early  Christians  (  '  Erastus  the
treasurer  of  the  city,'  Rom.  1623;  'Alexander  the
coppersmith,'  2  Tim.  4  14;  Zenas  'the  lawyer,'  Tit.
813;  'Simon  a  tanner,'  Acts  943;  Lydia  'a  seller  of
purple,'  1614;  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  like  Paul,  tent-
makers,  183).  The  Apostolic  letters,  however,  con
tain,  besides  the  general  warnings  against  covetousness,
extremely  few  references  to  trade,  either  for  illustration
or  warning  :  —  Jas.  4  13  ff.,  biff-  i  Thess.  2g  2  Thess.
38  (Paul's  own  example  of  industry)  i  Thess.  4u
2  Thess.  89^  (exhortations  'to  do  your  own  business
and  to  work  with  your  hands  .  .  .  that  ye  may
walk  honestly  towards  them  that  are  without  and
may  have  need  of  nothing')  Rom.  13?  ff.  (taxes,  and
debt)  i  Cor.  7  30  ('those  that  buy  as  though  they  pos
sessed  not  '  ).  The  fewness  of  such  references  is  the
more  conspicuous  when  the  many  passages  on  the
relations  of  masters  and  slaves  are  contrasted  with  it.
The  lifting  of  the  burdensome  law  from  the  lives  of
the  Jewish  converts  to  the  new  faith  must  have  given
them  fresh  advantages  in  trade  ;  cp  Peter's  vision  at
Joppa,1  in  which  the  sheet,  let  down  from  heaven,  full
of  things  clean  and  unclean,  has  been  compared  to
the  sails  of  the  merchant  ships  in  the  roads  visible
from  the  Joppa  house-tops  (see  HGi^if.},  'What
God  hath  cleansed  call  not  thou  common  '  (Acts
\Qgff.}.  We  may  take  for  granted  that  the  rise  of
Christianity  had  far-reaching  economic  effects-  —  e.g.,
upon  the  fortunes  of  certain  trades  (cp  the  outcry  of
the  Ephesus  silversmiths,  Acts  19  24^),  and  still
more  deeply  —  as  in  parts  of  India  to-day  where  a
rise  in  wages  has  been  known  to  follow  the  adoption  of
the  new  faith  —  upon  the  wage-earning  slaves  and
freedmen.

In  the  Book  of  Revelation  the  peculiar  traders  of
LAODICEA  (i/.v.  )  are  referred  to.  On  the  mark,  the

_ . .  name of the  beast, which  gave  license
81.  BOOK  Of  t() buy.

On>


see the com.


mentaries.  In  the  picture  of  Rome,
Babylon  the  Great,  as  in  the  prophet's  account  of  her
namesake  of  old,  her  vast  trade  is  included  :  Rev.  183,
'  the  merchants  of  the  earth  waxed  rich  by  the  power  of
her  luxury'  ;  v.  ii,  '  the  merchants  of  the  earth  weep  and
mourn  over  her,  for  no  man  buyeth  their  cargo.  '  Then
follows  a  list  of  her  imports.  Compared  with  those
assigned  to  Tyre  and  Babylon  by  the  prophets,  there  is
nothing  new  except  SiLK(g.v.  )  ;  but  note  the  emphasis
in  v.  13  on  'bodies  and  souls  of  men.'  Rome's  fall
means  the  destruction  of  commerce  and  industry
(1815-23).  With  this  acknowledgement  of  Rome  as  the
centre  of  the  world's  trade,  we  may  finish  our  survey  of
the  Roman  period.  In  the  prophecy  of  her  fall  there
may  be  traced  a  just  sense  of  the  precariousness  of  her
commercial,  apart  from  her  political,  position.  Less  than
a  couple  of  centuries  saw  the  gradual  disappearance  of
her  trade  to  other  positions  naturally  more  fitted  to
attract  it.

1  For  a  description  of  Joppa,  see  Jos.  BJ  iii.  83.
5192


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

IV. TERMINOLOGY  IN  OT

An  account  of  the  terminology  of  trade  among  the
Israelites  will  complete  our  survey,  by  giving  a  number
82.  Terminology  °f  ™mes  both  of  agents  and  pro
of  trade  in  OT:  ces,ses  "ot  touched  on  m  the  Pre'
ceding  history. The  appended  list

is  as  nearly  as  possible  exhaustive  so  far  as  the  OT  is
concerned.  It  ought  to  be  noted  that  a  great  many
of  the  terms  and  phrases  given  are  used  only  metaphori
cally  ;  yet,  in  the  case  of  nearly  all  of  these,  the  meta
phorical  (generally  a  religious)  use  implies  a  previous
direct  employment  in  common  life.  The  list  presents
many  points  of  historical  interest  of  which  the  following
may  be  summarised  by  way  of  preface  to  it.

i.  The  OT  terms  are  all  Semitic.  Down  to  the
Greek  period  there  are  in  fact  no  others  —  none  of
Egyptian  and  none  of  Persian  or  Indian  origin.  This
is  the  more  striking  in  that  so  many  of  the  names  of
articles  and  objects  which  trade  introduced  into  the
Hebrew  vocabulary  are  Egyptian  or  Persian — plants,
raw  materials,  garments,  etc.  ;  and  that  from  their
Persian  masters  Israel  also  adopted  a  number  of  political
terms.  That  none  of  the  agents  or  processes  of  trade
even  in  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  periods  are  of  non-
Semitic  origin  is  clear  proof  that  till  the  advent  of  the
Greeks  the  trade  of  W.  Asia  remained  in  Semitic  hands
(witness  the  dislike  of  the  Egyptians  to  trade,  §  12)  and
that  all  the  foreign  commerce  of  Israel  was  achieved
through  Semitic  tribes  or  nations  who  spoke  a  Semitic
tongue  ;  further  evidence  that  the  non-Semitic  PHILIS
TINES  (q.v. ,  §  5/. ),  with  whom  the  early  Hebrews  did
so  much  trade,  had  adopted  '  the  lip  of  Canaan.'  As
soon  as  the  Greeks  come  to  Syria  we  perceive  a  change  :
the  purely  Semitic  words  for  trade  and  trader  are
displaced  in  MH  by  Greek  terms  ;  and  there  is  a  great
influx  of  Greek  names  for  specialised  forms  of  trading,
and  for  the  articles  and  objects  of  trade  (see  above,
§  77  ;  also  HELLENISM,  §  5).

ii.  The  OT  terms  all  belong  to  the  common  Semitic
stock  and  are  native  to  Hebrew  except  in  the  case  of
a  small  number  borrowed  from  the  Assyrian  probably
through  the  Aramaean  (e.g. ,  ,-no,  f3t),  and  these  are
chiefly  in  P  and  the  post-exilic  writings.  Of  course,
some  others  may  be  of  Phoenician  or  Aramaean  origin  ;
but  this  it  is  impossible  to  prove.

iii.  There  is  clear  evidence  in  the  OT  terminology  of
a  gradual  growth  and  organisation  of  commerce  in
Israel.  For  (a)  the  number  of  terms,  and  the  frequency
of  the  instances  of  each  increases  from  Dt.  onwards  and
rapidly  in  P  and  Ezra-Neh.  (b)  Especially  are  there
more  words  for  '  property,'  '  wealth,'  '  substance,'  or  at
least  these  occur  more  frequently  ;  (c)  terms  of  general
significance  (ny,  ips,  and  the  like)  have  specially  com
mercial  meanings  attached  to  them  in  the  later  writings  ;
(d)  the  shades  of  meaning  increase  in  the  case  of  some
words,  or  the  various  processes  (cp  '  valuation '  and  the
like)  are  carefully  differentiated  ;  (e)  the  mention  of
deposits  of  money  becomes  more  frequent  ;  (/)  old
processes  of  a  primitive  type  are  displaced  by  more
formal  and  by  written  deeds  ;  cp  the  sale  of  land  in
Ruth  4  with  that  in  Jer.  32  ;  (g)  and  yet  in  spite  of  all
this,  Hebrew  trade  remains  somewhat  simple  ;  there  is,
e.g. ,  no  mention  in  the  OT  of  a  trading  company.

The  Hebrew  names  for  trade,  traders,  and  merchants,
and  for  the  various  processes  and  conceptions  included

„„ T»Q*O,-I«J  under  trade  are  as  follows  :—
83.  Detailed /  \ »7  .• ,  .  ,. .  .

vocabulary \a'  ^a'wna^  names  specialised  to  mean

*'  traders.1

i.  kcna'dni,  '3_5?33i  '  Canaanite '  or  '  Phoenician,'  means
'  trader  '  in  Job  40  30  [41  6],  Prov.  31  24  (but  <S  QOIVIKOIV,  Xara-
wu'ois).  There  is  a  plural  form  with  suff.  J'J^JS  in  Is.  23  8  ;  and
in  Zech.  11  7,  n  Mjy  p  is,  after  IB,  to  be  read  ":j;j3  with  the
same  sense.  In  Hos!  12s  North  Israel  is  described  as  a  jyj^

1  These  have  been  alluded  to  already,  §  13.
5193


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

ai/aoi/); in  Zeph.  1  u  JJH?  DiT>3 is  probably  used  of  the


cp  Crit.  Bib.\.)

2.  mcdanlm, D'np  for  midyanlm,  C'JHC>  Midianites,  Gen.
3"  28  36,  and

3.  yismeetlm, D'?Myp0)i  '  Ishmaelites'(Gen.  37  25  39  i),  may
also  (as  we  can  see  from  a  careful  observation  of  these  passages)
have  been  used  in  the  sense  of  traders. On  the  other  hand  there
is  no  provable  connection  (tempting  as  it  might  bo  to  suppose
one)  between  3iy  in  its  sense  '  to  do  trade1  (see  below)  and  31  u
'Arabians.

(6)  Names  for  Traders  and  Trade  in  General—  For
these  the  Hebrews  used  four  terms,  the  radical  meaning
of  all  of  which  was  the  same  :  viz.  ,  '  to  go  about  '  :-
-irtD, ^3-1, iin and  -w. Of  these  the  first  three  when
applied  to  trading  are  practically  synonymous.

i.  s-h-r,  -inD  (cp  Assyr.  saharfi  '  to  turn  round  '  ;  Syr.  '  to  go
about  as  a  beggar'  :  in  MH  '  to  go  about  as  a  pedlar  '),  in  the
Ol  used  exclusively  (with  metaphorical  applications)  of  travel-
ling,  making  circuits  or  tours,  for  trade  :  Gk.  ^jropeueo-eai  by
which  (P  renders  it.l  Gen.  4-'  34  (JK)  of  the  right  to  trade  in
tgypt  granted  by  Joseph  to  his  brethren,  Gen.  y4  10,  21  (P?):
nnnp  '  traverse,  or  trade  in,  it  '—i.e.,  the  land.  Jer.  14  18  :  meta
phorical  of  prophet  and  priest,  '  trafficking  '  (<5  iuopevO^av).
The  pt.  sohir  (inc)  is  one  of  the  usual  terms  for  '  merchant,'  <S
efXTropos.  Gen.  37  28  (JE)  '  men,  Midianites,  merchants.'  i  K.
1028(||  2  Ch.  1  16)  7]^en  nnb:  either  the  Israelite  agents  through
whom  Solomon  did  trade  with  the  N.  Syrian  Musri  and  Kue,  or
(more  probably)  horse-dealers  of  those  lands  who  traded  with  his
agents  ;  cp  Is.  47  15  -"ini  not  'thy  native  merchants'  but  '  those
(foreigners)  who  trade  with  thee,'  Babylon  (cp  <B).  Ez.  27  36  :
'the  merchants  among  the  peoples';  38  13  :  '  the  merchants^of
Tarshish  ;  2  Ch.  9  14  :  'the  chapmen  and  merchants.'  Other
phrases  :  —  Ez.  27  21  :  '  the  merchants  of  thy  hand  '  ;  Gen.  23  16
(P):  'money  current  with  the  merchants'  (int)1?  naj;  r£2)  ;  cp
KESITAH;  Prov.  31  14  :  -liflD  rVJN  (sic)  'a  merchant-ship'-,  Is.
23  2  :  '  the  merchants  (<5  jm6Ta/36Aot)  of  Sidon  that  pass  over
the  sea.'  The  fern.  pt.  soJitreth  (nnnc)  is  used  of  cities,  etc.—
Tarshish,  Aram,  Damascus—  trading  with  Tyre  ;  Ez.  27  12  16  18.
Derivatives  :—  (a)  ina  :  Is.  23  318;  45  14  RV  'mart'  and
'merchandise,'  but  (cp  the  parallel  J3HN  in  23  is)  more
probably  'profit,'  cp  Prov.  3  14,  31  is.2  For  wishar  ("1003  in
constr.),  i  K.  10  13,  taken  by  the  lexicons  as  a  separate  word,
Klost.  reads  1~ED.  (/•)  schorah  (rnhp),  'trade,'  is  used  collec
tively  of  '  traders  '  :  Ez.  27  15.

2.  rakal,  731  (cp  71~\  '  to  march  '  or  'go  about  '  :  Aram.  NSs'


, ,  . ,  .

174:  'a  city  of  merchants  '  (D'^31  Yj;)—  i.e.,  Babylon  ;  27  13  15
17  22-24  (of  various  nations  trading  with  Tyre);  Cant.  36,
'powder  of  the  merchant';  Neh.  3  •}!/.:  'the  house  of  the
Nethinim  and  of  the  merchants  '  :  this  was  opposite  the  Gate
Ham-Miphkadh  (see  JERUSALEM,  §  24  [10]).  The  fern.  pt.  rokf-
Icth  is  used  in  Ezek.  27  20  (of  Dedan)  23  (collectively  of  five
peoples  :  omit  X3W  '^31).  Although  the  root  721  (like  ^n)  was
used  as  in  7'3n  =  slander  (cp  MH  m1?'::1!)  in  a  bad  sense,  there
is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  any  derogatory  meaning  was
intended  by  its  employment  for  trading.  IJeriv.  :—  (a)  ri-kullah,
'  trade  '  :  Ez.  26  12,  28  5  16  18.  (l>)  >narki>!ctli  '  market  '  :  Ez.
27  24  (but  see  Cornill).

3.  tnr,  -flpi  (Assyr.  tiit~ii  '  to  turn  '  re/!.  ;  Ar.  tara,  '  to  go
about  ')  is  used  in  the  OT  in  Kal  of  exploring  a  land,  Nu.  13  2  etc.  ;
in  Hiph.  of  exploring  or  spying,  Judg.  123  (J).  Cp  SPIES.  The
pt.  kal  in  the  phrase  D"TOn  "^N  is  used  of  traders  parallel  with
,  i  K.  10  15,  and  with  C'-n.fc.  2Ch.  914.


where  existence  of  the  verb  *f,y  is  denied)  ;  Ez.  27  25  :  '  ships  of


1  [On i  K.  1028,  cp  MIZRAIM,  §  2  a; also  throughout  cp
Crit.Jltf.]

2  Similarly  in  modern  E.  Syriac  bazar  means  both  '  trade  '  and
'profits'  ;  Maclean,  Diet.  ofVernac.  Syr.  [1901].

3  [On  the  difficult  phrase  in  i  K.  10  15  cp SOLOMON,  §  10,
SPICE  MERCHANTS  ;  on  Neh.  S  •}!/".,  MERCHANT,  2,  and  Amer.
Journ. of  TheoL,  July 1901 (' Nethinim '  =  ' Ethanites,' and
rOkelim  =  Jerahme'eUm)  ;  see  also  Crit.  Bit.]

5194


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

Tarshish were  Tpjvne',' RV  'thy  caravans,'  but  Cornill  reads

>,  'served  thee.'
With  these  we  may  take  the  following  terms  signifying
way  or  going  as  applied  to  trade  or  business.

(1)  derek,  7]T1. Is.  6813,  '~\  n'tyy  =  to  do  business;

(2)  hallkak,  ns'^n,  'caravan' (but  perhaps metaph.:  lit. 'going';
also  procession) :  of  Sheba,  Job  6  19  ;  cp  Bibl.  Aram.  ^n,  'way-
money,'  toll,  Ezra  4  13,  etc.

(3)  'orehaJt,  nrnx,  '  caravan '  always  of  merchants,  Gen.  37  25,
or  of  mercantile  tribes  ; Is.  21  13  :  Dedan  ;  Job6  i&f.  :  Tema.
'ffridA,  mN,  the  pt.  is  used  of  travellers  in  general :  Jer.  5  i  [2]
D'rnx  ji^D (but  Giesebrecht  after  ©  jnriK  [cp  also  Crit.  Bib.}),
a  'caravanserai.' nn"Ut  =  provision  for  journey  : J?S3  and  JJSC
refer  to  the  journeys  of  nomads'  camps  (cp  TENT,  §  2)  ; he
who prepares the camping ground, the quarter-master, IE?
nrrcJ2,  Jer.  51  59. [But  see  SEKAIAH,  4.]

(c)  Merchants  Quarters.  — Travelling  merchants  took
up  their  quarters  in  special  parts  of  the  towns  to  which
they  took  their  goods.

hiisoth,  niiTt,  'streets'  or  'bazaars,'  were  what  Ben-hadad's
father  was  allowed  by  treaty  to  build  in  Samaria,  and  Ahab  in
Damascus  (i  K.  2034),  probably  for  their  merchants;  cp  the
'bakers'  street'  in  Jerusalem,  Jer.  37  21.  The  MAKTESH  (<?•&.,
cp  also  JERUSALEM,  col.  2424)  appears  to  have  beeen  a  quarter
of  the  city  where  the  Q'jjns  or  '  merchants '  (?)  resided  (Zeph.
1  n).  For  '  the  house  of  the  merchants  '  see  above,  under  O'SDI ',
for  the  fish-,  sheep-,  and  horse-gates  see  JERUSALEM,  §  24,  coll.
2424  ff.  For  market  see  rt 73")p  above  (b  2  [6])  ;  for  caravan
serai,  D'rnk  jiSp,  see  b  (3).

(d)  Trading  Companies. — There is no mention of
these  in  the  OT;  but  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  they  existed.

(i)  Jieber,  ")3n,  'a  company  of  priests  for  robbery,'  Hos.  69  ;
'a  house  held  by  a  number  of  people,'  Pr.  21 9  25 2 1  (but
Gk.  and  Toy  read  3m).  (2)  habbar,  130,  '  a  guild  '  or  '  society '
of  fishermen,  Job  40  30  [41 6],  (cp  Phoen.  -art  and  Assyr.  ebru,  '  a
comrade').1  (3)  mispahah,  nnSC'S,  lit.  'family,' or 'clan ';  but
'  a  guild  '  of  scribes,  i  Ch.  255;  'of  linen  workers,'  4  21.

(e)  Various  Processes  included  under  Trade.

1.  Barter  and  exchange, (i)  3  JHJ, 'to  give  one  thing  for
another,' Joel4[3]3(3  before  the  object  taken  in  exchange; cp
Lam.l  n),  Ezek.27  13  (3  before  the  object  given  in  exchange),  16
(3  before  both  objects),  14  (without  3  ;  both  objects  in  the  ace.);
cp  Dt.  14  25,  '  to  give  for  money  '  :  1033  ;  Ps.  15  5,  '  for  interest ' :
™t??3. (2)  The  antithesis  of  jn3  is nj3^  ; and  so  in  Neh.  1032,
rrinjJD  (Ba.  "pp),  lit.  'things  to  be  taken,'  are  '  wares  for  sale';
cp  Talmud  nj3!p  or  npp, buying '  or  '  article  bought.'

(3)  11 D  >  <to  exchange",  does  not  appear  in  the  OT  in  the  sense
of  barter  (Lev.  27  1033,  the  substitution  of  one  beast  for  another  ;
Ezek.  48  14,  of  one  piece  of  land  for  another) ;  yet  the  fact  that  the
Syr.  im'tr  means  '  to  import  victuals '  proves  that  at  one  time
among the  Aramaeans  it  was used  in  the sense '  to barter.'
Deriv. ITTinPl, 'exchange,'  Ru.  4  7,  Job  28  17; 'the  thing  ex
changed,'  Lev.  27  10  33  (P); 'gain'  or 'profit'  as  a result  of
trade,  Job  20  18  ;  also  'compensation,'  15  31.

(4)  Nor  does  rAn,  '  to  exchange,'  appear  in  the  OT  for  barter  ;
yet  fpn  is  used  twice  :  Nu.  18  21  31  (P)  in  the  sense  of 'returns,'
'  rewards  for ' service rendered; and Hoffmann (Phflniz.
Inschriftcn, 20) gives nsSn as  =  equivalent (in exchange) ;
(Bloch, PhBn. Gloss.) 'payment,' 'n c're'S ' to reward.'
(5)  3T_^,  usually  '  to  pledge '  (see  below,  3  [6]),  is  used  in  Ezek.
27927  as  =  'to  exchange.' In other  Sem. languages  it  is  to
'furnish  security,'  or  'to  pledge." The  original  meaning  seems
to  be  to  mix  or  'mingle,'  as  in NT,  Aram.,  Syr.,  and Heb.
Hithpael ;  yet  this  may  be  a  secondary  meaning,  through  '  having
intercourse  with. Deriv. 3"iJ7p, sg. and  pi. 'wares.' (6)  It  is
possible  that  the  difficult  J13?y  (see  below,  7  [8])  in  Ezek.  27
means  'exchange.'

2.  Bargain,  contract,  etc. (i)  The  very  wide  use  of  berith,
JV"13,  to  express  a  'covenant'  between men  (see  COVENANT),
and its application in Job  40  28  _  [41 4] to an engagement
between  master  and  servant,  are  evidence  of  the  probability  of
its  employment  for  business  contracts; 2  (2)  hdziith,  fflin,  is  used
in  Is.  28i8as  a  synonym  for  IV"]3!  cp  H'ln  in  Levy,  NHll'B.
(3)  tesumeth ydd,  T  nOIC'n,  Lev.  5 21  [62](P),  lit. 'something

1  In MH the  root  is  used  apparently  only  of  societies  for
religion  or  learning. See  further  HANDICRAFTS,  col.  1955.

2  Vet  in  MH  it  seems  to  be  used  only  in  a  theological  sense.

5195


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

placed  in  the  hand '  or  '  trust '  of  another,  is  translated  by  EV
'bargain':  ©  Koifui/ia.1  (4)  dabhar,  131,  'affair,'  in  Ruth  47
in  sense  of  transaction  ;  IS!'1?!  C'p1?,  '  to  confirm  any  transac
tion.'  (5)  This  confirmation,  in  cases  in  which  the  object  bought
and  sold  could  not  be  handed  over,  appears  to  have  been  symbol
ised  by  the  seller  drawing  off  his  shoe  or  sandal,  Vi'3  rfiiy,  Ruth
47/T;  cp  Dt.  25  o_^;  where  it  symbolises  the  giving  up  of  one's
right ;  WRS  Kin.  269.  Cp  RUTH,  SHOE  ;  also,  for  a  similar
action  among  the  Arabs,  Burton,  Land  of  Alidian,  2197  ;  and
Goldziher,  Abhaud.  z.  Arab.  Philol.  147  (quoted  by  Buhl,  Die
social.  I'erhiiltnisse  der  Israelite*.,  94,  n.  2).  The  antithesis  'to
take  possession  '  was  symbolised  by  '  throwing  one's  shoe  over"
the  object,  Pss.  60  io[8]  108  10(9].  (6)  teftdah,  nnyn,  '  attesta
tion,'  Ruth  47.  (7)  In  Jer.  'i>'lg  ff.  we  find  another  mode  of
conveyance  (which  probably  displaced  the  primitive  one  just
noticed).  A  deed  of  sale  (rupsri  ISO)  was  signed  by  the  buyer
12S3  3013,  and  witnesses  were  called  who  also  signed.  The
deed  was  in  two  copies,  one  sealed  (rann.l),  and  one  open
(**7|n),  and  placed  in  an  earthen  vessel  ;  cp  Johns,  op.  cit.  84.
'The  terms  and  conditions  of  the  sale'  (?)  =  D'jDnni  rpsarN
(8)  'They  strike  hands,'  Is.  26,  'P'SP'  ;  espec.  if  with  Hi.  and
Du.  we  read  <-p3  for  nS'3-  But  see  Che.  SBOT  '  Isaiah,'  and
Ges.-Buhl,  Lex.(^\  s.v.  psjy.

3.  Buying  and  selling.  The  commonest  words  are  kdndh.
rap,  and  miikar,  130,  Is.  24 2;  131)23  njij33,  'like  buyer  like
seller ' ;  Ezek.  7  12,  cp  Zech.  11  5.  (i)  kdndh,  lit.  '  to  make,  or
obtain,'  is  applied  to  purchasing  either  with  'JCJS,  Am.  86  Is.
4824,  or  alone,  Gen.  39  i,  ©  fKnjtTaro  (JE);  28.' 12  3  Jer.  13  i
19  i  32  -]J?f.  1543  Gen.  49306013  (both  P).  Also  in  a  more
general  sense  of  purchasing  a  Hebrew  slave  through  his  falling
into  one's  debt  ;  fcx.  21  2  (JE).  Also  metaphorically  ;  Ex.  15  16
Is.  11  n,  etc.;  koneh,  'the  buyer,"  Is.  242  Ezek.  7  12,  is  used
also  as  owner,  Is.  1  3.  Bib.  Aram,  njp,  'to  buy,'  Ezra  7  17.
Deriv. : — (a)  mikneh,  but  only  in  sense  of  '  property,'  cattle  (Ex.
1026,  etc.)  or  land  (Gen.  49  32,  (crijcris) ;  cp  CATTLE,  §  8  end.
(li)  miknah,  besides  meaning  '  possession '  is  used  for  '  sale ' ;
"en  ISO  =deed  of  sale,  Jer.  32  iiff.  ;  or  object  sold  f]D3  rGjrp,
'a  purchased  slave,'  Gen.  17  I2_/I  23  (apyvpoii'i/TOf),  Ex.1244;
or  '  purchase -price,'  Lev.  25  16  (cpitrqo'if)  (all  P) ;  also  rjD3
irupp,  Lev.  25  51,  '  the  money  for  which  he  was  bought '  (apryvpiov
Tijs  Trpacrews  auroO).  (f)  kinydn,  '  property '  in  widest  sense  ;
12D3  j'Jp,  '  the  produce  of  his  money  '  (eViCT^-ros  apyvpiov),  Lev.
22ii  (Ph.).

(2)  mdkar,  'to  sell,'  with  3  pretii :  of  selling  persons;  Gen.
31  15  (JE),  ©  TreVpaKei/ ;  of  selling  a  bride  ;  so  also  the  Aram.
mekar,  or  men  and  women  as  slaves,  Gen.  37  27^  (©  aTro6i'6o)jii),
and  Ex.  21  7  (JE),  Ps.  105  17  Ezra  "4;  cattle,  Ex.  21  37  [22  i]
(JE),  Lev.  2*27  (<P  TrpaflrjcreTai,  P);  land,  Lev. 2023  34  (etc.,  P);
birthright,  Gen.  25  31  (JE)  ;  land,  Ezek.  7  12^,  or  any  property,
Lev.  202527,  or  any  wares,  Neh.  13  16.  So  generally,  maker,
'seller,'  Is.  242.  The  same  general  sense  attaches  to  -\y^  in
Phoen.,  MH  and  Assyr.;  in  the  latter  damga.ru  or  tamkaru,
Syr.  taggara?=  '  merchant,'  Del.  Ass.  HWB,  222.  Derivv.  : —
(a)  mfker,  '  price  '  or  '  value,'  Nu.  20  19  (JE)  ;  cp  Pr.  31  10  ;  also
'wares'  or  'things  for  sale,'  Neh.  13  16.  (b)  mimk&r,  'act  of
sale  ' ;  Lev.  25  27,  £5  Trpcitrts,  29  50,  etc.  ;  33  (JV3  D= '  house  that
was  sold  '),  or  '  thing  sold,'  25  25  Ezek.  7  13  ;  or  '  wares  for  sale  '  =
•OC,  Neh.  1820.  (3)  kdrdh,  ,-n3,  'to  buy,'  Dt.  26,  fxeVpu
A7J|u.i/;ecr#e,  Hos.  82  Job  627,  '  to  make  merchandise  of  a  friend  '
or  'haggle,'  4030  [41  6]  with  *?J/.  Ace.  toTalm.  R.haSh.,klrah
was  used  on  the  coast,  Levy,  NHWB  2323;  Ar.  kard  =
to  hire,  kira,  'wage.'  (4)  inehir,  I'rlS,  'price'  or  'payment,
28.  2424  iK.1028,  VTO3;  iK.2l2,  Tnp  r(D3  ;  cp  Pr.  17i6
27  26  ;  also  '  wage,"  Dt.  23  19  [18]  Mi.  3  n  ;  cp  the  phrase  Jl'3'1  K7
Dn'Tnpa,  'thou  hast  not  gone  high  with  their  price,'  Ps.  4413;
Pr.  22  16  appears  to  have  a  different  sense.  Assyr.  mahtru,  cp
Del.  Prol.  93,  Ass.  HIV  B  400,  404,  from  maharu,  '  to  be  opposite '
— i.e.,  mutual.  *jD3  alone  means  price,  Gen.  31  15,  '  the  money
paid  for  us.'  (5)  mahar,  'to  buy  a  wife,'  (£5  fapviii ;,  Ex.
22  15  [16].  Deriv.  mbhar,  'price  of  a  wife,'  Aram,  tnaluird,
Syr.  tnahra,  Ar.  mahr  (MARRIAGE,  §  i).  (6)  sabar.  -\i&,
'  to  buy  corn  ' ;  Gen.  41  57  42  5  47  14,  ©  iyopofeii/,  42  2,  <S
Trpt'oo-ee;  'to  buy  victuals,'  with  'okel  (^^N),  Gen.  42  7  10,  etc.,
Dt.  26.  Hi.  'to  sell  corn,'  ©  emiAei,  Gen.  426  (©  tp.TroAoi'
f/j.iropevf(T0ai)  Am.  8  $f.  ;  with  "?3»,  Dt.  2  28,  ©  an-oSoioT).  (7)
padah,  mB,  'to  buy  free'  or  'ransom,'  ©  \vrpota,  Ex.  34  20
(JE);  13  13  (P);  Dt.  7s,  etc.,  Ar.  fad  a,  Assyr.  padu,  'to  buy
free.'  Eth.  to  'pay.'  Derivatives  pidyom,  -«,  pedftyim,
'ransom  money.'  (S)gd'al,  Vxa,  'to  redeem.'  Barth,  Etynt.
St.  18,  gives  Ar.  ju'dlat,  'price.'  Derivative  ge'uldh,  usually

1  cv.9  in  MH  is  'to  appraise,'  'value.'

2  [So  Jensen,  ZA  6349  ;  for  another  view  of  the  derivation  of
the  Syriac  see  Nold.  in  Fraenkel's  Aram.  Frcmdtv.  i8i/J

5196


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

'  redemption,'  but  also,  Lev.  25  51,  '  the  sum  paid.'  ©  ra  Aurpa.
(9)  kopher,  133,  '  quit -money,'  ©  \VTpov.  (10)  Bibl.  Aram.
zeban,  p],  'to  buy,'  is  used  metaphorically,  Dan.  28 ;  found
also  in  MH,  Targums  Nab.,  Palm.,  and  Syr.  Supposed  to  be
from  Assyr.  zibanitu,  'balance'  (see  Ges.-Bu.).  Ar.  fainan,
'price'  'value'  (Spiro,  Ar.  Eng.  l-'ocab.).

4. Hiring,  lending,  pledging.

(i)  sdkar,  "Ob",  '  to  hire,'  with  2  prctii  (jj.i<r9ovtrBa.C),
mercenary  troops,  Judg.  94  28.  10 6  i  Ch.  1'Je/  2  Ch.  256;  a
priest,  Judg.  184;  a  workman,  Is.  406  2  Ch.  24  12  ;  a  husband,
Gen.  30  16 ;  cp  Pr.  2(5  10  [Heb.].  Ar.  sa.ka.ra  =  '  to  thank.'
Derivatives: — (a) seker,  '  wage,'  Pr.  11  18.  131?  '&y,  '  makers  of
wages,'  Is.  19  10.  (b)  sdkdr,  the  commoner  word  for  '  wage,'


§3  Job  14  6,  etc.;  mercenaries,  Jer.  4tJ2i. Note  that  the  hirer
asks  the  servant  what  his  wage  will  be,  Gen.  29  15  3028 ;  yet  the


words  for  wage  are/oW, *?J7S,  pc'ullah,  n^ys.

(2)  /awaA, HI1?, 'to borrow,'  Sai>i'£eu- fll??!, 'to  lend,'  Dt.
28  12 Is.  24  2; rrta  rn"?a3,  Pr.  22  7, etc., Ex.  22  24  [25] (JE

[e/cSan'^.H),  Ps.  372i'll25  (.cixpav)  Neh.  .04.  In  MH  ni1?
= '  lend  ';  Ar.  lawil,  'to  delay  payment  of  debt.'  (3)  ndsd/t,
rt!?3,  and  x^j,  i  S.  22  2  Is.  242,  etc.,  'to  lend,'  Is.  242  Jer.
15  10  Ut.  24  ii  Neh.  5  7  10  (with  r,p3),  n  (with  other  goods).  The
pt.  Kal='  creditor,'  Ex.  22  24  [25]  (JE  with  bad  signification).  ©
6  &ave(.<nri's  (in  Ex.  Karen-eiyim').  Ar.  nasa'a.  The  use  of  the
Aram.,  Syr.,  and  Ar.  cognates  and  the  Heb.  use  of  Kal  (once
Lam.  3  17),  Niph. ,  and  Hiph.  in  the  meaning  '  to  forget,'  proves
the  origin  to  lie  in  delaying  payment.  Yet  Ass  itt:si= '  to  take,'
Johns  36  10  Jf.  Derivatives: — (a)  nfsi,  'debt,'  2  K.  4  7,  roil?
TOKOUS  <rov.  (b)massd,  '  usury,'  ace.  after  nz'}>  Neh.  07;  cp  10  ;
'debt 'or 'exaction  of  debt.'  '(4)  7NE?,  '  to  borrow.'  (5)  iwjg  103

•t  v  .. . I  -T'

Ezek.  1817,  etc.,  'to  lend  on  interest.'  (6)  JT2-IB  Dp?,  parallel
phrase,  Ezek.  188,  etc.  On  borrowing  and  lending,  see  LAW


Job  17  3.

5.  Debt.

(i)  At/;  nin,  'debt,'  Ezek.  18  7  (Co.  nit?),  Syr.  haubetha,
Ar.  hdba.,  'to  be  in  debt'  ;  cp  Pi.  'to  make  guilty,'  Dan.  1  10.
(2)  N3:C,  Neh.  1032  [31] ;  (3)  nNB:2,  Dt.  24  10  Pr.  2226;  (4)
n^C,  Dt.l52,  'debt';  "D  SjQ,  'creditor.'

6.  Payment,  reckoning,  etc.

(i)  sdkal,  ^py,  lit.  '  to  weigh,'  Ezra  8  25  f.  29,  so  '  to  pay  '  with
f]D3,  Ex.  22  16  [17]  (JE)  ;  Gen.  23  16  (P),  2  S.  IS  12  Is.  5y  2  Jer.

32  9  ; with  I?3"1?3.  I  K-  2039  ',  or  with  13b,  Zech.  11  12. 7p»
is  used  with  7,  "V  ?y,  'S3  7V  (of  persons),  and  ?J7  (of  treasuries,
Esth.  4  7). Phcen.  ^>py, 'a  weight,'  Aram,  ^pn,  Ass.  sakalu,
'to weigh,' — the last also  'to  pay.' See MONEY, SHEKEL,
WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES. (2)  nasa,  N-;^,  is  used  poetically
of  weighing,  Job  6  2. (3)  nehsab  (yyn  in  Niph.),  of  '  the  reckon
ing  '  of  money,  2  K.  22  7. (4)  tnandh,  n:S>  '  to  count '  is  used  of
money,  2  K.  12  n. Deriv.  MAN  EH  (</.?>.). (5)  The  root  kasas(kas)
CDD, 'to count'  (Ex.124) 's  used  commercially  in  the  deriv.
miksiih, 'sum' or 'value,' Lev.  27  23. Del. (Ass. Hll'B,
407)  gives  miksu as 'toll' or 'duty.' Heb. mekes  is used
only of tribute to Yahwe, Nu. 3128 3741.! (6) sapliar,
12D> may have  been  used  of  the  counting  of  money ; cp  Is.

33  18. (7)  silletn,  DW,  lit.  'fulfil,'  is  used  of  'repayment'  of  debt,
2  K.  4  7  ;  Ass.  sa.la.mu  = '  to  pay. '  (8)  On  kese/>h,  t]D3,  see  MONEY,
SILVER. It  is  used  in  the  sense  of 'price,'  nib'.!  f]D3,  Gen.  2813
(P);  cp  above  under  n:p!2. (9)  kcsltdh,  na'fc'p,  see KESITAH.
(10) kikkar,  133,  see  TALENT, (i i)  'agorah  ('TTUN),  in  constr.
before *]??, i  S.  2  36, is usually taken after © (6|3oAou
apyvpiov)  and  Tg.  as  'a  small  coin';  but  Syr. agglrtd, 'pay
ment'  and  Ar. 'aggar, 'to let'  or 'to  hire,'  'ugva, 'wages.'
(12)  'cthnan, |3nx, usually  of  a  'harlot's'  wage, but  applied
in  Is.  23  18  to  the  profits  of  Tyre's  trade  ;  perhaps  metaphorical,
but  the  original  general  meaning  of  the  word  makes  it  possible
that  the  commercial  application  of  it  was  direct. In  Ezek.  1(5  41
the  tribute  which  Israel  pays  to  foreign  idols  or  nations  (?). For
other  terms  see  above,  under  Buying  and  Selling,  3.

7.  Profit,  gain,  etc.

(i)  A<i'z/(Hiph.  of  ^y),  '  to  profit,'  in  a  general  sense,  Job  21 15
35  3  ;  except  (perhaps)  in  Is.  47  12  it  is  not  used  of  commercial
profit.  (2)  IP-,  'to  be  over.'  Derivv. : — (all  late  words),  (a)

1  [In  Aram,  maksa,  'tribute,'  inakesa,  'tax-collector.']
5T97


TRADE  AND  COMMERCE

yithron,  Eccles.  1  3,  etc.,  'profit,'  in  general,  }\\\  yuthran  \  (6)
yother,  'profit,'  Eccles.  (5  8  n  ;  (c)  mot /tar,  'profit,'  Pr.  1423  of
labour,  215.  (3)  ~wy,  'to  be  rich.'  Deriv.  ~\wy  nay,  'to  make
riches,' Jer.  17  n.l  (4)hon,  pn,  'riches,'  'goods,'  Ezek.  27  12
18  33  and  Pr.  (5)  hdyil,  ^n,  'substance'  or  '  wealth, ' 'n  fivy,
Dt.  8  i7/.  Ezek.  28  4.  (6)  nekdsliit,  D'pap,  '  wealth  '  of  various
sorts,^  Josh.  22s  (D),  2  Ch.  In/  See  CATTLE,  §  8,  end.  (7)
rdkas,  yjy\,  'to  gather,'  and  rekus,  'substance'  or  'goods,'  in
general ;  Gen.  12  5,  (!5  TO.  imdpxoi'Ta.  avrtav  ova.  e(CT)?<7ai'TO,  and
frequently  elsewhere  in  P,  also  in  Ezra  and  Ch.  Of  the  royal
property,  iCh.  2731  28  i  2Ch.  813  867.  (8)  'izzabdn,  JU?y,  in
Ezek.  27  12  14  etc.  means  '  wares,'  but  in  v.  27  it  is  parallel  to
hon.  HorTm.  PhSn.  Inschr.  15  gives  the  original  meaning  as
'produce'  or  'results  of  trade,'  from  3Ty  =  asl'-  The  Assyr.
ezlbu  is  '  to  leave  over,'  uzub(b)u,  '  a  payment.'  See  also  above,
under  ina,  ,13 pa,  |;:p,  TPIB,  ni?C?l,  Ijn.N.  (9)  bdsa,  ysa,  lit.
'to  break  off,'  'take  unjustly,'  Pr.  1 19  1627  Ezek.  22  12  27,  Pi.
'to  finish'  a  work,  Is.  10  12,  etc.  Deriv.  besa',  generally  of
'  violent '  or  '  unjust  gain,'  Judg.  5  19,  taken  in  war,  i  S.  8  j  (<S
TTJS  (Ti/i'TeAct'a?,  EV  'lucre'),  Ezek.  2227  (RV  'dishonest  gam'),
Pr.  1527,  cp  Is.  57  17  Ezek.  22  13.  But  'profit'  in  general,
Gen.  37  26  (JE),  ©  xpr)tnit.ov.  Cp  above,  §  61.  (10)  'osek,  p&y,
'unjust  gain,"  Eccles.  77.

8.  Value,  valuation,  etc.

(a)  Prepositions. — (i)  3  pretii,  in  the  giving  of  one  thing  'for'
another.  (2)  -23,  »£)•>,  'S-^J,',  'according  to  the  number'  or  'the
rateof.'  (3)  3.J3JT,  'for' areward,  Is.  623;  cp  3.J3J?,  Pss.  40i6  704.
PhGn.  npy,  'profit,'  'reward.'  (4)  ~"3J]3,  Am.  26.

(fi)  Verbs,  nouns,  adjectives. — (i)  'drak,  ""l^,  '  to  compare,'
also  '  to  equal  in  value  '  ;  Job  28  17  19.  Hi.  '  to  tax,'  2  K.  23  35,
'to  value'  (<£>  eri/j-oypa^rjerai'),  Lev.  '27  8  1214,  (0  Ti/urjcreTai.
Deriv.: — 'erek,  'valuation,'  for  purposes  of  royal  taxation,  2  K.
2335  ((5  o-m/Tt'/uW-s),  °r  for  priestly  sacrifices  and  fines,  Lev.
5  15  1825  [6  6]  272_^i2i6/  Nu.  IS  16  ((15  TI/IX>;,  <rui'Ti'jurjo-is,
etc.)  ;  '  the  sum  at  which  a  thing  is  valued,'  Lev.  27  13  18  23  27
(<5  Tt/x»j,  <ruimVr)cris) ;  this  is  also  rendered  by  TJIJ?  "",03,  w.
15  19,  and  by  ~?\~$!  rDDD,  v.  23.  Note  that  the  valuation  was
made  at  the  sanctuary ;  cp  above,  §  24  n.  (2)  sillah,  nSo
(only  in  Pu'al),  'to  weigh,'  rightly  rendered  'to  value,'  by  EV
Job  28  16  19.  (3)  gddal,  h^l,  constr.  with  '3%V3,  '  to  be  worthy  in
mine  eyes'  (EV  '  much  set  by  '),  i  S.  26  24  parallel  to  ip'  in  v.  21
(*D  6/AeyaAui/(h;) ;  giddllvtas  probably  used  of '  setting  a  high  value
on'  anything,  cp  Job  7  17.  (4)  ydkar,  Ip',  'to  be  valuable"  or
'  dear,'  i  S.  20  21  (©  eWt/aos)  ;  also  '  to  be  valued  at.  Derivv. : —
yekar,  'price,1  Zech.  11  13,  DivVjflD  'Ppjr  ~WK  1|Tn,  ydkar,
'valuable,'  'dear,'  and  yakkir.  (5)  rdhok,  pini,  'far,'  is  used
metaphorically  in  Pr.  31  10  of  value  ;  EV  '  far  above  rubies.'  (6)
ntahiniid,  1CTO,  anything  'desirable';  pi.  applied  to  'costly
things,'  Hos.  96,  silver,  Is.  04  io[n]  Joel  4 [3]  5  2Ch.  8619  Lam.
1  10— all  of  the  costly  vessels  and  treasures  of  the  temple.  (7)
jn  fax,  'costly  stone,'  Pr.  17s.  (8)  fsn,  in  pi.  'costly  things'
Pr.  815  8n;  n  »33N,  'precious  stones,'  Is.  54  12.  (9)  rn^Ja,
'costly  things,'  Gen.  2453  (JE),  but  ©  Siapa,  Ezra  1  6  (©
f  en'ois)  2  Ch.  21  3  (©  on-Aa)  32'23  (©  66/j.ara).  See  also  above,
under  Vnp.

(/) Customs,  dues,  toll,  etc.

(i)  In  Gen.  43  it  (JE),  Israel  commands  his  sons,  going  to
buy  corn  in  Egypt,  '  to  take  a  minliafi,  nnja,  or  '  present '  to
the  governor  of  the  land  ;  elsewhere  miuhah  is  applied  to
sacrificial  '  offering  '  and  political  '  tribute  ' ;  see  SACRIFICE,
§  30.  (2)  middtih,  JTTO,  Heb.  of  'tribute'  or  'tax'  to  the
king,  Neh.  54;  Bibl.  Aram.  «"np  or  'TJ11?.  Ezra  41320  724,
'dues'  or  ' customs, '  cp  6s.  This  term  is  said  to  be  borrowed
from  Assyr.  niandattu,  'tribute,'  from  nadan,  'to  give'  (Del.  v
Ass.  HH'B,  451),  but  cp  naditu,  'deposit,'  'treasure.'  (3)
belo,  173,  Bibl.  Aram.  Ezra  4  13  20  724,  'customs '  or 'dues.'
Assyr.  biltu,  '  tax.'  (4)  Aiildk,  ?pn,  Bibl.  Aram.  Ezra,  id.  '  way-
money,"  'toll.'  See  further,  TAXATION,  §  j n.

(g)  Deposit,  banking,  hoarding,  etc.  See  DEPOSIT,
etc.

(T)  ISw'S  •  •  p3.  '  t°  g've  to  keep '  money,  tools,  garments,
or  any  beast,  Ex.  22 6-12  [7-13],  (E).  (2)  pdkad,  1£E,  'to
store"  or  'deposit,'  2  K.  5  24  of  money,  etc.  Hi.  'to  lay  up'  a
roil  or  baggage,  'to  commit'  people  to  any  one,  'to  muster.'
Ho.  '  to  be  deposited '  of  money  or  other  property,  Lev.  5  23
[64],  (P).  Denv.  pikkdJfin,  'store'  of  corn.  Gen.  41  36,  (JE),
'  deposit '  of  money  or  other  property,  Lev.  5  21  23  [(3  2  4],  (P)  ;

1  ntyy  is  also  used  with  ^<n  and  noDl  3HT,  Ezek.  28  4.
5198


TRADITION


TRIBES


©  TrapatiriKT).  (3)  nCii;'n,  Lev.  5  21  [6  2],  is  '  trust '  or  '  deposit '
parallel  to  p^S  ;  see  above  e  2  (3).  (4)  In  the  east  the  hoarding
of  money  is  common  and  in  Heb.  this  is  matnwn,  lit.  'place
where  one  hides'  or  '  hoards,' Jer.  41  8,  pits  for  'storing'  corn,
oil,  honey  (cp  Ar.  fkat&fkio)'t  Gen.  4823  (JE),  'money'  ((5
0r)<raupov«),  cp  Pr.  'J  4  Job  821.  ['IDED  is  one  old  derivation  of
MAMMON  (g.v.  §  4  3),  recently  favoured  by  Deissmann.  Banking
is  not  mentioned  in  OT,  where  one  individual  lends  money  to
another.  Hut  we  saw  that  in  the  Roman  period  the  temple
contained,  besides  the  sacred  revenues,  sums  deposited  by  private
individuals  (§  78) ;  cp  the  gate  HAM.MIFHKAD,  close  to  Temple.
See  also  Johns,  op.  cit.  8254.

(h] J  'art ous  other  terms.

(1)  'fibad,  -ny,  'to  work'  (used  frequently  (a)  of  cultivation,
(6)  of  serving  as  slave,  (c)  of  working  by  means  of  another  ;
'3 lay,  Lev.  2539,  (P),  Jer.  22  13,  etc.)  is  not  applied  in  the  OT
to  commercial  business,  nor  is  the  deriv.  '<V-ddah  (all  other  kinds
of  work). Bibl.  Aram, 'iibida  is  '  work,'  Kzra  4  24,  etc.  ;  and
state  'business,'  Dan.  249  3  12.

(2)  itiamkdh, nUiOD, '  work '  or  '  business '  (lit. '  mission  '),

Gen.  39  1 1  Ex.  20g_/:  (JE)  cstr.  with  nfc'J?,  cp  Neh.  2  16  ;  of
handiwork,  Jer.  183  2  K.  12  i2[n];  of  the  superintendents  of  royal
treasures,  E.sth.  89  93;  also  of  worked  articles,  Lev.  1848;  'Q
liy,  '  leather-work,'  in  Ex.  22  7  10  [8  1 1],  '  goods,"  '  possessions. '
Besides  the  works  cited  in  the  course  of  the  article,  the
student  may  consult  on  (a)  the  trade  of  the  Jews,  Herzfeld,

Handelsgesch.  dcr  Juden  (not seen) ; the
84.  Literature, brief  summaries  in  Benzinger  and  Nowack's

manuals  of  Hebrew  Archaeology  ; Bennett,

art.  'Trade'  in  Hastings'  Dli;  several  works  given  under  Dis-
PEKSKJN.  (/')  for  the  Persian  and  Greek  periods,  Kennell's
Illnstrat.  of  Hist,  of  Exped.  of  Cyrus,  etc.  (1816)  ;  Sayce's
Herodotus.  (<-)  for  the  Roman  period,  Bergier,  Hist,  des  Grands
Chemins  tie  fF.mp.  Remain  (1728)  ;  Mommsen's  History  and
Prpv.  of  the  Roman  Kinpire ;  MahafTy,  Gk.  World  under
Roman  Sway;  Hausrath,  NT  Zeitge sch.  ;  Ramsay,  St.  Paul
the  Traveller  and  Roman  Citizen.  Consult  also  Tozer,  Hist,
of  Ancient  Geog.  See  W  W.  Hunter,  Hist,  of  British  India,
vol.  i.  G.  A.  S.

TRADITION  (TT&P&AOCIC),  Mt.  15  2  etc.  See
SCRIBES,  §  6.

TRAGACANTH  (11X33)  Gen.  37  25  RV»*  See
STOKAX.

TRANCE (t) Xu. 24  4  AV,  and (2) Acts  10  10

(eKcrrao-is)  ;  see  PROPHECY,  § 19  b.

TRANSFIGURATION. See  SIMON  PETER,  §  8.

TRANSLATION  (MeTAGecic),  Heb.  11  5  [same
word,  but  not  used  of  change  of  place,  in  7  12  12  27,  also  in
2  Mace.  11  24  f].  See  ENOCH,  §  i.

TRANSLATIONS  OF  SCRIPTURE.  See  TEXT
AND  VERSIONS.

TREASURE  CITIES  (JYl^pp  n»).  Ex.  1 »  AV,  RV
STOKE  CITIES  (q.v.)  [/]} ;  cpCiTY.
TREASURER. The  word  renders  :

1.  A denom.  verb  of  osar,  ~->'iN,  'treasure, "in  Neh.  1813. See
TREASURE-HOUSE,  i.

2.  soken,  |5-,  Is.  22  15  ;  see  SHEBNA.

3.  gizbar, 1-!3, Ezra  1 8 (ja<T^OLpT\vov [B],  ya-pfi. [A], yav-
<Ja/3paiov  [L]),  and  in  plur. Bibl. Aram. ib.  7  21  (•yajjcu). The
word  is  of  Persian  origin  (ganjabara),  and  if  a  current  restora
tion  of  a  passage  in  an  Egyptian-Aramaic  papyrus  be  adopted,
the  first  part  of  the  word  n3  1  had  already  become  Aramaised
by  at  least  the  fourth  century  B.C. (CIS  2,  no.  149  A,  /. 3).
According  to  Meyer  (Entst.  23),  Ges.-Buhl(Z,«.r.(13)),  and  others,
the  word  is  identical  with  : —

4.  The  plur.  ftdabtrayya, KJI?^?, Dan.  3  if.  (©  ?  but  yaS-
Sapj)i>ovs,  Symm.  in  Syr.  Hex.).  So  also  Bludau  (Alex.  Uebersetz.
Dan.  98)  who,  moreover,  takes  the  presupposed  original  N'13I3
to  be  a  gloss  to  N"13m  (CP  COUNSELLOR,  2). An  alternative  view,
that  of  Graetz,  which  is  favoured  by  Bevan  (Comm.  79),  treats
the  word  as  purely  a  scribe's  error  for  x'nain  (cp  COUNSELLOR,
3),  chiefly  on  the  ground  that  the  word  recurs  in  the  similar  but
much  smaller lists  of  officials in Dan.  827  68. It is more
plausible,  perhaps, to  suggest,  with  S.  A.  Cook,  that  N-nmn
(the  true  meaning  of  which  is  quite  obscure)  is  a  corruption  of
the  perfectly  intelligible  N"13rn- [See  also  Crit.  Bib.\

5.  olfcoyofios,  Rom.  1623  RV,  AV  CHAMBERLAIN  (q.v.).

TREASURE  HOUSE,  TREASURY,  occur  as  the
rendering  of  several  Hebrew  and  Greek  terms.

1  Cp  TREASURY,  (3).


(1)  im,  0f,ir(\/  '  to  heap  up  '),  i  K.  7  51,  etc.,  and  1^'lX  n'3
beth  'osar,  Neh.  10  39  [38]  Dan.  1  2,  with  which

(2)  nhbj  TV3,  beth  nfkotkoh  (2  K.  20  13  =  Is.  392)  is  clearly  a
synonym  (EV, by  guess, 'the  house  of  his  precious  things';
ol/cos  TOV ve\a>0a  [in  2  K.  rrjs  un-dpfecos  avrov  Kal  TOV  v.  L,  in
Is.  -Ta  N*]). Nekoth  is  possibly  an  Assyrian  loan-word  ; bit
nakamti=  treasure-house,  Pel.  Prol. 141  ; ZDMGW-j^i  ; cp
Haupt,  ZA  2266,  who  plausibly  reads  '•'ni??  TfZ=.bit  nakavati
(for  nakamati,  plur.). Very  possibly  too  the  same  word  should
be  read  in  Nah.  2g  [10]  (i.e.,  n'fVO:  for  n:«R,  EV  '  store  ').

(3)^»?,  ganzak  (iCh.  28nt;  &KXIO  [BAa?,  see  Sw.],
airoBriKwv  [L]),  like  the  NH  n3733i  perhaps  Pers.  origin  with
the  addition  of  O.  Pers.  ak  (Lag.  Ges.  AM.  27).  The  simpler
j  form  occurs  in  Ezra  6  i  **,'!??,  ginzayya,  EV  '  treasures,'  or  in
combination  with  rra  i"  Ezra  5  17  7  20,  EV  'treasure  house'
((pHA  ya^a  ;  (BL  in  617  720  ya£b<£vAaicio>'  ;  but  it  is  used  alone
in  the  last-mentioned  sense  in  Esth.  89  4  7  1  (•y<u(b</>uAoKioi',
•yoAa  [BNAL]),  a  usage  which  is  paralleled  by  Gk.  (tyaavpos
(treasure,  store-house,  casket,  etc.).

(4)  (cop/Saras,  Mt.  27e(cp  Jos.  BJ,  ii.  84);  see  CORBAN.

(5)  ya.£ort>v*.dieiov, i  Mace.  3  28 1449 2  Mace.  36^ 442 5  18
Mk.  1241  43  Lk.  21  i  Jn.  820;  see  TEMPLE,  $  36  (a).

TREE  OF  KNOWLEDGE  (ninn  }']}),  Gen.  29,  and
TREE  OF  LIFE  (D»nn  }'!?),  Gen.  2g  ;  see  PARADISE,
§  ii.  TREES,  SACRED.  See  NATURE-WORSHIP,
§*/

TRENCH  i.  PTI,  hel,  2  S.  20  15,  RV  '  rampart.' See

FORTRESS,  §  5.

2.  'jjJTO,  ma'gal,  i  S.  26  5  7  ;  and  3.  rPJJJCi  ma'galah,  x  S.
1720.  *  See  CAMP,  §  i.

4.  D'33,  gebim,  2  K.  3  16  RV,  AV  'ditches.'  See  CONDUITS,.
§  i  (3,  .5).

5-  n;i'?)  tfalah,  i  K.1832_^,  2  K.  1817  20  20  Is.  7  3  36  z
Ezek.  31  4  Job  38  25.  See  CONDUITS,  §  2.

6.  piy, Is.  62, 'made a trench' RV, AV 'fenced.' See
VINEYARD.

7.  x«P<*f, Lk.  1043, RV 'bank,' RVmg. 'palisade.' Cp-
SIEGE,  §  2.

TRESPASS-OFFERING  (D^N),  Lev.  56.  See
SACRIFICE,  §  2//.


TRESSES  (D^rn),  Cant.  7s  [6],  RV. SeeGALLERY,

(2).

TRIAL,  TRYING.  See  TEMPTATION.  The  words
are  :

1.  DSD,  massah,  Job  9  23. Cp  MASSAH.

2.  jna,  bshan,  Ezek.  21  13;  see  BDB  ;  but  also  Toy  (ad  loc.\
who  follows  RV  'for  there  is  a  trial,'  and  refers  to  Jer.  20  iz
Ps.  06  10  139  23  Is.  29  16  ;  add  Ps.  17  3,  rurQ.  i&oKifuurat-

3- nns,  eTrupiocras,  Ps.  17  3.

4  and  5.  Soxi.fj.ri  2  Cor.  82,  RV  'proof  [of  affliction],'  and
SoKiniov,  i  Pet.  1  7  Jas.  1  3  (AV  here  'try'ing,'  RV  in  both
passages  '  proof)  ;  cp  Ps.  17  3,  eSoKifitto-as  (jn^)-  But  is  SoK^iioy
really  a  substantive?  In  the  Greek  Egyptian  papyri  SOKI'/OIIOS  is
an  adj.  =  '  genuine.'  Deissmann  (Xeue  Bibelstudien,  88)  pro
poses  to  adopt  this  sense  here  —  '  that  which  is  genuine  in  your
faith  '  ;  cp  2  Cor.  88,  TO  TTJS  v/iierepo?  aya'nrjs  yinij&iov.

6  and  7.  Treipa,  Heb.  1136,  and  Treipocr/ids,  i  Pet.  4  12
(cp  1  S/.).

On  '  trial  '  in  the  sense  of  a  legal  process  (a  sense  not  found  in
EV)  see  LAW,  §  10,  GOVERNMENT,  §  16  etc.  For  the  '  trial  '  of
Jesus  see,  further,  PROCURATOR,  ROMAN  EMPIRE,  §  5,  SYN-
EDRIUM,  §  3jf.


TRIANGLE

§  3  (4).


i  S.  186,  RV°>g- See  Music,


TRIBES

TRIBES  OF  ISRAEL


Words  (§  i).  Lists  :  order  (§  9/)-

Clans  (§  2).  Current  theories  (§§  11-13).

Tribes  (§  3).  Criticism  (§  14).

Number  and  origin  (§§  4-8).  Conclusion  (§  15).

The well-established Hebrew  words  for '  tribe  '  are
ttbet, tD2^;, and  matfeh, Ht^P  (see  ROD,  STAFF), to

which (byAH corresponds in © and in
the  NT^T


. TTT j
1.  Words.


Apparently  also  in  Ezek.  27  24,  see  CHEST  (2).
5200


TRIBES

Matt  eh  is  characteristically  post-exilic ;  on  the  possibility  of
exceptions  in  i  K.  7  14  Mic.  0  9  see  Giesebrecht,  ZA  TW 1  239^!
Scbct  occurs  throughout  the  OT,  from  JE  to  Ch. ;  but  its  use  in
post-exilic  writings  may  be  archaic.  Stiff  also  appears  to  bear
the  sense  of  '  clan  '  (a  tribal  division)  in  Nu.  4  18  Judg.  20  12
i  S.  9  21  ;  in  all  these  passages,  however,  the  text  may  be
questioned.-  A  third  word,  according  to  some,  is  misfahah,
nnS!i'D  =  6rj|u.os,  <7u-yyeVeia  (for  probable  etym.  see  Ges.l13));  see
Josh.  7  17  Judg.  132  l"7lSn.  But  here  again  critical  scepticism
is  legitimate.3  Beth  tifi,  ax  n'3  =  oi«os7raT/nas('  fathers'  house  '),
and  efcpft,  rl?J<  =  ^iAias  ('  thousand  '  ?)  may  also  perhaps  be  added.
For  the  one  see  Nu.  7  2  (cp  1  4),  Josh.  22  14  ;  for  the  other,
Nu.  1  16  104  (cp  7  2)  36  Josh.  2^2130  (cp  Ps.M  on  Ps.  68  18).
Misfiiikah,  be'tk  a/>,  and  fleph,  however,  are  properly  terms  for
subdivisions  of  the  tribes.  Using  them  for  '  tribe '  would  seem
to  be  in  a  certain  qualified  sense  a  relic  of  the  old  nomadic  times
before  the  groups  of  clans  could  become  consolidated  into  the
later  tribes.  Mispahah  and  bcth  nb  might  apparently  be  used
synonymously  (see  Ex.  6  14  Nu.  3  24)  ;  more  properly,  however,
the  ,inSt?i'D  (the  Gk.  <j>pa.Tpa  or  <j>pa.Tpia,  or,  to  use  the  word
somewhat  vaguely,  '  clan  ;  EV  '  family ')  was  made  up  of
beth  dboth  '  fathers'  houses  '  (so  EV)  or  '  families.'  £leph  (EV
generally  'thousand';  Nu.  1  16  RV"'K-  'families')  is  perhaps  =
mispahah;  cp  Judg.  615,  'my  thousand  ('3/N,  EV  'my
family';  Moore,  'my  sept')  is  the  poorest  in  Manasseh,'
meaning  the  clan  of  the  Abiezrites  ;  also  i  S.  10  19,  '  by  your
tribes  and  by  your  thousands,'  but  c>.  21,  '  the  tribe  of  Benjamin
by  its  clans'  (l'nnflB>D1?)-  According  to  the  prevalent  view,  the
assumption  is  that  the  normal  number  of  the  fl^N  is  1000 ;

Jv  •••

nevertheless  Buhl  (Ges.(13))  is  probably  right  in  supposing  that
the  true  meaning  of  the  root  of  eleph  is  '  to  bind  together '  (cp
Ass.  ulaftu,  '  band ').  Naturally  the  members  of  the  nS^  or
'  union  '  (?)  fought  together  under  a  i(j»  or  '  captain  '  (i  S.  17  18
1813  28.181,  which  passage,  to  be  sure,  presupposes  the
meaning  '  thousand '  for  *j  7X).  Lastly,  many  scholars  would
add  iV,  'kinsfolk'  (  =  Ar.  hayy>'",  'a  group  of  families  united
by  vital  ties  'in  i  S.  IS  18,  if  not  also  in  Gen.  3  20  (see  ADAM
AND  EyE,  §  3),  and  i  S.  256  (so  H.  P.  Smith).  It  is  remarkable
that  this  view  should  have  become  an  unquestioned  tradition
among  critics,4  for  it  seems  to  imply  a  confidence  in  the  received
text  which,  in  the  present  state  of  textual  inquiry,  must  be
called  excessive.

Before  we  consider  the  question  of  the  '  twelve  tribes  '
we  must  endeavour  to  do  justice  to  the  arrangement  by
_.  clans, which  represents  the  form  of  social

system  natural  to  Semitic  nomads.  The
'  tribe  '  was  no  doubt  composed  of  '  clans, '  but  there  was  a
stage  of  development  in  which  there  were  '  clans,'  but  not
in  the  fuller  sense  of  the  word  '  tribes.'  What,  then,  was
a  '  clan  '  (nnstra)?  It  was  an  association  of  '  brothers'
(Gen.  2427  29i5  i  8.2029) — i.e. ,  of  kinsmen,  or  more
strictly  of  kinsmen  on  the  father's  side.  This  appears
from  Judg.  9 1,  where  Abimelech  speaks  to  '  the  whole
clan  '  of  the  family  of  his  mother,  from  which  his  own
clan  was  distinct.0  That  the  kinship  was  largely  based
on  what  seems  (but  wrongly  seems)  to  Westerns  fiction,
and  not  on  literal  descent  from  the  same  father,  need
only  be  remarked  in  parsing.  The  '  clan '  might  form
the  whole  (or  nearly  the  whole)  body  of  citizens.
Hence  place-names  and  clan-names  are  often  identical  ;
hence,  too,  such  a  phrase  became  possible  in  an  early
legend  as  '  Ophrah  of  the  Abiezrites  '  (Judg.  624).6  Of
course,  however,  it  was  also  possible  that  more  than
one  clan  might  dwell  in  the  same  city,  as  in  the  case  of
the  Shechem  of  Gideon's  son  Abimelech.  The  special
characteristics  of  clansmen  are  summed  up  in  the  often

1  On  Driver's  view  see  below,  §  3.

2  In  Nu.  MT  has  Jlhsp'a  BaBTriK,  and  in  i  S. 'B3ty  mnBB>S.
Probably,  however,  both  -23^  and  »Q-S>  come  from  jinBl?S,  which
seems  to  have  been  dittographed. In  Judg.  'oat?  should  prob
ably  be  B3;?  (see  Moore,  ad  loc.).

3  In  Josh. 'j?o  should obviously  be  &yy  (see  Z'.  16)  ; after
mi.T  read  I'rinpra1?  (<S KO.TO.  fijj^ovs). So  Steuernagel  (alt.).
It  is  a  mere  slip  of  the  scribe. In  Judg.,  however,  there  is
deep-seated  corruption  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

4  It  is  or  has  been  held  by  Ewald,  Bottcher,  Thenius,  Wellh.,
Robertson  Smith, Driver,  Kittel,  Liihr,  Budcle,  Siegfr.-Stade,
and BDB. >;jx  nnSU'D 's commonly omitted as  a  (correct)
gloss. See,  however,  a  different  explanation  in  Crit.  Bib.

5  In  Judg.  0318, however,  there  are  indications  of  another
view  of  kinship. For  here  '  brother '  =  son  of  the  same  mother.
Cp  KINSHIP,  §  6.

6  From  Judg.  6  24,  compared  with  S  2,  we  gather  that  Gideon's
clan  could  muster  300  able  fighting  men.

5201


TRIBES

misunderstood  phrase  yn  "Tea,  which  is  really  a  technical
term,  and  not  to  be  rendered  literally.1  When  in  2  K.
1520,  Menahem,  king  of  Israel,  is  said  to  have  exacted
the  money  for  the  tribute  of  all  who  were  Vn  niaa,  the
persons  who  are  meant  are  not  merely  mighty  warriors,
nor  merely  'mighty  men  of  wealth'  (EV),  but  those
who  were  at  once  .holders  of  property  and  subject  to  the
obligation  of  military  service.  For  in  Israel,  as  else
where,  those  who  did  not  belong  to  the  propertied  class
were  excluded  from  the  ranks  of  the  warriors  (cp  ARMY,
§  4/ ).  It  is  equally  true  that  the  propertied  class,
which  formed  the  mispahah  or  clan,  and  consequently
also  the  sfbef  or  'tribe,'  alone  had  political  rights.
Represented  bytheirheads — the  so-called  D'3j?T  'ancients,'
D'nii  'freemen'  or  'nobles,'  and  Q«I'B>  'princes'2 — they
must,  in  the  pre-regal  period,  have  monopolised  the
supreme  power,  both  in  peace  and  in  war.  Under
kingly  government,  however,  the  political  authority  of
the  collections  of  territorial  '  clans,'  denominated  '  tribes,'
naturally  faded  away  more  and  more.  Nothing  is  said
about  '  tribes '  in  2  Kings,  and  none  of  the  statistical
passages  in  Ezra  and  Xeh.,  with  two  exceptions,
mention  a  tribal  connection.  The  exceptions  are
Neh.  113-24  and  1125-36,  both  certainly  late  passages,
though  with  an  artificial  antique  tinge.  It  should,
however,  be  added  that  the  lists  in  the  Books  of  Ch.
and  Ezra- Neh.  produce  the  impression,  that  uhen
these  books  were  compiled  the  tie  of  the  clan  had  by  no
means  disappeared.  This  is  surely  natural,  for  this  tie
had  the  sanction,  not  merely  of  antiquity,  but  of
religion.  Two  proofs  of  this  are  preserved,  viz.  (i)  the
notice  of  the  yearly  sacrifice  of  David's  mispahdh  (i  S.
20629),  and  (2)  the  direction  in  the  law  of  the  Passover
in  J  (Ex.  122i  ;  see  Baentsch,  ad  lac.)  that  the  paschal
lamb  was  to  be  provided  by  each  miSpdhah  (?NX  inp
D3'nnDlS'Dl?)i  which  contrasts  with  the  legal  direction
given  in  a  secondary  stratum  of  P  (Ex.  12s)  that  every
'  father's  house '  (ax  ira)  should  provide  a  lamb  for
itself.

The  designation '  tribe ' belongs specifically to the

Israelites,  and  means,  in  its  fullest  sense,  an  association

_  ., of  clans  and  families,  living  near  together,

and  conscious of  a  closer  mutual affinity

than  that  which  united  them to '  Israel '  as  a  whole.

If  we  are  not  misled  through  relying  too  implicitly  on

the  traditional  text,  we  nowhere  find  the  term  D't:3i?.

'  tribes,'  applied  to  any  of  the  peoples  with  which  Israel

was  most  closely  connected.

The  Edomites  ('  sons  of  Esau  ')  are  said  in  Gen.  36  15-19  40-43
(cp  the  'allftph'im  of  the  Horites  in  TT>.  •zgf.)  to  have  had
D'S17N  ^allfiphiiif),  a  term  which  presupposes  the  existence  of
C'2^X  (^tilaphliii)  — i.e.,  following  Buhl,  'unions.'  Evidently,
in  some  sense  of  the  word,  '  tribes  '  are  meant.  The  Ishmaelites,
too,  are  said  in  Gen.  25  16  to  be  divided  into  HIEN — i.e.,  '  popula
tions '  ;  and  in  Nu.  25  15  Sur  (TiO  is  said  to  have  been  'head  of
a  people  (ni2K  ;  read  n^X?),  of  a  father's  house  in  Midian.'3
Strangely  enough,  in  Is.  19 13  we  hear  of  persons  who  are
called  'the  cornerstone'  of  Egypt's  'tribes.'  Duhm  wilfully
makes  these  'tribes'  into  'nomes';  not  less  wilfully  his
predecessors  explain  'castes'  (Herod.  2  164).  Now,  however
(see  MIZKAIM,  §  ??>),  it  is  almost  beyond  the  possibility  of
question  that  the  Misrites  of  N.  Arabia  are  referred  to,  so  that
here,  at  least,  in  a  late  literary  production  we  have  the  word
scbet  applied  to  a  neighbouring  non-Israelite  people.  But,  as  a
rule,  it  is  only  Israel  that  has  scbdtiin.

Though  both  &bet  and  matteh  might  conceivably
have  been  used  by  early  writers  in  speaking  of  the
primitive  stage  of  Israel's  social  development,  the
probability  is  that  both  terms  arose  after  the  Israelites
had  begun  to  acquire  territory  by  conquest.  We  may

1  See  E.  Meyer,  GA  1  449  ;  F.ntst.  \^f.  (cp  iog/).

2  On  Judg.  8  14,  where  the  C'^iy  are  apparently  distinguished
from  the  Q'3J3>,  see  Moore's  commentary.

3  Stade, however, would read  C'B?N  for  C'B??N, which is
probably  right. Similarly  in  Ex.  1615 'B7N  may  be  read  for
'Bl^N-

5202


TRIBES


TRIBES


therefore  concede  to  Driver  x  that  though  matteh  may
be  in  OT  usage  only  post-exilic,  it  was  scarcely  invented
by  P,  and  that,  like  fttet,  when  used  in  a  metaphorical
sense,  it  is  at  any  rate  suggestive  of  high  antiquity.
'  Archaic,'  however,  which  is  Driver's  word,  seems  to
claim  too  much.2  At  the  time  that  we  here  suppose  the
metaphorical  use  of  sebet  (and  of  matteh  ?)  to  have
arisen  the  creative  tendency  of  language  was  still
strong.  As  to  the  precise  date  when  the  usage  was
initiated,  who  can  venture  to  dogmatise  ?  We  can
only  say  that  it  must  have  been  a  fairly  ancient,  though
not  archaic  period.  When  the  Blessing  of  Jacob  was
written  in  its  original  form,  the  usage  must  have  been
already  in  existence,  not  because  Gen.  49  16  speaks  of
Dan  as  'judging  his  people,  like  any  of  the  tribes  of
Israel'  (for  the  text  of  v.  \f*b  is  questionable),3  but
because  the  contents  of  the  series  of  blessings  require
this  view.  The  union  of  clans  must,  at  this  time,  have
been  closer  than  in  the  nomadic  age,  owing  to  the
pressure  of  new  conditions  arising  out  of  changed
circumstances.  And  even  though  it  cannot  be  historical
that  the  first  king  was  chosen  by  lot  (i  S.  IQzof.  )  —  first
Benjamin  being  selected  from  the  other  'tribes,'  then
Saul's  '  clan  '  and  then  Saul  himself  —  we  can  believe
that  there  was  in  that  hero's  time  not  only  a  'clan'
of  Matri,  but  also  at  least  the  beginnings  of  a  '  tribe"  of
Benjamin  (cp  SAUL,  §  i^r).

It  is  probable  that  the  tribal  association  was
strengthened  by  the  sanctions  of  religion.  The  names
of  some  at  least  of  the  Israelitish  tribes  can  be  more
or  less  plausibly  explained  as  borrowed  divine  names4
(see  ASHER,  DAN,  GAD,  MANASSEH,  REUBEN),  and
though  it  would  be  natural  that  some  specially  famous
sanctuary  should  draw  pilgrims  not  only  from  the  tribe
on  whose  territory  it  stood,  but  also  from  other  tribes,
yet  we  may  presume  that  every  tribe  had  some  sanctuary
of  its  own  in  which,  besides  Yahwe,  some  tribal  god  or
divine  hero  was  implored  to  give  his  blessing  to  the
tribe.5

If  we  ask  how  many '  tribes  of  Israel  '  historically

existed  together,  the  answer  must  be  that,  apart  from  a

„ , hieratic and literary convention which

'  .  .  only  in  quite  a  late  period  can  be  shown
and  origin.  {o  ^ave  Become  a  p0puiar  belief,  the

number  must,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  have  been
variable.  A  clan  may  (i  ),  through  the  adhesion  of  other
clans  and  through  favouring  fortune,  become  so  large  as
to  be  called  a  '  tribe,'  or  (2),  through  acquisition  of  fresh
territory  may  be  inevitably  impelled  to  bifurcation  ;
again,  a  tribe  may  (3),  through  persistent  ill-fortune,
sink  so  low  that  its  constituent  clans,  or  those  of  them
which  survive,  may  seek  protection  in  a  fresh  tribal
attachment.  In  a  word,  there  is  no  sharp  division
between  clans  and  tribes.6  An  example  of  the  first  of
these  cases  may  be  found  in  the  growth  of  the  tribe  of
Judah  (see  CALEB,  §  zf.  ;  JUDAH,  §  5)  ;  of  the  second,
as  some  think,  in  the  division  of  Joseph  into  Ephraim
and  Manasseh  ;  of  the  third,  in  the  attachment  of
Simeonite  clans  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  (see  SIMEON).
The  gradual  disappearance  of  Reuben  and  the  destruc
tion  of  a  tribe  or  clan  called  DINAH  (q.v.  ,  but  cp  §  12,
below),  and  of  Simeon  and  Levi,  regarded  as  territorial
tribes,  should  also  be  mentioned  here,  though  with  regard
to  Levi  it  has  to  be  once  more  pointed  out  that  the  city
of  ZAREPHATH  (<?.v.  )  in  the  Negeb,  with  which  in  the

1  JPhil.  11  214  (in  the  course  of  an  answer  to  Giesebrecht,
Z  A  Til'  I  242).

'•2  B.  Luther's  phrase  (ZATW  21  14),  '  dass  der  Begriff  kein
hohes  Alter  hat,'  may  be  accepted  in  so  far  as  it  rejects  the  idea
that  the  term  sebet,  'tribe,'  is  archaic.'

3  See  Crit.  Rib.  ad  he.

4  K.  Kohler  (Der  Segen  Jacob's,  1867)  presses  the  theory  that
a  tribal  name  may  indicate  the  god  anciently  worshipped  by  the
tribe  to  an  impossible  extent.

5  Dt.  33  19  is  often  supposed  to  refer  to  a  mountain-sanctuary,
common  to  the  tribes  of  Zebulun  and  Issachar. Mt.  Tabor  has
been  thought  of. See,  however,  Crit.  Bib.

6  Cp  Griineisen,  Ahnencultus  (1900),  p.  242.

5203


earlier  form  of  the  tradition  Moses  is  most  probably
connected  (see  MOSES,  §  4),  appears  to  be  referred  to,
in  the  appendix  to  the  Book  of  Judges,  as  the  head
quarters  of  the  Levites.  J

The  convention  referred  to,  however,  definitely  repre

sents  the  tribes  of  Israel  as  twelve  in  number. There

„ , is  a  similar  convention  with  regard  to  the

',  .  clans  or  tribes  whose  origin  was  traced

to  Nahor  (Gen.  22  20-24),  to  Ishmael  (Gen.
17  20  25  13-16),  and  to  Esau  (Gen.  8615-1940-43)  re
spectively.  a  Its  artificiality  is  obvious.  Never  can  the
'twelve  tribes'  of  Israel  have  been  all  in  existence
together.  When,  e.g.,  Benjamin  came  into  prominence
as  an  independent  tribe,  Simeon  and  Levi  presumably
had  long  suffered  the  fate  poetically  prognosticated  in
Gen.  49?.  What,  then,  was  the  origin  of  the  numera
tion  ?  More  than  probably  it  had  a  mythological
character.  Diodorus  Siculus  (230),  in  his  account  of
the  Babylonian  astronomy,  after  speaking  of  the  thirty-
six  star-gods,  tells  us  that  the  Kvptoi  of  the  gods  are
twelve  in  number,  to  each  of  whom  are  allotted  a  month
and  one  of  the  signs  of  the  zodiac.  In  mythological
style  the  twelve  months  and  the  twelve  signs  of  the
zodiac  could  be  called  'sons  of  the  moon.'  It  is
probable  that,  either  directly  or  indirectly  (through
some  other  people),  a  faint  echo  of  this  had  reached  the
primitive  Israelites.  The  most  plausible  view  is  that
the  priests  at  the  chief  sanctuaries  of  the  people,  from
whom  Israel  derived  a  pale  reflection  of  a  mythology,
knew  of  a  myth  of  the  moon  -god  who  had  twelve  sons
(the  months,  or  the  signs  of  the  zodiac)  ;  3  and  it  is
further  probable  that  they  connected  the  ancestor  of
their  race  with  the  moon-god,  and  the  constituent  tribes
of  their  people  with  the  moon-god's  sons.  To  what
people  Israel  was  indebted  for  its  semi-mythic  tales,  is
matter  for  investigation.

Elsewhere,  however  (see PARADISE, SODOM),  we  have  seen


tha


of the Is


probably  borrowed  from  the  X.  Arabian  people  of  Jerahmeel,
and  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  semi-mythic  figure  of
Jacob  (3Sj;')i  *he  ancestor  of  the  Israelites,  is  a  reflection  of  the
mythic  ancestor  of  the  Jerahmeelites,  who  was  presumably
called  Jarham  (from  rWi  'moon,'  perhaps  with  the  Arabic
mimation).  Cp  col.  2363,  n.  2.  Jacob's  wife  Rebekah  (npai,
'  Ribhkah  ')  may  also  owe  her  name  to  popular  corruption  of
'Jarham,'  just  as  Isaac's  wife  Rachel  owes  hers  to  popular
distortion  of  '  Jerahme'el.'  See  REBKKAH,  §  2.4

Gunkel,  with  his  wonted  penetration,  remarks,  '  There  must
be  a  line  leading  from  the  twelve  Babylonian  zodiac-gods  to  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel  ;  but  of  what  nature  and  how  long  the
line  is,  cannot  at  present  be  said'  (/7*».M,  293).  It  is  much
to  see  a  problem,  even  if  its  solution  be  hidden.  But  the
evidence  already  adduced  makes  it  difficult  to  doubt  that  the
earliest  conveyors  of  Babylonian  myths  to  the  Israelites  were  the
N.  Arabian  Jerahmeelites.

Another  view  has  been put  forward  by  B.  Luther,5

and  though  this  scholar  does  not  deny  that  the  number

Q  ,  , of  the  months  may lie  at  the  root  of

6.  boiomon  s {he  numeration  of  the  tribeSi  h;s  theory

j  _(.  j.  nia>"  perhaps  be  welcome  to  those  who
departments.  woujj  sooner  admit  the  post-Solomonic
origin  of  the  '  twelve  tribes  '  than  grant  the  possibility
of  mythological  influences  on  biblical  representations.
It  is  well-known  that,  according  to  the  received  text  of
i  K.  ^T  ff.,  Solomon  divided  the  land  of  Israel  into

1  No  harder  section  than  Judg.  17  f.  can  be  found  among  the
early  narratives.  Methodical  correction  is  the  only  remedy
for  the  otherwise  insuperable  difficulties  of  the  text.  Cp
MICAH,  2,  and  Crit.  Bib.  Griineisen's  view  (of.  cit.,  241)  that
mi.T  nnSt?33  (EV,  '  of  the  family  of  Judah  ')  describes  the
Levite  as  one  who  sojourned  for  his  livelihood  in  the  tribe  of
Judah,  is  certainly  wrong.  Budde,  at  any  rate,  gives  effect  to
a  right  impression  when  he  substitutes  as  the  original  text
'aS  'of  the  clan  of  Moses.'  For  the  Levites  who


dwelt  at  Zarephath  were  the  clan  of  Moses. See  MOSES,  §  17.

2  Cp  Ewald,  Hist.  1369,  GENEALOGIES,  §  5,  n.  2.

3  For  Winckler's  form  of  the  lunar  theory,  see  his  Gcschichte
Israels,  2  57. The  credit  of  originality  as  well  as  learning  is  due
to  him.

4  That  cni'  >s  a  shorter  form  of  ^MDRV  's  indisputable. See
JEROHAM.


5204


TRIBES

twelve  departments,  each  of  which  had  to  supply
provision  to  the  king  and  his  house  for  a  month  in  the
year.  Now  B.  Luther  is  of  opinion  that  the  Solomonic
division  of  the  land  into  departments  was  at  least  a
principal  cause  of  the  later  theory  of  twelve  tribes.
Solomon,  it  is  held,  found  a  division  into  tribal  provinces
(not  as  yet  twelve)  already  in  existence,  and  adopted  it
so  far  as  it  was  geographically  suitable  for  his  purposes.
It  was  natural  that  a  later  generation  should  follow  the
precedent  set  by  this  king,  and  reckon  twelve  tribal
provinces.  The  reason  why  Solomon  fixed  upon  the
number  twelve  was  its  supposed  sacred  character.  (Cp
NUMBER,  §  7,  and  note  that  in  the  Amarna  letters
[81,  8]  we  find  the  expression,  not  to  be  taken  literally,
'  twelve  of  my  men  ' ).

This  view  derives  its  plausibility  from  the  mention  of
the  months — '  each  man  had  to  provide  victuals  for  a
month  in  the  year'  (i  K.  4;).  But  is  this  notice
critically  acceptable  ?

Kittel  indeed  says  that  the  providing  spoken  of  (cp  4  22-28
[5  2-8])  is  equivalent  to  the  collection  of  taxes.1  But  this  is  by
no  means  natural.  'To  provide  victuals  for  the  court  month  by
month  '  is  not  the  same  as  '  to  enable  Solomon  to  do  whatsoever
his  soul  desired.'  Stade  accordingly-  criticises  the  whole  state
ment  in  i  K.  4  7.  He  thinks  that  there  were  not  twelve  but
thirteen  'prefects'  (D'SJH),  and  that  the  reference  to  Solomon's
magnificent  scale  of  living  is  due  to  the  editor  who  inserted  the
old  list  of  prefects  in  the  main  body  of  chaps.  3-11,  and  whose
object  was  to  enhance  the  glory  of  the  king.  This  object  he
effected,  but  in  doing  so  he  correspondingly  diminished  the  im
portance  of  the  prefects,  who  became  commissariat  officers.  It
is  now  possible,  however,  to  go  beyond  this,  and  to  say  that,
text-critically,  the  statement  in  i  K.  4  7^  may  be  regarded  as
absolutely  wrong,3  and  that  the  whole  of  it  has  most  probably
arisen  (thanks  to  an  ingenious  editor)  out  of  a  gloss  on  the
incorrect  word  ^KW  (Israel).  The  region  over  which  the
D'3!i3  presided  was,  not  the  land  of  Israel,  but  the  land  of
Jerahmeel  or  Ishmael,  i.e.,  the  Negeb  (see  SOLOMON,  §  6).

The  number  of  the  prefects  may  coincide  with  the
number  conventionally  given  to  the  tribes,  but  either
the  coincidence  is  accidental  (twelve,  as  we  have  seen,
was  a  sacred  number),  or  the  number  of  the  prefects
was  suggested  by  that  of  the  tribes,  not  vice  versa.

We must, therefore, still hold that the traditional
number  of  the  tribes  is  due  to  a  hieratic  theory  respecting
the ancestor of the Israelites and his


7.  Another


sons. To  this  it  may  perhaps  be  ob-


. ,,  buiib.  u uiib IL limy pci  nli|j3

early  theory.  jected  lhat>  as  statjstics  Sh0w,  Israel  is
'  the  older  and  the  original  designation  of  the  tribes
united  by  Moses,'  4  and  that  the  OT  prose-writers  of  all
ages  use  '  Israel'  and,  less  frequently,  the  phrase  'b'ne
Israel,'  as  the  name  of  the  people.  If  this  may  be
taken  to  imply  that  Israel,  not  Jacob,  was  originally
regarded  as  the  name  of  the  ancestor  of  the  Israelites,
must  we  not  question  the  originality  of  the  representation
of  the  tribes  as  descended  from  sons  of  Jacob?  This
criticism  may  plausibly  be  supported  by  the  remark
that  '  Jacob  '  as  a  designation  of  the  whole  people  is
nowhere  found  in  prose-writings,  and  that  the  phrase
'  b'ne  Ta'akob '  occurs  only  twice  in  prose  literature,  viz.
— in  i  K.  1831  and  2  K.  17  34,  both  which  passages  are
to  be  assigned  to  redactors.  The  right  answer  perhaps
is,  not  that  'Israel'  was  preferred  to  'Jacob,'  as  the
higher  or  religious  name,  but  that  according  to  the
original  view  '  Israel  '  and  '  Judah  '  were  both  sons  of
Jacob5 — i.e. ,  of  Jarham  or  Jerahmeel.  For  the  earliest
accounts  of  the  historical  relation  between  Israel  and
Judah  exclude  the  idea  that  Judah  was  even  theoretically
regarded  as  a  part  of  Israel;  'Israel  and  Judah,'  as
B.  Luther  remarks,  '  are  opposed  as  two  equal  powers.'
If  this  relation  were  to  be  expressed  in  genealogical

1  Konige  (HK),  32  ;  cp  Gesch.  2  161  {Hist.  1 186).

2  GVI,  1  305. Ewald  and E.  Meyer  also  adopt  the  number
thirteen. Cp,  however,  Benzinger  and  Kittel  aii  loc.

3  The  section  62-8  [EV  422-28]  also  calls  for  the  application
of  a  keener  textual  criticism. See  SOLOMON,  §  6,  n.  i,  and  Crit.
Bib.

4  Staerk,  Studien  zur  Religions-  unif  Sprachgeschichte  des
AT,  2 70.

5  B.  Luther,  op.  cit.  32,  of  course  without  any  reference  to
Jerahmeel.

166  5205


TRIBES

style,  it  would,  in  accordance  with  analogy,  be  stated
that  '  Israel'  and  'Judah'  were  brothers,  and  precisely
such  a  genealogical  description  Luther  finds  unmistak
ably  implied  in  the  fierce  words  of  the  '  man  (i.e. ,  men  ;
t"N  collective)  of  Israel'  to  the  'man  (men)  of  Judah'
in  2  S.  1943  [44],  '  I  have  ten  parts  in  the  king,  and
moreover  I  am  the  firstborn  (1133,  as  <5)  rather  than
thou. ' *  It  was  not  till  long  after  the  breaking  up  of
Solomon's  kingdom  that  Judah  became  a  '  son,'  i.e. ,  a
dependent,  of  Israel.  The  genealogy  which  represents
Judah  as  a  son  of  Jacob  can,  it  would  seem,  have  arisen
only  at  a  time  when  Judah,  not  less  than  any  one  of
the  '  ten  tribes,'  owned  the  supremacy  of  the  central
Israelite  power,  and,  one  must  of  course  add,  when  the
identification  of  Jacob  and  Israel  had  been  effected  by
those  who  recast  and  refashioned  the  old  tradition.
Luther,  therefore,  holds  (p.  33)  that  '  the  genealogy  of
J,  if  not  his  own  work,  can  at  any  rate  not  be  much
older  than  the  time  of  Ahab,  when  Judah  became  the
vassal  of  Israel.'

To  accept  this,  however,  as  the  approximate  date  of
the  representation  of  the  tribes  as  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,
simply  because  in  the  forms  in  which  it  has  reached  us
Judah  always  appears,  is  somewhat  hasty.  It  is
possible  that  there  were  reckonings,  now  lost,  of  the
twelve  sons  of  Israel  in  which  Judah  was  not  included.
As  a  matter  of  fact  the  number  of  the  tribes  whose
origin  is  accounted  for  genealogically  by  JE  is  not
twelve,  but  thirteen,  so  that  if  we  take  away  '  Judah,'
the  number  left  will  be  twelve.  The  reckoning  which
underlies  JE  is  as  follows, —

(a)  The  Leah-tribes  (Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah)  .  4
(6)  The  Bilhah-tribes  (Dan,  Naphtali)  ....  2
Or)  The  Zilpah-tribes  (Gad,  Asher) 2

(d)  The  Leah-tribes  (Issachar,  Zebulun). . . .2

(e)  The  Rachel-tribes  (Manasseh,  Ephraim)  . . .2
(_/)  A  Rachel-tribe  (Benjamin) i


It  is  true,  there  is  evident  trace  (in  J)  of  an  earlier
arrangement,  which  included  Dinah  and  excluded
Benjamin.  This,  however,  does  not  affect  our  present
argument,  which  is  that  if  we  are  counting  tribes,  we
cannot  speak  of  Joseph,  but  only  of  Manasseh  and
Ephraim.  That  there  ever  existed  a  tribe  which  in
cluded  the  late'r  (?)  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  and  passed
under  the  name  of  Joseph,  cannot  be  shown  with  any
certainty;  we  cannot  appeal  to  Nu.  13 n  because  the
text  there  is  evidently  in  disorder  (see  JOSEPH  [TRIBE],
§  i,  n.  i).  Winckler's  conclusion  may  here  be
mentioned  without  of  course  committing  him  to  more
than  he  has  said.  '  That  Joseph  is  not  a  tribal  name,
but  a  genealogical  form  [creation]  is  proved  by  the
circumstance  that  his  domain  [Shechem]  is  in  possession
of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  who  therefore  has  to  be  Joseph's
son'  (GI,  268).  Mr.  Hogg,  on  the  other  hand",  thinks
that  not  improbably  '  Joseph  and  Ephraim  are  simply
two  names,  older  and  younger,  tribal  and  geographical,
for  the  same  thing'  (JOSEPH,  §  2).

We  may  here  refer  to  the  possibility  of  other  reckon
ings  of  the  tribes — ten,  eleven,  and  thirteen, (a)  Ten
sons  of  Israel  may  perhaps  be  referred  to
8.  Other jn  2  s.  19  43  (see  above). (£)  Eleven  sons
reckonings.  seem  to  be impljed by z  K.  H3i/,2
where  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  bids  Jeroboam  take  only  ten
of  the  rent  pieces  of  his  garment,  symbolising  ten  tribes,
because  one  tribe  was  to  be  left  for  Rehoboam. Kittel
indeed  alters  '  ten  '  into  '  eleven  '  (cp  v.  30),  whilst  €>  as
arbitrarily  reads  '  two  tribes '  for '  one tribe '  in  v.  32.

1  Budde,  however  (Sa»i.  KHC,  295),  thinks  it  safer  to  explain
thus ;  '  the  North  is  conscious  of  its  unity,  and  therefore  feels
itself  not  a  row  of  brothers  but  one  brother,  under  the  name
Israel,  as  opposed  to  Judah.'  On  the  reading  1133  see  Driver,
TBS,  ad  loc.

-  On  the  geography  of  the  statement  in  its  original  form,  see
SHILOH,  2.  It  may  be  added  that  in  Dt.  33  6-25  the  number  of
the  tribes  is  left  doubtful.  /'.  13  opens  with  the  words,  'And
of  loseph  he  said  ; '  this  implies  that  there  are  eleven  tribes.
But  v.  \ib  introduce.-  a  reference  to  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.

5206


TRIBES


TRIBES


Since,  however,  we  must  take  some  liberty  with  the
text,  is  it  not  least  hazardous  to  read  '  eleven  '  for
'  twelve  '  in  v.  30,  and  to  suppose  either  that,  as  in
Dt.  33,  Simeon  is  omitted,  as  having  early  disappeared,
or  that  Levi  is  omitted  as  not  being  a  territorial  tribe?1
(c)  The  adoption  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  by  Israel
(Gen.  48i3^i,  E)  makes  the  number  of  Jacob's  sons
thirteen  (see  above).  Similarly  the  sons  of  Joktan
(Gen.  1026-29)  and  Keturah'2  (Gen.  25  1-4)  appear  to  be
reckoned  as  thirteen.  T.  K.  c.

[As  to  the  different  biblical  arrangements  of  the
tribes,  it  is  strange  but  true  that  there  are  more  than
twenty.  In  the  following  section,  these  twenty  are
tabulated,  and  a  brief  indication  will  be  given  of  the
relative  influence  of  the  different  principles  that  govern
them.  The  earlier  and  more  interesting  extra-biblical
lists  are  included  in  the  examination.  For  a  fuller
treatment  see  G.  B.  Gray,  '  The  Lists  of  the  Twelve
Tribes,'  Exp.,  March  1902,  pp.  225-240.  It  will,  it  is
hoped,  become  abundantly  clear  that  in  spite  of  the
great  variety  of  arrangement  there  is  always  some
controlling  principle.]

The  twelve  tribes,  or  '  sons  '  of  Jacob,  are  mentioned

by name  together  some  twenty-five  times  in  OT  and

,  .  , . NT  ;  and  except  in  Nu.  2  7  10  14-29  the

treoeranhical  arranSement of the names is ahvays
ICal  different. In  all there  are  upwards of
orders  t-ff  -r^ *

twenty different arrangements. Early

extra  -biblical  literature,  such  as  the  Book  of  Jubilees
and  the  writings  of  Philo,  repeat  some  of  the  biblical
arrangements,  but  also  contain  fresh  variations.

In  Charles's  Book  of  Jubilees  (1902),  pp.  ijoff.,  the  text  of
the  dates  given  for  the  birth  of  the  several  children  is  discussed.
In  the  present  text  of  Juhilees,  the  hirth  of  Dan  is  placed  in
an  earlier  year  than  the  birth  of  Judah  ;  but  this  must  be  due
to  textual  corruption,  for  it  is  out  of  accord  not  only  with  the
order  in  which  the  tribes  are  mentioned,  but  also  with  the
express  statement  of  21  17  f.  There  are  several  similar  errors  in
the  text  of  Jubilees  and  later  works  dependent  on  it.

In  a  few  cases  where  the  tribes  are  mentioned  in
connection  with  the  conquest  or  distribution  of  the
country,  geographical  considerations  have  overridden
all  others;  and  in  two  other  instances  (Jos.  13  is/".  ,
i  Ch.  4-6)  these  considerations  constitute  the  main
principle  of  arrangement.  These  lists  are  not  included
in  the  following  table  and  may  be  briefly  discussed  at
once.  The  most  perfect  geographical  arrangement  is
found  in  Jos.  214-7  (CP  I  Ch.  654^)  :  here  the  tribes
are  mentioned  in  four  groups,  the  southern  first,  then
the  midland,  then  the  northern  and  then  the  eastern.
In  Nu.  34i8^  Judg.  1  and  Jos.  Ant.  v.  122  only  the
western  tribes  are  included  ;  the  order  of  mention  is
from  S.  to  N.  ,  but  in  Judg.  and  Jos.  Dan  is  mentioned
last,  either  in  consequence  of  its  subsequent  position  in
the  extreme  N.  ,  or  as  being  descended  from  a  hand
maid.  In  Jos.  13  15/  the  eastern  tribes  Reuben  and
Gad  are  treated  apart  (13),  but  in  the  discussion  of  the
western  tribes  (15  /.  )  a  strict  geographical  order  is  not
followed  ;  considerations  of  the  importance  of  the  tribes
appear  to  have  modified  the  tendency  of  the  arranger  to
follow  a  S.  to  N.  order.  In  i  Ch.  4-8  the  southern
tribes  Judah  and  Simeon  come  first,  then  the  three
eastern  tribes  and  the  rest  in  an  order  governed  by  no
obvious  principle.  The  one  common  feature  of  these
arrangements  is  the  marked  tendency  to  survey  the
tribes  from  S.  to  N.  ;  of  the  contrary  tendency  there  is
nowhere  the  slightest  trace.

The  main  considerations  that  have  governed  the
order  of  the  remaining  and  far  more  numerous  lists  of

i  r.  m\  the  tribes  are  obviously  the  traditional  order
10.  Other  r

,  of births and the several '  mothers or

'  wives  '  of  Jacob  from  whom  the  tribes
traced  their  descent.  On  this  account  these  lists  are
here  tabulated  by  means  of  symbols  that  will  show  at  a
glance  the  extent  to  which  these  principles  have  exerted

1  Cp  GENEALOGIES,  J  5  (on  the  reason  for  the  enumeration  of
the  priestly  tribe  of  Levi).

2  The  '  sons  of  Dedan  '  in  v.  3  are  interpolated.

5207


8. L1245  Rlh2  L6  Rla  rl  12  r2
o. L12  11  L-»S6  RJba2  rl  12  r2
10. L12  11  L«6  R1*M  rl  12  r2


their  influence  ;  so  far  it  will  speak  for  itself.  It  will
only  remain  to  consider  how  far  and  with  what  results
the  two  principles  conflict  with  one  another  and  what
other  influences  over  the  arrangements  can  be  detected.
The  two  wives  of  Jacob,  Leah  and  Rachel,  are  indicated  by
L  and  R  respectively  ;  Leah's  handmaid,  Zilpah,  by  1,  Rachel's
handmaid,  Bilhah,  by  r.  The  order  of  birth  from  the  same
mother  is  indicated  by  index  figures,  and  the  grandsons  of
Rachel  by  Joseph,  who  also  fall  to  be  considered,  by  an  ad
ditional  index  letter,  thus  :  —

L1 =  Reuben.  Rl =  Joseph.

Lln=Henoch  (eldest son of R'»=  Manasseh.
Reuben.  RU>=  Ephraim.

L2 =  Simeon.  R2  =  Benjamin.

L» =Levi.  rl =Dan.

L* =  Judah.  r2 =  Naphtali.

L' =Issachar.  11 =Gad.

L« =Zebulun.  12 =Asher.

The  sources  whence  the  lists  are  derived  are  indicated  to  the
right  hand,  the  references  are  given  at  the  foot  of  the  list.

!. L12M  r!2  112  L56  R12  JE.

2.  L12H465  rl  112  r2  R12  Early  Poem.

3.  Ll«  R21ba  L«5  11  r!2  11  Early  Poem.

4.  1.123456  R12  r!2  ]12  'p.

5.  L123456  R2  r!2  ]12  p.

6.  L123456  112  R12  r!2  p.

p.
p.
P.
P.
.  Ch.

12.  L1234B6  r2  Rll»2  rl  Ch.

13.  L«  112  r2  Rla  L2S56  R12  Rev.

14.  LI  24*5  Rlb»2  [I  rl  12  r2  ©.

15.  L12MS6  r!2112  R12  Jubilees.
jg. L1234S8  rl  112  r2  R2  *  philo.

17.  L2345R12| Ll]12L6rl2  D.

18.  rl  12  r2  Rl-b  L"  |  R2  L256  [I  Ezek.

19.  L«6  I L"  11  I Rlb«2  I  rl  [2  r2  p.

20.  L*  r2  U  I  L3  rl  L2  |  L156  |  L2  R2  Li» Jubilees'.

1.  Gen.  29  y.f.  -30  24  35  16  jr.  ; n.  iCh.  2i^C

Jubilees  28  11-24  ^  33.  12.  i  Ch.  27  i6_^

2.  Gen.  49.  13.  Rev.  7  ^ff.

3.  Dt.  33.  14.  Nu.  120-43  ©•

4.  Gen.  35  23-26  ; Jos. Ant.  15.  Jubilees  34  20  ; Test. jcii.

ii.  7  4  ;  Jubilees  23  22.  Patr.

5.  Ex.  1  1-5.  16.  Philo,  Drtat>is,Zt,  ;  Alleg.

6.  Gen.  46  9  Jff.  ; Jubilees  1  26.

4*13^7:  ;  cp  Nu.  20  (g.  17.  Dt.  27  12-14.

7.  Nu.  1  5-15.  18.  Ezek.  48  1-7  23-29.

8.  Nu.  13  4-15-  19-  ^>Tu.  2710  14-29.

9.  Nu.  i  20-43.  2O-  Jubilees  8  5  j£
10.  Nu.  26.

The  last  four  lists  (17-20)  are  somewhat  different  in
character  from  the  first  sixteen  ;  for  in  them  the  tribes
are  distributed  for  various  purposes  into  two  or  more
groups,  which  are  marked  above  by  the  perpendicular
line.

The  two  principles  that  have  obviously  influenced
the  various  arrangements  conflict  with  one  another  ;  for
the  sons  of  the  handmaids,  in  virtue  of  seniority,  come
between  the  first  four  and  the  last  two  of  Leah's  children.
Since  the  simple  order  of  birth  is  never  adopted  except
in  the  story  of  the  births,  the  tendency  to  group  the
tribes  according  to  their  respective  mothers  was  clearly
stronger  than  the  tendency  to  group  according  to  age.

Further,  the  least  departure  from  the  order  of  birth,
required  in  order  to  maintain  the  maternal  groups  in
tact,  would  be  to  place  the  children  of  the  handmaids
immediately  after  Leah's  six  children.  This,  however
(except  in  the  later  lists  —  NT,  Philo,  Jubilees),  is  a
comparatively  infrequent  arrangement  ;  far  more  fre
quently  the  children  of  the  full  wife  Rachel,  though
younger,  precede  the  children  of  the  handmaids.  An
obvious  cross  principle  is  adopted  but  once  (no.  6  ;  see
also  Nu.  26  @).

The  tendency  to  keep  the  children  of  the  two  full
wives  in  two  distinct  groups  is  far  stronger  than  that  to
keep  the  children  of  the  two  handmaids  distinct  ;  indeed,
a  tendency  to  keep  the  children  of  the  two  handmaids
in  two  distinct  groups  can  hardly  be  said  to  exist.  'I  he
handmaid  tribes  are  to  be  regarded  as  constituting  a
single  class  in  which  considerable  freedom  of  arrange
ment  prevailed.

It  will  only  be  possible  to  refer  briefly  to  some  of  the

5208


TRIBES

chief  apparent  or  real  violations  of  the  principles  just
indicated.

In  some  lists  Judah,  though  the  fourth  son  of  Leah,  stands
first  (13,  19,  20  ;  cp  Nu.  34  19  Josh.  21  4  and  other  geographical
lists). The  reason, it  can  scarcely  be  questioned,  is  the  pre- i
eminence  of  the  tribe.

In  the  camp  order  (19),  Judah  is  given  the  superior  eastern
position  ;  otherwise,  the  four  groups  are  constituted  and  arranged j
in  such  an  order  as  to  do  least  violence  to  the  principle  that
sons  of  the  same  mother  should  be  kept  together  and  in  the
order  of  their  birth. Since  Levi  is  necessarily  omitted  from  the
scheme,  Leah's  sons  fail  to  make  two  complete  groups  of  three, I
the  second  group  is  completed  by  Gad,  the  eldest  son  of  Leah's
handmaid. Lists  o,  10  seem  to  be  so  far  influenced  by  this  list  *
that  Gad  follows  Simeon. On  the  other  hand,  the  separation
of  Dan  from  the  other  handmaid  tribes  in  n  and  12  is  not  easy
of  explanation.

In  lists  2  and  3  Zebulun,  exceptionally,  precedes  Issachar.
As  both  these  lists  occur  in  poems  of  earlier  origin  than  JE,  it  is
possible  that  the  arrangement  represents  an  earlier  theory  of
the  relative  ages  of  the  two  tribes,  according  to  which  all  the
sons  of  Leah  were  older  than  any  of  the  sons  of  other  mothers,
Zebulun  was  older  than  Issachar,  and  the  relative  ages  of  the
handmaid  tribes  were  not  the  same  as  in  the  later  scheme.

Benjamin  precedes  Joseph  (R'21)  in  only  one  (no.  3)  of  the
twenty  lists ;  in  another  (no.  8)  it  stands  between  Ephraim  and
Manasseh  (Rlb'-ln).  Both  these  arrangements  are  extremely
anomalous,  and  each  occurs  in  a  list  that  contains  other  anoma
lies.  In  the  case  of  no.  8  the  anomalies  are  almost  certainly  due
to  an  accidental  transposition  in  the  text.  If  in  Nu.  13  in>.  n  f.
be  placed  before  w.  8_/T,  three  anomalies  are  at  once  removed
and  an  entirely  normal  list  restored  (L1'2456  Rl»b2  rl  [2  r2  ]l).  I,,
Dt.  33,  unless  the  text  has  suffered  very  serious  dislocation,  the
order  was  originally  altogether  anomalous.

In  no.  13  also,  a  simple  transposition,  by  which  7m.  $c6  should
be  made  to  follow  z>.  8  in  Rev.  7,  would  restore  a  far  more
normal  list  (L«-'356  Rl-'  112  r'2  R>)  where  Rl"  (Manasseh)  is  an
intentional  or  accidental  substitute  for  Dan  (r'2).

In  17  and  18,  and  to  a  much  slighter  extent  in  20,  the  tendency
to  maintain  the  traditional  groups  still  exerts  itself,  but  is
checked  by  other  considerations.  The  second  group  in  17  con
sists  of  the  tribes  whose  duty  it  was  to  curse  ;  the  tribes  selected
for  this  purpose  are,  not  unnaturally,  the  less  eminent  hand
maid  tribes  and  the  youngest  son  of  Leah  ;  why  Leah's  eldest
son  completes  the  group  is  not  clear,  unless  the  curse  pronounced
on  him  in  Gen.  49  has  influenced  the  selection.  In  Ezek.  a
similar  slightness  of  regard  for  the  handmaid  tribes  has  given
them  positions  most  remote  from  the  holy  district.

G.  B.  G.

The  problems  which  have  just  been  stated  and  illus
trated, differ in  their  degree  of  importance, and  the
r  t  most interesting of them advance but

slowly towards a satisfactorv solution.
theories: ,,,  • ,  •  • ' ,  •  • ,

_„.  .„  More  particularly, opinions are  divided

We  ausen.  relative  to  the  inner  meaning  of  the  first  list
of  the  tribes  (that  of  JE),  and  of  the  traditions  which  are
connected  with  it.  Ewald  long  ago  expressed  the  convic
tion  1  that,  rightly  understood,  such  a  list  must  convey
important  information  relative  to  the  '  pre-Egyptian
period  of  Israel's  history,'  and  we  may,  at  any  rate,
agree  with  him  that,  even  allowing  for  the  extreme
uncertainty  of  tradition  with  regard  to  details,  and  for
the  probability  of  the  intermixture  of  elements  derived
from  the  circumstances  of  later  ages,  something  of
value  may  be  obtainable  by  the  historical  critic  from
the  genealogical  narrative  of  JE.  Wellhausen  and
Stade  deserve  special  gratitude  for  the  acuteness  with
which  they  have  studied  both  this  and  the  other  tra
ditional  narratives  relative  to  the  origin  of  the  tribes.
According  to  Wellhausen,2  with  whom  Guthe  (GI7,
1899,  p.  41)  and  probably  Bennett  (Hastings'  DB,  s.v.
'Tribes')  and  Paton  (Syria  and  Palestine,  1902,  pp.
124,  138,  etc.)  agree,  the  original  Israelitish  tribes  were
seven  in  number,  six  of  which  belong  to  the  group
represented  by  Jacob's  wife  Leah,  and  one  to  that
represented  by  his  other  wife  Rachel.  It  was  the  latter
tribe — viz.,  Joseph,  which  (according  to  these  critics)
alone  sojourned  in  Egypt  (cp  EXODUS,  §  2).  The
combination  of  the  Leah  and  the  Rachel  tribes  was
probably  effected  by  Moses,  who  came  from  the  Sinaitic
peninsula  to  conduct  the  Hebrews  thither  from  Goshen.
The  sons  of  the  concubines  (Bilhah  and  Zilpah) — viz.,
Dan,  Naphtali,  Gad,  and  Asher — are  not  in  the  same
full  sense  sons  of  Jacob  or  Israel  ;  these  tribes  were

1  GVI(y\  1  wff.  (Hist.  1 362^).
8  //GW,  11-13,  18;  Prol.(*),  322-329.

5209


TRIBES

probably  of  very  mixed  origin,  and  joined  the  b'ne
Israel  later.  On  what  principle  the  Bilhah  and  Zilpah
groups  were  arranged,  is  not  clear.  Guthe  thinks  that
these  two  couples  of  tribes  had  come  into  specially  close
relations  with  Joseph  and  with  either  Reuben  or
Issachar  and  Zebulun  respectively,  and  that  this  was
expressed  genealogically  by  the  statement  that  their
mothers  were  the  handmaids,  in  the  one  case  of  Rachel,
in  the  other  of  Leah.  For  the  further  movements  of
the  tribes,  according  to  Guthe,  see  ISRAEL,  §  7.

Stade  1  is  of  opinion  that the  legend  of  Jacob  and
Joseph  in  its  present  form  presupposes  the  division  of

12  Stade  l^e  kingdoms.  Leah,  the  legitimate  but
'  slighted  wife,  represents  the  kingdom  of
Judah,  Rachel  that  of  Israel.  The  assignment  of  a
tribe  to  Leah  or  to  Rachel  depends  on  the  question
whether  the  tribe  came  earlier  or  later  into  the  country
W.  of  the  Jordan.'2  The  details  of  the  legend  cannot,
for  the  most  part,  be  interpreted  historically.  Bilhah
was  probably  connected  with  Rachel  for  geographical
reasons  ;  but  not  so  Zilpah  with  Leah.  Why  the
insignificant  Reuben  is  made  the  firstborn,  is  obscure.
'  If  the  precedence  given  to  Reulren  reflects  actions  of
this  tribe,  these  actions  must  go  back  to  the  most  re
mote  antiquity.'  Why,  too,  fire  Issachar  and  Zebulun
grouped  with  Judah,  and  Gad  with  Asher?  Here
again,  political  circumstances  may  be  reflected.  It  is
only  Joseph  and  Benjamin  whose  position  is  quite
clear  ;  they  reached  distinction  only  at  a  late  period.
Benjamin  branched  off  from  Joseph  (cp  28.  192i,  'I
[Shimei]  have  come  the  first  of  all  the  house  of  Joseph  ')
before  Joseph  split  into  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.
Dinah  is  merely  a  genealogical  creation.  She  represents
an  Israelitish  minority  in  the  population  of  the  Canaan-
ite  city  of  Shechem  in  the  pre-regal  period  (cp  DINAH,
§  i).  The  story  of  Dinah  (Gen.  34)  and  that  of  Tamar
(Gen!  38)  are  the  oldest  parts  of  the  tribal  legend,  and
indicate  on  what  lines  the  occupation  of  Palestine  really
proceeded.  In  the  formation  of  the  tribes,  not  only
the  vicinity  of  Israelite  clans,  but  the  intermixture  of
non-Israelitish  elements  were  important  factors.  As  we
find  them  in  the  historical  period,  they  arose  on  this
side  of  the  Jordan.  On  the  question  of  the  sojourn  in
Egypt,  Stade  is  in  agreement  with  Wellhausen.

A  new  impulse  has  been  given  to  these  inquiries  by

Steuernagel,  who  has  made  a  very  thorough  and  critical

„ „,  , studv  of  the  legends  of  the  immicra-

13.  Steuernagel.  tbn-of the £.ibes of Israel tnto


Canaan.3  According  to  him,  it  is  the  Rachel-tribes
which  have  the  first  right  to  be  called  sons  of  Jacob.
They  arose  through  the  fusion  of  the  '  genuine  Israel
itish  '  tribe  Jacob,  and  the  Aramaic  tribe  Rachel.  The
Jacob-tribe  thus  lost  its  independent  existence,  and  by
degrees  the  tribal  name  Jacob  gave  way  to  the  new
name  Joseph.  The  name  Jacob  itself,  however,  did
not  disappear.  The  facts  of  the  origin  of  the  Joseph-
tribe  led  to  the  traditional  statement  that  Joseph  was
the  son  of  Jacob  and  Rachel.  Steuernagel,  however,
also  seeks  to  throw  light  on  the  early  history  of  the
Jacob-tribe,  which  was  led  out  of  Egypt  by  Moses,  and
dwelt  in  the  eastern  steppe-country  to  the  S.  of  Canaan,
by  Sinai,  where  the  tribe  allied  itself  to  the  Horite  clan
Bilhan  (  =  Bilhah),  but,  together  with  other  tribes,  was
driven  further  by  the  Edomites,  who  had  formed  a

1  CF/1P)  145^:;  'Lea  und  Rahel,'  ZA  TIV\  112-116  ;  'Wo
enstanden  die  genealogischen  Sagen  uber  den Ursprung  der
Hebriier'?  ZA  TH'l  347-350  ;  '  Entstehung  des  Volkes  Israel,'
Akad.  Reden,  97-121.

2  ZA  TIV\  113. In  GVI\  147,  however,  Stade  cautions  us
against  looking  to  the  genealogical  legend  for  any  disclosures
as  to  the  course  of  events  in  the  immigration  into  Canaan. For
a  criticism  of  Stade's  view  on  the  combination  of  two  systems,
one  representing  them  as  wives  of  Jacob,  and  the  other  as  sons,
see  Steuernagel,  Die  Einivami.  gf.  ;  Robertson,  Early  Religion
of  Israel,  4997:

3  Die  Einu'anderung  der  Israflitischen  Stamtne  in  Kanaan
(1901). For  criticisms  of  this  able  work  see  Gunkel,  Gen  (2),
285;  J.  C.  Matthes,  'Israels  nederzetting  in Kanaan,'  Th.T
3tj  517^-:  [1902].

52IO


TRIBES


TRIBES


kingdom  to  the  N.  01  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  (Gen.
8631);  this  the  legend  describes  as  Jacob's  flight  from
Esau.  From  Mesopotamia,  where  the  fusion  with
'  Rachel '  took  place,  the  mixed  tribe  now  called
4  Joseph  '  was  pushed  by  Aramaean  tribes  (under  Assyrian
pressure)  southward.  On  the  N.  border  of  Gilead  the
Aramaeans  made  a  temporary  halt,  while  the  Jacob-
Rachel  tribe  occupied  N.  Gilead.  Not  improbably,  the
boundary  between  them  was  fixed  by  a  compact  near
the  Yarmuk.  '  If  this  be  correct,  it  will  follow,  not
only  that  the  migration  of  Jacob  should  receive  a  place
in  general  history,  but  also  that  it  is  to  be  assigned  to
the  fourteenth  century'  (p.  60).  The  story  in  Gen.
8221^-32  tells  of  the  duel  between  Jacob  and  the  god  of
the  conquered  N.  Gileadites.  '  Israel '  means  '  El  (  =
Yahwe)  fights,'1  i.e. ,  for  Jacob;  it  became  a  war-cry
and,  later  on,  the  name  of  the  people.  The  sequel  is
related,  according  to  Steuernagel,  in  two  forms — in  the
Jacob-story  and  in  the  Book  of  Joshua.  Attacks  of  the
Bedouin  tribes  (probably)  forced  the  Jacob-Rachel  tribe
to  cross  the  Jordan,  to  the  S.  of  the  point  where  the
Yarmuk  enters  it.  The  tribe  goes  to  Shechem,  where
it  acquires  land  by  payment  (a  reminiscence  of  ancient
payment  of  tribute  to  the  Shechemites).  The  narrative
in  Gen.  35  belongs  to  a  later  time  when,  as  a  conse
quence  of  the  extension  of  the  Rachel-tribe  to  the  S. ,
the  Benjamin  tribe  made  itself  independent.  The
Jacob- Rachel  tribe  now  disappears  ;  in  future  the  two
tribes,  Joseph  and  Benjamin,  appear  in  its  place.  In
the  legendary  style,  this  is  expressed  by  saying  that
soon  after  the  arrival  at  Bethel,  and  the  founding  of  a
sanctuary  there,  Benjamin  was  born,  and  Rachel  died.
As  to  the  Leah-Zilpah  tribes,  Steuernagel's  view  is  that
they  reached  Canaan  before  the  Jacob-Rachel  tribe,  and
came  into  connection  with  that  tribe  in  Canaan,  on
which  account  legend  represented  Leah  as  the  wife  who
was  foisted  upon  Jacob.

All  these  theories  are  ably  defended. The  least  satis
factory is the  third, precisely because it is  the  most
_  ... . elaborate, and aims at the fullest
f  ^f  historical  results. Almost everything

'  in  the  patriarchal  narratives  turns  out
to  be  a  typical  or  anticipative  history  of  the  settlement
of  the  tribes  in  Canaan.  Unfortunately  Steuernagel,
under  the  presence  of  theory,  has  here  and  there  to
alter  the  traditional  statements.  The  tradition  states
that  lacob  married  Leah  and  Rachel  at  the  same  time,
and  afterwards  Bilhah  and  Zilpah,  and  that  the  place
was  in  Mesopotamia.  This  critic,  however,  alters  the
order  of  the  marriages  and  the  places,  and  represents
that  the  Bilhah  tribe  joined  Jacob  in  the  S.  of  Canaan,
and  the  Rachel  tribe  in  Mesopotamia  ;  Leah  and  Zilpah
however  only  joined  after  the  immigration.2  This  is
one  great  drawback.  Another  is  that  Steuernagel  treats
his  traditional  material  very  undiscriminatingly,  the  con
nections  between  the  legends  being  made  as  much  use
of  as  the  legends  themselves.  For  instance,  the  order
of  the  events  related  in  Jacob's  progress  through
Canaan  surely  does  not  rest  on  early  tradition  ;  there
is  no  real  traditional  authority  for  placing  the  founda
tion  of  Bethel  before  the  death  of  Rachel  at  Ephrath.
Nor  does  Steuernagel  allow  for  the  probability  that  the
historical  circumstances  of  the  regal  period  have  found
a  reflection  in  the  patriarchal  legend,  and  throughout
he  shows  a  confidence  in  the  vitality  of  the  earliest
tradition  which  is  not  justified  by  the  experience  of
historical  critics  elsewhere.

But  even  Wellhausen's  and  Stade's  theories  cannot
either  of  them  be  accepted  without important  modifi-

1  Another  explanation  of  '  Israel '  is  offered  elsewhere  (p.  62).
But  both  '  El  fights'  and  'man  of  Rachel'  must  be  incorrect.
*?X  in  names  of  the  type  SniK"  does  not  mean  '  God,'  and  no
sound  analogy  can  be  offered  for  such  a.  tribal  name  as  ^m  t:"N>
out  of  which  Steuernagel  (as  an  alternative  theory)  doubtfully
brings  ^XTE"-

2  On  Steuernagel's  view  (p.  47)  of  the  traditional  representa
tion  of  the  Leah-Zilpah  tribes,  see  ZILPAH,  col.  5418,  n.  2.

5211


cations,  and  it  remains  for  future  investigators  to  use
the  works  of  the  three  eminent  critics  mentioned  rather
as  mines  of  suggestions  than  as  records  of  results.  Two
things  seem  to  be  required  in  order  that  we  may  take
a  genuine  step  forward.  ( i )  We  must  criticise  the
Hebrew  text  more  keenly  and  with  more  adequate
methods,  and  (2)  we  must  look  out  for  further  help  from
archaeological  research.  Many  perhaps  will  shake  their
heads  at  the  first  of  these  requirements.  But  without  a.
more  thorough  investigation  of  the  text  we  shall  not  be
in  a  position  to  use  archaeological  discoveries  aright
when  we  get  them.  Steuernagel  for  instance  refers
(113 /  ;  cp  ASHER,  §  i)  to  W.  Max  Muller's  statement
(As.  u.  Eur.  2T,f>ff.)  that  in  the  inscriptions  of  Seti  I.
and  Rameses  II.  a  land  of  Aseru  or  As(s)aru  is  often
mentioned  as  occupying  W.  Galilee.  It  is  true,  he
declines  to  lay  any  great  stress  upon  this,  though,  if  the
land  of  Aseru  were  named  after  the  tribe  of  Asher,  it
would  fit  in  with  his  view,  independently  obtained,  that
the  Jacob-Rachel  tribe  was  forced  by  the  Aramaean
migration  into  X.  Gilead  in  the  fourteenth  century  B.C.
Others,  however,  are  less  cautious.  Paton  (Syria  and
Pal.  126)  tells  us  that  '  in  an  inscription  of  Sety  we
meet  for  the  first  time  'A-sa-ru  (Asher),  a  Canaanite  or
Amorite  tribe  that  subsequently  was  adopted  into  the
Hebrew  confederacy,  and  was  classified  as  a  son  of
Jacob  by  his  concubine  Zilpah.'  Hommel  too  (AHT
228,  237)  thinks  that  the  Egyptian  notices  can  be
utilised  for  the  history  of  the  tribe  of  Asher.  All  this
is  precarious  until  the  Hebrew  texts  have  been  more
thoroughly  explored.  It  must  be  admitted,  indeed,  that
Hommel  (as  well  as  the  present  writer)  has  made  a
beginning  in  examining  those  OT  passages  which  may
have  a  bearing  on  the  origin  of  the  trite  of  Asher  ;  but
here  as  elsewhere  nothing  short  of  a  complete  survey  of
the  biblical  texts  (such  as  is  begun  in  portions  of  the
present  work  and  will  be  continued  and  completed  in
Critica  Biblica]  will  enable  us  to  give  a  fairly  satisfactory
solution  even  of  this  comparatively  small  problem.

Very  much  more  importance  is  attached  by  Steuer
nagel  to  the  references  to  people  called  the  Habiri  in  the
Tell  el-Amarna  letters  (cp  ASHER,  i,  §  i  ;  HEBER  ;
HEBREW  LANGUAGE,  §  i  ;  ISRAEL,  §  3).  These
Habiri  are  identified  by  Steuernagel  with  the  Israelites,
or  at  least  with  the  Leah-tribe.  This  too  fits  in  with  his
chronological  theory  ;  he  infers  from  it  that  the  Negeb
was  occupied  by  the  Leah-tribe  about  1400  B.C.,  and
that  the  extension  of  this  tribe  over  the  central  highlands
of  Ephraim  took  place  towards  1385.  Now  in  itself
this  dating  of  the  conquest  of  central  Canaan  is  plausible
enough  ;  it  approximates  to  that  given  more  vaguely  by
Winckler  in  1895*  (671 14).  It  must,  however,  be
stated  that  there  is  so  much  uncertainty  about  the
names  in  the  early  Hebrew  traditions,  and  such  tricks
are  constantly  played  us  by  the  ancient  narrators  who
use  the  same  name  in  different  senses  that  for  the
present  all  such  theories  can  only  be  put  forward  with
great  reserve.

It  may  be  stated  in  conclusion  that  this  is  the  reason
why  we  have  made  no  use  in  this  article  of  the  references
to  Israelitish  tribes  in  the  song  of
Deborah.  Negatively,  previous  critics
have  done  much  for  the  text  of  this  song — i.e. ,  they
have  pointed  out  many  corruptions  as  probable.  But
very  little  of  a  satisfactory  character  has  been  done  for
the  correction  of  the  text  ;  the  old  methods  have  once
more  proved  their  inadequacy.  Here  as  elsewhere  a
fresh  start  in  criticism  must  be  made  by  the  application
of  a  broader  text-critical  method.

We  are  also  precluded  from  taking  up  any  position

1  For  Winckler's  latest  statement  of  his  view  on  the  Habiri
see  AOFW  90-94.  Budde (The  Religion  of  Israel  to  the  'Exile
[1809],  6)  may  produce  an  impression  that  Winckler  identifies  the
Habiri  with  the  Israelites.  This,  however,  of  course  is  not  the
case.  Winckler  expressly  guards  himself  against  being  supposed
to  mean  that  the  Habiri  are  to  be  limited  to  '  Israelitish'  tribes
or  clans.

5212


15.  Conclusion.


TRIBUNAL

as  to  the  question,  what  traces  (apart  from  any  in  the
Jacob  legend)  the  narrative  books  contain  of  changes  in
the  dwelling-places  of  the  migrating  Israelitish  tribes.
A  number  of  such  traces  are  pointed  out  by  Steuernagel.
Asher,  for  instance,  according  to  this  critic  (p.  30),  may
once  have  dwelt  on  what  was  afterwards  the  border-
region  of  Ephraim  and  Benjamin.  Issachar  and
Zebulun  (p.  12),  dwelt  anciently  in  the  central  highland
country  (Mt.  Ephraim).  Dinah,  Simeon,  and  Levi
(p.  14^)  were  once  settled  near  Shechem  in  Mt.
Ephraim.  (Steuernagel  might  plausibly  have  referred,
in  proof  of  Simeon's  having  belonged  to  N.  Israel,  to
2  Ch.  log  ;  see,  however,  Crit.  Bib.  on  Is.  97-104).
Reuben  (p.  15)  once  had  his  home  NE.  of  Judah,  in
what  was  afterwards  Benjamite  territory.  All  these
problems,  however,  assume  a  fresh  aspect  as  the  result
of  a  continuous  text-critical  investigation  of  the  Hebrew
texts.  To  enter,  at  this  point,  on  a  piecemeal  examina
tion  of  selected  passages  would  require  too  great  an
extension  of  this  article,  and  the  conclusions  would  not
have  the  best  chance  of  making  a  due  impression  on  the
reader.

The  special  articles  in  this  work  on  the  tribes,  on  the  tribal
'  mothers,'  and  on  Jacob,  should  be  consulted.  The  conclusions,
sometimes  tentative,  may  not  always  be  in  harmony,  but  in  the
present  unsettled  condition  of  the  subject  this  could  not  be
otherwise.  The  present  writer  is  responsible  for  the  view  that
the  first  war  of  Israel  was  for  the  possession  of  the  Negeb,  and
that  much  in  the  OT  which  has  been  supposed  to  refer  to
districts  of  Canaan  proper  really  refers  to  the  '  Holy  Land  of
the  Israelites' — the  Negeb,  or  N.  Arabian  border  land.  For  a
full  critical  monograph  on  the  tribes  of  Israel  see  'Die  Israeli-
tischen  Stiiinme,'  by  B.  Luther,  ZA  Tlf  21  1-76  [1901]  ;  cp  also
Bennett's  article  'Tribe,'  in  Hastings'  DB  vol.  iv.

T.  K.  C.,  §§  1-8 11-15  I G.  B.  G., §  gf.

TRIBUNAL (KPITHPION  : i  Cor.  624 RV"'£-  ;

same  word  also  in  Jas.  '26,  EV  'judgment  seat,'  and  in  Ex.  21  6,
Judg.  •>  10  [not  <J3A],  Sus.  49  [Theod.,  not  ©**"]  ;  in  i  K.  7  7  for
QSlTp,  mispdt  and  in  Dan.  7  10  26  for  j"1!,  din,  T\  Kpurts  (5s"  in
~i.  26).  Cp  GOVERNMENT,  §  16,  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,  §  ^Jf.

TRIBUNES,  MILITARY  (xiAiARXOi),  Rev.  19  18,
RV"'i>'-  See  ARMY  (' chiliarch'),  §  10.

TRIBUTE. See  TAXATION,  and  cp  SOLOMON,  §  6.

TRIPOLIS  (TpirroAlC  [VA]).  It  was  at  the  haven
at  Tripolis  (TOV  KO.TO,  'fpin-oXiv  At/u^cos)  that  Demetrius
I. ,  son  of  Seleucus,  mustered  the  '  mighty  host '  and
'fleet1  of  which  we  read  in  2  Mace.  14 iff.  Cp
MACCABEKS,  §  5.  As  its  name  indicates  (see  PHCKNICIA,
§  21,  col.  3759),  Tripolis  was  divided  into  three  quarters
(separated  by  walls)  ;  it  had  been  founded  (not  earlier
probably  than  700  B.C.)  by  Aradians,  Tyrians,  and
Zidonians,  and  in  Persian  times  Zidon,  Tyre,  and  Aradus
held  a  federal  council  in  it.  From  197  B.C.  onwards  it
belonged  to  the  Seleucid;e  ;  but  towrrds  the  end  of  that
period  it  fell  under  usurpers  or  '  tyrants, '  and  was  plagued
by  robber  tribes  from  whom  it  was  delivered  by  Pompey
in  64  (see  PHCKNICIA,  §  22,  col.  3763-4).

The  modern  Tripoli  or  Taritbulus,  on  the  river  Kadisha  or
Abu  'Ali,  is  situated  in  a  fertile  maritime  plain  covered  with
orchards  and  dominated  by  a  castle  overhanging  a  gorge  of  the
river,  some  parts  of  which  are,  perhaps,  the  work  of  the
crusaders.  The  port  (el  Mind)  is  about  2  m.  distant,  on  a
small  peninsula  (see  PHOENICIA,  map).

TRIUMPH.  Twice  the  Roman  'triumph'  is  referred
to  figuratively,  and  if  the  general  meaning  in  one  passage
(Col.  2 15)  is  plain,  in  the  other  (2  Cor.  214)  it  is  by  no
means  plain.  God,  we  are  told  in  Col.  I.e.,  '  triumphed
over '  the  angels  opposed  to  Christ  in  the  henceforth
annulled  bond  of  ordinances  which  had  been  directly
hostile  to  men,  and  so  had  justified  those  angels  (who  had
in  fact  promulgated  those  ordinances?)  in  their  opposi
tion.  The  words  are — dtrfKSv(rd/j,evos  rdj  dpxds  Kdl
TO.S  f^ovaia?  edeiy/j,dri(rei>  ev  Trapp-rjffiq.,  tfpia/x/iewras
atfroi's  kv  avrip,  which  the  RV  renders,  '  having  put  off
from  himself  the  principalities  and  the  powers,  he  made
a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it. '
In  2  Cor.  I.e. ,  however,  the  rendering  is  disputed.  The
words  are — rep  de  8e<f>  x&P1*  T<?  Trdfrore  OptanftfuovTi

KO.I TT]V 6<T/J.T]V T7JS 7«'W<7eWS O.VTOU

5213


TROAS

(paffpovvri  81'  TJ/J.UV  iv  WQ.STI  r^irtf,  which  the  RV
renders,  '  but  thanks  be  unto  God,  which  always  leadeth
us  in  triumph  in  Christ,  and  maketh  manifest  through
us  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  in  every  place,1  whilst
the  AV  gives  to  fyua/u/Seitafrt  the  sense  '  causeth  (us)
to  triumph,'  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  causative
sense  does  not  appear  elsewhere.  But,  unless  we
desert  the  paths  of  natural  exegesis,  how  can  God  be
said  to  lead  Paul  and  his  companions  in  triumph  ?
Does  not  Si'  •^ucDi/  in  the  following  clause  prove  that
Paul  himself  is  supposed  to  be  a  member  of  the
triumphal  procession  ?  Another  point  has  to  be
mentioned.  J.  C.  M.  Laurent  has  pointed  out  that
w.  i2/.  do  not  help  our  comprehension  of  the  context  ;
according  to  him,  they  are  a  marginal  note  (by  Paul
himself)  on  the  statement  in  1 16.  '  The  subject  of
dyvoovftev  (v.  n)  and  the  nominative  of  r/yuas  (r.  14)  are
the  same  man,  the  apostle.  The  verb  (tpia.fj.jlei'oi'Ti  is
excellently  accounted  for  by  the  avrov  which  precedes
in  v.  ii.'  It  is  over  Satan  that  Paul  'triumphs.'  The
reference  to  a  '  sweet  odour '  which  follows  harmonises
with  the  figure  of  the  'triumph.'  For  during  a
triumph,  sweet  spices  were  burnt  ;  as  Plutarch
(^Emil.)  says,  the  streets  were  dv/j.ia.fjLdTwv  ir\7jpeis.
Paul's  preaching  of  God,  or  of  Christ,  is  as  penetrating,
as  all-pervading,  as  the  smell  of  incense.  It  was  a
brave  sight — that  of  a  Roman  triumph — and  worthy  to
be  chosen  by  such  an  enthusiast  for  Christ  and  his  victory
as  Paul.  '  Rome  was  en  fete,  the  streets  gay  with  gar
lands,  the  temples  open.'  The  procession,  it  is  true,
presented  reminders  that  the  Christian  principle  was  not
yet  supreme.  The  best  part  was  the  end,  when  '  on
reaching  the  temple  of  Jupiter  on  the  Capitol,  the  general
placed  the  laurel  branch  (in  later  times  a  palm  branch)
on  the  lap  of  the  image  of  the  god,  and  thus  offered  the
thank-offerings'  (see  EB,  art.  'Triumph').

TROAS  (TROJAC,  Ti.  WH,  Acts  168  n  205  2  Cor.
2 12/1  2  Tim.  4  13).

The  full  name  of  the  town  was  Alexandria  Troas  ('AAef  dv&peia

17 Tpuxis, Strabo, 581; Ptol.  v.  2  4  ; Liv.  8642. The order

17 Tpcoa? 'AAefarSpeia is found in Polyb.  5  in).

1.  Name. One or other part of the full form was very

commonly  used  to  designate  the  place  (Alexandreia
in  Strabo,  599  et  pass.  ;  cp  Polyb.  078.  Troas  alone  in  NT,
and  Pliny,  HN,  b  33,  ipsaquc  Trans).1  Troas  is  simply  an  ad
jective,  which  distinguishes  the  '  Trojan  Alexandria '  from  the
many  other  towns  called  after  the  great  conqueror.  Ap

parently  the  simple  17  Tpu>a?  is  not  used  by  Greek  writers
before  the  NT  period,  as  leading  to  ambiguity.  For  17  Tpwtx?
is  the  correct  Greek  equivalent  fc-  '  the  Tread  ' — i.e.,  the  region
between  Mt.  Ida  and  the  Hellespont,  which  was  the  centre  of
the  Trojan  power  in  Homeric  tradition.  The  '  Troad  '  (as  the
word  is  adopted  in  En  ^lish)  was  spoken  of  by  the  Greeks  as
•>;  Tpoia?  from  the  time  at  least  of  Herodotus  (5  122).  In  2  Cor.
2  12  eis  TT\V  Tp<adSa  might  therefore,  so  far  as  form  goes,  mean
'to  the  Troad'';  but  of  course  the  word  Alexandria  must  be
supplied  to  limit  the  phrase  to  the  city  in  question — unless  we
are  prepared  here  to  insist  that  Paul  really  meant  the  Troad
and  did  not  confine  his  visit  to  the  Troad  Alexandria.

Alexandria  Troas  (mod. Eski-Stambui)  was  an  im
portant town and harbour on the coast of yEolis
_,. .  (Mysia) or NW. Asia Minor, opposite

2.  History. the SE extreniity of the island of

Tenedos  ;  it  was  half-way  between  Sigeium  and  Cape
Lectum  (which  cape  was  rounded  by  the  ship  in  passing
from  Troas  to  Assos,  Acts  20 13).  Alexandria  was  built
by  Antigonus,  who  gathered  to  it  the  population  of  the
neighbouring  small  townships — Scepsis,  Cebren,  Nean-
dreia,  Larisa,  Kolonai,  Hamaxitos,  and  Chrysa  (Strabo,
604;  cp  593  597).  The  town  was  first  named  Antigonia
Troas,  after  its  founder  ;  but  subsequently  Lysimachus
changed  this  to  Alexandria  Troas  (Strabo,  593  ;  Pliny,
f/N533,  'Troas,  Antigonia  dicta,  nunc  Alexandria,
colonia  Romana').  The  importance  of  the  city  is  seen

1  Many  varieties  are  found  —  y  r!av  'A\e£av6pf<av  n-dAi?  in
Polyb.  21  10 f.  In  an  inscription  at  Delphi  (Ditten.  ,S>//.i-',  268
=  Michel,  Recueil,  655)  we  have  Tpios  an-b  'A Aef av&peiax  followed
almost  immediately  by  'AAefai/fipeus  ex  ras  Tpwafios.  In  Strabo,
134,  we  find  'AAe£di'5peia  Trjs  TpwaSos,  just  as  in  Paus.  x.  124  we
have  'AAefai>6peia  17  tv  rfj  Tptad&t.


TIT

rences.


TROGYLLIUM

from  the  fact  that,  in  the  negotiations  of  Antiochus  the
Great  with  the  Romans  before  the  battle  of  Magnesia,
the  Syrian  king  offered  to  surrender  '  the  territories  of
Lampsacus  and  Smyrna  as  well  as  Alexandria  Troas,
which  were  the  original  cause  of  the  war  '  (Polyb.  21  13)  ;
its  extensive  ruins,  which  for  long  have  served  as
a  quarry,  bear  testimony  to  its  importance  and
prosperity.  After  the  defeat  of  Antiochus  the

Great,  Troas  fell  inio  the  hands  of  the  Romans  and
experienced  many  benefits  from  them.  It  was  one  of
the  few  Roman  colonies  in  Asia  Minor  (Strabo,  593  ;
cp  run.  HN,  l.c  '.  \'i  dated  from  the  time  of  Augustus  ;
hence  the  coi.;  ear  the  Latin  inscription  COL.  TROAD.  ;
COL.  ALEX.  TRO.  :  or  COL.  AUG.  TRO.  ,  from  which  we
may  infer  the  name  '  Colonia  Alexandria  Augusta
Tioas.'1  Julius  Caesar  was  credited  with  a  design  of
removing  the  capital  of  the  Roman  world  to  this  place
(Suet.  Jui  79),  and  perhaps  Horace  (Od.  iii.  857)  hints
at  the  same  design  on  the  part  of  Augustus  (cp  also
what  is  sa'd  of  Constantino  before  he  fixed  upon  the
site  of  Cnnstaiii.iiople,  Zosim.  2  30  ;  Zonar.  183).
Augustus,  Hadrian,  and  Herodes  Atticus  contributed
to  the  beautification  of  the  city.  Herodes  Atticus  built
the  aqueduct  of  which  remains  can  still  be  seen,  and
ihe  baths  ,vere  also  probably  his  gift  (see  on  the  baths
Koldewey,  in  A  then.  AJitth.  9  367.).

Through  Troas  in  Roman  times  ran  the  coast  road
which  encircled  the  peninsula,  and  thus  there  was  direct
anc^  easy  commun'cat'on  with  the  interior
by  way  of  Adramyttium. From  ADRA-
MYTTIUM  |(/_  ^  )  a  road  ran  NE  to  cyzicus

on  the  Propontis,  and  thence  towards  the  Bithyhian
frontier  :  a  road  also  ran  southwards  to  Pergamos.
The  former  of  these  roads  may  well  have  been  in  the
main  that  followed  by  Paul  when  he  found  it  impossible
to  penetrate  into  Bithynia  (Acts  167/i  )  ;  but  the  scanti
ness  of  the  record  here  reduces  us  to  conjectures  which
gain  but  little  strength  from  the  later  traditions  (see
Ramsay,  Church^,  488,  Expos.,  Oct.  1888,  p.  264;
April  1894,  p.  295).  Similarly,  when  Paul  was  obliged
to  retire  from  Ephesus  (Acts  20  1)  to  Troas  (2  Cor.  2  12),
he  may  have  gone  either  by  sea,  or  by  the  coast  road
which  led  through  Adramyttium  (more  probably  the
coast  road,  if  the  circumstances  of  the  departure  from
Ephesus  are  taken  into  account).  The  importance  of
Troas  in  the  itineraries  of  the  time  in  this  region  is
shown  by  the  references  in  2  Cor.  2  12  and  Acts  20  5  —
ships  passing  in  either  d'rcction  were  certain  to  put  in
at  Troas.

In  order  to  clear  up  all  ambiguity,  perhaps  reference  should
here  be  made  to  a  neighbouring  town  which  also  bore  the  name
of  Troy,  Nmnun  Ilium,  which  is  quite  distinct  from  Alexandria
Troas.  Novum  Ilium  (Grk.  Ilion)  claimed  to  occupy  the
veritable  site  of  Homer's  Troy,  and  all  antiquity  allowed  this
claim  (cp  Herod.  "43;  Strabo,  594;  Diod.  IS  4  ;  Xen.  Hell.
i.  n  .i)  until  it  was  disputed  by  Demetrius  of  Scepsis  followed  by
Strabo;  the  discoveries  of  Schliemann  have  settled  the  question
i'1  the  affirmative.  In  Alexander's  time  the  site  was  a  mere
.ortified  post  only  occasionally  occupied  ;  but  he  designed  the
restoration  of  the  town  —  a  restoration  finally  effected  by
Lysimachus.  Having  been  destroyed  by  Fimbria  in  85  R.c.  ,  the
town  vas  once  "nore  restored  by  Sulla  (Appian,  Ulithr.  53)  as
a  favoi  red  city  exempt  from  tribute  (Pliny,  ffJV5  33,  cp  Tap.
Ann  12  58,  '  ut  Ilienses  omni  publico  munere  solverentur,'  in
53  \.D.).  This  generosity  on  the  part  of  the  Romans  was  due
to  their  fond  belief  that  the  city  was  the  original  birthplace  of
their  race  ;  intrinsically  the  town  was  of  no  importance  at  all
(cp  Tac.  Ann.  4  55)  and  in  this  respect  was  a  great  contrast  to
Alexandria  Troas.  \V.  J.  W.

TROGYLLIUM  (rpcorYAAiorsi,  Acts20is  [TR],
whore,  for  TTApeB&Ao/v\eN  eic  CAMON.  TH  Ae

eXOMGNH  HA0OMGN  eiC  MlAHTON  [WH],  the  TR
has  TTApeBAAOMeN  GIC  CA.MON  KAI  MGINANTeC  eN

TpcoryM'W  TH  exo/weNH  K.  T.  A.  [For  rpcorYAAiu)
there  is  the  variant  TpoOfY^'W'  which  's  apparently  to
be  preferred  :  see  WH  2  App.  98  n.]),  Acts  20  15  AV,
RVms  (see  end).

1  In  the  time  of  Caracalla  the  coins  bear  the  additional
epithets  '  Aurelia  Antoniniana.'  See  Head,  Hist.  Nmmn.  470.  '

S2IS


TROPHIMUS

The  island  of  Samos  is  separated  from  the  mainland
by  a  channel  now  called  the  Little  Boghaz,1  formed  by  the
overlapping  of  its  eastern  promontory  Poseidium  (Cape
Colonna]  with  the  western  spur  of  Mt.  Mycale  which
was  called  Trogylium2  (now  Cape  Santa  Maria).  The
channel  is  about  one  mile  wide  (Strabo,  636,  iiriKarat  5£
Tri  Za/tup  [sc.  Mii/caAr;  TO  6/)osJ  Kal  Trote?  irpos  a.M]»
(irfKfiva  rfjs  fpuyt\Lov  Ka\oiifj.tvris  d/cpa?  tiaov  eirra.-
ffTddtov  iropd/j.6i>).  Strabo  (I.e. )  also  explains  that
Trogylium  is  a  spur  (&Kpa  wpowovs),  of  Mt.  Mycale  and
that  facing  it  there  was  an  island  of  the  same  name.
Pliny  (//^V53?)  names  three  '  insulfe  Trogiliae,' viz. ,
Psilon,  Argennon,  and  Sandalion.  The  anchorage  of
Trogylium  must  have  been  well-known  to  sailors,  for
Strabo  uses  it  as  a  point  from  which  to  measure  the
distance  of  cape  Sunium  in  Attica  (1600  stades  to  the
W. ,  ibid.  •  the  two  points  lie  practically  on  the  same
parallel  of  latitude).  According  to  the  maps,  there  is  an
anchorage  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  point,  called  St.
Paul's  Port  (see  Adm.  Charts,  1530  and  1555).

Paul  sailed  through  this  channel  on  his  way  to  Jeru
salem  at  the  close  of  his  third  missionary  tour.  After
leaving  the  latitude  of  Chios  the  ship  ran  straight  across
to  the  eastern  point  of  Samos  (Tra.pffid.\ofjLei>  in  t'.  15  need
not  imply  stoppage  at  or  off  the  harbour  of  Samos
which  lies  4  or  5  m.  distant  to  the  west  of  Trogylium  :
cp  Thuc.  832).  The  night  was  spent  in  the  anchorage
of  Trogylium,  and  Miletus  was  entered  in  the  morning
(see  MILETUS).  It  is  certain  that  there  must  have  inter
vened  a  night  between  Chios  and  Miletus,  and  this  can
have  been  spent  only  at  Samos  or  at  Trogylium.  The
omission  of  the  reference  to  Trogylium  by  the  great
MSS  may  be  due  to  the  idea  that  wapfj3d\o/j.fv  eis  ~La.fi.ov
implied  a  stoppage  during  the  hours  of  darkness  at  that
port  ;  this  idea  may  have  been  strengthened  by  the
existence  of  the  variant  ((nr^pa  for  ertpq.  in  v.  15,  for  by
implying  that  the  passage  to,  or  arrival  at,  Samos  was
postponed  to  a  somewhat  late  hour,  it  made  the  further
progress  that  same  night  to  Trogylium  impossible.
The  western  text  undoubtedly  here  preserves  a  true
reading,  and  the  reference  to  Trogylium  should  be
retained  (omitted,  except  in  margin,  by  RV  :  '  touched
at  Samos  ;  and  [RVn'£-  many  ancient  authorities  insert,
' '  having  tarried  at  Trogyllium  "]  the  day  after  we  came  to
Miletus.'  See  MILETUS,  §  2.  W.  J.  W.

TROOP. The  words  so  rendered  are  :

1.  13,  gad,  Gen.  30  n  Is.  65  n  ;  see  FORTUNE,  GAD,  §  i.

2.  1113,  gidud,  2  K.  623,  etc., 'band'  (<5BA  fiovo^iavoi, ©L
Treiparai). See  ARMY,  §  3.

3-  n?AN>  ''iguitdah,  2  S. '.»  25,  RV  '  band  '. See  above.

4.  rrn,  hayyah,  2  S.  23  n  Ps.  OS  n  fio]. See  HDB.

5.  rnx, 'oral;, Job  6 19, RV CARAVAN (?."'.). See also
TRADE,  §  83  \b  /3]  col.  5195.

6.  Dr^,  rekeb,  Is.  21  7  RV. Cp  CHARIOT,  §  i.

TROPHIMUS  (rpO(J>iMOC  [Ti.  WH]i,  an  Ephesian
disciple  and  companion  of  Paul,  seems  to  have  been
with  him  in  Greece  during  his  third  missionary  journey,
and  along  with  Tychicus  preceded  the  apostle  to  Troas,
where  he  was  joined  by  Paul  and  his  party  on  their  way
to  Syria.  Trophimus  was,  apparently,  a  Gentile,  and  a
mistaken  impression  that  he  had  been  introduced  into  the
temple  proper  by  Paul  led  to  the  uproar  which  resulted
in  Paul's  being  taken  into  custody  and  ultimately  trans
ferred  to  Cassarea  and  Rome  (Acts  204  2129).  The
allusion  to  Trophimus  in  2  Tim.  4 20  ('Trophimus  I
left  at  Miletus  sick ')  is  one  of  several  which  have  made
it  necessary  to  postulate  certain  journeys  of  Paul  of
which  the  NT  contains  no  direct  record,  if  the  genuine
ness  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles  is  to  be  maintained.


1  The  Great  Boghaz  is  on  the  W.  of  Samos,  separating  that
island  from  Icaria.  and  varies  from  3  to  8  m.  in  width  ;  this  is


5216


TRUMPET

The  name  of  Trophimus  closes  the  lists  of  '  the  seventy'  by  the
Pseuclo-  Dorotheas  and  Pieudo-Hippolytus,  which  state  that  he
suffered  martyrdom  at  Rome  along  with  the  apostle.

TRUMPET, i. Hi?-  ^ren> c&ArrirS.  Lev.  2824,

etc. See  HORN,  Music,  §  5  a.

2.  "isip,  sophiir  (i.e.,  'ram's  horn';  Ar.  saivafir,  cp  Egypt.
thupar,  Ass.  sapparu, '  wild  goat  '  and  deriv.  of  yffbfl,  below),
Judg.  7  16,  etc.,  xeparuT)  (roO  craAn-uJ'eii',  7  20). See  Music,  §  5  a.

3.  "ISXn, msin, hiisoser, hasi>sfrah, <raAiri-y£  , i  Ch.  15  24
2  Ch.  5  12  76  13  14  2928t. See  Music,  §  5  b.

4.  ^y,yol>el—i.e.,  '  ram's  horn,'  so  Ex.  19  13,  RV»ig-,  oroA7riy|.
See  Music,  §  s«  and  cp  JUBILEE.

5.  In  Ezek.  7  14  MT  has  yipna  Wpn,  rendered  in  EV  '  they

have  blown  the  trumpet'  ((B  o-aATriVarr  [iv]  emATnyyi);  J'ipn,
tii&M',  however,  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  sense  of  trumpet.
Cornill,  therefore,  followed  by  Toy,  proposes  to  read  yipn  1J,'pn>
'  blaset  nur.'  See  Music,  5/',  end.

6.  '"ijflin,  Ptii'ah,  Nu.  20  i,  etc.,  see  TRUMPET-BLOWING.


TRUMPET  -BLOWING,  DAY  OF  (rumjjl  D1\
EV  'day  of  blowing  of  [AV  insert  'the']  trumpets'  ;
HMep*.  CHMACI&c;  dies  clangoris  ettubaritm:  Nu.
29i),  or,  MEMORIAL  OK  ('n  |VGT  ;  MNHMOCYNON
CA.ATTirr^N  •  memariale  clangentibus  tubis  :  Lev.
2824).  According  to  Lev.  2824  P  Nu.  29  i  P2,  the  first
day  of  the  seventh  month  was  to  be  '  a  day  of  solemn
rest  '  on  which  '  no  servile  work  '  was  to  be  done,  a  holy
convocation,  a  day,  or  memorial,  of  Frii'ah.  See
further  JUHILEE,  §  i,  NEW  MOON,  NEW  YEAR,  YEAR
§  8  (near  end),  and,  on  the  shape  of  the  ritual  trumpets,
Music,  §  5  (cp  fig.  10).

The  word  terfiah  is  used  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  joyful
shouting  (Job  8  21  Ecclus.  39  15  [Heb.]  i  S.  4  5  Ezra3ni3  Nu.
23  21),  sometimes  in  that  of  the  battle-shout  or  alarm  of  war
(Am.  1  14  Jer.  4  19  492  Josh.  65  20).  Nu.  316  speaks  in  this
connection  of  '  the  trumpets  for  the  alarm  '  (nynnri  miSXn)-
That  t'ruah  in  the  passages  cited  means  'trumpet-blowing'
(cp  Nu.  10  10  Ps.  276  S9i6  [15])  follows  from  the  law  which
enjoined  that  trumpets  were  to  be  blown  at  each  new  moon.

TRUTH. The  Heb.  HOX, 'imeth  (  VJOS, 'to  be
firm'),  requires  to  be  rendered  differently  according  to
\ H  h d  l'le  context  • tne  l^V,  sometimes  so  need-
Gk t  l"-ssly  addicted  to  a  variety  of  rendering,

is  here  as  needlessly  consistent  in  its
adherence  to  the  rendering  '  truth.'  As  a  general  rule,
'faithfulness,'  'trustworthiness,'  'permanence'  'sure-
ness,'  'sincerity,'  are  at  least  as  likely  to  be  the  right
rendering  of  'Zmeth  as  '  truth  '  ;  indeed,  where  'Smettl  is
spoken  of  as  a  divine  attribute,  we  may  constantly
substitute  '  faithfulness  '  for  the  '  truth  '  of  EV.  In  the
NT  a  different  group  of  renderings  is  called  for.  The
X  r  was  not  written,  nor  were  the  discourses  on  which,
ultimately,  portions  of  it  are  based,1  spoken  in  biblical
Hebrew  ;  it  is  a  Greek  book,  though  with  more  or  less
Semitic  colouring.  Besides  this,  the  religion  which  its
writers  support  was  a  struggling  religion  ;  its  writers
are  conscious  of  antagonism  to  other  forms  of  religion
which  has  a  direct  bearing  on  the  sense  or  senses  in
which  they  use  the  word  d\y0et.a.  A  complete  examina
tion  of  passages  containing  the  word  '  truth  '  in  the  EV
is  impossible.

A  few  may,  however,  be  referred  to,  and  alternative,  even  if
inadequate,  renderings  may  usefully  be  suggested.

Gen.  32  10,  '  I  am  too  small  for  all  the  lovingkindnesses  and
for  all  the  faithfulness  '  etc.  ;  Ex.  1821,  '  trustworthy  men  '  ;  Dt.
32  4,  '  a  God  of  faithfulness  '  (so  RV)  ;  i  K.  2  4  2  K.  20  3,  '  walk
in  sincerity  '  ;  2  K.  20  IQ,  '  peace  and  permanence  '  ;  Ps.  25  5,
'  Direct  me  with  thy  faithfulness  '  [personified]  ;  Ps.  31  5,  '  faith
ful  God  '  ;  Ps.  51  6,  '  Thou  desirest  sincerity  '  ;  Ps.  So  10,  '  Loving-
kindness  and  faithfulness  are  met  together  '  (similarly  always,
for  'mercy  and  truth');  Ps.  119142,  'Thy  law  is  sureness  (itself)';
Is.  42  3,  'he  shall  declare  the  law  faithfully  ';  Jer.  63,  'Are  not
thine  eyes  upon  sincerity?'

Both  in  OT  and  in  NT  the  duty  of  truth-speaking  is
urged,  and  the  Psalter  shows  how  deeply  the  teaching
of  the  prophets  had  penetrated  Jewish  minds.  This  is
one  of  the  points  in  which  Judaism  and  Zoroastrianism
manifest  their  inward  affinity.  The  substitution  of

1  Cp  Dalman's  remark,  Die  Worte  Jesu,  15  (foot),  16  (top).
S2I7


TRUTH

'  faithfulness  '  for  '  truth  '  in  no  degree  obscures  this  ;
and  of  course  there  are  passages  enough  in  which
'  truth '  is  the  only  possible  rendering  of  ' Imeth  (e.%.  Ps.
152  Prov.  87  1217192823  Dan.  812).  In  Dan.  812  the
'  truth '  spoken  of  is  apparently  the  religion  of  Yah  we.
No  complete  parallel  to  this  occurs  in  the  XT,  because
'  the  truth  of  the  gospel '  (Gal.  2  5  14)  is  not  bound  up
with  an  elaborate  cultus,  but  is  simply  life  in  Christ.
Certainly  this  life  is  impossible  without  an  act  of  obedi
ence  to  the  divine  will.  There  is  a  lawgiver  who  bids
us  repent  and  believe,  in  order  that  we  may  have  life
in  Christ.  Consequently  we  have  the  singular  phrases,
'  those  who  disobey  the  truth  '  (ro?s  .  .  .  direiOovai  Trj
d\i)0flq.,  Rom.  28)  and  'those  who  do  not  obey  the
gospel '  (rots  /LIT;  vira.Kovov<ri  T$  fvayyeXi^,  2  Thess.  18).
The  difficulty  in  grasping  the  sense  to  be  assigned  to
d\r)0fia  is  greatest  in  the  Johannine  gospel  and  epistles.

o "v  '0 ,•„  T- This  and  the  connected  forms  occur
2.  aAfiOeia,  in  Ju.

not less than  eighty times m this

literature.  The  writer's  individuality  is  very  manifest
in  this  ;  he  is  almost  like  a  Zoroastrian  in  his  intense
love  of  truth  and  hatred  of  falsehood.  '  The  father  of
the  liar  is  the  devil  in  whom  there  is  no  truth,'  he  says
(Jn.  844).1  And  in  the  address  of  a  letter  to  friends  he
thinks  it  worth  while  to  say  '  whom  I  love  truthfully '
(iv  dX-rjOfiq,  2  Jn.  i).  This  hatred  of  shams  suggests  the
peculiar  form  of  his  theology  or  Christology.  Christ  is
ij  d\-r)0«a  (Jn.  146)  ;  he  is  full  of  d\T)0ei.a  (Jn.  1 14).
How  shall  we  render  aXr/Ofia  ?  As  Jn.  146  shows,  it  is
one  aspect  of  fwij,  '  life, '  and  as  its  combination  with  656s,
'way,'  in  that  passage  and  with  x<*P<s>  '  liberality,'  in  Jn.
1 14  shows,  it  is  something  which  God  in  and  through
Christ  generously  communicates  to  man.  It  is  therefore
not  a  bundle  of  intellectual  truths  ;  it  is  a  share  of  the
divine  nature ;  it  is  real  as  opposed  to  seeming  existence.
d\rj0eia  then  is  strictly  '  reality,'  and  '  full  of  grace  and
truth  '  means  '  full  of  self-communicating  divine  life '  ;
or,  in  plainer  English,  'full  of  a  gift  of  real  life."3
Certainly  this  can  be  given  only  to  those  who  have  some
inward  affinity  to  it,  to  those  at  least  who  are  hungry
for  'the  bread  of  life'  (Jn.  635).  Such  persons  are  'of
the  truth,'  ex  TTJS  d\r)0eias  (Jn.  1837  ;  cp  e*r  TOU  Oeov  847) ;
it  is  their  destiny  to  become  free  ;  the  '  truth,'  manifested
in  the  Son,  can  make  them  free,  make  them  '  sons  of
God  '  (Jn.  832  36  1 12,  cp  Rom.  821).  The  work  of  Jesus
is  to  '  bear  witness  of  the  truth'  (Jn.  1837)  ;  and  when
he  '  goes  away  to  the  Father '  he  will  ask  the  Father  to
send  a  never-failing  representative  of  himself,  '  the  spirit
of  truth'  rb  irvfvfj.a.  TTJS  d\t)0eias  (Jn.  14  17).  This  'spirit'
also  bears  witness,  because  the  spirit  is  17  aX-fjdtia.  (truth
itself),  i  Jn.  56.  Still  the  fact  remains  that  it  is  'he
that  has  the  Son'  that  'has  life'  (i  Jn.  Sis),  and  the
Son  (i.e.,  the  Christ),  even  when  he  has  'gone  away,'
'  comes '  to  the  disciples,  indeed  to  each  individual  dis
ciple  (Jn.  14  1821).  The  spirit  of  dXrjQfia,  therefore,  by
abiding  in  the  disciples,  enables  them  to  '  behold '  him
(ffewpelre,  Jn.  14 19)  in  a  degree  in  which  this  would
otherwise  be  impossible.  And  through  this  supreme
vision,  they  will  make  ever  fresh  progress  in  '  life '  and
in  'reality'  (Jn.  14 19).

To  return  to  this  d\r)0(La  or  'reality.'  It  has
primarily  to  do  with  moral  life  ;  it  is  not  an  idea  to  be
thought,  but  a  deed  to  be  done  (Jn.  629,  TO  tpyov  TOV
0eov,  'the  work  which  God  wills';  Jn.  821  i  Jn.  16
iroielv  TTJV  d\riQeia.v}.  Its  opposite,  when  so  regarded,
is  'to  practise  ill,'  or  'to  walk  in  darkness,'  for  the
writer  has  almost  a  Zoroastrian's  love  of  the  symbol  of
Light  (see  LIGHT).  But  '  reality '  extends  from  the
moral  to  the  intellectual  sphere.  There  is  but  one

*  Lachmann's conjecture  ( Test. Gr. 2, Pnef. p.  vii)  of  av
XaAjj  TO  i^euSos  should  probably  be  accepted  ;  '  Whoever  speaks
a  lie  speaks  of  that  which  is  his  own,  for  his  father  also  is  a
liar.' The  verse  now  becomes  intelligible. It  belongs  probably
to  the  editor,  who  rightly  explains  VT.  41,  44  (cp  v.  55).

-  The  »cai'  in  x°-P-  Kal  <*Ar/0.  is  the  /ecu  e.vpliccitivum. So,  in
Jn.  4  24,  iv  jri/ev/ixaTt  <cai aArjflei'o means  '  in the spirit, with
reality.'

53l8


TRYPHENA


TUBAL


•  Light '  (Jn.  14),  and  in  bearing  witness  of  this  '  Light '
the  '  spirit  of  reality '  is  insensibly  led  on  to  the  dis
closure  of  great  intellectual  truths.  '  He  shall  teach
you  all  things '  (Jn.  1426),  '  shall  guide  you  in  the  whole
truth'  (Jn.  1613),  the  truth  of  the  primeval  Reason
(\6yos),  and  also  the  truth  of  things  that  are  to  come
(Jn.  \iff.  1613) — in  accordance  with  the  longing  of  the
primitive  age  for  an  apocalypse  of  the  winding-up  of
the  world.  There  is  one  other  writing  in  which  dXijtfeta,
real  as  opposed  to  merely  speculative  truth,  is  specially
prominent — the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  Certainly
a\ri0eia  is  still  somewhat  restricted  in  its  application.
The  full  scope  of  'real  truth'  is  so  wide  that  it
needed  another  name  —  ao<(>la.,  'wisdom,'  or  •yptDo'ij,
'knowledge.'  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning
of  wisdom,  said  the  wise  man  of  old  ;  this  fear  of  the
Lord  to  the  Christian  teacher  is  a\r)0tia.  To  it
StKcuoffwri,  'righteousness,'  and  offiuTys,  'piety,'  are
ascribed  (Eph.  424);  and  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is
'in  righteousness  and  reality'  (Eph.  f>9).  'The  word
of  real  truth  '  (rbv  \6yov  rrjs  d\i)6fias)  is  the  '  Gospel  of
your  salvation'  (Eph.  113;  cp  2  Tim.  2 15).  Hence
disciples  are  '  taught  in  Christ,  even  as  real  truth  is  in
Jesus'  (Eph.  421).  Naturally,  truth-speaking  is  one  of
the  chief  duties  of  such  disciples  (Eph.  425),  but  only  as
one  expression  of  that  '  truth  '  or  '  reality  '  which  is  the
first  part  of  their  'panoply'  (Eph.  614).  In  Eph.  4  15
d\rj0€i'fiv  et>  dydiry  (RY  'speaking  truth  [mg.  dealing
truly]  in  love')  means  more  than  'speaking  truth
charitably '  ;  it  is  both  speaking  and  practising  that  real
truth  which  Christ  embodied.

The  use  of  the  adjectives  (dXr^s,  d\7)6ivos)  should
also  be  studied.  Both  are  specially  frequent  in  the

, >\ a, lohannine Gospel and Epistles. Note

3.  a\Ti6T)s,

dX^cvds  ii  "P^fy  >'  6"- ''»}'  flesh is  a true
J ,  meat a\r)0T]s  fern  ppuais — t.e., 'a  food

which  really,  permanently  nourishes '  ;
Jn.  1  9  '  the  very  light '  ( '  very  '  as  in  the  Nicene  Creed,
'very  God'  —  0e6s  dXijtfii'os),  'the  true  light'  TO  <pZs
rb  d\T](hi>oi' ',  In.  15 1  'the  vine  rightly  so-called,'  r/
&/u.tre\os  ij  d\rj0ivr/ ;  Jn.  17  3  'the  only,  veritable  God,'
TOV  fjLovov  d\rjdivbv  Oeov.  Trench :  compares  Plato,
Tim.  251?,  7^X0.70?  6vruis  d\r)6ivbs  TTOVTOS,  'an  ocean
worthy  of  the  name.'  But  Hebrew  has  similar  phrases,
npx  'nSx,  tithe  'fmeth,  '  a  real  God  '  (2  Ch.  15s)  ;
npx  cnS,  I  them  'fmeth,  'true,  unfeigned  hospitality,'
net*  ^v  ton,  htsed  set  'fmeth,  '  true,  unfeigned  charity  '
(quoted  in  Jastrow,  Diet.  79).  dXrjdiv 6s  is  also  frequent
in  Revelation,  but,  except  in  87,  always  with  the
meaning  '  trustworthy. '

The  use  of  dXrj&pos  (EV  'true')  in  Jn.  lg  423  15,
etc.  Heb.  82  (cp  (@  Jer.  2  21  dXrjQivriv  =  nsx  I'll)  is  very
characteristic  of  the  writers'  belief  in  heavenly  patterns
of  earthly  things.  Wycliffe  has  the  fine  phrases  '  a
verey  light,'  'a  verrei  vyne,'  '  the  verrei  tabernacle'  ;
but  in  In.  423  '  trewe  worshippers. '

On  the  Johannine  use  of  aAijSeio  (reality)  see  H.  Holtzmann,
NT  Theol.^-y]%\  Wendt  (Die  Lehre  Jesu,  2  200  ff.)  gives  the
term  perhaps  too  prominently  an  ethical  sense  ('  righteous ').
Further,  on  the  presuppositions  of  the  Johannine  term,  see
Holtzmann,  op.  cit.  '2  374 _/C  T.  K.  C.

TRYPHENA,  or  rather,  as  in  RV  Tryphsena
(TPY<J>AINA).  and  Tryphosa  (TPY<J><JOCA),  'who  labour
in  the  Lord,'  are  saluted  in  Rom.  16 12.  They  appear
to  have  been  deaconesses,  and  not  improbably  were
sisters.

The  name  Tryphosa  is  met  with  in  Carian  inscriptions  (cp
C/(72  2819  2839),  and  among  the  monuments  of  the  imperial
household  in  the  first  century ;  Tryphfena  appears  in  the
apocryphal  Acts  of  J'aul  and  Thecla  as  the  wife  of  Polemo
king  of  Cilicia.  Gutschmidt  has  shown  that  there  really  was  a
queen  of  that  name,  of  Mauretanian  origin  ;  she  was  repudiated
by  her  husband  Polemo  II.  of  Cilicia  about  40  A.D.  She
afterwards  lived  under  the  emperor  Claudius  in  Roman  territory
at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  (see  Lipsius,  Apokr.  Ap.-Gesch.  3  464-5).


New  Test.  Synonyms,  31.
5219


TRYPHON1  (TpY<t>u)N  [AKV]  ;  cp
Waddington,  no.  2711  and  perhaps  p£"lL5  the  name  of
a  Rabbi  upon  a  Hb.  inscr.  quoted  by  Euting,  SBA  W
i6th  July,  1885,  no.  47),  of  Apamea,  formerly  an  ad
herent  of  Alexander  Balas,  took  advantage  of  the  dis
affection  prevailing  among  the  troops  of  DEMETRIUS  II.
to  obtain  the  person  of  ANTIOCHUS  (q.v.  4),  the  young
son  of  Balas,  whom  he  used  as  a  puppet  to  gratify
his  personal  ambitions.  Supported  by  the  soldiers  of
Demetrius,  Tryphon  was  enabled  to  defeat  his  rival  and
win  over  Antioch  (  i  Mace.  1  1  39  ff.  ).  The  allegiance
of  Jonathan  and  the  Maccaboean  party  was  gained
(vv.  57  ff.  ),  and  his  position  became  gradually  stronger.
At  last  he  was  able  to  throw  over  Antiochus  ;  but
fearing  lest  the  power  of  the  Maccabees  might  be
inimical  to  his  interests,  he  found  it  necessary  to  march
against  Jonathan.  They  met  at  Bethshan,  and,  by  a
stratagem,  Jonathan  was  captured.  Taking  his  prisoner
with  him  Tryphon  proceeded  to  Jerusalem,  but  was
intercepted  at  Adida  by  Simon,  Jonathan's  brother.
Tryphon  pretended  that  the  detention  was  due  to  the
non-payment  of  revenues,  and  thus  obtained  a  ransom
for  his  prisoner,  whom,  however,  he  failed  to  hand
over  ;  and,  at  last,  irritated  by  two  futile  attempts  to
reach  Jerusalem,  slew  Jonathan  at  Bascama  (143  B.C.;
181-23);  see  JONATHAN.  Tryphon's  next  step  was  to
seize  the  throne,2  a  proceeding  which  resulted  in  Simon
and  Demetrius  II.  forming  an  alliance  against  their
common  enemy  (1831  ff.\  When  Demetrius  was  a
prisoner  in  Persia  his  younger  brother  (Antiochus
Sidetes)  continued  the  struggle,  and  Tryphon  was  forced
to  flee  to  Dora,  and  thence  by  successive  stages  to
Ptolemais,  Orthosia,  and  finally  to  Apamea,  where  after
a  brief  reign  of  three  years  he  perished  (Jos.  Ant,
xiii.  72).  See  SELEUCID^K,  §  14.

TUBAL  (^R^3Fl;  9oBeA,  once  [A  Ezek.  39i]
GoBep  I  once  [Ezek.  27  13]  H  CYMTTACA  [H],  TA
C[Y/V\]TTANTA  [A;  see  also  Q'"i>'-  Ezek.  8226  882];
Thubal]  and  MESHECH  (^L"»  ;  Sam.  7L"1£,  "pID  ;

MOCOX  [m  Ezek.  27  13.  TA  TTApATeiNONTA];  Mosoch).
We  shall  first  of  all  collect  the  exegetical  data  presented
in  MT,  and  state  the  current  theory  based  upon  these
data  ;  we  shall  then  endeavour  to  put  the  question  in
a  new  critical  light.  As  the  text  stands,  Tubal  and
Meshech  are  always  mentioned  together
excePl  in  Is-  6619  (but  see  ©),  where
Tubal  and  Javan  are  mentioned  together
as  distant  nations,  and  in  Ps.  1205,  where,  strangely
enough,  '  Meshech  '  (©  e/jLaKpi'vOi])  is  ||  to  '  Kedar,'  the
second  in  order  of  the  sons  of  Ishmael,  and  in  i  Ch.  1  17
(om.  <SB)  where  Meshech  is  introduced  as  last  in
order  of  the  sons  of  Shem.  In  Ezek.  27  13  Tubal  and
Meshech  appear  as  supplying  Tyre  with  slaves  and
vessels  of  brass.  In  8226  they  are  among  the  nations
which  have  gone  down  to  Shfiol  —  i.e.  ,  have  suffered
some  great  reverse.  In  38  2/.  (fj.ecrox  [BQ].  HO<TOK
[A  v.  3])  39  1  (fj.effox  [BJ)  they  are  mentioned  as  under
the  rule  of  Gog.  Since  Bochart  they  have  been
usually  identified  with  the  Moschi  (fioffxot)  and  Tibareni
(Tiflaprivoi)  who  are  named  together  by  Herodotus
(894  7  7).  In  the  Ass.  inscriptions  (see  Schrader,
A'ATW  82  ff.,  KGT  \^  /.;  Del.,  Par.  250^;
Winckler,  GBA  172)  their  territory  is  extended  farther
S.  than  in  Herodotus,  the  Tabali  up  to  Cilicia,
and  the  Muski  NE.  of  the  Tabali.  According  to
Gelzer  and  Schrader,  a  part  of  the  Tabali,  together
with  the  Muski,  had  been  driven  N.  by  the  Gimirrai
(the  Ki/j./u.4pioi  ;  see  GOMER)  to  the  seats  where  they
were  in  the  time  of  Herodotus.  Asur-bani-pal's  in
scriptions  report  that  the  tribute  of  Tabal  consisted
entirely  of  '  great  horses.'  Cp  HORSE,  §  3  (Tabal  was
close  to  Cilicia).

1  This  name  (which  means  defrauchf)  was  given  to  Diodotus,
for  that  was  his  real  name,  after  his  victoiy  over  Demetrius  II.

-  Whether  he  really  slew  the  young  king  at  this  juncture  (so
i  Mace.  1331)  is  uncertain  ;  see  Ca»tl>.  Bible,  ad  loc.

5220


TUBAL-CAIN

It  so  happens, however, that all the passages in

which  Tubal  and Meshech  are  mentioned  are  among

2 A  N  those which labour under  a strong

Arabian  Tubal  ?fuspicion  ofuhaving  been  manipulated
by  editors,  who  approached  the  already
corrupt  texts  with  most  inaccurate  preconceived  opinions.
In  the  true  text  of  Is.  66 19  the  nations  referred  to  are
probably  those  which  bordered  on  8.  Palestine,  viz.,
Ashhur  (Geshur),  Zarephath,  Jerahmeel,  Cusham,
Tubal,  Jaman  ;  the  names  are  used  conventionally,
and  drawn  from  earlier  sources.  '  Cusham '  cor
responds  with  the  pocrox  of  (§,  and  means  the  N.
Arabian  Cush  (see  GUSH,  2).  'Tubal,'  as  '  Tubal-
kain '  (where  -kain  [see  TUBAL-CAIN]  is  equivalent  to
1  Kenites ')  the  name  of  a  son  of  Lamech  (=  Jerahmeel),
suggests,  is  a  N.  Arabian  ethnic  ;  we  meet  with  it  in
i  K.  1631  under  the  disguise  of  SjnriN  (see  PROPHET,
§  7,  col.  3862,  n.  i),  and  in  Is.  76  under  that  of
TABEAL  [q.v.  ],  and  there  is  an  echo  of  it  in  the  name
of  the  patriarch  Bethuel,  in  the  place-name  Bethul  (Josh.
194),  also  in  Tob  (land  of),  and  in  the  personal  names
TEBALIAH,  TOBIEL,  TOBIJAH.

Ps.  1205  has  been  very  much  misunderstood  ;  but  none  of  the
critical  commentators  affects  to  suppose  that  the  explanation
which  he  gives  is  quite  satisfactory.  The  reference  to  N.
Arabian  oppression  in  the  Psalms  is  so  pervasive  (see  PSALMS,
§§  28Jf.)  that  we  cannot  hesitate  to  read,  '  Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn
in  Cusham'  (for  parallels  see  SHECHKM).  On  i  Ch.  1  17  see
below.  In  Ezek.  27  13  the  right  reading  is  approximately  'Jaman
(or  Jamin  =  Jernhmeel),  Tubal,  and  Cusham.'  Their  merchandise
is,  besides  'vessels  of  brass  (or,  bronze),'  not  'human  persons,'
but  ivory  (read  D'TSrqt?,  cp  i  K.  10  22).  In  Ezek.  32  26  '  Tubal '
and  '  Cusham  '  (so  read)  are  beyond  doubt  N.  Arabian  peoples  ;
'  Asshur  '  and  '  Elam,'  or  rather  Ashhur  and  Jerahmeel,  precede,
'Edom'  and  'the  Zidonians,'  or  rather  '  Edbm '  and  'the
Misrites  '  follow.  In  38  2  311 1  Gog  is  the  representative  of  the
collective  N.  Arabian  power  —  the  '  Zephonite  '  of  Joel  2  20;
'  Tubal '  and  '  Cusham  '  are  again  required.

We  have  reserved  for  the  end  the  Chronicler's  repre
sentation  of  Meshech  as  a  son  of  Shem  in  i  Gh.
Ii7  (MOO-OX).  In  Gen.  1023  MT  gives  MASH  (q.v.).
Critics  (e.g. ,  Kittel,  Benzinger)  agree  in  rejecting  the
Chronicler's  reading.  In  truth  'Meshech'  is  wrong,
but  not  more  wrong  than  '  Meshech '  in  v.  5.  The
right  reading  in  both  passages  is  'Cusham.'  The
same  names  occur  in  Gen.  10  from  which  the  Chronicler
borrows  more  than  once.  The  significance  attached  by
critics  to  the  Table  of  Nations  is  out  of  all  proportion
to  its  real  worth.  See  Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  c.

TUBAL-CAIN  (ft?  talfl  ;  9oBeA  [AEL] ;  Tubal-
cain),  one  of  the  sons  of  Lamech  (Gen.  422)^.  See
CAINITES,  §  10,  where  the  view  is  taken  that  Tubal-cain
is  a  humanised  god  (cp  Gunkel,  Gen.  48,  '  vielleicht
verklungene  Gotter'?),  and  the  text  is  emended  in
accordance  with  Kautzsch  and  others,  omitting  t^n1?
(lofes  =  a  hammerer??)  and  inserting  <3N,  'father  of.'
The  theory  of  a  N.  Arabian  Tubal  (see  TUBAL,  §  2),
however,  compels  us  to  recommend  another  view  in
preference.  Tubal-cain  =  Tubal  of  Kain  —  i.e. ,  the
Kenite  Tubal — is  the  eponym  of  a  N.  Arabian  people
of  mercantile  habits,  who  brought  '  ivory  and  vessels  of
brass  '  to  the  market  of  the  great  Misrite  capital  (cp  Jer.
15 12,  as  explained  under  ZAPHON).  That  the  home  of
Tubal  is  in  N.  Arabia,  we  cannot  pause  here  to  show
(see  TUBAL,  §  2) ;  but  the  result  seems  unassailable.
The  mysterious  word  eraS  (MT  lote!)  can  now  be  ex
plained.  Like  pp,  it  is  a  collective  term  for  a  N.  Arabian
people — viz.,  the  LETUSHIM,  mentioned  in  Gen.  25s
among  the  sons  of  Dedan,  between  the  Asshurim  ( =
Ashhur  or  Geshur)  and  the  Leummim,  or  rather  the
Jerahme'elirn.  The  name  of  the  third  son  of  Lamech
(i.e.,  Jerahmeel),  therefore,  is  possibly  Tubal  of  Kain
and  Letesh  (to  distinguish  him  from  any  other  Tubal).
The  alternative  is,  not  any  of  the  renderings  mentioned
by  Dillmann  and  Delitzsch,  but  a  still  more  searching
criticism  (see  Crit.  Bib. ).

©  has  KOI  ty  instead  of  Koti/ ;  originally  perhaps  it  had  all  three
5221


TUNIC

words.  «ai  i)i>  would  make  up  for  the  loss  of  '3N,  which  analogy
requires  us  to  supply.  Cp  Budde,  Urgesch.  iy)f.

T.  K.  C.

TUBIENI  (ToyBiANOYC  [V]),  2  Mace.  12i7,  RVmB
'  men  of  TOB  '  (q.v. ).

TUMOURS  (D^Dtf),  i  S.  56  9  12  64/.  n  17  RV,  AV
EMERODS  (q.v. ).

TUNIC  occurs  only  in  Dan.  821  for  the  Aram.  ET3E)
(see  BREECHES,  2),  and  in  Jn.  1923  RVme  for  XITWI/,
(EV  'coat');  but  '  tunic '  admirably  suits  the  Heb.
kuttoneth,  runs,  from  which,  indeed;  the  Lat.  tunica
has  possibly  arisen  by  metathesis  through  the  medium
of  the  Greek  y^riav  (cp  PHOENICIA,  §  7).

The  Hebrew  kuttoneth  (of  uncertain  derivation  ;  but
cp  probably  Ass.  kitinne,  linen,  cloth  ;  see  Zehnpfund,
1.  Ordinary  Be*tr-  z-  ^ss-  Iss^).  commonly  rendered
tunic  'coat,'  was  a  short,  sleeveless  garment
worn  next  the  body  and  held  together
by  a  girdle  of  linen,  leather,  etc.  (GIRDLE,  2).  As
a  garment  for  females  it  was  doubtless  longer,  and
appears  to  have  answered  to  the  simlah  worn  by  men
(in  Cant.  53  it  is  put  off  at  night-time);  see  MANTLE.
The  kuttoneth  has  evidently  been  derived  in  the  first
instance  from  the  GIRDLE  (i),  and  in  Gen.  821  is  a
simple  covering  made  of  skins.  In  later  times  it  was
made  of  wool  or  flax,  but  would  naturally  vary  in
fineness  according  to  the  wearer's  taste  and  means.
Besides  being  a  priestly  garment  (see  below,  §  2),  the
kuttoneth  is  worn  also  by  men  of  distinction  as  an
official  '  robe'  (Is.  222i  EV).  A  distinctive  garment  of
this  nature  is  implied  in  Joseph's  kithdneth  passim,
C'D3  ruha  (Gen.  87323  32),  which,  as  we  learn  from  a
gloss  in  2  S.  13 18,  was  worn  also  by  the  maiden
daughters  of  a  king.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  long
garment  with  sleeves  (cp  RV'"H-  Gen.  I.e.), — thus  re
sembling  the  Ionian  xLr(^v  — and  was  perhaps  of
Canaanite  origin.1  It  is  difficult  to  determine  from  the
monuments  whether  an  inner  garment  or  tunic  was
worn  as  well  as  the  outer  robe  or  mantle.  On  the
whole,  everything  points  to  a  very  general  simplicity  in
matters  of  dress.  See  further  MANTLE,  §  i.

Other  varieties  of  the  tunic  were  adopted  by  the  Jews
in  the  Roman  period  (DRESS,  §  4  end),  among  them
the  hdlfik  (niSn),  an  under-robe  reaching  to  the  heels.

1  T

It  was  commonly  made  of  wool  ;  but  linen  and  even
papyrus  was  used.

The  Greek  xn-wv  2  (in  NT  'coat,'  Mt.  lOio  Acts939
etc.  ;  'garments,'  Jude  23),  like  kuttoneth,  is  applied  to
an  under-garment  and  thus  distinguished  itself  from
l/jLanov,  the  richer  outer  garment  (see  MANTLE).  This
forms  the  point  of  the  Logion  in  Mt.  640  ;  it  is  other
wise  in  Lk.  629,  where  the  transposition  (xiT-  'coat'
following  I/Mar.  '  cloke  ')  indicates  the  order  in  which
the  garments  would  be  torn  off.  In  its  appearance  the
Xtrujj/  was  sometimes  a  short  woollen  shirt  without
sleeves  (Dorian),  and  sometimes  a  long  linen  tunic
reaching  to  the  feet  (Ionian);  see  Diet.  Class.  Ant.,
s.v.  '  Tunica '.

The  kuttoneth  was  worn  by  all  priests  (Ex.  298  40 14
Lev.  813  10s).3  It  was  made  of  fine  linen  and  is  de-

2  Priestlv scr'bec^  by  Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  7 2)  as  a  fine
tunic linen  vestment  dtirXrjs  <Ttvd6i'os  fivvaiv-ris

called  xe^o/i^fr;,  from  x^ov  'linen.' It

1  Sleeves  appear  to  be  referred  to  also  in  Is.  52  10  Ezek.  4  7.
Joseph's  'coat  of  many  colours'  ('pieces'  mg.)  is  highly  im
probable  and  must  be  given  up,  although  with  regret.  05  seems
to  mean  (as  in  Aram.),  palm  (of  hand)  or  sole  (of  foot);  so  ®
(in  Sam.)  \iTfav  (caprrioros  [BA,  Aq.],  \.  acrrpayaAajTOS  [L],
\.  xetpiSwTos  [Sym.].  See  also  Nestle,  ZNTW  1902,  p.  169,  who
suggests  the  meaning  'seamless  coat,'  and  points  to  the  parallel
with  Jn.  19  23.

'•2  In  ©  it  regularly  renders  MM,  but  also  112  (thrice),  and
(once  each)  ~IO  (see  DRESS),  and  TJ-'D  (MANTLE,  §  2  [6]).

3  Plur.  of  all  the  priestly  garments,  Ezra  2  69  Neh.  770  72  EV
'garments';  cp  X'TWI^J  Mk.  1463  EV  'clothes.'

5222


1.  Varieties.


TUEBAN

reached  down  to  the  feet  (iro5?j/)7js)  and  fitted  close  to  the
body,  and  had  sleeves  which  were  tied  fast  to  the  arms.
The  garment  was  girt  to  the  breast  by  a  girdle  (cp
GIRDLE,  5),  and  had  a  narrow  aperture  about  the  neck.
Josephus  adds,  moreover,  that  it  was  called  /uacrtra/idvTjs
(var.  massabazan,  etc. ).  The  high  priest's  kuttoneth l  was,
according  to  Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  7  4),  the  same  as  that  of
the  rest  of  the  priests ;  but  the  name  given  to  it  in  Ex.  284,
kithSnetk  lashes  (fairn  ruriD.  '  broidered  coat,'  RV  '  coat
of  chequer  work'),  shows  that  some  particular  kind  of
tunic  is  meant.

Unfortunately  the  exact  signification  of  ritpn  is  uncertain.
It  is  to  be  connected  doubtless  with  the  riljOE'D  of  Ex.  27  n  etc.
on  the  one  hand,  and  probably  with  the  tiiassabazan  (  =  ['3rs)
of  Josephus  (/.<:.),  on  the  other.  The  root-meaning  of  v-yy  is  sup
posed  to  convey  the  idea  of  intertwining  (cp  Dr.  on  2  S.  19),  in
which  case  the  rns3B'D  would  be  some  kind  of  filigree-work  for
jewels  (see  OUCHES,  and  cp  EMBROIDERY,  §  3),  whilst  the  priestly
garment  might  well  represent  some  woven  garment,  not
necessarily  seamless,'^  but  ornamented  and  adorned  with  various
patterns.  The  Targ.  on  Ex.  28  4  renders  NsaTD  NJ1H3 — tnat  i-s»
perhaps,  a  garment  woven  into  patterns,  but  this  is  not  certain.
In  Assyrian  ramtisu  seems  to  mean  'set  with  jewels '  (see  Del.
H\lrlt  624/5).  ©BAL  read  \IT.  KtHTVfifliaTov,3  which  suggests  a
tasseled  or  fringed  garment.  Cp  FRINGES.

I.  A. — S.  A.  C.

TURBAN.  Instead  of  restricting  ourselves  to  the
voluminous  cloth-wrapper  with  which  the  word  turban
is  associated,  it  will  be  convenient  under
this  heading  to  deal  generally  with  head-
coverings  of  all  kinds.  A  head -covering  is  not  an
indispensable  protection,  like  the  GIRDLE  (q.  v. )  for
instance.  It  does  not  appear  to  have  been  worn  in
Europe  in  the  earliest  times,  and  the  monuments  of
Egypt  and  Babylonia  clearly  prove  that  even  in  those
countries,  too,  it  was  not  in  habitual  use.  Not  un-
frequently,  a  narrow  fillet  encircles  the  head  and  binds
the  hair  close.  This  custom  is  widespread  among  both
sexes,  and  is  frequently  met  with  in  Assyria  and  adjacent
countries.  Shishak's  Hebrew  prisoner  at  Karnak  is
thus  depicted.  Naturally  this  fillet  varied  in  material
and  ornamentation,  and  a  good  example  of  the  elaborate
nature  of  an  Assyrian  fillet  is  seen  in  Perrot-Chipiez
(Art  in  Chald.,  etc.,  lios);  cp  CROWN,  DIADEM.
Some  covering  like  the  modern  kefflyeh  must,  how
ever,  have  been  in  use  among  the  Hebrews.  The
keffiveh  is  a  square  or  oblong  piece  of  wool  or  silk,
folded  triangularly  and  tied  by  a  cord,  'agdl,  which
protects  not  only  the  head,  but  also  the  neck,  cheeks,
and  throat.  Coverings  more  or  less  approximating
to  this  are  seen  in  monuments  from  Assyria  (op.  cit.
2 129,  fig.  62  ;  cp  WMM  As.  u.  Eur.  139),  and  were
worn  in  Palestine  (As.  u.  Eur.  294/1 ).  The  turban
proper  was  perhaps  a  later  introduction  among  the
Hebrews,  although  a  certain  variety  of  it  seems  vo  have
been  worn  at  an  early  time  by  the  nomad  inhabitants
of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  (As.  u.  Eur.  138  f. }.

A  specifically  feminine  attire,  confined  (it  would  seem)  to
Palestine,  is  the  long  garment  worn  by  the  women  of  Lachish.
It  covers  the  head,  with  the  exception  of  the  face,  and  descends
over  the  back  to  the  feet,  thus  bearing  a  general  resemblance  to
the  classical  Jlamincunt.

A  covering  of  the  nature  of  the  turban is  no  doubt

implied  in  the  post-exilic  term  sdnip/i,  rpu  ( \/to  wind

v.T»— in  -  coil,  cp  Is.  22 18),  which  was  worn  by

'he  noble  of  both  sexes  (Job  29  14  '  diadem,'

*s- RV1"?- 'turban,' 15.823 'hoods,' RV

'turbans,' cp Is.  623 'diadem,1 and Ecclus.  476c  of

David  [dtdd-rifia]),  and  even  by  priests  (Zech.  85  /adapts

1  For  the  '  tu, 'ics '  (m:n2)  mentioned  between  the  'breeches'
and  'robe'  in  Ecclus.  45 8c,  the  sing,  should  doubtless  be  read
with  (ESHNA  iroSriprj<;.

2  The  mc'tl,  we  know,  was  seamless ;  cp  MANTLE,  g  2  [7].
The meaning  of  TIB'n  '133  (Ex.  31 10, etc.), too,  is  obscure  ;
cp  col.  1137,  n.  i,  and  see  Baentsch,  ad  loc.

3  Cp  (co<7un/3oi  [AFL  ;  -laroi,  B]  for  the  verb  nx3t?  Ex.2839
(treated  as  a  plu.  constr.),  and  for  the  D'D%3C>  of  Is.  3  18  (see
CAUL,  and  NECKLACE,  2  n.).

5233


TURBAN

'  mitre,'  RVm2-  '  turban,'  '  diadem  ').J  A  similar  allusion
is  found  in  Ezek.  16 10  (iPB'3  lic'anKi,  RVn'B-  'I  bound
thee  with  a  tire  of  fine  linen,'  cp  Orelli,  Co.,  etc.).2
The  haballm  (o'Snn,  <rxou>ia,  EV  '  ropes  ')  of  i  K.  20 31
sometimes  taken  to  represent  a  primitive  substitute  for
a  fillet  for  the  hair  (so  Nowack,  HA  1 125,  P.enzinger,
HA  104),  may  be  taken  otherwise  to  express  the  sub-
missiveness  of  the  men  referred  to.  Ahab  might  drag
them  away  as  captives,  and  they  would  not  resist.3
This  agrees  with  the  mention  of  sackcloth  girt  around
their  loins,  as  a  sign  of  humiliation.  Of  the  particular
form  of  the  \lpher,  ns.K,  of  i  K.  2038  41  f  RV  ('head
band  ')  we  are  ignorant ;  the  context,  however,  shows
that  the  wearer  could  cover  his  face  with  it,  in  which
case  it  may  have  resembled  the  kefflyeh  (cp  Ass.  afaru,
apru,  covering,  head-gear).4

A  head-dress  of  some  elaborate  nature  and  of  Baby
lonian  origin  is  alluded  to  in  Ezek.  23 15  C'V?3B  'nno
crrtrtna  (EV  'exceeding  in  dyed  attire'  RVlnK-  'dyed
turbans').  According  to  Delitzsch  (Baer,  Ezek.  p.  xii. ),
/Mu/im  =  Ass.  tublu,  'turban,'  but  the  word  does  not
seem  to  be  substantiated.5  Another  head-dress  more
ornate  than  the  ordinary  turban  is  the /<*<?>•  (INB),  which
may  have  tapered  to  a  point.  It  is  worn  by  people  of
distinction,  male  (Ezek.  24 17  23,  EV  'tire')  and  female
(Is.  820  AV  '  bonnet,'  RV  '  head-tire1),  by  priests  (Ex.
39a8  Ezek.  44 18,  AV  'bonnet,'  RV  '  tire'),  and  by  the
bridegroom  (Is.  6X3  10),  see  CHAPLKT.

It  is  not  unlikely  that  we  may  find  in  the  pfer  the
well-known  conical  head-gear  worn  by  warriors,  kings
and  gods  of  Assyria,  Babylonia,  and  of  the  Hittites?6
At  all  events  it  is  exceedingly  probable  that  this  particular
covering  is  the  kind  alluded  to  in  the  karb&ld,  N^aTS,  of
Dan.  821  (AV  'hat'7  mg.  'turban,'  RV  'mantle')
which,  from  its  shape,  signifies  in  later  Jewish-Aramaic
and  Syriac  '  cock's  comb.'  The  Gr.  Ven.  correctly
renders  by  Ki'pfiaffia,  which  is  actually  likened  to  a
cock's  comb  in  Arist.  Av.  487.  The  RV  rendering
'  mantle '  relies  too  much  upon  the  doubtful  Saips  of
i  Ch.  1527. 8  In  the  same  passage  (Dan.  821)  '  turban  '

1  With santyh, cp the high priest's misnef>heth (MiTRE,
§  i  [2]),  and  C--.  col.  3157,  nn.  2  and  3. In  Job  29  14  (above)  the
siin'iph  and  me'  .  are  emblems  of  justice,  and  possibly  typify
the  high  priest.

2  For  'his  use  of  eon  cp  Ex.  29  9  Lev.  8  13,  and  perhaps  Ass.
hibsu,  nead-band  (Bcitr.  z.  Ass.  1  499  525_/).

'j  Cp  the  representations  on  the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian
monuments  where  captives  are  dragged  away  by  ropes  round
ineir  necks.

4  See  Barth,  Eiymolog.  Stud. 19. The  Ass. parallel  (Del.
Pro/.  54)  greatly  increases  the  probability  that  -isx,  in  spite  of
the  ease  of  corruption  in  more  than  one  way,  is  the  correct
reading. The  vocalisation,  however, is  uncertain. The  Ass.
root  aparii,  'to  cover,  clothe,'  permits  us  to  assume  that  the
garment  was  a  mantle  which  could  be  drawn  over  the  head  (see
further,  note  on  1X3,  below). Targ.  J.  *nEJ?S  'cloak'  (cp  Syr.
|;  C>  *v,  ^jp")  may  come  from  a  different  root  ( £&JS>.  =  j-££, or
perhaps  ;  ft  X..  =  itv.-  in  MH  to  plait,  weave  =wiXj?).

5  'Turban'  is  traced  back  to  Ar.,  Pers.,  and  Hind,  dulband ;
it  is  the  same  word  as  '  tulip,'  Ital.  tulipano  (prop,  a  turban-like
flower). With  this  cp  the  similes  used by Josephus in his
description  of  the  high  priest's  mitre  (col.  3156,  §  2). If  /«/•/«
can  be  proved  (it  is  not  cited  by  Del.  HH'B,  or  Muss-Arnolt),
the  resemblance  between  the  two  becomes  significant.

6  [It  is  difficult  not  to  conjecture  that  -1x5  is  really  the  Ass.
a/>ru,  which  (cp  Jensen,  Kosmol.  105,  n.  2)  is  a  synonym  of  agfi
the  royal  cap  (not  crown). See  Creation-Epic  7  n,  'Let  him
make  the  a/>rati,  or  royal  caps,  to  shine.' This  view  makes  it
still  easier  to  accept  the  theory  that  IEK  in  i  K.  'JO  38  41  is  the
Ass.  word  referred  to. For  -ex  will  then  no  longer  be  isolated.
— T.K.C.] See  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art  in  Chald.,  etc.  1  106;  Art
in  Jud.  2  27  145,  etc.,  and  for  the  view  that  agii  is  a  crown  or
tiara.  Hommel,  Stidarab.Altert.  37  (Munich,  1899).

7  From  this  rendering  Fox  deduced  the  well-known  Quaker
doctrine  prohibiting  the  removal  of  the  hat  even  in  the  presence
of  royalty  (Bevan.  Dan.  84).

8  A  head-covering  of  this  kind  may  have  developed  into  the
Roman  pileus  which,  it  has  been  suggested,  was  first  introduced
through  the  medium  of  Carthage  (O.  Schrader, Rcalcncy.  d.
Indogerm.  Altert.  455).

5324


TURPENTINE  TREE

occurs  in  the  RVms-  for  trap  (AV  'hosen,'  RV  'tunic '^
This  rendering,  implying  an  identification  with  TT^TOCTOJ,
'broad-brimmed  hat,'  is  extremely  improbable;  see
BREECHES,  2.1

For  the  sake  of  completeness  it  may  be  useful  to  note  (a)  the
primitive  straw  hat  worn  by  Sinaitic  Bedouins  (see  WMM  As.
u.  Eur.  295),  (f>)  the  characteristic  Hittite  head-gear,  curiously
resembling,  in  its  outline,  the  modern  silk  hat.  Without  the
brim  the  Hittite  hat  resembles  the  elaborate  crown  of  Marduk-
idin-ahi  (see  Perrot-Chipiez,  Art  in  Chald.,  etc.,  2  fig.  43),  a
variety,  which,  surmounted  by  a  knob,  recurs  in  several  forms
in  representations  of  Assyrian  monarchs  (see  of>.  cit.  1  fig.  22).
Finally  (c)  reference  may  be  made  to  the  use  of  feathers  in  head
coverings.  The  Ethiopians  of  Tirhakah,  as  represented  upon
slabs  in  the  British  Museum,  wear  a  feather  in  front,  which  is
held  in  position  with  a  ribbon  or  band,  and  Asur-bani-pal's
Arabians  are  adorned  with  a  peculiar  feathered  crown  which
recurs  in  one  shape  or  another,  not  only  in  S.  Arabia  (Hommel,
SUdarab.Altert.  d.  \l~iener  Hof museums,  32^;  Munich,
1899),  but  also  in  Ararat  (Brit.  Mus.),  and  Lycia,  and  other
regions  of  Western  Asia  Minor  (W.  M.  Miiller,  As.  u.  F.ur.
364^)-

See  CAP,  CHAPI.ET,  CROWN,  DIADEM,  HELMET,  and,  for  the
priestly  head-dresses,  MITRE.  I.  A.-S.  A.  C.

TURPENTINE  TREE  (repe/WINGcc  [B]),  Ecclus.
24 16  AV,  RV  TEREBINTH  (y.v.).

TURRETS  (nVs'pri),  Cant.  44  RV">e-,  EV  ARMOURY
<?•».).

TURTLE  (I'm)  Cant.  2 12),  TURTLE  DOVE.  See
DOVE.

TUTOR  fenirpOTTOc).  Gal.  42,  RV  'guardian'  ;  in
Mt.  208  Lk.  83  f  EV  '  steward.'  See  STEWARD.

TYCHICUS  (TYXIKOC  [Ti.  WH]),  one  of  the  com
panions  of  Paul,  was  '  of  Asia  '  (Acts  204)  and  seems  to
have  joined  the  apostle  at  some  point  on  his  '  third '
missionary  journey,  preceded  him  from  Greece  to  Troas,
and  accompanied  him  thence,  it  would  appear,  to
Jerusalem  (Acts  20s).  He  is  mentioned  in  Eph.  621
and  Col.  4  7  as  the  '  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister
and  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord '  who  was  the  bearer  of
the  epistles  to  the  Ephesians  and  to  the  Colossians  to
their  respective  destinations.  2  Tim.  4 12  represents
him  as  having  been  sent  by  the  apostle  from  Rome  to
Ephesus,  and  in  Tit.  812  the  apostle  proposes  to  send
either  Tychicus  or  Artemas  to  Titus  in  Crete.

In  the  lists  of  the  '  seventy  '  in  Pseudo-Dorotheus  and  Pseudo-
Hippolytus  he  is  twice  enumerated — once  as  bishop  of  C'jio-
phonia  and  once  as  bishop  of  Chalcedon.  In  the  work  of  the
Pseudo- Epiphanius  on  the  twelve  apostles  he  is  represented  as  a
disciple  and  attendant  of  the  apostle  Andrew,  by  whom  he  is
appointed  bishop  of  Chalcedon.

TYRANNUS,  THE  SCHOOL  OF,  the  place  where
Paul,  after  his  separation  with  his  disciples  from  the
synagogue  at  Ephesus,  reasoned  daily  (ActslOg:  Ka.6'
T)/j.epav  diaXeyo/JLevos  iv  rfi  crxoXf;  Tvpdvvov  [Ti.WH]).
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  who  this  Tyrannus  was —
whether  himself  a  rhetorician  or  philosopher,  or  merely
the  hirer  of  the  premises.  D,  Syr. ,  p.  marg.  (see
ACTS,  §  17)  has  the  reading  T.  TIV<JS,  airb  uyas  TT^UTTTT;?
ews  5e/car7?j.  Cp  El'HESus,  §  4.

TYRE  (•)¥,  "liV,  rypoc.  Ass. Siirni,  Egypt.  Dara

\As.  u.  Eur.  185]),  the  most  famous  of  Phoenician  cities.

1 TwoTvres- tor its msto'T'  see pn<KNtciA; cp

referent '  NEBUCHADREZZAR. Though never

leiereiices. ...  . r  .. T ... ,T.

in  the  possession  of  the  Israelites,  I  yre

is  mentioned  in  the  delimitation  of  the  territory  of
Asher,  in  Josh.  1929,  as  the  'fenced  city  of  Tyre1
(1S-1S3D  Tjriy),  or  perhaps  rather  (following  <55B,  2ws
77777%,  pjriy)  '[the  fountain  of]  the  fortress  of  Tyre,'
the  landmark  referred  to  being  the  fountain,  not  the
city,2  and  also  in  the  geographical  sketch  of  the

1  riapa,  tiara  (Theod.,  ©  Vg.)  and  the  corresponding  readings
•of  Pesh.  and  Ar.  seem  to  refer  properly  to  jpTia  and  not  to
ty'CB  ;  see  S.  A.  Cook,  Journ.  Phil.  20  310^  (1899),  followed
by  Marti,  KHC,  Daniel,  23  (1901).

2  It  is  very  possible,  however,  that  the  description  in  vv.  25-
30  is  based  upon  a  list  of  places  in  the Negeb  (cp  SHIHOR-

5225


TYRE

operations  of  Joab  at  the  census,  2  S.  24?  (<5'iA
<5  poffbppav  Ttfpov),  where,  however,  the  mention  of
Tyre  as  on  the  mainland  must  be  due  either  to  a  late
hand  or  to  corruption  of  the  text.1  From  the  present
text  of  the  OT  it  would  appear  that  Tyre  and  Israel
had  close  relations  in  the  time  of  Solomon  (i  K.
579;  but  see  SOLOMON)  ;  it  is  also  mentioned  in  the
times  of  Zerubbabel  and  Nehemiah  (Ezra  87  [<5B  ffupttv
=  men  of  Tyre]  Neh.  13 16  [©B«A  om.]).  A  prophecy
on  Tyre  finds  a  place  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  (Is.  23) ;  and
another  in  that  of  Amos  (Am.  19/  ) ;  and  three  times  in
our  Psalter  glances  are  taken  at  Tyre  (Ps.  45 12  [13]  83  ^
[8]  87  4)-  Unfortunately  in  all  these  prophetic  and  poetic-
passages — not  excepting  Is.  23 — and  also  in  Joel  3  [4]  4
Zech.  92/,  the  reading  'Tyre'  is  open  to  doubt  (cp
MiZRAiM,  §  zb,  SIDON,  §  3).  Where  Tyre  is  certainly
referred  to  (i.e.,  in  Josh.,  and  Ezra-N'eh. ,  and  in  Ezek.
26-28,  as  redacted  by  the  editor?),  it  is  the  island-city
that  is  meant.  So  also  in  2  Mace.  4  rt  ff.  Mk.  38  Mt.
11 2i/.  (Lk.  10 13/.)  Mk.  724  (Mt.  1021)  31  Acts  1220(
passages  of  great  interest,  but  not  to  be  dealt  with  in  a
geographical  article.2  Palostyrus  had  an  ancient  name
of  its  own,  which  Prasek  has  detected  in  the  name  Usu  ;
possibly  the  Israelites  may  have  known  it  as  Hos  or
Hosah  (see  HOSAH).  This  city  appears  to  have  been
ruined  by  the  cruel  Asur-bani-pal  ;  all  the  buildings
that  remained  were  demolished  by  Alexander,  when
about  to  construct  the  mole  by  which  he  was  enabled  to
reach  the  island  city.  T.  K.  c.

The  modern  Tyre  (5??;-)  lies  at  the  NW.  end  of  the

former  island,  which  is  now,  owing  to  the  widening  of

2 Later Alexander's  mole  by  deposits  of  sand,

notices  and connected with the mainland by a

present  state.  tong,ue °f la"d * '"' broad

greatest length  of  the  ancient island,

from  N.  to  S. ,  is  about  f  m. ,  and  its  area  about
142  acres — a  small  surface  for  so  important  a  town.
The  researches  of  Renan  seem  to  have  completely
refuted  the  once  popular  idea  that  a  great  part  of  the
original  island  has  disappeared  by  natural  convulsions,
though  lie  believes  that  the  remains  of  a  line  of  sub
merged  wall  at  the  S.  end  indicate  that  about  15  acres
more  were  once  reclaimed  from  the  sea  and  have  been
again  lost.  Confined  to  this  narrow  site — on  which,
moreover,  place  was  found  for  the  great  temple  of
Melkarth  with  its  courts,  and  for  all  the  necessities  of  a
vast  trade,  for  docks  and  warehouses,  and  for  the  great
purple  factories  (see  PURPLE)  which  in  the  Roman  time
were  the  chief  source  of  wealth  and  made  the  town  an
unpleasant  place  of  residence  (Strabo,  162  23  ;  Plinv,  076)
— Tyre  was  very  closely  built  ;  Strabo  tells  us  that  the
many-storied  houses  were  loftier  than  those  of  Rome.
In  the  Roman  period  the  population  overflowed  its
bounds  and  occupied  a  strip  of  the  opposite  mainland,
including  the  ancient  Pakt-tyrus.  Pliny  gives  to  the
whole  city,,  continental  and  insular,  a  compass  of  19
R.  m. ;  but  this  account  must  be  received  with  caution.
In  Strabo's  time  the  island  was  still  the  city,  and
Paloetyrus  on  the  mainland  was  30  stadia  off,  whilst
modern  research  indicates  an  extensive  line  of  suburbs
rather  than  one  mainland  city  that  can  be  definitely
identified  with  Palretyrus.  The  topography  of  Tyre  is
still  obscure  owing  to  the  paucity  of  Phoenician  remains.
The  present  harbour  is  certainly  the  Sidonian  port,


LIBNATH),  and  that  "linsaa  is  a  corruption  of  "HXa  (cp  following
note).

1  It is probable (see TAHTIM  -Honsm) that the present
narrative  in  2  S.  24  is  an  expansion  of  an  earlier  narrative,  which
represented  the  census  of  David  as  limited  to  the  fighting  men
of  Missur  and  Jerahmeel, regions  which  David  had  recently
brought  under  his  sway  (2  S.  82,  and  cp  MOAII,  §  14). 1i"~is2D
is  a  corruption  of  "TCJfD—  i.e.,  probably,  the  capital  of  Missur  (cp
MIZRAIM,  §  26).

2  On  2  Mace.,  I.e.,  see  HERCULES,  JASON,  2,  and  on  the  con
nection  of  Jesus  with  the  'borders  of  Tyre,' see  Keim.  Gesch.
Jesu  ran  Nazara,  2  534^

5226


TYRE

though  it  is  not  so  large  as  it  once  was  ;  the  other
ancient  harbour  (the  Egyptian  port)  has  disappeared,
and  is  supposed  by  Kenan  to  have  lain  on  the  other
side  of  the  island,  and  to  be  now  absorbed  in  the
isthmus.  The  most  important  ruins  are  those  of  the
cathedral,  with  its  magnificent  monolith  columns  of
rose-coloured  granite,  now  prostrate.

The  water  supply  of  ancient  Tyre  came  from  the  powerful
springs  of  Riis  el-'Ain  on  the  mainland  (perhaps  the  '  fountain  '
of  Josh.  1929 — see  §  i),  one  hour  S.  of  the  city,  where  there
are  still  remarkable  reservoirs,  in  connection  with  which  curious
survivals  of  Adonis  worship  have  been  observed  by  Volney  and
other  travellers.  Tyre  was  still  an  important  city  and  almost


UNICOEN

impregnable  fortress  under  the  Arab  empire.  From  1124  to
1291  it  was  a  stronghold  of  the  crusaders,  and  Saladin  himself
besieged  it  in  vain.  After  the  fall  of  Acre  the  Christians  deserted
the  place,  which  was  then  destroyed  by  the  Moslems.  The
present  town  has  arisen  since  the  Metawila  occupied  the  district
in  1766.

See  Pietschmann,  Gesch.  der  PhSnicier,  61-72  (1889)  ;  F.
Jeremias,  7'yrus  bis  zur  Zeit  Nebukadnesars  (1891)  ;  PraSek,
Forschungen  zur  Gesch.  des  Alierthums,  221-39  ('898);
Winckler,  'Assyrien  u.  Tyrus  seit  Tiglath-pileser  III. '  AOF
265^  T.  K.  C.  ,  §  I  ;  W.R.S.,  §  2.

TYRE,  LADDER  OF  (KAIMAKOC  Typoy,  i  Mace.
1159)  ;  see  LADDER  OF  TYRE.


U


UCAL  p3N),  Prov.  30 1. See  ITHIEL  AND  UCAL.

UEL  pN-lN.  §  39)  one  of  the  b'ne  BAM  (<j.v.)  ;
Ezral034(ou»jA[BabA],  0u.  [B«vid.N],  lt0r)A  [L]).  In  i  Esd.934
the  name  appears  as  JUKI.  (HUTU  [BA],  iour)A  [L]),  cp  ourjA  [B],
ioio)A  [A],  iu)»)A  [LJ  in  v.  35.

UKNAZ  (T3J>1),  i  Ch.  4 15,  AV'»«-,  AV  '  even  Kenaz,'
RV  '  and  KENAZ'  (q. v. ).  ©  does  not  represent  ?.

ULAI  C^-IN  ;  in  Dan.  82  ©  [87]  <MAAM  ;  Syr.  of  ©
oyAAM,  Theod.  [BAQF]  joy  oyB&A ;  i"  v-  16  ©
oyA&i,  but  with  o)A<M  superscr.  87  a  ;  Theod.  as  in  v.
2),  mentioned  in  Dan.  8  2  as  a  river  near  '  Shushan  the
palace  (?),'  in  Klam  ;  cp  ?'.  16  '  between  [the  banks  of?]
Ulai.'  Presumably  the  (nar)  U-la-a  of  the  Assyrian
inscriptions,  described  as  '  a  river  whose  banks  are  good  '
(for  a  battle-field).  The  word  for  'river'  in  Dan.  82
('rniN,1  iibdl),  which  in  w.  2  16  Theod.  (BAQP)  gives
instead  of  '  Ulai,'  occurs  nowhere  else,  and  is  commonly
viewed  as  a  parallel  form  to  *?3V,  yubal  (see  K6. ,
Lehrgeb.  2  88  460),  Jer.  178  (KV  'river';  ©  iY,uds
'  moisture  '),  though  ©  gives  the  Aramaic  sense  of  'gate'
(TT/JOS  TT}  irv\ri  AiXafj.),  So  in  Dan.  83  Theod.  [EAQF]
has  oi'/3a\  where  ©87  has  wv\r)s.  In  Judith  16  the
Syriac  has  '  Ulai,1  where  the  Greek  has  '  HYDASPES
(if.  v. }  ;  can  'Hydaspes1  be  an  error  for  '  Choaspes  '  ?
At  any  rate,  Herodotus  (Ii88;  54952),  followed  by
Strabo  (16728),  places  Susa  on  the  C'hoaspes  ;  but  Pliny
(6135)  makes  the  Eulteus  the  river  which  flows  by  that
capital.  According  to  Noldeke,  though  it  is  possible
that  Susa  in  the  days  of  its  glory  may  have  stretched
from  the  Eul;fus  to  the  Choaspes  (if  we  assume  these
rivers  to  be  different),  it  is  more  probable  that  the  two
names  represent  the  same  river.  Frd.  Delitzsch,  how
ever,  infers  confidently  from  the  cuneiform  evidence
that  the  Eulreus  is  not  the  Choaspes  (the  Ass.  Uknti
=  mod.  Kercha),  but  the  Karun,  which  is  the  Pasitigris
(i.e..  Lesser  Tigris),  up  which  sailed  Nearchus  and
the  Macedonian  fleet  to  join  Alexander.  In  all  this,
however,  the  uncertainty  of  the  original  text  of  Daniel
and  of  Judith  must  be  remembered.  [On  the  reading
'  Ulai,'  see  SHUSHAN,  and  cp  Crit.  Bib.  The  question
of  an  underlying  text  in  which  the  geography  was
different  must  here  be  reserved.]

Cp  Noldeke,  'Ulai,'  Bib.  Lex.  5  576/1  ;  Del.  Paradies,  177
ig^ff.,  329  ;  Loftus,  Chald&n  and  Susiana,  423^

ULAM  (D^-IS; oyAAM  [BAL]). i. A  Machirite

name;  I  Ch.  7  16  17  (rjAa/u.  [L]).  U  lam's  brother  is  called
Rekem.  Both  names  mean  the  same  thing — viz.,  Jerahmeel.
Cp  REKEM,  and  for  '  Ulam  '  cp  Klam  =  Jerahmeel  in  Ezra  '2  7  31,
and  probably  Is.  21  2  Jer.  49  34^

2.  Ancestor  (in  a  genealogy  of  Benjamin  [17.7'.,  §  9  ii.  /3])  of  the
B'ne  Ulam  [i.e.,  Jerahmeel]  who  were  distinguished  for  their
archery;  i  Ch.  8  397:  (aiAa/x,  aiAeijn  [B]).  See/(V?  11  Iioii2/,
§§  9  and  12,  and  for  Jerahmeelite  archers,  Jer.  4935,  '  Behold,  I


1  According  to  Jensen  however  SSIN  is  a  loan-word  from
Ass.  ubbtil '  carries  down '  ;  cp  the  phrase  in  the  Ass.  inscrip
tions,  '  which  (i.e.,  the  Ulai)  carries  down  [ubbalu]  its  full  waters
to  the  sea,'  Ges.  Le.r. I1*),  s.v.

5227


will  break  the  bow  of  Elam  [Jerahmeel],  the  chief  [source]  of
their  strength.'1  T.  K.  C.

ULLA(N^;  cp  Palm.  N^J?  [fern.]  and  Sin.  ^T;  coA*.
[BA]),  an  Asherite  whose  sons  are  named  in  i  Ch.  739.
Possibly  therefore  he  is  to  be  identified  with  one  or  other
of  the  preceding  Asherites  —  e.g.  ,  Shual  (Syief),  v.  36,  or
ARA  (KIK)I  v.  38.  ©L,  however,  omits  the  names  of
Ulla  and  Ara,  and  makes  Hanniel  and  Rizia  sons  of
ITHRAN.  See  ASHER,  §  4,  ii.  and  note.

UMMAH  (HSU),  one  of  a  group  of  place-names  in
Josh.  1929  (end),  30,  which,  since  they  produce  great
stylistic  awkwardness,  may  have  been  introduced  from
Judg.  131  (Steuernagel).  It  is  usual  to  emend  nay  (MT
Ummah)  into  iiy  (MT  in  Judg.  I.e.  'Acco').  See
PTOLEMAIS.  Geographically  this  can  be  made  plaus
ible  (see  Moore,  Judg.  51)  ;  but  whether  it  can  be  said  to
be  favoured  by  a  study  of  the  variations  of  the  MSS  of
©,  is  at  any  rate  doubtful.

There  is  a  strong  probability  that  parts  of  the  geographical
survey  in  Josh,  have  been  based  upon  earlier  texts  which  referred
to  the  Negeb,  where  accordingly  we  may  have  to  suppose  that
the  clans  or  tribes  of  Israel  originally  dwelt.  Also  that  r(Cy<
pCy2  (Pesh.),  lay  (MT  in  Judg.),  and  apx<aft,  axieta,  aiciuap,  and
a/«u>/3,  all  ultimately  come  from  ^RDrlT  (Jerahmeel).  Notice
that  the  valley  of  Achor  (lisy)  in  Josh.  7  24-2*  is  near  '  Jericho  '
—i.e.,  Jerahmeel  (Kadesh?;  see  JKRICHO.  §  4).  How  the  final
t'litor  of  Josh.  1924-31  read  the  name  given  in  MT  as  Ummah,
m^y  be  left  uncertain.  The  passage  has  but  a  doubtful
geographical  value.

As  to  the  Versions,  Pesh.  and  2  Heb.  MSS  (de  Rossi)  read
poy-  Of  tn^  *-"k-  MSS,  B  has  apx<"|3  (i.e.,  a\top,  modified  by
pow/3?).  A  group  of  MSS  which  as  a  rule  agree  with  B  (16  52
53  57  77  85  J3T  J44  236  237)  reac*  aKK<a  >  another  group  (44  74  76
84  134)  ciKKiap,  and  the  related  MSS  54  75  a<c[ic]w/3  ;  A  and  V
(Holmes  and  Parsons,  III  XI)  and  related  cursives  with  L,
Compl.,  Aid.  and  Syro-hex.,  in  which  the  names  are  generally
corrected  after  the  Hebrew,  afj.ua.  See  conspectus  in  Hollen-
berg(2^77r,  1  ioo/).  T.  K.  C.

UMPIRE  (rriflO),  Job933  EV™e-,  EV  DAYSMAN.
See  MEDIATOR.

UNCLEAN. See  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN.
UNCTION  (XPICM<\),  i  Jn.  220;  RV  ANOINTING.


UNICORN

92n], cp plur.


also  D'")  [Job  399/j,  D'JO  [Ps.
p"! [Ps.222i]; MONOKepcoc  i  4


1  Originally  Jer.  46-51  appears  to  have  referred  to  the  peoples
on  the  S.  and  SE.  of  Palestine.  Owing  partly  to  confusions  of
geographical  names,  the  original  prophecies  have  been  filled  up
and  expanded  so  as  to  appear  to  have  a  wider  scope.  This  is  a
highly  probable,  though  a  new,  result.  See  PROPHET,  §  45.

*  Cp  Jer.  21  13  47  5  where  pcyn  and  CpDJ,'  b°'h  probably  come
from  5nDm'  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

3  The  Nab.  pr.  n.  pn  (CIS,  2  316)  may  possibly  be  connected
with  CXI.

4  With  regard  to  the  rendering  of  ©,  it  should  be  noticed
that  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  one-horned  animal  goes  back
to  Aristotle  (Part.  An.  863),  who  mentions  as  such  the  oryx,
and  the  Indian  ass. Later  accounts  such  as  that  of  /Elian
(Nat.  An.  10  20)  are  largely  influenced  by  the  accounts  of  the
rhinoceros; cp  Houghton  in  Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Kat.  Ifist.,
Nov.  1862,  and  art.  '  Unicorn  '  in  Ency.  Brit.W

5228


UNKNOWN  GOD,  ALTAR  TO  THE


Rhinoceros  unicornis],  a  much-debated  and  somewhat
unhappy  rendering  of  the  AV,1  occurs  some  nine  times
in  the  OT,  where  it  regularly  gives  place  in  RV  to
WILD-OX  (mg.  OX-ANTELOPE,  cp  Nu.  2822  etc. ).  It
appears  as  a  wild  untamable  animal,  the  most  unlikely
of  all  to  submit  to  the  plough  (Job  399-12),  of  great
strength  (Ps.  22  21,  parallel  to  aryeh  ,TIK  'lion'),  and
agility  (tb.  296,  parallel  to  'fgel,  ^y  'calf'),  whose  horns
were  lofty  and  a  symbol  of  power  and  might  (Nu.
23222  248  Dt.  8817  cp  Ps.  92n  [on  which  see  Che.,
/>j.  <->]).  From  Is.  34?  (oi  adpoi  AVms-  '  Rhinoceros  ')  it
was  apparently  used  also  in  sacrifices.  The  Heb.  re' em
is  the  same  as  the  Ass.  rfmu,a  which  is  a  strong-horned,
fierce-looking  wild  bull  depicted  with  shoulders  fully-
arched,  images  of  which  were  often  placed  at  the
entrances  of  Assyrian  palaces.4  Among  the  Assyrians
it  was  often  employed  in  metaphors  of  strength,  and  at
times  occurs  in  parallelism  with  pirn,  elephant.  Hence
it  is  not  improbable  that  the  animal  referred  to  is
the  Aurochs,  the  Urus  of  Julius  Caesar  (5(7628),
who  mentions  it  as  existing  in  the  forests  of  Central
Europe,  and  the  Bos  primigenius  of  naturalists.  Its
teeth  were  found  by  Tristram  in  Lebanon,  in  the  valley
of  the  Nahr-el-Kalb,  which  is  just  in  the  neighbourhood
where  Tiglath-pileser  I.  (1120-1100  B.C.)  claimed  to
have  killed  the  rlmu.  The  Aurochs  was  of  great  sixe
and,  to  judge  by  records,  of  great  ferocity  ;  it  was
hunted  and  killed  by  prehistoric  man,  as  skulls  which
are  occasionally  found  pierced  with  flint  instruments
testify.  It  probably  lingered  in  remote  parts  of  Europe
till  the  middle  ages,  and  it  is  believed  to  have  been  the
ancestor  of  the  domesticated  breeds  of  cattle.  Probably
its  least  altered  descendants  are  the  wild  herds  of
certain  English  parks  such  as  Chillingham,  though
these  have  certainly  fallen  off  in  size,  in  which  they
compare  unfavourably  with  fossil  remains  of  the  B.
primigenius?  See  Fr.  Del.  Heb.  Lang.  6  ff.  ;  Schr.
KA  T  ,  256  ;  Hommel,  Saugethiere,  227.

A  similar  animal  is  the  '  wild  cow  '  or  wadiha  which,  according
to  Doughty  (Ar.  Des.  1  328),  may  probably  be  the  CN"1.  Though
of  no  great  size  it  has  dangerous  horns  measuring  sometimes  23
inches  (cp  illustration  of>.  cit.  327),  with  which  when  maddened
with  wounds  it  will  inflict  fatal  injuries.  The  animal  goes  in
herds  of  three  to  five,  and  only  the  keenest  hunter  can  hope  to
catch  one.

The  literary  history  of  the  unicorn  in  classical  and  mediaeval
ages  has  been  treated  by  C.  Cohn,  Gesch.  d.  Einhorns  (Berlin,
1896-7).  A.  E.  S. — S.  A.  C.

UNKNOWN  GOD,  ALTAR  TO  THE  UrNO>CTu>
6eo>  [Ti.  \VH]  ;  AV,  RVmtr-  '  to  the  Unknown  God '
RV  '  to  an  Unknown  God  '  Acts  17  23).  It  is  of  little
moment  which  rendering  we  adopt  ;  difference  in

1  In  Dt.  33  17  the  horns  of  the  unicorn  are  spoken  of,  and  to
evade  the  difficulty  AV  has  to  render  the  sing.  0X1  by  the  plural.

2  By  CXI  ni2j;in,  Nu.  I.e.,  RV  'strength  of  the  wild-ox,'  we
should  rather  understand  the  reference  to  be  to  the  animal's  horns
(so  RVing.). riisjrin,  lit. 'eminences,'  from r\yt  =  ys"> cp  Ar.
yafei ',  a  hill, and  yafa'a, to  ascend. [For  a  conjecture,  see
Crit.  Bib.}

3  According  to  its  ideogram,  a  '  mountain-ox,'  cp  Del.,  Entst.
Schrift,  56.

•*  The  old  conventional  representation  of  the  unicorn  is  in
geniously  explained  by  Haupt('  Psalms'  SBOT,  ET,  173).  On
the  reliefs  from  the  N.  palace  of  Assur-bani-pal  we  see  the
king  grasping  a  lion  by  the  ear  and  piercing  his  body  with  a
spear.  Another  represents  an  arrow  fixed  in  the  lion's  forehead.
The  existence  of  the  unicorn  seems  to  be  derived  from  Persian
sculptures  at  Persepolis  and  Susa,  and  these  in  turn  were
undoubtedly  influenced  by  Assyro-Babylonian  sculptures.  The
conception  of  the  horn,  according  to  Haupt,  has  accordingly  arisen
from  the  imagination  of  the  Persian  artist  who  combined  the
arrow  and  ear  I

5  In  Arabic  the  cognate  rftn  is  applied  to  the  Antelope
Leucoryx,  a  meek  and  graceful  animal,  an  inhabitant  of  the
deserts  of  Arabia  and  NE.  Africa — the  very  opposite  of  the
Ass.  and  Heb.  CN1.  \Vhentheolderwildbullbecameextinct,
the  oryx  from  its  size  and  general  aspect  was  the  natural  legatee
of  its  name  (cp  Che.  on  Is.  34  7).  Cp  the  similar  variation
in  the  meanings  of  HEp  and  nSjpn  in  Heb.  and  the  cognate
languages.

5229


interpretation  cannot  be  based  upon  a  distinction
between  definite  and  indefinite  article  here,  but  must
be  detived  from  dyvucrrij)  alone.  The  word  is  trans
lated  'unknown,'  or  -unknowable.'  Whichever  be
accepted  we  must  be  careful  to  exclude  all  non-Athenian
connotation.  To  suppose  an  allusion  to  the  God  of
the  Jews  is  clearly  impossible,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that
the  epithet  '  wholly  hidden  '  (irdyKpvtfros)  was  applied  to
Yahwe  by  gentile  writers  (Just.  Mart.  Ad  Gr.  38  ;
Apol.  2io;  Phil.  Leg.  44).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
equally  unjustifiable  to  read  into  the  inscription  the
signs  of  '  a  want  of  something  deeper  arid  truer. '
Both  notions  would  be  anachronisms.  Although  we
have  no  example  of  an  inscription  in  the  precise  terms
quoted  in  Paul's  speech,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  illus
trating  and  verifying  the  passage.  Pausanias  (i.  1  4),  on
his  way  from  Phalerum  to  Athens,  remarks  the  altars  of
'  gods  called  unknown,  and  of  heroes  '  (fiufjLoi  de  6eC)v  re
&voiJ.a.foiJ.£vtj}v  dyvuffruv  nal  iipuuv).  It  would  be
most  natural  to  take  this  to  mean  several  altars,  each
with  the  inscription  in  the  singular  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to
do  this  in  the  face  of  what  Pausanias  says  at  Olympia,
'beside  it  is  an  altar  of  Unknown  Gods'  (irpbs  atrnjj  5"
dcrriv  '  Ayvuxrruv  deuv  ftwfj.cfs,  v.  148).  Philostratus  in  his
life  of  Apollonius  (63)  writes,  '  it  is  more  prudent  to
speak  well  of  all  the  gods,  and  especially  at  Athens,  where
are  found  also  altars  of  unknown  deities'  ((rutypovtarepov
rb  Trepi  WOLVTUV  dfdov  eft  \eyew  /cat  ravra  ' \0-t)vrpjiv ,  oC
/cat  dyvuffTUv  dcu/j.6vui>  flu/mol  'iSpvvrai)  ;  where  again
it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  altars  bore
the  words  ' Ayvuffrois  Beois  or  '  Ayvdouri^i  tfey.  The
significance  of  such  altars  is  clear  from  Diog.  Laert.
1  no.  Epimenides  in  his  purification  of  Athens  is
said  to  have  turned  out  some  black  and  white  sheep  on
the  Areopagus,  directing  attendants  to  follow  and
watch  them,  and  on  the  spot  where  the  animals  lay
down  altars  were  built  r<f)  wpoff-fjKOvTi  #etjj.  This  ex
pression  cannot  be  translated,  '  the  appropriate  local
deities '  (Grote),  indicating  that  in  each  instance  the
divinity  was  a  recognised  and  familiar  one  :  this  is
clear  from  the  words  which  immediately  follow  (tiOev
ZTI  KO.I  vvv  tffriv  evptiv  /caret  TOI)S  ST^UGCS  TU>  'A.6r]vaiuv
fiwfjiotis  dvuivv/j-ovs).  The  people  on  this  and  possibly
on  subsequent  occasions  knew  not  what  divinity  had
been  offended  and  required  propitiation.  In  Rome  in
precisely  the  same  way  it  often  taxed  the  inventive
powers  of  the  College  of  Pontifices  to  say  what  god  had
sent  prodigies.  Sometimes  they  named  him  from  the
manifestation  itself — e.g.,  Aius  Locutius,  the  Voice
which  forewarned  the  city  of  the  approaching  Gauls  ;
sometimes,  being  in  doubt,  they  used  the  formula  '  sive
dei  sive  deae'  (Aul.  Gell.  238).  It  is  on  this  principle  that
we  find  a  woman  imprecating  curses  on  her  rival  and
praying  to  the  deities  of  the  hot  spring,  '  uti  vos  aquce
ferventes,  sive  vos  Nimfas  (Nymphas)  sive  alio  quo
nomine  vultis  appellari,  uti  vos  earn  interimatis '  (/us.
Urb.  Rom.  141).  In  a  well  known  passage  of  Horace
we  have  '  Matutine  Pater,  seu  lane  libentius  audis  '  (Sat.
ii.  6  20).  In  the  passage  quoted  from  Diog.  it  is  possible,
however,  that  by  dvuvvp-ovs  we  should  understand  the
altars  to  have  been  altogether  without  inscription.  If  so,
we  see  that  our  examples  fall  into  three  classes,  according
to  the  degree  of  doubt  in  the  worshipper's  mind.  The
altar  may  be  left  without  inscription  ;  whether  it  is  god
or  goddess  that  claims  it  cannot  be  guessed.  Or  again,
it  is  inscribed  'to  the  unknown  god,'  in  the  singular
or  plural.  In  the  third  case  the  deity  is  known,  but
the  votary  is  ignorant  of  the  proper  mode  of  address.

We  may  mention,  but  only  to  dismiss  it,  the  theory  that  in  the
case  of  Athens  these  altars  dated  from  a  time  when  writing  was
unknown  and  were  subsequently  inscribed  when  men  no  longer
knew  to  what  god  they  had  been  raised.  We  must  reject  also
Jerome's  statement  (ad  Tit.  1  12)  that  the  inscription  ran  '  to
the  gods  of  Asia  and  Europe,  to  unknown  and  strange  gods';
the  whole  point  of  the  reference  in  the  speech  lies  in  its  being
an  exact  quotation.  Jerome  may  indeed  have  seen  such  an
inscription  as  he  mentions  ;  but  it  was  certainly  not  that  alluded
to  in  Acts.


UNLEAVENED  BREAD


UR  OF  THE  CHALDEES


If  we  take  the  far  less  probable  rendering  '  to  the
unknowable  god,'  we  must  understand  the  words  to
refer  to  the  mysteriousness  of  God.  We  may  then
compare  the  inscription  on  the  (V  are  of  the  Egyptian
Isis  —  '  I  am,  and  was,  and  shall  be  ;  no  man  hath
lifted  my  veil'  (Pint.  De  Is.  et  Os.}.  Still  better  is  the
inscription  on  an  altar  of  Mithra  found  at  Ostia  —
'signum  indeprehensibilis  Dei.'  (For  analogies,  see
Frazer,  Paus.  2  33.  )  w.  J.  W.


UNLEAVENED  BREAD  (ilSD),  Gen.  19  3,  etc.
See  BREAD,  §  i,  LEAVEN,  §  2,  and  PASSOVER,  §  if.  15.

UNNI  (''IV;  perhaps  shortened  from  rC£V  [  =  either
the  probable  gentilic  '  Anani  (so  Che.  ;  cp  Crit.  Bib.
on  i  Ch.  824  15i8),  or  '  Yahwe  answers,'  §  52]).

i.  A  Levitical  door-keeper,  a  musician  (i  Ch.  15  18;  eAiojijA
[B],  uor)A  [«],  an  [\],  avavias[L]  ;  v.  20:  loyei  [B«],  avavi  [A],
ai-aiaas  [L]).  Cp  Ki.  '  Chron.  '  SBO  T,  cuiloc.

•2.  RV  Unno,  a  Levite,  temp.  Nehemiah  (Neh.  12  9  Kt.  uj;  ;
om.  BN*A,  ia.vai  fNca-mK-]  [L]).  In  L  lavai  is  a  doublet  of
ayeKpouofro  =Q':J7.  Omitting  'And  Bakbukiah  '  (as  a  gloss
from  Neh.  11  17),  render,  '  And  their  brethren  took  up  the  strain
(ranged)  over  against  them.'  So  Guthe(S£OT  [Heb.J,  adloc.);
cp  Be.-Rys.  ad  foe.1

UPHAZ  (TQ-1N)  in  the  phrases  'gold  from  Uphaz  '
and  'gold  of  Uphaz'  (TS-1NP  ^HT,  z&h&b  me'  uphaz,
Jer.lOg,  TD-1X  003,  kit  hem  'uphaz,  Dan.  10s)  is  an
imaginary  place-name.  Both  passages  are  corrupt,  the
former  most  probably,  the  latter  certainly.  Later
scribes,  who  knew  the  rare  phrase  7310  3n],  zahdb
mftphas  (\  K.  10  18  ;  see  GOLD,  §  i  [/.]  and  n.  ),
imagined  this  to  mean  'gold  from  Uphaz'  (iffixp  'i,  s.
me  uphaz},  and  read  this  or  (in  Dan.  10s)  a  phrase  like
this,  in  the  indistinctly  written  text  which  they  were
copying.

(a)  The MT  of  Jer.  10g  is not well supported. Vg. has


T31O  3H7  ;  while  Tg.,  Pesh.,  Syr.  -Hex.  (mg.),  and  Theod.  pre
suppose  VE1XD.  Giesebr.  (but  not  Co.)  reasonably  adopts
this  ;  cp  pi3  for  pi3  Ezek.  1  14.  (<$)  The  phrase  in  Dan.  10s  is
rendered  ei<  \pv<ri<a  <o<£a£  by  Theod.  [BAQ]  ;  <PS7,  however,
instead  of  rendering  it,  translates  what  is  really  a  corrupt  form
of  two  dittographed  words  from  the  line  above,  except  that  it
appends  to  this  73,  i.e.,  it  gives  evSeSv/j-fvo';  fivcr&iva.  Kal  -ri)f
b(r<l>vv  Trepie^w<r/J.ei'os  fivfftrivtf  Kal  ex  ne'crou  avrov  $o)s  (where
<£«)S  is  simply  a  Graecised  13  ;  cp  <f>a£  Cant.  5  u).  ©'s  Hebrew
MS  must  therefore  have  had,  not  7311*  or)3>  hut  73  V3DS1  0'~I3-
The  second  word  was  indistinctly  written,  and  was  read  by  him
131  RD1.  But  we  must  not  suppose  that  MT  is  really  more
correct.  'Girded  with  gold  of  Uphaz'  (or,  as  <S's  text  ran,
'  with  refined  gold  ')  is  not  a  natural  expression.  We  should
almost  if  not  quite  certainly  correct  TS1X  CHID  into  13  Jl!pp"13,
'with  embroidery  of  gold.'  A  magnificently  embroidered  girdle
is  what  we  expect  to  hear  of  ;  the  correction  is  easy,  self-evident.
Probably  7310  is  an  earlier  reading  than  731^  ;  73  VMlD  would
resemble  7310  rO  It  's  also  of  course  more  plausible  ;  the  con
text  does  not  suggest  the  mention  of  a  locality.  It  is  worth
noting  that  J.  D.  Michaelis  explained  7310  3777  as  731x0  3nt  '-  a'so
that  in  Cant,  on  &  read  731  DTlD  ;  Theod.  731^  CHD  (Lag-)-
Cp  GOLD.  T.  K.  C.


UR  OF  THE  CHALDEES,  lit.  Ur  Kasdim
Dnb'3  ;  [H]  xoopA2  [TCON]  XA^AIWN  [BHADEL]  ;
CP  Acts  ?  *<  *K  7W  xaXSai'uw  ;  Syr.  'ur
dekaldayya;  Ur  Chaldccorum,  but  in  Neh.
(de)  igne  Chaldaorum,  alluding  to  the
Rabbinic  explanation  of  '  Ur  '  as  =  fire,  with  which  a
singular  Aggadic  legend  is  connected  ;  see  Jewish
Encyclopaedia,  Igi,  and  cp  Koran,  Sur.  21),  Gen.  1128  31
15  7.  The  place  whence  Abram  set  out  on  the  journey
to  Canaan,  also  mentioned  in  Neh.  9?t-  That  Ur  is  the


1  The  following  word  cn'riN,  if  not  a  corruption  for
'  after  them,'  may  have  been  introduced  to  give  a  meaning  to  '3
and  the  already  corrupt  ijy.  El}}1?  DnTIN>  as  Be.-Rys.  point
out,  is  unnecessary  here  ;  cp  v.  24.

-  [Probably  &  read  t~ix  for  TIN,  rather  \<apa  is  a  translitera
tion  of  TIN  confused  (?)  with  -nj;.]

5231


2
f


c P  i  K
Sf™


old  Babylonian  city  of  Uru  (mod.  Mukayyar,  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Euphrates,  about  40  m.  SE.  from  Warka  and
about  135  m.  SE.  from  Babylon)  is  altogether  more  likely
than  Rawlinson's  identification  with  Erech  (i]ni<),  the
mod.  Warka,1  and  is  generally  accepted  ;  even  Dill-
mann  in  1892  (Gen.&),  214),  after  holding  out  long
against  the  view,  substantially  adopted  it.  The  chief
opponent  of  the  theory  at  present  is  Kittel  (  Hist.  1  181  ff.  ;
and  earlier,  Theol.  Stud,  aus  Wurtt.  l2\*,ff.}.  The
fact  that  there  is  no  other  known  Ur  in  the  territory  of
the  Kasdim  than  the  Babylonian  Ur  is  a  great  difficulty
in  the  way  of  rejecting  the  identification,  especially  since
language  •  and  literature  point  so  decisively  to  close
relationship  between  Hebrews  and  Babylonians.  If  it
is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  other  statements  of  J  or  of  P
—  who  mentions  Ur  Kasdim  (Gen.  11  31)  —  that  only  points
more  strongly  to  the  strength  of  the  tradition  in  favour
of  the  Babylonian  Ur.  But  in  fact  the  difficulties  are
not  so  formidable  as  Kittel  thinks,  [and  the  compara
tive  antiquity  of  the  tradition  is  shown  by  Judith  56
Jubilees  11  Acts  7  4.  Cp  Francis  Brown,  JBL,  Dec.
1887,  pp.  46^.  ;  Del.  Par.  226  /.  ;  Budde,  Urgeschichte,
433/;  Schrader,  HWB^,  1729/1  ;  and  see  references
in  Dillmann's  note  on  Gen.  1128].

The  greatness  of  the  city  of  Uru  in  politics,  religion,
and  commerce  is  well  brought  out  by  Hommel,  GBA
212~218  3*S~3*9  (L'P  his  Die  semzf.
Volker  u.  Sprachen,  204-211);  see
also  BABYLONIA,  §  48.  Rogers  (HBA
237i/.  )  thus  describes  its  situation.
'  The  river  Euphrates  flowed  just  past  its  gates,  affording
easy  transportation  for  stone  and  wood  from  its  upper  waters,
to  which  the  Lebanon,  rich  in  cedars,  and  the  Amanus  were
readily  accessible.  The  Wady  Rummein  came  close  to  the  city
and  linked  it  with  central  and  southern  Arabia,  and  along  that
road  came  gold  and  precious  stones,  and  gums  and  perfumes  to
be  converted  into  incense  for  temple-worship.  Another  road
went  across  the  very  desert  itself,  and,  provided  with  wells  of
water,  conducted  trade  to  southern  Syria,  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,
and  across  into  Africa.  This  was  the  shortest  road  to  Africa,  and
commerce  between  Ur  and  Egypt  passed  over  its  more  difficult
but  much  shorter  route  than  the  one  by  way  of  Haran  and
Palestine.  Nearly  opposite  the  city  the  Shatt-el-Hai  emptied
into  the  Euphrates,  and  so  afforded  a  passage  for  boats  into  the
Tigris,  thus  opening  to  the  commerce  of  Ur  the  vast  country
tributary  to  that  river.  Here,  then,  were  roads  and  rivers
leading  to  the  N.,  E.,  and  W.,  but  there  was  also  a  great  outlet
to  the  southward.  The  Euphrates  made  access  to  the
Persian  Gulf  easy.  No  city  lay  S.  of  Ur  on  that  river  except
Eridu,  and  Eridu  was  no  competitor  in  the  world  of  commerce,
for  it  was  devoted  only  to  temples  and  to  gods  —  a  city  given  up
to  religion.'

The  local  god  of  Uru  was  Nannaru  or  Sin,  the
moon-god  ;  cp  Eupolemus  (Eus.  Prcep.  Ev.  9  17),  ac
cording  to  whom  the  Babylonian  city  Ka/napivr)  (Moon-
city)  was  called  by  some  TroXis  Ovpirj.

These  details  are  doubly  interesting  if  Abraham  was
a  historical  personage,  or  even  if  the  tribe  which
regarded  him  as  its  ancestor  once  lived  a  pastoral  life  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Uru  (cp  Tomkins,  Life  of
Abraham^,  7  ff.}.  Certainly  it  is  still  the  average
opinion  of  scholars  that  the  Ur-kasdim,  with  which  P
at  any  rate,  if  not  also  JE,  closely  connects  Abraham,
is  this  S.  Babylonian  city.  Why  '-kasdim  '  was  added,
is  not  indeed  plain  ;  for  no  other  Ur  is  mentioned  in
the  OT.  That,  however,  is  a  mere  trifle.  The  considera
tions  which  induce  Kittel  2  to  reject  the  prevalent  theory
are  as  follows  :  —

(i)  The genealogy given by P in Gen. 11  10  ff.

assumes  that  the  Semites  of  Arpachsad's  time  migrated

, gradually  from  N. Armenia  to  Mesopo-

3.  Kittel  S jamia They  then  moved  on  to  Harran.

opposition. ^  In  harniony  with  the  above  fact  P

states  (Gen.  84)  that  the  ark '  rested  on  the  mountains

1  [This  view  was  adopted  by  Loftus,  Chaldeo.  and  Susiana,
126  (1857). The  Syrian  Christians,  however,  maintain  Edessa
to  be  the  Ur-casdim  of  the  patriarch.]

2  The  English  translation  of  the  History  (1  181,  n.  4)  gives
an important modification of view as regards '  Armenian
Chaldajans'; Kittel now withdraws one of his original
arguments.

5232


UR  OF  THE  CHALDEES

of  Ararat,'  which  must  be  on  the  N.  or  N\V.  of
Assyria.  Here  is  the  starting-point  of  the  subsequent
history.  Can  we  imagine  him  suddenly  trans|x>rting
the  Semites  to  the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates,  and  making
this  their  starting-point,  simply  to  bring  them  back  to
the  place  where  they  once  stood  with  Serug  ?

(3)  We  also  meet  with  '  Ur-kasdim '  in  the  J2
stratum  (1128  15  7).  Now  J  does  not  state  where  the
ark  grounded.  Budde  therefore  conjectures  that  J
must  have  meant  a  mountain  in  the  S.  of  the  land
of  the  Two  Rivers,  corresponding  to  Mt.  Nisir  in  the
Babylonian  story.  From  this  point  Noah's  descendants
will  have  pressed  on  to  Ur,  in  S.  Babylonia.  Terah
and  Abraham  are  then  supposed  to  have  migrated  to
Harran.  This  conjecture  is  not  a  very  solid  one  ;  but  in
any  case  '  what  a  marvellous  zigzag  we  must  ascribe  to
J2,  if  we  make  him  take  the  Semites  from  the  mountain
in  the  S.  on  which  they  landed,  to  Mesopotamia  in
the  N.  (Peleg,  Serug),  thence  to  Ur-Mugheir,  and  thence
to  Haran  ! '

Gunkel,  too  (Gen.  145  [1901]),  does  not  accept  the
favourite  identification.1  '  The  Kasdim,'  he  says,  'are
not  the  Chaldosans  of  the  ' '  land  of  the


4. And
Qunkel's.


sea  "  [S.  Babylonia],  but  the  people  of  the


same  name  reckoned  in  2222  among  the
Nahorids  ;  cp  also  Job  1 17  2  K.  24  2  and  see  Winckler
AOF1®,  2  250-252.  From  the  description  in  Gen.  11 31  we
can  only  infer  that  the  way  from  Ur-kasdim  to  Canaan
passed  by  Harran.  Against  this  location  of  Ur-kasdim
it  may  be  objected  that  we  know  both  Uru  and  Harranu
to  have  been  famous  seats  of  moon-worship,  so  that
these  two  places  appear  to  have  an  inner  connection.
But  this  coincidence  may  be  accidental.  At  any  rate
the  statement  that  Abraham  came  from  Ur-kasdim
will  be  a  very  primitive  tradition — a  variant  to  the  other
statement  that  he  came  from  Harran.  In  P  both
traditions  are  united  in  such  a  way  that  two  journeys
are  distinguished,  the  first  from  Ur-kasdim  to  Harran,
the  second  from  Harran  to  Canaan.'

The  riddle,  as  usually  stated,  admits  of  no  satisfactory

solution, for  the  simple  reason  that the  texts of the

_ -VT  . narratives  in  Genesis,  after  having  been

''  .  -  partly  corrupted  in  transcription,  were
,  .  re-edited  by  men  who  had  different

geographical  presuppositions  from  those
of  the  original  writers.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more
probable  that  the  original  scene  of  the  primary  Hebrew
legends  was  in  the  Negeb.  From  '  Adam  '  to  Joseph
this  can  be  traced,  sometimes  with  virtual  certainty,
sometimes  with  considerable  probability.  The  geo
graphical  changes  introduced  were  owing  partly  (as  we
have  seen)  to  corruption,  and  partly  to  the  perplexing
similarity  of  the  names  in  different  parts  of  the  ancient
East  (cp  Schr.  KGF  29  247).  There  was  a  Harran  in
the  N.  ;  there  was  also  in  all  probability  a  Harran  in
the  S.  (referred  to,  e.g. ,  in  the  phrase,  '  Sanballat  the
Haranite,'  'nnn,  NTeh.  2io,  see  SANBALLAT).  There
was  an  Aram  in  the  N.  ;  there  was  also  an  Aram  in
the  S.  The  later  scribes  unfortunately  forgot  all
about  the  southern  Harran  and  Aram,  though  they  were
conscientious  enough  to  leave  abundant  half-concealed
evidence  of  their  existence.  Transcriptional  errors  too
were  easy.

ISO  and  Bnp,  e'~1p  and  £?13  were  very  easily  confounded,  and
beside  B13  there  was  a  form  C\y)3,  which  was  liable  to  be  mis-
written  DK'lp  ar>d  even  p&y\  (see  PROPHET,  col.  3861,  n.  2).
It  would  not  be  right  at  the  opening  of  a  large  field  of  inquiry
to  assume  that  such  confusions  in  any  particular  case  were  more
than  probable.  But  we  are  not  at  the  opening  of  an  inquiry.
Sufficient  evidence  has  been  produced  by  the  present  writer  to
justify  him  in  the  assertion  that  there  is  a  strong  probability  in
favour  of  any  correction  which  brings  any  particular  legend


1  In  GV«.  f2)  139  [1902],  however,  Gunkel  falls  back  on  the
average  opinion  of  scholars.  After  stating  the  view  mentioned
in  the  opening  sentence  of  the  quotation,  he  continues,  '  against
the  latter  location  of  Ur-kasdim  it  may,  with  justice  (init  g-utein
Grund),  be  objected,  etc.'

5233


URIAH

referred  to  away  from  the  N.  into  the  S.  (i.e.,  into  the  Negeb).
In  a  continuous  survey  of  the  sagas  or  legends  of  (  ienesis  it  would
be  possible  to  make  this  clear  to  virtual  demonstration.  All  that
can  be  done  here  is  to  point  out  that,  given  the  presuppositions
obtained  by  the  study  of  other  passages,  we  have  a  right  to
make  the  following  emendations  which  affect  the  question  of
'Ur-kasdim.'

1.  Arpachsad  (TC1:!?-

2.  Ur-kasdim  (Cni'S


come  from  &3  ^  -Arab-cush(im)
—i.e.,  'Cushite  Arabia.'


3.  Chesed  (~lt?r)  comes  from  B^3—  i.e.,  'Cush'  in  N.  Arabia"
(see  CUSH,  2).

4.  Dammesek  (pil'S1;!)  sometimes  comes  from  C'^3  '  Cusham.

5.  Kena'an (JJ?33)  sometimes  comes  from  TJp  '  Kenaz.'

In  spite  of  the  attempts  of  Gunkel  and  Winckler1  to  justify  the
traditional  reading,  it  remains  for  us  no  mere  struggling
hypothesis  but  a  fact  that  the  '  Kasdim  '  of  Job  1  17  a  K.  24  2,
are  the  N.  Arabian  Cushites(see  JOB,  BOOK  OF,  §  14  ;  OUAUIAH
(Book),  col.  3460,  n.  i).  We  are  now  bound  to  go  farther,
and  to  assert  that  according  to  the  original  tradition  Abraham
(the  Jerahmeelite  patriarch)  first  dwelt  in  'Arab-cush,  and  thence
went  to  rtarran  in  the  land  of  Kenaz.  It  will  be  remembered
that  Caleb  was  known  as  a  Kenizzite,  and  as  the  hero  of  Hebron,
which  name  appears  to  have  supplanted  the  original  name
REHOBOTH  (q.v.).  Abram  or  Abraham  too  migrated  to  Hebron,
or  rather  Rehoboth  —  the  well-known  Rehoboth  in  the  Negeb  ;
he  retained  however  a  'son  of  Cusham,'  'a  Cushamite,'  whom
he  had  brought  from  'Arab-cush  (Gen.  15  2  ;  see  Crit.  /?//».).  In
the  same  chapter  which  states  this  circumstance  we  read  (?>.  7)  a
solemn  assurance  of  Yahwe  that  he  had  brought  Abraham  from
'Arab-cush  to  possess  the  land  of  Kenaz.  It  is  difficult  to  believe
that  the  original  writers  (or  schools  of  writers)  whom  we
symbolise  as  J  and  E  were  unaware  of  this.  On  Neh.  9  7  we
must  content  ourselves  with  referring  to  Crit.  Rib.  It  is  enough
to  have  stated  distinctly  here  the  original  tradition.

F.  B.  §  I  ; T.  K.  C. §§  2-5.

UR  0-1N),  one  of  David's  'thirty'  (i  Ch.  H35t;
cGyp  [R]-  coyp  [**]•  top  [A],  oyp  t1'])-  One  would
have  expected  Uri  (nix)  ;  but  see  ELIJ'HELET,  2.

URBANE,  or  rather,  as  in  RV,  Urbanus  (oypB&NOC
[Ti.  WH]),  is  saluted  as  'our  fellow-worker  in  Christ'
in  Rom.  16g.  The  name  is  a  Latin  one.  When,  or  in
what  capacity,  Urbanus  helped  the  apostle  in  his
missionary  labours  is  not  known.

Urbanus  figures  as  bishop  of  Macedonia  in  the  list  of  'the
seventy  '  compiled  by  Pseudo-Dorotheus.  The  i/TTOjou'Tjju.a  of
Peter  and  Paul  as  given  by  the  Pseudo-Symeon  Metaphrastes
represents  him  as  consecrated  bishop  of  Tarsus  by  Peter.

URI  C^'IN,  perhaps  a  clan-name,  shortened  and
corrupted  from  Jerahme'eli  [so  Che.],  but  see  NAMES,  §  52,  and
cp  URIAH).

1.  b. Hur  —  from  'Ashhur'?  [Che.]  —  the  father  of  BEZALEKI.
(Ex.  3l2'bfj3o  2  Ch.  1  5  :'oup[e]iov  [B,  and  A  in  2  Ch.],  oup[e]i
AFL]; i  Ch.22o:  oupUMBAL]).

2.  Father  of  GEBER  [f.v.,  no.  2]  (i  K.  4  19  :  oSat  [43™],  a55at
[L]). Cp  SOLOMON,  §  6,  third  note.

3.  A post-exilic door-keeper temp. Ezra  ; Ezra  10  24  (taSovd
[BN],  wiove[A],  ouptas  [L])  =  iCh.  9i7(AmMAM  ;  Jp'riK;  aina.fi.
[B], -i>[AL/|); probably  corrupt [Che.])  =  i Esd.92§t'  (oupios
[L]  ;  om. EV  with  BA,  unless  the  name  is  buried  in  arr/s  of

)S  or  in  |3a/<xoupos  of  v.  24).


URIAH,  and  in  Mt.  16  AV,  Urias  (n>"VlN.  but  no.  3
•inn-IN  ;  oyp[e]|A.C  [BSAL]).

The  name  might  mean  'Yahwe  is  a  fire,'  §  35  ;  cp  AKIEL,  i.
It  is  strange,  however,  that  a  Yahwistic  name  should  be  borne
by  a.  Hittite.  The  difficulty  disappears  if  we  accept  Jastrow's
theory(//>'Z.  13  \oijf.  ;  see  NAMES,  §  109,  n.  3)  that  the  element
rv  is  often  only  an  emphatic  afformative.  It  is  equally  non
existent  on  the  theory  that  this  element  has  generally  arisen
out  of  ',  the  common  termination  of  gentilics.  miN,  like
TWIIK,  URIEL,  >-llN,  URI,  is  in  fact  most  probably  a  corruption

either  of  'SNDrtTi  Jerahmeeli,  or  of  <3"iy>  'Arfibl.  Cp  also  Uru
in  the  Phoenician  Uriimilki  (KA  7T-1.  185).  The  amount  of
evidence  for  such  corruptions  is  too  great  to  be  disregarded.

i.  A  '  Hittite,'  one  of  David's  heroes  (2  S.  2839  [oi'pet
L],  i  Ch.  11  41  [ovpa  BN]),  who  took  part  in  the  war
against  the  Ammonites  under  Joab,  and  was  got  rid  of
by  David  in  a  most  cowardly  way  to  cover  over  his
adultery  with  BATHSHEBA  (q.v.  ),  Uriah's  wife  (28.  11
i  K.15S).2


1  See  AOF,  2250-252.

2  The  qualification  in  7».  5  (end)  is  wanting in ®B,  and is
no  doubt  a  gloss. The  redactor  himself  elsewhere  gives  David
an  absolute  eulogy  (11  34  38). So  Benr.,  Kittel.

5234


URIEL


URIM  AND  THUMMIM


Our  view  of  the  notices  of  Uriah  in  2  S.  11  f.,  however,  needs
revision  in  the  light  of  the  facts  ;  (i)  that  the  list  of  David's
heroes,  which  includes  '  Uriah  the  Hittite,'  makes  no  allusion  to
the  reported  treachery  of  David  ;  (2)  that  the  story  of  this
treachery  has  undoubtedly  been  manipulated  (see  BATH-
SHEBA,  JEDIDIAH,  SOLOMON,  §  2),  out  of  a  regard  for  edifica
tion  ;  and  (3)  that,  Tin  being  most  probably  a  mutilated  form  of
'riiirn,  '  Rehobothite,'  and  '  Rabbah  of  the  b'ne  Ammon  '  being
not  less  probably  a  corruption  of  '  Rehoboth  of  the  b'ne  Jerah-
meel  '  (cp  REHOBOTH),  it  is  not  conceivable  that  '  Jerahrneel  the
Rehobothite  '  (misread  in  the  traditional  text,  '  Uriah  the
Hittite  ')  should  have  fought  in  the  ranks  of  the  Israelites  on  the
occasion  referred  to.  Obviously  Uriah's  true  designation  had
been  forgotten  when  the  story  of  the  siege  received  its  present
expanded  form.  To  this  we  must  add  that  stories  similar  to
that  of  the  baleful  letter  to  Joab  are  familiar  to  students  of
primitive  folklore.1  Even  apart  from  this,  it  is  plausible  to  hold,
on  grounds  of  literary  criticism,  that  2  S.  11  i  was  originally
followed  by  1226  (S.  A.  Cook,  AJSL  16156  [April  1900];  so,
independently,  Winckler).  Cp,  however,  Budde  in  KHC,
'  Sam.'  250.

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  Uriah  may  have  come  into  the
story  of  Bathsheba.  BATHSHEBA  (y.v.)  was  apparently  a
'Jerahmeelite'  by  origin.  ^NDnV,  when  broken  up  by  the
carelessness  of  scribes,  furnishes  material  for  the  two  words
DyXx  (Eliam)  and  n'llN  (Uriah).  Errors  like  this  often  have
strange  results  in  the  production  of  legends.

2.  A  priest,  temp.  Ahaz,  who  acted  as  a  witness  for  Isaiah  (Is.
82). He  is  presumably  the  Uriah  (AV  UKIJAH)  who  built  an
altar  for  Ahaz  after  a  Damascene  pattern,  2  K.  16  loyC

3.  h. Shemaiah  of  Kirjath-jearim, slain  at  the  command  of
Jehoiakim  for prophesying  against Jerusalem  (Jer.  2620  AV
Urijah).

4.  Father  of  MEREMOTH  (i),  a  priest  temp.  Nehemiah,  Ezra
833  (apetou  [L]),  I  Esd.  862  (!RI,  RV  Urlas  ;  oup[e]ia  [B],  oupi
[A],  oupiou  [L]),  cp  Neh.  8421  (AV  Urijah,  trovpia  [  jj]),  possibly
the  Uriah  present  at  the  reading  of  the  law  under  Ezra  (Neh.
8  4  AV  Urijah  ;  ovpeia.  [BNc'a-  A]  =  i  Esd.  9  43  E  V  URIAS).

T.  K.  C.

URIEL  (  Vriet],  '  the  angel  that  was  sent  '  to  Ezra,
according  to  4  Esd.  4i  36  (?)  620  1028.

In  436  he  is  called  an  archangel,  but  RV  prefers  the  reading
JEKE.MIEL.  (y.v.),  a  name  which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  this
literature,  but  is  most  probably,  like  'Jeremiah,'  one  of  the
many  distorted  forms  of  'Jerahrneel'2  (cp  ©BA;  Jer.  8626).
Possibly  '  Jeremiel  '  (SttDT)  's  a  variant  to  '  Raphael  '  (^N£n)  ;
Raphael,  according  to  Enoch  20  2,  is  the  '  angel  of  the  spirits  of
men.'  Uriel,  under  the  corrupt  form  '  Adoil,'  occurs  in  Tg.  Jon.,
and  in  the  Slavonic  Enoch  25  2,  not,  however,  as  an  angel.  This
passage  presupposes  the  explanation  'flame  of  God,'  which  is
hardly  the  original  meaning.  The  Jerahmeelite  connection  of
some  of  the  chief  angelic  names  in  -el  is  noteworthy.  See
MICHAEL,  and,  in  illustration,  note  the  facts  which  point  to
Jerahmeelite  influence,  both  healthful  and  the  reverse,  on  the
religion  of  Israel  (MosES,  §  14,  PROPHET,  §  df.).  T.  K.  C.

URIEL  (?N'>"V1N  ;  oypmA)-  A  plausible  explanation
of  the  name  is  'flame  of  God,'  §  35,  or,  'God  is  a
light,'  cp  ?3~)1X  Niirbel,  a  Palmyrene  name,  de  Vogiie',
Syr.  Centr.  124;  Baeth.  Beitr.  86.  But  (  i  )  the  analogy
(contested,  no  doubt)  of  many  similar  names,  (2)  the
occurrence  of  the  regularly  formed  ethnic  Uri,  and  (3)
the  connections  of  the  bearers  of  the  name,  may  be
held  to  favour  an  explanation  similar  to  that  given  above
of  URIAH  —  i.e.,  it  is  a  Jerahmeelite  or  N.  Arabian
name  [Che.].

1.  The  father  of  Michaiah,  the  mother  of  Abijah, king  of
Judah  (2  Ch.  13  2). (For  ouptrjA  a-n-b  yapauii'  d5L  has  a/3ecrcraAu)jii.)
But  see  MAACAH,  3.

2.  Chief  of  the  Kohathites,  mentioned  at  the  bringing  up  of
the  ark  to  Jerusalem  under  David  (i  Ch.  15  5  n  ;  apnq\  [B]).

3.  A  name  in  the  Kohathite  genealogy  of  ELKANAH  (q.v.)
(i  Ch.  624  [9]:  opirjA.[B]).

4  and  5.  Perhaps  a  collateral  form  of  ARIEL,  i  (  =  ARELI)
and  ARIEL,  2.


),  Jer.  2620  AV,  RV  URIAH  (3).


URIJAH


URIM AND THUMMIM (

AH/\OOCIC,  or  AnAoi,  KM  &AH9ei&  [i  8.1441
OCIOTHC];  Aq.  Sym.  Theod.  cJxJOTiCMOl  [Sym.  i  S.
286  AnAoi,  Dt.  338  jeAeiOTHC  KAI  AiA&xn.  cp
Jerome]  and  reAeioTHTec-  TeAeicoceic.  reAeioi  ;

1  Miicke  (Vont  F.uphrat  nach  Tiber,  p.  75,  n.  i)  refers  to  the
stories  of  Bellerophon,  Pausanias,  and  Otto  von  Wittelsbach.

-  Similarly  Gunkel,  in  Kau.  Afiokr.  357.

3  Urim  alone,  Nu.  27  21  i  S.  286  ;  Thummim  and  Urim,  Dt.
33  8.  On  the  derivation  and  meaning  see  below.

S23S


Vg.  doctrina  and  veritas  or  perfcctio],  the  apparatus  of
the  priestly  oracle  (Dt.  338  cp  10  ;  Nu.272i  Ezra26s
[<§BA  TOIC  (J)U)TIZOYCIN  K&l  TOIC  TeAeiOIC.  <SL

•  •  •  TeAeio)ceciN]  =  Neh.  76s  [<SBXA  C}>COTICOON,  <SL

TOIC 4>CGTICMOIC KAI TAIC T6A6ICOC6CI  N])- The

only  passage  which  throws  any  light  upon  the  nature
and  use  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim  is  i  S.  144i/.

Emending  after  ©,  we  read:  'And  Saul  said,  "O  Yahwe,
God  of  Israel,  why  dost  thou  not  answer  thy  servant  to-day?  If
this  fault  be  in  me  or  in  Jonathan  my  son,  giveUrim,  and  if  it  be
in  thy  people  Israel,  give  Thummim."  Thereupon  Saul  and
Jonathan  were  taken  and  the  people  went  free.  Then  Saul  said
"  Cast  between  me  and  Jonathan  my  son  ;  he  whom  Yahwe
takes  shall  die  "...  So  they  cast  between  him  and  Jonathan
his  son,  and  Jonathan  was  taken.'

It  is  evident  from  v.  41  that  the  question,  which  in
both  cases  is  put  as  a  simple  alternative  (cp  39),  was
decided  by  casting  lots  ;  and  from  v.  40  that  Urim  and
Thummim  were  the  names  respectively  of  two  objects
with  which  the  cast  was  made.

Comparing  i  S.  14  41  f.  with  36  ©  (cp  3  18  (5)  we
see  that  the  casting  of  lots  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim
was  part  of  the  method  of  divination  by  the  ephod  ;  in
other  places  where  the  ephod  is  employed  (236  9  30?)
the  procedure  is  so  exactly  the  same  as  in  i  S.  14  36^
that  there  is  hardly  room  for  doubt  that  in  these  cases
also  the  decision  was  by  the  same  sacred  lots  (see
EPHOD)  ;  and  in  many  others,  though  neither  the  ephod
nor  the  Urim  and  Thummim  is  named,  the  same
inference  may  confidently  be  drawn  (see  i  S.  10  20^
2  S.  2  1  5ig/:  Josh.  1  ibff.  Judg.  20  27/.  ).1  In  the  article
EPHOD  (§  4)  it  has  been  surmised  that  the  Urim  and
Thummim  were  kept  in  the  ephod,  and  with  certain
manipulations  secundum  artem  drawn  or  thrown  from
it.  Moslem  writers  describe  a  similar  mode  of  divina
tion  among  the  Arabs  before  Islam.  Two  arrow-shafts
(without  heads  or  feathers),  on  one  of  which  was  written
'  Command,'  on  the  other  '  Prohibition,'  or  words  of
similar  purport,  were  placed  in  a  receptacle,  and  ac
cording  as  one  or  the  other  of  them  was  drawn  out  it
was  known  whether  the  proposed  enterprise  was  in
accordance  with  the  will  of  the  god  and  destined  to
succeed,  or  not  (cp  Pro  v.  1633  Acts  126).  At  Mecca,
it  is  said,  these  lots  were  in  the  keeping  of  the  guardians
of  the  Holy  House,  one  of  whom  drew  an  arrow  when
a  man  wished  to  decide  whether  to  go  on  a  journey,
to  marry,  etc.  Sometimes  three  arrows  were  used,
one  of  which  was  blank  ;  if  this  was  drawn  the  god
refused  a  response  (cp  i  S.  14s?  286).  Other  objects,
such  as  white  pebbles,  similarly  marked,  were  also
used  ;  and  the  interrogatory  could  be  framed  in  other
and  more  complex  ways.2  That  the  divination  by
Urim  and  Thummim  was  of  this  kind  is  the  opinion
of  J.  D.  Michaelis  (Mas.  Recht,  i,  §  52  —  three  pebbles),
Ewald  (Alt.  390  ff.  ),  and  many  others.  The  form
of  the  Urim  and  Thummim  is  unknown  ;  that  they
were  little  images  (De  Castro,  Spencer,  Gesen.,  and
others)  is  a  conjecture  which  rests  solely  upon  an
erroneous  identification  with  the  teraphim.  If  it  were
safe  to  draw  an  inference  from  the  size  and  shape  of  the
receptacle  provided  for  them  in  P's  description  of  the
high  priest's  vestments,  we  should  imagine  them  as
small  flat  objects,  perhaps  tablets  of  wood  or  bone  ;  but
it  may  be  doubtful  whether  P,  who,  strangely  enough,
gives  no  directions  for  the  making  of  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  had  any  definite  notion  what  they  were.

In  P  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  in  the  keeping
of  the  high  priest  (Ex.  2830  Lev.  88  Nu.  272i);  they
are  preserved  in  a  square  pouch  which  is  worn  upon  his
breast,  the  Bseto  jrn,  hosen  mispilt  (EV  '  breastplate  of


1  It  is,  of  course,  not  imagined  that  in  all  cases  in  which  lots
are  used  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  meant.

2  See  Ibn  Hisham,  1  ^ff.\  Lane,  Aral<.-Engl.  Lex.  col.  1247  ;
cp  Tac.  Germ.  10,  and  in  general  Van  Dale,  De  dhinationibus
idolatricis  in  VT  memoratis,  chap.  4;  We.  Heid.^t  izf>f  (2)
I33_/C An  example  of  belomancy  in  the  OT,  Ezek.  21  21  [2t];
see  Jerome  adloc.,  and  cp  DIVINATION,  §  2  (ii.).

5236


USURY

judgment'  ;  rather  'of  [divine]  decision,  oracle';1  see
BREASTPLATE).  This  pouch  was  permanently  attached
by  chains  and  cords  through  rings  at  its  corners  to  the
ephod  ;  the  association  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim  with
the  ephod  which  we  found  in  the  historical  books  is  thus
preserved  in  P  (  EPHOD,  §  3).  Whether  this  form  of
consulting  Yahwe  was  actually  practised  in  the  post-
exilic  period  is  doubtful.  There  is  no  mention  of  it  in
the  historical  books  after  the  time  of  David  and  Solomon
(i  K.  226  read  '  the  ephod']  ;  but  Hos.  84  shows  that  in
the  prophet's  day  the  ephod-oracle  was  one  of  the  things
which  the  popular  religion  could  not  be  thought  of  as
existing  without.  In  Neh.  76s  (Ezra263  i  Esd.  640),
however,  an  important  question  affecting  the  rights  of
certain  priestly  families  is  reserved  for  decision  '  when  a
Urim  and  Thummim  priest  shall  arise,'  proving  that
this  mode  of  divination  was  then  disused  —  the  art  seem
ingly  lost.  A  reference  like  Ecclus.  883  [Si/ccu'wc  (B),
dri\wv  (A)  ;  cp  45  10  5rj\ois  d\i]9eias,  where,  moreover,
\oyiti)  Kpifffus  also  corresponds  to  aat'D  JBTI]  does  not
prove  that  it  was  practised  in  the  writer's  day.  Josephus
says  that  the  breastplate  had  ceased  to  light  up  (\O./J.TT€LV,
his  understanding  of  the  Urim)  two  hundred  years  before
his  time  (Ant.  iii.  89  [§  218]);  while  according  to  the
Mishna  (Sotafi  9i2)  2  the  Urim  and  Thummim  ceased
with  the  death  of  the  pre-exilic  prophets  ;  but  this  is
apparently  only  an  inference  from  Ezra  263.

The  names  Urim  and  Thummim  as  vocalised  in  MT
mean  '  Lights  '  and  '  Perfection.  '  This  pronunciation
is,  however,  unknown  to  the  translators  of  @,  who
read  the  former  'Orim,  and  derived  it  from  min,  '  to
give  decision,  torah  '  (cp  Dt.  338  10)  —  an  interpretation
to  which  Sym.  adheres  (diScix^)-  Modern  scholars
have  not  succeeded  in  giving  a  satisfactory  explanation
of  the  words.  If  Urim  and  Thummim  were  the  names
respectively  of  two  lots  which  were  of  opposite  presage,
it  is  natural  to  infer  that  the  names  had  a  corresponding
significance  ;  and  this  presumption  is  still  stronger  if,
as  seems  not  unlikely,  the  words  were  actually  written
upon  the  objects  used  for  casting  or  drawing  the  lot.
If,  then,  D'Dn  is  derived,  as  there  is  no  need  to  question,
from  the  root  can  '  be  without  fault,'  its  opposite  might
well  be  a  derivative  of  TIN  '  curse,'  3  the  one  signifying
that  a  proposed  action  was  satisfactory  to  God,  the  other
that  it  provoked  his  wrath.  This  contrast  would  be
still  more  natural  if  we  might  suppose  that  the  Urim
and  Thummim  were  originally  employed  in  a  kind  of
ordeal  such  as  is  described  in  r  S.  1436^,  where  the
re;il  question  was  one  of  guilt  or  innocence  ;  and  it  is
perhaps  not  without  significance  that  Saul  asks  that  if
the  fault  be  in  himself  or  in  Jonathan  the  lot  Urim  may
come  out.  If  this  view  is  sound,  the  words  should
probably  be  pronounced  'orlm  and  tamlm.  But  all
such  conjectures  are  subject  to  the  greatest  reserve.

Literature.  —  For  the  older  literature  see  J.  G.  Carpzov,
Apparatus  historico-criticus  antiquitatum,  1748,  p.  75./C  ;  for
the  history  of  opinion  esp.  Kautzsch  in  PREW,  s.v.  16  226-233.
The  most  important  of  the  earlier  monographs  are  Joh.  Huxtorf,
'  Historia  Urim  et  Thummim,'  in  his  Rxercitatianes,  267  Jf.,
reprinted  in  Ugolini  Thes.  Viyj^Jf.  ;  and  Spencer,  '  De  Urim  et
Thummim,'  in  De  leg.  rit.,  lib.  '6  diss.  7  (and  in  Ugolini,  1^453^)  ;


see  also  Braun,  De  vestitu  sacerdntuin,  p.  593^  See  also  the
literature  under  EPHOD  ;  [also  Haupt,  '  Hah.  elements  in  the
Levit.  Ritual,'  /#£  19  S8_/  \-jzf.  (1900);  W.  Muss-Arnolt,  '  The
Urim  and  Thummim,'  reprinted  from  AJSL,  July  1900]  ;  T.  C.
Foote,  JBL  21  27^  (1902).  G.  F.  M.

USURY.  See  LAW  AND  JUSTICE,  §  16  ;  PLEDGE  ;
TRADE  AND  COMMERCE,  §  83  (e)  4  (2).

i.  The  commonest  word  is  7JE>J,  nfsek,  -v/lt?],  lit.  '  something
bitten  off':  TOKOS,  usura  (Ex.2225  Lev.  2536  f.  Dt.  IZigf.
Ps.  15  5  Prov.  288  Ezek.  18s  13  17  22  12).

1  The  meaning  of  the  word  jjyn  is  not  known  ;  something  like
'receptacle'  hest  suits  the  context.

-  See  also  the  Talmud,  SfifaA  48  t,  Joina  21  f>  (Urim  and
Thummim  lacking  in  second  temple),  and  Maimonides,  Kcle  ha-
mikdash,  10,  §  10.

3  That  Q"ix  is  perhaps  to  be  connected  with  TIN  was  sug
gested  by  Wellhausen,  Prol.^  419  n.

1  67  5237


uz

2.  The  verb  HC>3,  nas<i,  awaire'iv,  cx}>ti\tiv  (Neh.  5  7  (Kt.)  Is.
242),  gives  the  substantive  NtfC,  massa,  djrouYrjo-is  (Neh.  67  10).

3.  The verb  W3,  nilsah,  airaneiv  (Kr.)  (Neh.  6  7,  ci^eAelx,
Jer.  15 10,  etc), gives ntr:, noseh, Karentiytav, Ex. '.'2  25, AV
'usurer,'  RV  'creditor,'  and  '&},  «<•// (K-r.),  2  K.  47,  EV  'debt'
(©BA  airoTt'o-eis  TOVS  TOKOUS  o-ov,  lPL  avona-ov  TO  San/dov).

4.  TOKOS  in  Mt.  25  27  Lk.  19  23,  RV  '  interest.'

UTA  (OYT<\  [BA]),  a  post-exilic  family  of  Nethinim
(i  Esd.  630),  unmentioned  in  ||  Ezra  (245),  or  Xehemiah
(7  48).

UTHAI  C-rVU?1 ;  oyGi  [BAL]).

1.  i  Ch.  94(yio6i[e]t  [BA])=Neh.  114,  ATHAIAH.

2.  One  of  the  b'ne  BK;VAI  (y.v.); Ezra 8  14  (ovdai  [A],  wflat
[L])=i  Esd.  S4ot,  Uthi  (OVTOV  IB],  wflcu  [L]),  son  of  Istalcurus,
on  which  see  ZABUD,  2.

UZ  (pi;  ;  with  art.  I'-Wil,  Jer.  252of;  on  origin  of
name,  see  GEOGRAPHY,  §  20,  and  note  suggestion
below  that  '  Uz  '  may  be  due  to  an  early  transcriber's
error).  According  to  the  traditional  view,  the  name  is
connected  both  with  a  region  to  the  N.  and  with  a
region  to  the  S.  of  Palestine.  The  facts  of  MT  are  as
follows  :  (i)  Eldest  son  of  Aram,  Gen.  1023  (us,  AEL),
cp  i  Ch.  1 17  (ws,  A  [17-23,  om.  B],  oi>f,  L),  where  Uz,
Hul,  etc.,  are  among  the  sons  of  Shem,  but  (5A  agrees
with  MT  of  Gen.  1023  (so  Cappellus,  Houb. ,  Ki. ).
(2)  Eldest  son  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother,  Gen.  222i
(<a%  [A],  wf  [L]).  (3)  Grandson  of  Seir  the  Horite,
Gen.  8628  (ws  [ADL],  ovs  [E]),  i  Ch.  142  (wj  [BA],  our
[L]).  (4)  A  land  between  c'lSD  (Egypt?  Musri  in  N.
Arabia?)  and  Philistia,  Jer.  25 20  (not  in  &).  (5)  An
Edomite  land,  Lam.  4 21  (not  in  ©).'2  (6)  A  land  of
uncertain  situation,  where  Job  dwelt,  Job  1  i  (<?i>  x^Pf
rri  AiV[e]m5i  ;  and  in  ©'s  addition  to  42 17).  See,
further,  GEOGRAPHY,  §  20.

Let  us  consider  these  data  in  the  following  order : — (4),  (5),
(3).  (6),  (i),  (2).  Not  much  need  be  said  on  (4).  The  clause
relative  to  Uz  (?)  is  omitted  by  Graf,  Cornill,  Giesebrecht,  and
Duhm  as  a  gloss.  It  seems  more  probable,  however,  that  pjM
is  a  corruption  of  pun,  which  a  thoughtless  scribe  wrote  instead
°f  DTIB'^D,  which  follows  in  the  list  of  peoples.  As  to  (=)•  it  is
plain  from  metrical  considerations  that  py  is  superfluous  ;  most
probably  it  is  a  corruption  of  a  dittographed  px  (<S,  en-i  y>)s);
the  first  px  seems  to  have  come  from  I^Q  (see  LAMENTA
TIONS,  BOOK  OF,  §  8;  MIZRAIM).  As  to  (3),  for  '  Dishon '  <0
appears  to  have  read  '  Rishon,'  which  suggests  Assuran-*  as  the
original.  Now  the  first-mentioned  son  of  Dishan  (a  mere
double  of  Dishon)  is  Hemdan— i.e.,  probably  Jerahmeel.  The
corresponding  place  in'  the  list  of  Dishon's  children  ought  to  be
occupied  by  some  not  less  important  ethnic.  Ozem  (ci'x),  i  Ch.
225,  appears  therefore  to  be  excluded.  Missur  is  what  we
expect,  and  if  pj;  is  a  name  of  purely  literary  origin,  and  has
come  by  an  early  transcriber's  error  from  l^C!4  our  expectation
is  justified.

We  now  come  to  (6),  and  ask,  Where  was  the  land  of  Uz,
where  Job  dwelt?  The  data  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  con
flicting.  Job  was  one  of  the  pip  *:a-  It  seems  therefore  as
if  he  ought  to  be  placed  in  the  E.  or  NE.  of  Palestine,  and  this
can  be  supported  by  the  mention  of  the  Kasdim  in  Jobl  17,  and
possibly  by  the  ethnics  '  Shuhite '(?)  in  2  n,  and  '  Buzite  '  in  322,
also  by  the  references  to  Uz  in  (i)  and  (2),  according  to  the
ordinary  view.  No  stress,  however,  can  be  laid  on  the  tradition
connecting  Job  with  the  district  of  Haurftn  called  the  Nukra
(see  Wetzstein's  valuable  excursus  in  Del.  //?V»/>(2i,  551-604),
since  it  can  only  be  traced  back  to  the  fourth  century  A.D.
On  the  other  hand,  the  names  Eliphaz,  BILDAD  (?.?'.),  and
ZHPHAR  (y.T.),  and  the  ethnic  '  Tcmanite '  in  2n,  suggest
placing  the  home  of  Job  in  a  region  S.  of  Palestine,  and
'  Kasdim'  in  1  17  should  probably  rather  be  '  Kusim  '  (Cushites
of  N.  Arabia),  while  the  representation  of  Job  and  his  friends  as
cultivators  of '  wisdom  '  indicates  that  this  was  really  the  view
of  the  writers  of  our  present  Book  of  Job  (cp  Jon,  BOOK  OF,
§§  4,  9).  This  latter  view  is  also  confirmed  by  the  apocryphal
appendix  to  Job  in  (0  (see  GEOGRAPHY,  §  20),  and,  according  to
the  present  writer's  theory,  by  the  phrase  bene  kedcm  in  Jobl  3,
which  is  a  corruption  of  benc  reketii — i.e.,  sons  of  Jerahmeel  (see

1  For  n'mj?  cp  de  Vogiie,  /.  As.  1897,  10202  (no.  355).

2  Unless  •)/»)?  represent  not  only  pn  but  also  a  transliteration
of  pj>. See  next  paragraph.

'  So  c'XT  in  Ezek.  38  2  probably  comes  from  llC'tf,  'Asshur1
(the  southern  Asshur).  See  ROSH.

4  In  Lam.  4  21  JHN  seems  to  have  come  from  IX— i.e.,  15fS ;  see
above,  on  (5).

5238


UZAI

REKE.M).  As  to  (i)  and  (2),.  we  have  seen  elsewhere  (see,  e.g.,
MIZRAIM)  that  Gen.  10  has  been  largely  recast,  so  that  'Aram'
originally  meant  the  N.  Arabian  tribes  known  collectively  as
'  Jerahmeel,'  and  it  is  possible  that  the  names  '  Nahor '  and
'  Haran  '  were  originally  attached  to  the  Negeb.

To  sum  up.  The  two  sets  of  data  do  not  really  conflict,  if
Aram  and  Nahor  are  primarily  names  of  clans  and  districts  in
the  Xegeb,  and  not  where  later  writers  placed  them  in  the  NE.
of  Palestine.  This  is  not  a  mere  struggling  hypothesis,  but
accords  with  a  large  series  of  parallel  phenomena.  If,  however,
we  hesitate  to  admit  this  view  (which  implies  that  '  Aram  '  comes
from  '  Jerahmeel '),  we  may  still  find  a  plausible  reconciliation  of
the  data  (see  _|<>n,  BOOK  OF,  §  4).  At  any  rate,  a  new  critical
treatment  of  the  name  may  not  be  altogether  unwelcome.
Theories  that  are  simple  frequently  prove  to  be  erroneous.  Cp
Budde,  Hiof>,  '  Vorwort,'  pp.  ix-xi.  T.  K.  C.

UZAI  H-1X,  eyei  [BK],  eyz<M  [A],  oyz.  [L]),  father

of  Palal  (Xch.  825).

UZAL  (tylS  ;  Sam.  hr$  ;  AIZHA),  son  of  Joktan,
Gen.  10 27  (om.  E),  iCh.  l2i  (om.  B,  AJ^HN  [A],
oyz&A  [L]),  and,  by  a  necessary  correction,  Ezek.
27 19,  where  ironwork  (i.e.,  sword-blades?),  cassia,  and
calamus  (spice)  appear  among  the  articles  of  trade  from
Uzal.  The  name  is  obscure.  Ar.  tradition  makes
Aziil  the  ancient  name  of  the  capital  of  Yemen,  later
known  as  San'd  (see  Di.  ad  loc.  and  reff. ).  The  con
nection  of  the  two  names  is  disputed  by  Glaser  (Skizze,
£277310427434),  who  prefers  to  seek  for  Uzal  near
Medina.1

On  the  text  of  the  whole  verse  see  Cornill  (£2.,  ad  foe.).
VjINa  for  SHNO  is  supported  by  some  MSS,  ©,  Pesh.,  and
nearly  all  moderns.  AV  renders  '  going  to  and  fro ' ;  RV
strangely  relegates  the  above  reading  ('from  Uzal')  to  the
margin,  and  translates  'yarn,'  based  apparently  on  a  passive
formation  of  SjN  =  Aram.  Sjy,  'to  spin.'  This  weakening  of
y  to  x  does  occur  in  Heb.,  but  not  often  enough  to  warrant  such
a  rendering  (cp  W.  Wright,  Conip.  Gr.  Sent.  48  247).  [See  also
Crit.  />'//>.  on  Gen.  10  27  Ezek.  27  19.]  F.  B.

UZZA,  THE  GARDEN  OF  (NW  \\,  .  .  .  KHTTOC
OZA  [HAL];  Pesh.  g'nthgssa;  kortus  Aza),  the  spot
where  Manasseh  and  Amon,  and  according  to  (§5B  (see
below)  Jehoiakim  were  buried  (2  K.  21 1826).  The
most  important  passage  is  2  K.  21 18,  because  the
Chronicler,  toq,  refers  to  the  spot  where  Manasseh  was
buried  ;  he  makes  no  such  statement  in  the  case  of
Amon.  Manasseh  was  buried  '  in  the  garden  of  his
house,  in  the  garden  of  Uzza'  (2  K.  21  18):  the  ||  passage,
2  Ch.  8820,  simply  says,  '  in  his  own  house,'  or  (©)  '  in
the  garden  of  his  house.'  Most  scholars  suppose  that
near  Manasseh's  palace  was  a  plantation  named  after
Uzza  (Uzziah?)  where  Manasseh  had  made  a  family
grave,  but  this  is  not  quite  satisfactory.

In  2  K.  21  18  pa  is  written  twice  over  in  parallel  phrases.
Omit  the  second  j:3,  and  read  "IIS  JV3  J33,  'in  the  plantation
of  the  mausoleum  '  (lit.  '  rock -house  '—i.e.,  grave  in  the  rock,  cp
Is.  14  18  22  i6/')-  IV  in  the  Psalter  is  repeatedly  miswritten  for
IS.  Note  also  that  in  2  Ch.  3<>8  <E>B  has  .  .  .  K<X!  €KOI^^»)
'liaaxeifj.  .  .  .  KCU  eTct</>?)  ei/  yavo^ar]  (yavo^av  [A],  Tav  O£a  [L])
juera  ran'  rraTepwi/  aiirov.  T.  K.  C.

UZZAH  (OZA  [BAT,]),  i.  (HW,  28.66-8,  §  51;
A.ZZA[N]  [A])  or  UZZA  (NW,  2  S."63  Uz<v  A]  i  Ch.
1879-11),  one  of  the  sons  of  Abinadab  who  took  part
in  the  bringing  up  of  the  ark  from  Kirjath-jearim  under
David  (see  ARK,  §  5  ;  KIRJATH-JEARIM).  He  and
his  brother  (rnx;  cp  AHIO)  were  driving  the  cart  upon
which  the  ark  was  placed,  when,  upon  reaching  a  certain
threshing-floor  (see  NACHON),  the  oxen  '  stumbled  '  (see
below),  whereupon  Uzzah  put  forth  his  hand  to  steady
the  ark  (emend  2  S.  67  after  i  Ch.  13  10  with  We.,  Dr.,
Bu. ,  and  others).  For  this  'God  smote  him,'  and  the
place  received  the  name  PEREZ-UZZAH  (q.v. ).  The
Chronicler,  however,  accounts  differently  for  the
calamity  ;  '  none  ought  to  bear  the  ark  of  God  but
the  Lev'ites'  (i  Ch.  1»2  ;  cp  v.  12 /  and  col.  3463,  n.  i).
The  narrative  can  hardly  be  understood  by  itself ;  it
must  be  taken  in  connection  with  2  S.  5 17-25-  It  would

1  Asur-bani-pal  speaks  of  a  city  called  Azalla,  in  the  far-off
land  of  Mas  (see  MESHA  i.);  see  Del.  Par.  243,  298^

5239


UZZIAH

appear  (see  REHOBOTH,  ZAKEPHATH)  that,  according
to  the  story  which  underlies  this  passage  and  2  S.
21 15-22  and  238^,  David  and  his  giblwrim  won  a
great  victory  over  the  Zarephathites  and  the  Rehoboth-
ites,  and  by  textual  corruption  Zarephath-'azzah  (the
name  in  the  original  text)  became  Perez-uzzah,  and  so
an  imaginary  person  was  produced,  called  Uzzah.
The  corrupt  word  Perez  naturally  suggested  a  divine
judgment  (cp  Ex.  1922  Ps.  60s  [i]).  The  story  is  recog
nised  as  historical  by  Wade  (Old  Test.  hist.  248),
but  it  is  perhaps  wiser  to  regard  it  as  artificial.  See
PEREZ.

'Stumbled  '  is  evidently  the  sense  required  in  2  S.  66,  though
AV  gives  '  shook '  (RV  '  stumbled  ' ;  with  margins).  mptf,  how
ever,  is  not  the  right  word ;  perhaps  it  is  the  residuum  of
'BECnn,  '  wavered  violently.'  For  other  views  see  Dr.  and  Bu.
(KHC).

2.  AV  UZZA  (.IT},'),  a  Merarite  (i  Ch.  6  29  [14]:  a£x  [A],  o£a
[L]).  Cp  GENEALOGIES  i.,  §  7  (ii.  d).  T.  K.  C.

UZZEN  -  SHEERAH, UZZEN  -  SHERAH. See

SHEKAH.

UZZI  CW,  a  perfectly  regular  abbreviated  form  of
•1!"I*'T1?  [for  Cheyne's  view  see  UZZIAH],  cp  Palm.
nrYozfcll  [BAL]  generally).

i.  b.  Bukki,  in  the  genealogical  list  connecting
Eleazar  and  Zadok  (i  Ch.  65  [031],  cp  v.  51  [36],  ofr-rjX
[L]).  This  list  is  given  also  in  Ezra?2^  (craovia  [B],
ofti/t  [A],  ofioi'  [L]),  but  with  the  omission  of  all  names
between  Meraioth  and  Azariah  (the  father  of  Amariah).
In  i  Esd.  82  the  name  appears  as  SAVIAS  (om.  B,  ffaovia
[A],  ofiou  [L]);  for  OZIAS  (AV  EZIAS)  here  represents
Azariah  (of[e]toi>  [B],  cfiou  [A],  fapcuov  [L]),  and  ©B
by  further  omitting  Uzzi  and  his  son  Zerahiah  makes
Azariah  the  son  of  Bukki — a  proceeding  which  is  based
on  a  confusion  between  inmy  and  vy.  Jos.  (Ant.  viii.  13)
replaces  Uzzi  and  Zerahiah  by  to>[a]#a/xos.  See  GENE
ALOGIES  i. ,  §  7  [iv.].

2.  b.  Tola,  a  chief  of  ISSACHAR  (§  7,  end),  i  Ch.  7  2/1  (£eipp«
[B  v.  3]).

3.  b.  Bela  b.  BENJAMIN  (§  9,  ii.  a),  i  Ch.  "7  ;  cp  UZZA  (i  Ch.
87).

4.  b.  Michri  of  BENJAMIN  (§  9,  iii.),  i  Ch.  9  8  (o£ou  [L]).

5.  b.  Bani,  anoverseer,  temp.  Nehemiah(Neh.  11  22,  om.  Nc.a).

6.  A  chief  of  a  father's  house  of  Jedaiah  (Neh.  12  19  42  om.
BN*A  in  both  places,  o£i  [L],  o£  [Nc.a  mg.]).  S.  A.  C.

UZZIA  (JOU? ;  oz[e]iA[c]  [BSAL]),  the  Ashterathite
(very  possibly  Og's  city  of  Ashtaroth  [Dt.  14  etc.]  was
really  Zarephath,  a  city  on  the  N.  Arabian  border  prob
ably  conquered  by  David,  see  ZAREPHATH  ;  but  for  the
received  view  see  ASHTAROTH),  one  of  David's  heroes
(DAVID,  §  ii «,  i.);  i  Ch.  l!44-t  T.  K.  c.

UZZIAH  (ITU?  [-in  in  2  K.  163234  Is.  1 1,1  etc.,  2  Ch.
26 1  ff.  27  2  ;  see  also  5,  below],  either  an  expansion  of
the  clan-name  Uzzi  (see  Crit.  Bib.  on  i  Ch.  631)  or  a
religious  utterance  ='  Yahwe  is  strength,'  or  'my
strength'  (§  29);  there  is  the  same  difference  of

1  That  'Uzza'  in  2  K.  21  1826  has  anything  to  do  with
'  Uzziah,'  as  Wellhausen  once  suggested,  is  far  from  probable  (see
UZZA).  Nor  has  the  name  Azriya'u  of  Ya'udi  anything  to  do
with  our  Uzziah  or  Azariah.  With  regard  to  the  authentication
of  the  names  in  the  OT,  '  Azariah  '  has  on  the  whole  the  support
of  Kings,  '  Uzziah  '  of  Chronicles.  More  particularly,  the  form
,-ny  (Uzziah)  occurs  in  2  K.  15  13  (?)  30  Hos.  1  i  Am.  1  i  Zech.
]  14s,  but  in  2  K.  103234  Is.  1  i  6  i  7  i  2  Ch.  26ijf.  272  in'tj?
'  (Uzziahu);  rriTj;  (Azariah)  in  2  K.  14  21  1617172327,  perhaps
1  13  (see  Ginsb.),  i  Ch.  3  12,  but  irmij?  (Azariahu)  in  2  K.  1568.
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  study  of  clan-names  Azariah  is  the
most  to  be  preferred  of  these  forms.  An  examination  of  the
occurrences  of  Eleazar,  Eliezer,  Azariah,  Azarel,  Ezri,  shows
indisputably  that  there  was  till  quite  late  times  a  consciousness
that  Azar  or  Ezer  represented  a  clan  of  the  Negeb.  It  is  note
worthy  that  by  their  mothers  the  kings  of  Judah  were  much
connected  with  the  Negeb.  Very  possibly  the  mothers  of
Amaziah  and  Uzziah  came,  not  from  'Jerusalem,'  but  from
'  Ishmael '  (cSeTV  and  SxyCC"  being  liable  to  confusion).
When  a  queen-mother  was  of  Jerusalem,  it  was  possibly  not
stated  ;  take,  c.f.,  the  cases  of  the  mothers  of  Hezeki.ih  and
Manasseh.  In  2  K.  15 13  (B's  readings  are  oxoftou  [A]  (cp
o\o(eiav,  B,  2  Ch.  26  r)  :  30  axa?  [B],  afapiou  [A]  (om.  L) ;  32
afa/nat  [BAL] ;  34  (of[e]tas  [B],  a^apta?  [AL]).


UZZIAH

opinion  as  to  '  Uzziel.'  The  question  is  hardly  decided
by  the  existence  of  the  Phuen.  pr.  names  ^yny,  -fooiy,
or  the  Palm,  'iy  and  Nab.  vty,  or  by  the  name  found
on  old  Heb.  seals—  rjy,  'uzziya'u,  for  which  see  Wright,
Camp.  Sem.  Gr.  72  f.  —  [Che.]).

i.  Son  of  Amaziah,  king  of  Judah,  whom  he  suc
ceeded  at  the  age  of  sixteen  (2  K.  14zi  =  2  Ch.  26i).
„  ..  That  the  name  Uzziah  was  changed  to
'  .  .  .  ''  Azariah  at  his  accession  is  highly  improb-
'  '  able.  Both  names  are  equally  religious  or
rather  perhaps  equally  non-religious,  and  from  i  Ch.
6  24  [9]  and  36  [21]  we  see  how  easy  it  was  for  my  to
become  mt;,',  or  for  rimy  to  become  my.  The  form
Azariah  is  the  more  accurate,  but  Uzziah  may  have
been  a  popular  corruption  ;  it  is  hardly  worth  while
therefore  to  disturb  the  modern  usage,  and  substitute
Azariah  for  Uzziah.  According  to  Stacle1  in  1887,
there  is  very  little  information  respecting  Uzziah  at  the
disposal  of  the  historian.  After  stating  that  Aznriah  or
Uzziah  was  proclaimed  king  by  a  popular  assembly,  he
adds  that  '  the  Book  of  Kings  knows  nothing  of  any
warlike  achievements  of  Uzziah.  The  king  had  the
misfortune  to  become  a  leper,  so  that  in  functions  like
that  of  pronouncing  judgment,  the  discharge  of  which
would  have  brought  him  into  contact  with  the  people,
he  had  to  be  represented  by  his  son  Jotham,  who  was
invested  with  the  office  of  a  prefect  of  the  palace.
Where  the  leper-king  resided  (see  (5)  did  indeed
originally  form  a  part  of  the  tradition  ;  but  the  word  in
question  (15s)  has  become  disfigured  beyond  recog
nition.  '

In  further  explanation  Stade  adds,  'bet  hachophschit  [n'w'Bnri],

2  K.  15  5,  chopschiit  [Tna'snri])  2  Ch.  26  21,  cannot  possibly  mean
an  infirmary  |RVn>s,r-,  'a  lazar  house'].  The  aphphusoth  [a</>-
<|>ou<rnj0  ;  but  in  2  Ch.  aufyfyovmiav  B,  antftovcrwd  A]  of  (5  seems  to
suggest  that  it  is  not  the  original  reading.  It  is,  however,  equally
obscure  what  is  the  Hebrew  word  underlying  it.  Probably
some  building  in  the  royal  fortress  is  meant.  '  '2

Stade  concludes  with  the  remark  that  '  the  sixteen
years  which  the  Book  of  Kings  gives  to  Jotham,  include
the  period  during  which  Jotham  was  the  regent  for  his
father.  '  Elsewhere  (567)  Stade  further  mentions  that
Uzziah  rebuilt  Elath,  which  his  father  had  probably
recovered.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  fresh  investiga
tions  of  the  Book  of  Chronicles  and  of  the  Hebrew  text
both  of  Kings  and  of  Chronicles  do  not  favour  this
extreme  historical  sobriety.  Considering  that  the  Book
of  Kings  gives  Uzziah  a  (nominal)  reign  of  not  less
than  fifty-two  years,  an  augmentation  of  our  scanty
material  is  of  importance.  Let  us  consider  our  situation.

As  to  the  accession  of  Uzziah,  and  the  assumed  con

quest  of  Elath, we can hardly  rest  satisfied  with  the

_.  ordinary  view  of  the  circumstances  of  the

lm~ time. As  Kittel  has  pointed  out,  these

stances  01  are  contained  in  portions  of  two  different
documents,  viz.,  2  K.14y-i4  and  vv.  19-

accession. ^  .  3  eacn  sourcej ;n  a  carefully  revised

text,  must  be  separately  studied.  From  the  former  we
infer  (cp  JOK.THEEL),  that  the  contest  between  Jehoash
and  Ama/iah  was  for  the  possession  of  the  NEGEB
(q.  v.  ),  a  part  of  which  Jehoash  had  recovered  for
Israel,4  but  which  Amaziah  wanted  for  Judah.  A
decisive  battle  took  place  '  at  Beth-cusham  which  be
longs  to  Jerahmeel,'  and  Amaziah  was  worsted  and
(according  to  this  stratum  of  the  narrative)  taken
captive.  We  now  have  to  turn  to  our  second  fragment
of  narrative,  remembering  (this  we  learn  from  v.  7,


2  For  Stade's  fuller  expression  of  opinion,  see  ZA  TIV$  156-159
(1886),  where,  inter  alia,  it  is  suggested  that  the  true  reading  may
have  been  f]inri  JV3,  Jer.  36  22  (Am.  3  15)—  i.e.,  the  winter

palace.

a  Kittel  wrongly  detaches  v.  22,  and  assigns  it  to  the  same
document  as  TTV.  7-14.  The  text,  in  its  true  form,  does  not
appear  to  allow  this.

*  In  2  K.  13  25  the  reference  is  to  cities  in  the  Negeb  ;  the
present  text  of  1033  is  full  of  distortions  of  names  of  districts
and  places  in  that  region.  See  Crit.  Bib.

5241


UZZIAH

where  read  'Arammites/  and  for  the  rest  see  JOK-
THEEL,  SELA)  that  Amaziah  had  excited  the  bitter
animosity  of  the  Arammites  or  Jerahmeelites  by  his
cruelty  at  the  rock  of  Kadesh.  The  notice  (rv.  19-22)
is  very  meagre,  and  the  text  is  imperfect.  We  can,
however,  venture  to  infer  from  v.  19  that,  according  to
this  document,  Amaziah  had  not  been  carried  away  by
Jehoash,  but  had  sought  refuge  at  some  place  in  the
independent,  non-Israelitish  portion  of  the  Negeb.1
Thirsting,  as  it  would  appear,  for  vengeance,  some  of
the  inhabitants  conspired  against  the  fallen  king.  He
tied  to  Eshcol-  or  Halusah  (?),  an  important  city  in  the
Negeb,  but  the  dagger  of  the  assassin  found  him  there.
The  actors  in  the  following  scene  (w.  20-22)  are  the
non-Israelites  of  the  Negeb.

'  And  all  the  Cushites  bore  him  [to  Jerusalem],  and  he  was
buried  in  Jerusalem.  .  .  .  And  the  Jerahmeelites  took  Azariah
(16  years  of  age)  and  made  him  king  instead  of  Amaziah  his
father,  and  imposed  paths  upon  him.  And  they  returned  to
Jerahmeel,  after  the  king  had  lain  down  with  his  fathers.' a

The  humiliation  of  Judah  was  now  complete.  First
Israel,  and  then  Jerahmeel,  had  treated  it  as  a  subject
state.  The  only  comfort  was  that  Israel  and  Jerahmeel
were  foes,  and  in  a  struggle  between  the  two  the  wishes
of  Judah  would  naturally  accompany  Israel.  (It  will
be  seen  that  the  statement  of  the  conquest  of  Elath  has
arisen  out  of  a  corruption  of  the  text.4)

As  to  the  wars  of  Uzziah.  According  to  the  Chronicler,
the  king  warred  successfully  against  the  Philistines,  the

0  TIT  - Arabians,  and  the  Metinim,  and  strength-
TT ' Vi  9 ened  the  fortifications  of  Jerusalem,  which

must  have  suffered  greatly  at  the  capture
of  the  city  by  Jehoash  (2  Ch.  266-9).  The  Book  of
Kings  (as  we  have  seen)  is  entirely  silent  as  to  this
national  aggrandisement  ;  but  elsewhere  valuable  in
formation  has  been  found  underlying  the  statements  of
Chronicles.  Still,  great  exaggeration  there  must  at
any  rate  be,  as  Guthe  (GVI  186)  remarks.  Unless  we
could  bring  ourselves  to  identify  Azariah  of  Judah  with
Azriya'u  of  Ya'udi,  we  could  not  possibly  imagine  the
sudden  and  unexpected  revival  of  the  martial  prowess
of  Judah.  M 'Curdy,  it  is  true,  assumes  this  ;6  he  also
thinks  that  the  relation  of  Hezekiah  to  the  Philistine  city
of  Ekron  in  the  time  of  Sennacherib,  and  the  statement
of  Sennacherib  that  the  cities  which  he  had  cut  off  from
Judah  he  gave  19  the  kings  of  Ashdod,  Ekron,  and
Gaza,  imply  a  period  of  Judahite  expansion  which  we
can  only  place  in  the  reign  of  Uzziah.  Winckler,  on
the  other  hand,  remarks,  '  Such  successes  as  those
which  are  described  would  be  possible  only  if  Azariah
acted  as  the  vassal  of  a  more  powerful  prince.  Musri
could  not  be  such,  for  it  is  certain  that  the  Philistine
cities  would  have  enjoyed  its  special  protection.  There
was  Assyria,  no  doubt  ;  but  Azariah  could  have  taken
part  in  the  Assyrian  campaign  of  773  [the  last  year  of
Shalmaneser  III.]  only  as  a  feudatory  of  Jeroboam  II.'
(KAT<A\  262).

There  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that  either  the
Chronicler  has  misread  his  authority,  or  the  text  of
Chronicles  itself  has  suffered  corruption.  There  is  no
difficulty  in  supposing  that  Uzziah  after  a  time  broke
his  'oaths'  and  made  war  on  the  Jerahmeelites — i.e. ,
on  that  section  of  the  Jerahmeelites  which  neither
Jehoash  nor  (2  K.  1428,  explained  in  col.  3861,  n.  i)
Jeroboam  II.  had  subdued.  That  he  '  broke  down  the
wall'  of  Rehoboth  and  Ashhur,6  is  improbable,  but  he

1  In v.  19 we read, 'And they  conspired against  him in
Ishmael '  (^N>'CC"i  as  elsewhere,  for  o^BTl')-

2  Reading  ^;c'X  for  V"^>- The  same  change  may  be  required
in  Mic.  1  13.

3  For  the  corrections  see  Crit.  Bib.

4  The  emendation  in  2  K.  14  22*1  (nl^N3  1HN  KTl  :  CP  Kzek.
17  13)  has  already  been  suggested  by  Klostermann,  who,  how
ever,  makes  Jeroboam II.  the  subject  of  the  verb. To  con
nect  v.  22,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  with  v.  ^  (as  most  propose),
is  very  difficult.

8  Hist.  Proph.  Man.  1  312,  n.  i  ;  '  Uzziah  and  the  Philistines*
Expos.  1891  b,  pp.  388-396.

6  So  read  for  '  Gath  '  (as  often)  and  '  Ashdod  '  (as  Am.  3  9). A

5242


UZZIAH

may  have  made  successful  incursions  into  the  Jerah-
rneelite  land,1  and  have  inflicted  a  check  on  his  enemies.
More  than  this  we  cannot  say,  and  underlying  the
account  of  Uzziah's  leprosy  there  is  probably  a  record
of  a  great  humiliation  sustained  by  the  king.

As  to  Uzziah's  leprosy  (cp  LEI'KOSY,  §  5,  iv. ). In
2  Ch.  26 16-21  he  is  said  to  have  been  struck  with  leprosy
as  a  punishment  for  attempting  to  usurp


4.  Reported


the office  of  the  priesthood liy  burning


"  *'  incense  in  the  temple,  in  spite  of  the  well-
established  fact  that  the  ancient  kings  from  time  to
time  exercised  sacerdotal  functions.  Hut  in  2  K.  15s
all  that  is  said  is,  '  And  Yahwe  smote  the  king,  so  that
he  became  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death,  and
dwelt  in  the  house  *  *  '  (the  last  word  appears  untrans
latable).  Has  something  been  omitted  by  the  compiler
of  Kings,  and  if  so,  did  it  agree  with  Chronicles?  To
answer  the  latter  question  in  the  affirmative  is  difficult,
the  story  in  Chronicles  being  so  clearly  post-exilic.
The  case  is  parallel  to  that  of  2  K.  14  22.  The  true  text
probably  runs  nearly  as  follows  : — •'  And  Jerahmeel  led
the  king  away  to  Missur  to  the  day  of  his  death,  and
he  dwelt  in  Beth-zarephath  of  Missur.'  -

The  mother  of  Jeroboam  I.  was  called  in  error  '  a
leper,'  whereas  really  she  was  a  Misrite  (col.  2404,  n.
2) ;  Naaman  in  the  earlier  form  of  his  story  was  called,
not  a  leper  (2  K.  f>i),  but  a  Misrite.3  And  Uzziah,
too,  in  the  narrative  from  which  the  compiler  of  Kings
drew,  must  have  been  brought  into  connection  with  the
Misrites.  Like  Manasseh  (probably),  Uzziah  was  carried
into  captivity  by  the  Misrites  or  Jerahmeelites  of  N.
Arabia  ;  but  unlike  Manasseh  he  did  not  return.  Mean
time,  his  son  Jotham  was  necessarily  regent  at  Jeru
salem.

As  to  the  earthquake,  a  detail  so  romantically  used
by  Josephus  (Ant.  ix.  ICU).  In  Zech.  14s  Am.  1 1  (title)
_  _  ,,  ,  we  find  obscure  references  to  an  earth-
e>  quake  in  Uzziah's  reign,  and  the  sug
gestion  has  been  hazarded  that  this  earthquake  may
have  suggested  the  imagery  of  Is.  219-21  and  Am.  4  n.
It  is  true,  the  available  evidence  for  the  fact  is  very  late,
and  Wellhausen  throws  doubt  on  its  historical  character
(cp  AMOS,  §  4).  In  Zech.  14s  we  should  probably  read,
'  as  ye  fled  before  Ashhur  '  (iinB'N)i  and  in  Am.  1 1,  '  two
years  before  Ashhur  was  rooted  out.'  The  Zech.
passage  alludes  to  the  frequent  raids  of  Jerahmeelites  or
Ashhurites  from  N.  Arabia,  and  the  Am.  passage  prob
ably  to  the  events  attending  the  successes  of  Jeroboam
II.  in  the  Negeb  (see  §  2).

As  to  references  to  Uzziah  in  Isaiah. That  there  is

such  a  reference in Is.  61, is unquestionable. In Is.

T_ . . . 26-8  12-16,  however,  it  is  only  to  Jotham,

6.  Uzzia m  firgt  ag  regent  ancj  tnen  as  king,  that  the

prophetic  writer's  descriptions  can  be
safely  held  to  apply.  Exegesis,  of  course,  is  unaffected
by  this  result.  T.  K.  C.

\Ve  have  no  further  information  respecting Uzziah,


region  in  or  near  the  Negeb  was  called  Ashhur,  and  there  must
also  have  been  a  city  bearing  the  same  name  (cp  the  place-name
Jerahmeel).

1  The '  Philistines '  are  our  old  friends  the  '  Zarephathites '
(see ZARKPHATH), and the 'Arabians of  Gur-baal' are the
'Arabians of  Jerahmeel.1 The '  Maonites ' should be the
'Ammonites,'  which,  as  often,  is  a  corruption  (which  obtained
an  independent  existence)  of  'Jerahmeelites.'

2  lisa  nsijrrrnn  atri  iro  cv—iy  lisa  iferrnn  ^XDm'  :nrv

The  final  word  is  restored  from  2  Ch.  26  21.  The  strange  word
JVt'Enn  comes  from  niSE'Nit)  '  the  dung-hill,'  and  niEX'N  (as  in
the  phrase  rtSe'NJ  IJWi  Neh.  2  13,  etc.)  is  a  corruption  of  "ES

=  nE-is-

3  The  rendering  of  2  K.  5  i/>  and  accompanying  note  in  the
OT  of  Kautzsch  should  open  the  eyes  of  some  readers. '  But
the man was  .  .  .  leprous.' 'The two  omitted words mean
elsewhere,  "  an  able  (or  valiant)  man  "  ;  either  they  have  arisen
from  a  mutilation  of  the  text  or  they  have  got  in  here  by  mistake."
'"1SS> however, if  we restore this word, is in apposition to

STI  11:33.

5243


UZZIEL

unless  we  may  venture  to  identify  Azariah  of  Judah
7  Azriva'u  witl1  an  'mPorlant  personage  in  an
is  he  Uzziah?  ™cr'W\on  °/  Tiglath-pileser  III.  This
monarch  informs  us  that  in  his  reign
(738  B.C.)  nineteen  districts  situated  in  the  neighbour
hood  of  Hamath  banded  themselves  against  him  under
Az-(or  Iz-)ri-ya-u  of  Ya-u-di,  but  were  eventually  over
come  (see  KATM  217  /.,  K  'B  2  **,/.,  Tiele,  BAG
229/).  The  identification  of  Azriyau  of  Ya'udi  with
Azariah  (  =  Uzziah)  of  Judah  proposed  by  the  late
George  Smith  the  Assyriologist,  and  after  him  by
Schrader  (KGF  399.^),  %vno  :lljlv  supported  it  against
A.  von  Gutschmid,  was  accepted  by  Winckler  in  1892,
and  is  even  now  defended  by  M  'Curdy  (HPM  \-$$f.},
C.  F.  Kent  (Hist.  Heb.  People®,  2  126),  and  Rogers
(HRA  2iig/.  ).  A  strong  opposition  has,  however,
been  raised  to  it  (see,  e.g.  ,  Wellh.  JDT  20632  ;  Klo.
Sa.-Ko.  496;  \Vi.  AOF\i/.;  KAT>^  54,  and,
following  Winckler,  Che.  Intr.  Is.  4).  Ahaz,  it  has
been  urged,  was  reigning  four  years  later  (734  B.C.,  see
AHAZ),  and  the  deaths  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham  must
therefore  have  been  almost  contemporaneous.  The  as
sertion  that  Jotham  himself  may  have  possibly  taken  the
field,  and  not  Uzziah  (M  'Curdy,  Hist.  Proph.  Alon.
1414),  on  the  theory  that  qui  facit  per  alium  facit  per
se,  is  scarcely  borne  out  by  the  precise  wording  of  the
cuneiform  text.  But  a  far  greater  objection  is  the  diffi
culty  of  supposing  that  Uzziah  of  Judah  should  ever  have
wished  to  interfere  with  Tiglath-pileser,  that  he  should
ever  have  been  in  a  position  to  undertake  such  an
expedition,  and  that  he  should  have  been  the  leader  of
a  band  of  tribes  representing  a  district  extending  from
the  Orontes  to  the  sea,  and  from  the  northern  flanks  of
Lebanon  and  Anti-libanus  to  the  sea  of  Antioch  ;  1  for
whatever  his  relations  with  Jeroboam  II.  may  have
been,  it  is  at  all  events  clear  that  the  statement  in  2  K.
1428  cannot  be  called  in  to  support  the  identification
(see  JEROBOAM  ii.  ).

These  objections  are  urged  with  great  force  by
Winckler  (AOF\  io^i),  who,  dismissing  the  old  identifi
cation,  would  explain  Ya-u-di  as  the  well-known  -IN'  of
the  Zenjlrli  inscriptions  mentioned  in  the  steles  of
Panammu  and  Hadad,  a  view  which  is  favourably
quoted  by  Kittel  (Konige,  263),  and  unreservedly  ac
cepted  by  Hommel  (art.  'Assyria,'  Hastings'  BD).'2

S.  A.  C.

2.  One  of  the  b'ne  Kohath.  in  the  genealogy  of  H  E.MAN,  i  Ch.
624  [91  =  36  [21]  AZARIAH,  '•T~']>'.

3.  One  of  the  b'ne  HARI.M,  Ezra  10  21  =  i  Esd.  9  21  AZARIAS
(but  ofios  [L]).

4.  Father  of  Athaiah  in  list  of  Judahite  inhabitants  of  Jeru
salem  (EzKA,  ii.,  §5^, §  15, la)  (Neh.  11  4,  a&& [B],  a&Sva.


5.  Father  of  JONATHAN,  9  (i  Ch.  27  25,

T.  K.  C.,  §§  i-6; S.  A.  C.,  §  7.

UZZIEL  (yN'-Tr,  §  29  ;  either  a  clan  name  [cp
UZZIAH],  the  -el  being  only  formative,  or=  'God  is  my
strength,'  §29;  oz[e]mA  [BAFL]),  a  name  found
only  in  post-exilic  writings,  and  in  connection  with
names  capable  of  being  regarded  as  clan-names  of  the
Negeb  (Che.).

i.  b.  Kohath  (cp  JAHAZIEL,  3)  ;  mostly  mentioned
last  in  the  list  of  sons  (Ex.  6  18  Nu.  819  i  Ch.  62  [628]  18
[63]).  According  to  Lev.  104  he  was  the  uncle  (-n)  of
Aaron  (afiTjX  [B]).  Of  his  sons  who  are  mentioned  in
Ex.622  (see  also  i  Ch.  2820  [<$B  identifies  Uzziel  with
Jahaziel  of  619]  24  24)  the  most  important  was  Elzaphan
(cp  ZAPHON),  who  was  the  chief  of  all  the  Kohathites
(Nu.33o).

1  Among  the  districts  named  are  Hatarikka,  Arka,  Siattna
(see  HADKACH,  ARKITE,  SINITE).

-  See,  on  the  other  hand,  M  'Curdy,  Hist.  Proph.  Men.  1  41  -}.ff.
It  has  also  been  plausibly  suggested  that  -IK-  may  be  meant  in
the  famous  title  of  Sargon  at  the  opening  of  the  Nimrud  inscrip
tion  (A"  /?2  37),  'the  subduer  of  Ya'udu.  whose  situation  is  far
off.'  Elsewhere.  Sargon  calls  Canaan  bit  Humri  (cp  KA  TM
189,  and  see  OMRI).  See  SARGON,  §  17.

5244


UZZIEL

The  b'ne  Uzziel  are  mentioned  in  i  Ch.  15  10  with  Amminadab
their  chief  as  amounting  to  112;  and  it  is  noteworthy  that
Elzaphan  appears  in  Z'.  8  as  a  separate  clan.  From  Uzziel  come
the  UZZIELITES  Oty'iyn,  Nu.  3  27  6  offujAeis  [B],  6  ofirjA'eis'
[A],  ofiTjA  'eis  [F],  ofirjA  els  [L] ;  i  Ch.  26  23).  See  GENEALOGIES
i.,  §  7-

2.  b.  Ishi,  a  captain  of  SIMEON  (§  5)  in  the  raid  against  the
Amalekites  and  Meunim  (i  Ch.  4  42).

3.  b.  Bela,  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.,  §  9,  ii.  a)  (i  Ch.

77)-

4.  A  Hemanite  musician  (i  Ch.  '25  4  <x£apar)A  [B],  who  in  v.  18
is  called  AZAREL  (L,  however,  o<Jir)A).

5.  In  2Ch.  29  14  Uzziel  figures  as  a  son  of  Jeduthun,  not  of
Heman  (as  above). It  is  also  noteworthy  that  the  name  occurs
here  in  close  connection  with  that  of  Elzaphan  (v.  13).

6. '  Uzziel,  the  son  of  HARHAIAH  (q.v.}  goldsmiths,'


VASHTI

in  list  of  wall-builders  (see  NEHEMIAH,  §  i/.  ;  EZRA
ii.,  §§  16  [i],  15  d),  Neh.  38  (@B«A  omits).  See  Kyle-
Be. -Ky. ,  Siegfr.  ad  loc.

[Various  explanations  have  been  given  of  this  strange  phrase.
Apart  from  the  '  Jerahmeelite  theory,'  we  may  be  grateful  for
S.  A.  Cook's  ingenious  suggestion  (Exp.  T 10  280,  and  HAR
HAIAH).  But  in  the  light  of  many  other  passages  in  which
JJerahmeel'  and  'Zarephath'  put  on  strange  disguises,  and,
in  particular,  of  w.  31  f.  (on  which  see  Amer.  Journ.  of  Tkeol.
6440  [1901],  and  PERFUMERS),  it  is  difficult  not  to  decide
somewhat  positively  in  favour  of  the  following  restoration,
'  Next  to  him  repaired  Uzziel,  son  of  Jerahmeel,  a  Zarepha-
thite.  And  next  to  him  repaired  Hanar.iah,  son  of  Jerahmeel.'
The  historical  inference  of  Meyer  (Entst.  153)  that  artisans
with  no  landed  estate  had  nog-ens,  the  guild  taking  the  place
of  the  gens,  is  therefore  hardly  justified. — T.  K.  c.J


V


VAHEB  (SHI  mXl  ;  but  MSS  andGr.  Yen.
apparently  a  locality  in  the  Amorite  country,  towards
Moab,  described  as  being  'in  Suphah  '  (HD-ID?)  ;  Nu.
21  14  RV.

A  V  (following  Onkelos)  gives  the  indefensible  rendering,  '  What
he  did  in  the  Red  Sea  '  ;  Vg.  '  sicut  fecit  in  mari  rubro  '  ;  1  Gr.
Ven.  «Te(3ae/3T/  iv  Aai'Aan-i.  The  rendering  of  ©BA]  however  —
Tffv  fwo/3  (£oo/3  [  FL])  e<^Aoyicre  2  —  presupposes  the  reading  nnt'DN
rpjj,  and  studying  this  in  the  light  of  suggestions  elsewhere
made  with  regard  to  the  '  stations  '  of  the  Israelites  and  the
place-names  in  Dt.  Ii  Gen.  3ti  31-39,  we  see  that  '  Vaheb  '  is
probably  a  corruption  of  '  Missur'  and  'Suphah'  of  '  Sarephath'
(see  DI-ZAHAB,  Sui'n).  It  the  quotation  really  conies  from  a
poetical  record  of  the  ancient  wars  we  may  further  suppose  that
a  verb  has  dropped  out,  and  render  '(he  conquered)  Missur  and
Sarephath  '  (two  places  in  N.  Arabia  on  the  border  of  S.
Palestine;  see  MIZKAIM,  §  26,  ZAREFHATH).  It  is  much  more
probable,  however,  that  instead  of  'the  book  of  the  wars  of
Yahwe  '  (mn'  nan/3  ISO)  we  should  read  '  the  list  of  Jerahmeel  '
(^N^nT  H2a),  and  suppose  that  the  Priestly  Writer  here  intro
duces  us  to  one  of  his  chief  sources  of  information  for  N.
Arabian  place-names.

The  passage  then  becomes,  '  Wherefore  it  is  said  in  the  list  of
Jerahmeel,  The  land  of  Missur  and  Sarephath  ;  the  land  of
Jerahmeel  which  stretches  towards  the  city  of  Zarephath,  and
is  adjacent  to  the  border  of  Missur  '  (S^anT  "IBD3  1S»r  [3"Vy


•nxa).1 See  Crit.  Bib.

VAJEZATHA,  RV  Vaizatha  (SHPI  ;
[BL11],  z&BoyAeeA  [N]r  zABoYr^e*.  [A],
[Laj),  a  son  of  HAMAN,  Esth.  9g.  The  names  of
Hainan's  sons  put  a  heavy  strain  on  the  traditional
theory  respecting  the  Book  of  Esther.  In  the  case  of
Vaizatha  the  form  itself  is  not  certain,  the  i  being  ex
ceptionally  long  and  the  T  exceptionally  short  (a  trace
of  an  early  corrector's  work?).  Benfey  conjectures  as
the  Persian  original  Wahyaz-data.

If,  however,  the  story  has  been  remodelled,  and  in  its  original
form  the  names  were  such  as  a  Hebrew  writer  might  regard  as
Jerahmeelite  (see  PURIM,  §  7),  one  might  venture  to  restore  -|JVT
(cp  inT,  1  10),  behind  which  may  lie  'flSTSi  'Zarephathite.'
Hainan,  being  an  Agagite,  was  an  Amalekite  (i.e.,  Jerahmeelite).

T.  K.  C.

VALE,  VALLEY,  occurs  in  AV  as  the  rendering  of
the  following  Heb.  words  :

i.  pay,  'emek  (etym.  'depth';  «OlA*.C.  (J)Ap&r5.
TreAlON,  etc.),  for  which,  in  geographical  designations,
RV,  followed  by  G.  A.  Smith,  gives  'vale,'  is  the  most
natural  antithesis  to  in,  Mr,  'mountain'  (cp  Mic.  14
i  K.2028,  -rizra,  misdr,  v.  23,  cp  PLAIN,  5).  It  is
applied  to  wide  level  spaces  opening  out  of  a  mountain
ous  country.  About  the  names  of  most  of  these  'vales'
considerable  controversy  has  gathered  (see  ACHOR,
ELAH,  ESDRAELON,  MULBERRY-  TREE,  REPHAIM,
SIDDIM,  SUCCOTH).  The  vales  of  Hebron  and  Aijalon,
however,  are  well-known,  and  may  be  taken  as  typical.

1  Vg.  continues  '  sic faciet in torrentibus Arnon. Scopuli
torrentium  inclinati  sunt,  ut  requiescerent  in  Ar,  et  recumberent
in  finibus  Moabitarum.'

2  ©  continues  KO.\  TOUS  xei/aappovs  \pvtav  ical  roiis  Xeif--  «""t'<7-
T>7<r«i<  (caroiKiVat  Hp,  <cal  Trpocnceirai  TOIS  opi'ot?  Mu>a£.

5245


'Emek  is  also  applied  to  parts  of  the  Jordan  valley  (Josh.
1827  [cp  <g]  17 16,  and,  if  the  text  is  correct,  Ps.  606[8],
but  see  SUCCOTH),  and  to  the  lateral  valleys  of  the
Jordan  (i  Ch.  12i5  [avXwv']  Cant.  2i).  In  Ps.  6614
Job  39 10  '  vales'  are  apparently  referred  to,  not  as  the
antithesis  of  mountains,  but  as  containing  fertile  arable
land.  But  the  text  of  these  passages  is  disputed.  AV
has  VALE  in  Gen.  143810  37i4,  and  DALE  in  Gen.  14  17
(RV  '  vale')  2  S.  18 18  (EV).  On  the  difference  between
the  'emek  and  the  bik'd  (see  2),  see  ESDRAELON.

2.  nypa,  bik'a/i  (etym.  'split,'  'cleft'; irtdiov)  is  also
used in contrast to 'mountain' (e.g. , Dt.  87 11  n,
\we5<.vf)~\,  cp  Ps.  1048). The  etymological  meaning  ex
plains  Is.  404,  '  Every  bik'ah  (EV  '  valley  '  ; &  <f>dpa.y£  ;
Di. 'ravine')  shall  be  exalted' — i.e. ,  filled  up. The
modern  Arabic  equivalent  el-Duka is  the  name  given
to the valley situated between the Lebanons. The
same  word  is  rendered  PLAIN  (q.v.}  by  AV  in  Am.  Is
(RV 'valley'),  Ezek.  37  i  /.(AVm*?- 'champaign'),  and
byEVinXeh.62  Dan.  3i  (Aram,  nypa),  Gen.  11  2  Ezek.
322  f. (RV'»K- 'valley') 84, etc/ On Dt.  34  3 (EV
inaccurately, 'the  plain  of  the  valley  of  Jericho') see
JORDAN,  §  2.

3.  N<3  (also  x-j,  tr;;,  »a  ; see  the  Lexicons),  gai,  ge,
etc.  (etym. perhaps  'depression'  ; tf>dpa.y^,  also  vawrj,
KOI\CLS, etc., once  (3ovv6s, 2  K.  2i6  [om.  A]). A  fre
quently  occurring  word  for  a  somewhat  narrow  opening
in  the  mountains,  gorge,  ravine; see  (e.g. }  JIPHTHAH-
EL, HARASHIM. SAMARIA, ZEBOIM, ZEPHATHAH,
HAMONGOG, and especially HINNOM. In i  S.  17 3
(av\(bv  [<SAL])  it  apparently  designates  the  deep  channel,
dug  by  the  turbid  water  torrents  in  the  middle  of  the
vale  (&>nek}  of  Elah. Relatively  to  the  gai,  or  lower
valley, the 'emek might be called hdr, '  mountain,'
unless  we  suppose  in  i  S.  17  the  combination  of  elements
from  two  sources. See  ELAH,  EPHES-DAMMIM.

4.  7i"U,  ndhal,  denotes  both  a  winter  torrent  and  the  valley  it
flows  through. It  occurs  in  both  senses  i  K.  185. See  BROOK.

5.  rt7SB'n,  the  shcphclah,  AV  '  vale,'  '  valley,'  '  low  plain,'  RV
'lowland.' See  JUD^A,  SHEPHELAH.

6.  av\<av,  Judith  44  (see  SALEM,  VALLEY  OF)  7317  10  lof.
(see  BETHULIA).

7.  <t>dpay£,  Judith  2  8  (<£apayyas  .  .  .  xf  ipappovs, '  ravines  .  . .
wadys')  7  4  11  17  12  7  13  10  Lk.  3  5  (=Is.  404).

VAMPIRE  (Hi^i;),  Prov.  30 15  RVme- ;  see  LILITH
(§4

VANIAH  (rVOl),  of  the  b'ne  BANI  (q.v.},  in  list  of
those  with  foreign  wives  (see  EZRA  i.,  §  5,  end);  Ezra  10 36
(ouiexwa  [B],  -tpf\<a  [«],  ovovvia  [A],  OVOLI>.  [L]),  apparently  the
ANOS  (cu/ws  [BA],  ?  om.  L)  of  II  i  Esd.  9  34.

VASHNI  (^1),  i  Ch.  628. See  JOEL  i. ,  2.

VASHTI  (»nCM;  ACTIN  [BKAl/],  oy<v  [La],  en
[?  BXc-a-AL  in  lig]),  the  name  of  the  consort  of
Ahasuerus,  who  was  divorced  on  account  of  her  refusal
to  present  herself  before  the  guests  of  the  king  on  the
seventh  and  last  day  of  his  great  banquet  (Esth.  19-22).

5246


VAULT

According  to  Herodotus  (5i8;  cp  9 no)  it  was  the
custom  of  the  Persians  to  have  their  wives  and  con
cubines  present  at  great  feasts.  This,  however,  hardly
illustrates  the  story  of  Vashti,  for  it  was  evidently  by  an
arbitrary  command  of  the  king,  whose  heart  was  '  merry
with  wine,'  that  Vashti  was  summoned  to  the  banquet.
Indeed,  Vashti  had  made  a  feast  of  her  own  for  the
women  of  the  palace  (v.  9).

Vashti's  name  used  to  be  connected  with  the  Persian
•vahista,  'optimus,'  but,  according  to  a  very  clever
hypothesis  of  Jensen,  Vashti,  Haman,  and  Zeresh  are
pale  reflections  of  Elamite  divinities,  named  respectively
Mashtr  (or  Vashti?),  Huniman,  and  Kerisa  (see  ESTHER,
§  7;  Jensen,  PFZA',1/ 6  70 ;  Wildeboer,  'Esther'  in
KHC  17  173).  This  view,  however,  is  not  very  probable.

Ahasuerus  (?)  and  Vashti  (?)  are  as  much  a  couple  as  Haman
and  Zeresh,  and  both  ought  to  be  explained  on  the  same  prin
ciples.  Moreover,  the  text  of  Esther  ought  to  be  not  less  care
fully  criticised  than  that  of  Samuel  before  any  hypothesis  as  to
the  origin  of  the  story  is  formed.  There  is  no  issue  out  of  the
perplexities  caused  by  the  book  as  it  has  come  down  to  us.
But  revising  the  text  on  the  same  principles  as  we  revise  the
text  of  Samuel  we  see  that  (as  in  parts  of  Samuel)  a  story  under
lies  the  present  story  of  Esther  and  Mordecai  which  has  a
different  geographical  and  historical  setting.  The  Jewish  people,
doubly  represented  by  Esther  (  =  Israelith)  and  by  Mordecai
(Carmeli  =  the  Jerahmeelite  Jews),  are  in  captivity  in  the  land
of  the  hostile  Jerahmeelites  (see  OHADIAH,  §  7  ;  LAMENTATIONS,
BOOK  OF,  §  if.  ;  PSALMS,  §§  28^)—  i.e.,  the  Edomites  and
other  Arabians,  whose  king  is  described  as  'Ashhur,  king  of
Jerahmeel  and  Cush '  (for  enj—ijfl  nno  "pOn  'nx  Nin  C'lllCTIN
read  '&131  ^XOnT  rj^O  •flne'N).  Vashti,  therefore,  ought  to
be  a  representative  of  the  Asshurite,  Jerahmeelite.  and  Cushite
people,  that  the  nation  of  the  oppressors  may,  like  the  nation
of  the  oppressed,  have  double  and  therefore  complete  representa
tion.  That  the  name  Vashti  is  corrupt  is  plain  ;  cp  VANIAH,
VOPHSI.  Most  probably  it  comes  from  Asshurith,  'Asshur'
being  often  used  as  a  synonym  for  'Jerahmeel'  Cp  MORDECAI,
PURIM.  T.  K.  C.

VAULT  0-1V3),  Is-  654  RVms-  ;  see  TOMB.
VAULTED  CHAMBER  (33  ;  OIKHM*.  TTORNIKON  ;

lupanar],  Ezek.  1624,  etc.,  RVms-  ;  see  HIGH  PLACE,
§  6.  A  mound  or  shrine  for  illicit  worship  is  obviously
intended ;  but  the  rendering  of  (5  and  Vg.  (after  analogy
of  fornix]  is  '  without  sufficient  proof,  and  needless '
(BDB).

VEDAN  (pi),  Ezek.  27 19  RV. See  JAVAN,  §  i^.

VEIL  (VAIL).  It  is  not  easy  to  distinguish  between
the  veil  and  the  mantle  in  the  OT.  As  in  the  East  at
the  present  day,  the  Hebrew  veils  were  mostly  ample
wraps  which  protected  the  head  and  shoulders  against
exposure,  and  sometimes  reached  the  feet.  Though
veils  were  part  of  the  ordinary  attire  of  Hebrew  women,
unmarried  girls  did  not  muffle  their  faces,  nor  did
married  Jewesses  usually  wear  veils  even  out  of  doors
( i  Cor.  11s/).  In  the  Talmud  we  find  that  only
Jewesses  of  Arabia  wore  veils  (Sabbath,  65  a]  to  cover
their  whole  face,  the  eyes  excepted.  The  bride,  how
ever,  veiled  herself  (cp  nubere  riro}  in  presence  of  the
bridegroom,  both  before  marriage  and  at  the  wedding
ceremony  (Gen.  2925);  see  MARRIAGE,  §  3.1  The
modern  Oriental  yashmak,  which  hangs  in  a  narrow  strip
from  below  the  eyes  to  the  feet,  was  not  used  by  the
Hebrews.

The  terms  rendered  '  veil '  are  :—

1.  sa'lph, fpyx,  Gen.  246$  38  14  igf,  which,  as  Lagarde  (Sent.
24)  has  shown,  was  not  a  veil  (EV),  but  an  ample  wrap  square
in  shape. ©(ADEL)  renders  Bepicrrpov,  a  light  summer  garment ;
cp  MANTLE,  §  2  [12].

2.  sammah, HSS, Is.  47  2 RV (xaTaicaAuiu/xa [BNAQ] ; AV

Mocks'),  Cant.  4i3  67t  RV  (cri<o7n,<Tcs  [BNA] ;  AV,  RVmg.
'  locks  V

3.  redid, TT1,  Bipio-rpov  [BNAQr],  EV  Is.  823  ;  AV,  RVmg-
Cant.  5  7t  (RV  mantle) ;  and

1  On the  sa'lph  of  Gen.  246$,  see  the  first  of  the  Hebrew
terms.

2  According  to  Delitzsch  from  A/QSSi  constringere. <&'s  read
ing  seems  to  rest  upon  a  confusion  with  riDSi  '  be  silent '  (cp  in
Syr.).

5247


VENISON

4.  mitpAhath,  nnserj, Ruth  3  15  AV  (irepi£u>pa  [BAL],  <ru'-
SOI'LOV  [Sym.] ;  AVmtf.  'apron,'  'sheet,'  RV  '  mantle ')  were  all
ample  wraps  ;  cp  Is.  3  22  and  see  MANTLE,  §  2  [3].

5.  titassekah, nDBO,  EV  Is.  25  7  (perhaps  the  reading  should
be  nSDD,  a  covering,  as  in  Ezek.  2813);  most  moderns  render
'covering  '  (cp  Is.  2820,  EV).

6.  The  term  lot,  ci^,1  in  Is.  267  (EV  'covering')  is  usually
explained  as  a  veil. The  figure  in  this  passage  is  derived  from  the
custom  of  covering  the  face  as  a  token  of  grief  (see  MOURNING).

7.  re'Alah, ^/V^'  *S-  "  '9^'  's  e'tner  a  s°fl shawl  (EV  '  muffler,'
AVn'JT-  '  spangled ornaments '),  or  a  fine  veil  (so  Che.). The
root  'jyi  is  cognate  to  -jyi  (tremble),  and  the  form  of  veil  was  so
called  from  its  loose,  clinging  material.

8.  jrept/SoAcuoi/,  i  Cor.  11  15  AVnig.,  EV  preferably  'covering';
cp  MANTLE,  §  2  [19].

The  face  of  the  king  or  other  chief  was  sometimes
covered  to  hide  the  divine  halo  ;  thus  Moses  wore  a
masweh,  nips,  Ex.  8433^".  (/cciXi;/x/u.a  [BAFL],  cp  2  Cor.
813),  with  which  Dillmann  compares  suth,  rnD.  Gen.
49 ii.2  It  will,  however,  be  noted  that,  according  to
MT,  Moses  seems  to  have  worn  his  veil  only  in  private,
and  to  have  removed  it  not  only  when  seeking  an  oracle
but  also  when  addressing  the  people.  I.  A.

VEIL  (OF  THE  TEMPLE).  See  TABERNACLE,  §
5,  and  cp  TEMPLE,  §  33.

The  words  are  pdroketh,  ri3"!S,  Ex.  2631  etc.  ;  KO.ro.-
Tr^Taoyta,  Mt.  27$i  Lk.  2845.  Jerome  (in  Mt.  27si;
also  Epist.  189;  and  again  Epist.  1208)  affirms  that  in
Matthew's  Hebrew  Gospel  he  read,  not  'veil,'  but
'lintel' — superliminare  templi  infinite  magnitudinis
fractum  esse  atque  divisum(a\so  corniisse,  also  sublatum}.
Nestle  infers  that  Jerome  found,  not  ro'is,  'veil,'  but
"IBM,  'capital'  (of  the  column  supporting  the  roof;  see
CHAPITER,  4),  though  Jerome  less  accurately  gives
superliminare  (Expos.  1895  £,  310^).  Cp  TEXT,  §
65  n.  2.

VENISON  (Fr.  venaison,  Lat.  venatio,  '  a  hunting'  ;
Heb.  TV,  sayid,  vT1¥,  'to  hunt,'  cp  Ar.  saydun,
Syr.  saida}.  The  Hebrews,  as  described  by  the  OT
writers,  had  already  reached  the  stage  of  pastoral  nomads
when  '  the  hunting  which  is  the  subsistence  of  the  ruder
wanderer,  has  come  to  be  only  an  extra  means  of  life '
(to  quote  Tylor,  Anthropology,  220).  ESAU  (q.v. )  is
probably  meant  to  represent  nothing  more  than  this  ( '  a
man  acquainted  with  hunting,'  TS  J?T  r'x,  Gen.  2627;
cp  25 28  27s),  since  later  he  seems  to  be  himself
possessed  of  flocks  and  herds  (Gen.  889;  for  Nimrod
see  the  special  article).

As  weapons  used  for  this  purpose  or  for  driving  off  wild
animals,  mention  is  made  of  the  bow  and  arrow  (Gen.  27  3  Is.
724;  see  WEAPONS,  §  2)  and  the  SUNG  (?.?'.,  i  8.1740).  Dt.
14s  enumerates  amongst  the  animals  that  might  be  eaten  several
belonging  to  the  venison  class.  These  are  some  species  of
fallo\v  deer  ^ayyal,  sfbi,  yahmftr;  see  HART,  ROEBUCK),  two
kinds  of  wild  goat  (see  GOAT,  §  2,  CHAMOIS),  the  PYGARG(?.Z/.,
the  Addax?),  and  the  ANTELOPE  (q.v.  ;  so  RV).

One  of  the  Hebrew  terms  for  '  provision  '  is  actually
reminiscent  of  the  hunting  stage  (nix,  seddh.  Gen.  4225
452i  Ps.  132 15  []|  cnV],  Josh.  9s  ['s  en1?]  ;  cp  the  use  of
the  verb  in  Josh.  9 12,  '  this  our  bread  we  provisioned
ourselves  [wresn]  with  it  hot  from  our  houses').3  But,
although  both  as  a  necessity  and  as  a  pastime  the
pursuit  has  in  general  played  an  important  part  in  the
education  and  evolution  of  mankind,4  the  Hebrews,
hampered5  again  (see  COLOURS,  §  i)  perhaps  by  certain
peculiarities  in  their  religion,  after  they  had  passed
through  the  stage  were  not  often  induced  '  to  revert  for
amusement  to  what  their  ancestors  had  been  compelled

1  The  expression  jji^n  '33  shows  that  the  outside  of  the  veil
differed  from  the  inside. Cp  linaS  %32>  J°b  41  5  [13].

2  In  the  Talmud  XIBS>  nj«1DS  >s  both  'covering'  and  'veil.

3  Elsewhere  we  find  the  verb  SsSj),  kilkel,  used  (i  K.  47),
and  the  noun  Dn?,  lehem  (i  K.  4  22  [5  2]).

4  As  to  its  value  in  this  respect  Charles  Kingsley's  Glaucus
is  suggestive  in  parts.

6  In  view,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  struggle  of  the  nations.

5248


VENUS,  TEMPLE  OF

to  practise  from  necessity'  (to  quote  M.  G.  Watkins,
Gleanings  from  the  Natural  History  of  the  Ancients,
chap.  10).  Assyrian,1  Egyptian,-  Chaldcean,3  and
Persian  monarchs,  on  the  other  hand,  boasted  of  their
exploits  in  hunting  ;  the  Assyrians  and  Persians  even
maintained  private  hunting-grounds,  called  TrapdSewot. 4
The  Greeks  and  Romans  pursued  the  pastime  vigorously.5
Their  writers  describe  it  frequently  ( Homer,  Horace,
Caesar),  and  in  some  cases  whole  treatises  were  written
on  the  subject  (Xenophon,  Appian).

Solomon's  table,  it  is  true,  was,  we  are  told,  supplied  with
species  of  fallow-deer  Ca/yy&l,  s?l>i,yahmi~ir  ;  see  HART,  ROE
BUCK)  ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  they  were  taken  in
the  hunt.  We  know  that  in  other  cases  traps  were  used  for  the
purpose  (see  NET,  SNARE).  In  i  8.2620,  too,  according  to
EV  we  have  a  figure  of  hunting  a  partridge,  but  the  Hebrew
term  is  radafih,  'pursue,1  and  in  any  case  the  meaning  of  the
context  is  not  clear  (see  PARTRIDGE  ;  and  for  the  methods  of
capturing  birds  see  FOWLING).  M.  A.  C.

VENUS,  TEMPLE  OF  (TO  <vrepr<vriON  [AV]),
2  Mace.  1226,  AVm*-  See  ATARGATIS.

VERMILION  pW),  Jer.22i4  Ezek.  23i4t.  See
COLOURS,  §  14.

VERSIONS. See  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS.

VESTMENTS  (p\&,  etc.),  2  K.  1022,  etc.  See
DRESS.

VESTRY  (nnr6n  ;  Tw  eni  TOY  OIKOY  MecGA&A
[BL],  TOIC  erri  TOY  MICGA&A  [A];  .  .  .  TOY  CTO-

AlCMOY  [Aq.  Sym. ]),  in  the  phrase  '  him  that  was  over
the  vestry'  (2  K.  1022f),  is  generally  supposed  to  mean
the  place  where  the  holy  vestments  supplied  to  the
worshippers  of  Baal  were  kept  ;  see  DRESS,  §  8  ;  JEHU,
col.  2356.  The  ancient  versions  differ  ;  there  was  no
fixed  traditional  interpretation.  The  moderns  have
defended  '  vestry  '  or  '  wardrobe  '  by  a  far-fetched  com
parison  of  Ethiopic  e'ltdh,  'tunic,  coat.'  The  text
must  be  corrupt.

Read  probably  n3O'?rr?y  IffX,  'him  that  was  over  the  hall'
(E.rJi.T,  Nov.  1899).  That  there  were  several  'halls'  or
'  chambers  '  (ni3:?7)  attached  to  the  Jerusalem  temple  we  know
(Ter.  35  2  4  Ezra  106  Neh.  13  5,  etc.)  ;  and  from  i  S.  !»  22  (cp  1  18
&)  we  gather  that  close  to  the  altar  on  a  biimah,  or  '  high  place,'
there  was  a  lishkah,  or  'hall,'  in  which  those  who  partook  of
the  sacrificial  meal  assembled.  It  was  in  such  a  lishkah  that
the  Baal-worshippers  assembled  in  expectation  of  a  sacrificial
feast  6  (r.  19).  Cp  TEMPLE,  §§  24,  32.

This  view  does  justice  to  the  context,  and  accounts  for  (P's  rep
en-l  TOU  OIKOU  (fj.e(r9aa\  =  fjif\0aa  is  a  correction  from  the  later  [?]
Hebrew  text) ;  that  ®  did  not  fully  understand  naif^  's  plain
from  i  S.  (see  above).  &  and  3  are  liable  to  be  confounded  with
n  and  n  >  D  may  come  from  n,  repeated  in  error.  To  correct
nnplp,  'the  composition  of  the  (sacred)  perfumes,'  or  n2i\'?p)
'  the  ceremonial '  (cp  Klo.),  gives  a  less  suitable  sense.  On  the
guesses  of  the  other  versions  see  commentators.  T.  K.  C.

VESTURE  (IM&TION),  Rev.  19i3i6  AV,  RV  'gar
ment.'  See  MANTLE,  §  2  [17].

VETCHES,  WILD  (^-VYI),  Job  30 7  RVm«.,  EV
NETTLES  (q.v. }.

VIAL.  i.  ^3,  fak,  i  S.  10i;  also  2  K.  9i3  RV
(where  AV  has  Box  \t?.v.} ',  <J>a»c<k).  Cp  also  CRUSE.

2.  i/uaAr),  Rev.  58  107,  etc.,  where  RV  always  BOWL  (y.v.,  9).

VILLAGE,  i.  A  'village'  as  distinguished  from  a
'town'  or  'city'  (~W,  'ir)  is  properly  ~lS3i  kdphdr
(Cant.  7  ii  [12]  i  Ch.  27 25),  or  "133,  kopher  \i  S.  618  in
combination  with  l|T"l3n,  happHrdzt,  '  village  of  the
peasantry,'  EV  '  country  village),'  or  T33  6fy&ir  (Neb.
62,  plur. ,  if  MT  is  correct;  see  CHEPHIRAH).  Like

1  See  Ball,  Light  from  the  East,  it>}ff._
"  See  Maspero,  The  Daion  of  Civilisation,  6iff.
3  Ibid.,  766 ff.

*  See  Warre-Cornish,  Diet,  of  Gk.  and  Rom.  Antiq.  s.v.
ITapaSe«Tos.

5  Ibid.,  s.v.  '  Venatio.'

6  Moore  (Judges,  361)  suspects  that  the  '  house*  which  Samson
pulled  down  by  leaning  against  its  two  pillars  was  the  banquet
ing  hall  of  the  temple  of  Dagon.

5249


VINE

the  Arabic  kefr,  the  word  enters  into  compound  place-
names — e.g. ,  Chephar-ha-ammonai  ;  cp  Capernaum.

2.  D"isn,  haserim,  is  the  name  given  to  villages  which
grew  out  of  the  early  settlements  of  nomads,  Gen.  25 16
(I!  niYB, tlroth; cp  CASTLE, 4), Lev.  25  31  ('villages
[enclosures]  which  have  no  wall  around  them'),  Josh.
198 ('villages which lay around their cities'; see
CITY),  Neh.  1228/. See  HAZOR,  HEZRON,  HAZERIM.
HAZEROTH.

3.  In  AV  '  villages '  is  now  and  then  given  for  nua,
banoth, 'daughters' — i.e., the  dependent towns  of  a
city; Nu.  212532 (RV 'towns'), i  Ch.  223 (so too
RV). Cp  DAUGHTER.

4.  On  n'nn,  haivivoth,  a  less  distinctly  Hebrew  term
than  2,  and  properly  synonymous  with  it,  see  HAVOTH-
JAIR,  HIVITES.

5-  nins,  plrdzoth,  properly  '  level  country.'  RV
renders  'villages'  (AV  'towns')  'without  walls'  in
Zech.24  [8],  and  in  Ezek.  38  n  Esth.  9 19  EV  gives

1  unwalled  villages,' '  unwalled towns.' nirs  should
possibly  be  restored  for  rrsnn  in  2  Ch.  27 4  (see  FOREST),
unless  we  hold  that  it  was  in  conquered  portions  of  the
Negeb  (read  nn^wa,  'in  the  Ashhurite')  that  Jotham,
like  REHOBOAM  (q.v. ),  built 'castles  and  towers.' In
Esth. (I.e.)  the  noun  p'rdzim is  rendered  in  EV 'of
the  villages  '  ;  cp  EV  of  Dt.  3s  i  S.  618. Some  connect
PEKIZZITES  (q.v.}  with  this  word.

6.  jinSi  plrdson,  too,  is  conjecturally  rendered
'villages,'  'villagers'  by  AV  and  some  recent  scholars
(cp  Moore  and  Budde)  in  Judg.  0711,  but  by  RV,  not
less  conjecturally,  'rulers,'  'rule.'  For  Judg.  on
Robertson  Smith  in  1892  suggested  '  in  the  redemption
of  Israel '  (see  Black,  Judges,  42)  ;  but  more  probably
the  true  reading  in  Judg.  0711,  and  Hab.  814  is  c*3n
(o'JjVl)  ;  cp  (S  SvvoLToL  [B],  (ppafav  [AL],  duvacrTuiv
(but  in  Judg.  5n  av^rjffov  [B],  ivlaxv(rat'  [AL]).  So
Cheyne,  and  (in  Hab.  I.e. }  Vollers.

7-  C'TIB  Hab.  3  14  AV,  '  the  head  of  his  villages '  (RV  '  of  his
warriors';  mg.  'hordes':  or,  'villages').  But  see  6.

8.  Kio/iT)  in  NT  is  uniformly  rendered  village  in  RV  (Mk.
S  27— the  villages  of  Caesarea  Philippi  ;  Jn.  742 — the  village  of
Bethlehem).  In  ©  it  sometimes  represents  not  only  H3,  run,
nsn,  !TYB,  133,  TD3,  and  123,  but  also  even  TJ,"  and  n'ljp.

It  is  given  as  a  Rabbinical  view  that  a  city,  as  distinguished
from  a  village,  was  a  community  with  ten  learned  men  in  it — i.e.,
a  sufficient  number  to  entitle  it  to  have  a  synagogue.  According
to  Furrer  (Schenkel,  BL  2  12)  the  modern  criterion  in  Palestine
is  the  possession  of  a  separate  market.  In  Esth.  9  19  oi  Karoc.
KoGvTe?  ei/  THIS  /ur;TpO7roAe<Tii'  (cm.  1!*),  and  oi  SifcTTrap/iieVot  ev
TraaT)  X">P?  constitute  the  two  categories  to  one  or  other  of  which
every  Jew  is  assumed  to  belong.

VINDICATOR  (^N3),  Job  19 25  RVme-  See  GOEL,
and  JOB  ii.  col.  2474.

VINE  (|35,  more  fully  j^H  |2|  Nu.  64  Judg.  13 14).

Like  the  name  of  the  grape  (335;)-  l'le  WOI'd  's  common

„  ,  to  Heb.  Aram.  Arab,  and  Ass. — from  which

Jr6  Guidi  infers  (Delia  Sede  primitive,  etc.  40

lerms. ^  ^^  the  vine  was  known  to  the  people

who  formed  the  original  Semitic  stock. But  from  the

names  for  pruning,  vintage,  winepress,  and  wine  being

distinct  in  the  different  languages  he  concludes  that  the

primitive  Semites  were  unacquainted  with  the  making  of

wine,  their  original  '  strong  drink  '  (isr,  a  word  common

to the four  languages and Ethiopic) being probably

made  from  barley.

Gt'phen  (jsa)  denotes  the  grape-vine  everywhere  but  in

2  K.  4sg,  where  gtphen  sddeh  (nib-  JB3.)  is  used  of  some
plant  resembling  the  vine  in  form,  but  bearing  poisonous
or  bitter  gourds  ;  see  WILD  GOURDS. Another  word
Sorek (pn-r, Is.  02 Jer.  22if) or sorekali (npnr, Gen.
49  nt) seems to denote a superior sort of vine.
Probably  it  derives  its  name  from  the  rich  dark  hue
of  the  grapes  (cp  Ar.  Zakira  or  Sakura ;  Lag. Uebers.
31  f. explains differently). Its grapes were called

5250


VINE

seruklm  (D'pnb,  Is.  168,  though  RV's  'choice  plants'  is
a  possible  rendering).  According  to  Jewish  tradition,
they  were  very  sweet,  with  almost  invisible  kernels
harsannltn  (c'Jsin  ;  see  GRAPE,  7).  The  vine  branch
or  shoot  is  called  zlmordh  (mici).  from  net  to  '  prune  ;
or  sarig  (rjy,  Gen.  40io  12  joellyf),  from  nt?  to
'interweave.'  Zalsallim  (D'Vl^J.1  Is.  18s)  seems  to
denote  low  branches  or  clusters  that  lie  on  the  ground.
The  gathering  of  grapes  is  expressed  by  the  verb  -i$a
(Lev.  25s,  etc.),  the  vintage  or  vintage -season  being
bdsir  (TSS,  Lev.  26s,  Judg.  8zf)  ;  to  prune  the  vine  is
nDl  (Lev.  25  3/.  Is.  56f)  ;  the  pruning-hook  is  mazmerah
(main).  The  '  pruning  of  vines'  (Budde,  Siegfried)  is
a  more  likely  interpretation  of  zamir  (TOT)  in  Cant.
2 12  than  the  'singing  of  birds'  (Del.,  Konig).  The
obscure  word  zimrath  (rnpi)  in  Gen.  43  n  is  by  Frd.
Delitzsch  connected  with  this  root,  and  interpreted  as
'fruits  cut  (from  the  plants  that  bear  them)';  but
Dillmann  rightly  objects  that  -at  is  used  only  of  pruning
away  that  which  is  useless  :  probably  the  word  must  be
traced  to  some  other  source  ;  <5  renders  rCiv  Kapirwv.
In  Talm.  zemer (net)  =  dessert-fruit  (grapes,  etc.).

The  Israelites  traced  the  planting  of  the  vine  to  Noah
(Gen.  920;  see  Budde,  Bib  I.  Urgesch.  306  ff.,  407,  and  cp

_.,.. . NOAH)  ;  and  Budde  thinks  that  the  'com-
z.  Biblical fort>  Spoken  of  in  Gen  529  refers  to  the

'  invention  of  wine.  Noah  was  not  a
dweller  in  Palestine  ;  thus  the  Israelites  preserved  the
tradition  of  the  introduction  of  the  vine  from  another
land.  Palestine,  as  described  in  the  OT,  was  a  great
wine-producing  country.  Joseph  ( Ephraim )  in  Gen.  49  22
and  Israel  in  Ps.  808  [9]  (cp  Is.  52  Hos.  10i,  etc.)  are
compared  to  a  vine.  Delitzsch,  in  his  charming  essay
'  The  Bible  and  Wine'  (Iris,  1888,  essay  9),  sees  in  the
fact  that  Jesus  compares  himself  to  a  vine  (Jn.  15 1),
an  allusion  to  his  being  the  Messiah,  the  Second  David
— which  illustrates  a  passage  in  the  early  Christian
Didache.  The  phrase  to  '  sit  under  one's  own  vine  and
one's  own  fig-tree'  occurs  constantly  in  descriptions  of
a  time  of  peace  (iK.  425  [5s]  Mic.  44  Zech.  3io).
Passages  like  Judg.  9 13  Ps.  104 13  show  with  what
simplicity  men  thanked  God  for  the  gift  of  wine.  But
the  vine  supplied  another  figure.  There  were  wild  vines
—not  of  a  '  genuine  '  stock  (Jer.  2  21).  Israel,  when  un
faithful,  is  compared  to  these  (Jer.  I.e.  cp  Is.  52),  and
the  enemies  of  Israel  are  even  likened  (Dt.  8232)  to  a
'  vine  of  Sodom  ' — i.e. ,  one  whose  juices  and  fruit  were
tainted  by  the  corruption  typified  by  Sodom  (Driver).
Cp  SODOM,  §  3,  n.  2.

The  vine  (  Vitis  vinifera,  L. )  '  grows  spontaneously  '  2

(according  to  de  Candolle,  L'Origine,  151  ff.  )  in  W.

„. . . temperate  Asia,  S.  Europe,  Algeria,  and

'  *  Morocco  ;  but  its  spontaneous  growth  is

•*'  most  marked  in  the  region  S.  of  the
Caspian,  and  between  that  and  the  Black  Sea.  Its
original  home  was  most  probably  in  Transcaucasia,
though  traces  of  it  have  been  found  in  deposits  of
prehistoric  and  probably  prehuman  age  in  other  quarters
— as  in  N.  Italy,  Switzerland,  and  S.  France.  It  has
been  cultivated  from  the  most  ancient  times  in  W.  Asia
and  in  Egypt  ;  in  the  latter  country  there  is  evidence
reaching  back  five  or  six  thousand  years.  The  '  soma '
of  the  Yedas  appears  to  have  denoted  primarily  a  beer
made  from  grain,  but  subsequently  wine:  and  it  is
probable  that  wine  was  one  of  the  earliest  discoveries  of
the  Aryan  race  and  that  they  carried  the  vine  with  them
as  they  migrated  westward.  Of  the  condition  of  vine-
growing  in  modern  Syria  an  account  is  given  by  Ander-
lind  in  7.DPV  \\\teff.  Cp  also  Tristram,  NHB  407
ff.,  and  see  WINE.  N.  M.  —  w.  T.  T.-D.

1  Possibly  nWrVp  in  Jer.  6 gt  has  a  similar  meaning.

2  This  phrase  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  it  is  a  native  of
these  districts.

5251


VOWS, VOTIVE  OFFERINGS

VINEGAR  O'Dh  v/  '  be  sour,'  '  leavened,'  Xu.  63  ;
Oloc,  J»-  1929).  Cp  cols.  959  n.  3,  2752,  5309.

VINEYARDS, PLAIN OF THE (D'p->3
Judg.  1133  AV,  RV  ABH:L-CHERAMIM  (q.v.\

VIOL  (^J),  Is.  5 12  AV. See  Music,  §  2,  6-9.

VIOLET  (rtafl),  Esth.  16  AVm*-;  EV  'blue.'  See
PURPLE  and  COLOURS,  §  13.

VIPER  (nrBN.  Is.  306;  exiANA,  Acts 28 3).  See
SERPENT,  §  i  [i].

VIRGIN  (TT<\p6eNOc).  There  is  no  clear  trace  of  an
Order  of  Virgins  in  the  Apostolic  Church.  The  four
daughters  of  Philip  the  Evangelist  [cp  PHILIP],  who
exercised  the  gift  of  prophecy,  were  virgins  (Acts 21 9).
In  i  Cor. 725-38  Paul  declares  that  he  has  'no  command
ment  of  the  Lord  '  respecting  virgins  :  they  may  marry,
or  not  marry,  without  sin.  On  the  whole  he  is  inclined
to  recommend  for  them  and  for  all  the  unmarried  state,
'on  account  of  the  present  necessity,'  which  should
make  all  Christians  sit  loosely  to  the  world.

A  later  age,  which  valued  virginity  as  a  superior  virtue,
peopled  the  Apostolic  age  with  virgins  living  in  community  and
presided  over  by  the  Virgin  Mary  :  see,  for  example  Donnitio
Mat-ice  (Tischendorf,  Apocal.  Apocr.  1861)  pp.  gdf.  '.  Coptic
Apocr.  Gospels,  F.  Robinson,  1896.  But  this  picture  has  no
historical  authorisation,  and  is  simply  the  reflex  of  a  subsequent
institution.  On  the  difficult  passage  in  Ignatius,  Smyrn.  13,
'  I  salute  .  .  .  the  Virgins,  who  are  called  Widows,'  see
Lightfoot's  note  ad  lac.  '.  he  is  probably  right  in  interpreting  it
as  '  I  salute  the  Widows,  whom  I  prefer  to  call  Virgins,  for  such
in  God's  sight  they  are  by  their  purity  and  devotion.'  [Cp
MINISTRY,  §  41  end.]  j.  A.  K.

VISION  (iirnpetc. ),  Gen.  15 1,  etc. See  PROPHECY.
VISION, VALLEY OF (|V-Tn "3 or &O3, THC

4>Ap<\rr~oc,  [U>N  N*  in  v.  5]  eN  d>&p&rn  c[e]iooN),

a  place  called  Valley  of  Hizzaion,  from  which  the
Assyrians  were  expected  to  make  an  assault  on  the
fortifications  of  Jerusalem,  Is.  22 1  (late  heading),  5f.
That  Hizzaion  is  a  proper  name,  and  that  the  phrase
does  not  mean  '  valley  of  vision  '  (or,  prophetic  revela
tion)  is  generally  admitted.  According  to  Dillmann,
some  part  of  Jerusalem  is  referred  to,  perhaps  the
Tyropoeon,  where  the  fortification  may  have  been
specially  weak.  This  implies  the  Massoretic  division
of  the  verse,  which,  however,  must  surely  be  wrong
(see  Duhm ;  Marti;  SBOT}.  No  such  name  as
Hizzaion  being  known,  it  has  been  proposed  to  read
— Disn  'a  '  the  valley  of  Hinnom,'  comparing  Zech.  14s,
where  nn  N-J  ('valley  of  my  mountains')  and  c%in  K'j
('valley  of  mountains')  may  be  miswritten  for  cisrt  N'3
'  valley  of  Hinnom  '  (see  '  Isaiah,'  SBOT  [Heb.],  112  ;
Marti).

It  is,  however,  by  no  means  improbable  that  Is.  22  1-14,  in  its
original  form,  referred  to  an  expected  blockade  of  Jerusalem  by
the  Jerahmeelites  (cp  SENNACHERIB,  §  5),  and  that  p'TH  "33
should  be  |C'?D  '32  'the  sons  of  Cushan."  The  next  metrical

line  begins  with  cS*yi>  where  cS'J,'  (Elam),  as  also  probably  in
11  ii  21~2  Jer.  25  25  40  34  Ezek.  32  24,  is  a  misunderstood  corrup
tion  of  SusnT  (Jerahmeel).  Such  is  the  position  of  the  un
decided  question  respecting  the  reference  of  Is.  22,  and  the
meaning  of  '  Valley  of  Hizzaion.'  T.  K.  C.

VOPHSICpQI;  iAB[e]i[BAFL];  Vapsi\Vg.]), father
of  Nahbi  (Nii'l'Sirf).

VOWS, VOTIVE OFFERINGS. A vow is a

voluntary  obligation  solemnly  assumed  toward  God  to
_ - ..  do  something  not  otherwise  required,

1.  Definition,  km  believed  to  be  acceptable  or  influ-
ential  with  him.  The  promise  may  be
either  simple  or  conditional.  In  the  former  case  it  is
usually  a  pledge  to  perform  at  a  future  date — for  ex
ample,  at  the  next  recurrence  of  a  feast — an  act  of
worship  which  is  less  convenient  or  suitable  at  the
time  the  vow  is  made  ;  and  the  motR-e  may  be  any
which  would  prompt  man  to  the  act  itself,  such  as
gratitude  to  God,  the  desire  to  secure  his  favour,  etc.

5252


VOWS,  VOTIVE  OFFERINGS

A  conditional  vow  is  commonly  made  in  circumstances
in  which  the  urgent  need  of  God's  protection  or  help
is  felt,  as  in  illness,  an  attack  by  the  enemy,  or  for  the
obtaining  of  a  greatly  desired  end,  such  as  the  birth  of
a  child,  the  increase  of  Mocks  and  herds,  victory  in
battle,  and  the  like.  In  such  a  case  a  man  solemnly
binds  himself,  if  God  does  for  him  what  he  wishes,  to
do  such  and  such  a  specified  thing  for  God.

Vows  of  the  latter  kind  were  in  ancient  religions  the
common  accompaniment  of  prayer,  and  were  believed
to  contribute  greatly  to  its  efficacy.  The  transaction
seems  to  us  commercial  in  even  a  higher  degree  than
the  familiar  motive  of  sacrifice,  Do  ut  des  ;  this  may  be
formulated,  Dabo  si  dederis.  We  have  to  remember,
however,  that  man's  gift  was  not  conceived  as  an
equivalent  by  which  the  service  of  God  was  purchased,
but  as  a  present,  just  as  in  similar  transactions  among
men  when  an  inferior  sought  the  aid  of  a  great  man.
The  thing  vowed  might  be  anything  with  which  it  was
conceived  that  God  would  be  pleased — -a  sacrifice,  a
service,  a  dotation  of  gold  and  silver,  houses  and  lands,
cattle,  or  persons  to  God,  that  is,  to  the  temple.  It
might  also  be  an  interdict  imposed  by  the  maker  upon
himself  for  a  time  or  for  life  in  the  use  of  things  other
wise  lawful  ;  thus  fasting,  abstinence  from  particular
kinds  of  food — as  the  grape  and  its  products  in  the
Nazirite's  vow — from  the  wearing  of  ornaments,  sexual
intercourse,  etc. ,  were  often  vowed.  Such  arbitrary
self-denial  was  thought,  like  the  scrupulous  observance
of  the  similar  restrictions  imposed  by  religion  itself,  to
be  a  proof  of  devotion.

The  general  word  for  vow  is  "113,  neder,  05  fux1?-  For  a  vow
of  abstinence  specifically,  Nu.  30  employs  "1BX,  "ON,  zssdr,  esdr
(*5  optoTxos),  from  ~DN,  'bind.'  The  meaning  of  this  word  is
especially  clear  in  Dan.  6  7 12./C  15,  where  RV  well  renders
'  interdict '  ;  cp  also  the  rabbinical  use  of  the  verb  in  the  sense
of  prohibit,  and  Mt.  16  19  IS  18.

The  vow,  being  a  solemn  promise  freely  made,  was
a  most  binding  obligation  ;  it  had  the  force  of  an  oath,
with  which,  indeed,  it  was  frequently  associated  (see
Xti.  :iOa  Acts  23  21 ).  liven  a  rash  vow  or  one  which
entailed  unforeseen  and  terrible  consequences,  like
Jephthah's  (Judg.  11),  must  be  fulfilled  to  the  letter.
To  break  faith  with  God  in  such  a  matter  was  to  invite
destruction.  Men,  nevertheless,  often  tried  to  slip  out
of  their  obligation  by  subterfuges,  or  practised  deceit  in
paying  their  vows.  Malachi  (1  14)  pronounces  accursed
the  fraudulent  man  who  had  vowed  a  male  victim  and
had  one  in  his  flock,  but  sacrificed  a  blemished  beast.1
The  Deuteronomic  law  enjoins  the  prompt  payment  of
vows  according  to  their  tenor,  for  God  will  strictly
exact  it  ;  it  is  no  sin  not  to  make  a  vow,  but  being
voluntarily  made  it  must  be  fulfilled  (Dt.  2821-23  [22-24]  ;
cp  Prov.  2025  Eccles.  D4/  [if.]  Ecclus.  1822).

Examples  of  vows  in  the  OT  history  are  those  of  Jacob  at
Bethel  (Gen.  '.'8  20-22,  cp  31  13,  302-7),  Jephthah  (Judg.  11  307:
34-39),  Hannah  (i  S.  1  iif.  24-28),  Absalom  (2  S.  layyT).  Frequent
references  in  other  connections  show  how  important  a  place
vows  had  in  all  periods  of  religion  :  see  Dt.  126n  1726  Ps.  2225
60  14  50  12  6158  65  i  6613  76  ii  1161418  Prov.  V  14  Is.  I'.iai
Nah.  1  15  Jon.  1  16  2  9  Judith  4  14  i  Esd.  2  7  2  Mace.  3  35  9  13^
Acts  21  23  232i.

The  only  laws  in  the  Pentateuch  on  the  subject  of
vows  in  general,'2  Lev.  27 1-29  and  Nu.  30,  are  both

2  Laws  ^ate'  ^u'  ^  c'etermmes  wno  can  make
a  binding  vow,  with  especial  reference
to  the  vows  of  women  (see  M.  Ntdarlm).  If  a
man  makes  a  vow  or  imposes  upon  himself  by  an  oath
some  abstinence,  he  must  not  '  profane  his  word,'  but
strictly  fulfil  his  obligation.  The  vow  of  a  widow  or  a
divorced  woman  is  similarly  binding  (v.  10)  ;  but  the
vow  of  an  unmarried  woman  in  her  father's  house,  or
of  a  married  woman  in  her  husband's,  is  null  without
his  consent,  which,  however,  is  assumed  to  be  tacitly
given,  if,  being  cognisant  of  the  vow,  he  did  not  oppose

1  Cp  the  Arab  substitution  of  gazelles  for  sheep  in  payment
of  a  vow,  SACRIFICE,  §  8.

2  On  the  Nazirite's  vow,  see  NAZIRITE.

5253


VOWS,  VOTIVE  OFFERINGS

her.  If  a  woman  marries  while  under  a  vow  made  in
her  father's  house,  the  subsequent  consent  of  her
husband  is  necessary  ;  if  he  annuls  it  she  is  free.  If
the  husband  lets  the  vow  pass  in  silence  when  he  first
learns  of  it,  but  afterwards  prevents  its  fulfilment,  he
makes  himself  guilty  of  the  breach  of  obligation.  The
law  does  not  say  how  it  is  with  the  vow  of  a  minor  son
in  his  father's  house,  or  with  that  of  an  Israelite  slave.

Lev.  27  treats  of  the  conditions  under  which  persons
or  property  that  have  been  given  to  God  in  fulfilment
of  a  vow  may  be  redeemed.  An  animal  of  the  kinds
from  which  sacrifices  are  made  to  Yahwe  is  made  '  holy  '
by  the  vow  ;  no  redemption,  substitution,  or  exchange
is  allowed  ;  if  such  a  thing  is  attempted  both  animals
become  '  holy  '  (v.  gf. ).  On  an  unclean  animal  a  value
is  set  by  the  priest,  and  it  may  be  redeemed  by  the
payment  of  this  sum  with  one-fifth  added  (w.  11-13).
Human  beings  are  redeemed  at  a  price  fixed  by  the  law
in  accordance  with  their  age  and  sex  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  iv.  4  4) ;
a  boy  between  one  month  and  five  years  old,  five  shekels,
a  girl,  three  ;  from  five  years  to  twenty,  twenty  shekels
and  ten  respectively  ;  from  twenty  to  sixty  a  man  is
valued  at  fifty  shekels,  a  woman  at  thirty  ;  after  sixty
this  value  fell  to  fifteen  and  ten.  If  a  man  was  too
poor  to  pay  the  price  on  this  scale,  the  priest  fixed  a
sum  within  his  means.  If  a  man  consecrates  a  house
to  Yahwe  by  a  vow,  the  priest  estimates  its  value,  and
the  owner  may  redeem  it  on  payment  of  six-fifths  of  the
sum.  In  the  case  of  hereditary  lands  which  revert  to
the  family  in  the  Jubilee  year,  the  value  depends  on
how  far  off  this  term  is.  The  basis  is,  on  an  acreage
seeded  with  one  homer  of  barley,  fifty  shekels  for  the
whole  period,  that  is,  one  shekel  for  each  year  the
tenure  has  to  run.  The  surtax  for  redemption  is,  as
in  all  other  cases,  one-fifth.  If  not  redeemed,  or  if
sold  to  another  man,  the  reversion  is  cut  off,  and  the
land  ceded  to  the  priests.1  Purchased  land,  in  which
the  buyer  has  really  only  a  leasehold  till  the  next  Jubilee
year,  is  estimated  by  the  priest.

Some  things  cannot  be  consecrated  to  God  by  a  vow,
either  because  they  already  belong  to  him,  like  the
firstlings  of  animals  fit  for  sacrifice  (Lev.  27z6),  or
because  they  are  abominable  to  him,  as  the  hire  of  a
religious  prostitute  of  either  sex  (Dt.  23  18) — a  kind  of
votive-offering  frequent  in  that  world.

A  vow  of  abstinence  of  a  pecyiliar  kind  is  that  of  the  NAZIRITE
(y.v.),  for  which  there  are  special  laws  in  Nu.  »)  1-21.

A  man  might  not  only  vow  to  '  hallow'  some  object
to  God  (tr'npri,  hikdls),  he  might  devote  it  (Q'inn,  heMrlin)
by  his  vow  so  that  it  became  herein  (see  BAN,  and  cp
Nu.  21  2).  What  was  so  devoted  became  intensely  '  holy,'
that  is,  God  guarded  his  rights  in  it  most  jealously  ;  it
could  neither  be  sold  nor  redeemed.  Lands  or  animals
so  dedicated  belonged  irrevocably  to  the  sanctuary,  that
is  to  the  priests  (Xu.  18 14  Ezek.  44  29) ;  men  thus  devoted
must  be  put  to  death  (Lev.  27  z8/. ).  The  last  provision
can  hardly  be  an  actual  provision  for  a  private  ban.

Vows,  like  oaths,  were  frequently  made  rashly  and  about  trivial
matters  ;  indeed,  they  often  became  a  mere  form  of  speech  to
fortify  an  asseveration  or  a  declaration  of  purpose,  as  '  I  vow.  if
I  didn't  see  a  snake  as  big  as  the  beam  of  a  wine-press '  (.If.
N&darlm,  3  2).  With  a  lurking  scruple  such  as  among  us  gives
rise  to  minced  oaths,  men  in  NT  times  said  kf>ndm,  kondh,  or
the  like,  instead  of  korbdn.  The  rabbis  discouraged  the  practice
by  requiring  the  fulfilment  of  unadvised  vows,  and  declaring  the
clipped  formula  equivalent  in  force  to  the  proper  word.  They
had  to  distinguish,  however,  between  vows  the  fulfilment  of
which,  though  inconvenient,  was  a  proper  punishment  for  the
rash  undertaking,  and  such  as  ought  not  to  be  kept,  and  to  pro
vide  some  way  of  absolution  for  the  latter  (.17.  Nedarim,  3  i
!>i_^i).  In  this  endeavour  they  were  led  into  a  casuistry  not
always  accordant  with  sound  ethics.  The  example  given  by
Jesus  in  Mk.  7  io_f.  Mt.  \f>$f.  of  the  way  in  which  they  nullified
the  law  of  God  by  their  traditions  has  been  discussed  under
CORHAN'  (q.v.).

The  commonest  vow  in  all  ages  was  doubtless  a  sacrifice,  and
votive  offerings  were  probably  the  commonest  of  private  sacri-


1  The  provisions  of  the  law  are  not  clear ;  see  the  commen.
taries,.  For  the  rabbinical  elaboration  of  these  rules  see
M.  'Ardkln.

5254


VULGATE

fices.  The  votive  sacrifice  might,  according  to  the  terms  of  the
vow,  be  a  burnt-offering  or  a  peace-otTering,  or  both  combined,
and  consist  of  any  kind  or  number  of  sacrificable  animals,  or
simply  of  an  oblation.  The  rites  were  those  appropriate  to  the
species  of  sacrifice  and  the  victim  (see  SACRIFICE)!  a  votive
peace-offering  was  subject  to  the  ordinary  rule  that  the  flesh
should  be  eaten  on  the  day  of  the  offering  or  the  next,  not  to  the
narrower  restriction  of  the  thank-offering  (ti'ddk),  and  to  the
general  requirement  of  ceremonial  purity  in  those  who  partook
of  the  feast  (Lev.  7  i6^/".).  Nu.  15  3^  prescribes  an  oblation  with
every  victim  in  the  case  of  votive  as  of  other  sacrifices.  Offer
ings  of  wine  and  oil  were  also  made  in  the  fulfilment  of  vows  (see
SACRIFICE,  §  31  a).

.I/.  Nld&rlm,  'Arakln,  cp  also  Sfk<lli»i,  46-8;  the  works  on
biblical  archaeology,  especially  Saalschiitz,  Motaischei  Recht,

l358^; Nowack, Hebr. Arch.; Ben-
3.  Bibliography, zinger,  Hebr. Arch.;  articles  'Gelubde'

in  PREW,  Riehm,  HBA,  Schenkel,  BL,
'Vow,'  Hastings,  DB.  G.  F.  M.

VULGATE. See  TEXT  AND  VERSIONS,  §§21,  59.
VULTURE. Of the four species of Vulturidae


-WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OP

described  by  Tristram  from  Palestine,  three  (Gyps
fulvus,  Neophron  percnopterus,  and  Gypaetus  barbatus)
are  treated  under  the  he?dings  (i)  EAGLE  [R\'m£-
'  Great  Vulture'],  (2)  GIER-EAGLE  and  (3)  OSSIFRAGE.
The  fourth  species  is  the  black  vulture,  Vultur  monachus,
the  only  living  representative  of  its  genus.  This  bird
inhabits  the  countries  surrounding  the  Mediterranean
and  extends  eastward  to  China.  It  is  not  common  in
Palestine,  and  does  not  seem  to  be  mentioned  in
Or  or  NT.

4.  The  'vulture'  (.IKJ,  da  ah)  in  AV  of  Lev.  11  i4t  is  in  RV
rendered  'kite.' Its  identification  can  only  be  conjectural  ;  but
see  KITE.

5.  The  'vulture*  (!V^  dayyiih,  tin,  dayytlth,  another  form  of
ntn  above)  of  Dt.  14 13 (om. Di. after Sam. ©), Is.  34  15!
(eAcu^os)  is  also  rendered  KITE  in  RV. See  above.

6.  rr«  'ayydh,  Job 28 7, AV (RV 'falcon), but elsewhere
KITE  (q.v.).  A.  E.  S.


w


WAFERS,  i.  p'pn,  rakik,  Ex.  29 2,  EV,  etc.,  i  Ch.
23  29  RV.  See  BREAD,  '§"2  (c).

2.  nrrss,  sapftihath,  Ex.  1031!  eyxpi's ;  see  BAKEMEATS,  §  3
(3),  where,  however,  nrPSs  is  to  be  read  for  '  p'pT  .  .  .  BREAD.'

WAGES.  See,  generally,  TRADE  AND  COMMERCE,
§  83  (e)  4.  The  words  are  :  —

1.  "I^T''  sakiir,  /J.i<r06s,  inerces,  of  the  hire  of  a  servant  (Gen.
8032  Ex.  2g  Dt.  24  15  i  K.  620  [6]  [©B  om.  /uio-flop],  etc.),  the
'  reward  '  of  priests  (Nu.  1831),  passage-money  (Jon.  1  3,  vaJvKov),
etc.

2.  15;:',  seker,  Prov.  11 18  Is.  19  10  ;  on  the  latter  passage  see
SLUICES.

3.  rnbt'B, tnaskoreth, /aio-flds, merces, Gen.  29 15 31 7 41
Ruth  2  i2f.

4.  n^J/'B, /i5* ullah,  jiicrfJds,  opus,  Lev.  19  13,  etc.

5.  jiAnrSos,  mcrces,  Jn.  436,  etc. See  above,  i.

6.  01//UJ1/IOI', stipendium, stipendia, i  Esd.  4  56 i Mace.  3  28
1432  Lk.  3  14 Rom.  6  23  i  Cor.  07  2  Cor.  11  8  (cp  o\fiov  'meat'
Tob.  22 [6i//aptoi'  N]  78,  [om.  N]  oi/rt>iroti}jtia  Judith  12  i, 61/^05  =
j-l  Xu.  11  22).

WAGON, i.  Pl^i;,  'agdldh;  see  CHARIOT,  §  2.

2.  D^V. sabblm. Is.  6620, EV '  litters,'  but  better,
following  (5  (ev  \a/uLTrrivai5  [rifubvuv']) ,  'cars'  such as
are drawn, for swiftness, by mules (cp Find. Pyth.
494/1  airrivri}  ; cp  Ass.  sunibu  (from  subbu),  a.  car  drawn
by  mules, as distinguished from  narkabtu, a wagon
drawn  by  horses. At  the  same  time, the 'cars,'  like
the  '  chariots  and  horses,' in  Is.  (I.e. )  are  very  possibly
due  to  an  editor  ; the  original  text  gave  the  names  of
the  peoples  whence  the  Jews  were  to  be  brought  ;  see
Crit.  Bib.  49.

In  Xu.~3  3S  n'7.U',  EV  'covered  wagons' ;  but  this  is  merely
a  syn.  for  c'SS  'cars.'  Cp  NTS  Tg.  Is.  4922  Nab..  28  (the
queen  sitting  in  a  jo's).

3.  -Dn,  rekeb,  Ezek.  23  24  AV,  RV  CHARIOT  (q.v.~).

4.  ^3,  galgal,  Ezek.  23  24  RV,  Ezek.  26  10  RV,  AV  RVmf*.
'wheel,'  cp  WHEEL.

On  the  '  place  of  the  wagons  '  i  S.  17  20  etc.  RV,  AV  '  trench,'
see  CAMP,  §  i.

WAIN,  THRESHING  ^TlPI),  Job413o  [22]  RV.
See  AGRICULTURE,  §8/3.

WALL. i.  On  noil"!,  komdh,  see  FORTRESS,  passim.

3.  7'n,  hel  (v/Vin),  a  surrounding  wall,  defined  by  Jews  as
DCin  ja — i.e.,  'a  little  wall '  (see  BDB),  a  glacis  ;  see  FORTRESS,
{  5,  end,  col.  1557.

3-  TP)  gadir,  's  rendered  '  wall '  by  AV  in  Nu.  22  24  Ezra  9  9
Is.  65  Ezek.  427  12  Hos-  2<s  where  in  each  case  RV  or  RVmc-
prefers  'fence.'  See  HEDGE,  2,  and  cp  the  place-names  Geder,
Gederah,  Gederoth,  Gederothaim,  Gedor.  RVmg.  suggests
'walls'  for  'hedges,'  fliTIS,  in  Nah.  3  17.

4.  VJ5,  klr,  of  a  town-wall  in  Josh.  2  15,  etc. ;  of  a  house-wall

52SS


in iK.6s_/C,  etc.,  of  a  room-wall  in  i  S.18n202S,  etc.,  cp
HOUSE,  §  i.

5-  "\W,  stir;  Gen.  49  22  Ps.  18  30  [29]t,  2  S.  22  30 ;  in  Jer.  5  10  for
ml:?,  nil!?  is  suggested — i.e.,  rows  of  vine-plants  ;  seeGes.-Bu.
s.v. ,  mi!?,  and  cp  Duhm,  ad  loc.

6.  .  n3,  kothel,  Cant.  2  gt  of  a  house-wall.

7.  KJIU'N,  'ussarna,  Ezra  5  3  pf. Word  of  uncertain  meaning;
see  Ges.-Bu.  who  suggest  'Gebiilk' — i.e.,  'timberwork.' ©HAL
has  \ofi^i.av ;  II  i  Esd.  64  has  -n\v  <nifr\v  ra.\>Tt\v. See  Marti,
KHC,  ad  loc.

WALLET  (nHRA),  Mt.  lOio  RV,  AV  SCRIP  (q.v.).

WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OF. '  The  Wilder
ness  '  (ham-midbdr,  ~Q"n2n)  was,  in  all periods, the
standing phrase among the Hebrews


1.  Term
'  wilderness.'


for the scene  of that  epoch  in their


history  which  immediately  preceded
the  settlement  in  Canaan  ;  in  addition  to  the  Hexa-
teuchal  narratives  see,  e.g. ,  Am.  2io  Hos.  185  Jer.  26
Ezek.  20io  Neh.  9zi  2  Ch.  24p  Ps.  1074-  Undefined  by
reference  to  particular  places,  the  Hebrew  term  is  a
wide  one.  Agreeably  to  its  etymological  signification,
'  the  place  where  (cattle)  are  driven,'  it  denotes  country
inhabited  by  nomads,  and  in  actual  OT  usage  includes
the  country  stretching  SW.  of  Canaan  to  Egypt,  to
gether  with  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  SE.  to  Arabia  and  E.
to  the  Euphrates.  (See  CATTLE,  §  5,  DESERT,  §  2  [3]. )

The  topographical  problem,  with  which  alone  the
present  article  is  concerned,  is  to  discover  the  limited
.  .  .  district  within  this  larger  area  of
2.  Topographical  wilderness  to  which  the  nomadic  life
problem.  of  {he  early  Hebrews  was  referred  in
the  memory  or  imagination  of  the  various  biblical  writers.'
The  difficulties  and  uncertainties  attending  the  solution,
which  probably  will  never  be  wholly  overcome,  are  due
mainly  to  the  uncertainty  in  many  ports  (but  chiefly  in
the  case  of  J  and  E)  of  the  analysis  of  the  sources,  our
insufficient  acquaintance  with  the  actual  historical  con
ditions  (cp  SINAI),  and  the  paucity  of  trustworthy
identifications  of  particular  sites.  The  literature  of  the
subject,  which  is  extensive,  needs  to  be  used  with
extreme  caution  on  account  of  the  general  neglect  of  a
critical  employment  of  the  sources  and  the  utter  insuf
ficiency — in  some  cases  also,  the  thoroughly  unphilo-
logical  character — of  the  reasons  for  the  identifications.
[Textual  criticism,  too,  may  have  to  be  applied  more
methodically.]

The  sites  of  the  Egyptian  starting-point  of  the  Exodus,
of  Sinai,  and  of  the  intervening  stages,  are  discussed
elsewhere  ( EXODUS,  SINAI).  We  are  here


3.  Site  of


more  immediately  concerned  with  the  district


Kaclesh. jn  w)lich  tne  peopie  are  sa;d  to  have  wandered

for  forty  years  between  the first  abortive  attempt  on

5256


WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OF


6.  In  JE.


Canaan  from  the  S.  and  the  final  successful  attack
from  the  E.  For  this  the  most  important  site  is
KADESH  (y.v. );  long  a  matter  of  almost  hopeless  dispute,
it  is  now,  by  general  consent,  identified  with  'Ain-Kadis
{50  m.  S.  of  Beersheba),  which  was  visited  by  Seetzen  in
1807  (Reisen  durck  Syrien,  848  [1859]),  and  then  by
Rowlands,  who  first  identified  it  with  Kadesh  (Williams,
Holy  City,  \^ff.],  and  by  Clay  Trumbull  (Kadesh
Darnea  [1881]),  who  has  elaborately  and  successfully
vindicated  the  identification.

Now,  what  relation  does  Kadesh  bear  to  the  wilder
ness  of  Wanderings? In  P,  where  the  case  is  simplest,
„ , >i Kadesh  is  the  stage  reached  immediately
4.  Kaaesn before  Mt Hor  ^  Nu  o0  22 1  27 14  Dt.  32  51
ln  and  Pin  Xu.  20 1-13). Apparently,  there

fore,  it  was  not  visited  before  the  fortieth  year — i.e.,
the  end  of  the  nomadic  period.  For,  according  to  P,
the  sentence  of  forty  years  wandering  was  given  in  the
wilderness  of  Paran  and  was  to  be  carried  into  effect  in
the  same  wilderness  (Nu.  12 166  13 1-3  2617  1435),  whereas
Kadesh  is  in  the  wilderness  of  Zin  (Nu.  20 122,  cp  3836),
which  is  distinct  from  the  wilderness  of  Paran  (Nu.
18321).  Doubtless,  the  fortieth  year  was  originally
mentioned  in  Nu.  20 1  (cp  3838),  and  was  subsequently
omitted  for  obvious  harmonistic  reasons.  In  P  the
whole  people  in  the  fortieth  year  moved  as  the  spies  had
done  a  generation  earlier  out  of  the  wilderness  of  Paran
into  the  wilderness  of  Zin  to  Kadesh.

From  the  foregoing  representations  all  the  remaining
narratives  differ  ;  for  all  these,  in  spite  of  other  differ
ences  among  themselves,  agree  in  associating  Kadesh
with  the  beginning  of  the  '  forty  years'  '  wanderings.

In  the  combined  narratives  of  JE — and  probably  also
in  both  of  the  originally  separate  narratives  J  and  E —

Kadesh  is  the  place  whence  the  spies  were

despatched  (Nu.  1826,  from  'to  Kadesh'  ;
cp  328^)  and,  presumably,  where  the  condemnation
to  the  forty  years'  wandering  was  pronounced  (Nu.
1433),  where  the  people  abode  (cyn  3B"i),  and  where
Miriam  died  and  was  buried  (Nu.  20 1^),  and  whence,
at  the  close  of  the  period,  they  made  their  request  to
pass  through  Edom  (Nu.  20i4j^).2  In  brief,  Kadesh
was  the  goal  of  the  people  after  the  Exodus  and  their
visit  to  Sinai,  their  headquarters  while  they  were  shep
herds  (c'jn)  f°r  '  forty  years,'  and  their  point  of  depart
ure  for  the  final  attack  on  Canaan.  Cp  also  Judg.  11  16.
In  D  Kadesh  is  the  goal  of  the  people  after  leaving
Horeb  (Dt.  1  19,  cp  923  Josh.  146/i ),  the  place  whence

the  spies  were  despatched  (Dt.  120-24  Josh.

14  7),  and  the  scene  of  their  condemnation
to  a  prolongation  of  the  nomadic  life  (Dt.  134^).
There  they  abode  for  an  indefinite  period,  not,  however,
exceeding  a  few  months  (Dt.  2i,  cp  7  14) ;  but  the  main
part  of  the  period — thirty-eight  years — was  spent  in
compassing  Mt.  Seir  (Dt.  2i  14).  Moreover,  according
to  the  only  natural  interpretation  of  Dt.  2 14,  Kadesh,
once  left,  was  never  revisited  ;  there  is  no  suggestion
here  (nor  anywhere  else)  of  a  second  visit  to  Kadesh
after  absence.

Thus  in  JE  Kadesh  is  the  (apparently)  permanent
centre,  in  D  the  starting-point,  and  in  P  theyf;z<z/  stage
of  the  nomadic  wanderings  which  intervened  between
the  defeat  of  the  Hebrews  on  their  first  attempt  to
conquer  Canaan  from  the  S.  and  the  commencement  of

1  Nu.  2022  has  been  generally  assigned  to  P  in  its  entirety.
Carpenter,  in  the  Oxford  Hexateuch,  assigns  clause  a  to  E. If
this  were  certain,  which  it  is  not  (see  Gray  in  Internat.  Crit.
Com.),  it  would  still  be  clear  that  20  22^-29  in  P,  as  in  the  present
compilation,  was  preceded  by  P's  story  of  the  sin  of  Moses  and
Aaron  at  Kadesh  ;  cp  20  24  with  v.  23.

2  It must  suffice merely to draw attention to the theory
recently  advanced by Steuernagel (Die Eimvandening  tier
israelitischen  Stiimmen, 1901)  that in J one  section of  the
people  (the  '  Leah  '  tribes,  according  to  his  denomination)  actu
ally  made  their  way  into  Canaan  from  Kadesh,  whereas  in  E
the '  Jacob '  tribes, leaving Kadesh at  the beginning of  the
nomadic  period,  spent  their  years  of  wandering  in  the  deserts
East  of  the  Jordan and the  Arabah. [Cp  EXODUS  i.,  §  6,
TRIBES,  §  13^]

5257


6.  In  D.


8.  To  E.  of
Canaan.


that  definite  march  which  led  to  the  actual  conquest
from  the  E.  a  generation  later.

We  must  now  consider  what  hints  the  various  narra
tives  contain  for  the  closer  definition  of  the  district  in
7  Sinai  to  {lucsti°n-  JE  contains  no  reference  to
Kadesh  in  JE  P!aces  wn'cn  directly  serve  to  define  the
district ;  for  Hormah  is  not  mentioned
as  a  place  in  the  wilderness  of  Wandering,  but  as  a  point
connected  with  a  definite  attempt  to  gain  an  entrance
into  Canaan  from  the  S. ,  and  all  the  other  places  referred
to  in  JE  are  stages  in  the  movements  (i)  from  Egypt  to
Sinai,  (2)  from  Sinai  to  Kadesh,  which  preceded  the
nomadic  period  proper,  and  (3)  from  Kadesh  to  the  E.
of  Canaan,  which  succeeded  it.  For  the  first  series,  see
Exonus,  i.  §§  \off.  The  second  consists  of  Taberah
(Nu.  lls),  Kibroth-hattaavah,  and  Hazeroth  (Nu.  lias).
The  identifications  which  have  been  offered  of  these  sites
have  little  more  to  recommend  them  than  that  they
agree  with  a  particular  theory  of  a  route  from  the  spot
identified  as  Sinai.  In  the  only  case  where  the  similarity
of  the  modern  name  ('Ain  el-Hadra  =  msn ;  so  Robinson,
Palmer)  appears  to  furnish  an  independent  reason  for
the  identification,  this  circumstance  is  far  from  con
clusive,  for  names  like  Hazeroth  were  frequent  (cp
NAMI-;S,  §  105).  The  third  series  concludes  with  places
which  are  obviously  on  the  E.  of  the
Arabah — '  the  wilderness  before  Moab
toward  the  sun-rising'  (Nu.  21 10),  the
valley  of  Zered  (Nu.  21 12),  '  the  other  side  of  Arnon  '
(Nu.  2113),  Beer,  Mattanah,  Nahalicl,  Bamoth,  'the
valley  that  is  in  the  field  of  Moab  ' — Nu.  21 16-20,  cp
further  21  tiff.  ;  for  details  reference  must  be  made  to
the  several  articles.  An  isolated  fragment,  apparently
of  E,  in  Dt.  106-8  preserves  the  names  of  four  places —
Beeroth-Bene-Jaakan,  Moserah,  Gudgodah  and  Jot-
bathah — which  were  probably  stages  in  the  earlier  part
of  the  march  down  the  W.  of  the  Arabah  ;  but  in  the
absence  of  identification,  we  cannot  speak  with  certainty.
Indirectly  and  negatively,  however,  the  district  of
the  nomadic  period  is,  within  broad  limits,  thus  defined
_  .,  in  JE.  The  country  to  the  N.  of  Kadesh

forJE  is  imPIied  to  have  bcen  effectually  held  by
other  peoples1  (Nu.  1439-45  ;  cp  z1.  25  1829
— to  the  NE.  by  Edom — cp  Nu.  20  16;  see  more  fully
Buhl,  Gesch.  der  Edomiter,  22-26,  and  EDOM).  The
wanderings,  therefore,  in  JE  are  conceived  as  taking
place  from  Kadesh  as  a  permanent  centre  over  an  in
definite  part  of  the  wilderness  stretching  to  the  S.  and
W.  of  that  place — in  other  words,  over  the  desert  of  et-
Tih,  and  more  immediately  over  that  part  now  held  by
the  'Azazimeh.

In  D,  as  in  JE,  Taberah  and  Kibroth-hattaavah  are

stages on the  journey  from Horeb to Kadesh  (922);

n,  Hazeroth  in Dt.  1  i is either  different

10.  JJsnarra-  from  the  Hazcroth  of  jE_  or  else  the

passage  in  question  has  ceased  to  be
intelligible  (cp  Dr.  ad  lor. ).  D  chiefly  differs  from  JE
in  making  the  scene  of  the  wanderings  for  the  greater
part  of  the  period  (thirty- eight  years)  distant  from
Kadesh,  but  immediately  bordering  on  Edom.  The
command  in  Dt.  2s  appears  to  be  referred  to  the  close
of  the  period,  and  to  have  immediate  reference  to  the
final  attack  on  Canaan  ;  consequently,  although  the
punitive  wanderings  extended  up  to  the  brook  Zered
(Dt.  2 14^)  on  the  E.  of  Edom,  we  must  conceive  the
greater  part  of  the  period  to  have  been  spent  on  the  W.
borders  of  Edom.  Removing  from  Kadesh  at  the
beginning,  the  people  are  found  at  the  close  of  the
period  at  the  SE.  end  of  the  Arabah  (Dt.23).  (In
attempting  to  arrive  at  D's  view,  Dt.  106/.  must  be
disregarded  ;  the  verses  form  an  isolated  fragment
out  of  relation  to  D's  other  statements  ;  cp  Dr.  ad  foe. )

1  Thus  much  it  seems  safer  to  affirm  of  IE.  It  is  unnecessary
here  to  discuss  at  length  the  analysis  of  the  several  sources  as
between  I,  E  and  editors,  for  which  the  Commentaries  must  be
consulted.

5258


WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OF


11.  P's  narra
tive.


When  we  turn  to  P  we  have  to  distinguish  between
the  general  narrative  and  the  summarising  chapter,
Nu.  33.

In  the  narrative,  the  Hebrews  journeyed  from  Sinai
to  the  wilderness  of  Paran.  Here  they  encamped,
hence  the  spies  were  despatched,  and
hither  they  returned  ;  and  '  in  this
wilderness'  (Nu.  1435)  the  punitive
wanderings  took  place.  On  the  boundaries  of  the
wilderness  of  Paran,  see  GEOGRAPHY,  §  7.  The  re
maining  places  in  P's  narrative  appear  to  be  referred  to
the  final  year.  These  occur  in  this  order  :  wilderness
of  Zin  (Nu.  20i),  Kadesh,  Mt.  Hor  (2022),  Oboth,  lye-
abarim  (21 10),  plains  of  Moab  (22 1),  pointing  to  a
northward  movement  (Paran  to  Kadesh)  followed  by  an
eastward  (to  the  plains  of  Moab);  and  the  latter  move
ment  was  in  all  probability  regarded  as  being  direct  across
the  N.  territory  of  Edom  (cp  We.  CH  no,  Buhl,  Gesch.
23,  Gray  on  Nu.  21  n),  not,  as  in  JE  (e.g.,  Nu.  214),  or
D  (Dt.  2s  8),  by  means  of  a  march  round  the  S.  end  of
Edom ;  for  although  the  site  of  Oboth  is  uncertain,  and
lye-abarim  unidentified,  yet  the  latter  certainly  lay,  as
its  name  indicates,  on  the  E.  of  the  Arabah  (cp  ABAKIM).
Thus,  the  main  narrative  of  P,  like  JE  and  D,  contains
no  topographical  details  of  the  scene  of  the  wanderings
proper.  The  district  suggested  by  P  is  more  southerly
than  in  JE,  less  easterly — i.e.,  less  definitely  associated
with  the  borders  of  Edom — than  in  D.

In  Nu.  33  the  point  of  view  is  different.  We  have
here  a  succession  of  forty  places  at  which  the  children
_,  ...  of  Israel  encamped,  between  the  time
'  when  they  left  Rameses  and  the  time
when  they  arrived  at  the  Fields  of  Moab.  Probably
the  number  has  been  fixed  at  forty  by  artificial  selection,
to  equal  the  number  of  the  years  of  wandering  ;  although
the  compiler  clearly  does  not  intend  us  to  suppose  that  the
people  tarried  at  each  place  just  a  year,  for  seven  of  the
stages  clearly  belong  to  the  fortieth  year  (cp  v.  38).
The  interpretation  of  the  chapter  must,  to  some  extent,
vary  with  our  estimate  of  its  historical  value,  and  that,
in  turn,  will  depend  on  our  general  view  of  the  antiquity
of  the  priestly  strata  of  the  Hexateuch.  One  at  any
rate — and  the  chief — of  Dillmann's  arguments  in  favour
of  the  antiquity  of  the  itinerary  is  quite  inconclusive  (see
below).  Starting  from  the  view  that  the  chapter  is  a  late
compilation,  the  following  points  must  be  noted:  (i)
It  is  compiled  from  more  than  one  of  the  literary  strata
of  the  Hexateuch;  for  it  contains  some  names  (e.g. ,
Pi-hahiroth,  wilderness  of  Zin)  peculiar  to  P,  others
unknown  to  him,  but  occurring  elsewhere — e.g. ,  Kibroth-
hattaavah  (JE,  D),  Ezion-geber  (D);  (2)  it  also  draws
on  an  otherwise  unknown  source,  for  seventeen  of  the
places  are  mentioned  nowhere  else  ;  (3)  it  is  dominated
in  its  representation  by  P,  for,  like  the  main  narrative
of  P,  it  makes  Mt.  Hor  the  death-place  of  Aaron  (con
trast  Dt.  106  /". )  and  places  the  wilderness  of  Zin  =
Kadesh  immediately  before  Mt.  Hor  ;  on  the  other
hand,  between  Hazeroth  and  Kadesh,  which  are  im
mediately  connected  in  JE,  this  list  inserts  eighteen
stages.

This  being  the  case,  the  one  striking  divergence  from

P  (claimed  by  Dillmann  in  favour  of  the  high  antiquity

_, . of  the  list)  is  all the  more  remarkable,

,.' , ,  . and  probably  contains  the  true clue to

8 the  view of the period underlying the

V6> chapter. The wilderness of  Paran, so

prominent  in  P,  is  not  mentioned  in  the  list. This  will

be  entirely  accounted  for,  in  complete  accordance  with

the  evident  purpose  of  the  list,  which  is  to  name,  not

large  districts,  but  definite  camping-grounds,  if  we  assume

that  the  stations  mentioned  between  Sinai  and  Kadesh

are  conceived  to  have  lain  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran.

Thus,  the  compiler  derives  from  the  other  sources  such

places  as  are  there  naturally  referred  to  the  forty  years

between  Sinai  and Kadesh — viz.,  from  JE Hazeroth,

Kibroth-hattaavah, and  the  four  places  mentioned in

5259


the  fragment  Dt.  106/.  ;  Ezion-geber  from  D,  and
thirteen  places  mentioned  only  in  this  list  from  some
sources  unknown  to  us.  Granted  this  single  assump
tion,  the  view  of  the  compiler  is  found  to  be  in  com
plete  accord  with  P — thus  w.  3-15  contain  the  stages  in
the  straightforward  march  from  Egypt  to  Sinai  ;  w.
16-36  give  the  names  of  the  camping-grounds  during
the  forty  years  of  punishment,  the  names  of  the
individual  places  being  substituted  for  that  of  the
general  district — Paran  ;  w.  37-49  describe  the  march
from  Kadesh  to  the  plains  of  Moab,  and  this,  as  in  the
main  narrative  of  P,  is  apparently  across  the  N.  end  of
Edom,  not  round  Ezion-geber  on  the  S.  border.  With
a  recognition  of  a  double  tradition  as  to  the  route  of  the
final  march,  the  old  difficulty  occasioned  by  a  com
parison  of  Dt.28  106^  with  Nu.  883037,  which  was
met  by  various  unsatisfactory  hypotheses  (such  as  that
there  was  a  second  Ezion-geber  near  Kadesh,  or  a
backward  and  forward  movement  from  Ezion-geber  to
Kadesh,  or  that  Nu.  3336^-4ia  originally  followed
immediately  on  30*2)  falls  to  the  ground.  Ezion-geber
was  considered  by  the  compiler  of  the  itinerary  to  have
been  merely  a  camping-ground  during  the  nomadic
period,  not  a  stage  in  the  final  march  from  Kadesh  to
the  E.  of  Canaan.

The question whence the  compiler  of  this chapter
derived  the  otherwise  unknown  names  can  only  be  met


14.  Its  origin.


by  conjecture. Possibly  it  was  from  a


now  lost  written  source  ;  but  it  is,  per
haps,  more  probable  that  they  are  names  of  places  known
in  his  own  day  as  belonging  to  that  region.  That  the
names  (or  at  least  the  great  majority  of  them)  are  genuine
names  of  places,  there  seems  no  reason  to  question  ;  and
if,  as  is  far  from  unlikely,  they  are  names  of  caravan
stations  (Masp.  Hist.  Ancienne,  2475,  n.  i)  given  by
travellers,  but  never  used  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  dis
trict,  the  failure  to  identify  the  sites  would  be  accounted
for  (cp  Doughty,  Arabia  Deserta,  1  49).  It  is,  further,
quite  possible  that  Alush  and  Dophkah  (v.  13),  stages
in  the  movement  from  Egypt  to  Sinai,  and  Zalmonah
and  Punon  (v.  42),  stages  in  the  movement  from
Kadesh  to  the  E.  of  Canaan,  are  only  accidentally
absent  from  some  of  our  present  sources  in  which
they  originally  stood.  That  the  eastern  traditions  had
little  or  nothing  to  say  of  the  places  connected  with
the  wanderings,  is  merely  one  side  of  the  more  general
silence  as  to  the  period.  In  Nu.  between  the  incident
of  the  spies  (13/. )  at  the  beginning  and  the  events  at
Kadesh  (20i-2i)  at  the  end  of  the  period,  but  five
chapters  intervene.  Two  of  these  (15  19)  contain  miscel
laneous  laws  wholly  unrelated  to  the  period,  and  the
remaining  three  (16-18)  relate  the  revolt  of  Korah
(Dathan,  and  Abiram)  and  the  laws  which  were  the
outcome  of  it.  But  whether  even  this  incident  was  re
ferred  to  this  period  in  the  sources,  or  only  by  the
editor,  it  is  impossible  to  decide.

In  conclusion, some  of  the  general features  of  the
country  may  be  mentioned. In  JE,  as  we  have  seen,
TF' t Kadesh  is  the  permanent  centre. This
':.  .  harmonises  with  JE's  view  of  the  punish

ment  as  a  postponement  of  the  possession
of  the  richer  country  of  Canaan  rather  than  the  infliction
of  positive  hardship.  The  people,  for  their  unbelief,
are  to  remain  as  they  had  been — nomads  (c'jri).  That  is
all  ;  the  punishment  is  not  aggravated  by  their  being
condemned  to  a  peculiarly  barren  tract  of  country.
For  Kadesh  ('Ain  Kadis)  is  a  singularly  fertile  and
attractive  oasis  ;  cereal  crops  even,  in  small  quantities,
can  be  raised  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  Wady  'Ain
el-Kudeirat,  to  the  W. ,  with  its  important  well,  is  also
fertile;  less  valuable,  but  also  worthy  of  mention,  are
the  themail  or  shallow  pits  of  water  in  the  Wady
Kasaimeh,  situated  still  farther  W.  Southwards  and
westwards,  whither  according  to  JE  the  Hebrews  must
have  wandered,  stretches  the  desert  of  et-Tih  ;  this,
according  to  the  description  of  Palmer  (Desert  of  Exodus,

5260


WAR


WAR


286-288),  is  an  'arid  featureless  waste'  marked  by
scanty  lines  of  vegetation  along  the  shallow  wadies,  but
for  the  most  part  waterless.  The  ground  is  hard  and
unyielding  and  covered  with  small  Hints,  and  only  in
spring,  after  the  rains,  becomes  covered  with  grass  ;  cp
also  Seetzen,  Reisen,  '&4&ff.

Thus,  the  discovery  of  the  true  site  of  Kadesh  and
the  literary  analysis of  the Hexateuch have brought


16.  Conclusion.


to light a very noticeable difference


of  general  representation.  In  the
earlier  traditions  embodied  in  JE,  the  Hebrew  nomads
had  as  their  common  centre  a  large  and  fertile  oasis  in
the  neighbourhood  of  two  other  fertile  valleys  and  a
vast  roaming  ground  southwards  and  westwards,  barren
for  most  of  the  year,  but,  as  is  usual  in  these  deserts,
abounding  with  grass  in  spring.  On  the  other  hand,
the  greater  part  of  the  time  in  D,  the  whole  of  it  in  P,
is  spent  away  from  this  fertile  centre  on  the  arid  and
barren  plateau  described  above.

Guthe  in  ZDPV,  1885,  pp.  182^  ;  Lagrange,  'L'itineraire  des
Israelites  du  pays  de  Gessen  aux  bords  du  Jourdain,'  Rev.

biblique,  9  (1900)  273-287.  On  the  literary
17.  Literature,  analysis,  the  relevant  works  of  Dillmann,

Wellhausen,  Kuenen,  and  Driver,  should  be
consulted  ;  Bacon's  Triple  Tradition  of  the  Exodus  is  especially
worthy  of  attention  for  his  careful  attempt  to  discriminate  J  and
E  ;  the  frequent  uncertainty  in  the  analysis  of  these  two  sources
may  be  seen  by  consulting  the  analytical  tables  in  Holzinger's
Einl.  in  den  Hex.  On  the  site  of 'Ain  Kadis  (Kadesh)  and  on
the  character  of  this  and  the  neighbouring  valleys,  see  Clay
Trumbull,  Kadesh  liarnea  (which  also  contains  a  very  full
index  of  the  literature),  Seetzen,  Reisen  durch  Syrien,  3  43-48,
and  on  the  character  of  the  desert  of  et-Tlh,  E.  H.  Palmer,
Desert  of  the  Exodus,  pt.  ii.  chaps.  1-5.

[Cp,  among  other  illustrative  articles,  KADESH  i  ;  MAKHE-
LOTH  ;  MOSES,  §  14  ;  MOSERAH  ;  NAHALIEI,  ;  NEBO  [MOUNT],
§2;  PAKAN  ;  REPHIDIM  ;  RIMMON-PAREZ  ;  SIN;  SIXAI  ;  ZIN.]

G.  B.  G.
WAR. The  ordinary  word  in  Hebrew  for  '  war '  is

rWl^p,  milhdmdh  ;  to  'fight'  or  'carry  on  war'  is
Dn?3,  nilham  (nifal],  X3\',  sdba  ,  2"1|?,  kdrab  (lit.
'  advance  to  war,'  followed  by  ?X  or  7>1?  of  the  object),
HDnPSp  iTJ'l',  'd'sah  milhdmdh,  etc. ,  '  to  advance  to
war'  is  also  expressed  by  i"P^  (with  ?!?,  ?,  or  3).  The
ordinary  Greek  equivalent  is  TroXe/uos,  troXe/j.fiv.

Palestine  and  all  its  adjacent  land  bordering  on  the

Mediterranean, including Tyre, Sidon, and Byblus

p  . ,. (Gebal), was called by the Babylono-

16  Assyrians  (mat)  Martu  or  Amurri,  or,  in

asatneatre  ks  northern  portion>  mat  Haiti,  and  by

the  Egyptians  Rtnu  (see  WMM  As.  v.
Eur.  147).  All  this  country  stood  in  a  position  of  great
strategic  importance  in  the  mutual  relations  that  sub
sisted  between  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  lands  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  Nile  territory  on  the  other.  For
Palestine  possessed  a  fairly  well-watered  and  fertile  belt
of  hills  and  plains  extending  from  the  Lebanon  mountains
on  the  N.  to  the  el-'Arish  stream  on  the  S.  Conse
quently  Canaan  became  the  natural  highway  for  the
trading  caravans  (Gen.  37  28  i  K.  10 15)  that  passed
from  N.  to  S.  or  from  S\V.  to  NE.  (see  TRADE).  It
would  also  be  the  most  fertile  route  for  the  Egyptian
army  as  it  moved  to  the  NE. ,  or  for  the  Assyrian  army
as  it  advanced  to  the  SW.  to  attack  Egypt  along  its
short  vulnerable  frontier  defended  by  frontier  fortresses,
N.  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez.  For  the  empire  on  the  Nile,
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  empire  on  the  Tigris  or  on
the  Euphrates,  on  the  other,  were,  to  adopt  the  language
of  modern  politics,  the  two  first-class  powers,  prot
agonists  in  the  drama  of  Western-Asian  history,  whose
mutual  relations  overshadowed  and  dominated  all  other
political  interests  and  combinations  among  the  minor
Western-Asian  states.  Unless  this  controlling  factor
be  kept  clearly  in  view  during  the  larger  part  of  the
regal  period,  the  history  of  Israel  in  its  external  aspects
can  be  but  imperfectly  understood.  For  a  time — e.g. ,
in  the  days  of  David  and  Solomon — the  power  of  Egypt
or  of  Assyria  may  suffer  decline,  or  lapse  into  quiescence,

5261


and  the  Hittite  states  or  Syria  (e.g.,  in  the  gth  cent.),
or  Israel  itself,  may  come  into  temporary  prominence,
but  this  is  only  a  passing  phase.  The  more  permanent
and  dominating  factor,  to  which  we  have  referred,  is
nevertheless  ever  present  and  reasserts  itself.

No  land,  therefore,  felt  the  pulses  and  tremors  of  war  more
acutely  than  the  plains  and  mountains  inhabited  by  Israel.  Of
this  the  prophetic  oracles  bear  abundant  witness.  The  prophet
of  Israel  —  which  geographically  stood  so  central  to  western-
Asiatic  movements— could  not  but  be  deeply  interested  in  foreign
politics.  Hence  the  earliest  prophet  of  Judah  whose  oracles
have  come  down  to  us  in  separate  collections  (Amos),  as  well  as
the  latest  of  the  closing  years  of  the  monarchy  (Jeremiah),  uttered
his  Masid  on  foreign  peoples.  No  other  land  was  better  situated
as  a  watch-tower  for  the  inspired  seer.  Probably  no  other  country
on  the  earth's  surface  has  been  more  frequently  traversed  by
armies  or  has  oftener  resounded  to  the  shock  of  battle  or  suffered
greater  hardships  from  the  ravages  of  war.  Belgium  has  been
called  the  '  cock-pit  of  Europe  '  from  the  days  of  Louis  XIV.  and
Marlborough  to  those  of  Napoleon  and  Wellington.  But  in  a
far  truer  sense,  during  the  millenniums  that  separate  Thotmes
III.  from  the  age  of  the  Saracens,  Palestine  has  been  the  cock-pit
of  Western  Asia.

It  was  at  Eltekeh  (Altaku),  not  far  from  Ekron,  that
the  power  of  SENNACHERIB  (</.  v. }  recoiled  from  the  onset
of  his  southern  enemies,  and  it  was  on  the  fatal  field
of  Megiddo  that  Pharaoh  Necho  slew  JosiAH  (q.v. )  who
resisted  the  endeavours  of  the  Egyptian  monarch  to
capture  the  spoils  of  the  defunct  Assyrian  empire.  The
Palestinian  towns,  Samaria,  Jerusalem,  Ekron,  Ashdod,
and  Lachish,  were  regarded  by  the  Assyrian  kings  as
outposts  on  the  path  of  the  invader  of  Egypt,  whilst  the
empire  on  the  Nile,  on  the  other  hand,  would  naturally
regard  with  apprehension  their  possession  by  a  foreign
foe.  It  is  difficult  to  over-estimate  the  strategic  im
portance  of  Palestine.

The  close  vital  bond  that  existed  between  the  clan

or  tribe  and  the  clan  or  tribal  deity  profoundly  affected

„ ft  -i- • the ancient Semitic conception of war.

. .i.lglOUS  '  Religion,1 as Wellhausen says, 'was

sigm cance  patrjotjsm  • Thus  war  against  a  foreign

nation,  like  other  national  acts,  was  only

undertaken  under  the  favour  or  sanction  of  the  patron

deity  or  deities.

Thus  the  inscriptions  of  the  Assyrian  monarchs  preface
the  annals  of  a  campaign  with  phraseology  like  this  :  —
'  In  my  fourth  campaign  Asur  inspired  me  with  con
fidence  ;  then  I  summoned  my  mighty  forces.  .  .  .'
(Sennacherib's  prism  inscription  [Taylor  cyl.]  col.  iii.,
42.  Cp  Judg.  1 1  29. )  Kings  in  all  their  public  functions,
whether  of  building  temples  or  conducting  wars,  like  to
describe  themselves  as  under  divine  favour  and  guidance.
Sargon  opens  his  cylinder  inscription  by  describing  him
self  as  saknu  Bel  isakku  na'id  Asur  nisit  ina  Anim  u
Dagan,  '  Bel's  officer,  exalted  priest  of  Asur,  favourite
of  Ami  and  Dagan.'  Cp  also  Nimrud  inscription  i.
On  the  other  hand,  Sargon's  enemy  Merodach  Baladan,
son  of  Jakin,  king  of  Kaklu,  is  described  as  being  under
the  influence  of  an  'evil  demon'  (gal/u  limnu}?-  and
'  showing  no  fear  for  the  name  of  the  lord  of  lords  '
(triumphal  insc.  122).  The  Rassam  cylinder  of  Asur-
bani-pal  continually  recites  the  names  of  Asur,  Sin,
Samas,  Ramman,  Bel,  Nebo,  Istar  of  Nineveh,  Istar  of
Arbela,  Nergal,  and  Nusku.  In  fact,  the  king  (or  his
tablet-writer)  seems  possessed  with  a.  nervous  dread  of
offending  any  deity  by  omitting  his  name.  Doubtless
in  all  these  cases  the  magic  potency  of  the  name  operated
in  the  recital.

Istar  was  the  Assyrian  war-goddess  (Jastrow,  Rel.  of
Bab.  and  Assyr.  83,  204;  Driver,  'Ashtoreth'  in
Hastings'  Z?j51i68).  The  Canaanite  war-deities,  ac-

1  It  may  here  be  noted  that  the  deity  of  a  defeated  nation
became  relegated  into  the  position  of  a  demon,  like  the  Titans
overthrown  by  Zeus.  It  is  to  be  observed  in  this  connection  that
the  Hebrews  called  the  deities  of  the  Gentiles  sedim  (C'liT)  or
demons  (Dt.  32  17  Ps.  10637,  see  DEMONS,  §8  2,  4),  and  we  meet
with  several  of  their  names  as  the  demons  of  later  Judaism— e.g.,


in  Hastings'  DB). Beelzebub  is  the  most  conspicuous  example.
5262


WAR


WAR


cording  to  Egyptian  data,  were  the  goddess  'Anat
(represented  as  armed  with  helmet,  shield,  and  lance,
and  in  her  left  hand  a  battleaxe)  and  the  god  Reseph
(armed  with  helmet  and  lance).  See  Wiedemann,
Relig.  der  alien  Aegypter,  83.  The  warrior  Shamgar
was  Ben  'Anat  ;  see  Baethgen,  Beitrage,  52  f. ,  Judg.  831
56.

The Moabite stone yields us other  parallels (see

MESHA).

Chemosh,  national  deity  of  Moab,  says  to  Mesha,  '  Go,  take
Nelio  against  Israel.'  This  time  it  is  Yahwe,  national  deity  of
Israel,  who  suffers.  His  vessels  (?)  are  dragged  before  Che-
rnosh,  and  Chemosh  drives  the  king  of  Israel  out  of  Yahas,  //.
14,  i8/T  A  high  place  is  made  for  Chemosh  because  he  had
saved  Mesha  from  all  his  foes,  and  had  caused  him  to  see  his
desire  on  all  them  that  hated  him.  In  former  times  when  Omri
reigned  over  Israel  Moab  was  oppressed  because  Chemosh  was
angry  with  his  land  (/.  4^).  The  biblical  parallels  to  this
language  are  very  close  both  in  Judges,  Samuel,  and  the  earlier
Psalms — f'j,'.,  1's.  00,  which  may  contain,  as  Ewald  supposed,  a
Davidic  fragment.  (Cp  MESHA  ;  see  also  Wi.  GI  '2  204/1)

The  name  Israel  may  not  improbably  have  originated
with  the  early  Hebrew  battle-cry  of  the  desert  '  El
fights';  and  the  cry  'for  Yahwe  and  for  Gideon,'  and
'  the  Sword  of  Yahwe  and  of  Gideon,'  are  the  echoes  of
old  Hebrew  battle-cries.1  All  Israel's  victorious  wars
were  therefore  wars  of  Yahwe.  He  was  called  in  com
paratively  early  times  niN~s  'liSx  mrr,  '  Yahwe,  God  of
Hosts. '  The  view  of  Wellhausen,  Smend,  and  others,
that  this  phrase  originated  with  the  prophets  of  the
eighth  century,  is  hardly  probable.  The  conception  of
Yahwe  as  an  atmospheric  deity  is  obviously  ancient,
and  the  designation  of  the  Hebrew  god  as  Lord  of  the
heavenly,  as  well  as  the  earthly,  armies  is  in  full  accord,
Judg.  020  (Deborah's  song).-  That  Yahwe  was  closely
identified  with  Israel's  wars  is  clearly  shown  in  Dt.  204
Josh.  10 ii  Ex.  lo 3,  etc.  Like  other  Semites  the  Hebrews
inaugurated  war  by  sacrifices.  This  was  said  to  conse
crate  war  (nDrrVp  Bhjp,  kiddcs  milhdmdh),  Mic.  84  Jer.
64  cp  Josh.  3s.2  Hence  the  burnt-offerings  at  the  open
ing  of  a  campaign  (Judg.  62026  2026  i  S.  7  9  13io).  The
sacrificial  pieces  sent  round  by  Saul  to  the  Israelites
were  probably  intended  not  simply  to  inaugurate  a  war
against  the  Ammonites  (i  S.  11  7)  but  also  to  unite  the
warriors  into  a  holy  league  of  war  under  Yahwe  by  a
covenant.  Every  war  against  a  common  foe  thus  tended
to  weld  the  scattered  clans  into  a  unity,  and  this  union
was  cemented  by  the  rites  of  sacrifice.  Moreover,  in
war-time,  in  seasons  of  great  anxiety  or  strife,  special
piacular  sacrifices  would  be  offered.  In  times  of  special
danger  a  human  victim  might  even  be  sacrificed.  Of
this  we  have  a  remarkable  example  in  2  K.  827,  which  is
the  more  significant  as  it  reveals  the  Hebrew  dread  of
its  potency.  (On  the  Hellenic  l>elief  in  the  efficacy  of
human  sacrifice  see  WRS  Rel.  ScmJ-l,  402/1 ,  and  n.  5. )
In  early  Hebrew  warfare  the  leaders  would  always  be
accompanied  on  the  field  of  battle  by  the  priest-sooth
sayer  with  the  ephod  and  sacred  lot,  or,  as  in  the  early
Philistine  campaigns,  with  the  ark  of  God(i  S.  4s/!  14  iS/.
236  g/.  SO?/. ).  What  is  probably  meant  by  the  use  of
his  ephod  in  divination  by  the  priest-soothsayer  is  that
the  sacred  lot  was  used  in  the  presence  of  the  plated

1  Jti'lg.  7  18  20. Moore  regards  the  introduction of  2^n  in
the  form  given  in  v.  20  as  due  to  a  gloss.

2  This  use  of  the  Hithpael  ENpnn  shows  that  warriors  conse
crated  themselves  for  war  just  as  they  would  for  the  performance
of  a  religious  rite. This  idea  seems  to  underlie Is.  13  3,  and
lienzinger  in  /'A'A'!3)  would  connect  with  this  the  ancient  Semitic
custom  of  sexual  abstinence  which  prevailed  among  the  Arabs;
WRS  Rel.  SetH.ffl,  455. It  is  in  this  sense  we  should  understand
2  S.  11  hf.  ;  Uriah  refuses  to  come  to  his  wife  as  long  as  the  ark
of  God  and  the  army  of  Israel  are  on  the  field. Evidently  there
was  a taboo  on sexual nncleanness in war-time. Hence the
strict  camp-regulations  with  regard  to  uncleanness  in  Dt.  23  10-14.
These  were  manifestly  old  Toroth  based  on  the  conception  that
Yahwe  was  present  in  the  camp  (v.  14). Probably  this  is  the ,
underlying  motive  of  Dt.  20  7. It  is  not  easy,  however,  to  follow j
Schwally  (Sen/if.  Kriegsalterf.)  in  his  interpretation  that  in  the
other  cases  mentioned  in  Dt.  -'OsyC  the  individual  was  believed
to  be  specially  exposed  to  demons.


3.  Prelimin
aries  of  war.


ephod  image  which  gave  the  procedure  divine  sanction.
Wellhausen  reminds  us  (Heid.  <2>,  132,  136/1 )  that  nearly
all  the  clan  chiefs  of  the  Kuraish  consulted  lots  before
they  marched  on  their  expedition  to  Badr,  though  re
quested  by  Abu-Sufian,  whom  they  sought  to  rescue,
not  to  wait  to  consult  lots.  Similarly,  though  with  more
elaboration  of  detail,  the  Assyrian  ruler  questioned  the
deity  before  definitely  entering  upon  a  fresh  expedition,
all  possible  contingencies  being  enumerated,  so  that
there  might  be  no  loop-hole  of  escape,  just  as  in  a
lawyer's  deed.1  As  Yahwe,  Israel's  national  deity,  was
identified  with  the  people,  and  especially  with  the  national
act  of  war  which  was  undertaken  in  his  name  and  under
his  auspices,  so  the  booty,  including  the  human  captives
as  well  as  the  cattle,  belonged  in  a  very  special  sense  to
him.  This  is  evidently  the  underlying  principle  of  the
herein,  which  surrounded  the  objects  captured  in  war
with  a  sacred  ring-fence  which  forbade  their  appropria
tion  for  human  uses.  This  explains  Samuel's  action  in
slaying  Agag  in  i  S.  157-33,  the  whole  passage  viewed
from  this  aspect  being  exceedingly  instructive.

The  language  of  v.  18  is  exactly  parallel  to  that  of  the  stone  of
Mesha',  //.  14  f.  32.  In  the  latter  case  Mesha  devotes  to  Astar-
Kemosh  (I.  17,  nroinn)  the  entire  population  of  Neho,  both  men
and  women.  The  inscription  makes  it  clear  that  this  means
wholesale  slaughter  (cp  Josh.  6  17  ;  see  BAN).  This  tradition  of
ancient  Semitism  even  persisted  in  Hebrew  legislation.  Dt.  7  2
20  13-17,  however,  limit  its  application  to  Canaanite  towns  which,
near  the  close  of  the  seventh  century,  practically  meant  nothing
but  the  maintenance  of  an  old  formula.  Women,  children,  and
cattle  were  permitted  to  live  and  be  divided  as  spoil  of  war  (see
SIEGE,  end,  and  cp  Nu.  31  -jf.  Josh.  8  2  27.7.  Judg.  21  n/".).

The  negotiations  which  precede  a  declaration  of  war
are  set  forth  in  fuller  form  in  Judg.  11 12-28  iS.  11  i-ioi  K.
202-n.  The  negotiations  took  place  by
word  of  mouth  through  messengers  (Judg.
11 12  i  K.  202).  Proverbs  or  parables
might  be  employed  (2  K.  \\<)f.  i  K.  20n).  Proceedings
of  this  kind  are  regulated  in  Dt.  20io/i  ;  but  we  have
no  precise  information  as  to  the  form  in  which  war  was
declared.  Probably  the  cessation  of  negotiations  would
be  the  indication  that  war  was  in  preparation.

(a]  Provisioning  of  troops. — On  this  subject  we  have
very  slight  information.  The  methods  consisted  in  the

4  Preparations rough and ready °'les of Providi"g
r*eparawons  sufficient for the sustenance of the

army  for  a  brief  space  until  it  entered
the  enemy's  territory ;  each  family,  household,  or  local
clan  sending  provisions  sufficient  for  its  own  warriors.
Of  what  these  consisted  we  may  gather  from  i  S.  17  17.
Kali  or  roast  (parched)  corn  was  the  usual  diet  of
workers  who  led  an  out-door  life  (Ruth  2 14)  and  there
fore  of  soldiers  (cp  2  S.  17 28)  ;  and  to  this  would  be
added  curds  and  cakes  ('  rounds,'  ninss,  Judg.  85)  of  un
leavened  bread  ;2  see  BREAD  and  MILK.  In  one  case
(Judg.  20  10 /. )  we  read  that  a  special  corps,  about  one-
tenth  of  the  army,  was  told  off  for  the  express  purpose
of  supplying  the  army  with  necessaries.  These  could
be  furnished  without  difficulty  in  ordinary  circumstances,
to  an  expeditionary  force  at  a  short  distance  from
its  base.  Rut  when  the  territory  of  the  enemy  was
entered  the  simple  method  adopted  was  that  of  un
limited  spoliation  of  the  crops  and  fruit-trees,  including
the  palm-groves  and  the  vines,  in  the  country  through
which  the  army  passed  (cp  Is.  1  7).  The  Assyrian  army
was  specially  destructive  and  left  a  wide  tract  of
desolation  behind  it.  Is.  7  20  compares  it  to  a  '  razor

1  See  Knudtzon's  Assyr.  Gebete  an  den  Sonnengott,  where
examples  are  given  of  prayers  of  this  kind  addressed  to  Samas.
An  excellent  illustration  is  quoted  by  Jastrow,  Rel.  Bab.  334/1
See  also  '  Soothsaying  '  in  Hastings'  DB.

'•*  Also  round  cakes  of  figs — summer  figs  dried  into  cake?,  and
uc-:d  as  an  article  of  consumption,  called  di-btlah  (i  S.  30  12  cp
25  i» :  fee  FRUIT,  §  7)— as  well  as  raisins  (simmfik ;  see  I-KVIT,
§  4)  which  were  also  made  into  cakes  Ciisisfih  ;  see  FRUIT,  §  5),
Moreover  the  grape  juice  which  came  from  trodden  clusters
was  boiled  down  to  a  syrup  called  'honey,' in  modern  Ar;  i>ic
eiit>s  (see  FRUIT,  §  3  ;  HONEY,  §  i  (3!).  This  may  have  been  the
honey  which  P>arzillai  bestowed  on  David  and  his  warriors  (aS.
1729);  see  Whitehouse,  Hcb.  Antiquities  (A'  TS),  102 /.

5264


WAR

hired '  by  Yahwe  for  the  infliction  of  his  chastise
ments  (cp  Is.  lt>9/. ).  Even  the  Hocks  and  herds  were  not
spared  (jer.  515-17).  Israel's  practice  was  in  reality  the
same  in  the  spoliation  both  of  sheep  (i  S.  15g)  and  of
fruit  (2  K.  3  19),  the  trees  being  cut  down  partly  for  the
timber,  which  could  be  turned  to  account  (see  SIEGE),
and  partly  to  deprive  the  enemy  of  their  use.  This
practice  was  forbidden  in  the  Deuteronomic  legislation
( Dt.  20  ig/. ) ;  but  it  was  recommended  by  Elisha  to  Israel
in  the  war  against  Moab  (2  K.  819).

(&)  Mustering  of  troops. — Troops  were  summoned  in
early  times  by  the  blowing  of  the  trumpet  or  war-horn
whereby  the  clan  warriors  were  rallied  together  (Judg.
827  2  S.  20 1  ;  cp  i  Mace.  3 si).1  An  alarm  of  war  was
usually  sounded  in  this  way,  and  was  the  function  of  the
watchman  (nss,  sopkeh}.  Compare  Ezekiel's  use  of  this
metaphor  for  the  prophet's  vocation  in  33  2-11.  Frequent
messengers  were  sent  if  the  forces  were  to  be  summoned
from  a  large  district  (i  S.  11  7).

(a)  Spring-time  would  be  the  natural  season  chosen

for beginning  a  campaign. The  annual expeditions

.__ . ,  recorded  by  Shalmaneser  II.  probably  com -

', , .. menced at that  time. The reasons are

details, i  • 11 • i-  i  •

obvious,  and  have  been  partially  indicated  in
the  previous  section  (§  4*7).  Troops  on  the  march —
especially  in  a  hostile  territory— were  sustained  by  the
crops  and  other  fruits  of  the  earth.  Winter,  to  say
nothing  of  its  climatic  rigours,  was  the  time  when  the
earth  was  bare  of  subsistence  for  man.  By  the  close  of
the  month  Tisri  (Ethanlm  in  the  old  Hebrew-Canaanite
calendar)  the  troops  would  betake  themselves  to  their
homes.  Thus  in  2  S.  11  i  'at  the  return  of  the  year,
when  the  kings  march  forth  '  (cp  i  K.  2620-26)  does  not
mean  the  beginning  of  the  year  in  the  old  pre-exilian
calendar — viz. ,  Ethanim  or  Tisri — but  about  the  time  of
the  spring  months.

The  expression  rt3C'  N3  in  2  K.  13  20  cannot  be  cited  in  this
connection  since  the  passage  should  probably  be  emended,  as
Kittel  suggests,  into  rnr:}  n:B>  pxn  1KT  '(bands  of  Moabites)
used  to  invade  the  land  yearly.'

(fi)  Scouting  was  necessary  in  order  to  ascertain  the
strength  and  position  of  the  enemy  (i  S.  264  Judg.

124  7  io/.  Josh. 2 1/., ehn  D'^riDi  nnpr  ;  cp  SPIES);

or  strict  inquiries  would  be  made  by  the  leaders
of  the  army  of  those  whom  they  chanced  to  meet  (i  S.
30n).

(c)  The  camp  (n:nn,  mahdneh.)  was  carefully  guarded,
since  it  formed  the  base  of  operations  (cp  i  S.  3024).  We
have -very  few  details  to  guide  us  as  to  its  character  or
shape.  Nu.  '2  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was
square  ;  but  as  this  passage  is  late  (belonging  to  a
considerable  P  section)  it  should  be  cautiously  used.
The  Egyptian  camp  was,  however,  four  -  cornered.
See  Erman,  530 — a  vivid  description  (see,  further,
CAMP).

Probably  the  camp  was  round  like  the  encampments  of  the
Bedouins  (cp  TENT).  It  is  hardly  possible  to  draw  any  particular
inference  from  the  ma'gdl,  73^0,  of  i  S.  17  20  26  5.  The  word  is
found  only  in  i  S.  in  this  particular  sense  of  a  '  waggon-laager.'
Probably  it  would  in  many  cases  be  fenced  in  with  stones,  like
the  fitiser,  isn,  of  the  nomadic  tribes  (Gen.  25  16)  for  purposes
of  protection.  Dwelling  in  booths  must  have  largely  prevailed
in  the  time  of  David,  and  the  language  of  Uriah  the  Hittite
(2  S.  11  n)  shows  that  this  was  certainly  the  case  in  time  of  war.
The  camp  was  guarded  by  sentinels,  who  had  three  watches
(Judg.  7  19  i  Mace.  1^27).  To  the  rules  for  the  maintenance  of
purity  in  the  camp  (Dt.  23  io  f.  Nu.  5  1-4),  we  have  referred
already  (§  2,  n).

The  arms or  weapons  used  in  warfare  would  vary

considerably at different periods of

6.  Accoutre- israel's  history. In  the  early  nomadic

ments  and stage  of  the  nation's  development  the

other  appli- arms  would  consist  of  thespear  or  lance,

ances  of  war.  Mnnh  („,„),  a  wooden  shaft  with  a

bronze  or, in later  times,  an  iron  head  (see  SPEAR).

1  The  trumpet  was  also  used  in  sounding  a  halt  or  a  return
(a  S.  228  IS  16  20  22).

5265


WAR

We  also  read  of  the  smaller  kidon  (J'ITS),  or  JAVELIN
[</•?'•  ]  (i  S.  17645  ;  also  a  Babylonian  weapon,  Jcr.  6  23
5042)  and  of  the  row  ah.  (no'i,  difficult  to  distinguish
from  the  rnn  ;  see  SPEAR).  The  SWORD  (q.v. ),  hfreb
(yin),  would  be  fastened  to  the  girdle,  and  we  likewise
find  in  use  the  dagger,  Id/tab  (an1?  ;  Judg.  822),  so  called
from  its  glittering  blade  or  point.  The  bow  (see
WEAPONS,  §  2)  and  the  SLING  (q.v. )  were  also  employed
as  weapons  of  offence,  particularly  by  the  Benjamites
(cp  2  S.  122  i  S.  20  2o/).  The  use  of  the  bow  by  the
Josephite  tribes  is  clearly  indicated  in  Gen.  4923 /.,  cp
Ps.  789.  The  use  of  the  sling  is  specially  connected
with  the  Benjamites  whose  left-handed  slingers  became
famous  (Judg.  20 16,  cp  SLING).  That  the  tribe  01
Juclah  also  possessed  slingers  is  evident  from  i  S.  17 40
etc. ,  and  the  constant  presence  of  slingers  in  Assyrian
warfare  is  certified  by  the  figures  on  the  monuments
(see  SIEGE).  They  were  specially  formidable  in  sieges,
and  operated  with  the  Israelite  forces  with  potent  effect
against  the  Moabite  stronghold,  Kir  Haraseth.  In
early  times  we  read  little  of  defensive  armour.  The
SHIELD  (</. r>. )  in  use  was  the  smaller  and  simpler  tmigi'n
([jD,  dcTTris)  employed  to  defend  the  bowman  on  the
chariot  (cp  CHARIOT,  §  9,  and  fig.  7).  Neither  chariots
nor  horsemen,  however,  were  used  till  the  time  ot
Solomon.  The  shield  was  probably  carried  only  by
the  more  important  warriors  (2  S.  1  21).  The  BREAST
PLATE  (q.  i'. )  was  like  wise  a  rarity  in  ancient  Israelite  war
fare  and,  like  the  bronze  HELMET  (<j.i'.)t  would  be  the
privilege  only  of  the  chiefs  (i  K.  22 34)-  Probably  the
Israelites  were  among  the  most  backward  among  Semitic
peoples  in  adopting  these  accessories  of  combat,  and
the  story  of  David's  proving  the  armour  provided  by
Saul  probably  reflects  old  tradition  and  prejudice  ( i  S.
~[~1&f.).  The  ordinary  warrior  wore  only  the  simlah
(see  MANTLE,  §  2,  i),  which  displayed  the  blood-stains
of  battle  (Is.  94).  Even  Joab  merely  wears  the  If  bus
(2  S.  208  text  restored  by  Klostermann).  We  may
therefore  assume  that  in  the  earlier  period  of  Israel's
history,  when  the  nomad  clans  were  establishing  their
position  on  the  hills  of  Canaan,  all  their  fighting-men
were  light-armed.  As  soon,  however,  as  they  learned
the  arts  and  methods  of  the  Canaanites  and  Philistines
who  inhabited  the  plain,  the  distinction  began  to  arise
between  the  light-armed  (whose  weapons  would  be  the
spear,  bow,  sling,  sword,  and  smaller  shield)  and  the
heavy-armed,  whose  accoutrements  were  the  larger
shield  (sinntih,  naXi  tft'peos ;  see  SHIELD),  resembling
that  of  the  Assyrians,  as  well  as  the  cuirass  (siryon,  j'vnp)
and  the  helmet.  According  to  the  statements  of  the
Chronicler,  which  in  this  case  McCurdy  (K.vfos.,  Nov.
1891)  has  shown  to  be  worthy  of  credence  in  the  main
facts,  it  was  Uzziah  who  first  provided  his  army  with
helmet  and  breastplate  (2  Ch.2t>i4),  to  what  extent  is
uncertain.  Previously  they  had  belonged  to  the  captains
or  chieftains  only.

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  how  the  Israelite  forces  in  early
times  were  shod.  But  it  seems  fairly  probahle  that  they  wore
the  ordinary  sandals  consisting  of  soles  of  leather  or  wood  tied
under  the  feet  by  thongs  (Gen.  1423).  From  Isaiah's  vivid
description  (027)  as  well  as  from  the  portrayal  on  Assyrian
monuments,  we  gather  that  the  soles  were  firmly  and  strongly
made  and  the  back  was  protected  by  leather,  but  the  toes  and
upper  part  of  the  foot  were  bare,  covered  only  by  the  thongs
that  were  bound  firmly  and  tightly  across.  Not  improbably  the
Hebrews  had  by  this  time  (740-700  B.C.)  learned  the  value  of  a
strong  and  serviceable  military  shoe,  and  the  Hebrew  word  srfin
used  by  Isaiah  in  9  4 1  is  probably  a  loan-word  from  the  Assyrian
senu.  See  SHOES.

It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  ascertain  at  what  time  the
wheeled  battering-ram  of  the  Assyrians  (Assy  r.  arammu,
Sitpii}  was  first  employed  by  the  Hebrews.  Probably
it  was  quite  unknown  to  Israel  until  the  ninth  century,
when  it  was  employed  by  Assyria  against  the  Syrian
towns  in  the  N.  See  SIEGE.

1  Regarded,  however,  as  post-exilic  by  Hackmann  and  Cheyne.
5266


WAR

It  has  been  pointed  out  already  (see  CHARIOT)  that
one  powerfully  determining  factor  in  the  advance  of

_,  ..  Israel's  military  accoutrements  and  tactics
'  was  the  great  change  brought  about  when
the  people  ceased  to  be  a  band  of  hardy  warriors  armed
with  spear  and  bow  who  sallied  forth  from  their  moun
tain  fastnesses,  and  became  a  disciplined  force  that
waged  aggressive  wars  upon  the  plain.  It  was  the  life
and  death  struggle  with  the  Philistines  that  first
welded  the  Israelite  clans  into  some  semblance  of  unity
under  Saul,  the  representative  of  the  hegemony  of
Benjamin,  and  subsequently  under  David  of  Bethlehem-
Judah.  The  Philistines  taught  the  Hebrews  some
severe  lessons  from  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  Shiloh
down  to  Saul's  tragic  overthrow  at  Gilboa.  The
Hebrews  were  able  to  hold  their  own  with  wonderful
skill  and  persistence  when  the  fighting  was  in  mountain
passes  like  that  of  Micmash  (i  S.  lisf. )  or  in  the  forests
of  Ziph  (i  S.  2814)  or  Ephraim  (2  S.  186),  or  when
sudden  night  attacks  were  made  (Josh.  lOg/.  Judg.
7 5  f.},  or  rocky  citadels  stormed  (2  S.  56 f. )  ;  but  their
inability  to  forge  their  own  weapons  placed  them  at  a
great  disadvantage  (i  S.  ISigf.),  and  their  irregular
guerilla  tactics  were  utterly  at  fault  when  the  Philistines
managed  at  Aphek  to  concentrate  immense  forces  around
Saul  (whose  strength  was  weakened  by  David's  defec
tion),  and  to  drive  him  from  the  open  plain  of  Jezreel
(where  the  methods  of  attack  employed  by  Jonathan
could  not  avail)  into  his  last  forlorn  stronghold  on  Mount
Gilboa.

The  mountainous  regions,  where  chariots  and  horse
men  could  not  operate,  afforded  the  best  ground  for  the
irregular  tactics  of  the  Israelites.  Even  as  late  as  the
time  when  the  dynasty  of  Omri  reigned  (9th  cent. ),
Israel's  God,  Yahwe,  was  regarded  by  the  Syrians  as
god  of  the  hills  (i  K.  20 23).

A  change,  however,  begins  to  be  apparent  in  the  reign
of  David,  whose  wars  of  conquest  led  him  beyond  his
own  borders  and  who  was  seconded  by  one  of  the  ablest
and  most  energetic  generals  that  the  Hebrews  ever
possessed,  from  the  days  of  the  Exodus  to  those  of  Judas
the  Maccabee.  What  Hannibal  was  to  Carthage  in  the
latter  end  of  the  third  century,  Joab  was  to  David
throughout  his  stormy  reign  in  the  tenth.  We  have
already  seen  (see  SIEGE)  that  it  was  Joab  who  first
taught  the  Israelites  the  regular  methods  of  reducing  a
fortified  town  (2  S.  20  15).  Nevertheless,  the  equipment
of  Israel  must  still  have  remained  primitive,  for  horses
and  chariots  were  not  employed,  and  even  the  leader
Absalom  rides  upon  a  mule  (2  S.  18g).  In  the  reign  of
Solomon  Israel  began  to  enter  into  fuller  intercourse
with  foreign  peoples,  and  the  dynasty  of  Omri  united
Israel  closely  with  Phoenicia,  and  was  able  to  wage  suc
cessful  wars  with  Syria  and  Mesha,  king  of  Moab.  Omri
and  Ahab  were  capable  generals,  and  the  strategic
instinct  of  the  former  marked  out  Samaria  as  his  royal
fortress-citadel.  Omri's  name  was  dreaded  by  the
Moabites,  as  the  stone  of  Mesha  clearly  testifies  (/.  4/  ),
and  became  permanently  identified  by  the  Assyrians
with  the  Ephraimite  kingdom  long  after  his  dynasty
had  disappeared  (see  OMKI).  Chariots  and  horsemen
were  now  a  recognised  part  of  Israel's  war-equipment,
and  in  the  Syrian  coalition  against  Shalmaneser  II.  (as
we  learn  from  his  monolith  insc.  col.  2gi)  Ahab  figures  as
Hadadezer's  (see  BENHADAD,  §  2)  most  powerful  ally,
furnishing  a  contingent  of  2000  chariots  and  10,000
men.  Probably  Ahab  had  brought  Israel  to  a  level  of
military  efficiency  fully  equal  to  that  of  any  other
Palestinian  state,  evidenced  by  his  brilliant  victory  at
Aphek  over  much  superior  numbers  (i  K.  'iQzjf.}.  In
the  last  fatal  battle  of  Ramoth  Gilead  Ahab's  value  is  so
highly  esteemed  that  the  word  of  command  goes  forth
among  the  Syrian  ranks  that  he  must  be  slain  at  all
costs.  See  AHAB,  §  8.

The  term  ma'arakdh  (nsnyp,  i  S.  178  10  etc.,  23s)
and  the  phrase  [non^p]  ?jny.  '&rak  [milhdmdh]  (Judg.

5267


WAR

2020  22  30  33  i  S.  42  l"2i),  show  that  in  comparatively
early  times  the  fighters  were  drawn  up  in  line.1  Some
times  we  read  that  they  were  disposed  in  three  separate
divisions  (Judg.  7 16  20  i  S.  11  n).  This  seems  to  have
been  a  favourite  tactical  arrangement  of  forces,  and  it
was  adopted  by  David  against  his  son  Absalom  with
complete  success  in  a  country  of  wide  extent  covered  by
forest  (28.182).

The  Hebrews  remained  throughout  their  history
without  a  navy  manned  by  their  own  sailors.  The
geographical  configuration  of  the  sea-coast  of  Palestine
S.  of  Tyre,  with  its  almost  utter  absence  of  harbours,
made  the  sea  a  strange  element.-  Naval  warfare  was
therefore  unknown  to  them.  For  even  their  rivers
were  insignificant,  and  thus  we  never  read  of  river
expeditions  like  those  which  proceeded  up  the  Nile,  or
of  such  naval  battles  as  those  which  were  waged  by
Rameses  III.  in  which  he  repelled  the  hordes  of  bar
barians  (who  had  defeated  the  Syrians  and  the  Hittites)
from  their  descent  on  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  by  sea
(Erman,  540).  It  is  true  that  Phoenician  vessels
were  utilised  by  Solomon  ;  but  this  was  not  for  military
purposes.  On  the  other  hand  Sennacherib  (like  Xerxes
more  than  two  centuries  later)  employed  Phoenician
ships  and  sailors  in  his  expedition  to  Elam  in  697  B.C.
A  vivid  relief,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  exhibits  a
Phoenician  galley  armed  with  shields  and  propelled  by
two  banks  of  rowers  (bas  relief  from  Kuyunjik).  In
the  ninth  century  B.C.  Shalmaneser  II.  describes  in  his
annals  how  he  crossed  the  Euphrates  on  boats  of  sheep
skin  (ina  elippani  sa  niasak  tahsl ; 3  cp  ASSYRIA,  col.
356) ;  but  such  details  are  entirely  foreign  to  the  military
annals  of  Israel.  Cp  SHIP.

When  we  come  down  to  the  second  century  B.  C.  we
are  brought  into  contact  with  Grace-Asiatic  civilisation
and  its  military  methods,  i  Mace.  6  gives  us  a  vivid
description,  garnished  with  some  luxuriance,  of  the  war
fare  and  equipment  of  king  Antiochus.

The  conquests  of  Alexander  had  extended  to  India,  and
Pyrrhus,  in  the  preceding  century,  had  made  Italy  familiar  with
the  .sight  of  Indian  elephants  in  warfare.  The  army  of  Antiochus
advanced  against  Judas  the  Maccabee  in  the  phalanx  formation.
A  thousand  men,  armed  with  coats  of  mail  and  bronze  helmets,
accompanied  each  elephant.  The  number  of  troops  of  Antiochus
that  were  engaged  is  computed  at  100,000  footmen  and  20,000
cavalry  and  32  elephants  '  trained  for  war.'  400  horsemen  were
detailed  for  service  around  each  elephant.  Each  elephant
carried  a  wooden  tower,  '  strong  and  covered  '  and  '  bound  fast
with  cunning  contrivances,'  containing  32  warriors  besides  an
Indian,  probably  the  driver  who  managed  the  elephant.  The
remainder  of  the  cavalry,  amounting  to  4000  men,  were  placed
on  the  wings  for  the  protection  of  the  phalanxes.  The  whole
army  covering  the  hills  and  the  plain  moved  with  precision.
One  elephant  was  believed  by  Eleazar,  surnamed  Avaran,  fourth
of  the  Maccaba;an  brothers,  to  carry  king  Antiochus  himself.
It  towered  above  the  other  animals  and  was  protected  by  royal
breastplates.  Eleazar  daringly  broke  through  the  protecting

Ehalanx,  crept  beneath  the  elephant,  stabbed  it,  and  was  crushed
y  its  fall. Cp  ELEPHANT.

(a)  The  conquerors  were  welcomed  home  with  song

and  dance. Of  this  we  have  several  examples  in  the

.  . literature  of  the  OT  ;  Ex.  15  and  Judg.

ll~  5 (Deborah's  song)  are  songs  of  triumph

ments  ol  war.  and  thanksgiving  after  victory, i  S.

186/  gives  only  the  brief  refrain  of  the  song  of  the
maidens  who  greeted  Saul  and  David  (cp  Judith  16i/l
i  Mace.  424).  Of  such  a  character  is  Hannah's  song
in  reality  (i  S.  2  [cp  col.  2965]).  Similarly  Esarhaddon
says  (Prism  Inscr.  col.  i. ,  53)  :  'With  singers  (sammuiv)
and  playing  on  lutes  I  entered  Nineveh.'  See  fig.  25

1  The  procedure  of  battle  even  in  the  later  regal  period
cannot  be  described  in  any  but  general  terms,  as  we  have  no
materials  for  an  accurate  and  detailed  portrayal.  Perhaps  the
following  description  (by  Sir  G.  Wilkinson)  of  ancient  Egyptian
warfare  (1  2^4)  will  serve  as  the  best  illustration  :  '  The  archers
drawn  up  in  line  first  discharged  a  shower  of  arrows  on  the
enemy's  front,  and  a  considerable  mass  of  chariots  advanced  to
the  charge  ;  the  heavy  infantry,  armed  with  spears  or  clubs  and
covered  with  their  shields,  moved  forward  at  the  same  time  in
close  array,  flanked  by  chariots  and  cavalry,  and  prosed  upon
the  centre  and  wings  of  the  enemy,  the  archers  still  galling  the
hostile  columns  with  their  arrows.'

3  See  Nowack,  HA  1247.  3  Monolith  insc.  col.  2  is.

S268


WAR

in  Music.  The  burial  of  dead  warriors  was  a  sacred
duty  (i  K.  11 15),  and  lamentations  were  composed  and
sung,  2  S.  1 17-27  831-36  (Ezek.  8218-32).

(t>)  The  darker  reverse  is  presented  when  we  deal
with  the  treatment  of  the  conquered.  This  was
characterised  by  the  utmost  cruelty.  The  wars  with  the
Canaanites  are  full  of  examples  (Josh.  10  26  /.,  and
passim}.  Also  we  have  instances  of  mutilation  of  the
captives  (Judg.  1  6  /.  ;  cp  i  S.  11  2  and  2  S.  1231).
Captured  kings  or  generals  were  frequently  slain  (fudg.
725).  Too  often  we  read  of  wholesale  slaughter  (Judg.
87  28.82)  indicated  by  the  phrase  ann  ^  nan  (EV
'smote  with  the  edge  of  the  sword').  The  feet  were
placed  (in  token  of  conquest)  upon  the  neck  or
head  of  the  conquered  (Josh.  10 24).  The  dead  were
decapitated  (i  S.  17 54  31 9  2  Mace.  1030  Jos.  DJ  i.  17  2).
The  dead  were  often  rifled  of  their  property,  and
prisoners  plundered  ( r  S.  31  8  2  Mace.  927).  The  horses
of  the  enemy  had  their  sinews  severed  ('  houghed  ')  that
they  might  be  rendered  useless  (Josh.  11  69).  We  also
read  of  pregnant  women  ripped  up,  and  infants  dashed  to
pieces  (2  K.  15 16  Is.  13  16  Am.  1 13  Hos.  10  14  Nah.  3io
Ps.  1378  2  Mace.  013).  The  land  of  the  enemy  was
desolated,  the  trees  cut  down,  and  the  wells  stopped  up
(Judg.  64  iCh.  20i  Dt.  20i9/).  Towns  and  villages
were  burnt  to  the  ground  (Judg.  945  i  Mace.  628  1084).
The  payment  of  large  sums  of  money  was  imposed  on
the  conquered,  or  a  yearly  tribute  (2  K.  1814  Is.  33 18),
a  custom  which  was  universal  and  is  constantly  referred
to  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions.

A  severe  judgment,  however,  cannot  be  passed  on  the
treatment  by  the  Hebrews  of  their  conquered.  The
universal  custom  of  antiquity  must  be  taken  into  con
sideration  as  well  as  the  all- prevailing  conception  of
war  as  a  religious  act  in  which  the  deity  of  the  nation
was  deeply  involved.  The  old  Semitic  conception  of
the  herein  explains  much  of  the  practice.  In  comparison
with  Assyrian  usage  the  Hebrews  must  be  called
humane.  By  far  the  larger  proportion  of  the  captured
were  made  into  slaves.  The  women  became  concu
bines,  and  were  treated  with  consideration.

The  Egyptians  also,  according  to  Wilkinson's  judgment,  were
humane  as  compared  with  the  Assyrians  in  their  treatment
of  captives  (Anc.  Egypt.  1  264).  'The  cruel  custom  of  flay
ing  alive  and  the  tortures  represented  on  the  sculptures  of
Nineveh  show  that  the  Assyrians  were  guilty  of  barbarities  at  a
period  long  after  the  Egyptians  had  been  accustomed  to  the
refinements  of  civilisation.'  Just  as  the  followers  of  David
reckoned  up  the  foreskins  of  the  Philistines  whom  they  had
slain,  so  the  ancient  Egyptians  reckoned  up  the  severed  hands
which  were  placed  in  heaps  before  the  king  and  counted  by  his
secretary  (Wilkinson,  ibid.  1266).

The  attitude  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  towards  the
wars  of  their  people  against  a  foreign  foe  was  at  first
q  Aii-j.  j  °ne  °f  unquestioning  sympathy.  This
VP  Vi  t  was  mev'taDle  m  consequence  of  the
"  '  religious  aspect  of  war  above  indicated.
Elisha  advises  the  allied  monarchs  of  Israel  and  Judah
to  adopt  a  skilful  ruse  in  their  war  against  Moab  (2  K.
4  15/1 ),  and  on  his  deathbed  he  is  greeted  by  Joash,  king
of  Israel,  with  the  same  words  '  The  chariots  of  Yahwe
and  the  horsemen  thereof,'  with  which  the  prophet  him
self  had  greeted  Elijah  in  the  latter's  closing  hours
(2  K.  2  12  12i4)  ;  and  Elisha's  last  address  to  the  king
of  Israel  is  one  of  passionate  insistence  on  the  need  of
persistent  energy  in  prosecuting  the  war  with  Syria.
More  than  a  century  later,  Isaiah's  powerful  personality
is  Judah's  strongest  stay  in  the  kingdom's  darkest  hour
of  conflict  with  Assyria.  Towards  the  close  of  the  eighth
century,  however,  prophecy  scanned  more  closely  the
religious  and  ethical  aspects  of  national  policy,  and  in
the  days  of  Jeremiah  the  divorce  between  nationalism
and  religion  in  its  purest  sense  was  complete,  and  the
prophet  saw  nothing  tjefore  the  disordered  and  corrupt
state  but  irrevocable  doom.  There  gleamed  rlso  upon
the  distant  horizon  the  vision  of  a  pure,  holy,  and
righteous  rule,  when  men  would  '  beat  their  swords
into  coulters  and  their  spears  into  pruning-knives'  (Mic.

168  5269


WARS  OF  THE  LORD

4s  Is.24),  '  the  image  of  Joel  810  reversed  '  (Cheyne).
sustained  also  by  the  utterances  of  Is.  9$  and  11 1-9;
cp  Zech.  9 10.  These  are  the  ideals  which  Christianity
seeks  to  realise.

In  the  moral  world  there  is  a  constant  opposition
between  the  powers  of  good  and  evil,  both  in  the
10  Metaphori-  individual  mental  life  and  in  the  life  of
ca'l  references  society-  Bolh  the  Old  and  the  New
Testament,  therefore,  inevitably  em
ploy  the  material  terms  of  earthly  warfare  as  metaphors.
God  is  repeatedly  called  a  '  shield  '  in  this  world  of
strife  (Gen.  15  i  Dt.  8829  Ps.  5 12  59  n  84911),  or  his
truth  (or  faithfulness)  is  so  called  (91 4).  These  terms
abound  in  the  NT  passages  which  deal  with  spiritual
warfare.  The  apostle  Paul  is  especially  prone  to  their
use  ( i  Cor.  926  2  Cor.  7s  i  Tim.  612  2  Tim.  4;  and  in
Eph.6n/  [see  BREASTPLATE]).  In  the  Book  of  Revela
tion,  which  moves  in  the  language  and  ideas  of  Jewish
apocalyptic  and  Messianic  eschatology,  we  have  a  '  war
in  heaven  '  (TroAe/uos  cv  ovpav^})  in  which  Satan  and  the
Beast  are  finally  quelled  by  God  and  his  heavenly  host,
Megiddo  being  employed  as  the  type  of  the  great
heavenly  Armageddon  (see  Beyschlag,  NT  Theol.  II.
pp.  399-408).

War  in  Islam,  on  the  other  hand,  is  chiefly  regulated
by  Kuran, Sur. 47, and is nothing but old Semitic
11 War  in warfare  carl"iei:1  out beyond the  distinc-
Islam t'0115  °f  nationalism  into  that  of  believers
and  non-believers  in  the  prophet. Allah
is the Lord -protector  of  the  faithful but not of  un
believers (Sur.  47 12). The Jihad should even be
carried  on  against  unbelievers  during  the  four  sacred
months,  while  for  all  believers  those  months  are  exempt
(Sur.  936/). Those  who  are  slain  in  a  Jihad hav?
paradise  as  their  reward  (Sur.  47s-?). See  further  Sell,
faith  of  Islam*®,  360/1

The  most  important  recent  contribution  is  Schwally's  Setni-
tische  Kriegsaltertnnier,  of  which  his  first  Heft,  dealing  with
the  religious  side,  has  appeared. Especially
12.  Literature, important  is  his  account  of  the  taboos  im
posed  during  war,  as  well  as  of  the  apparatus

of  religious  cultus  in  war.  The  writer,  however,  is  somewhat
in  danger  of  finding  religious  motives  connected  with  war  where
none  such  existed.  See  criticism  by  Volz  (in  TLZ,  i3th  Sept.
1902).  Next  in  importance  are  the  arts.  '  Kriegswesen,  etc.'  by
Henzinger  in  PRE&\,  and  §  72  in  Nowack's  Heb.  Arch.  (1 372  f.\
Respecting  war  among  the  Assyrians  the  materials  are  found  in
the  royal  annalistic  inscc.  in  Schrader's  AY  A'  i.  and  ii.  For
Egypt  consult  especially  Erman's  Li/'e  in  Ancient  Egypt,  20

(52°  ff-)-  o.  c."  \v.

WARD. See  PRISON. The  words  are  : —

1.  "CE'lp,  wiSmar,  Gen.  40  3  f.,  rnWC,  mismfreth  (§  i).

2.  1PD,  sugar,  Ezek.  19  gt  (§  22).

3.  rnps,  fekiduth,  Jer.  37  13!  (§  2  10).

4.  T>jprj<n<;  (S  -'  14).


WARDROBE,  KEEPER  OF  THE  (n»"!J?n  10b;;
2  K.  22  14,  TOY  iM<vno<J>YAAKOC  [BAL],  2  Ch.  3422.
4>YA<\ccoYC<\N  TAG  eNToA&c  [HAL]),  see  DRESS

§  6, HULDAH.

On  'vestry '  (nnn^C)  in  2  K.  1022,  see  DRESS,  §  8,  VESTRY.

WARP  C'fll''),  Lev.  1848^ See  WEAVING.

WARS  OF THE  LORD  [BOOK  OF THE]  (IDC)

HIPP  nittrt^p),  a  book  cited  in  Xu.  21 14/.  (E),  accord
ing  to  RV,  in  the  following  terms.  (We  remove  RY's
poetical  arrangement,  however,  and  assume  provision
ally  that  the  text  of  the  formula  of  citation  is  correct  ;
that  the  text  of  the  passage  quoted  is  not  by  any  means
correct,  is  maintained  under  VAHKB. )  'Wherefore  it
is  said  in  the  book  of  the  Wars  of  the  LORD,  Vaheb
in  Suphah,  and  the  valleys  of  Arnon,  and  the  slope
of  the  valleys  that  inclineth  to%vard  the  dwelling  of
Ar,  and  leaneth  upon  the  border  of  Moab. '

Ktiencn  gives  the  following  brief  statement  of  what  is

5270


WASHINGS,  CEREMONIAL


.... . .

1.  A  nistoricai


supposed  to  be  known  respecting  the  '  book  '  referred
to. '  Evidence of the date of the
Sepher  j/,YAa»w/A Ya/iwe  is  supplied
e  tkle  j'self  .  the  .  .  wars  of  Yahwe"

are  the  wars  of  Israel  against  his  neighbours  in  the
period  of  the  Judges,  under  David  (i  S.  18i/  25  28),  and
later  on.  The  collector  of  the  songs  referring  to  these
wars  presumably  lived  after  their  close,  when  Israel's
heroic  age  was  long  gone  by'  (Hex.  ET,  p.  35,  n.  5).
According  to  Stade  ((7/71  50),  the  fragments  of  song
in  w.  17  £  1  8  and  (probably)  vv.  27^-30  come  from  the
same  source  as  vv.  146  15.  Uillmann,  too,  thinks  it
plausible  to  derive  from  this  source  w.  17  £  18  and
perhaps  also  Ex.  15  1-19.  The  'book'  referred  to  was
therefore,  these  scholars  think,  a  collection  of  songs,
similar  to  the  Book  of  JASHER  (g.v.),  and  its  date  is
variously  placed,  in  the  time  of  Omri,  about  900  B.C.
(Stade),  the  latter  half  of  the  ninth  century  (E.  Meyer,
y.ATW,  1881,  p.  131),  and  the  times  of  David  and
Solomon  (Reuss,  Gesch.  der  heil.  Schr.  AT^,  172;
Dillm.  ).

There  is,  however,  only  one  express  quotation  from  the  '  book,'
and  it  is  not  certain  that  it  is  poetical  or  even  metrical.1  Looking
at  the  contents  of  the  quotation,  moreover,  one
2.  A  geo-  would  not  judge  it  to  come  either  from  a  history
graphical  or  from  a  collection  of  historical  songs  or  ballads.
Survey  ?  ^'as  l'le  'i''6  °ftne  'book  'really  'Wars  of  Yahwe?'
*  IS  at  any  rate  did  not  so  understand  it,  for  it
renders  thus,  Sia.  TOVTO  Ae'yerai  iv  j3ij3Ai'a>2  [,]  HdAe^os  TOV
Kvpiov  TTJI'  <jb>oj3  e^AayKrec.  'Another'  version  in  the  Hexapla
agrees  ',  it  gives  ota.  TOVTO  etpTjrat  fv  jcaraAoya*  TOH'  TroAe^tovrTcoy
IIII1I  [  =  ,T,T]  Tpo?  f-fv  au<ja/3.  Nor  is  the  title  'Book  of  the
Wars^of  Yahwe  '  a  probable  one.  It  says  either  too  much  or  too
little.  The  phrase  '  wars  of  Yahwe  '  occurs  elsewhere  (i  S.  18  17)
of  the  wars  of  Saul,  and  (i  S.  '.25  28)  of  David  in  his  earlier
period.  But  can  a  historical  work,  such  as  a  '  book  of  wars  '
must  be  supposed  to  be,  have  excluded  the  unsuccessful  cam
paigns  of  the  champions  of  Israel?  'Book  of  the  Wars  of
Israel'  is  possible,  but  surely  not  the  title  which  now  stands  in
Xu.  2114.  What  then  is  a  possible  title  ?  The  quotation  sug
gests  that  it  had  reference  to  geography.  Elsewhere  (see
VAHEB)  it  is  maintained  that  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb  is  the
region  spoken  of,  and  we  have  reason  to  think  that  David,  after
conquering  a  large  part  of  the  Negeb,  took  a  military  census  of
its  inhabitants  (see  TAHTI.M-HODSHI).  Both  [mfcnSo  and  ,-nrt'
have  sometimes  arisen  out  of  ^KCnT-  The  one  word  represents
SfNte".  the  other  nv-  Most  probably  the  book  quoted  from  by
E  in  Nu.  'Jl  14  was  called  spplicr  Yerahmc'el—i.e.,  'the  book,
or  list,  of  Jerahmeel.'  It  was  a  geographical  survey.

T. K.  C.

V7ASHINGS,  CEREMONIAL.  On  the  subject
generally  see  CLEAN  (§§  15  and  17)  and  SACRIFICE  ;
cp  also  BAPTISM,  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST.

The  words  for  '  washing,'  whether  ceremonial  or  not,  are  :

1.  j*rn,  rahas,  Ass.  rahdsu\ Aoueif  (Ex.  284,  etc.), TrAvpcip
(of  the  feet, Lev.  1  9  etc.),  i>iVreii»  (of  feet,  Gen.  19  2  etc.  : of
hands, Ex.  302i etc.; efface,  Gen.  43  31),  a.irovimt\.v  (Prov.
80  12). Mainly  in  1'

2.  C23,  kibbcs,  nMveiv  (of  garments,  Ex.  19  14  Lev.  136  etc.),
dn-OTrA.uj'eci'  (of  garments,  28.1924);  Ass.  kabasu,  to  tread. See
FULLEK.

3.  Vna,  iabal,  fiairrfiv,  'to  dip"  (in  blood,  Lev.  9  9  1451  ;  in
water,  Nu.  19  18  [hyssop], 2  K.  815  [coverlet];  in  oil,  Dt.  33  24
[the  feet],  etc.). Cp  MEAI.S,  §  5.

4.  nn,  diiak  (in  Hiph.),  an-o/<Ai;<JW  (of  washing  in  the  lavers,
2  Ch.  4  fi),  TrAweii/  (burnt  offering,  Ezek.  40  38).

5.  jSaTrn.^o/xei'os,  Eccl.  3430  ii  Nu.  i9n./7,  vVy  p-ii'.x1?  ma  'o-

6.  Aoi/rpoi',  Ecclus.  3430  [25],  'washing.'

7.  Aoueiv,  Jn.  13  10  (6  AeAou/ueVos,  RV  '  he  that  is  bathed  ').

8.  i/iWiv,  Mt.  152  Mk.  7s  (hands)  Jn.  185  etc.  (feet)  Jn.  9?
(in  healing).

9.  /3a7rTto>i6s,  Mk.  7  4  (cups).

It  is  well  known  that  man  in  a  primitive  state, but

at  the  stage  at  which  he  has  become  a  religious  being

_  . . .  and  some  degree  of  reason  has  succeeded

... ° to  what  was  little  more  than  instinct,  looks

upon  rivers, springs, and  wells  as the

abodes of  gods or as being themselves deities (cp

SPRINGS).3 To drink the water, to bathe in it,

or  merely  to  sprinkle  the  person  with  it,  was  to  imbibe

1  The  arrangement  in  RV  is  misleading.

2  So  BF  ;  AL,  /3i'/3Aco.

3  See  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  and  Pausanias  ; Grant  Allen,


vol. of  the  Idea of  God, 388  (cp 405)  ;  Clodd,  Primitive
an,  182.2?: Cp  WRS,  Rel.  Sent.W,  135.

5271


WASHINGS,  CEREMONIAL

or  to  cover  oneself  with  a  divine  and  mysterious  power.
Bathing  was  a  religious  act.  Water  therefore  was
holy.  Further  evidence  for  the  idea  that  a  more  than
natural  power  was  inherent  in  water  would  be  seen  in
the  refreshing,  and  sometimes  healing,  effect  of  this
act.  Water  was  refreshing  and  healing  because  it  was
holy.  When  a  reason  was  sought  for  the  fact  that
water  cleansed,  the  explanation  would  again  be  the
same  :  it  cleansed  because  it  was  holy.1  Then,  water
is  looked  upon  as  purifying,  as  washing  away  impurities
or  cleansing  from  a  taboo  ;  and  finally  the  frequent  use
of  water  becomes  a  social  and  sanitary,  as  well  as  a
religious  act.  The  order  of  ideas  can  hardly  have  been
otherwise.  Primitive  man  fears  water,  therefore  makes
a  god  of  it,  worships  it  (cp  religio)  ;  this  fear  must  have
been  overcome  before  he  could  make  frequent  use  of
it  for  other  than  strictly  religious  purposes.

Benzinger tells  us (Heb. Arch. 108) that in the

ablutions  of  the  Hebrews  it  is  often  difficult  to  distin-

2 A  th Su'sn  between  the  washings  performed

TT  y. °  purely  for  the  sake  of  the  body,  and

such  as  were  purely  religious.  That  is
no  doubt  because  originally  no  distinction  was  made.
The  Hebrews,  however,  when  we  make  their  acquaint
ance,  had  already  forgotten  the  true  origin  of  ablutions  ;
it  is  the  second  idea  that  now  prevails  :  cleansing  or
washing  is  a  holy  act,  and  water  is  holy  because  it
cleanses.2  In  this  sense  for  the  most  part  ablutions
play  an  important  part  in  the  religious  and  social  life  of
the  Hebrews,  as  in  that  of  their  neighbours  (Egyptians,
Arabians,  etc.  ).3

The  next  step  is  for  ceremonial  washings  to  become
symbolical.  '  Water  and  fire,'  says  Jastrow,  'are  the
two  great  sources  of  symbolical  purification  that  we
meet  with  in  both  primitive  and  advanced  rituals  of  the
past'  (Rel.  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  276).  Thus
amongst  the  Jewish  ESSENES  (q.v.  §  4  ;  cp  De  Quincey,
Works,  vol.  vii. ),  as  already  amongst  the  Babylonians
(Jastrow,  276  ;  see  also  RITUAL,  §  10)  and  Persians
(see  ZOROASTRIANISM,  §  16),  washing  as  a  religious
act  received  quite  a  special  importance.4

The  ablutions  of  the  Jews  may  be  divided,  as  far  as  it  is
possible  now  to  distinguish  them,  as  follows  : — (i)  The  purely

religious (magical)* (2  K.  5  10  cp  Jn.  2  97).
3. Occasions. In these  we  can  still  detect  the primitive

idea.  (2)  The  purely  ritual,  which  wert
suggested  by  the  first.  In  these  the  idea  is  now  that  of  purifi
cation.  LTnder  this  heading  come  (a)  washings  of  initiation  and
consecration  (Lev.  86).  With  this  is  connected  the  washing  or
baptism  of  the  Jewish  PROSELYTE  (q.v.  §  5).  (b)  Washings
with  a  view  to  the  performance  of  a  sacred  function  (Ex.  30  17-21).
The  Egyptian  priests,  too,  were  required  to  bathe  frequently  in
cold  water  (cp  Herod.  2  37  ;  also  the  Mohammedan  li'ai/n).&  (3)
The  semi-ritualistic  washings  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing  from
uncleanness.  Examples  are:  Lev.  136  34  54-58  (leprous  gar
ments),  1447  (clothes  after  contact  with  leprous  house),  14 52
(house — with  running  water),  156-8  lof.  13  i6_/I  (clothes  and
person),  15  12  (earthen  vessel;  wooden  vessel)  15  18  (person),  lo
22  27  (menstruous  contact  ;  cp  Doughty,  Ar.  Des.  1  572)  ;  in  D,
Dt.  21 1-9  289-11;  in  JE,  Ex.  19  10-15.  Besides  these,  there
arose  (4)  the  purely  social  usage  common  to  all  eastern  peoples.
The  hot  climate  and  the  wearing  of  sandals  1  made  the  practice

1  The  writer  in  Schenkel  (BL,  s.r>.  '  Waschen ')  reverses  the
order  of  ideas. As  a  preparation  for  contact  with  holy  things,
the  body  must  be  cleansed. Because  water  was  used  for  the
purpose,  streams,  etc.,  were worshipped  and men bathed in
them  as  a  religious  act.

2  At  a  much  later  date,  however,  to  perform  ablutions  was  not
always  considered  a  virtue. Cp  Stanley, Christian  Institu
tions, 6  f.  : '  Cleanliness is a duty which some of the
monastic  communities  of  Christendom  have  despised,  and  some
have  even  treated  as  a  crime  ; '  also  Socrates,  HE\  23.

3  For  the  Egyptians,  cp Wilkinson, Anc.  Egyptians,  248.
For the modern Arabians, see Doughty, Ar. Des.  1250;
where  water  is  lacking  or  scarce  they  use  sand  (cp  Doughty,
1536;  Benzinger,  HA,  108  note),  but  the  act  is  here  no  doubt
symbolical.

4  For  the  Greek  practice  see  Hesiod,  Op.  ei  Dies,  722.

5  See  Th.  Frede,  H'utulcrglaubt:  im  Hcidentum  und  in  dcr
alien  Kirche,  y)f.

6  For  Mohammedan  usage,  see,  further,  Koran  Sura,  5  8,  and
Hughes,  Diet,  of  Islam,  under  'Ablution.'

7  The  writer  in  Schenkel  adds  other  reasons  for  washings  of
the  clothing,  of  the  whoje  body,  or  of  paiticular  paits  of  it  in
the  East — viz.,  on  account  of  the  desert  sand,  and  particularly
as  a  protection  against  cutaneous  diseases.

5272


WASHPOT

of  feet-washing  important,  and  the  offering  of  water  for  the
purpose  a  common  mark  of  hospitality  (Uen.  184  192  L'4  32).
To  the  same  category  probably  belong  the  washings  before
(Alt.  15  2)  and  after  meals  (Btrackotk  84),  on  which  see  MEALS
§  5-1

To  the  first  of  the  social  usages  (§  3  [4])  Jesus no
doubt  conformed. The  fourth  gospel,  which  has  to  be
4 Washings used  with the  £reatest caution, even
in  NT tells us that he  nimself  washed his
disciples'  feet  (Jn.  13 2). To  the  second
social  usage,  however,  he  seems  to  have  attached  little
importance  (Lk.  11 38). We  are  also  told  that  he  sub
mitted to a ritual washing  or baptism, and further
showed his  approval of  such an act  by  making  it  a
Christian  institution. As,  however,  such  a  rite  would
be  contrary  to  the  general  tenor  of 'his  teaching,  so  far
as  we  can gather it from  our  imperfect  sources (cp
Tolstoy, The  Kingdom  of  God, chap. 3),  and  cannot
be  certainly  inferred  from  the  passages  in  the  Gospels
which are generally adduced as evidence (see O.
Holtzmann,  Leben  Jcsu,  p.  411  ;  Cp,  on  the  other  hand,
BAPTISM),  its  adoption  by  Jesus  himself  must  be  con
sidered extremely doubtful.'2 Moreover, Paul, or  the
Pauline  school,  does  not  mention  it  as  an  institution  of
Jesus, i Cor.  1  17  even  makes  Paul  say  '  Christ  sent
me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  gospel  '  (cp  Ernst
von  Dobschutz, Die  Urchristlichen Gemeinden,  22  f. ).
Feine,  indeed, thinks  that  Paul  implies it, while not
actually  mentioning  it  because  it  was  not  a  matter  of
controversy  in  the  apostolic  church  (Jesus Christus  und
Paulas, 243). And Dreschen (Das Leben  Jesu bet
Paulus)  takes  a  very  similar  view. But almost  any
thing  might  be  implied  (or  read  into)  the  NT,  and  the
simplest conclusion  is that it  had  not  yet  become a
Christian  institution. It  has  been  contended  that  the
rite  was  a  natural  development  of  the  Jewish  practice  of
baptizing  the  proselyte  (see  Stanley,  Christian  Institu
tions, 5;  cp  Tylor, Primitive  Culture,  2440^)  or  of
the  ceremonial  washings  of  the  Essenes  (see  E.  Plauta
Nesbit, Christ, Christians, and Christianity  ; De
Quincey, Works,  vol. vii. ). The  second  suggestion  is
unnecessary  (see  von Dobschutz,  p. 105). As  to the
first, it is much more probable  that  the  rite, as in
the  case  of  the  Eucharist,3  was taken over from  the
Pagans.

This,  with  other  rites,  was  adopted  at  a  time  when
the  new  sect  was  trying  to  win  over  converts  among  the
Gentiles,  and  when  the  gap  between  Judaism  and
Christianity  had  widened.  With  that  wonderful  power
of  adapting  itself  which  it  once  had,  the  new  religion
admitted  the  pagan  ceremony  of  initiation.4  Cp  ROME.

M.  A.  c.

WASHPOT,  a  term  of  abuse  applied  to  Moab  in  the
expression  '  Moab  is  my  washpot '  (^r\~\  "Vp  3X1O  ;
M60A.B  AeBHC  THC  eArriAoc  MOy  !  similarly  Vg.  ;
flTl  in  Tg.  =Heb.  rtp3  'to  trust');  Ps.  608  [10]

1  Cp,  further,  Kohler's  art.  '  Ablution  '  in  the  Jewish  Encyclo
pedia.

2  Colenso  (Natal  Sermons,  1866,  No.  10)  thought  that  'the
command in Mt. 28 10, "Go  ye therefore, and teach all
nations,  baptising  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the
Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  would  be  conclusive  as  to  the  fact
of  his  having  directly  enjoined  the  practice,  were  it  not  that  this
formula,  with  its  full  expression  of  the  name  of  the  Trinity,
betrays  the  later  age  in  which  the  passage  in  which  it  occurs
was most  probably  written.' Conybeare  has  recently  shown
(ZNTIV,  2  275^  [1901] ;  cp  Hibb.  Jo,,rn.  1  102.^)  very  strong
reasons  for  believing  that  the  mention  of  the  three  Persons  in
the  Trinity  is  not  original  (cp  col.  3270  [top]). The  passage  as
it  stands, therefore, seems  to have  been  edited  for  liturgical
purposes,  and  it  is  likely  that  in  the  first  instance  there  was  no
reference  whatever to baptism. Apart  from  this  we  have  no
evidence,  as  Colenso  again  says  (ibid.  No.  9),  that  any  of  Jesus'
disciples  were  baptised.

3  This  again  has been  looked  upon  as  a  development  of  a
Jewish  practice. See,  especially,  G.  H.  Box  in  the  Journal  of
Theological  Studies,  3  357-369,  who  thinks  that  the  Last  Supper
was  not  a  Passover,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  bui  the  weekly
Kiddfish,  a  service  in  the  house.

4  Cp Grant  Allen, Evol. of  the  Idea  of  God,  388 405  ;
Clodd,  Primitive  Man,  itejf.  ;  J.  M.  Robertson,  Short  Hist,
of  Christianity  (see  Index).

5273


WAX

-  t10];  The  commentators  refer  to  the  story  told
of  Amasis  (Herod.  272),  or  to  the  custom  of  Persian
kings  of  having  a  footpan  carried  in  their  train  when
in  the  field.  The  latter  illustration  is  preferred  by
Delitzsch.

This  base  image,  however,  is  surely  due  to  corruption  of  the
text.  Both  TO  and  «sm  are  corruptions  of  1HTC,  Mijsur,  or  of
•HntpK,  Ashhur.  See  Che.  Ps.W,  ad  toe.,  and  cp  MOAB,  §  14
('  Moab'  and  '  Missur'  liable  to  confusion).

WASP  (ccbH5),  Wisd.  128  AV,  also  RV'"?-,  RV
HORNET  (</.v.).

WATCH


,  Neh.  7  3.  See  GUARD,  3.
WATCHER  (Tr,  '*>  [Aram.]  ;  ArreAOc  [<587J  eip
[Theod.];  erpHf-OpOC  [Aq.  Sym.];  vigil,  in  the  Gk.
Enoch  erpHfOpOc);  Dan.  4  10  14  [om.  ©]  20  [131723].
The  term  reminds  us  of  the  c^ov,  fJmtrfm  (Is.  626)
whom  Yahwe  charges  to  watch  over  the  ruined  walls  of
Jerusalem,  and  to  remind  him  of  their  sad  condition.
We  find  it  again  in  Enoch  and  in  Jubilees.  In  Enoch
it  is  used  in  a  double  sense.  In  15  10g  15  12a  4  13  J0
14  1  3  15z  16  1  2  91  15  it  designates  the  fallen  angels  ;  in
20  1  39  12  13  402  61  12  717  it  belongs  to  the  archangels.
In  Jubilees  4  15  (cp  83  10s),  in  the  explanation  of  the
name  Jared  (which  agrees  with  that  given  in  Enoch  66,
except  that  Mt.  Hennon  is  not  mentioned  as  the  place
on  which  they  descended)  it  is  said,  '  in  his  days  the
angels  of  the  Lord  descended  on  the  earth,  those  who
are  named  the  Watchers,  that  they  should  instruct  the
children  of  men,  and  that  they  should  do  judgment  and
uprightness  on  the  earth.'  A  myth  of  the  watchers
which  differs  somewhat  from  that  in  the  Ethiopic  Enoch
is  given  in  the  Slavonic  Enoch  (183  cp  63  ;  see  Charles's
notes  in  Secrets  of  Enoch]  ;  they  are  there  called  the
Grigori  (typiiyoptH.).  In  the  Book  of  Adam  and  Eve
(6th  cent.  A.  D.  )  the  watchers  are  also  represented  as
the  fallen  angels,  who,  as  long  as  they  preserved  their
virginity,  were  called  the  '  sons  of  Seth.  '  See  Charles's
very  full  note  on  Jubilees  4  15.  .

WATCHES  OF  THE  NIGHT. See  DAY,  §  4.

WATCHTOWER  (PlSyp,  mispch  ;  Is.  218).  Cp
MIZPAH,  MIZPEH.  For  jna.  bdhan  (Is.  32  i4t)and  ^JO,  migddl,
see  TOWER.  In  Is.  2  16  RVm£-  has  'pleasant  watch-towers  '  for
1"'7?£l?  ™"??,  sckiyyoth  hahemdah  (AV  'pleasant  pictures,'
RV  'pleasant  imagery')  ;  but  see  '  Isa.'  SBOT  (Heb.),  note  ad
lac.,  and  Crit.  Bib.

WATER  (Dstt).  On  the  'holy'  or  'bitter'  water,
called  also  the  'water  of  purifying'  (AV)  or  'of  ex
piation  '  (RV)  of  Nu.  %Tjf.  see  JEALOUSY  [TRIAL  OF]  ;
on  the  water  of  'separation'  or  'of  impurity'  (RVme-)
in  Nu.  19g,  see  CLEAN  AND  UNCLEAN,  g  17

WATERCOURSE. i. te'alah, n^D, see CON


DUITS,  §  2.

2.  pc  leg,  pclaggah,  j^£,  nj^rj,  see  RIVER,  5.

3.  mesa  mayiin,  c-a  N^C,  2  Ch.  3'2  30  AV. See  SPRINGS,  §  2
[6],  and  cp  GIHON.

4.  sinnor,  -flai1,  2  S.  58  RV,  AV  'gutter'  ;  meaning  doubtful.

WATERPOT  (yApiA),  Jn.  27. Cp  POTTERY,  §3(1).
WATERS  OF  MEROM  (C'np-'t5),  Josh.  11  5  7. See
MEROM  [WATERS  OF].

WATERSPOUT,  (i)  113  >'.  sinnor,  Ps.  42  7  (RV">*r-
'cataract').  Cp  WATERCOURSE,  4.  (2)  pjn,  tannin,  Ps.  148  7
RVmg.  See  SERPEXT,  §  •$/.  n.  2  ;  WHALE.

WAVE  LOAVES  (HB-ian  DH^),  Lev.  23  17.  See
SACRIFICE,  §  34  b.  WAVE  OFFERING  (n&Ufi).  Ex.
2924.  See  SACRIFICE,  §  14,  and  cp  CLEAN  AND  UN
CLEAN,  §  3.

WAX  (JTPl,  donag;  KHpOc),  Ps.  22i4  [15]  682  [3]
97s  Mic.  14;  also  Judith  1615  Ecclus.  242o;  also  Ps.
588  [9]  ©  (see  SNAIL,  2),  Is.  64  1  [2]  ©««AQ  ;  anci  possibly
Ezek.  27  17  (emended  text;  so  Co.  ;  but  see  PANNAG),
and  Ps.  118  12  [see  ©].  Beeswax,  which  is  secreted  by

5274


WAY

all  honey-bees  and  formed  into  the  cell  walls  of  their
comb  is  intended.  It  melts  at  144°  F.  See  BEE.

WAY.  On  'the  way'  (H  oAoc),  Acts  9  a,  etc.,  see
HERESY,  §  i.

WAYMARK  (JVV),  Jer.  31 21  [20].  See  MASSEBAH,
§  i  e,  col.  2978  ;  also  Crit.  Bib.

WEAPONS.  Cp  WAR.  Hebrew  uses  the  general
term  keltnt  (Gen.  27  3),  which  means  simply  instruments  or
implements.  In  18.2640  AV  renders  by  the  more  ambitious
word  'artillery.'  In  the  NT  (Jn.  183  Rom.  613  2  Cor.  104)
the  common  Greek  term  on-Aa  is  employed.

Naturally  at  first  any  implement  or  instrument  would

be  used  as  a  weapon,  a  club  or  a  STAFF  (\_q.v. ] ;  cp

Darwin, Descent  of  Man,  81 [1890]).

1.  In  general. But  the  naturai  weapons  of  the  lower
animals  (horns,  etc.;  see  Darwin,  500^)  would  soon
suggest  to  man  the  use of  something  more  effective.
Later,  it  is  possible  that  one  at  least  of  the  agricultural
implements,  the  sickle (see  AGRICULTURE,  §  7,  with
figs. ),  gave  rise  to  the  scimitar  or  SWOKU  (q.v. ). This
would  add  force  to the  words  in Is.  24. In  no  art,
perhaps, has  more  ingenuity  or  more  rapid progress
been  shown  than  in  that  of  the  manufacture  of  weapons
(see  Herbert  Spencer, Principles  of  Sociology,  I'3'  59)-
As  the  Hebrews  had  no  doubt  to  wage  war  continually,
it  would  be  no  matter  for  surprise  if  they  had  displayed
some  skill in this  art  at  quite  an  early  date. Later,
they  would  also  be  quick  to  note  and  to  copy  the  equip
ment  of  more advanced  neighbours  (e.g. Canaanites,
Egyptians, Assyrians, etc.), who realised more fully
the  value  of  well-equipped,  organised,  and  disciplined
armies. See  ARMY  and  cp  WAR. The  more  primitive
weapons  of  offence,  however, such  as  the  CLUB  (see
STAFF)  and  SLING  (</.v.)  were  perhaps  never  entirely
displaced  by  the  SWORD  and  DAGGER (see  SWORD),
JAVELIN  (q.v.).  Bow  (see  below,  §  2),  and  SPEAR  (</.?'.);
and  instruments  with  Hint  edges  or  points,  as  has  fre
quently  happened,  no  doubt  continued  to  be  used  side
by  side  with  those  of  metal. Of  defensive  weapons,  a
SHIELD  (q.v.)  of  some  kind  was  probably  in  use  at  a
very  early  date  ;  but  we  also  hear  in  the  OT  of  BREAST
PLATE,  GREAVES,  and  HELMET  (qq.v.).

On  Egyptian and  Assyrian  monuments  one  of  the
" weapons  most  commonly  represented  is

2.  The  bow.  the  Eow  |see  CHARIOT,  SIEGE,  WAR).

The  Hebrew  term  is  IlC'jJ,  kcseth.  With  this  are  of  course
connected  the  ARROW,  J'fl,  lies,  and  the  case  for  carrying  it,
'Sa,  tt'li  (Gen.  27  3),  or  nSy'N,  'asfah—i.e.,  the  QUIVER  (t?.v.\
cp  also  CHARIOT).  This  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  earliest
of  the  more  elaborate  weapons.  The  throwing  of  a  small  SPEAR
(q.v.)  or  DART,  nV?,  stlah  (2Ch.  32s  AV,  RV  'weapons';  cp
Joel  2s),1  with  the  hand  would  soon  give  rise  to  a  mechanical
instrument  (cp  Si. ING),  to  which  the  dart  would  be  suitably
adapted,  feathers  being  added  to  increase  its  flight  (cp  Tylor,
Anthropology,  chap.  S).'2  In  this  way  we  get  the  ARROW.  The
bow  was  commonly  made  of  reed,  wood,  or  horn.  The  Israelites
used  it  both  in  war  (Gen.  48  22),  and  in  the  chase  (21  20)  ;  and
seem  to  have  bent  it  with  the  foot  (for  the  Egyptian  practice,
see  Wilkinson,  Anc.  Eg.  1  203).  The  strings,  C'nrrc,  mciharim
(Ps.  21  12),  were  probably  made  of  gut  or  hide.  Here  we  seem
to  have  a  case  in  which  an  implement  of  war  suggested  an
instrument  of  music  (see  Music,  §  2  ;  cp  Tylor,  Anthropology,
chap.  12).  According  to  the  AV  of  2  S.  1  is  David  'bade  them
teach  the  children  of  Judah  [the  use  of]  the  bow'  apparently  an
irrelevant  notice  where  it  stands  in  2  S.  ;  hence  RV  substitutes
'  song  '  for  '  use.'  The  remedy,  however,  seems  inadequate,  and
it  is  open  to  methodical  textual  critics  to  devise  something  more
radical  and  effective.  See  H.  P.  Smith,  ad  Inc.,  and  cp  Crit.
Bib.  The  bowmen  of  Elam  (Is.  226  Jer.  49  35,  if  the  text  is
correct),  of  Kedar  (Is.  21  17),  and  of  an  unnamed  people  from
the  land  of  pas  (Jer.  G  23)  are  specially  mentioned  in  the  OT.

1  Other  words  rendered  DART  are  :  B3?,  Sebet,  2  S.  18  14  EV,
RVmg. 'staves,'  see  STAFF;  nniPi,  tSth&h,  Job  41  29  [21]  AV,
RV  'clubs,'  but  see  JAVELIN,  •> ; UBS,  massa',  Job  41  26  [18]
EV  !  VO.  $??> Pf-  ?  23  AV,  RV  '  arrow  '  (see  above)  ;  TO.  /3e'A>7,
Eph.  6  16  ;  and  /3oAi'«,  Heb.  12  20  (but  the  clause  should  probably
be  omitted  ;  see  Ti.).  .

2  In  other  respects  the  construction  was  no  doubt  similar  to
that  of  the  SPEAR  (q.v.).

5275


WEAVING

WEASEL  ("1771  ; J  r&AH  ;  mustela),  the  name  of  an
unclean  animal,  Lev.  Il29t  (EV,  <&,  Targ.  Jon.;  Pesh. ,
Vg.,  and  most  Rabbins).  There  is  some  little  doubt,
however,  whether  the  weasel  is  really  referred  to,  and
various  interpreters  (Saadia,  Bochart,  Lag.  .\B  144)
have  preferred  on  philological  grounds2  the  rendering
'  mole '  (but  see  below).  The  weasel  is  an  animal
hardly  ever  eaten,  and  its  long  body  and  short  legs
might  be  urged  as  justifying  its  position  '  among  the
creeping  things  that  creep  upon  the  earth. '

Zoologicaljy  weasels  are  placed  with  the  pole-cats,  martens,
and  others  in  the  family  Mustelidae  of  the  order  Carnivora.
One  species  of  each  of  the  above-mentioned  animals  is  recorded
by  Canon  Tristram  from  the  Holy  Land.  The  southern  weasel,
Alustela  boccamela,  is  found  about  Mount  Tabor  and  probably
in  other  wooded  districts  ;  the  pole-cat,  -I/,  putorius,  lives  under
Hermon  and  Lebanon,  and  the  white-breasted  or  beech  marten,
717.  foina,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Beyrout.  It  is  unlikely  that
the  Hebrews  distinguished  between  these  species,  though  from
its  habits  and  habitat  they  may  have  separated  off  the  otter,
Lutra  vulgaris,  which  is  common  on  the  shores  of  the  sea  of
Galilee.  A.  E.  S. — S.  A.  C.

WEAVING

Raw  products  and their pre-  Warping  (§  5).

paration  (§  i).  Shedding  (§  6).

Spinning  (§  2).  Passing  and  beating  up  of  weft

The  horizontal  loom  (§  3).  (§  7).

Two types of upright loom  Direction  of  web  (§  8).

(§  4).  Final  processes  (§  9).

Technique  and  terminology  of  Pattern and figure weaving

weaving  (§§  5-8).  (§  10).

In  the  present  study  of  the  art  of  weaving  as
practised  by  the  Hebrews  from  the  enrliest  times  to
the  opening  centuries  of  our  era  it  is  proposed  (i)  to
glance  briefly  at  the  raw  materials  and  the  manner
of  their  preparation  for  the  loom,  which  will  include  the
process  of  spinning  ;  (2)  to  explain  the  construction  and
modus  operandi  of  the  loom  itself  ;  and  (3)  to  close  with
brief  references  to  the  further  processes  through  which
the  web  had  to  pass  after  leaving  the  loom,  and  to  the
more  obscure  subject  of  pattern  and  figure  weaving.

Throughout  the  whole  period  of  their  national  exist
ence,  the  needs  of  the  Hebrew  households  in  the  matter
.  of  textiles  were  supplied  for  the  most

J he,raw, part by WOOL  and FLAX (qq.v.)—

products  and  frequently  niemioned  together  in  OT.
3  Hos.  25 Prov.  31 13, etc. —with the

preparation.  addition  for  coarser  textures,  of  the
HAIR  (q.v- }  of  goats  and  camels,  and,  in  the  latest
periods  of  their  history,  of  COTTON  and  SILK  (qq.v.).
In  an  interesting  passage  of  the  Mishna  treatise  Shabfrdth
(72),  among  the  various  categories  of  work  forbidden
on  the  Sabbath — '  forty  save  one  '  in  number  (cp  2  Cor.
11  24) — we  find  an  enumeration  of  the  chief  processes  in
the  manufacture  of  woollen  cloth,  including  '  shearing,
scouring,  teazing,  dyeing,  spinning,  warping,  attaching
the  leashes  to  the  leash-rods  (for  these  technical  terms,
see  below,  §  $ff.),  weaving,'  etc.

The  fleece  (^~Sn  n?3,  Judg.  637),  according  to  the  statement
in  the  Mishna,  was  first  scoured  (J21?)  to  remove  impurities  and
restore  the  original  white  colour  (hence  the  term),  after  which
it  was  thoroughly  teazed  (j'S3)  and  carded  (p"]D)  with  a  carding
comb.  The  latter  operation  is  done  at  the  present  day  in  the
wool  bazaars  of  the  Levant  (cp  Jos.  BJ  v.  8  i  [§  331]  for  an
eplo™Aioi>  in  Jerusalem,  the  C"1SJ!  ^V  pit?  of  Erub.lOq)  by
means  of  a  bow  and  its  string.  At  this  stage  the  wool  might

1  For  proper  names  possibly  derived  from  the  name  of  this
animal  see  HF.LED,  HELDAI,  HULDAH.

2  Cp  Ar. huld, Syr. /inliia, '  mole,'  and  !TT?in, an animal
often  mentioned  in  the  Talm.  (see  Di.  ad  loc. A  connection  with
-\^n  which  means  '  penetrate  deeply ' [cp  V7TB1  in  Talm.,  '  to
plunge  in  the  sacrificial  knife  '],  is  probable); Lewysohn,  tool.
Taltti.  101,  and  Hommel,  Saugethiere,  337. It  is,  however,  to
be  observed  that, now,  at any rate, no  true  mole  occurs  in
Palestine. See  MOLE. On  a  'later  Heb.  word  for  weasel,  see

3  The  standard  work  on  this  subject  is  still  Textrinutn  Anti-
quorum an Account of  the Art of ll'ea-'inf among  the
Ancients  :  Part  i  fall  published]  :  '  On  the  raw  materials  used  for
weaving,'  by  James  Yates,  1843.

5276


WEAVING-


WEAVING


be  dyed,  or  this  process  might  be  deferred  till  after  the  spinning |
or  even  until  it  could  ba  dyed  '  in  the  piece '  after  leaving  the
loom.

In  the  case  of  flax,  we  can  follow  the  similar  pro
cesses  by  the  help  both  of  literary  references  (Mishna,
passim  ;  Pliny,  H.V  19s  etc. ),  and  of  the  graphic  repre
sentations  on  Egyptian  tombs  (see  Yates,  op.  cit.  [n.  3,
above],  pi.  7;  Wilkinson,  Anc.  Eg.^i-j-^].  Here  we  see
the  stalks  being  pulled  up  by  the  roots,  laid  in  order  and
rippled  with  a  rippling-comb,  or  beaten  over  a  stick  to
free  them  from  the  seed  capsules.  After  being  exposed  on
the  flat  roof  (see  Josh.  26)  or  elsewhere  until  thoroughly
dry,  they  were  steeped  in  a  trough  to  separate  the  inner
fibres  from  the  woody  portions  of  the  stalk,  a  process
technically  known  as  '  retting. '  The  stalks  thus
macerated  were  again  dried  in  the  sun  or  in  an  oven
(Shabb.  16),  and  then  beaten  with  a  wooden  mallet
(Pliny's  '  stupparius  malleus  ' )  to  complete  the  separation
of  the  inner  fibres.  In  the  earliest  period  these  fibres
were  sorted  by  the  hand  (Erman,  Egypt,  450);  later
they  were  '  heckled '  or  combed  by  means  of  a
comb  (|B'«y9  SE>  /Tips,  illustr.  Wilkinson,  2174),  by  which
the  longer  and  finer  fibres  were  separated  from  those  of
inferior  quality.  Women  as  well  as  men  were  engaged
in  this  process  of  heckling  the  flax,  as  appears  from  Is.
19g,  where  the  nip"!::1  of  MT  (AV  'fine  flax,'  RV  'combed
flax'  ;  cp  Symm.  KTeinarov]  should  be  read  nipiib',  the
flax-combers  (Vg.  pectentes}.^  Linen  was  preferably
worn  in  its  native  whiteness  ;  but,  if  required,  the  flax
might  be  dyed  before  being  spun,  as  in  the  case  of  the
Tabernacle  curtains  (Ex.  8525),  or  the  dyeing  might  be
postponed  to  a  later  stage  as  explained  above  for  wool.
To  judge  from  an  incidental  remark  in  Babd  Kamma
lOg,  woollen  garments  were  more  favoured  in  Judjea,
whilst  Galilee  preferred  linen.

Goats'  hair  was  employed  for  textures  of  the  coarser  sort,
especially  for  the  garb  of  mourning  (see  SACKCLOTH), 2  and  like
camels'  hair  was  often  mixed  with  sheep's  wool  {Kelaim  9  i).
In  later  times  COTTON  and  SILK  (qq.v.)  (Rev.  18 12  but  not
Ecclus.  45  10  [AV],  see  RV,  nor  Am.  812  [RV])  were  introduced  ;
the  kindeivin  (  'Trjn,  YUma,  3  7)  or  Indian  fabrics  worn  by  the
high  priest  were  undoubtedly  of  cotton.  To  these  the  Mishna
adds  hemp  (D'33p,  KO.vva&i<s — but  the  '  hempen  frock  '  of  Ecclus.
404  RV  is  an  incorrect  rendering  of  <u/u.6A.u'oi>  for  which  see
below,  §  9)  and  the  fibres  of  a  species  of  mussel,  for  which  see
Yates,  op.  cit.  i^ff.

Whilst  among  the  Hebrews,  as  among  the  Egyptians,
both  men  (Ex.  8035  iS.  17;  [andjjs],  I  Ch.  421)  and

2  Smnnine  women  OudS-  16  '3  /•  2  K.  2:57  Prov.
2..  spinning.  gi2+  i  Esci  4l? .  cp  Jos  BJ  ;  ^  g/ta

rafs  Soi'Xcus)  plied  the  loom,  the  art  of  spinning  was
peculiarly  a  feminine  accomplishment  (Ex.  35 25  f.  Prov.
31 19  Tob.  2  n).  The  apparatus  for  spinning  (mo  ;  vyOu
Mt.  628  Lk.  1227)  both  wool  and  flax  consisted  of  the
distaff  (kisor,  niirs  [see  BOB  s.v.~\  Prov.  31 19  RV  ;  AV
spindle — in  the  Mishna  neN,  i^Aa/cariy,  colas]  and  the
spindle  (pdlek,  r^3,  Prov.  I.e.  RV ;  AV  'distaff,'
&Tpa.KTos,fusus  ;  Mishna,  ana).  In  2  S.  829  we  should
render  'that  holdeth  the  spindle'  (Vg.  tenens  fusum]
for  '  that  leaneth  on  a  staff'  (EV)  [though  here — see
STAFF — the  suitableness  of  the  reading  has  been  dis
puted].3  The  distaff  generally  consisted  of  a  piece
of  cane  round  the  open  head  of  which  the  wool  or  flax
was  wound.  It  is  held  in  the  left  hand  or  fixed  in  the
girdle,  while  the  spinner  draws  out  and  twists  the  yarn
between  the  finger  and  thumb  of  the  right  hand,4  with

1  So  modern  edd.  For  the  technical  process  disguised  under
the  following  nnine'  see  below,  §  5.

'2  For  the  variety  of  haircloth  named  by  the  Romans  cilicium,
and  its  interesting  association  with  Paul,  see  CILICIA,  §  •}.

3  From  the  original  significance  of  the  root  -j^a  in  Semitic,
viz.  '  to  be  round,  globular,'  pelek  must  originally  have  signified
the round or spherical whorl with which the spindle was
weighted,  as  the  cognate  fern,  form  still  does  in  Arabic,  then  by
metonymy  the  whole  spindle  (see  Driver, TBS  192  _/C). Cp
DISTRICT,  i.

4  Cp  Jerome,  Ej>.  150  15  '  habeto  lanam  semper  in  manibus,
vel  staminis  pollice  fila  deducito,'  etc.

5277


which  also  the  spindle  is  kept  rotating.  The  spindle
consisted  of  three  parts  (see  Maitnon.  on  Para  128  ap.
Surenh.  Mishna } :  a  hook  by  which  the  thread  from
the  distaff  was  fastened,  the  wooden  shank,  9-12  inches
in  length,  and  the  circular  or  spherical  whorl  of  clay,
stone,  or  other  heavy  material  which  served  to  steady
the  rotatory  motion  of  the  spindle.1  (For  illustration
of  early  Palestinian  spindle-whorls  see  Bliss,  A  .\founa
of  AJany  Cities,  82,  cp  80.)

The  word  'yarn,'  in  Heb.  rnt?D  (Ex.3525,  lit.  that  which  is
spun  ['"IJtp],  cp  (5  rei'rjo-fieVa),  occurs  in  AV  only  i  K.  1028  2  Ch.
1  16  as  a  curious  rendering  of  nipDi  '"  which  recent  editors  are
unanimous  in  finding  the  name  of  the  district  of  Kue  in  Asia
Minor  (see  MIZKAIM,  §  2  a  ;  and  Benzinger  and  Kittel  ad  loc.
but  cp  CHAKIOT,  §  5,  col.  726,  n.  i,  and  Crit.  Bil>.).  It  is
introduced  by  the  revisers  in  Prov.  7  16  as  the  rendering  of  the
obscure  pDN  (for  which  see  LINEN,  i),  and  Ezek.2"i9  where
most  scholars  would  read  as  in  RV"'tf-  '  from  UZAL  '  (y.7'.).

The  art  of  spinning  was  carried  to  perfection  in  Egypt
even  under  the  earlier  dynasties.  Much  of  the  linen
used  as  wrappings  for  the  royal  mummies  is  composed
of  threads  of  almost  incredible  fineness.  Thus  it  has
been  calculated  that  the  bandages  in  which  the  hands
of  Thotmes  III.  were  enveloped,  and  which  shows
about  150  threads  of  warp  and  75  of  weft  to  the  square
inch,  was  woven  from  yarn  so  fine  that  60  miles  of  it
would  only  weigh  one  pound  avoirdupois  (reduced  to
English  measures  from  Braulik,  Altagypt.  Gewebe,  6  ;  cp
Birch's  note,  ap.  Wilk.  op.  cit. 'lite).  Such  gossamer
threads,  however,  cannot  be  identified  with  those  of  the
'  fine  twined  linen '  (scs  moszdr,  ITB>D  vv)  of  Ex.  26-28
36-39,  as  a  fabric  of  this  sort  would  be  entirely  out  of
place  as  curtains  for  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  (for  the
most  probable  explanation  of  the  term,  see  LINKN,  §7).
Probably  no  department  of  the  technology  of  an-
.  .  tiquitv  is  so  beset  with  difficulties

3.  The  horizontal  J  ^  which  deals  with  the  art  of

lo°m-  weaving.

After  all  that  has  been  done  by  Blumner  (  Techno!,  u.  T?>  tninol.
derGewerbe,  etc.,  i87s)and  Marquardt  (Privatlebcn  tier  Reiner,
i879>for  the  Greek  and  Roman  looms,  by  Braulik  (Attagyptische
Gewefa,  1900)  for  those  of  Egypt,  and  by  Rieger  (I't-rsucA  ciner
Terminal,  u.  Technol.  der  Handwerke  in dcr  Mishna:  i  Th.,
Spinnen,  Weben,  etc.,  1894)  and  others,  there  remains  much
that  is  uncertain,  not  only  as  regards  the  terminology  and  modus
operandi,  but  even  as  regards  the  details  of  construction.  Were
the  ancients,  for  example,  familiar  with  the  mechanism  of  the
treadles?  Was  the  horizontal  or  low  loom  in  use  among  the
Romans  of  the  republic  and  early  empire?  To  the  latter
question  Bliimner  and  Marquardt  reply  in  the  affirmative,  whilst
Ahrens  \Philologus,  35),  Rich  (in  his  excellent  Diet.  ofGk.  and
Rom.  Ant.\  Yates  and  Marindin  (in  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gk.  and
Rom.  Ant.,(s)  s.v.  '  tela ')  present  a  good  case  for  the  exclusive
use  of  the  upright  loom.  Certainly  no  monumental  representa
tions  of  the  horizontal  loom,  or  for  that  matter  few  of  the  up
right  loom,  have  come  down  to  us  from  classical  antiquity.

Treating  the  question  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
history  of  man's  progress  in  the  arts  of  civilisation,  we
find  that  weaving  is  merely  a  development  of  the  art  of
plaiting,  and  has  been  correctly  defined  by  Plato  as
TT\eKTiKJ)  KpoK-rjs  Ko.1  OT^OCOS  ('a  plaiting  of  weft  and
warp,'  cited  by  Marq.  op.  cit.  504).  More  precisely,
the  art  of  weaving,  in  its  simplest  form,  consists  in
intersecting  a  series  of  parallel  threads,  called  the  warp,
at  right  angles  by  another  set  of  threads  called  the  weft
or  •avof,  in  such  a  way  that  each  weft  thread  shall  pass
alternately  over  and  under  each  of  the  warp  threads.
In  plaiting,  this  interlacing  is  done  by  hand,  and  even
at  the  present  day  in  some  parts  of  Arabia  and  NT.  Africa
— no  doubt  also  among  many  other  half-civilised  tribes
—the  art  of  weaving  has  not  advanced  beyond  this
stage.  The  late  E.  H.  Palmer  thus  describes  the  very
primitive  work  of  an  old  Bedouin  woman  in  the  neigh
bourhood  of  Jebel  Mtisa.  '  On  one  of  these  occasions
I  noticed  an  old  woman  weaving  at  the  tent-door.  Her
loom  was  a  primitive  one,  consisting  only  of  a  few
upright  sticks  upon  which  the  threads  were  stretched  ;

1  For  illustration  of  Egyptian  distaffs  and  spindles  see  Wilk.
op.  cit.  1  172  ;  Gk.  and  Roman  ap.  Blumner,  Ttchnologie,  etc.
lii8J?:',and  the  Diets,  of  Class.  Antiq.  s.ii'.  'coins 'and  '  fusus.'

5278


WEAVING

the  transverse  threads  were  inserted  laboriously  by  the
fingers,  without  the  assistance  of  a  shuttle,  and  the
whole  fabric  was  pressed  close  together  with  a  piece  of
wood.  Beside  her  stood  a  younger  female  spinning
goats'  hair  to  supply  the  old  lady  with  the  materials
necessary  for  her  task  '  (  The  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  1 125).
Between  this  incident  and  the  first  representations  of  the
horizontal  loom  by  Egyptian  artists,  there  stretches  a
period  of  nearly  5000  years.  Even  at  that  early  period,
however,  and,  as  the  textile  remains  abundantly  prove,
for  at  least  a  millennium  previously,  the  inventive  genius
of  Egypt,  which,  according  to  Pliny,  taught  the  ancient
world  the  art  of  weaving,  had  furnished  the  loom  with
the  apparatus  necessary  for  more  expeditious  work.
Putting  aside  the  case  illustrated  by  Wilkinson  (Anc.
Eg.liio),  which  furnishes  no  indication  of  any  appar-


FIG.  i. — -Women  weaving

atus  beyond  a  simple  frame,  and  is  therefore,  in  all
probability,  a  case  of  mat-plaiting,  we  may  take  the
familiar  representation  from  the  tombs  at  Beni  Hasan
of  the  two  women  squatting  on  the  ground  and  engaged
in  the  process  of  weaving  (Wilk.  op.  cit.\-$i-i,  Erman,
Anc.  Eg.  448,  after  Lepsius  ;  Moore's  'Judges,'  SBOT
Eng. ,  86;  Braulik,  op.  cit.  Figs.  89-91,  pp.  59  f.\
Till  recently,  it  was  assumed  that  this  picture,  which
dates  from  the  middle  empire,  represented  an  upright
loom.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  this  is  a  mistake
due  to  the  absence  of  perspective  in  Egyptian  drawing.
The  loom  is  horizontal  with  a  yarn-beam  a,  and  a
cloth-beam  b,  each  fixed  to  the  ground  by  a  couple  of
wooilen  pegs.  Between  the  beams  the  warp  is  stretched,
and,  if  we  can  trust  the  artist  in  this  detail,  the  cloth-
beam  is  capable  of  revolving  and  winding  up  the  finished
web.  The  remaining  parts  of  this  instructive  represen
tation  will  require  a  more  detailed  examination  iu  a
subsequent  section  (§  6).

Xow,  when  we  consider  the  antiquity  and  prevalence
of  the  horizontal  loom  in  Egypt,1  and  its  prevalence  in
a  variety  of  forms  throughout  the  1C. ,  from  Africa  to
India,  at  the  present  day,2  it  would  be  strange  if  the
Hebrews  were  unacquainted  with  it.  We  have,  how
ever,  no  explicit  testimony  to  the  form  and  construction
of  the  early  Hebrew  loom.  Still,  a  study  of  the  well-
known  passage  which  will  engage  our  attention  when
we  come  to  deal  with  the  terminology  of  weaving  (§  7)
— shows  that  the  probabilities  of  the  case  are  in  favour
of  Delilah's  loom  being  of  the  horizontal  type.  The
operation  of  weaving  the  hair  of  a  person  asleep  on  the

1  The  apothegm  dating  from  the  twelfth  dynasty,  quoted  by
Braulik  {op.  cit.  89)—'  the  weaver  is  more  unfortunate  than  a
woman,  he  has  his  knees  for  ever  reaching  to  his  chin ' — proves,
as  he  rightly  ohserves  (i)  that  men  as  well  as  women  exercised
the  art,  and  (2)  that  they  worked  in  a  squatting  attitude,  and
therefore,  like  the  women  of  the  Beni  Hasan  picture  (Fig.  i),  at
the  horizontal  loom.

2  This  was  also  the  type  of  loom  in  use  among  the  Aztecs  of
Central  America  ;  see  illustration  in  Tylor's  Anthropology,  248.
A  full  description  of  the  modern  Syrian  looms,  with  a  valuable
list  of  the  Arahic  termini  technici  will  be  found  in  the  ZDPT
viii.,  1885,  pp.  l^ff.,  iSoyC

5279


WEAVING

ground  into  the  warp  could  be  much  more  easily  and
naturally  done  on  a  horizontal  loom  such  as  that  shown
above. !

Of  the  upright  loom,  which  consists  essentially  of  two

upright  posts  joined  at  the  top  by  a  cross-beam, the

Th t jiigi'tn  of  the  Roman  loom  (for  this  view

of  the  >«£«»«  see  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gk.  and

"ht  1 UP~  A'"m- ^ni-m  27&5)' there  are  tw°  main
'  types, regarding which it is  difficult  to

say  which  is  the  older,  (i)  There  is  first  the  type
familiar  to  classical  students  from  the  representation  of
Penelope's  loom  on  a  Greek  vase  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.  (see  ill.  EB(^  23 206  ;  Blumner,  op.  cit.  1357,  and
often  elsewhere),  the  distinguishing  feature  of  which  is
the  absence  of  a  cross-beam  below,  the  warp  threads
being  kept  taut  by  a  series  of  small  stone  weights
attached  either  to  the  individual  threads,  as  in  the  case
just  cited,  or  to  bundles  of  threads,  as  in  the  compara
tively  modern  Icelandic  loom  (ill.  Smith,  op.  cit.  2;66,
less  complete  in  Rich,  s.v.  '  tela').  The  Roman  looms
were  also  of  this  type,  as  were  those  of  the  lake  dwellers
of  Switzerland  in  the  neolithic  age  (Buschan,  '  Die
Anfange  u.  Entwickelung  der  Weberei  in  der  Vorzeit '
in  I'erhandlg.  d.  Berlin.  Ges.  f.  Anthropologie,  etc.,
1889,  pp.  227 ff.\  In  one  of  the  strata  of  the  mound
of  Tel-el-Hesy  (circa  500-400  B.C.),  Dr.  Bliss  found  a
large  number  of  objects,  some  round,  some  pear-shaped,
of  unburnt  brick,  which  he  considers  to  have  served  as
weaver's  weights  (A  Mound  of  Many  Cities,  113).  On
this  view  we  must  admit  the  existence  of  this  type  of
loom  in  Palestine,  although  it  has  not  yet  been  found
in  Egypt.

(2)  The  other  type  of  upright  loom  is  characterised
by  the  presence  of  a  second  cross-beam  below.  Where,
as  usually  in  Egypt  according  to  Herodotus  (2as),  the
web  was  commenced  at  the  bottom  of  the  loom,  such  a
beam  was  indispensable  and  served  as  a  cloth-beam  ;
where,  as  was  presumably  the  case  in  Palestine,  the
web  was  'woven  from  the  top'  (Jn.  1923),  the  lower
beam  served  as  the  yarn-beam.  In  either  type  of
upright  loom,  however,  an  additional  cross-beam  might
be  provided — usually  constructed  so  as  to  revolve,  thus
rendering  it  possible  to  weave  a  length  of  web  greater


FIG.  2. — Upright  loom. From  Wilkinson,  Anc.  Eg.  2  171.

than  the  height  of  the  loom — as  is  the  case  in  the
earliest  representation  of  an  upright  loom  that  has  come
down  to  us  by  an  Egyptian  artist  of  the  new  empire
(here  reproduced  from  Wilk.  -Birch,  op.  cit.  2 171).

This  picture  is  unfortunately  imperfectly  preserved,
and  the  details  of  the  construction  are  in  several  points
uncertain.  The  weaver  sits  on  a  bench  in  front  of  his

1  Moore  (pf>.  cit.  su/>.)  gives  this  picture  to  illustrate  Delilah's
loom,  but  is  in  error  in  regarding  both  looms  as  consisting  of  '  a
simple  upright  frame.'

5280


WEAVING

loom,  the  frame  of  which  is  composed  of  two  upright
posts,  kept  rigid  by  two  cross-bars,  a  and  b.  The
roller  c  serves  as  a  yarn-beam  and  is  suspended  from
the  upper  beam  by  twisted  loops  of  rope,  e.  But  a
revolving  yarn-beam  seems  to  imply  a  revolving  cloth-
beam  as  well,  which  makes  it  probable  that  the  roller
d,  attached  to  the  uprights  by  the  loops  ^  serves  this
purpose.  The  functions  of  the  three  rods,  g,  h,  i,  sus
pended  from  the  yarn-beam  will  be  discussed  in  a  sub
sequent  section  (§  6).

There  is  no  indication  of  the  date  at  which  the
upright  loom,  which,  to  judge  from  the  existing  repre-
tations,  was  a  later  development  in  Egypt  (Erman,
followed  by  Braulik),  was  introduced  into  Palestine.  It
may  have  been  in  use  from  time  immemorial  alongside  of
the  horizontal  loom.  That  the  ordinary  Jewish  loom  in
NT  times  was  of  the  second  type  above  described  is
evident  from  various  indications.

Thus  the  upper  and  lower  beams  (reff.  below)  are  referred  to
in  the  Mishna,  where  also  there  is  frequent  reference  to  the
'standing  warp'  ("iwiyri  'Hir,  cp  the  classical  crrtj^tav  and
stamen,  the  warp,  from  the  root  s-t-a) ;  weaving  was  done
standing  as  well  as  sitting  (7.ab.  3  2)  ;  the  Latin  transference
of  jugitm  and  stamina  to  the  cross-bar  and  strings  of  the
lyre  is  paralleled  in  late  Hebrew  and  Aramaic  by  the  trans
ference,  though  in  the  contrary  direction,  of  733  (also  K*?33
and  H713,  Syr.  nawlii)  to  signify  a  loom,  a  phenomenon  which
points  to  the  upright  loom.  The  seamless  robes  '  woven  from
the  top  throughout,'  finally,  could  only  have  been  made  on  the
upright  loom,  although  this  does  not  of  necessity  require  that
the  looms  for  the  manufacture  of  ordinary  fabrics  were  of  this
type.

The  loom  in  use  at  the  present  day  in  Palestine,  as
has  been  said,  is  uniformly  of  the  horizontal  type,  and
resembles  our  own  handloom  in  being  furnished  with
healds  or  heddles  worked  by  a  pair  of  treadles.  The
frame,  however,  is  much  lower,  the  weaver  sitting  on  or
near  the  ground,  and  the  warp,  instead  of  being  wound
round  the  yarn-beam  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  frame,
as  with  us,  is  usually  carried  upwards  and  passed  over  a
roller  attached  to  the  opposite  wall,  a  few  stones  fastened
to  the  ends  of  the  warp-threads  serving  to  keep  them
taut.  (For  other  forms  with  slightly  different  arrange
ment,  see  7.DPV  viii. ,  1885,  p.  73/)

To  weave  is,  in  the  OT,  generally  J1X,  'cirag;  a  weaver  3"1N>
Vtt"_£-(masc.  and  fern.),  the  latter  supplanted  to  a  large  extent  in
later  Hebrew  by  the  loanword  "H3  *  (ye'pSios,  gerdius).  The
loam  is  probably  JHX,  'creg  (Judg.  16  14  EV  'beam,'  perhaps
also  Job  7  6  EV  '  shuttle  ').

In  commencing  a  new  web  the  weaver's  first  care  is  to  stretch
the  warp  in  parallel  lines  evenly  between  the  upper  and  the  lower
beam  Qi'Vj/n  13^3  and  [inriFin  "3,  AW.  _H  i
5.  Warping.  .V^.n9),"if  the  upright  loom  is  adopted.
If  we  assume  that  the  web  is  commenced  at  the
top  of  the  loom,  these  become  the  cloth-beam  and  yarn-beam
respectively.  The  cloth-beam  apparently  is  intended  by  the
"12DV1,  6(.coo-njp  (a  term  used  in  the  later  chaptersof  Ex.  to  render
C';l3i  the  poles  for  carrying  the  tabernacle  furniture;  in  Ex.
25  ff.  the  earlier  translators  of  <B  used  aiw/xSpeus)  of  AW.  20  3,
from  which  we  gather  that  it  might  either  lie  across  the  forked
ends  of  the  uprights  or  be  passed  through  the  latter.2  Fig.  2
shows,  as  we  have  seen,  that  a  roller  (f^K,  agiav,  Tg.  Judg.
li'>  n  i  S.  17 7)  might  be  attached  to  the  upper  beam  to  serve  as
a  cloth  or  yarn-beam,  as  the  case  may  be.  In  five 'passages  of
our  EV  (2  S.  21  19  i  Ch.  11  23  20  5  and  the  two  just  cited)  mention
is  made  of  a  weaver's  'beam,'  but  in  none  of  the  cases  is  this
rendering  admissible,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  following  section.

The  process  of  arranging  the  warp  is  technically
known  as  '  warping,'  the  late  Heb.  ijp'n  (Shabb.  7  2,  etc.,
from  -po),  the  Gk.  Stdfoucu,  Lat.  ordiri.

This  verb  occurs  in  OT  only  in  the  metaphorical
sense  of  the  beginnings  of  the  human  foetus  (Ps.  139  13,
cp  -pi?  in  the  same  sense,  JoblOn  and  the  similar
metaphorical  use  of  the  Lat.  ordiri,  exordiri,  exordium}.

1  In  the  vocalisation  of  the  many  terms  in  the  sequel  found
in  Talmudic  literature,  the  pointing  adopted  by  Daltnan  in  his
Aramdisch-Neuhebraisckes  Worterbuch  has  been  generally
followed.

_ 2  Rieger's  suggestion  that  "-\  may  be  the  shuttle  (pp.  cit.  32)
is  inadmissible.

5281


WEAVING

The  cognate  7]D3  (Is.  25?  30  1)  had  originally  the  same
signification.  In  Is.  30,  in  particular,  as  is  shown
by  Aquila's  and  Theodotion's  rendering  did£ofj.ai,
and  Jerome's  '  ordiremini  telatn,"  we  have  a  metaphor
derived  from  the  warping  of  the  loom  in  commencing  a
new  web  for  the  beginning  of  political  intrigue.  So
too  massekah  (,i3DD  Is.  II.  c.)  and  masst'keth  (nrDD,  Judg.
16  13/.  ,  Mishna,  passim]  are  both  primarily  the  '  warp,'
then  by  metonymy  the  '  web.  '  Another  technical
term  for  warping  was  nn^  (cp  Ar.  sadd  in  this  sense),
which  is  to  be  restored  for  the  corrupt  MT  in  Is.  19io
(see  modern  edd.  for  reading  ,-rnr,  to  be  rendered  '  those
that  warp  it  [in  the  loom]  '  )  as  already  by  an  early  hand
of  ©N  5ia£ofj,ei>oi,  which  has  every  probability  of  being
more  correct  than  the  non-technical  epya^6fj.evoi  of  the
other  copyists.  Here  we  find  an  unexpected  confirma
tion  of  the  traditional  rendering  of  <nc>  (Lev.  1348^t,
cp  Ar.  masJi)  as  '  the  warp,'  the  sense  which  it  regularly
has  in  the  Mishna,  but  which  the  majority  of  commen
tators  have  refused  to  recognise  here,  a  position  reflected
in  RY'"g-  '  woven  or  knitted  stuff'  l  for  '  warp  or  woof.'
The  obscure  word  n^  (Is.  38  12  AV  'pining  sickness,'
RV  '  loom  ')  seems  also,  from  its  etymology  (cp  Cant.  76
[5]  where  it  denotes  the  spreading  tresses  of  a  woman's
hair),  to  have  originally  signified  '  warp,'  the  npiyn  «ni?
of  the  Mishna,  then  perhaps,  by  metonymy,  the  loom.

Now  the  essential  movements  in  the  process  of  weav
ing  are  three  in  number. These  are  (  i  )  the  '  shedding  '


6 Sheddin?
°'


l'le  warP'  t'lat  'S|  'n  'ts  sim


form,


the  dividing  of  the  warp  into  two  sets  of
the  odd  and  the  even  threads  respectively,  to  allow  of
the  passage  between  them  of  the  weft,  the  opening
through  which  the  latter  passes  being  technically  known
as  the  'shed,'  (2)  the  passing  of  the  weft  through  the
'  shed  '  by  means  of  a  rod,  needle,  or  other  contrivance
serving  as  a  shuttle,  and  (3)  the  beating  up  of  the  weft
to  form  with  the  warp  a  web  of  uniform  consistence
throughout.  The  first  of  these  movements  is  the  most
complicated  and  demands  a  closer  study.  In  the
medkeval  and  modern  horizontal  loom,  as  found  from
the  Atlantic  to  the  Ganges,  the  operation  of  shedding
is  effected  by  a  pair  of  heald-  or  heddle-frames  worked
by  treadles  underneath  the  loom.  This  arrangement,
the  result  of  a  long  process  of  evolution,  is  believed  by
some  of  the  best  authorities,  as  we  have  indicated  in
an  earlier  section,  to  have  been  adopted  with  the
horizontal  type  of  loom  by  the  classical  peoples  before
the  Christian  era.  Riegcr,  in  his  frequently  cited  mono
graph  on  the  arts  of  spinning  and  weaving  in  the  period
of  the  Mishna,  even  goes  so  far  as  to  provide  the  upright
Jewish  loom  with  an  arrangement  of  pedals  (XTJ  'a'J  op.
cit.  30).  The  evidence,  however,  for  the  presence  of
the  horizontal  loom  N.  of  the  Mediterranean  before  the
middle  ages  is  of  the  slenderest  character,  and  for  the
use  of  treadles  is  absolutely  non-existent  (see  Ahrens,
Philologus,  30385^  ;  Yates  and  Marindin  in  Smith's
Diet.  Ant.W  2768/.).

The  various  stages  in  the  evolution  of  the  apparatus
for  rapid  shedding  may  be  thus  briefly  traced.  In  the
earliest  stage  of  all,  when  weaving  was  scarcely  as  yet
differentiated  from  plaiting,  '  the  transverse  threads  were
inserted  laboriously  by  the  fingers,'  as  in  the  case  thus
described  by  Palmer  (see  above,  §  3).  It  was  soon  per
ceived,  however,  that  by  inserting  a  flat  lathe  or  a  rod
over  and  under  every  alternate  warp  thread,  so  that,  let
us  say,  all  the  odd  threads  were  above  the  lathe  and  all
the  even  threads  under  it,  a  shed  could  be  rapidly
formed  by  turning  the  lathe  through  an  angle  of  90°,

1  The  introduction  of  '  knitting  'here  is  a  curious  anachronism,
this  art,  according  to  Beckmann's  History  of  Inventions,  having
probably  been  invented  in  Scotland  not  long  before  the  year
1500  A.D.  (Yates,  e/>.  cit.  (if.).

-  For  what  we  believe  to  be  the  true  explanation  of  this
technical  term,  see  below,  col.  5285^

5282


-WEAVING

and  the  weft  passed  through  by  means  of  a  pointed
stick  with  which  (or  with  the  lathe)  it  was  then  beat  up.
This  stage  is  represented  by  the  Arab  horizontal  loom
described  by  Burckhardt  (.Votes  on  the  Bedouin  and
Wahaby,  67  f. )  :  '  to  keep  the  upper  and  under  woof
(read  'warp')  at  a  proper  distance  from  each  other  a
flat  stick  is  placed  between  them.  A  piece  of  wood
serves  as  the  weaver's  shuttle,  and  a  short  gazelle's  horn
is  used  in  beating  back  the  thread  of  the  shuttle.'
With  a  single  dividing  rod,  however,  it  must  still  have
been  necessary  to  insert  every  alternate  weft  thread  by
means  of  this  primitive  shuttle  over  the  odd  threads  (in
t!ie  case  supposed)  and  under  the  even  threads,  since  the
formation  of  a  second  shed  requires  a  second  rod.  This,
however,  was  the  next  stage  of  the  evolutionary  process
now  being  traced,  and  is  already  represented  in  the
early  Egyptian  loom  reproduced  above  (fig.  i).  Here
we  note  the  presence  of  two  rods  in  close  connection
with  the  warp  ;  the  one,  d,  a  plain  rod  inserted  between
the  two  halves  of  the  warp — let  us  say,  as  before,  that  the
odd  threads,  i,  3,  5,  etc.,  pass  over  the  rod,1  the  even
threads,  2,  4,  6,  etc. ,  under  it — the  other  rod,  e,  which
must  lie  outside  and  above  the  warp,  crossed  by  a  series
of  threads  which  are  represented  in  the  picture  by  short
diagonal  lines.  The  invention  of  this  simple  device  for
expediting  the  operation  of  shedding  deserves  to  rank
with  that  of  the  'flying  shuttle,'2  for  by  this  means
almost  twice  as  much  work  could  be  done  in  a  given
time.  A  single  rod,  such  as  d,  as  we  have  seen,  is
capable  of  forming  but  one  shed,  which  allows  the  weft
to  be  passed  under  the  odd  and  over  the  even  threads  of
the  warp  only.  Now  in  order  that  warp  and  weft  shall
be  properly  interlaced  to  form  the  web,  it  is  necessary
that  in  returning  the  weft  shall  pass  under  the  even  and
over  the  odd  warp  threads.  To  effect  this  each  of  the
even  threads  passing  under  the  rod  d  is  attached  by  a
loop  to  the  rod  e.  Therefore  by  simply  raising  this  rod
— in  the  upright  loom  by  its  being  drawn  tim.<ards  the
operator  standing  in  front  of  the  loom — all  the  even
threads  are  pulled  upwards  (or  forwards)  so  as  to  be
above  (or  in  front  of)  the  odd  threads  and  thus  a  second
shed  is  formed  through  which  the  weft  is  passed.  Rod
d  is  again  raised,  then  e,  and  so  on  alternately.  But
this  cannot  be  clone  with  the  rods  in  the  relative
positions  which  they  occupy  in  fig.  i,  for  if  the  reader
will  make  the  experiment  on  a  model  with  twenty  or
twenty-four  warp  threads,  he  will  find  that  the  shed
formed  by  raising  the  rod  e  with  its  attachment  of  loops
will  not  reach  to  the  edge  of  the  web  owing  to  the
obstruction  caused  by  the  rod  d.  Braulik,  who  alone,
apparently,  of  previous  writers  has  attempted  to  describe
the  exact  modus  operandl  of  the  Egyptian  loom,  has  over
looked  this  defect  in  the  artist's  picture  and  has  even
gone  so  far  as  to  assume,  contrary  to  his  own  descrip
tion  of  the  drawing,  that  both  rods  were  worked  in  the
same  manner  as  rod  e  (see  Braulik,  op.  cit.  fig.  92,  p.  62).
The  true  explanation  is  that  the  artist — if  we  assume
the  correctness  of  the  reproduction  in  fig.  i — being  un
skilled  in  the  technique  of  weaving,  has  reversed  the
true  position  of  the  rods,  since  it  will  be  found  by  experi
ment  that  with  two  such  rods,  the  one  separating  the  two
leaves  of  the  warp,  the  other  attached  to  the  lower  leaf
by  a  series  of  looped  threads,  the  latter  rod  must  always
be  placed  nearer  to  the  edge  of  the  web.  This  holds
good  of  both  types  of  loom  and  of  both  methods  of
weaving  on  the  upright  loom,  namely  from  above  or
from  below  (see  below,  §  8).

The  principle  here  enunciated  for  the  first  time  will  be  im
mediately  recognised  as  indispensable  from  the  following
diagrams  in  which  the  letters  correspond  to  those  of  fig.  i,  with
the  addition  of  x  to  denote  the  odd,  y  the  even  threads  of  the
warp,  and  z  the  web.

1  The  prepositions  'over'  and 'under'  are  here  used  with


prepos

substituted  for  'over and  'under.'
2  By  John  Kay  of  Bury  in  1733.

5283


WEAVING

Fig.  3  shows  the  formation  of  the  first  or  natural  shed  at  t
through  the  raising  of  the  odd  warp  threads  by  the  rod  d,  fig.  4
the  formation  of  the  second  or  artificial  shed  at  i  through  the
raising  of  the  even  threads  by  the  rod  e.

The  final  stage,  we  are  convinced,  in  the  evolution  of
the  shedding  apparatus  for  plain  weaving  on  the  looms
of  antiquity  was  reached,  when  in  the  case  of  the  upr.ght


FIG.  3.


FIG.,


loom  it  was  found  expedient  to  attach  both  sets  of  the
warp,  the  odd  and  the  even  threads  alike,  by  loops  or
leashes  to  a  couple  of  rods,  which  we  shall  henceforth
call  leash-rods,  both  being  suspended  in  front  of  the
warp  from  the  jugum  or  upper  crossbeam  of  the  loom,  or
from  the  second  of  the  top  beams  if  there  were  two,  as
in  the  case  of  the  Theban  loom  in  fig.  2.  Here,  so  far
as  the  imperfect  condition  of  the  picture  enables  us  to
infer,  we  have  a  rod  g  near  the  top  of  the  loom,  doubt
less  dividing  the  warp  into  two  sets  ( '  stamen  secernit
arundo,'  Ovid,  Met,  655)  to  facilitate  the  attachment  of
the  leashes  to  the  leash-rods  h,i,  all  three  suspended
from  the  yarn-beam  b.  By  pulling  forward  h  and  i
alternately,  are  formed  the  alternate  sheds  through
which  the  weft-thread  k  is  passed.

We  come  now  to  the  perplexing  question  of  the
Hebrew  terminology  of  the  apparatus  just  described.
The  single  reed  of  the  more  primitive  loom  was  termed
by  the  Greeks  Kavuv,  by  the  Romans  arundo;  in  the  more
elaborate  looms,  such  as  fig  2,  we  find  not  only  Kavoves
and  KaXafJLOi  but  also  in  <&  avriov1  (see  below),  in  Latin
liciatoria,  as  the  names  of  the  leash-rods  to  which  the
warp-strings  were  attached  by  means  of  loops  or  leashes
of  thread  (hence  called  /xiroi,  licia],  corresponding  to
the  healds  or  heddles  of  the  modern  loom.  Now  the
liciatorium  or  leash-rod  of  the  classical  loom  was  named
by  the  Jews  of  NT  times  not  only  kanek  njp  (Ohol.  84,
here  mentioned  along  with  the  spatha  [see  infra],  Jer.
S/ia/>t>.  10s),  but  also  as  Jastrow  (Diet.,  s.v. )  and  Rieger
(of.  cit.  29)  have  rightly  perceived,  nlr  (vj  //.  nirim
and  -hi).  Etymologically  identical  with  the  Assyrian
»iru,  a  yoke,  this  term  might  be  applied  to  any  trans
verse  rod  or  beam,  hence  to  the  leash-rods  or  shafts
of  a  loom.  This  meaning  alone  suits  the  (textually
corrupt)  description  of  the  veil  of  the  temple  in  Shikdltm
8  5,  of  which  many  wonderful  renderings  have  been
given  by  lexicographers  and  commentators.

This  veil,  we  read,  '  was  a  handbreadth  thick  and  was  woven
upon  72  rods  (J"1'3),  and  over  each  rod  (NV31  NT]  7D~7>'1—  so  we
must  read  for  nimin  and  nima  of  the  ordinary  text)  were  24
leashes (j-a^n  lit-  'threads,'  cp  Gk.  fiiroi).'2  These  two  nlrm
of  the  ordinary  loom  might  be  suspended  by  cords  passing  over  the
cross  beam  as  in  fig.  2,  or  from  a  peg  (^n)  projecting  from  either
end  of  the  beam  in  question,  '  two  rods  on  one  peg,  and  two  pegs

1  The  conjecture  may  be  hazarded  that  the  avriov  was  at  first
the  rod  which  lay  or  hung  outside,  as  if  opposite  to(ai'Ti)  the  warp
(see  e  of  fig.  i),  as  distinguished  from  the  KO.VUJV,  d,  which  latter
again  may  be  the  fiecravTiov  of  certain  MSS.  of©  (i  S.  1~7 — for
the  strange  variety  of  readings  in  (B  see  Moore,  Proc.  of  Am.  Or.
Soc.  1889,  p.  clxxvii).

2  The  arrangement  is  not  essentially  different  if  we  take  j'E'rt
here  of  the  threads  of  the  warp,  in  which  case  each  nir  would
resemble  not  e  but  d  of  fig.  i. For  the  modus  ofierandi  of  such
complex  looms,  but  of  the  horizontal  type,  with  as  many  as  ;o
to  oo  shafts  see  F.BC^  24  465. Moore's  rendering  of  the  above
passage  (I.e.),  'and  on  every  thread  (nima  of  textus  rec*ptltt\
namely  of  the  warp,  were  24  strings  (connecting  it  with  as  many
different  heddles)1  is  unintelligible  to  the  present  writer.

5284


WEAVING

for  one  rod  '  (Jer.  Shabb.  7  2,  so  Rieger  ;  cp  illustr.  op.  cit.).  This
identification  of  the  nlrin  with  the  liciatoria  of  the  contem
porary  Roman  looms  must  be  maintained  against  that  of
Maimonides  and  other  commentators  who  identify  the  nirin
with  'the  threads  wound  round  the  rods  (C'"p,  Kavoves,
arundines),  by  which  the  warp-threads  are  raised,  etc.'  (see
ap.  Surenh.  Mishna,  Kelim  21  i),  in  other  words  with  the
leashes  (JJ.LTOL  lido)  to  which  we  come  presently.  Equally  im
possible  is  Moore's  identification  of  nir  (t'AOS,  1889,  p.  clxxix)
with  the  'gear 'of  the  developed  horizontal  loom — which  certainly
bears  this  name  (.nir)  in  modern  Arabic — consisting  of  two
heddle-leaves,  connected  by  spring-staves  or  otherwise  with  a
pair  of  treadles.  For  not  only  have  we  no  evidence,  as  has  been
already  maintained,  of  the  presence  of  treadles  in  the  ancient
looms,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  they  could  be  conveniently
adjusted  in  the  upright  loom  of  the  Mishna.1

The  identification  of  the  nir  with  the  shaft  or  leash-
rod  (liciatorium)  of  the  ancient  loom,  here  maintained,
gives  us  a  clue  to  the  mysterious  mfnOr  'origin,  Tup
D'-ik  of  i  S.  17  7  2  S.  21 19  i  Ch.  11 23  20$  to  which  the
shaft  of  a  giant's  spear  might  be  compared,2  for  -\\ya
cannot  be  separated  etymologically  from  Y:  (see  BDB,
s.i'.).  Now  the  shaft  of  a  good-sized  loom  with  a
heavy  warp  must  have  been  considerably  thicker  than
the  ordinary  light  spear-shaft  (see  the  actual  avriov  or
liciatorium  of  a  modern  Lycian  loom,  apparently  a
branch  of  a  tree,  reproduced  from  Benndorf  in  Smith's
Diet.  Ant.W  2769),  and  seems  to  satisfy  all  the  con
ditions.  In  support  of  this  view  we  have  ( i )  the  ex
pression  itself,  'like  the  weavers'  shaft,'  which  suggests
something  usually  in  the  weaver's  hand,  rather  than  a
fixture  of  the  loom  such  as  the  cloth  or  yarn-beam  (see
below);  (2)  the  testimony  of  the  oldest  versions,  ©in
three  places  has  O.VTIOV,  a  synonym  of  KCLVWV  (see  the
authorities  in  Bliimner,  op.  cit.  1132);  so  also  Aquila
and  Theodotion  in  i  S.  17?  where  the  MSS.  of  @  have
a  set  of  curious  variants  (see  ref.  to  Moore  above),  all,
however,  identified  by  the  later  Greek  lexicographers
with  the  leash-rod,  the  liciatorium  texentium  of  Jerome
in  all  the  passages  cited.

The  less  probable  rendering  of  EV  'a  weaver's  beam,'  has  the
sanction  of  the  Targum  and  of  Jewish  commentators  of  note.
Thus  Rashi  (on  i  S.  17  7)  quotes  with  evident  approval  the  Tg.
rendering  Q'xnjn  JCON  (i.e.,  a£tav  yepSiiav,  the  weavers'  roller)
adding  '  in  the  vernacular  [French!  it  is  ensuble.'  The  latter  at
once  suggests  the  insiebuli  of  the  Roman  loom,  rightly  explained
by  Vates  and  Marindin  (Smith,  Diet.1?},  2765  b)  as  the  yarn  and
cloth  beams  of  the  upright  loom  (b  and  d  of  fig.  2,  above),  an
identification  of  which  Rashi's  comments,  both  here  and  on
Judg.  10  I3./C,3  supply  a  hitherto  unnoticed  corroboration.

The  leash-rod,  as  we  have  seen,  was  passed  through
a  series  of  loops  or  leashes  of  thread,  each  loop  also
passing  behind  every  alternate  warp-thread.  These
leashes,  the  /ULITOI  and  licia  of  the  classical  looms,  must
be  identified  with  the  J-T:  'na  (sing.  NYJ  '3  damns  licia-
torii)  of  the  Mishna  (Shabb.  7 2  132),  of  which  also
many  curious  explanations  have  been  offered,  the  latest
being  none  the  less  objectionable  that  it  is  given  without
any  qualification.  'The  raising  of  the  shafts,'  says
Rieger  (op.  cit.  30),  '  was  usually  effected  by  an  arrange
ment  of  treadles  (XTJ  '3),  the  shafts  being  joined  to
pedals  by  cords,'  a  statement  absolutely  unsupported  by
the  accompanying  references.  The  key  to  this  enig
matical  expression  will  be  found  in  the  idiomatic  use  of
beth.  in  compounds  familar  to  every  Semitic  scholar.  In
the  OT  we  have  an  exact  parallel  in  D'13^  'H3  (Ex.  2527

1  This  is  the  least  satisfactory  part  of  Rieger 's  attempted  re
construction  of  the  Jewish  loom  in  his  monograph,  I'ersuch,  etc.

2  Ahrens,  in  Philologiis  (vol.  3.5  40070,  gives  an  extract  from
an  old  Norse  saga,  in  which  also  the  shafts  of  the  loom  are  com
pared  with  the  warrior's  spear.

3  Rashi, however, on this  passage wrongly  defines riI!Da}
which  he  takes  as  a  noinen.  instrutnenti  from "1?''1  to  'warp'
(see  §  5),  as  '  the  wooden  beam  on  which  the  weaver  mounts
the warp, in the vernacular ensuble,' which may apply to
either  cloth  or  yarn-beam This  comment  has  been  entirely
misunderstood  by  Moore  (I.e.  clxxvii),  who  strangely  supposes
Rashi  to  refer  to  the  '  heddles  '  of  the  developed  horizontal  loom,
and  takes  the  TIJQ  to  be  the  cross-beam — the  juguin  of  Mar-
quardt  and  Bliimner's  untenable  theory — from  which  the  heddles
are  suspended.

5285


WEAVING

etc.,  lit.  'houses  for  the  staves'),  and  c-maS  'ns  (Ex.
2629  etc.,  lit.  'houses  for  the  bars'),  explained  in  each
case  by  niyaa,  rings.  The  bate  nlrin,  therefore,  are  the
loops  or  rings  of  thread  through  which  the  nirin  or
leash-rods  are  passed.  The  identification  here  proposed
suits  admirably  the  passage  Shabb.  7  2  where  the  opera
tion  of  '  making  two  bate  nirin  '  intervenes  between  the
warping  (ijD'a)  and  the  weaving  ;  so  also  in  Shabb.  13  2
'  he  that  fastens  two  leashes  (bate  nirin)  to  the  leash-
i  rods  (nirin)'  before  beginning  to  weave.  Bate  nirin,
in  short,  is  the  idiomatic  equivalent  of  the  loan-word
pr^>  licia  (  Tus.  Neg.  5 10).

The  shed  having  been  formed  as  explained  in  detail
above,  the  weaver  proceeded  to  pass  the  weft  (rij- ;

7.  Passing  and  Kp6l<7}  ' *Ml"eme«> CP Lev.  1848  >,
beating  up

of  weft.  KpJKy>  AV  'in  the  warp  or  woof).
This  was  done  by  means  of  a  flat  stick
or  lathe  somewhat  longer  than  the  width  of  the  web,
carrying  sufficient  weft  by  a  hook  at  the  end,  which
also  served,  as  in  many  places  at  the  present  day,  for
a  batten  to  beat  up  the  weft  (so,  most  probably,  in  fig.  i
the  curved  stick  e  serves  both  purposes).  Later  the
functions  of  shuttle  and  batten  were  differentiated  ;  the
rod  which  the  Egyptian  weaver  holds  in  his  right  hand  in
fig.  2  serves  to  all  appearance  as  a  shuttle,  and  suggests
the  corresponding  radius  of  the  Romans  (cp  Ovid's  '  in-
seritur  medium  radiis  subtemen  acutis'),  the  /cep/as  of  the
Greeks.  Even  so  early  as  Homer's  time,  this  shuttle-
rod  appears  to  have  been  fitted  with  a  revolving  spool
(inr)vlov),  on  which  the  weft  was  wound,  and  from  which
it  unwound  itself  in  passing  through  the  shed.

Rieger  (op.  cit.  31  34)  has  attempted,  with  doubtful  success,  to
discover  the  various  parts  of  the  classical  shuttle,  regarding
which  there  is  still  much  uncertainty,  in  the  Talmudic  writings.
It  is  scarcely  safe  to  go  beyond  the  conjecture  that  the  ETO,  or
weaver's  needle,  and  the  pointed  13*13  (icepia't,  Shabb.  8  6)  may
be  the  native  and  the  imported  names  of  the  combined  shuttle
and  batten.  The  kerkid  was  certainly  used  to  beat  up  (^;^'
Kpouecj/)  the  weft.  For  this  purpose  the  Greeks  used  a  sword-
shaped  lathe,  resembling  a  modern  paper-cutter  on  a  large  scale,
the  crirdSij,  adopted  both  by  the  Romans  (spatha)  and  the
Jews  ('flSpN  Ohol.  S  4).  When  the  older  type  of  upright  loom,
in  which  the  warp  was  stretched  by  means  of  weights,  was  super
seded  by  the  Egyptian  type  with  the  yarn  and  cloth  beams,
the  Egyptian  comb  (Bret's,  pecten,  Martial's  Niliacum
pecten,  illust.  from  Wilkinson  in  Rich,  s.v.,  with  which  cp  the
modern  comb  from  Asia  Minor,  Smith,  .Dict.fi)  27680)  was
introduced,  and  the  weft  driven  home  by  inserting  the  teeth  of
the  comb  between  the  warp  threads.  The  obscure  D'lTj")  (/ceupos)
of  Shabb.  13  2  Kcl.  21  i  is  identified  by  Maimon  ides  (see  on  latter
passage  ap.  Surenh.)  and  others  with  this  comb,  a  very  doubtful
equation.!  To  judge  from  its  original  sense  (for  which  see
Bliimner,  pp.  cit.  1  126),  the  keros  was  rather  some  arrangement
of  loops  and  cords,  stretched  across  the  loom  to  ensure  that  the
web  was  kept  of  a  uniform  width.

One  interesting  reference  to  the  beating  up  of  the
weft  has  been  preserved  in  the  OT,  the  recovery  of
which  in  modern  times  is  due  to  G.  F.  Moore  in  the
paper  to  which  reference  has  frequently  been  made
(Proc.  Am.  Or.  Soc. ,  1889).  In  Judg.  16 13/. —a
passage  which  has  suffered  considerable  curtailment  in
MT  (see  Moore's  Comm.  and  his  editions  [Heb.  and
Eng. ]  of  Judges  in  SHOT,  also  Bu.  and  Now.  in  loc.)
— Delilah  is  told  to  weave  the  seven  braids  of  Samson's
hair  with  the  warp  and  to  beat  them  up  (ygn)  with  the
pin  (-|jv,  the  batten  or  spatha).'2'  The  inadmissible
rendering  of  EV,  '  to  fasten  with  the  pin,'  is  due  to  the

1  Still  more  doubtful  is  Rieger's  identification  of  the  kerfs  with
a  fully  developed  modern  '  reed,'  an  apparatus  found  only  with
the  horizontal  loom  (op.  cit.  34).

2  With  this  sense  of  1JV  as  a  flat  instrument  with  a  thin  edge
like  a  paper-cutter,  cp  Dt.  23  14  [13],  also  Shabb.  17  4,  where  it
denotes the  flat point of  the ploughshare  (illust.  Vogelstein,
Die  Landiuirthschaft  in  Palcistina,  79). The  ungrainmatical
form  in  which  it  occurs  in  Judg.  1C  14^  01NH  "i*vn)  shows  h  to
be  an  intruder  here  (Moore),  so  that  we  may  dispense  with  the
inquiry  as  to  what  is  intended  by  '  the  pin  of  the  beam '  (EV).

5286


WEAVING

influence  of  the  early  translators,  who  had  formed  a
quite  erroneous,  though  intelligible  and  consistent,  con
ception  of  the  details  of  the  incident.1

In the case  of the older classical loom, the  tela

pendula,  open  below, the  operator  had  no  alternative

but  to  commence  his  web  at  the  top  of  the

8.  Direction  loom  .  he  had  also  to  weave  standing.

of  web.  \vith  the  looms  figured  above,  on  the
contrary,  the  web  might  be  begun  at  either  end  of  the
low  loom  (fig.  i),  and  at  either  top  or  bottom  of  the
high  loom  (fig.  2).  According  to  Herodotus  (235)
'  other  nations  push  the  weft  upwards,'  i.e.,  commence
at  the  top  of  the  loom,  '  the  Egyptians,  on  the  other
hand,  push  it  downwards,'  i.e.,  commence  at  the
bottom.  The  position  of  the  leash-rods  in  fig.  2,
relative  to  the  weft  at  /,  shows  that  Herodotus  is  right
as  regards  the  usual  Egyptian  practice,  although
absolute  uniformity  is  scarcely  probable.  The  operator,  ;
as  we  further  see,  was  able  to  remain  in  a  sitting  posture
while  the  lower  half  of  the  web,  at  least,  was  being
woven,  and  if,  as  we  have  inferred  is  the  case  in  Fig.  2,
the  loom  was  provided  with  a  cloth-beam,  he  might  at
the  expense  of  a  yard  of  warp  remain  seated  throughout.
That  the  Jews  in  NT  times  wove  from  the  top  down-  |
•wards  is  a  probable,  though  by  no  means  conclusive,  j
inference  from  the  description  of  the  tunic  of  Jesus
which  was  woven  £K  TUV  &vudev  SV  #\oi>  (Jn.  19 23,  for  j
which  see  also  below),  a  phrase  which  strictly  means —
as  paraphrased  by  Delitzsch  in  his  Hebrew  rendering —
1  from  collar  to  selvage. '  That  the  inference  is  a  cor
rect  one,  however,  is  attested  by  Theophylact,  archbishop
of  Bulgaria,  about  1070,  who,  with  reference  to  the
passage  just  cited,  comments  thus  :  '  Others  say  that
in  Palestine  they  work  their  looms  not  as  with  us
(among  whom)  the  leashes  and  the  warp  are  at  the  top,
the  web  being  woven 'at  the  bottom  and  thence  upwards,
but  on  the  contrary,  the  leashes  (/j.lroi  =  t>dtt  nirin]  are
at  the  bottom  and  the  web  is  woven  from  the  top'  (Ad
JMIHI.  18825  ;  cp  the  similar  though  less  explicit  testi
mony  for  Galilee,  quoted  from  Isidorus  Pelusiota  by
Ahrens  :  Ph  ilol.  35  39°)-

The  web  having  reached  the  desired  length,  it  was
severed  from  the  remaining  warp  threads  (ysa,  Is.  8812,
iKT^veiv,  Tob.  2 12  (5),  and  rolled  round
9.  Final  the  eioth-beam  (hence  the  figure  in  Is.  ibid.:
processes.  ,^p,  RV  •  I  have  rolled  up  like  a  weaver
my  life'),  for  removal  from  the  loom.  Linen  in  this
undressed  (&yva<f>os,  Mt.  9i6  Mk.2ai  RV— AV  'new
cloth')  condition  was  termed  u/j.6\tvov  (Ecclus.404,  RV
wrongly  'hempen  frock'),  and  was  exposed  to  less
danger  from  shrinking,  if  exposed  to  wet,  than  cloth
made  from  wool.  The  task  of  milling  or  felting  the
cloth  (to  use  the  modern  terms)  fell  to  the  FULLER
(y.v.),  by  whom  it  was  steeped  in  water  mixed  with
various  alkaline  ingredients,  stamped  and  beaten  to
complete  the  felting  process,  then  bleached  with  fumes
of  sulphur,  carded  to  raise  the  nap,  and  finally  pressed
in  the  fuller's  press.  To  enter  into  these  processes  in
detail  would  extend  this  article  unduly  (see  for  full
references  Rieger,  op.  cit.  39-45,  and  cp  Bliimner,  op.

cit.  1157-177)-

In  the  preceding  sections  regard  has  been  had  only

to  the  most  ordinary  sort  of  weaving,  where  the  warp

„  and  weft  are  of  the  same  material, the

10-  Pattern  weft  passing  over  and  under  each  alter-

and  figure nate thread of  the warp. jt remains

weaving. now  tQ  rcfer  briefly  to  a  few  Of  the  more

complex  varieties  of  the  textile  art. The  Hebrews  were

forbidden to follow a custom in vogue among all

nations  of  combining  a  warp  of  flax  with  a  weft  of  wool,

1  The  technical  terms  employed  in  the  divergent  renderings
of  <B  show  that  the  Greek  translators  thought  of  Samson's  hair
as  stretched  with  the  warp  of  the  horizontal  loom,  the  end  of
which  was  fastened  by  a  pin  into  the  opposite  wall  (see  above,
§  V>.  while  in  MT  the  braids  are  clearly  intended  to  be  used  as
•weft.

5287


WEAVING

which  is  probably  what  is  signified  by  the  obscure  term
uzyiy  (Lev.  19 19  Dt.  22  n).  The  reason  for  this  taboo
was  certainly  not  that  given  by  Josephus  (Ant.  iv.  Su
[§  208]),  that  garments  of  this  sort  were  priestly  wear,
but  must  probably  be  sought  in  connection  with  illicit
magical  practices  (see  Goldziher,  ZATIV,  1902,  pp.
36 /.  for  an  Arab  parallel,  and  cp  the  similar  prohibition
against  seething  a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk  :  see  COOK
ING,  §  8  end).  The  simplest  variation  from  the  plain
web  hitherto  discussed,  was  obtained  by  using  alternately
different  coloured  wefts,  say  white  and  black,  or  by
mounting  the  warp  in  alternate  bands  of  white  and
black  yarn,  by  which  striped  fabrics  were  produced,
similar  to  those  so  much  in  favour  among  the  Syrian
peasantry  at  the  present  day.  It  is  very  doubtful,  how
ever,  whether  the  obscure  and  textually  suspicious
PBN  n'uon  of  Prov.  7i6  (see  LINEN,  i)  means  'striped
cloth  of  the  yarn  of  Egypt'  (so  RV).  The  coloured
representations  of  Syrians  on  Egyptian  monuments
show  that  they  '  wore  narrow  close-fitting,  plain  clothes,
in  which  dark  blue  threads  alternated  with  dark  red,
and  these  were  generally  adorned  with  embroidery '
(Erman,  Eg.zidf.,  where  also  illustration  of  Syrian
ambassador  with  dress  as  just  described,  the  embroidery
being  in  the  form  of  stars,  a  form  of  ornamentation
called  oculi  by  the  Romans,  Marq.  Rom.  Privatlcben,
5267". ).  By  having  the  warp  all  of  one  colour  and  the
weft  all  of  another,  what  is  known  as  a  '  shot '  fabric
was  the  result.  Thus  we  read  of  garments  '  of  which
the  warp  is  dyed  and  the  weft  white,  or  the  weft  dyed
and  the  warp  white  '  ( Neg.  11 4)-  By  alternating  different
coloured  bands,  both  in  warp  and  woof,  further,  a  '  check'
or  chequered  pattern  is  obtained.  Such  '  chequer  work  '
was  in  great  favour  in  antiquity,  as  may  be  seen  from
the  extant  coloured  representations,  not  only  for  every
day  clothes  (see  e.g. ,  in  the  procession  of  Semitic  immi
grants,  part  of  which  is  reproduced  in  colours  in  Riehm,
HWBW,  opposite  p.  54),  but  as  a  pattern  for  the  sails  of
vessels  (see  Wilk.  op.  cit.,  frontispiece  to  vol.  ii.).
Among  the  Jews  we  find  mention  of  '  a  summer  garment
of  white  and  coloured  checks'  (c'pfi'DB  [^^os];  so
read  for  c'DS2S,  Ncg.  11 7).  Joseph's  'coat  of  many
colours'  (o'DB  njha).  it  need  hardly  be  said,  belongs,
according  to  one  line  of  tradition  (©,  Vg. ,  see  Comm.
on  Gen.  37  3),  to  one  or  other  of  the  categories  just
enumerated.

What  precise  style  of  weaving  is  denoted  by  sibles  (  2C",  Ex.
2839  AV  'embroider,'  RV  'weave  in  chequer  work')  applied  to
the  high  priest's  tunic— hence  its  description  as  f  ICW  rUP3
(if>,  4  AV  '  a  broidered  coat,'  RV  '  a  coat  of  chequer  work ')  is
quite  uncertain.  The  revisers,  as  we  see,  indicate  their  prefer
ence  for  some  kind  of  check.  Hraun  (lit  veslitu  sacerdot.  [1680],
367-384)  argues  at  great  length  in  favour  of  Maimomdes  view
that  a  species  of  honeycomb  pattern  is  intended,  resembling  the
lining  of  the  second  stomach  (reticvlum)  of  ruminants.

From  the  earliest  times  in  the  E.  we  find  evidence  of
the  use  of  gold,  and  to  a  less  extent  of  silver,  to  enhance
the  richness  and  value  of  textile  fabrics.  Thus,  gold
thread,  prepared  by  cutting  finely  beat  plates  of  gold
into  narrow  strips  (Ex.  393),  was  directed  to  be  employed
in  the  manufacture  of  the  robes  of  the  high  priest  ( Ex.
28s/  392/i).  It  was  chiefly  used  as  weft  (cp  Vergil's
•picturatas  auri  subtemine  vestes,'  sEn.  8483),  fabrics
wholly  of  gold  thread  being  of  late  and  rare  occurrence
(Marq.  op.  cit.  519).  The  ghostly  horsemen  of  2  Mace.
52  were  arrayed  in  'cloth  of  gold'  (AV,  diaxpi>ffovt
oroXcis),  so,  too,  according  to  the  Greek  interpretation,
was  the  royal  bride  of  Ps.  45g  [I0]  (fv  ipariffnv
diaxpvffV  =  -i-six  crna).  Holofernes'  mosquito  curtain
was  of  'purple  and  gold'  (Judith  lf)2i).  Agrippa's
royal  robe  (cp  Acts  122i),  on  the  other  hand,  is  described
by  Josephus  (Ant.  xix.  82)  as  woven  throughout  of  silver
thread.

The  rectangular  plaid-like  upper  garment  or  nmlO*
of  the  Hebrews  (MANTLE,  §  2  [i])  was^of  course,  woven
in  one  piece  ;  the  undergarment,  klthoneth  (TUNIC),  on
5288


WEAVING

the  other  hand,  which  had  to  be  more  in  accordance
with  the  stature  of  the  wearer,  was  apparently  made  by
sewing  together  two  lengths  of  cloth  cut  more  or  less  to
measure.  This  we  infer  from  Josephus1  description  of
the  high  priest's  tunic  (XIT&V),  which  was  '  not  made  of
two  pieces,  so  as  to  be  sewed  together  upon  the  shoulders
and  down  the  sides,  but  was  woven  in  one  long  piece,
etc.'  (Ant.  iii.  ?4  [§  161]).  The  tunic  worn  by  Jesus  at
the  close  of  his  ministry  was  also  of  this  sort  ;  Jjv  d£  6
XIT<JJI>  dpaipos  (without  seam)  e/c  rGjv  avwOfv  ixpavrbs  Si
6\ov  (Jn.  1923).  For  the  manufacture  of  such  seamless
fabrics  it  was  necessary  to  mount  a  double  warp  which
was  woven  with  a  continuous  weft.  The  warp  threads,
that  is,  were  so  arranged  as  to  lie  on  both  sides  of  the
upper  beam,  each  face  of  the  warp  being  provided  with
its  own  set  of  leash-rods.  The  operator,  if  there  was
but  one,  had  to  pass  the  weft  across  first  one  face,  and
then  the  other  in  succession  by  going  round  and  round
the  loom,  a  procedure  which,  of  course,  could  be
obviated  by  having  two  operators  for  the  same  loom.
In  this  way  a  cylindrical  web  was  produced.  Whether
the  sleeves  were  worked  at  the  same  time,  as  Braun  in
his  classical  treatment  of  this  style  of  weaving  maintains
(op.  cit.  with  illustration  of  specially  constructed  loom
opposite  p.  360)  is  less  certain.  It  may  also  be  noted
that  Braulik  (op.  cit.  with  technical  diagrams,  28 /. ,
77/1,  89/1)  has  discovered  that  the  Egyptians  from,  at
the  latest,  the  time  of  the  twenty-second  dynasty,  were
familiar  with  a  similar  style  of  seamless  fabrics,  as
indeed  might  have  been  inferred  from  the  extremely
tight-fitting  garments  represented  on  some  of  the
Egyptian  statues.

The  finest  products  of  the  textile  art  known  to  the
Hebrews  are  evidently  intended  to  be  represented  as
the  work  of  the  craftsman  designated  by  the  authors  of
the  priestly  code  the  hoseb  (ion,  Ex.2(ii  31,  and  often),
literally,  the  designer,  inventor,  artist.  Three  grades
of  craftsmanship,  it  will  be  remembered,  are  mentioned
together  in  the  directions  for  the  construction  of  the
tabernacle  and  the  priestly  robes  :  the  ordinary  weaver
(;-ix),  the  rokem  (DJTI,  Ex.2636,  and  often),  and  the
hoseb.  The  nature  of  the  work  (nspn)  produced  by  the
•second  of  these  has  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion.
German  scholars,  as  a  rule,  understand  merely  colour-
weaving  (Buntweberei),  such  as  we  have  discussed
above  ;  but  various  considerations  which  cannot  be
•  detailed  here  (see  EMBROIIJF.RV,  and  the  writer's  forth
coming  commentary  on  Exodus  in  the  Intern.  Crit.
Series)  lead  to  the  belief  that  embroidery,  the  opus
pliimarium  of  the  ancients,  is  intended.  There  is  a
greater  consensus  of  opinion  in  favour  of  identifying
the  3B>n  ri'yys  (Ex.  26  i,  ete.  EV  'work  of  the  cunning
workman')  with  tapestry.  This  differs  from  ordinary
weaving  in  respect  that  the  weft  is  not  thrown  across
the  warp  by  a  shuttle,  but  the  design  is  traced  by
inserting  short  coloured  threads  by  the  fingers,  or  by
a  '  broach '  or  needle,  behind  as  many  warp  threads
only  as  may  be  required.  The  high  loom  in  use  in  the
celebrated  Gobelins  factory  is  almost  an  exact  repro
duction  of  the  Egyptian  loom  of  fig.  2  above  (E.
Miintz,  A  Short  History  of  Tapestrv,  5  [where,  however,
the  reference  is  to  our  fig.  i],  and  especially  356^
with  illustrations).  Indeed,  it  is  by  no  means  improb
able  that  the  picture  in  question  is  that  of  a  tapestry
rather  than  of  an  ordinary  weaver.  The  curtains  of
the  tabernacle  are  clearly  intended  to  be  of  tapestry
with  cherubim  figures  ;  so  too,  the  veil  both  of  the
tabernacle  (Ex.  2631)  and  of  Solomon's  temple  (2  Ch.
3 14  ;  cp  Heb.  <?;n  with  ©  nai  vtyavev  K.T.\.).  Jewish
tapestry  was  celebrated  at  a  later  period,  and  noted  for
the  unnatural  figures  of  animals  designed  by  the  Jewish
artists  (Claudian  in  Rutrop.  1  350^ ,  cited  by  Marquardt).
The  tapestry  worker  was  known  to  the  classical  world
as  polymifarius  (Jerome's  rendering  of  hoseb},  and  his
work  poly  mi  ta  ( TroX^/airoy,  used  by  Symmachus  Ezek.

5289


1613  27 16),  because  as  explained  by  Pliny  (//A'8i96)
he  wove  '  plurimis  liciis,'  that  is,  with  weft  threads1
of  various  colours  (cp  Isidorus,  Orig.  xix.  22 21  :  '  poly-
mitus  enim  textus  multorum  colorum  est').  In  EV
'tapestry'  is  twice  introduced  (Prov.7i6  8122);  but
the  sense  and  even  the  text  of  the  original  are  doubtful
(see  the  Comm. ).

It  only  remains  to  add  that  the  weavers  as  a  class
enjoyed  a  bad  reputation  among  their  countrymen,  many
curious  illustrations  of  which  have  been  collected  by
Delitzsch  (Jiid.  Handwerkerleben,  A,$ff.}.  Like  other
craftsmen,  however,  in  NT  times,  those  of  Jerusalem
formed  a  strong  guild,  the  beginning  of  which  may  be
traced  back  to  at  least  the  days  of  the  Chronicler  ( i  Ch.
4ai).

The  literature  of  the  subject  has  been  referred  to  with  some
detail  in  the  course  of  the  article.  ,\.  R.  S.  K..

WEDGE, i/  jitW,  IdSCm,  Josh.  7  21  24.
2.  Cn2,  kethent,  Is.  13 12  RV  '  pure  gold  '  ;  see  GOLD,  §  i  <?.
WEEDS  (5)10),  Jon.  2  5. See  FLAG.

WEEK.  The  subdivision  _  of  the  month  into  weeks,
as  also  into  decades  (asor,  "litl'l?) — the  week  represent-

1  Origin  ln?  aPProx'ma-telv'  a  fourth,  the  decade  a
°  '  third,  of  29-30  days — is  of  great  antiquity.
The  old  Hebrewfor  the  weekof  seven  days  is  M2C',  sdbua
— i.e. ,  a  seven,  a  heptad2(=Gk.  e/SSo^ds,  Lat.  septi-
mana);  cp  Gen.  292;  (<5  TO,  Updo^a).  In  later  times
rut:',  sabbath,  also  was  currently  employed,  although  only
four  instances  of  its  use  for  '  week  '  are  met  with  in
OT— viz.,  Lev.  23  15  [cp  Dt.  16g]  Lev.  258  Xu.  28  10  and
15.6623 — and  in  Aramaic  it  became  the  ordinary  word
(tffSZV  or  NSC'  I  cp  also  Arab,  sanba  and  sanl>ata=  'a

v T  :  -  -r-

short  space  of  time').  Similarly  in  NT  the  week  is
never  called  epSo/jois,  but  invariably  only  crd/S/Saroj'  or
ffa.llpa.Ta.  (pi.)  ;  cp  Mk.  16g  Lk.  IS  12  Mt.  28i.

This  quadripartite  division  of  the  month  into  weeks
was  naturally  suggested  by  the  phases  of  the  moon  and
was  far  from  being  peculiar  to  the  Hebrews.  In  par
ticular  it  has  been  shown  to  have  been  an  ancient
institution  with  the  Babylonians,  and  even  in  their  case
it  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  number  of  the  seven
planets,  after  which  at  a  later  date  the  days  of  the  week
came  to  be  named.  Whether  the  Israelites  used  the
week  as  a  division  of  time  even  in  their  nomadic  stage
remains  obscure.  It  is  not  impossible  that  they  may
have  derived  it  from  the  Babylonians  even  before
their  settlement  in  Canaan,  as  the  Canaanites  also  had
done.  However  that  may  be,  the  development  of  the
seventh  day  into  a  day  of  rest  must  certainly  be
referred  to  the  time  when  the  Israelites  had  already
become  an  agricultural  people  (see  SABBATH).

The mode  of reckoning among the Israelites was

originally  doubtless  the  same  as  that  of  the  Babylonians

1VT H f  — v'z' ' '5-v d'v'(l'nS l'le first 2& days

"" v  • °^ eac'1  month  i'lto  f°ur  weeks  terminat-

re omng. ing  respectively  on  the  7th, 14111,  2ist,

and  28th  day,  and  by  making  the  first  week  of  the  new

month  always  begin  with  the  new  moon. This  intimate

connection,  however,  between  the  week  and  the  month

was  soon  dissolved  (cp  the  expression '  feast  of  weeks  '

in Ex.  3422 [I]). Whether the  preponderance  which

the  Sabbath day,  as marking  the close of  the  week,

acquired over the  day of  new  moon, was  a  cause  or

a  consequence  of  the  loosening  of  the  connection  it  is

impossible  to  determine  ; we  are  not precluded from

supposing  that  quite  other  reasons may  have  contn-

1  .£&•;«»«  (  =  /UTOS),  has  this  meaning  here,  not  the  special  and
technical  sense  which  it  had  above.

2  In  view  of  this  original  meaning  of  the  word  it  becomes
possible for  y*3O  in Dan.  9  24-27 to mean a week of  years
(annonim /lebeiamas). Cp the corresponding  use of n|3>
with the  explanatory  addition  of  C'JS>  (Lev.  25  8  : nil?»  1)-$
C'3"',  '  seven  weeks  of  years  ').

5290


WEEKS, FEAST  OP

buted  to  the  increased  importance  attached  to  the
Sabbath  ;  what  is  certain  is  that  the  week  soon  followed
a  development  of  its  own,  and  it  became  the  custom,
without  paying  any  regard  to  the  days  of  the  month  that
did  not  fit  in  with  the  four  weeks,  to  reckon  by  regular
periods  of  seven  days  so  that  new  moon  no  longer
coincided  invariably  with  the  first  day  of  the  week.
After  this  the  week  of  course,  having  no  fixed  point  of
attachment,  became  quite  unsuited  as  a  measure  by
which  the  dates  of  events  could  be  fixed  ;  on  the  other
hand,  however,  it  became  useful  for  the  measurement
not  only  of  comparatively  brief  intervals  of  time  but  also
of  periods  exceeding  a  month  ;  thus  we  not  only  have
the  week  of  marriage  festivities  (Gen.  29 a;/),  and
periods  of  two  weeks  (Lev.  12s)  and  of  three  (Dan.
lOa/. ),  but  also  of  a  space  of  seven  weeks  (Dt.  1697".
[Ex.3422],  Lev.  23 15).

When  it  was  desired  to  specify  the  precise  day  of  the

week  on  which  an  event  had  happened  or  was  expected

„ ._ to  happen,  the  ordinal  numbers  had  to  be

f: P^°\  Ca~  used  as  long  as  the  days  remained  un-

days>  provided with special names. Friday

and  Saturday  are  the  only  days  that  have  names  of  their

own  ; in  the  OT — if  we  leave  the  Apocrypha  out of

account — Saturday  only.

Thus  for  Friday  in  OT  we  have  merely  '»!B>rt  CV3,  bayyom
hassiss'i,  '  on  the  sixth  day  '  (Ex.  1C  522),  and,  for  Sunday  in  the
NT,  [ev-iji]  fiiq  ™v  o-appdriav  (Mk.  162  Lk.  24 1  Acts2(>7  cp
I  Cor.  102  Alt.  28  i)  or  TrpuJTTj  cra.ftfta.TOv  (Mk.  Ug).


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

Besides  the  articles  in  the  various  dictionaries  of  the  Bible,

and  sections  in  the  handbooks  of  Benzinger  and  Nowack,  see

Schr.  '  Der  Bab.  Urspr.  d.  siebentiigigen  Woche  '

4.  Lltera-  in  St.  Kr.  1874,  p.  343^  and  KAT*  19^  ; E.

ture. Mayer, '  Ursprung der sieben Wochentage,' in

ZDMG,  1883,  pp.  453  ff.  ;  cp  W.  R.  Smith's  note

in  same  volume,  476  ;  Lotz,  Quaest.  de  historia  Sabbati  libri

duo,  1883;  We.  Prolt  n6^C  ;  Heid.O-)  173.  K.  M.


WEEKS,  FEAST  OF  (TWIIL''  JPI),  Ex.34  22.  See
PENTECOST.

WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.  In  view  of  the
position  of  Palestine,  lying  between  Egypt,  Phoenicia,
and  Assyria,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  the  systems  of
weights  and  measures  there  in  use  would  harmonise
with  one  or  other  of  the  systems  belonging  to  the
neighbouring  countries.  According  to  C.  H.  Toy,1
'  from  Amos  85  we  may  perhaps  infer  that,  as  early  as
the  eighth  century  B.C.,  the  Israelites  had  a  legal
standard  of  weights  and  measures  .  .  .  it  is  possible,
indeed,  that  the  Babylonians  had  introduced  this  system
into  Canaan  in  or  before  the  fifteenth  century  '  [cp
the  Amarna  correspondence  as  a  proof  of  Babylonian
predominance  in  Canaan].  The  literary  evidence  from
Palestine  itself,  however,  is  often  very  unsatisfactory,  and
we  are  accordingly  reduced  to  choosing  between  mere
probabilities.

The  most  important  measure  of  length  is  the  CUBIT
('ammd/i,  netf),  which  contains  2  spans  (ztreth,  mi)  or  6
palms  (topkah,  nsb),  or  24  fingers'  breadths  ('esbd,


Bible.

Bab. Planet

Names.

Latin.

French.

German.

English.

Samas

Dies  Solis

Dimanche

Sonntag

Sunday

Sin

,  , Lunae

Lundi

Montag

Monday

Nergal

,  , Martis

Mardi

Diens(  =  Zivis)-

Tuesday

tag

Nabu

,  , Mercurii

Mercredi

Mittwoch

Wednesday

(Wodanstag)

Marduk

.  ) Jovis

Jeudi

Donners(  =

Thursday

(Bel)

Thors)tag

TrapaffKevrj,

Istar  (Bel-

,  , Veneris

Vendredi

Frei(  =  Freias)-

Friday

Trpoffa'fifia.TOV

tis)

tag

res1

Ninib

,, Saturni

Samedi

Samstag

Saturday

Saturday  is,  in  the  £)T,  called  T\3&,  sabbath,  or  T128:n  ci'i
ymn  hassabbath  (e.g.,  Am.  8  5  Ex.  208)  ;  in  the  NT  [TO]  <ra.ftfta.Tov
(e.g.,  Mk.  62),  r;  Tjjote'pa  roO  cra.ftfta.Tov  (Lk.  13  16),  [TO.]  cra.ftfta.Ta.
(Alt.  28  i  Col.  2  16)  or  r,  wepa.  TMV  cra.ftft6.Ttav  (Lk.  4  16).  Friday,
as  preceding,  or  as  preparing  for,  Saturday  is  called  either
•apoa-a.ftfta.TOv  (as  early  as  Judith  8  6  ;  cp  Mk.  1642)  or  Trapacr/cevj)
(Alk.  15  42  Alt.  27  62  Jn.  10  31  ;  cp  also  Lk.  23  54  i^e'pa
TrapacrKevrjs,  and  Jos.  Ant.  xvi.  6  2).

The  naming  of  the  days  of  the  week  after  those  of
the  seven  planets  (of  which  no  instance  occurs  in  OT
or  NT)  has  its  explanation  simply  in  the  coincidence  of
number.  The  allocation  of  particular  planets  to  par
ticular  days  was,  no  doubt,  determined  by  astrological
considerations  ;  the  planet  that  presided  over  the  first
hour,  presided  over,  and  so  gave  name  to,  the  whole
day.  Amongst  the  Sabians  of  Harran  in  Mesopotamia
we  already  find  the  seven  planetary  deities  recognised
as  the  deities  of  the  days  of  the  week  in  the  order  still
current  with  ourselves :  the  sun,  the  moon,  Nergal  (Mars),
Xabu  (Mercury),  Bel  (Jupiter),  Beltis  (Venus),  Kronos
(Saturn).1  It  is  worth  noticing  also  that  Jewish  tradi
tion  assigned  the  care  of  a  day  of  the  week  to  each  of
the  seven  archangels  (Raphael,  Gabriel,  Sammael,
Michael,  Izidkiel,  Hanael  and  Kepharel).2  The  divine
names  of  the  day  passed  from  the  East  to  the  various
nations  of  Europe,  native  deities  in  some  instances
taking  the  place  of  foreign  ones,  just  as  among  the  Jews
the  names  of  archangels  were  substituted.  See  the
above  table.

1  See  KA  Tftl  21.
2  Weber,  A  Itsynag.  pal.  Theol.  164  ; (2)  (1897),  p.  169.


J?as«). Above the cubit was the reed or kaneh

(njjp) of 6 cubits (Ezek.  40s). The

1.  Measures  foo(. and the  fathom> characteristic of

0  en^ ' so many other  systems, are foreign to
the  early  Jewish  scale.

The  old  Hebre-.v  literary  data  are  as  follows  : —
The  bedstead  of  Og  was  measured  '  after  the  cubit  of
a man' (Deut.  3n) — which  gives us no exact indi
cation.

Solomon  (2  Ch.  83)  laid  out  his  temple  in  cubits
'after  the  first  (=ancient)  measure.'  Ezekiel  (40s
4813)  describes  the  cubit  of  the  temple  of  which  he
foresees  the  restoration,  as  being  '  a  cubit  and  an  hand-
breadth.'  It  may  be  presumed  (Hultsch,  Metr.  440)
that  this  longer  cubit  is  identical  with  the  cubit  of
Solomon's  temple,  and  that  the  common  cubit  of
Ezekiel's  time  was  only  i  of  the  cubit  of  Solomon's
time.2  Certain  views  of  Talmudic  writers  which  conflict
with  this  explanation  may  be  satisfactorily  explained  ;
for  instance,  the  idea  that  the  short  cubit  contained  only
5  hand's  breadths  (Zuckermann,  Das  jiid.  Maas-systcni,
17)  is  due  to  an  inverted  conception  of  Ezekiel's  meaning.
The  idea  of  a  cubit  of  one  finger's  breadth  more  than
the  long  cubit  is  also  mistaken.  This  (to  argue  on  the
basis  of  the  royal  Egyptian  cubit)  would  be  .  547  m. ,
which  is  nearly  a  'simple'  hand's  breadth  (.0792  m. )

1  Note  on  Prov.  16  u  (Internal.  Crit.  Comm.).

-  In  Egypt  the  short  cubit  (450  m.  or  17.72  in.)  was  similarly
?  of  the  royal  cubit  (.525  m.  or  20.67  in.).

5292


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

more  than  the  '  simple '  cubit  according  to  Julian  of
Ascalon  (see  below).  This  25-finger  cubit  was  there
fore  due  to  an  attempt  to  interpret  Ezekiel  as  speaking
in  terms  of  the  '  simple  '  cubit.

It  would  be  futile  to  discuss  in  detail  the  various
attempts  which  have  been  made  to  ascertain  the  exact
length  of  the  Hebrew  cubit.  Since  in  Egypt  the  two
cubits  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  each  other  as  the
Hebrew  (6  :  7)  and  were  similarly  divided  into  24  fingers'
breadths,  it  is  natural  to  make  an  attempt  to  identify
the  two  systems.  Supposing  the  length  of  the  Siloam
canal,  as  stated  in  the  inscription,  to  be  really  1200
cubits,  and  accepting  Conder's  measurement  (537.6m.)
we  obtain  a  short  cubit  of  .525  to  .527  m. l  Unfor
tunately,  the  distance  stated  in  the  inscription  of  Siloam
is  doubtful,  and  there  is  some  reason  to  suppose  that  it
is  not  1200  but  1000  cubits  (see,  e.g. ,  PEFQ,  1890,  p.
2og/. ),  which  yields  .5376  m.  for  the  short  and
.6272  m.  for  the  long  cubit.  Among  other  attempts  to
deduce  the  cubit  we  may  mention  Petrie's  measure
ments  of  tombs  at  Jerusalem  (PEFQ,  1892,  p.  28/  ).

One  set  of  tombs  seems  to  be  planned  on  a  cubit  which  is  the
same  as  the  Egyptian  ;  another  cubit  which  he  deduces  measures
22.6+. 03  in.  (about  .575  m.)  ;  while  there  is  one  chamber  which
suggests  25.2  in.  (about  .641  m.).  We  must  remember  in  dealing
with  deductions  of  this  kind  that  it  is  not  certain  that  buildings
were  always  planned  so  as  to  contain  an  exact  number  of  cubits
in  their  various  dimensions.

The  method  of  ascertaining  the  length  of  the  cubit
from  the  measurement  of  grains  of  barley  which,  accord
ing  to  a  recent  attempt  (PEFQ,  1897,  p.  201),  gives  a
cubit  of  17.77  in.  (-45*  ni. ),  is  liable  to  objections  (see
Hultsch,  Metr.  pp.  434,  435)  ;  nevertheless  the  result
helps  to  make  the  balance  of  the  evidence  incline  in
favour  of  the  Egyptian  cubit,  although  there  may  well
have  been  other  systems  in  use  in  early  times.  [For
other  discussions  of  the  length  or  the  cubit,  see  e.g,
PEFQ,  1879,  P-  lSl  I  l88°.  P-  98  ;  1899,  p.  226/j

Assuming  the  short  cubit  to  be  .450  m.,  and  the  long
cubit  .525  m.,  as  in  Egypt,  we  obtain  the  following
values  for  early  Jewish  long  measures.


LONGER  SVSTEM.

SHORTER  SYSTEM.

Metres.

Inches.

Metres.

Inches.

Finger's  breadth  .

O.  022

.86

0.019

-74

Palm ....

0.087

3-44

0.075

2-95

Span

8  86

Cubit ....

0-525

20.67

0.450

17.72

The  Hebrew  measures  of  length  of  later  times  are
explained  in  the  Table  of  Julian  of  Ascalon,  a  Byzantine
writer  of  uncertain  date  ('ETrapx<.Ka  d,7r6  TUV  TOU
'AffKaXuvlrov  'Iov\iavov  TOV  apxireKTOvos  e/c  TLOV  vdfjuiiv
tfroi  tO&v  TiJif  ev  \\a.\a.LffTivri:  Hultsch,  Metr.  Scr.
1  200 f. ).  It  appears  that  that  table,  or  its  original,  was
drawn  up  for  the  purpose  of  legally  defining  the
measures  of  the  province.  From  it  we  obtain  the  follow
ing  measures  and  equivalents  : — -

1.  The  SaKTuAos  or  finger's  breadth.

2.  The  7raAai(TT»j  or  palm  =4  6a«TvAoi.

3.  The  mrjxvs  or  cubit  =  ij  ft.  =  6  palms.

4.  The  /Brjua  or  pace  =  2  cubits  =  3  ft.  =  12  palms.

5.  The  ovpyia  (bpyiuo.)  or  fathom  =  2  paces  =  4  cubits  =  6  ft.  =
9  spans  4  fingers'  breadths.

6.  The  S.KO.LVO.  or  reed  =  ij  fathoms  =  6  cubits  =  9  ft.  =  36  palms.

7.  The  ir\edpov  =  i.o  reeds  =  i£  fathoms  =  3o  paces  =  6o  cubits
=  90  ft.

8.  The  <rra&(.ov  or  furlong  =  6  plethra  =  6o  reeds=ioo  fathoms
=  200  paces  =  400  cubits  =  600  ft.

9.  («)  The  it.ik.iov  or  mile, 'according  to  Eratosthenes  and
Strabo'  =  8js  stadia  =  833  fathoms  [more  exactly,  833^  fathoms],

(/')  The  jutAtof,  'according  to  the  present  use'  =  7J  stadia  =  750
fathoms  =  i5oo  paces  =  3Ooo  cubits.

10.  The  present  fxi'Aiof  of  jk  stadia  =  750  'geometric  fathoms'
=  840  [more  exactly  833^]  'simple'  fathoms;  for  100  geometric
fathoms=ii2  simple  fathoms,  or  more  exactly,  9  geometric=io
simple  fathoms.


Cp  the  dimensions  of  the  grave  in  Rev.  Archcol.,  18


5293


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  3000  cubits  (4500  ft.)  which
make  up  the  mile  according  to  9  (l<)  are  the  royal  Egyptian
cubits  of  .525  m.  We  thus  obtain  the  following  values  for  the
two  scales  (geometric  and  simple)  according  to  Julian.


GEOMETRIC.

SIMPLE.

Metres.

Inches.

M

Inches.

Finger's  breadth  .

O.022

.86

o.  020

•79

Palm ....

0.088

3-44

0.079

3-  1  1

Span ....

0.262

IO-33

0.236

9-3i

Cubit ....

0-S25

20.67

°-473

18.62

Fathom

2.  IOO

82.68

1.890

74-49

In  this  table,  the  span  is  taken  as  half  the  cubit,  as  in  the  earlier
system  ;  the  passage  in  Julian  (5)  which  equates  9  spans  to  the
fathom  is  either  corrupt,  or  an  attempt  to  express  the  fathom  of
one  system  in  spans  of  another.

Of  the  measures  longer  than  the  cubit,  the  kaneh
(&KO.IVO.)  is  equated  by  Ezek.  40s  to  6  cubits  (3.150  m.
or  10  ft.  4  in.).  It  will  be  noticed  that  in  §  6  Julian
gives  the  &KO.IVO.  9  ft.  ,  whereas  in  §  8  he  equates  60
S.KO.i.va.1  to  600  feet.  In  the  latter  case  he  must  be
thinking  of  the  ordinary  Greek  foot  of  .315  m.,  in  the
former  of  the  Ptolemaic  Egyptian  foot  of  .350  m.  ,  the
two  standing  to  each  other  as  9  :  10.

Julian's  plethron  and  staclion  must  be  regarded  as
being  on  the  Ptolemaic  scale  —  i.e.,  loox.^o  m.  and
600  x  .350  m.  —  i.e.,  38  yds.  10  in.  and  228  yds.  5  ft.
respectively.  The  stadion  thus  corresponds  very  nearly
to  our  furlong,  by  which  it  is  generally  translated.  The
mile  of  7^  stadia  on  the  same  system  is  1575  m.  or  1722
yds.  i  ft.  5  in.

The  '  pace  '  of  Julian  is  a  fixed  measure  of  2  cubits  ;
but  it  probably  did  not  belong  to  the  original  Hebrew
scheme,  and  the  pace  (IJTS)  of  2  S.  613  is  probably  not
intended  for  a  definite  expression.

The  '  Sabbath  day's  journey  '  (Zuckermann,  "27  f.  ;  cp
SABBATH,  col.  4175,  n.  4)  is  equated  by  most  Hebrew
authorities  to  2000  cubits  ;  thus,  too,  Josephus  gives  us
5  stadia  (  =  2000  cubits)  as  the  distance  of  the  Mt.  of
Olives  from  Jerusalem,  a  distance  which  in  Acts  1  12  is
a-aj3[3d.Tov  656s.  On  the  other  hand  the  Talmud  (  Zucker
mann,  27)  equates  Sabbath  day's  journey  and  mil  —  i.e.,
the  iu\wv  of  3000  cubits  or  7^  furlongs  ;  and  we  meet
with  measurements  (such  as  the  '  threescore  furlongs  '  of
Lk.  24i3)  which  contain  this  distance  an  exact  number
of  times.  Hultsch  (445)  accordingly  thinks  that  this
(  1721.475  yds.  )  was  the  distance  originally  permitted  for
a  Sabbath  day's  journey,  and  afterwards  shortened  by  one
third.  There  was  probably  much  vagueness  in  the  term.

'  Some  way  '  (i'ixrrrn23,  Gen.  35  16  48  7  2  K.  0  19),  if  the  text
is  correct  [for  criticism,  see  RACHEL,  §  2],  is  still  vaguer  than
the  preceding  ;  the  fact  that  it  was  compared  by  the  Syrian  and
Arabic  translators  with  the  parasang  hardly  justifies  us.  even  if
we  adhere  to  MT,  in  regarding  it  as  a  fixed  measure  (Hultsch,
446).  The  same,  or  even  greater,  indefiniteness  attaches  to  the
expression  '  a  day's  journey  '  (i  K.  10  4  Lk.  '1  44,  etc.).

Of  measures  of  area,  the  only  one  which  receives  a
special  name  in  the  OT  is  the  timed  (ic;.,  i  S.  14  14  Is.

5l°)  or  yoke  of  land' translated 'acre'
—  i.e.  , as  much  as could be ploughed

in  one  day  with  a  yoke  of  oxen  (on
Winckler's  different  view,  see  ACRE).  The  Egyptian
&povpa  of  100  royal  cubits  square  was  equivalent  to
.  2756  hectares,  or  .6810  acre  ;  but  we  have  no  authority
for  identifying  stinted  with  arour,i.

i. St'dh.  —  In Is.  5  10  ©  translates  ns'x (ephah] by

'three measures' (cp Mt.  1^33, and the Talmud,

„  f  Zuckermann,  427".  44). The  '  measure  '

3.  Measures  01  far  excellence  or  Hebrew  modius,  here

aP  c  »3' mentioned is the sfdh (nj«p, fj-erpov,

cp  difjierpov  [BA  in  2  K.],  crdrov  [Hag.  217(16),  cp  Mt.

1833];  Gen.  186  i  S.  25  18  2  K.  7i  16). This  is  described

by  Epiphanius  (Hultsch,  Metro!.  Scr.  1260)  as  a  /u.65tos

vtrepyo/j.os  —  a  modius of  extra  size  —  and is  equated

by  him  to  ij  Roman  modius  —  i.e.  ,  20  sextarii. Josephus

5294


2 Measures
' ,.  "


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

on  the  other  hand  (Ant.  ix.  4s)  gives  ffdrov  =  i£
mod.  =  24  sextarii.  Elsewhere,  Epiphanius  and  other
authorities  equate  the  Hebrew  modius  with  22  sextarii.
This  last  squares  with  the  estimate  of  the  Babylonian
ephah  at  about  66  sextarii  (Hultsch,  412).  The  s6ah
was  used  both  as  liquid  and  dry  measure,  but  more
commonly  mentioned  as  the  latter,  especially  in  the
biblical  writings.

ii.  Ephah. — Like  kin  (see  below,  iv. )  the  word  ephah
is  said  to  be  of  Egyptian  origin  (on  which  cp  Hommel's
remark,  AHT  293,  n.  i).  The  ephah  (ns\x,  Lev.  19a6,
etc.,  see  EPHAH),  as  we  have  seen,  was  three  times  the
s£ah  ;  the  name  was  confined  to  dry  measure,  the  cor
responding  liquid  measure  being  called  batk  (ra,  fid.5os,

/3dros,  etc.,  Is.  5io  [Kfpd/juov]  Ezek.  45  n  [xo^'s]  — '  tne
ephah  and  the  bath  shall  be  of  one  measure,  that  the
bath  may  contain  the  tenth  part  of  an  homer,  and  the
ephah  the  tenth  part  of  an  homer').  The  ephah  cor
responds  to  the  artabe  (cp  Is.  5io  where,  however,
aprd/Scu  ?£  =  a  homer),  or  Attic  metretes  ;  and  it,  or
rather  the  bath,  is  equated  by  Josephus  (Ant.  viii.  2  9)
to  72  sextarii,  in  accordance  with  his  estimate  of  the
ffa.Tov.  The  bath  was  divisible  into  tenths  (Ezek.
4614);  but  the  name  for  this  division  is  not  mentioned.
It  corresponded,  of  course,  to  the  dry  measure  'omer
(see  below).  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  the  ephah
divided  into  sixths  (Ezek.  45  13  4614),  which  have  no
name,  but  correspond  to  the  liquid  hin  (see  below,  iv. ).

iii.  Homer  and  cor. — The  homer  (nph,  Ezek.  45 1114
Hos.  82  etc. )  was  ten  times  the  ephah  or  the  bath,  being
used  for  both  dry  and  liquid  measure.  The  name  cor
(~\2,  Kopos,  Ezek.  45 14  [not  in  <5]  Lk.  167,  etc.;  see
COR)  is  an  alternative,  though  this  term  is  used  more
especially  for  a  liquid  measure.1  Epiphanius  equates
the  Kopos,  which  he  derives  from  Hebrew  xop,  with  30
(Hebrew)  modii.  Josephus'  statement  (Ant.  xv.  9  2)
that  it=io  attic  medimni  contains  a  slip  for  metretfe  ;
cp  iii.  15  3.  C.  H.  W.  Johns  (Assyr.  Deeds  and  Docu
ments,  2  245)  suggests  a  connection  between  cor  and  the
Assyrian  gurru.

The  half  homer  (dry  measure),  according  to  the
tradition  adopted  in  Vg.  and  EV,  was  called  lethek
(~nS,  Ae#^/c).  But  the  only  occurrence  is  in  Hos.  82,
where  <S  reads  differently  ; 2  indeed,  the  whole  passage
labours  under  the  suspicion  of  corruptness  (see  below,


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

There  is  evidence  (from  Epiphanius  and  Eusebius)  of
the  existence  in  later  times  of  a  sacred  hin  (ayiov  ti>\
=  |  of  the  ordinary  hin,  and  a  large  hin  (fdya  Iv)  —  §  of
the  ordinary  hin.

v.  'Omer. — The  'omer  (-c'y,  yfyop,  Ex.  16  16  36,  etc.)
was  TV  ephah  and  l.ence  is  called  assaron  ('issdron,
jnu-y,  Ex.  2940  Lev.  14 10  23  13  17  Nu.  1049).  Epiphanius
puts  it  at  7-J-  sextarii  (  =  1V  ephah  of  72  sextarii),
Eusebius  at  7  sextarii  (a  mere  rough  statement).  [The
last  calls  it  y6fwp  /MKp6v  ;  as  such  it  must  be  distin
guished  from  the  fjLiKpbv  y6/j.op  of  12  modii,  itself  so
called  in  distinction  from  the  '  large  gomor'  of  15  modii,
as  Epiphanius  calls  the  lethek — see  above.]  Josephus
is  apparently  wrong  once  more  when  he  makes  it=  7  attic
kotylas  (Ant.  iii.  66).  The  name  'omer  is  confined  to
dry  measure.

vi.  Cab. — The  cab  (ap,  ^d/3os,  2  K.  6251)  was  used  for
both  liquid  and  dry  measure.  Josephus  (Ant.  ix.  44)
equates  the  fourth  part  of  the  cab  with  the  £^<TTT;S  or
sextarius  ;  thus  the  cab  would  be  £  of  the  hin  (so  in
the  Talmud,  see  Levy  and  cp  Zuckermann,  37,  40).
The  cab  is  divided  into  halves,  quarters,  and  eighths.
Other  values  given  for  the  cab  are  :  (a)  6  sextarii —
i.e.,  the  Ptolemaic  ;^oCy  (Heronian  fragm.  Trept  fj.frpwv,
Hultsch,  Aletr.  Scr.  1 258 ;  Eusebian  fragm.  ibid.
277)  I  W  5  sextarii  :  '  great  cab'  of  the  Talmud  given
as  ij  cab,  Zuckermann,  37 ;  (c)  Epiphanius  calls
the  cab  $  modius  (Hultsch,  Metr.  Scr.  262),  which
may  mean  4,  5,  5^  or  6  sextarii  according  to  the  sense
in  which  he  uses  '  modius ' — i.e. ,  the  Roman  modius,  or
any  of  the  three  values  given  to  the  Hebrew  modius
(see  above,  s6ah).

vii.  Log. — -The  log  (jV,  Lev.  14 10  12)  is  mentioned  as
a  measure  of  oil,  and  in  the  Talmud  (Zuckermann,  49)
is  made  =  TV  hin  or  Jj  seah;  if  this  is  correct,  it  is  the
|  cab.

Finally,  we  may  perhaps  mention  the  i>e'/3eA.  olvov,  given  by
©  in  Hos.  3  2  instead  of  the  lethek  of  barley.2  All  the  authorities
agree  in  making  it  =  150  sextarii ;  hut  whether  they  mean  ordi
nary  sextarii,  or  the  larger  Syrian  sextarii  of  which  50  went
to  the  bath  (Hultsch,  Aletr.  Scr.  261,  271,  etc.),  so  that  the
>'e'/3eA.  (?3j)  would  =  3  baths,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  On  Vll3,  '  wine
skin,'  'wine-jar,'  see  BOTTLE.

We  thus  obtain  the  following  systems  of  dry  and
liquid  measures  :—


DRY  MEASURES.

LIQUID  MEASURES.

Homer  (Cor) .

I

Homer  (Cor) .

i

Lethek . . .

2

I

—

—


—

Ephah . . .

IO

5

!

Rath ....

10

I

Seah ....

3°

15

3

i

Seah ....

3°

3

i

1  ephah . . .

60

3°

6

2

I

Hin ....

60

6

2

I

'Omer  (Issaron)

TOO

5°

IO

3i

'§

i

fa  bath . . .

IOO

IO

3l

If

I

—


—

—

ihin . . . .

120

12

4

2

ii

i

Cab ....

1  80

90

18

6

3

if

i

Cab ....

1  80

18

6

3

it

4

i

—


—

ihin ....

240

24

8

4

2?

2

i*

i

i  cab  ....

360

1  80

36

12

6

3?

2

I

ihin ....

360

36

12

6

3?

3

2

it

i

j,  cab  . . . .

720

360

72

24

12

7\.

i

2

i

Log ....

720

72

24

12

7i

6

4

3

2 I

J  cab ....

1440

720

144

48

24

14? 8

4

2

—

~~

on  i>e/3eA). Epiphanius  gives 'large  omer'  as  another
name  for  the  Ae0eK,  and  equates  it  to  15  modii.

iv.  Hin. — Of  measures  smaller  than  the  ephah-bath,
we  have  first  of  all,  for  liquids,  the  hin  (pn,  [f]'h>,  Lev.
1936  [xo^s] — 'a  just  ephah  and  a  just  hin'),  a  name
apparently  of  Egyptian  origin  (see  above,  ii. ).  It  is
equated  by  Josephus  (Ant.  iii.  8  3  94)  and  Jerome  (on
Ezek.  4  ii )  to  2  Attic  choes=  12  sextarii  =  J  bath  =  ^  seah
=  12  log  (cp  Talmud,  Zuckermann,  49).  The  hin  was
divided  into  halves,  thirds  (  =  cab),  quarters,  and  sixths
(Xu.  15g/  156  Ex.  2940  Ezek.  4  n,  etc. ).

1  [Apart  from  Hos.  82,  where,  as  shown  in  Crit.  Bib.,  the  text
is  disputable,  the  lidiner  is  mentioned  only  in  writings  of  late
date. — T.  K.  c.]

2  '  Neither  is  the  text  secure,  nor,  if  -pfj  is  genuine,  do  we
know  the  capacity  of  the  measure '  (Nowack,  on  Hos.  8  2).

5295


It  is  obvious  that  we  have  here  a  mixture  of  two
systems,  the  decimal  and  sexagesimal.  The  foundation
of  the  whole  seems  to  have  been  the  sexagesimal  portion,
the  'omer  (with  the  corresponding  ^  bath),  and  also
the  lethek  (the  occurrence  of  which,  indeed,  as  we  have
seen,  is  doubtful),  being  foreign  to  the  original  system
(Nowack,  HA  202 /. ).

To  obtain  the  modern  equivalents  of  these  measures,
there  are  two  equations  which  may  be  chosen  out  of

1  [The  statement  (in  2  K.),  however,  depends  on  later  notices
and  elsewhere  (see  CAB)  a  more  probable  reading  of  2  K.,  I.e.,
is  indicated. — T.  K.C.]

2  [Here,  as  always,  we  are  dependent  on  later  notices,  and
elsewhere  (Crit.  Bib.)  it  is  maintained  that  both  c'^yv  ")rrV('a
lethek  of  barley  '  ?)  and  }^  ?33  ('  a  nebhel  of  wine  '  ?)  are  corrup
tions  which  conceal  something  very  different. — T.  K.  c.]

5296


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

the  many  set  forth  by  Hultsch  (pp.  453^  ). These  are

(1)  the  equation of  the log  with  the  Graeco-Roman
sextnrius, of  the  bath  with  the  metretes, of  the  6-log
cab with the Ptolemaic -%ovs. Assuming log and
sextarius  to  be  exact  equivalents, we  should  have  an
ephah  of  72  log-sextarii  =  39.39  litres  =  nearly  8 if  gallons.

(2)  On  the  other  hand  the  connection  of  Hebrew  with
Babylonian  and  Egyptian  measures  makes  it  probable,
in  the  eyes  of  many  metrologists,  that  the  log  is  only
roughly  equivalent  to  the  sextarius, and is  really  the
same  as  the  Babylonian  unit  of  .  505  1. From  this  we
obtain  an  ephah  of  36. 37  1. ,  or  very  nearly  8  gallons,
or  about  66. 5  sextarii.  * It  must  be  remembered  that
it is perhaps more common to  confound closely re
sembling  measures  in  cases  of  capacity  than  in  cases  of
length,  and  that  for  most  purposes  the  equation  log  =
sextarius  was  near  enough.

Assuming,  then,  the  log  to  be  .505  1. ,  we  obtain
the  following  values  in  logs,  sextarii,  litres,  and
gallons.


Logs.

Sextarii.

Litres.

Gallons.

Homer  (Cor)  .

720

660

363.7

80.053

L(?thek  . . .

360

330

181.85

40.026

Ephah-bath .

72

66

36.37

8.005

Sean . . .

24

22

12.  I2O

2.668

Great  Hln  .

18

I6.5

9.090

2.OOI

Hln  ....

12

II

6.O6O

i-334

Sacred  Hln

9

8.25

4-545

I.OOO

"Omer .

7.2

6.6

3-637

.800

\  hm . . .

6

5-5

3-°30

.667

Cab. . . .

4

3-66

2.  O20

•445

\  hin . . .

3

2-75

1-5*5

•333

\  cab

2

1.84

I.OIO

.222

Log  ....

I

0.92

0.505

.III

l  cab . . .

0-5

0.46

0.252

•055

The  chief  standards  of  weight  in  use  in  the  East,
outside  of  Egypt, are  explained  elsewhere (SHEKEL).
4. W  ' Vit It is there  shown that coins struck  on
*•  wel£nts-  the  three  standards,  the  gold  shekel  stan
dard,  the  Babylonian,  and  the  Phoenician,  circulated  in
Palestine, and these standards must therefore have
been  understood  by  the  Jews. It is  curious  that  the
influence  of  Egypt  does  not  seem  to  have  made  itself
felt  in  this  sphere.

As  already  explained,  the  Phoenician  and  the  Baby
lonian  system  both  used  the  same  scale  of  denominations
— i.e.,  (a)  for  ordinary  purposes,  the  shekel  as  unit,  the


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES

[Cp  Winckler  in  KATP)  1337-342,  and  on  the  Ass. -Bab
metrology  Johns,  Assyrian  Deeds,  2134-281.]

As  regards  the  extant  weights,  it  must  be  admitted
that  the  evidence  is  somewhat  unsatisfactory.  A  number
of  them  have  been  discussed  by  Clermont-Ganncau
(Rec.  d'Anh.  Orient.  4  24 /. ).  They  are  :  —

(a)  3  stone  weights  from  Tell  Zakariya  reading  ap
parently  neseph  : —

A,  10.21  grammes  =  157. 564  grains  troy.

B,  9.5  ,, =146.687 ,, ,,

C,  9.0  ,, =138.891 ,, ,,

(b)  A  weight  with  the  same  inscription  from  'Anatii
near  Jerusalem  : —

D,  8. 61  grammes=  134  grains  troy.

(c)  A  weight  from  Samaria  (now  in  the  Ashmolean
Museum,  Oxford)  reading  apparently  tjsj  jm  (£  ne'seph)
and  Vtfjm.

E,  2. 54  grammes  =  39. 2  grains  troy.

B  and  C  are  somewhat  broken,  D  is  pierced,  and  if
this  piercing  was  not  an  original  feature  of  the  weight,
something  must  be  allowed  for  the  material  removed.
The  meaning  of  the  inscription  on  E,  and  even  the
genuineness  of  part  of  it,  have  been  hotly  canvassed,
Acad.,  Nov.  18,  1892,  pp.  443  ff.  (  -  PEFQu.  St. ,  1894,
pp.  225/1);  Driver,  ////r.<fi)  449,  n.*;  (see  PEFQu. St.
1894,  pp.  220 /.  284^,  and  especially  Konig,  Einl.
425,  n.  i  ;  Lidzbarski,  Ephem.  f.  Semit.  Epigr.  1,  pp.
13 /. ,  cited  in  Ann.  Br.  Sch.  Athens,  7,  p.  13);  but
the  fact  that  the  weight  represents  a  quarter  of  some
denomination  is  not  disputed.  The  denomination  in
question  must  be  not  less  than  4x39.2  grains — i.e.,
156.8  grains.  We  need  not  concern  ourselves  with
the  meaning  of  the  much-disputed  word  *]<*:,  which  has
also  been  read  3^3  and  r]OD  (i.e.,  silver).  The  highest
weight  represented  by  these  pieces  is  about  10  grains
below  the  light  Babylonian  shekel  ;  at  the  same  time
they  are  too  high  for  the  Egyptian  standard  (in  which
the  ket  weighed  about  140  grains),  and  we  must  there
fore  assume  that  they  are  meant  to  represent  either  the
Babylonian  shekel  or  a  local  standard  approximating  to
it.  If  the  latter,  it  is  a  heavy  standard  corresponding  to
that  which  Petrie  (Nedesheh  and  Defenneh,  published
by  Eg.  Expl.  Fund,  1888,  p.  92)  describes  as  being
usually  '  smothered  over  '  as  a  low  variety  of  the  Persian
unit ;  he  prefers  to  recognise  in  his  8o-grain  standard
(which  would  be  the  light  standard  corresponding  to
the  one  we  are  concerned  with)  a  separate  standard,
possibly  '  Hittite,'  from  the  fact  that  the  tribute  of  the
Heta  in  the  lists  of  Thotmes  III.  and  Ramessu  III.
appears  to  conform  to  it.


Shekel  .
Mina .
Talent  .

BABYLONIAN.

PHOENICIAN.

«

Heavy.

Light.

Heavy.

Light.

Grains.

Grammes.

Grains.

Grammes.

Grains.

Grammes.

Grains.

Grammes.

336-6
20,196
1,211,760

2T.8l
1,308.68

78,520.77

168.4
10,098
605,880

10.91

654.34
39,260.38

224.4

13.464
807,840

14-54
872.45
52,347.18

112.  2
6,732
403,920

7.27
436-23
26(i73-59

mina  of  60  shekels,  and  the  talent  of  60  minas  ;  (/>),
for  weighing  the  precious  metals,  the  shekel  as  unit,  the
mina  of  50  shekels,  and  the  talent  of  60  minas.  The
mina,  although  it  must  have  been  well  known,  was,  so
far  as  we  ean  judge  from  literary  sources,  not  employed
by  the  Jews  until  post-exilic  times.  The  weights  of  the
shekels  of  the  Babylonian  and  Phoenician  standards
having  been  ascertained  by  the  method  already  ex
plained  (SHEKEL),  we  obtain  the  following  weights  (in
grains  troy,  and  in  grammes)  for  the  three  denomina
tions,  reckoning  60  shekels  to  the  mina,  and  confining
ourselves  to  the  common  norm,  as  this  would  presum
ably  be  used  for  ordinary  transactions.

1  Cp  Epiphanius'  equation  of  the  scah,  or  J  ephah,  with  22
sextarii.

5297


Of  other  weights  found  in  Palestine,  we  may  mention
those  analysed  by  Petrie  (PEFQ,  1892,  p.  114)  from
Tell  el-Hesy  (Lachish).  His  results  are  as  follows  : —


STANDARD.

No.  of
Specimens.

Average  Value
in  Grains  Troy.

(a)  Phoenician .

27

217

(b)  Aeginetan .

18

192

(c)  Attic  ....

6

65-6

(d)  Egyptian . .

4

IS*

(e)  Assyrian  .

3

128

(/)  Hittite . . .

3

80.5

In  estimating  the  value  of  such  results, it  must  be
5298


WELLS


WIDOW


remembered  that,  in  dealing  with  ancient  weights,  it  is  '
not  so  much  the  average  of  a  number  of  specimens,  as
the  highest,  which  must  be  taken  as  representing  the
normal.  It  is  just  possible  that  the  '  Aeginetan  '  weights  !
(6)  are  merely  low  examples  of  the  Phoenician  standard
(a) ;  that  (</)  and  (/)  are  to  be  classed  together  as  the
unit  and  the  half  of  the  standard  of  something  under
1 68  grains  arrived  at  above  ;  that  (e)  and  (c)  are  the
unit  and  the  half  of  the  gold-shekel  standard  of  nearly
130  grains,  or,  if  of  comparatively  late  date,  belong  to
the  slightly  higher  Attic -Euboic  standard  to  which
Petrie  attributes  (c).  In  any  case,  he  justly  calls  atten
tion  to  the  weakness  of  Egyptian  influence  in  the  very
S.  of  Palestine.

Most  of  the  extant  weights  are  of  stone,  a  fact  which
illustrates  the  well-established  use  of  JJK  (' stone '),  for
'  weight ' — e.g. ,  2  S.  14 26,  '  after  the  king's  stone '  (EV
weight);  Pr.  16n,  'all  the  stones  (KV  weights)  of
the  bag.'  Further,  many  ancient  weights  were  made
in  the  form  of  living  creatures,  such  as  lions  and
ducks.  Probably  this  is  the  explanation  of  the  fact
that  kesitah  (Gen.  33 19  Jos.  2432,  etc.)  is  translated
'  lambs'  by  (55.  Ridgeway  (Origin  of  Metallic  Currency ;
271)  considers  that  the  name  was  due  to  its  representing
an  old  unit  of  barter.1

See  especially  F.  Hultsch,  Griechische  u.  ram.  MetrologieC^
(1882),  and  the  Greek  and  Roman  authorities  in  his  Metrologi-

coruin  Scriptoruin  Keliquiie,  2  vols.  (1864-66).
5.  Literature.  Also, B. Zuckermann, Das  Juiiische  Maas-

system  (1867);  C.  V.  Lehmann,  Alt. -baby-
lonisches  Maas  u.  Gewicht  (\'erhandl.  d.  Berliner  Gesellscli.
f.  Antkrojiologie,  1889);  W.  Ridgeway,  Origin  of  Metallic
Currency  and  \\~eigIit-Standards  (1892)  ;  C.  F.  Lehmann,  Das
altbabylon.  IHaas-  u.  Gewichts-system  (8th  Oriental  Congress
of  1889),  1893;  W.  Nowack,  Lekrhuch  dcr  liebriiischen  Archii-
o
2

Persian,  Aeginetan),  PSBA  28378-395  [1901].  G.  F.  H.

WELLS  (~IN?),  Gen.  2615.  See  SPRINGS;  also
CONDUITS,  §  li,  and  NATURE-WORSHIP,  §  4.

WEN  (rb^yaMtteth),  Lev.  22 227. See  DISEASES,  5.

WEST,  WEST  WIND.  See  EARTH,  FOUR  QUARTERS
OF,  §  3,  and  WINDS.

WHALE  ([or  D']p3ri).  The  'whale'  of  AV  has
become,  in  RV,  (i)  'sea-monster'  (Gen.  l2i  Job7i2),
(2)  'dragon'  (Ezek.  322)  ;  cp  the  'jackal'  of  Lam.  43.
See  DRAGON,  JACKAL.  In  Mt.  1240,  however,  RV
retains  'whale'  (KTJTOS)  for  the  'great  fish'  (Vn3  33,
d,.ig  gadol,  K-^TOS  ptya.)  in  Jon.  1 17  [22],  though  this  is  as
inappropriate  as  the  rendering  '  a  whale '  in  AVme-  of
Job  41 1  for  'leviathan.'  'How,'  says  Hasselquist,
'  could  he  (the  author  of  Job)  speak  of  an  animal  which
never  was  seen  in  the  place  where  he  wrote,  and  at  a
time  when  he  could  have  no  history  of  Greenland  and
Spitzbergen  ? '  (1'oyages  and  Travels,  1766,  p.  440).
The  same  remark  applies  to  the  author  of  Jonah.  It
maybe  doubted,  however,  whether  we  need  trouble  our
selves  to  make  these  obvious,  but  superficial  criticisms,
nor  is  it  more  to  the  point  to  remark  that  the  Cetacea
are  represented  by  numerous  species  in  the  Mediter
ranean,  and  that  Elasmobranchs  (including  sharks)  are
also  to  be  found  there.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to  find
out  to  what  class  of  narrative  the  Book  of  Jonah  belongs,
and  to  interpret  the  '  great  fish '  accordingly.  See
JONAH  (BOOK).

WHEAT- (riGn, etc.; Dt.  88 etc.) has always
formed one  of  the staple  products of  Palestine. In ,
modern  times  the  districts  most  suitable  for  its  cultiva- |
tion  are  Philistia, Esdraelon,  the  Mukhneh  to  the  E.
of Nablus, and, above  all, Hauran, the  granary  of

1  fCp  KESITAH,  where  the  'lambs'  of®  is  otherwise  accounted
for,  and  the  passages  where  kesitah  (perhaps  a  fictitious  word)
occurs  are  examined  from  the  point  of  view  of  textual  criticism.
— T.  K.  c.]

-  Cp  CORN',  also  FOOD,  §  i  (a).

5299


Syria,  which  exports  its  produce  through  the  markets  of
Jaffa,  Beirut,  Haifa,  etc.  In  ancient  times  Galilee  was
regarded  as  the  most  fertile  district ;  but  Tyre  (or  possibly
the  N.  Arabian  Musri  [Che.])  imported  corn  from  Judah
in  the  time  of  Ezekiel  (Ezek. 27  17) ;  cp  also  Acts  1*2 20,
though  here  there  is  express  mention  of  wheat.  In  the
Sidon  inscription  Dora  and  Joppa  are  termed  pn  n:nNi
'arsoth  dagan ,  '  lands  of  grain  '  ( ( '/S  i.  3 19),  thus  testify
ing,  if  we  adopt  this  highly  probable  rendering  (cp  col.
984  n.  i,  and  see  DOR,  §  3),  to  the  early  fertility  of  the
S.  maritime  coast.

WHEEL, i. Of  the words so rendered in EV,

I  SIN,  ophan  (  N'|QX,  '  turn '  ?)  is  of  most  frequent
occurrence  ;  it  is  used  of  chariot  wheels  (Ex.  1425,  etc. ),
and  of  the  wheels  of  threshing  wains  (15.2827  Prov.
2026)  ;  also  in  the  description  of  Ezekiel's  vision  (1 15^!
102  6  12),  and  in  that  of  the  'bases'  of  Solomon's
lavers  ( i  K.  730  etc.).

The  component  parts  are  :  (a)  23,  gab ;  vinov,  vitro* ;  AV
'  nave '  or  '  back ' ;  RV  '  felloe ' ;  i  K.  7  33  Ezek.  1 18  10  12.  (£)
ptS'n,  hissfif;  ;  Trpayfia-reia. ;  AV  '  felloe,'  RV  '  spoke  '  ;  i  K.  7  33

(c)  ~\&n,  hissur,  a.\>x<)v  [A] ;  AV  '  spoke,'  RV  '  nave ' ;  i  K.  7  33  ;

(d)  T,  ydii;  xei'p;  EV  'axletree'  (AV  in  Ezek.  10  12  'hand');
i  K.732yC  Ezek.  10 12.

2.  SaVa,  galgal  (  ^hhi  '  roll '),  is  applied  to  the  wheel
of  a  war  chariot  (Is.  528  Jer.  47 3)  and  in  Ezek.  2824  26 10
may  perhaps  mean  'wagon.'  So  RV.  In  Ps.  8813  for
'  like  a  wheel '  render  rather  '  like  stubble'  (see  THISTLE,
end).

3  and  4.  For  the  potter's  wheel  (crj3N,  obndyim  ;
Jer.  ISst)  see  POTTERY,  §  8,  and  in  Judg. 528  (Tpys)
read  'steps'  (RV'"K-) — i.e. ,  'hoofbeats'  (Moore).

Three  passages,  not  yet  mentioned,  deserve  separate
notice:  (a)  Eccles.  126,  (f>)  Ecclus.  36(33)5,  (c)  Jas.  36.
(a)  '  The  wheel  (^jVj)  breaks  down  at  the  pit ' — i.e. ,  the
'machinery'  of  the  body  (likened  to  a  water-wheel)
comes  to  a  stop.  (f>)  'The  heart  (air\a.yx.va}  °f  a  f°°l  's
like  the  wheel  (rpoxfa)  of  a  cart' — i.e.,  he  never  con
tinues  long  in  the -same  mind,  (c)  The  tongue  is  that
member  which  '  sets  on  fire  the  wheel  of  nature '  rov
rpoxbv  TT)S  yevecreus — i.e. ,  the  whole  course  of  the  events
of  life  may  be  disturbed,  ruined,  by  an  unbridled
tongue.

In  Ps.  77 18  [19]  AV  ought  to  have  given  in  marg.
'  Heb. ,  wheel,'  to  justify  its  very  peculiar  rendering  of
^jSj.  Its  text  runs  '  The  voice  of  thy  thunder  was  in
the  heaven'  (RV  'in  the  whirlwind').  This  is  a
development  of  the  sense  of  '  wheel, '  the  heavens  being
regarded  as  a  round  arch  ;  it  is  an  exegetical  curiosity
derived  from  Kimhi.  The  variety  of  explanations  of
h&i  in  this  passage  may  well  excuse  AV  ;  RV's  '  whirl
wind  '  is  itself  a  precarious  rendering  (see  WIND).

The  variations  in  Hah.  3  10  n  15  suggest  the  probability  of
corruption.  Read  probably  TJ'?;J?C2  CJH  *?ip.  God's  '  wheels'
no  one  could  understand  ;  but  the  phrase  '  God's  tracks  (or
paths)'  is  plain  enough  in  the  description  of  a  theophany.

WHIP  (DitT,  tit,  /udo-Ttt),  Prov.  26 3  i  K.  12  n  :4
aCh.  10  ii  14  Nah.  3  2.  Figured  in  art.  CHARIOT,  fig.  7.  Asan
Egyptian  emblem  of  royalty,  see  Erman,  Anc.  Eg.  60,  63.  See
SCOUKGK,  SCEPTRE,  §  2.

WHIRLING  DUST  (^>J)  Is.  I7i3  Ps.83x3[i4]t
RV.  See  WHEEL,  2,  THISTLEDOWN,  end.

WHIRLWIND  (JTU'O,  etc.),  2  K.2i  etc.  See
WIND,  §  6.

WHITE.  For  \^h,  laban.  Gen.  3035  37,  and  1-in,
hiimvdr,  Dan.  7  9,  see  COLOURS,  §  9  (a) ;  and  for  lh:»,  siihfr,
Judg.  5  10,  §  7.  For  njaS  WHITENESS,  see  COLOURS,  §  9  (a).

WIDOW1  (XHP<\)- The  earliest  mention  of  widows

in  the  Christian  Church  is  in  connection  with  the  daily

meal  in  Jerusalem  (Acts6i),  when  the  Greek-speaking

Jews murmured against the Hebrews because '  their

widows  were  being  neglected  in  the  daily  ministration.'

1  For  '  widow'  in  the  OT,  see  MARRIAGE,  §  7.

5300


WILD  BEAST

Here  the  widows  come  before  us  at  the  outset  as  the
pensioners  of  the  Church  ;  but  we  are  told  no  more
about  them.  In  Acts 9 39  41  we  catch  another  brief
glimpse  of  them  in  connection  with  the  good  deeds  of
Dorcas,  who  had  supplied  them  with  clothing.  Peter
is  here  spoken  of  as  '  having  called  the  saints  and  the
widows,'  the  word  being  clearly  used  in  a  technical
sense.  In  i  Cor.  78  this  technical  sense  is  not  equally
clear  ;  and  we  hear  no  more  of  widows  till  we  come  to
the  regulations  regarding  them  in  i  Tim.  03-16.  [Cp
MINISTRY,  §  41.]  Here  we  find  that  the  church  of
Ephesus  was  liable  to  be  burdened  with  pensioners  of
this  kind  who  had  no  right  to  claim  public  support.
Widows  who  had  children  or  grandchildren  should  be
supported  by  them  and  not  thrown  upon  the  Church.
A  Christian  woman  who  had  widows — i.e.  a  woman  of
property  with  aged  dependants — should  recognise  her
individual  responsibility  to  maintain  them.  '  Widows
indeed' — i.e. ,  destitute  and  worthy  of  the  name — the
Church  niust  support  ;  but  for  admission  to  the  roll
various  qualifications  were  necessary — destitution,  piety,
and  prayerfulness,  the  age  of  sixty  years,  besides
evidence  of  purity  of  life,  and  a  record  of  good  works
such  as  women  might  be  expected  to  perform  for  the
common  benefit.  Younger  widows  were  to  have  no
recognition  :  they  were  a  source  of  calumny  to  the
Church  for  their  idle  and  dissolute  habits  ;  they  were
to  marry  and  bear  children  and  rule  their  families.

No  definite  duty  is  assigned  to  widows,  unless  it  be
the  service  of  continual  prayer  :  they  were  aged
pensioners,  whose  activity  of  service  was  past.  At  a
later  time  more  seems  to  have  been  expected  of  them  in
certain  quarters  of  the  Church  ;  and  a  confusion  con
sequently  arose  between  widows  and  deaconesses.  In
the  earliest  period,  however,  the  two  orders  were  wholly
distinct,  the  one  consisting  of  pensioners,  the  other  of
active  servants  of  the  Church.  This  distinction  is
clearly  maintained  in  the  Apostolic  Constitutions  as  late
as  the  fourth  or  fifth  century,  and  indeed  never  seems
to  have  been  lost  in  the  Greek  and  Syrian  churches.
In  Egypt,  however,  and  in  the  Latin  churches  there  is
no  trace  of  deaconesses,  except  sporadically,  and  even
so  mainly  for  Gaul  :  and  the  work  which  deaconesses
did  in  the  East  was  done  to  a  large  extent  by  widows.
Ultimately  both  orders  were  swallowed  up  by  the
monastic  system.

For  details,  and  for  the  clearing  up  of  the  common  confusions
on  this  subject,  see  The  Ministry  of  Deaconesses  by  Deaconess
Cecilia  Robinson  (1898).  j.  A.  K.

WILD  BEAST  (r\),  Ps.  50n  [12]. See  BEAST,  6.

WILD  BEAST  OF  THE  REEDS  (H^  rvn),  Ps.
68  30  [31].  See  CROCODILE  ;  REKD,  col.  40247".

WILD  BEASTS  OF  THE  DESERT  (D\s>*),  Is.  1821.
See  CAT,  end  ;  DESERT,  §  2  (5).

WILD  BEASTS  OF  THE  ISLANDS  (D'*S),  Is.
1322AV.  See  JACKAL  (4).

WILD  BULL  (Xifi),  Is.  5l2o  AV,  RV  ANTELOPE
(q.v.).

WILDERNESS  (ji»<'^,  etc.),  Dt.32io  etc.  See
DESERT.

WILDERNESS  OF  WANDERING.  See  WANDER
INGS, WILDERNESS  OF.

WILD  GOURDS. See  GOURDS  (WILD).

WILD  OLIVE  (|£tt;  |'1>),  Ecclus.  50io.  See  OLIVE,
§2.

WILD  OX(DN-l),  Nu.  2822  RV,  AV  UNICORN  (q.v.).

WILD  VINE  (nil"  1PI).  2  K.  439-  See  GOURDS,
WILD.

WILLOW,  WILLOWS,  occur  in  EV  as  the  rendering
of  two  Hebrew  words,  i.  C':n;7,  'drdbim  (Lev.  284°


169


S301


WIND,  WINDS

Job4022  Ps.  13"2  Is.  15?  444f).  In  each  mention  of
this  tree  there  is  reference  to  its  growing  by  river  banks  ;
and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  either  a  willow  or  a
poplar  closely  resembling  a  willow  (such  as  Populus

I euphratica,  Oliv. )  is  intended.

The  various  renderings  of  Ip  point  in  this  direction  : — irt'as

i /cat ayi'ou (cAa6ous Lev.  '23  40 ; xAwrtf dyi-ou  [{<c'a A], aypov
[BN»],  Job 40 22  ;  ii-cots  Ps.  1372,  and  iTe'a  Is.  44 4.1

The  word  is  found  in  Arabic  as  garab  and  in  Syriac
as'ar&Miii  (MH  naiy)-  The  evidence  as  to  species  is
conflicting.  Thus  both^<z;'a/'  axui'arift&d  are  ordinary
renderings  of  Irta.,  '  willow  '  (Low,  300 /. ,  cp  Cels.  1  304
ff.},  and  the  Arabic  word  is  so  explained  by  native
lexicographers.  On  the  other  hand  travellers  find  that
in  modern  Palestine  the  name  is  that  of  Popidus
euphratica  (ZDPlr  2209),  and  branches  of  gamb,
brought  to  Europe  and  examined,  proved  to  belong  to
this  plant  (Wetzstein,  ap.  Del.  Gen. <•"  568),  which  is  very
common  in  Palestine,  being  found  on  the  '  banks  of  the
Jordan  and  all  other  rivers'  (FFP  414)  —  including
those  streams  E.  and  SE.  of  the  Dead  Sea,  of  which
the  Q>:nj?n  Vm,  ndhal  haarabim,  of  Is.  15?  (Brook  of
the  Willows;  see  ARABAH  ii.  and  cp  JEROBOAM,  2,
Che.  Intr.  Is.  84),  is  believed  to  be  one.  Willows  are
not  very  characteristic  of  the  oriental  region.  Boissier
gives  only  two  as  certainly  indigenous  in  Syria  proper  :
— Salixfragilis  and  S.  alba,  and  the  former  may  not
improbably  have  been  introduced.  On  the  whole,
therefore,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Jordan  tree
is  Populus  euphratica ,  which  often  greatly  resembles  a
willow  by  the  length  and  narrosvness  of  its  leaves.

The  craiy,  'linibiin  of  Ps.  1372  have  been  in  com
paratively  modern  times  identified  as  weeping  willows
(Salix  babylonica] — a  tree  which  is  originally  a  native
of  Japan  and  could  not  have  existed  in  Syria  in
biblical  times.  If  it  be  true  that  it  is  in  Palestine  now
'  frequently  found  on  the  coast  overhanging  wells  and
pools'  (Tristr.  NHB  415),  it  must  have  been  intro
duced  into  Syria,  as  it  has  been  into  the  Caucasus,  at
a  later  time.  Here  again  it  is  most  probable  that
Populus  euphratica  is  meant.2

2.  nSSBS,  saphsiiphah  (eTr^Aen-o^ei'Oi' 3  Ezek.  IV  5),  the  Ar.
sa/>fisti/>/t,4  may  denote  the  willow,  or  more  probably  the  Populus
euphratica  (see  above).  N.  M. — W.  T.  T.  -U.

WIMPLE  (obsolete,  originally  a  covering  for  the
neck,  chin,  and  sides  of  face),  AV  for  nnBDp,  mifpd-
hath.  Is.  822,  RV  SHAWL.  See  MANTLE,  §  2  [3];  VAIL.

WIND,  WINDS  (n-n  ;  ANCMOC  ;  HNCYMA  [in  6,

Gen.  Si Is.  7  2  Job  30 15  Ps.  1044  Wisd.  132  ; in  NT,

i TTohvo  D- onl>'  in 'n'  3s Heb.  17];5 TTNOH  [Acts

f 22]; vent  us,  aura,6  spiritus). The  four

conception. ,  ends  ,  of  the  eanh  jn  the  Hebrew  mind>

correspond  to  the  four  '  ends  '  of  the  heaven  (see  EARTH,
§  i )  ;  and  it  might  equally  well  be  said  that  the  four
winds  came  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  and  from  the
ends  of  heaven,  the  earth  being  a  disk  surrounded  by
an  ocean,  and  the  heaven  a  vault  overarching  that
ocean.  Hence  'Enoch'  tells  us  (Enoch,  76),  'And  at
the  ends  of  the  earth  I  saw  twelve  portals  opened  for  all
the  winds,  from  which  the  winds  proceed  and  blow  over
the  earth.  .  .  .  Through  four  of  these  came  winds  of
blessing  and  prosperity,  and  from  those  eight  came

1  In  Is.  15  7  it  is  taken  as  a  proper  name — *Apa|3af.

2  The  text,  however,  is  disputed  (see  Che.  /V.C-i,  who  reads  in

v.  i  Sxprn;  nVnrVy  and  in  v.  2,  ':a  inns  arina  c-niy,  referring

to  the  N.  Arabians).  Tristram's  identification  of  the  D'^V  with
oleanders  (Xerium  Oleander)  labours  under  this  difficulty — that
garab  is  not  used  in  this  sense.  Winckler's  view  (A/^S  +  ij)  that
the  'arbhf  ndhal  of  Lev.  23  40  are  synonymous  with  the  hadas
of  Xeh.  8  15  ignores  the  arguments  mentioned  above.

3  Implying  an  erroneous  derivation  from  nSS'
•*  Ace.  to  Frankel  (143)  this  is  a  loan  word.

5  Heb.  1  7  =  Ps.  104  4 ;  in  Jn.  1  7  itv.  is  suggested  by  symbolism.
See  SPIRIT.

6  Gen.  38,  'ad  auram  post  meridiem  ' ;  EV  '  in  the  cool  (Heb.
wind)  of  the  day.' Cp  Cant.  217  46.

5302


WIND,  WINDS

hurtful  winds.' This  notion  (on  which  cp  DEW,  RAIN)
illustrates  a  number  of  biblical  passages.

See,  e.g.,  Jer.  10  13  =  6!  16  (cp  Ps.  1867)  'he  causes  mists  to
ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  .  .  .  and  brings  forth  the
wind  out  of  his  store-chambers';  Jer.  4936,  'I  will  bring  the
four  winds  from  the  four  ends  of  heaven'  ;  Dan.  7  2,  '  the  four
winds  of  heaven  burst  forth  upon  the  sea  ' ;  Rev.  7  i,  '  I  saw  four
angels  standing  at  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  holding  the
four  winds  of  the  earth,  that  no  wind  should  blow  on  the  earth,
or  on  the  sea,  or  on  any  tree.'

This,  then,  wouldseem  to  be  the  Hebrew  idea — that  the
winds  are  stored  in  chambers  at  the  point  where  heaven
and  earth  join.  For  though  the  circle  down  to  which
the  vault  of  heaven  reaches  is  '  marked  on  the  surface
of  the  ocean'  (Prov.  827  ;  cp  Job26io),  yet  ocean  and
earth  are  not  rigidly  separated  in  the  Hebrew  mind,  as
we  see  from  the  (probable)  fact  that  the  Bab.  apsu,
'ocean,'  has  become  in  Hebrew  'aphsc  in  the  phrase
'aphsc  'airs,1  (ends  of  the  earth  '),  which  has  arisen  by  a
process  of  Hebraising  adaptation.  The  idea  in  Rev.  7  i
seems  to  be  that  the  angels  placed  over  the  respective
store-chambers  of  the  wind  keep  back  the  winds  which
are  impetuously  pushing  forward,  somewhat  as  Istar  is
said  (IR29s  Karppe)  to  hold  together  the  vault  of
heaven  and  earth  (so  that  the  upper  waters  cannot  burst
forth  in  excess).

Very  different  ideas  were  awakened  by  the  thought  of
the  wind.  As  '  Enoch  '  says,  the  wind  might  be  either
a  blessing  or  a  curse.  Two  of  its  characteristics  were
specially  depressing  :  (i)  its  immense  power,  and  (2)  its
apparent  irregularity,  (i)  The  early  disciples  of  Jesus
exclaim,  '  Who  then  is  this,  that  even  the  ivind  and
the  sea  obey  him'  (Mk.  441  cp  Ps.  107 29),  and  a  poet,
unable  to  find  a  worthy  name  for  God,  asks,  '  Who  has
gathered  (=  can  gather)  the  wind  in  his  fists'?  (Prov.
364).  Certainly  human  power  was  baffled  in  presence
of  the  wind.  (2)  And  not  less  powerless  here  was
human  wisdom.  Once  allow  the  belief  in  God's  love-
directed  wisdom  to  be  obscured,  and  it  becomes  a  most
depressing  thought  that  the  wind  is  perpetually  '  going
toward  the  south,'  or  '  turning  about  to  the  north,'  in  a
series  of  revolutions  devoid  of  apparent  reason  ( Eccles.
16;  cp  114).  But  there  are  more  comforting  associa
tions  of  ideas  than  these.  God  '  created  the  wind '
(Am.  413),  and  the  cosmogonist  who  says  that  all  God's
works  were  attested  by  him  to  be  '  very  good  '  ascribes
the  growth  of  order  and  of  life  to  a  '  wind  of  God '
which  'hovered'  (the  wind  is  imagined  as  a  mighty
bird)  over  the  primeval  waters  (Gen.  12  ;  see  CREATION,
§  10)  —  an  old  myth  which  has  become  a  symbol  of  the
highest  spiritual  energy  (cp  Jn.  38),  and  which  was  in
the  mind  of  Ezekiel  when  he  wrote,  '  Come  from  the
four  winds  (  =  parts  of  heaven),  O  breath  (nnn),  and
breathe  upon  these  slain,  that  they  may  live'  (Ezek.
379).  See  SPIRIT,  §  if.  And  if  the  wind  ever  does
harm,  it  is  only  at  God's  command  (Is.  296  Am.  1 14
Ecclus.  39 28);  indeed,  '  he  makes  winds  his  messengers'
(Ps.  1044;  cp  1488).

Such compound expressions as 'north-east' (evpa-


2.  Terms  :
north  wind.


Kv\ui>  ;  see  EUROCLYDON)  being  impos
sible  in  Hebrew,  the  four  great  terms  for


winds  had  to  be  used  freely. It  was  not
always  convenient  to  take  two  clauses  to  express  the

1  (The  phrase  does  not  happen  to  occur  in  our  oldest  records
[cp  GEOGRAPHY,  §  i],  but  is  evidently  archaic.)  So  Hommel,
and  Gunkel,  Schopf.  46.  Halevy  (Rccherches,  228),  however,
derives  Bab.  apsA  from  a  Semitic  root  05^  ;  cp  Jensen,  Kasinol.
244.  The  original  vocalisation  of  the  above  Heb.  phrase  may
have  been  'ajhsf  aref.  In  course  of  time  'aphsi  was  interpreted
as  meaning 'ends  (of)' =  'DSN,  as  if  syn.  with  flisp.  But  even  if
"DSN  or  nisp  is  used  in  the  sense  'ends  (of  the  earth)  '  the  old
idea  has  not  entirely  gone.  '  The  creator  of  the  ends  (nisp)  of
the  earth,'  (Is.  40  28)  means  '  the  creator,  not  merely  of  the  most
distant  countries,  but  of  the  confines  of  earth  and  heaven,  where
the  storehouses  of  the  winds  and  the  rain  are,"  unless,  indeed,
we  suppose  that  the  writer  does  but  repeat  an  old  phrase  taken
from  hymns  to  Yahwe,  the  sense  of  which  he  has  forgotten.  So
Karppe,  /.  As.  9g2/  [1897].

5303


WIND,  WINDS

simple  idea  that  something  was  occasioned  by  a  NE.  or
a  SE.  wind  (see  Is.  4125  Ps.  7826).

In  the  two  following  passages,  N.  =  N\V.,  and  in  the  second,
S.  =  S\V.  :  (a)  'The  north  wind  bringeth  forth  rain'  (Prov.  '2623
R-V)  ;  (l>)  '  Awake,  O  north  [windl,  and  come,  thou  south  [wind],'
Cant.  4  16.  See  below,  8  5,  and,  for  parallels,  §  3.

The  north  wind  proper  is  called  by  Josephus  (Ant.
xv.  96,  §  338)  av^div  ai0pi.dijTa.Tov,  '  the  wind  which
most  produces  clear  weather,'  as  contrasted  with  the
impetuous  south  winds  on  the  coasts  of  Palestine  which
prevent  ships  from  finding  commodious  anchorage.
Still,  it  could  be  boisterous  without  being  rainy;
mariners  passing  near  Joppa  called  it  fjLf\a/jifiopfov  '  the
black  N.  wind'  (Jos.  BJ\\\.  9a,  §  422).  So  (5  in
Prov.  27  16  gives  the  emphatic  words  /3o/^as  cr/cXijpos
&ve/j,os,1  and  Jerome,  describing  the  wind  from  many
years'  acquaintance,  calls  it  ventus  durissimus.z

Jerome  was  even  misled  by  his  local  knowledge  into  a  false


rendering  of  S^inn  'n  Prov.  25  23,  dissipat  '(pluvias),  AV  'driveth
away  (rain)'.  The  meaning  of  'north'  is  explained  elsewhere
(see  EARTH  AND  WORLD).  Cold  comes  from  the  north  star  (Job
37  9  emended  text)  —  i.e.,  from  the  rough  N.  wind,  which,  as  Ben
Sira  tells  us,  covers  water  with  a  '  breastplate  '  of  ice  (Ecclus.
43  20).  He  adds  that  it  'burns  up  '  the  grass  ;  cp  Milton  (PL,

2  595),

the  parching  air

Burns  fierce,  and  cold  performs  the  effects  of  fire.
Ezekiel,  in  his  great  vision,  speaks  of  a  'whirlwind


suggests  a  co


riiah se'arali)  coming out of the  north  '  (Ezek.  1  4). This

correction  of  the  Hebr
the  Oxford  editors  render,


rew  text  of  Ecclus.  43  i-jb,  where


'The  hot  winds  of  the  north,  the  tempest,  and  the

whirlwind  '  ;

but  where  a  reading  given  in  the  margin  of  the  MS  is  surely
preferable,

'The  whirlwind*  of  the  north,  the  hurricane,  and  the

tempest.'

For  though  soon  after  the  parching  effect  of  the  cold  does  seem
to  be  referred  to  (v.  20),  yet  niSy1?!,  eifaf/iof/t,  a  word  used  of
the  simoom  (see  below),  could  hardly  be  used  of  the  N.  or  NW.
wind,  especially  in  combination  with  nSID,  suphah,  '  hurricane,'
and  rnyp,  searah,  'tempest.'

The  parallel  to  the  line  with  '  the  whirlwind  of  the
north  '  Ecclus.  43  17  should  probably  be

At  his  will  the  south  wind  blows.4

Just  so  in  Job  37  9  the  whirlwind  is  said  to  come  from

. - the 'chambers  of  the  south' (EARTH

3.  South  wind.  [FQUR  QUARTEKS]|  §  2). cp  Is.21l

Zech.  9  14.  Either  the  SE.  or  the  SW.  (strictly  SSW.  )
wind  may  be  meant  ;  both  these  winds  are  called  sirocco
by  travellers  in  Palestine,  though  etymologically  the  term
only  belongs  to  the  E.  wind.5  In  Ps.  7826  the  SE.
wind  is  called  first  a  S.  ,  and  then  an  E.  wind  ;  in  ©
(see  Ex.  lOis  14ai  Job3824  Ps.  782611  Ezek.  2726)  it
becomes  voros  or  the  S.  wind.  This  is  because  a  hot,
parching  wind  analogous  to  the  sirocco  blows  in  Egypt
from  the  S.  ;  it  is  there  called  khamsin,  because  it  blows
at  intervals  during  a  period  of  fifty  days.  In  Palestine,
however,  in  the  south  of  which  the  '  sirocco  '  is  very
troublesome,  it  does  not  often  blow  directly  from  the  S.  ,
so  that  when  in  Job  (which  was  hardly  written,  as
Hitzig  and  Herz  have  supposed,  in  Egypt  but  in
Palestine),  we  find  the  sultry  heat  of  the  '  south  wind  '
described  (Job  37  17)  in  terms  appropriate  to  the
1  sirocco,'  we  must  suppose  the  SE.  and  the  SSW.
wind  to  be  meant'  Lk.  12  55  ('  when  ye  see  the  S.  wind
blow,  ye  say,  Kavirwv  ftrrat),  requires  a  similar  ex
planation.  In  Babylonia  the  SW.  wind  was  represented
as  a  ferocious  demon,  images  of  which  are  to  be  seen  in
museums.  This  does  not,  however,  illustrate  Is.  21  1,
which  refers  to  the  S.  of  Palestine  (cp  Zech.  9  14).

This  wind  blows  from  the  Syrian  and  Arabian  desert

1  ©'s  form  of  the  text,  however,  was,  like  MT's,  corrupt.

2  The  Targ.  (Prov.  25  23  27  16)  gives  the  north  wind  the  ex
pressive  title  Nira-IJ,  the  scouring,  or  sweeping  (wind).

3  Reading  SwSy  (see  below). ©  /cat  (caraiyc?  /Sope'ou.

*  Reading as  (5. The text is  disarranged  (see  Lev!  and
Halevy).

5  Sirocco  from  Ar.  sarkiyya  'easterly.'

53°4


WIND,  WINDS

(Jer.  4 ii  1824  Hos.  1815  Is.  21 1,  cp  Job  1 19),  and,  as
4  East  wind  ®  S  rellderinS  KO.VITUV  *  suggests,  brings
'  extreme  heat,  at  any  rate  when  it  blows
for  a  length  of  time  in  the  spring  ;  in  the  winter,  how
ever,  it  brings  agreeable,  bright,  and  warm  days  between
the  times  of  rain.  For  its  parching  effect  on  vegetation,  to
which  <5's  name  refers,  see  Gen.  41623  27  Ezek.  17  10  19 12
Jon.  48  (where  rw'nn,  harlsitk,  RV  '  sultry,'  is  obscure;
see  JONAH  [Booic],  §  i  [i],  n.  2).  It  is  also  commonly
found  by  critics  in  nisy'?!  mi,  ruah  zil'aphoth  (AV
'horrible  [mg.  burning]  tempest';  RV  'burning  wind')
in  Ps.  116;  see  e.g.,  Baethgen,  but  on  the  text  cp  Ps.M
In  the  Lebanon  the  E.  wind  is  still  used  as  a  simile
for  anything  very  disagreeable  ;  there,  as  in  Arabia,  it
is  called  the  fa  in  rim  from  saw  m"'1  ('  poison  ').

Its  effects  are  thus  described  by  a  traveller  in  the  desert.
'When  this  wind  blows  the  atmosphere  assumes  a  yellowish
appearance,  fading  into  gray,  and  the  sun  becomes  of  a  dusky
red.  The  smell  is  nauseating  and  sulphureous,  the  vapour
thick  and  heavy,  and,  when  the  heat  increases,  one  is  almost
suffocated."2  See  Wetzstein's  instructive  statement  in  Del.
Hiol>,M  349,  n.  i.

This  wind,  and  the  NW.  wind,  are  prevalent  in
Palestine  in  summer  ;  we  have  already  mentioned  the

K Waot -A beneficent  mists  which  they  bring  from

o.  w  6Su  winci. , .  t ..  T«I_

the  Mediterranean.  These  are  gener
ally  known  as  DEW  (q.v.);  in  Prov.  2023  they  are
called  Q'N'b:,  nesl'im  (so  we  should  read,  with  Grii. ,
for  ctfa ;  <§  vt(pri ;  cp  Prov.  25 14  6).  In  Cant.  4 16
the  bride  calls  the  N.  and  the  S.  winds,  by  which  she
means  the  NW.  and  the  SW. ,  to  spread  abroad  the
fragrance  of  her  garden.3  Both  winds  in  summer
would  be  agreeable,  and  if  at  times  they  bring  rain
(especially  the  SW. ,  called  in  Arabic,  '  the  father  of
rain'),  yet  rain  is  one  of  God's  best  gifts  (Ps.  104 13
1478)  ;  in  Arabian  style,  it  is  '  the  father  of  life.'  On
the  '  strong  west  wind '  of  Ex.  10 19,  see  LOCUSTS,  RED
SEA,  and  on  the  relative  prevalence  of  winds  throughout
the  year,  see  PEFQSt.  1900,  pp.  296/1

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  '  whirlwind  '
seen  by  Ezekiel  (14),  and  to  the  'whirlwind  of  the

/. -nru-  i • j north,'  as  we  should probably  read  in
6.  Whirlwind.  Ecclus  43l?

Ezekiel's  word  is  myDi  sf'ara/i;  Sirach's  (if  we  are  correct)
/ly^y,  'fil'ul,  an  Aramaic  word,  used  in  Targ.  for  DSID,  sfiphiifi,
and  rnyo.  se'ilrah,  and  read  by  Perles  \_Analckten,  38],  in  Job
8633,  for  n'nj;  iy.

We  will  now  survey  the  use  of  the  Heb.  words
rendered  '  whirlwind. '

i.  nsw,  suphdh,  is  in  AV  rendered  'whirlwind,'  in
Job  37  9  (l5  bSvi'ai)  Prov.  1  27  10  25  Is.  5  28  17  13  21  i  06  15  Jer.
4 13  Am.  1 14  (iB  (rwreAeia,  and  in  Nah.  1  3)  Nah.  1  3,  but
'storm'  in  all  the  other  places  where  it  occurs  (Job21i8  Ps.
83  16  ©  op-joj)  Is.  296  Hos.  S  7  (ip  Karacrrpo'/)))).  RV  substitutes
'storm'  for  'whirlwind'  in  Job  37  9  Is.  17  13,  and  'whirlwind'
for  '  storm '  Is.  29  6.

That the  Hebrew  word is not always  used in the
Strictly technical meaning of  the English expression
seems evident (<S uses Karcuy'is  ; also XaiXai/', <n><r-
(m<7j«js  (?)  ; Vg.  tetnpestas,  turbo}. The  whirlwind  sug
gested  itself  as  an  apt  figure  (<i)  for  the  rapid  attack  of
great  conquering  powers, like  Assyria,  Babylonia,  and I
the  Syria  of  the  Seleucidse. Thus,  in  Am.  1  14 /. ,  the
'  day  of  the  whirlwind '  is  parallel  to  the  '  day  of  battle,'
and the next verse speaks of  captivity. In Is.  628 ,
Jer.  4 13,  the  wheels  of  war-chariots  are  '  like  the  whirl
wind,'  and  in  Dan.  1 1  40  '  the  king  of  the  north  '  (Syria) j
comes  out  '  like  a  whirlwind  '  (but  cp  £>).

(&)  The  whirlwind  also  symbolises  the  suddenness  of ;
the  divine  judgments  ;  nor  can  we  forget  that  Yahwe,

1  icau'crwi/  or  Kavcriav  ai-e/uos  in  (P  corresponds  to  three  Hebrew
words,  DHp, 'east  wind,' ait? (Is.  49 10,  see  MIRAGE),  and
3nn  (Gen.  31 40  [A] ;  cp  Lk.  12  55).

2  Fnndgrnl<fn  des  Orients,  fi  396  (Rpsenmiiller,  BiM.  Geogr.
of  Asia  Minor,  etc.,  126). Dr. Geikie  illustrate- the effects
of  the  sirocco  by  the  story  of  Jonah.

3  So  Magnus  and  Gratz. The  words  are  not  a  summons  to
the  N.  and  S.  winds  properly  so-called  (Del.),  nor  yet  to  all  the
four  chief  winds,  represented  by  N.  and  S.  (Siegfried).

5305


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK

in  imaginative  descriptions,  has  an  affinity  to  the  storm-
gods  of  neighbouring  countries.  It  has  in  fact  become
(in  no  unworthy  sense  of  the  term)  a  commonplace  to
say  that  Yahwe  moves  in  the  whirlwind  (Ps.  18 10  97  a
Nah.  13;  cp  CHEKI  n,  §  4,  THEOI-HANY,  2).  This
accounts  for  passages  like  Is.  6615  Zech.  9 14  (see  (5),
and  also,  if  we  look  closely,  for  Is.  17 13  Hos.  87  Prov.
lOzs  Ps.oSg,  where  the  'whirlwind'  spoken  of  certainly
means  the  divine  wrath.  Prov.  10  25,  however,  should  t>e
understood  as  in  RV  ;  it  states  that  when  the  whirlwind
of  judgment  has  passed  through  the  land  (cp  Is.  2817
8630),  the  wicked  will  be  swept  away,  but  the  righteous
will  stand  unmoved.  And  with  this  we  may  compare
the  fine  parallelistic  similitude  which  closes  the  sermon
on  the  Mount  (Mt.  724-27).  The  winds  that  '  blew  and
fell  upon  (irpofftirfaai'  v.  25,  irpocrlKo-^av  v.  27)  that
house  '  are  the  winds  of  the  Messianic  judgment.

2.  iTTjTDi  st'drdA,  is  synonymous  with  suphah.  (cp,  e.g. ,
Zech.  9 14  fO'Pl  n'nyp  with Is.  21  i, 3;|3  niB^D),  and  when it
stands  alone  is  usually  rendered  'whirlwind  '  (2  K.  2  i  n  Job  38  i
406  Is.  4024  41  16, etc.), in KV,  but  sometimes  'storm' (Ps.
10~29  Is.  296  [RV  whirlwind]); as  also  in  the  compound  ex
pressions  rni'p  nri, rfiah  se'&rak  (Ps.  10725  1488 Ezek.  1 4)
or  rrnyp  'i,  niah  si'ardth  (Ezek.  13  n  13). mrr  rnyo  in

Jer.  23  19  (<rft<r/.ios)  30  23  (opyrj),  is  rendered  '  whirlwind  of  the
Lord '  by  AV  and  '  tempest  of  the  Lord '  by  RV.  <&  renders
Ka.Ta.iyi';,  <7i><r<ret<j>ios,  \al\a\p  [in  Job?  \ai^.a\(i  Kai  i/e'<J>rj(o?)
3S  i  ve'^>os  40&] ;  Ecclus.  43  17,  <rvcnpo<l>r)  n-yeu/xaros  (nii'Dl  ~2ic)  I
489  Acu'AaTri  Trvpos  Fmi'sl  I  teiKpestas,  turbo.

3.  According  to  RV  we  have  once  an  expression  for
'  whirlwind  '  in  the  technical  sense— viz., ??inriO  1J,'D,  Jer.  23  19
( . . . ei? (TvvcreL&iLnv, (TutrTpei^ofie'iT)  ; temfestas eruiiipt'ns ;
R V  '  whirling  tempest ' ;  AV  wrongly  '  grievous  tempest '). But
the  existence  of  Sin,  H->  though  recognised  by  Ges.-Buhl,  is  not
quite  certain. In  all  the  passages  where  it  occurs,  the  text  is
doubtful. Here,  e.g.,  it  is  possible  to  read  THariS  'sweeping
(tempest) '  as  in  Jer.  23  19  (RV)  opyrj  <ru<TTpe</>ojoieV>) ;  Vg. procelln
rucns ;  if  S'TlaTO  'rolling  itself  along'  should  not  be  preferred
(so  Gra.).

4.  1>b,  sd'ar,  Dan.  1140  (©  Theod.  om. ;  quasi  teinpestas);

cp  Ass.  siiru  (Del.  Ass.  ffU'Ubzs),  Is.  2S  2  (aap  iyjy,  'destroy
ing  storm  ';  $4a  KaTcu/iepo/ieVr;  ?).

5.  SiSa,  galgal, Ps.  77  19  [  i«] RV (AV '  heaven  '). The
rendering  has  some  good  authority  (Ges., Hitz.,  Del.,  Kau.).
Pjiit  nowhere  else  does  Sj^j  mean  '  whirlwind ' ;  the  Vv.  adhere  to
the  sense  'wheel.' See  further  WHEEL,  and  THISTLE,  ad  fin.

T.  K.  C.
WINDOW. The  words  so  rendered  are  :

1.  H21X,  'ariMali,  Is.  (50  8. See  LATTICE,  §2,1,  and  COAL,  §  3.

2.  ji^n,  hallon,  Gen.  20s. See  LATTICE,  §  2  2.

3.  p?3,  kawivin(v\.),  Dan.  GIO[II]. See  LATTICE,  §  2,  3. On
these  three  words,  cp  HOUSE,  §  3.

4.  ins,  seliar,  Gen.  6  16. See  LATTICE,  §  2,  7.

On  the  *]££',  sckeph,  and  C'Ep-',  sckuphim,  of  i  K.  64  7  4f.,
see  LATTICE,  §  2,  6. On  VQV,  semes,  in  Is.  54  12  see  PINNACLE.


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK

Terminology  (§§  1-9).  Varieties*(§§  25-27).

Winepress  (g§  11-16).  Mixing  (§§  28-30).

Wine  making  (§§  17-24).  Metaphors  (§  31).

Use  of  wine  (§  32).

In  this  article  it  is  proposed  to  examine  the  terms
rendered  wine  or  strong  drink  in  EV,1  and  to  discuss
the  methods  adopted  by  the  Hebrews  in  the  preparation
of  these  beverages.  For  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  in
Palestine  reference  must  be  made  to  the  articles
VINE,  and  NEGEB,  §  7,  and  for  the  various  stages  in
the  growth  of  the  fruit  to  the  article  GRAPE.

The  first  place  in  our  study  of  the  relative  terminology
, , belongs to j«  ydyin, olvos, apparently a.

i.yaym;  loamvord  in  Sernitic  (see  BOB.  s.v.,  with

0  references  there,  to  which  add  O.  Schrader  in

Hehn,  Kulturpflanzen  u.  HavstkiereJW  pp.  xiv  91^,  also

1  For  a  complete  list  of  passages  with  the  renderings  of  the
prim-ipal  versions  (to  be  used  with  caution,  however)  see  Lees
and  Hums,  The  Temperance  Bible-Commentary,  412-428(1868).

5306


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


Muss-Arnolt,  '  Semitic  words  in  Greek  and  Latin  '  in
Publications  of  Amer.  Philolog.  Ass.  1892,  pp.  142-
146).  Occurring  over  140  times  in  the  traditional  text  of
OT,  ydyin  denotes,  like  its  Greek  and  Latin  congeners,
oivos  and  vinum,  the  juice  of  the  grape,  fermented  and
matured  in  appropriate  vessels.  It  is  represented  as  in
daily  use,  whether  at  the  ordinary  family  meal  and  the
more  ambitious  banquet  (MEALS,  §  12),  or  at  the  sacri
ficial  feast  and  in  the  ritual  of  the  sanctuary  (RITUAL,
§  2  ;  SACRIFICE,  col.  4193  etc.).  Ydyin  is  uniformly
rendered  by  'wine'  in  EY,  by  olvos  in  (5  (except  Job
3'J  19,  where  the  sense  is  correctly  given  by  -yXeO/iOS
sweet  [fermenting]  must),  and  by  vinum  in  the  I -at.
verss.  In  OT  ydyin  is  confined  to  grape-wine  ;  but  in
later  Hebrew  it  is  extended  to  include  both  the  freshly-
expressed  juice  or  must  (see  tiros  below)  and  the
fermented  juice  of  various  fruits,  such  as  the  apple-wine
frequently  mentioned  in  the  Mishna  (see  §  26).  The
corresponding  olvos  is  found  over  30  times  in  N'T,
not  reckoning  its  presence  in  compounds  such  as
oicoTTOTTys  '  winebibber  '  (Mt.  11  19  Lk.  734).  In  riVR
, —  tiros,  we  have  a  word  of  uncertain  etymology,1
occurring  38  times  in  OT.  A  convenient
summary  of  the  various  qualities  predicated  of  tiros  is
given  in  Driver's  Joel  and  Amos,  79 f.  ;  for  more
detailed  discussion  see  A.  M.  Wilson,  The  \Vines  of  the
Bible  [1877]  301-339.  In  ii  places  tiros  is  associated
with  corn  as  a  valued  product  of  the  soil,  and  in  19
other  passages  with  corn  and  fresh  oil  (yis/idr,  the
raw,  unclarified  oil  as  it  Hows  from  the  oil  press,  see
On.).  Hence  by  analogy  we  ought  to  regard  tiros  as
primarily  the  freshly -expressed  and  still  unfermented
grape -juice,  technically  known  as  must,  the  Latin
mustnm  (Mic.  615  Vg. ).  It  is  also  applied,  however,
proleptically  to  the  juice  while  still  in  the  grape,  as  in
Is.  65  8  ( '  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster '  EV ;
cp  the  Latin  phrase  vinum  pendens),  and  by  another
figure  to  the  grapes  in  the  press -vat  (Mic.  I.e.  '  thou
shalt  tread  tiros  [RV  the  vintage],  but  shalt  not  drink
the  wine '  [ydyin]).  On  the  other  hand  it  is  important,
in  view  of  the  controversies  to  which  the  term  tiros
has  given  rise,  to  note  that  in  certain  passages  it  clearly
denotes  the  product  of  fermentation ,  or  wine  properly
so  called.  Its  application  in  this  respect,  however,  was
apparently  limited  to  'new  wine,'  as  frequently  rendered
in  AY  and  RY,-  either  while  still  in  the  fermenting
stage  or  during  the  next  few  months,  while  the  process
of  maturing  was  still  incomplete.  The  grounds  on
which  this  conclusion  is  based  are  these  : — -

(i)  In  one  passage  where  tiros  is  associated  with  whoredom
and  wine  (ydyin)  as  '  taking  away  the  understanding  '  (Hos.  4  n
RV),3  intoxicating  properties  are  unmistakably  assigned  to  it.
(2)  Tiros  K  repeatedly  mentioned  as  subject  to  the  laws  of  tithe
and  of  the  first  fruits  (Dt.  12i;  1423  184  Neh.  10  37  _/£  and
elsewhere).  Now  the  later  Jewish  code  specifies  the  precise
moment  when  the  expressed  grape-juice  becomes  subject  to  the
law  of  tithe  :  '  Must*  is  tithable  from  the  time  that  it  throws  up
scum  '  (.Wa'ascr.  1  7,  reading  '"iBp] ;  so  evidently  Surenhusius"
unpointed  edition,  as  shown  by  the  explanations  of  Maimonides


1  The  usual  derivation  from  ydras, '  to  take  possession  of,'
though supported in Aramaic by the cognate wcritli from
yerath,  is  not  convincing. Recently  it  has  been  suggested  that
tires  is  a  loan-word  from  Sumerian  through  Assyrian  (see  Ball
and  Haupt,  SROT,  Gen.,  note  on  27  28).

2  According  to Temp. Bib. Comtn. (ut  supr. 415)  tiros  is
translated  in  AV  26  times  by  'wine,'  n  times  by  'new wine'
.  .  .  and once  (Mic.  (115)  by 'sweet wine.' A table  of  all
the occurrences with their renderings is given in Eadie's
Cyclopedia, s.7'. 'Wine.' RV  adds  to these the rendering
'vintage'  Nu.  18  12  Mic.  I.e.  and  in  several  other  passages  in
the  margin. The  American  revisers  would  consistently  render
by  '  new  wine  '  throughout.

3  It  is  possible,  however,  that  C'lTH  is  here  a clerical error
for "1317  which  the  context  certainly  leads  us  to  expect. <5's
rendering neSvcrna,  a frequent equivalent of  sf-kiir, but not
elsewhere of  tiros, supports this view. The other  ancient
versions  follow  (85.

4  The original has J", ydyin, tiros having now become
obsolete.

5307


and  Hartenora ;  cp  also  Levy,  NHWR,  s.-:  K£p)— /.<•.,  from  the
moment  when  it  begins  to  ferment.  The  result  is  the  same  if,
with  later  editions,  we  read  the  piel  'IS/;'  and  render :  '  from
the  time  one  begins  to  skim  the  froth '  (Jost.  Sammter ;  cp
also  Jastrow,  Diet,  of  the  Targuntint,  etc.,  s.v.).  Even  the
inferior  wine  made  by  pouring  water  on  the  refuse  of  the  press
had  to  ferment  (f"!2rn)  befor<>  becoming  subject  to  tithe  (Jlfa'dsfr
S/i.  1  3  ;  cp,  for  the  heave  -  offering,  Teriini.  3  i,  where  the
reference  is  to  wine  that  had  passed  through  the  stage  of
alcoholic  fermentation  and  had  become  vinegar  (acetous
fermentation)).  Hence  when  it  is  said  that  tiros  shall  be  drunk
in  the  courts  of  the  sanctuary  (Is.  02  8/.),  the  conclusion  is  un
avoidable  that  tiros  is  not  here  the  unfermented  must,  but  true
fermented  wine.  The  wine  of  the  drink-offering  (^p^  Nu.  15  5,
etc.  ;  see  under  SACRIFICE,  §  31  a)  is  never  described  otherwise
than  as  ydyin,  except  once  when  it  is  described  as  sekdr  (see
below,  §  8).  The  tiros,  finally,  which  in  an  early  passage
(Judg.  913)  is  said  to  'cheer  God'  as  a  libation,  and  to
exhilarate  man  in  the  accompanying  sacrificial  feast,  must  be
understood,  in  the  light  of  what  has  just  been  said,  as  a
fermented  wine.  (3)  The  evidence  of  the  versions  in  this
question  must  not  be  overlooked.  With  two  exceptions  (Is.  658,
pta£  '  grape-stone  '  ;  and  Hos.  4  u,  for  which  see  foot-note  above)
t!3  has  uniformly  rendered  tiros  by  olvos.  The  Targums  and
the  Peshitta  with  almost  equal  uniformity  give  "Cn  K^-~
fermented  wine  (see  §  4  below),  whilst  Jerome,  with  very  few
exceptions,  renders  by  vinuiti,  not  as  we  might  expect,  by
nnistutn  (except  Mic.  0  15),  even  where,  as  in  Pr.  3  10  Joel  2  24,
the  sense  seems  to  require  mustum.

The  word  'asis  (s'sy)  is  found  five  times  in  OT  and
is  rendered  in  AV  twice  by  '  new  wine,'  twice  by  '  sweet

,- - wine'  and  once  (Cant.  82)  by  'juice.' RY
3. clSIS  !  j  •/- i ,  • ,

» ,  renders uniformly  by sweet  wine except

'  " in  the  passage  cited,  where  it  appears  only

in  the  margin.

Derived  from  the  verb  03y,  to  crush  by  treading,  'dsis  is
apparently  a  poetical  synonym  of  tiros,  denoting  primarily  the
freshly-expressed  juice  of  the  grape  or  other  fruit  (so  Am.  9  13  ;
'sweet  wine';  imitated  Joel  3  [4]  is).  In  Joel  1  5  and  Is.  4926,
however,  the  context  shows  that,  like  tiros,  'dsis  might  be  an
intoxicating  beverage,  as  it  doubtless  is  in  Cant.  82,  where  it  is
made  from  pomegranates  (§  26).  In  this  passage  ©UNA  renders
by  1'a/j.a,  whence  EV  'juice  ' ;  in  Is.  49  26  by  oti-os  I'e'os  ;  Am.  9  13
Joel  3  [4]  18  by  •yAuicacr/ud's,  which  recalls  the  yAeOxos  (EV
'  new  wine  ')  of  Acts  2  13.  Gleukos  is  used  of  the  '  sweet '  grape
juice  through  all  the  stages  of  its  passage  into  fermented  wine.
Thus  the  lexicographer  Hesychius  defines  y\eiiicos  as  '  the
juice  which  drops  (TO  a7r6<TTa-yju.a)  from  the  grape,  before  it  is
trodden '  (cp  the  explanation  of  Ex.  L'2  29  [28],  §  15  below).  Again
the  word  is  used  of  must  in  the  process  of  fermentation,  as  Job
32  19  ((£>»  acTKo?  vAeuicovs  £eW),  whilst  in  the  passage  before  us
(Acts  2  13)  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  strongly  intoxicating
qualities  of  new  and  immature  wine — in  this  particular  case,
wine  of  the  preceding  vintage.  Here  may  be  taken  the  reference
in  Neh.  8  10,  to  eating  the  fat  and  drinking  the  sweet  (C'|TrC3
(P  yAi/KaoyiaTa),  evidently  a  variety  or  varieties  of  sweet  wine
recalling  the  p'WO  |"  of  Menafi.  8  5.1

Another  poetical  designation  of  wine  is  hhner  (ten)

which  occurs  only  in  the  poem  Dt.  32 14; for  in  Is.  27  2

we must read, for  the  MT  -en  (AV

4.  hemer,  etc. ,  red wine>)| wkh RVn,B. ^ ,a

pleasant  vineyard.'  In  Aramaic,  however,  as  frequently
happens,  the  Hebrew  poetical  term  is  the  ordinary  word
for  wine  ;  so  six  times  in  the  Aramaic  portions  of  Ezra
(69  722)  and  Daniel  (612423).  The  etymology  from
•on,  fet-'ere,  to  foam,  ferment  (cp  nan  p;  1's.  758  [9]  'the
wine  foameth,"  RV)  shows  that  Mmer  and  its  cognates
in  Aramaic  and  Arabic  specially  denote  wine  as  the
product  of  fermentation.

Sobt  (xrib)  occurs  only  in  Is.  1 22  (EV  'wine'  (5
olvos),  Hos.  4 18  (their  drink,'  RVm£-  'their  carouse'),
and  Nah.  1 10  ('  their  drink  ')  ;  but  the  text  of
the  last  two  passages  is  very  uncertain  (HDB
s.  v.  and  the  Comm. ).  That  sobt  was  some  strongly
intoxicating  beverage  the  root-word,  sabd,  '  to  drink  to
excess,' abundantly  proves  (see  e.g.  Pr.  232o/. ).  The
cognate  sabu,  a  synonym  of  kurunnu,  denoted  in
Assyrian  a  drink  from  sesame  (Del.  Ass.  H\VB,  $.-•.}.

In  a  small  number  of  post-exilic  passages,  we  meet


1  For  the  methods  adopted  to  increase  the  sweetness  of  wines,
see  §§  15  22  below.

5308


6.  sobe.


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


with a  group  of  allied  terms  derived  from  the  verbal
root  ^ps,  to  mix  (wine)  with  spices  (Pr.  9  2  5),
6.  mesek,  ancj  tne  C0gnate  .,„.,_  wnjch  in  the  Hebrew
mimsak, ,  , ...  ,

.  of  the  Mishna  period  signified  '  to  mix  with

water' — viz.  misek  7]DO  (Ps.  758  [9]  EV
'mixture'),1  mimsdk  7JDDD  (Prov.  2830,  EV  'mixed
wine,'  Is.  65 1 1  AV  'drink  offering,'  RV  'mingled
wine'  [K^paff/j.a]  'unto  Destiny'),  and  mlzeg,  310  (Cant.
72,  AV  'liquor,'  RV  'mingled  wine,'  <§  Kpcifj.a).  The
nature  of  the  mingling  or  mixing  here  implied  will  be
fully  discussed  later  (§  29).

In  Is.  2f>  6  the  word  c"ic»  sUmdrlm,  properly  the
lees  of  wine  (Ps.  758  [9]  Jer.  48  n  Zeph.  1 12),  is  used  for

7.  Miscellaneous  U:e.sake,fof <he *ssonance wi'h
and  figurative *$* 'fat  things, to  signify  wine

expressions. <EV wmes on 'he  ulees  > m a
figurative  sense. For  the  obscure  or

perhaps  corrupt  term  n&s-K  which  AV,  following  an
erroneous  tradition,  has  rendered  a  '  flagon  of  wine '
(2  S.  619;  cp  i  Ch.  167  Hos.  3i  Cant.  2s)  see  the
discussions  under  FRUIT  (§  5).  In  Nu.  63  wine  and
strong  drink  are  both  distinguished  from  the  un-
fermented  juice  (rno'o)  (EV  '  liquor  ')  of  the  grape.2

Our  list  of  the  words  rendered  wine  in  EV  may
close  with  a  reference  to  three  figurative  expressions
which  are  met  with  at  very  different  stages  of  Hebrew
literature.  In  the  early  book  of  the  covenant  we  have
the  unique  expression  yay  (literally  'tear'  Ex.2228),
which  includes  the  first  flow  of  the  juice  of  olives  as
well  as  of  grapes  (for  a  new  suggestion  as  to  the  origin
of  this  term  see  §  15).  In  the  Gospels  we  find  wine
designated  '  the  fruit  of  the  vine '  (r6  yevrnna  TTJS
d/j.TTf\ov  Mt.  2629  Mk.  1425  Lk.  22 18),  a  periphrasis
doubtless  already  current  in  Jewish  speech,  since  it  is
found  in  the  time-honoured  benediction  over  the  wine-
cup  in  Bcrakh.  6 1  (jsjri  "is — for  the  words  of  the
blessing  see  MEALS,  §  7,  end).  In  all  periods,  finally,
we  find  the  poetical  designation  'blood  of  the  grape"
from  the  red  colour  of  the  expressed  juice  (15.682)
derived  from  the  stalks  and  skins  of  the  fruit  (Gen.
49n  Dt.  32i4  Ecclus.  3920  50i5,  cp  Rev.  14 20  and  the
Arabic  Jamu-z-sikk,  blood  of  the  wineskin).

There  still  remains  for  examination  the  important
term  -my  sekdr  (from  the  root  -ay,  common  to  all

8 SekTr Semitic  dialects,  which  supplies  the  Hebrew

, '.  ' words  for 'drunk,'  'drunkard.' and 'drunken-

, . , , ness'). In  ©  the  word  has  assumed  the  form

criKfpa  —  but occasionally translated fj.e-

6i'fffj.a,  twice  /j.fdrj,  and  once  olvos — through  the  influence

of  the  Aramaic  sikrd,  xnri?  ; and  in  Jerome,  sicera. The

etymology  warrants  the  inference  that  sekdr  is to be

regarded  as  a  comprehensive  designation  for  every  sort

of  intoxicating  beverage  from  whatever  source  derived,

or,  as  Jerome  has  it,  '  omne  quod  inebriare  potest '  (Vg.

Lev.  109  Nu.  63  i  S.I  15).

In  one  of  his  letters  Jerome  expands  his  definition  as  follows  : —
'  Sicera  hebraeo  sermone  omnis  potio,  qua;  inebriare  potest,
sive  ilia  quae  frumento  conticitur,  sive  pomorum  sncco,  aut
quum  favi  decoquuntur  in  dulcem  et  barbaram  potionem,  aut
pahnarum  fructus  exprimitur  in  liquorem,  coctisque  frugibus

1  (5  has  here  the  apparent  contradiction  jroTrjpioi'  oivov
oxparou  n-Arjpe?  KepaoyxaTO?  (cp  Rev.  10 14  rov  KeKpavfiei'dv
axpaiTov),  the  explanation  being  that  oti'os  aicpaTOs  is  the  usual
designation  of  wine  undiluted  with  water,  whilst  (cepatr/ua
denotes  the  addition  of  aromatic  herbs  (see  §  29).

['-  In  Cant.  2  13  etc.  Sym.  renders  TIDD  (RV  'in  blossom';
Ges.,  following  Syr.  authorities,  flos  vitis)  by  v\.va.v&i\.  It  has
been  suggested  that  the  'impossible'  niSTJ'  in  Is.  168  should

be  corrected  into  vi^D  (GRAPE,  3),  and  a  special  reason  for  the
mention  of  the  vine-blossoms  may  be  found  in  the  use  of  these
blossoms  in  flavouring  new  wine  (cp  Duval,  A*/-,'/ 14277).  Such
flavoured  wine  was  called  olvo<;  oivdi'Oivos.  Hasselquist  thus
describes  the  method  employed,  viz.,  'hanging  the  powder  pro
duced  by  drying  the  flowers  of  the  vine  in  the  cask,  when  the
new  wine  begins  to  ferment '  (Voyages  and  Travels,  1766,  pp.
40I/:).]

53°9


aqua  pinguior  coloratur'  (Ep.  ad Nepotianum, ed. Vallarsi,

1  266).  I

From  this  specification,  it  will  be  noted,  wine  is  apparently
excluded,  and  for  this  exclusion  there  is  a  certain  amount  of
justification.  Thus  in  the  priestly  legislation  affecting  the
Nazirites  (Nu.  63/1)  vinegar  of  ydyin  is  distinguished  from
vinegar  of  si-harp  which  shows  that  by  the  early  post-exilic  period,
in  certain  circles  at  all  events,  ydyin  was  no  longer  included  in
the  category  of  sekdr  or  '  strong  drink.'  We  are  not  justified  in
inferring  from  this,  however,  that  the  two  categories  of  wine
and  strong  drink  were  at  all  periods  mutually  exclusive.  Thus
when  the  term  sika.ru  is  first  met  with  on  the  soil  of  Palestine,
it  is  used  for  '  drink '  generally,  and  is  repeatedly  associated
with  food,  oil,  honey,  etc.  (see  the  Amarna  letters,  KB  5,  index
S.T.).  One  has  but  to  recall  the  enormous  number  of  jars  of
wine  which  Thothmes  III.  received  from  Syria  at  an  earlier
period  to  see  that  the  sikari  or  'drinks'  of  the  Amarna  letters
must  have  included  wine.  In  the  Assyro-Babylonian  contract-
tablets  sika.ru  denotes  intoxicating  beverages  generally,  and  in
particular  wine  made  from  dates  (Del.  Ass.  HIVB,  s.v ;  see
further,  §  25).  Indeed  it  is  extremely  probable  that  in  pre
historic  times,  while  the  Semitic  races  were  still  confined  to
their  primitive  home  in  Arabia,  the  principal,  if  not  the  sole,
intoxicant  was  obtained  from  fermented  date-juice.3  To  this
first  of  all  the  name  sekdr  would  be  given,  \\hen  at  a  later
period  the  Semites  spread  northward  and  became  acquainted
with  the  vine  and  its  fruit,  it  is  only  natural  that  the  term
should  be  extended  to  include  tht fermented  juice  o/  the  grape,
for  which,  however,  the  loanword  ydyin  was  by  and  by  adopted
to  distinguish  grape  wine  from  the  older  date  wine  or  sekdr  in
the  strict  sense,  as  well  as  from  the  fermented  juices  of  other
fruits,  such  as  pomegranates,  quinces  etc.  (see  §  26)  included
under  sekdr  in  its  wider  application

The  distinction  which  has  just  been  drawn  between  these
varying  applications  of  the  term  sekdr  receives  ample  confirma
tion  from  a  closer  study  of  the  OT  data.  Thus  in  the  many
poetical  and  semi- poetical  (prophetical)  passages  where  the
word  occurs  in  the  parallelism  alongside  of  ydyin  (Pr.  20  i  31  6
Is.  5  ii  22  287  etc.)  it  is  unlikely  that  sekdr  is  more  than  a
synonym  of  ydyin,  denoting  'strong,'  'heady1  wine  or  such
like.  Perhaps  also  '  spiced  wine  '  (for  which  see  §  29),  as  stated
in  Suidas'  definition,  s.v.  <riicepa. '.  (TxevacrToi'  jro/xa.  /cod  jrap"
'E(3paiois  OVTIO  \ty6fj.evov  ^(6v<7fj.a.,  euros  au/j/iiyij?  ySvefiairiv.
The  Targums  and  the  Peshitta  frequently  render  sekdr  by
'old  wine,"  whilst  the  Midrash  records  the  tradition  that  it
denoted  wine  in  the  natural  state  (%H)  as  distinguished  from
ydyin  or  wine  diluted  with  water  (jltC);  in  both  cases,
however,  we  have  probably  nothing  more  than  exegetical
guesswork.  Of  much  greater  importance  for  our  argument  is
the  fact  that  in  the  unique  passage,  Nu.  287,  the  material  of
the  drink  offering  is  expressly  designated  sekdr  (AV  'strong
wine,'  RV  'strong  drink').  Now  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  in
the  historical  period  any  liquor  other  than  the  juice  of  the  grape
was  accepted  for  this  purpose,4  and  still  more  difficult  to  admit
that  any  other  liquor  than  wine  was  intended  in  this  passage  of
the  Priests'  Code.  In  other  legislative  passages,  such  as  Nu.
0  3_/T,  cited  above,  and  Dt.  1426,  sekdr  must  be  distinguished
(horn  ydyin)  in  the  direction  suggested  by  Jerome,  as  a  general
term  for  all  fermented  beverages  other  than  ydyin  and  in
particular — though  of  this  we  have  no  positive  OT  evidence — •
for  date  wine.  A  land  whose  produce  of  dates  was  beyond
reckoning  (Aristcce  Epist.,  ed  Wendland,  112)  was  certainly
not  ignorant  of  the  methods  of  manufacturing  wine  from  their
juice,  although  the  name  date  wine  is  first  met  with  in  the
Talmudic  period  (see  further,  §  25).

Last  of  all,  mention  may  be  made  of  one  or  two  more  com
prehensive  terms.  From  the  root  nnt:1,  'to  drink'  we  have

TT

nneto,  mis/eh,  as  a  general  term  for  beverages,

. especially  wine. Thus  workmen,  receiving

°  wages and 'everything found,' have an

allowance  of  'meat  and  drink  (nnro)  and
oil'  (Ezra  87;  cp  the  parallel  akali,  Sikari,  samnl  of
Am.  Tab.  209  12^  and  elsewhere  ;  also  Dan.  1 10  with
vv.  5  8  16,  where  the  mis/eh  is  said  to  consist  of  wine).
From  the  associated  root  npc>,  we  have  both  ^pjy,  sikk/iy,
(Hos.  2s  [7],  where  bread,  oil,  and  '  drinks'  are  parallel
to  the  '  corn,  oil,  and  wine'  of  i'.  8  [10]  ;  Ps.  1029  [10],  and

1  With  this  definition  of  sekdr  may  be  compared 'Omar's
definition  of  hainr  as  including  wine  from  grapes,  dates,  honey,
wheat,  and  barley  '  (Jacob,  Altarab.  Bcduinenleben,  97,  quoting
Buh-iri).

2  The distinction here so  clearly  drawn between the two
kinds  of  vinegar  is  fatal  to our  acceptance  of  the tradition,
represented  in  Onkelos  and  approved  by  Rashi  (Comm.  in  loc.\
that  the  sekdr  is  old  vrine.

3  For  the  importance  of  the  palm  among  the  early  Semites
see  Barton,  A  Sketch  of  Semitic  Origins,  75^  ;  cp  also  PALM,

|x.

•*  Date  juice  was  of  course  accepted  in  the  earliest  times  ;  in
Babylonia  indeed  in  all  periods  libations  of  date  wine  (niki  sa
sikari)  were  common  (see  RITUAL,  §  2).

5310


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


figuratively  Pr.  38)  and  npe>a,  maskeh.  MaSkeh  is  used
comprehensively,  as  in  Lev.  1134,  for  'every  drink  that
may  be  drunk,'  and  in  the  later  plural  form  (ppc'c)  it
becomes,  in  the  Mishna,  the  general  term  for  all  sorts
of  beverages — water,  wine,  milk,  etc.  (see  Tinlm.  11  2).
Hence  njJBJC*  ^N?  is  Delitzsch's  rendering  of  the  Gk.
/3pui<ny  Kal  7r6<ns  (Col.  2i6),  whilst  their  respective
plurals  represent  the  f3pwfj.ara  Kal  iro/j-ara  of  Heb.  9 10.

The  economic  use  of  grapes  in  ancient,  as  in  modern

times, was  fourfold. The  grapes  might be  eaten in

their natural state (c*nS Nu. 6  3, AV

'  moist '),  or  they  might  be  exposed  to  the

grape  . gun  ancj  usecj  as  rajsins  (FRUIT, §  4),  or

finally  they  might  be  trodden  in  the  press  and  the  juice
converted  either  into  grape-syrup  or  dibs  (HoNEY,  §  i
(3))  or  into  wine.  The  last  of  these  processes  alone
concerns  us  here.

The  ancient  winepresses,  traces  of  which  are  found  in

every  part  of  Palestine,  from  Dan  to  Beersheba,  have

„,  proved the  most  permanent  memorials of

'  ' the  Hebrew  occupation,  and  show  that  the

: land  of  promise  was  indeed  a  '  land  of  wine

press.  anfj  vineyar(js'  (2  K.  1832).  Two  adjoin
ing  vineyards  might  have  one  press  in  common  (DPmai
67).  The  typical  winepress  consisted  of  two  troughs
of  varying  dimensions,  at  different  levels,  hewn  out
(  as>n,  Is.  63  RV)  of  the  solid  rock,  the  upper  of  the  two
having  the  larger  superficial  area,  the  lower  the  greater
depth.1  In  the  upper  trough,  which  we  shall  call  the
pressvat  (na,  gath,  in  AV  variously  rendered  press,  wine
press  [sometimes  in  one  word,  sometimes  in  two]  and
winefat)  men  and  women  trod  (rt~ri)  the  grapes,  the
expressed  juice  flowing  by  a  channel  (nijsi  Mdaser.  1?)
through  the  intervening  rock  into  the  lower  trough  or
winevat  (HJT,  ytkeb ;  see  Schick's  diagrams  reproduced
below).  This  distinction  between  the  gath  and  the
yt'keb  is  not  always  observed  by  the  OT  writers,  yckeb
being  occasionally  used  to  denote  the  pressvat  (Is.  16io
Job24n)  whilst  either  may  be  used  by  metonymy  for
the  whole  winepress,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  names  of
localities  now  with  gath  (Gath,  Gath-hepher,  etc.),  now
with  ytkeb,  as  Zeeb's  winepress  (Judg.  725)  and  the
king's  winepresses  (Zech.  14 10)  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Jerusalem.  A  third  term,  ni'S,  piirdh,  which  may  be
rendered  winetrough,  is  used  as  a  synonym  both  of
gath  (Is.  683)  and  of  yikeb  (Hag.  2i6  reading  as  in  AV
miss — the  RV  rendering  'vessels,'  following  (5  and
Vg. ,  is  not  an  improvement).  By  NT  times  ytkeb  as
the  name  of  the  winevat  had  become  almost,  if  not
altogether,  obsolete,  its  place  being  supplied  by  113,  bar
(Mishna  passim} — gath,  however,  remaining  for  the
pressvat.  Occasionally,  however,  we  find  gath  used  in
the  Mishna  for  the  winepress  as  a  whole,  with  the  two
troughs  or  vats  designated  respectively  the  '  upper '
vat  (m'vSyn  n;)  and  the  'lower'  vat  (minnnn  ns,  Teriim.
89  Mdaser.  1  7  etc.).  In  (5  the  uniform  rendering  of
gath  is  ~\-r]v6s  (also  Mt.  21  33  Rev.  14ig/  19  15),  which
is  also  used  to  represent  yi'keb  in  some  passages,  whilst
in  others  we  find  for  vtkeb  the  more  exact  inro\'/]VLOV
(Is.  16  10  Joel  3  [4]  13  Hag.  2  17  Zech.  14  IQ  ;  also
Mk  12i).

Whilst  a  press  with  two  vats  seems  to  have  been  in

general  use,  several  instances  are  known  of  an  arrange-

„,,  ment  with  three  and  even  four. Thus  the

,  "  late Dr. Schick has given a description

trougn (/J£FQi  l899>  p 4I  j )(  with  plans  here  re_

produced,  of  an  elaborate  press  discovered
by  him  at  'Ain  Karim,  to  the  SW.  of  Jerusalem.
Here  we  have  a  trough  a,  about  7  ft.  square,  into  which

1  Of  the  modern  Syrian  winepresses  it  is  said  that  '  if  the
upper  trough  be  6  ft.  long  by  5  broad  [and  a  foot  and  a  half  deep]
the  lower  one  will  be  about  4  ft.  long  by  2  ft.  broad,  but  about
3ft.  deep.'  G.  M.  Mackie,  Bible  Manners  and  Customs,  1898.

S3"


the  grape- baskets  were  first  emptied.  This  trough
at  once  recalls  the  irpo\-r\v(.ov  by  which  (5  renders  the
ytkeb  of  Is.  02,  and  is  probably  the  'ablt,  c'31',  of  the
Mishna  (Bab.  j\ffs.  07  [where  it  occurs  alongside  of  the
md  titan,  ]oys,  or  trough  for  the  olives  ;  see  OIL,  §  2]
TohSr.  104  [the  grape  juice  here  trickles  in  drops  from
the  'dbit  into  the  gatli]  Jer.  MO'ed  A'at.  28i<z  [grapes
trodden  in  the  'ablf\).

The/>r0fcfiio;t,  a,  is  connected  by  a  channel  in  the  rock  with  the
larger  trough,  b,  10  ft.  by  8  ft.,  the  floor  of  which  is  lower  by  3  ft.
than  that  of  a.  From  l\  again,  two  channels  lead  into  two  vats
at  a  still  lower  level,  connected  with  each  other  by  a  third
channel ;  the  smaller  of  the  two  vats,  c,  is  about  -}J  ft.  square
and  4  'ft.  deep,  whereas  d  measures  over  5  ft.  square  and  is
6J  ft.  deep.  In  the  floor  of  the  larger  vat,  a  circular  hollow  has
been  sunk  at  one  side,  easily  recognisable  in  the  sectional  plan,
to  allow  the  last  drops  of  the  must  to  be  scooped  out.  This  is
evidently  the  'little  vat '  (p^?  *rfi)  of  the  Mishna.  A  some
what  similar  arrangement  of  three  vats,  the  floors  of  which  were
paved  with  a  mosaic  of  'rough  white  tesserae  set  in  plaster'  was
unearthed,  with  several  other  presses,  in  1889  at  Tell-es-Safi
(PEFQ  1900,  p.  34  with  plans,  32^  ;  see  this  volume  passim
for  numerous  vats  laid  bare  by  the  explorers).

In  vineyards  where  the  nature  of  the  ground  or  other
considerations  did  not  permit  of  rock  excavation,  pits


FIG.  i. — Ancient  wine-press. (From  the  Palestine
Exploration  Fund,  QS,  1899.)

were  dug  in  the  ground  (Mk.  12  i  RV,  '  a  pit  for  the
winepress,'  Mt.  2133),1  which  were  then  lined  with
masonry  or  cement  and  coated  with  pitch  (see  ^Aboddh
Zdrdh,  6  ii,  where  the  name  gath  sel  litres,  cin  'rt?  m,  or
cement-vat,  is  given  to  this  kind  of  press).  An  excellent
specimen,  probably  of  the  thirteenth  century  B.C.,  was
discovered  by  Bliss  at  Tell  el-Hesy  (A  Mound  of  Many
Cities,  69 /,  with  illustr. ).  The  vats,  of  which  there
were  three,  were  circular.  The  uppermost  had  a

1  That  the  Arjvos  of  this  parable  was  not  rock-hewn,  as  is
generally  assumed,  is  evident  from  the  context  of  M  t.  _o  is  where
the  same  expression,  'dug  the  ground,'  iopvgcv  yt)i>  (so  BX)  is
used.

53"


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


diameter  of  63  ins.,  walls  of  mud,  and  a  floor  of
cement  sloping  gently  towards  a  cup-like  hollow,  the
'  little  vat '  described  above.  The  second  vat  of  the
series  had  also  a  diameter  of  over  5  ft.  and  walls  of
brick  with  a  floor  of  cement  consisting  of  pebbles
imbedded  in  lime,  sloping  rapidly  towards  the  outlet
into  the  lowermost  of  the  vats,  a  small  pit  lined  with
rough  stones  and  in  the  side  of  which  was  a  stone  spout.

A third species of  press  was  used  from time im
memorial  in  Egypt,  and  is  attested  for  Palestine,  where
it  bore  the  name  gath  sel  'es,  vy  *}&  rn,  or
13.  Wooden  , ,  >, , „

wooden  press  (  Absd.  Zar.  I.e. ).  As  re
press,  presented  by  Wilkinson  (op.  cit.  1385)  this
was  simply  a  large  wooden  trough  raised  considerably
above  the  ground  and  furnished  with  spouts  through
which  the  must  flowed  into  the  receiving-jars.  In  the
particular  specimen  reproduced  by  Wilkinson  ropes  are
seen  hanging  from  a  wooden  roof,  by  means  of  which
those  treading  the  grapes  supported  themselves.  A
modern  press  of  the  same  type  is  reproduced  in  Van
Lennep,  Bible  Lands  [1875]  II^-  It  is  possible  that  the
ytkeb  of  Is.  02  is  to  be  understood  not  as  a  whole  press,
but  as  a  rock-hewn  vat  (such  as  vat  No.  4  at  Tell-es-
Safi,  PEFQ,  1900,  p.  33 /.),  and  the  inro\r;viov  of  Mk.
12 1  as  a  cemented  pit,  both  intended  to  receive  the
juice  expressed  from  a  wooden  press  such  as  that  now
described.  *

On the approach of the vintage season (r)/u,tpai

Tpvytjrov,  Ecclus.  2427,  6  tempos  TU>V  Ka,pir(av,  Mt.  '2\  34,

ninsrr  nytr,  Chaglgah 3 4),  which  corresponded

vT  <:  ^  fa'r'.v  w'tn  our  September,  whole  families
Harvest;.  repajrcti  to  the  vineyards  for  the  more
expeditious  gathering  of  the  fruit,  sleeping  in  booths,
and  living  largely  on  the  ripening  grapes.  It  was  the
most  joyful  time  of  all  the  Hebrew's  year  (Is.  16  10).
The  ripe  clusters  (rriV3E>K)  were  either  nipped  off  (j"]jj,
Pea,  It,},  or,  more  usually,  cut  off  p?2)  with  a  curved
knife  (Sso,  Joel  3  [4]  13,  Ohdl.  18 1 ;  Sp^-n-avov,  Rev.  14 19  ;
EV  'sickle').  Hence  is  derived  the  special  name  for
the  grape  harvest,  Ti'2,  bdsir  (cp  Ti2,  the  grape-
gatherer,  Jer.  69499;  rpvyuv,  Ecclus.  30  25  [33 16]),
although  Tap,  kdslr,  strictly  the  corn-harvest,  is  some
times  applied  to  the  vintage  (Is.  16p  17  n  18s  Joel  3  [4]
13,  '  put  ye  in  the  sickle  for  the  harvest  is  ripe  ').'-

The  grapes  destined  for  the  manufacture  of  wine
were  carried  in  baskets  (So,  Mishna/aw//«,  n'TD-'D,  Jer.

_ ,. GgAV, see,  however,  RVms-  and  art.
15.  bpreadmg-  BASKET)  to  the  press  where  thev  wore

immediately  trodden  out,  or,  as  is  still
a  common  practice  in  Syria  and  other  wine-producing
countries,  spread  out  for  some  days  3  on  the  naa'o  or
spreading-place  (cp  FRUITS,  §  4,  with  footnote),  where
the  grapes  were  laid  either  on  the  bare  ground  or  on
vine  leaves  (  TohSr.  104/. ).  The  mistali  was  generally,
if  not  always,  close  to  the  press,  so  that  the  juice
exuding  from  the  grapes  under  their  own  pressure  might
trickle  into  the  vat  (njS  «]Bj,  ib.  10  5).  The  object  of
this  proceeding  was  to  increase  the  amount  of  sugar
and  diminish  the  amount  of  water  in  the  grapes  (see
Redding,  A  History  .  .  .  of  Modern  IVinns^  [1851],
55),  with  a  view  to  the  production  of  a  specially  sweet
wine,  like  the  pao»^j«  (-rj\ia(TT6v)  of  M/ndAotA&s.  An
ancient  mistdh  or  spreading-place  with  its  adjoining  vat

1  Is  it  possible  that  puriih  (Is.  63  2  ;  see  above)  was  the  special
designation  for  a  press  of  this  description?

3  The  unity  of  the  prophet's  figure  in  this  verse  has  hitherto
been  marred  by  the  commentators  taking  kasir  in  its  usual_ sense
of  corn  harvest,  and  consequently  rendering  maggdtby  'sickle.'
In  reality  the  reference  is  to  the  grape  harvest  and  (>5  Tpvyqros)
the  gatherer's  knife.  This  view  of  the  passage  preserves  the
unity  of  the  figure  and  is  confirmed  by  (0  and  the  author  of
Revelation  (14 1<)/.),  and  by  the  fact  that  the  only  other  instance
of  ^'3,  in  the  sense  of  '  to  be  ripe,'  refers  to  the  ripening  of

grapes  (Gen.  40  10).

3  At  present  from  five  to  seven  days,  near  Hebron  even  for
sixteen  days  ZDPV 11 170.

5313


has,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  recently  been  laid  bare  at
Tell  es-San(/V-.7'X),  1900,  p.  3i/  with  plans).  It  consists
of  '  a  floor  of  rock,  roughly  rectangular,  about  42  ft.  long
by  16  ft.  8  ins.  broad.  It  has  been  smoothed  level  and
sunk  to  a  maximum  depth  of  5  ins.  below  the  surround
ing  rock  outcrop.'  The  many  cups  scattered  over  the
floor  (cp  a  similar  series  of  cups  at  Tell-el-Judeideh,  ib.
249,  with  illustrations)  were  evidently  for  receiving  the
juice  expressed  from  the  grapes  by  their  own  weight.
This  has  always  been  considered  to  produce  a  quality
of  wine  superior  to  that  obtained  by  treading  the  grapes,
and  was  termed  irp6xu/j.aby  the  Greeks,  and  protropum
by  the  Romans  (Gcopon.  6 16,  Pliny  HN  148$;  cp
Hesychius'  definition  of -yXeO/coj  cited  above,  §  3).

The  many  cup-like  hollows  in  the  floor  of  the  mistali  suggest
a  new  explanation  of  the  unique  term  IJ'Cn  (Ex.  11 29  [28]  lit.
'thy  tear'  [yQ"?]  EV  '  thy  liquors,'  (5  dimp^a?  ArjroO,  so  Pesh.).
The  hollows  in  question  may  very  naturally  have  been  termed
the  '  ej-es '  of  the  niisttih  (cp  '  the  seven  eyes  upon  one  stone  '  in
the  difficult  passage  Zech.  89),  when  the  liquid  collected  in  them
would  as  naturally  have  been  called  the  'tear.'  There  are
analogies  in  other  languages  for  this  application  of  the  word
'  tear,'  as  in  the  Arabic  dam'atu-l-karnti  (K<">nig,  Siilistik,  etc.,
106)  and  the  Spanish  la.gr ima,  the  name  for  wine  made  from
grape -juice  which  has  exuded  without  pressure  (Redding,
op.  cit.  58).

The  treading  of  the  grapes  was  accompanied  by
much  merry  shouting  and  singing  on  the  part  of  the
treaders  (c'lni — in  later  Hebrew  7]i-n,  women  trcaders
fi'iDTi,  T&rum.  84),  a  proceeding  several  times  referred  to
in  OT.  The  vintage-shout  even  received  a  special
name,  the  hcdad  (-rrn,  Is.  16io  Jer.  25so  4833).  A
snatch  of  a  vintage  song  is  preserved  in  Is.  658:
'  Destroy  it  not,  for  a  blessing  is  in  it.'  The  Greek
translators,  as  is  well  known,  read  the  titles  of  Pss.  8  81
and  84  as  nh;n  ^y,  which  they  rendered  vntp  TWV  \t]v&v
(Jerome,  pro  [or  in]  torcularibus),  evidently  regarding
the  Psalms  in  question  as  vintage  hymns,  corresponding
to  the  djULvoi.  twi\r)VLOL  of  the  Greeks,  a  view  adopted  in
recent  times  by  Baethgen  (HK  i6).1

The  grapes  having been  trodden as thoroughly  as

possible with the feet — the  juice thus  expressed was

r> T+- termed  by  the  Romans  must  urn  lixivum

Ib.  yua es  _a  further  How  was  obtained  by  piling

«  wine. the  husks  and  sta)ks  jn  a  hcap  ^,B5))  <j^

/.Jr.  48  etc. )  in  the  middle  of  the  pressvat.  Flat  stones,
or  planks  of  wood,  were  laid  upon  the  top  of  the  tappuah.


FIG.  2. — Modern  contrivance  for  pressing  grapes  in  Palestine.

and  the  whole  was  subjected  to  pressure  by  means  of  a
wooden  press-beam  (run  ^^y,  S/iai>/>.  1 9  ;  ToMr.lQB),
one  end  of  which  was  fixed,  into  a  socket  in  the  wall  of
the  pressvat,  as  shown  in  Schick's  diagram  reproduced
above,  whilst  the  other  end  was  weighted  with  stones  (see
the  illustr. ,  fig.  2,  of  the  same  procedure  at  the  present
day,  Mackie,  Bible  Manners  and  Customs,  45).  The

1  Specimens  of  modern  vintage  songs  in  Arabic  are  given  by
D.ilman  in  his  Paleitinischer  DiiuAn  (1901)  28,^

5314


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


17.  Fermen
tation.


wine  obtained  from  this  second  pressing,  which  pro
duced  the  rnustum  tortivum  of  the  Romans,  was  of
course  much  inferior  to  that  obtained  from  the  must  urn
lixivum.  Still  lower  in  the  scale  must  be  placed  the
beverage  termed  isn,  tt'med  (so  pointed  by  Dalman,
Aram.-Neuhebr.  Worterb. ,  s. v. ,  who  derives  the  word
from  the  Latin  temetum],  which  was  prepared  by
pouring  water  upon  the  skins  and  stalks  after  they  had
been  pressed  (Ma'dser.  64  6),  or  upon  the  lees  of
generous  wine  (Skabb.  202)  and  allowing  the  whole  to
ferment  (j"onn,  Mads.  Sh.  1  3),  precisely  as  in  the
manufacture  of  the  lora  of  the  Romans.  Ttfmed  was
also  prepared  from  grapes  that  had  become  atrophied
on  the  vine  ('Orld  18).  Some  such  wine  of  poor  quality
may  be  intended  in  some  cases  by  the  jiah,  homes,  of
the  OT  (AV  '  vinegar'),  which  like  lora  was  the  vinum
operariitm  or  workmen's  wine  (Ruth  214).

Proceeding  now  to  the  preparation  of  the  ordinary
varieties  of  wine,  we  are  met  by  the  somewhat  remark
able  fact  that  of  the  two  hundred  or
more  biblical  references  to  wine,  only
two  or  three  refer  specially  to  any  of  the
many  processes  in  its  fermentation  and  maturing.  We
are  accordingly  dependent  on  the  more  numerous  and
more  explicit  statements  to  be  found  in  the  Mishna,
which  apply  strictly  to  the  procedure  of  the  second
century  A.  D.  But  the  methods  then  in  use  are  of  so
primitive  a  character  that  they  may  safely  be  used  to
illustrate  the  procedure  of  a  much  earlier  period.  In
the  case  of  small  vineyards,  it  was  perhaps  possible  to
allow  the  must  to  ferment  in  the  winevat,  fermentation,
in  the  warm  climate  of  Palestine  in  September,  com
mencing  a  few  hours  after  the  expression  of  the  juice.
Thus  in  Aboth  426  the  man  that  learns  from  a  young
and  immature  teacher  is  compared  to  one  '  that  eats
unripe  grapes  and  drinks  wine  from  his  vat'  (injia  p').1
After  the  first  and  most  active  stage  of  the  fermentation,
technically  known  as  the  '  tumultuous '  fermentation
(Redding,  op.  cit.  62),  was  completed  in  the  vat,  the
new  wine  was  drawn  off  (r^-n,  Hagg.  2i6,  in  the  Mishna,
rjS?)  and  transferred  to  skins  (Job  3'2i9  Mt.  9  17  and  |;s,
see  BOTTLE,  §  i)  or  jars  for  the  so-called  'after-
fermentation.  '  It  is  impossible  that  the  must  could
ever  have  been  put  into  skins  to  undergo  the  whole
process  of  fermentation,  as  is  usually  stated,  the  action
of  the  gas  given  off  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  process
being  much  too  violent  for  any  skins  to  withstand.
Where  a  large  quantity  of  grapes  had  to  be  trodden,  it
was  necessary  to  relieve  the  winevat  by  transferring  the
must  immediately  to  earthenware  jars,  of  which  the  Jews
possessed  a  large  variety  (see  Krengel,  Das  Hausgerat  in
dt-r  MiSnah,  pp.  48^).  The  most  frequently  mentioned
is  the  jvan,  habith,  corresponding  to  the  Roman  dolium,
a  large  full-bellied  jar  with  a  wide  mouth,  of  the  type
represented  under  POTTERY,  Fig.  3,  Xo.  i,  intermediate
in  size  between  the  smaller  13,  kad  (/cctSos)  and  the
larger  ob'9,  pitos  (iridos}.  The  jars,  which  had  previously
been  lined  with  pitch,  were  placed  beneath  the  spout  of
the  vat  if  it  had  one  (see  the  Tell  el-Hesy  vat  above
described),  or  w:ere  filled — but  not  to  the  brim  (MZnah.
86) — -by  means  of  the  md/ias  (fno,  Tohdr.  10  7)  or  dipper,
a  bowl-shaped  vessel  like  those  used  in  Egypt  for  the
same  purpose  (illus.  Wilkinson,  op.  cit.  1  387  ;  cp  POT-
TEKY,  Fig.  2,  No.  6).  Schick's  diagram  above  shows
at  e  a  special  cavity  in  which  the  jar  was  placed  to  be
filled.  The  jars  \vere  then  set  aside  -  for  the  contents  to
ferment.  The  active  fermentation  of  the  Roman  wines
lasted  about  nine  days,  according  to  Pliny,  whilst  the

1  Here,  and  elsewhere  in  the  Mishna,  however, yiiyin  may  he
used  instead  of  the  now  obsolete  tirOs  to  denote  the  unfermented
must,  in  which  case  the  aphorism  throws  an  interesting  sidelight
on  the  Jewish  appreciation  of  unfermented  wine  !

2  From  Abodah  Zarah  4  10  we  learn  that  the  jars  were  left
open  ;  see  nSE  'n  Strack's  glossary  to  this  tractate.

5315


modern  red  wine  of  Syria  is  said  to  complete  its  first
fermentation  in  from  four  to  seven  days,  and  to  become
drinkable  after  the  lapse  of  from  two  to  four  months
(ZDPV\\w,  see  below,  §  21 ).

The  scum  which  was  thrown  up  during  the  process
of  fermentation  was  removed  from time  to  time,  the
technical term for which was nap

Wciiis*r-  *  7  4  '  etc-  )• The  later  Jewi*h
legislation  decreed  that  the  new  wine

was  not  admissible  for  the  drink  offering  until  it
had  stood  for  at  least  forty  days  in  the  fermenting-jars
(' Eduy.  6 1  ;  Bab.  Bath.  97  a  ;  Targ.  Jerus.  i  [Pseudo-
Jonathan]  on  Nu.  287,  where  after  rendering  Ickar  by
'old  wine'  it  adds  :  'if  old  wine  cannot  be  had,  let
wine  forty  days  old  be  poured  out  before  the  Lord').
On  the  expiry  of  this  period,  then,  the  wine  was
assumed  to  have  sufficiently  settled  to  allow  of  its  being
racked  off  into  smaller  jars  (13,  jjS,  |p3p.  Va:.  for  all
which  see  Krengel,  op.  cit. )  corresponding  to  the  Roman
amphorae,  and  into  wine-skins  (itu).  The  skins  were
preferred  to  the  jars  where  the  question  of  transport
was  concerned  (Josh.  84  i  S.  124  Judith  10s  etc.).  In
order  to  purify  the  new  wine  from  the  lees  (cnce')  or
deposit  of  husks,  stalks,  etc. ,  that  had  settled  at  the
bottom  of  the  fermenting  jars,  it  was  poured  through  a
strainer  (p  ^  rnsc>O,  AW.  25a  and  often),  which  might
be  of  metal,  as  in  the  passage  cited  (see  Becker's
(.iallus,  Eng.  ed.  490,  for  illust.  of  a  fine  metal  colum
vinarium),  or  of  earthenware  (A7/.  38),  or  more  fre
quently  a  plain  linen  cloth  ("mo,  Shabb.  2Q2  =  ffov5dpiov),
the  Roman  saccus  vinarius.  To  strain  wine  was
termed  ppj  (Is.  256  'wines  on  the  lees  well  strained')
and  j|D  (Mishna,  passim],  in  NT  6iiA/fw  (Mt.  2824  also
(5  of  Am.  66  rbv  5iv\i<T/j.tvot>  olvov,  which  suits  the
parallelism  better  than  the  MT).1  A  striking  figure
employed  by  Jeremiah  to  denote  the  even  tenor  of
Moabite  history  informs  us  that  it  was  the  custom  to
'  fine '  the  new  wine  by  pouring  it  at  intervals  from  one
jar  to  another.  '  Moab  has  been  at  ease  from  his
youth,  and  has  settled  on  his  lees  [cp  the  similar  figure
Zeph.  1 12]  and  has  not  been  emptied  (pTin  vb)  from
vessel  to  vessel,  neither  has  he  gone  into  captivity :
therefore  his  taste  remains  in  him,  and  his  scent  [the
modern  ' '  bouquet  "]  is  not  changed.  Therefore  behold
the  days  come,  says  Yahwe,  when  I  will  send
tillers  [c'KS,  from  nNs,  to  tilt  over  a  vessel  in  order  to
pour  out  its  contents  ;  see  RVm£-]  and  they  shall  tilt
him,  and  they  shall  empty  his  vessels  and  break  his  jars  '
( Jer.  48  n  f.  )•  Care  had  to  be  taken,  on  the  other  hand,
lest  this  frequent  '  tilting  '  should  set  up  acetous  fer
mentation  and  turn  wine  into  vinegar.  The  frequent


19.  No  '  old


,  references  to  this  danger  in  the  Mishna
show  that  the  Jewish  wines  were  not
wines.  calculated  to  keep  for  a  long  period.
Indeed  wine  was  already  '  old  '  when  a  year  had  passed
from  the  time  when  it  had  left  the  winepress.  '  Old
wine'  (JB"  ;  cp  the  similar  use  of  7raXcu6s  absolutely  in
Lk.  639)  we  read  in  the  Mishna  (Bab.  Bath.  63)  'is  wine
of  the  previous  year' — i.e.,  of  the  vintage  last  but  one
— '  very  old  wine  (pi-c)  is  wine  that  is  three  years  old,'
i.e. ,  according  to  Jewish  reckoning,  of  the  vintage  last
but  two,  in  other  words  from  two  to  three  years  old.
'  New  wine,'  accordingly,  would  apply  only  to  wine  of
the  immediately  preceding  vintage.  Probably  the
ordinary  custom  is  reflected  in  the  statement  in  the
book  of  Jubilees  (7  if. )  that  Noah  prepared  the  wine  of
his  vineyard  in  the  seventh  month,  and  kept  it  in  ajar
until  he  offered  it  on  the  following  new  year's  day  ;
that  is  to  say  wine  which  had  begun  to  ferment,  say,  on
the  first  of  October  was  considered  ready  for  use  about
the  middle  of  the  following  March.

1  Ignatius  is  fond  of  the  metaphor  from  straining  or  filtering  ;
see  ad  Rom.,  salutation,  '  filtered  (an-o6iuAia>xeVois)  from  every
stain ' ;  ad  Philad.  3.

5316


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


When the wine had been sufficiently refined and
clarified, the mouth of the amphora, which had

previously  been lined |«HBT)  with pitch,

20.  Storage.  '

was  closed  with  a  lid  (lB3)i  probably  in

the  shape  of  a  hollow  cone  (Krengel,  op.  cit.  50,  illustr.
ap.  Wilkinson,  op.  cit.  1387),  or,  if  the  jar  had  a
narrow  neck,  it  was  corked  (rpj)  with  a  stopper  (nsijp  ;
Mishna  oft. ).  Both  lids  and  stoppers  were  carefully
luted  with  gypsum  or  clay,  pitch,  wax,  etc.  (see  the  list
in  Kel.  10  2).  *  Wineskins  were  fastened  with  a  knotted
cord  (Shabb.  15  2;  cp  dcr/cds  SeSe/uepos,  Job  32g  (5).
The  jars  were  now  ready  to  be  stored  in  the  wine-cellars
(j",T  rrnxN,  i  Ch.  27  27,  Vg.  celUe  vinarice,  by  which
Jerome  also  renders  the  p»n  n'2  of  Cant.  24  [AV
'banqueting  house']).  Wine  shops  (nun,  Bab.  Mis.
4 it,  'Ab.  Zdr.  54)  were  common  in  Jerusalem  in  NT
times.  Those  of  Arabia— often  kept  by  Jews,  whence
the  name  hdnfit — frequently  had  displayed  a  sign  or
'bush,'  with  which  some  commentators  have  identified
the  obscure  '  banner '  of  the  '  house  of  wine '  in  the
passage  of  Canticles  just  cited  (cp  ENSIGNS,  §  i  b).

The  process  of  wine-making  as  above  described  on  the  basis

of  the data  of  the  Mishna  may  be illustrated  by  two brief

accounts of the modern process in Eastern

21.  Modem lands. Writing in 1824 Henderson in his
prOCeSS. History  of  Ancient  and  Modern I  fines  thus

describes  the  method  adopted  in  Persia  (264)  :
1  When  the  grapes  are  gathered,  they  are  brought  to  the  cellar,
and  introduced  into  a  vat  or  cistern,  formed  of  masonry,  and
lined  with  plaster,  about  8  ft.  in  length  and  breadth,  and  4  in
depth,  where  they  are  trodden,  and  the  juice  which  flows  from
them  is  collected  in  a  trough  at  the  bottom,  from  which  it  is
immediately  removed  into  large  earthen  jars,  to  undergo  the
requisite  fermentation.  .  .  .  When  the  fermentation  has  fairly
commenced,  the  murk  is  stirred  by  one  of  the  workmen  with  his
arms  bare  ;  and  this  operation  is  repeated  for  eighteen  or  twenty
successive  days.  The  wine  is  then  strained,  through  coarse
sieves,  into  clean  vessels,  which  are  filled  to  the  brim,  and
covered  with  light  matting.  In  these  it  is  allowed  to  remain
for  thirty  or  forty  days,  and  when  the  secondary  fermentation
is  thought  to  be  completed,  it  is  racked  into  smaller  jars  or
bottles  in  which  it  can  be  conveniently  transported.'  The
following  extract  applies  to  the  present  day.  '  In  Damascus
the  Christians  use  principally  red  grapes  in  the  manufacture  of
wine.  After  the  grapes  have  been  trodden,  the  must  is  trans
ferred  with  the  husks  to  large  earthenware  jars,  the  mouths  of
which  are  closed  with  pieces  of  linen.  Fourteen  days  after
wards  when  the  fermentation  is  completed  the  wine  is  poured
into  smaller  jars,  stirred  daily  for  two  months  with  a  rod  to
prevent  acetgus  fermentation  and  then  strained  through  a  thick
linen  cloth.  The  wine  is  now  drinkable.  It  is  preserved  in
jars  which  are  stoppered  and  sent  to  the  cellar '  (Anderlind  in
ZDPV  \\-iTi.  [1888]).

In  what  has  been  said  hitherto  of  the  Jewish  methods

of  manufacture,  the  ordinary  quality  of  wine  has  been

. ,  exclusively in view. We have also seen

22. .boiled  (g  j:-) tilat ;t was usuai to expose  some

part,  at  least,  of  the  vintage,  to  the  sun
before  pressing  in  order  to  increase  the  sweetness  and
strength  of  the  wine  ;  but  with  this  exception  the  mode
of  manufacture  was  as  above  described.  Another
procedure  which  aims  at  improving  a  must  that  is  poor
in  $ugar  is  still  in  vogue  in  Syria  and  elsewhere.2  The
must  is  boiled  in  a  caldron  for  a  short  time,  until  it  is
reduced  four  or  five  per  cent  in  volume  (see  the  direc
tions  from  the  geoponic  collection  a  p.  Henderson,  op.
cit.  41),  after  which  the  liquor  is  set  aside  to  cool  and
in  due  time  to  ferment.  This  is  apparently  the  '  boiled
wine'  (>c'pp  j",  Terum.  26;  Mindh.  85)  which  the
context  shows  to  have  been  inferior  to  wine  made  and
matured  in  the  ordinary  way  from  the  best  quality  of
must.  The  authorities,  however,  differed  in  their
attitude  to  '  boiled  wine.'  '  It  is  not  permissible  to  boil
the  must  (p<)  of  the  heave  offering,  because  its  bulk  is
thus  diminished.  But  Rabbi  Yehuda  allows  it,  because
it  is  thereby  improved'  (Ttrumoth  11 1).  The  process

1  There  is  a  decided  flavour  of  modernity  about  the  precau
tions  against  '  broaching  the  admiralj  or  tampering  with  the
wine-jars  in  transitu.  as  detailed  in  '  Afrodah  Ziirah  5  ^f.

2  '  In  some  parts,  e.g.  Portugal,  must  which  is  too  watery  is
concentrated by  evaporation in a caldron;' Thudicum, .-1
Treatise  on Wines,  50  (1894);  cp  Wilson,  The  Wines  of  the
Bible,  no^C

5317


now  described  must  not  be  confused  with  the  much
more  elaborate  process  of  the  manufacture  of  grape-
syrup,  full  details  of  which  have  been  given  under
HONEY,  §  i  (3)  (cp  also  PANNAG).

The 'doctoring'  of  wines,  as  it  is  now  called,  was
not  unknown  to  the  Jews,  since  we  read  of  the  lees  of

23.  Doctored  a  more  /enerous  wine  ^'"g  added  to  a
wine  Wlne inferior  quality  to  increase  its

strength  (see  Bab.  Af?f4n,  where  also  is
mentioned  the  familiar  expedient  of  combining  a  strong,
harsh  [HB^]  wine  with  one  of  a  milder  [?p]  quality).
The  method  of  hastening  the  maturing  of  wines  by
fumigation  (Henderson,  op.  cit.  54 ff.,  Wilson,  op.  cit.
96^,  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Ant.(3>,  2967^)
was  also  practised  ;  but  such  'smoked  wine'  (m;j?a  p*,
Mfudh.  85)  was,  like  the  'boiled  wine,'  admitted  with
a  grudge  as  the  material  of  the  drink  offering  (Mfndh.
I.e.).  The  poet's  comparison  of  himself  to  'a  bottle
in  the  smoke '  (Ps.  1198s)  is  generally  supposed  to  refer
to  the  fumigation  of  the  wine-skin  (so  RV"'S-)  ;  but  the
terms  are  not  sufficiently  precise  for  this  special  applica
tion,  and  the  reference  is  more  probably  to  any  skin-
bottle  exposed  to  the  smoke  of  the  hearth.

Of  the  wines  most  esteemed  in  OT  times,  only  two
are  known  to us  byname,  viz.,  the  wine  of  Lebanon

24  Various  ^Hos'  U;  ^'  but  see  Nowack-  who  sus'
'  , , pects an error in the text [see further

Crit.  Bib.,  and  cp  LEBANON,  §  8])  and
the  wine  of  HELBON  (Ezek.  27 18),  a  locality  about  three
hours  distant  from  Damascus,  to  the  NW.  Its  wine
was  greatly  prized  by  the  Assyrians  and  is  frequently
mentioned  in  the  cuneiform  literature  (with  nine  other
varieties  in  the  list  R  449-13,  Del.  Ass.  HWB,  s.v.
'  karanu ' ).  The  Persian  kings  are  said  by  Strabo
(15735)  to  have  drunk  only  wine  from  Helbon,  and
even  at  the  present  day  it  is  held  in  repute.  In  the
Mishna  treatise  Mlnahoth  (85)  five  obscure  localities
are  mentioned  by  name  as  supplying  the  wine  most
esteemed  in  the  Temple  service  (see  for  discussion  of
these  Neubauer,  Gfogr.  du  Talmud,  84  f. ).

In  discussing  the  signification  of  the  term  Sekar
(§  8),  we  found  that  both  etymology  and  history
pointed  to  its  being  originally  a
comprehensive  term  for  intoxicating
beverages  of  all  sorts,  including  wine,  but  that,  with
the  popularisation  at  an  early  period  of  the  word  ydyin
as  the  exclusive  designation  for  the  fermented  juice  of
the  grape,  the  two  terms  came  to  be  regarded  as  mutu
ally  exclusive.  It  was  further  pointed  out  that  of  all
the  intoxicating  liquors,  other  than  wine,  likelv  to  be
known  to  the  early  Hebrews  as  a  branch  of  the  Semitic
family,  date-wine  was  historically  the  oldest.  It  is  not
till  the  Talmudic  period,  however,  that  we  meet  with
its  Hebrew  name,  c"ion  ]"\  '  wine  of  dates  '  or  '  date-
wine.'  This  beverage  is  said  by  Herodotus  (1194)  to
have  been  the  principal  article  of  Assyrian  commerce
and  is  mentioned  times  without  number  in  the  cuneiform
contract-tablets  (Del.  Ass.  Hll'Ii,  s.r.  'sikaru').  The
greater  part  of  the  wine  of  Arabia  Felix  in  Strabo's
time  was  made  from  the  palm  (425  ;  see,  further,  Low,
Aram.  Pflanzennamen,  for  the  Arabic  sakr).  The
dates  were  first  steeped  in  water — -a  modius,  or  peck,
of  ripe  dates  to  three  congii  (about  17  pints)  of  water  is
Pliny's  recipe  (HN  14 19) — then  submitted  to  the  press,
after  which  the  juice  was  allowed  to  ferment.  The
wine  which  Pliny  mentions  as  being  made  '  from  the
pods  of  the  Syrian  carob '  (see  HUSKS,  FRUIT,  §  14)
was  no  doubt  prepared  in  a  similar  manner.

Repeatedly  in  the  later  Jewish  literature  reference  is
made to a  species  of  cider  known as tappfiah-wine

26.  Apple-wine,  ^  \\

pomegranate- etc-  )• In  the  uncertainty  that  attaches

wine  to  tne 'dent'fication °f  t*16  tafipuiih

(see  APPLE,  and  cp  FRUIT,  §  12)  we

cannot  be  sure  whether  we  have  to  do  with  true  cider  -


25.  Date-wine.


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK


or  apple-wine,  or  with  the  cydoneum  or  cydonites  of  the
classical  writers,  which  was  made  from  the  juice  of  the
quince.  In  any  case  the  beverage  was  intoxicating  and
therefore  taboo  to  those  who  took  a  vow  of  abstinence
from  wine  (see  Nfdar.  69).  From  the  kindred  pome
granate  was  prepared  the  only  fermented  liquor  other
than  wine  mentioned  by  name  in  the  OT  (unless  we  are
prepared  to  render  iekdr  by  palm-wine) — viz. ,  the  \isfs
rimmdnitn,  D'Jisi  D'DV  (so  rea(3  Cant.  82,  AV  'juice,'
RV  'sweet  wine  of  [pomegranates]).'  This  beverage
is  described  by  Pliny  as  '  vinum  e  punicis  quod  rhoi'ten
vocant '  (//iV14i6),  and  is  the  /XH'TTJS  otvos  of  Dios-
corides  (534).  Both  these  wines  were  prepared,  like
the  English  cider,  we  may  assume,  by  crushing  the
fruit,  probably  in  the  oil-mill,  as  described  in  detail
under  OIL,  §  3,  and  allowing  the  juice  to  ferment.

It  is  not  surprising  to  rind, in  the  later  literature,

reference  also  to  various  novel  beverages  either  imported

_ . from  abroad,  or  made  at  home  in  imita-

reign  {io]i  of  {ne  jmp0rteci  articie. Thus  in

beverages.  t]ie  mmute  directions  for  the  removal  of
every  trace  of  leaven  in  the  Mishna  treatise  on  the
passovers  (Pfsahim  3i),  four  foreign  liquors  are  pro
scribed  on  the  implied  ground  that  fermented  grain  in
some  form  or  other  entered  into  their  composition.
These  are  :  '  Babylonian  kuttah,  Median  sekar,
Edomite  (i.e.,  Roman)  vinegar,  and  Egyptian  beer'
(oirn,  futfos).  The  kuttah  is  said  to  have  had  sour
milk  for  its  basis.  The  Median  differed  from  the
Palestinian  sekdr,  in  not  being  pure  fermented  fruit-
juice,  but  having  an  admixture  of  malt.  The  Roman
vinegar  was  also  suspected  of  containing  a  similar
mixture.  The  last  of  the  four  is  the  beer  for  which
Egypt  had  long  been  famed.  Herodotus  (277)  is  the
first  Greek  writer  to  refer  to  the  Egyptians'  fondness
for  'wine  made  from  barley,'  whilst  Diodorus  styles  it
£vdos,  declaring  that  its  bouquet  was  little  inferior  to
that  of  wine  (134).  This  preparation,  of  which  the
native  name  was  hek,  is  said  to  be  as  old  as  the  fourth
dynasty  (Birch,  af>.  Wilk.  op.  cit.  1396)  and  to  have
been  at  all  times  the  favourite  beverage  of  the  common
people.  It  was  made  from  barley,  and  flavoured  by
an  infusion  of  various  plants  (for  further  details  see  the
references,  especially  to  modern  investigations,  in  the
list  of  authorities  cited  by  Schurer,  G/I'(3>,  257,  and  for
the  bilza  of  modern  Egypt,  see  J.  Death,  The  Beer  of
the  Bible,  1887).  The  Alexandrian  translators  found
a  reference  to  the  manufacture  of  beer  in  Egypt  in
the  already  corrupt  text  of  Is.  19 10^  (ol  Troiouvres  TOV
fidov  ;  see  WEAVING,  §  5).

It is  still  an open  question  whether the Hebrews

under  the  monarchy  drank  their  wine  neat  or,  as  was

customary among the peoples of

28.  With  water.  c]assical antiquity> di£te£ with

water  (see  MEALS,  §  12).  From  the  quaint  expression
used  by  Isaiah  to  symbolise  the  degeneracy  of  his  con
temporaries  (1 22,  'thy  silver  has  become  dross,  thy
wine  mixed  with  water'  ['rnc,  lit.  ''circumcised']),  it
has  been  inferred  that  in  the  eighth  century,  at  least,
the  addition  of  water  was  not  the  usual  practice.  That
this  is  the  significance  of  the  unique  phrase  'circum
cised' — the  accompanying  bammayim  in  the  original
is  probably  a  gloss — is  proved  by  many  analogies  both
in  the  Semitic  and  in  the  non-Semitic  languages,  of
which  Pliny's  castrare  vinum  is  the  most  familiar1  (see
Marti's  list  of  parallels  in  KHC,  in  loc. ).  In  this  con
nection  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  ancient  wines
were  not,  like  the  modern,  '  doctored  '  or  '  rectified  '  by
the  addition  of  a  strong  spirit,  and  the  wines  of
Palestine,  in,  particular,  may  be  assumed  on  the  whole
not  to  have  exceeded  the  strength  of  an  ordinary  claret.
It  may  be  taken  as  a  result  of  Hellenic  influence  that  it

1  [Or  we  may  read  SmC,  which  in  MH  means  the  dark  turbid
liquor  pressed  out  from  grapes.  So  Earth,  Noldeke,  Cheyne
(SBOT,  'Isaiah,'  Heb.,  in).]

5319


is  in  the  late  post-exilic  period  that  we  first  meet  with
a  clear  reference  to  the  diluting  of  wine  with  water.
Thus  the  author  of  2  Mace,  remarks  that  '  it  is  hurtful
to  drink  wine  or  water  alone '  whilst  '  wine  mingled
with  water  (otvos  vdari  ffWKfpay&fis)  is  pleasant '  (1039  ;
cp  (£5  rendering  of  Bel,  33).  In  NT  times  it  may  be
taken  that  the  Greek  custom  had  become  firmly
established,  since  the  diluting  of  wine  is  assumed  to  be
the  usual  custom  in  the  Mishna  (Bfrdk/i.  7582;  'A bod.
Zdr.  65,  and  oft.).  Wine  thus  diluted  was  termed
J1TO  j" ;  undiluted  or  'neat'  wine,  «n  j"  (lit.  'living
wine').  In  A'iddd  1^  mdziig  wine  is  defined  as  con
sisting  of  '  two  parts  of  water  and  one  part  of  the  wine
of  Sharon.'  In  the  GSmara  and  in  the  Midrash,  how
ever,  Sharon  wine  is  said  to  have  been  weaker  than  the
ordinary  sorts,  which  were  usually  mixed  in  the  pro
portion  of  three  parts  of  water  to  one  of  wine  (see  also
the  commentaries  on  Shabb.  81).  These  are  the  pro
portions  recommended  by  Hesiod  for  peasants  in  the
dog-days  (  Works  and  Days,  596).'  A  refinement  of
this  custom  consisted  in  mixing  the  wine  with  snow
(Xegd.  12),  a  practice  which  some  have  found  referred
to  in  Pr.  25 13  (see  Toy  in  loc.  with  reff.  there).  It  is
further  attested  that  it  was  a  common  custom  to  mix
wine  with  hot  water,  so  perhaps  always  at  the  Passover
supper  (see  Pfsah.  7 13,  where  the  hot-water  apparatus
[crrc]  is  specially  named).  Even  the  must  in  the  vat  was
drunk  mixed  with  water,  either  cold  (fjis)  or  hot  (j'snn,
Mauser.  44).  The  Arabs  also,  in  the  period  before
Mohammed,  mixed  their  wine  with  cold  water  (half  and
half)  or  with  hot  (Jacob,  Altarab.  Beduinenleben,  102).
A  study  of  the  OT  passages  in  which  reference  is
made,  either  explicitly  or  by  implication,  to  the  '  mix-

wtv,  'nS ' or '  m'ng'm&  '  °f  wine  shows

29.  Wltn  spices. that  the  mjxing  in  question  was  not

with  water  but  with  various  aromatic  herbs  and  spices,
for  the  purpose  of  heightening  the  flavour  and  increasing
the  strength  of  the  wine.  Thus  the  '  men  of  might '
denounced  by  Isaiah  (622)  did  not,  we  may  be  sure,
dilute  their  strong  drink  with  water,  but  mingled  it
with  appropriate  spices.  Indeed,  we  have  seen  some
ground  for  supposing  that  sekdr  itself  may  have  beer,
sometimes  used  to  denote  wine  when  treated  in  this  way
(see  §  8,  and  especially  the  definition  of  Suidas  there
quoted).  This  '  spiced  wine '  is  plainly  specified  by  the
name  npnrt  p  of  Cant.  82  and  by  the  CB:3D  ;;;  of  Bdba
Bathrd  63  (cp  the  special  term  f;'Trm  ess,  to  'spice'
the  wine,  Mauser.  SA.  2i).  Maspero  thus  describes
the  Assyrian  practice  :  '  The  wines,  even  the  most
delicate,  are  not  drunk  in  their  natural  state  ;  they  are
mixed  with  aromatics  and  various  drugs,  which  give
them  a  delicious  flavour  and  add  tenfold  to  their
strength.  This  operation  is  performed  in  the  hall,
under  the  eyes  of  the  revellers.  An  eunuch  standing
before  a  table  pounds  in  a  stone  mortar  the  intoxicating
substances,  which  he  moistens  from  time  to  time  \\iih
some  essence.  His  comrades  have  poured  the  contents
of  the  amphora;  into  immense  bowls  of  chased  silver
[cp  Pr.  92,  (5  iKfpaatv  els  Kparrjpa  TOV  olvov]  which
reach  to  their  chests.  As  soon  as  the  perfumed  paste
is  ready  they  put  some  of  it  into  each  bowl  and  care
fully  dissolve  it.  The  cupbearers  bring  the  cups,  draw
out  the  wine,  and  serve  the  guests'  (Ancient  J
and  Assyria,  370  ff. ,  with  illustrs. ).  This  class  of
beverages  is  styled  aromatites  by  Pliny,  who  enumerates
the  various  aromatics  used  in  their  composition — •
myrrh,  cassia,  calamus,  etc.  (HN  14 19).  The  same
authority  has  much  to  say  of  the  fondness  of  the
Romans  for  the  special  beverage  known  as  myrrhina
or  myrrh-wine  (HN  14 15  ;  cp  Smith,  Dict.®\  s.v.
'Vinum,'  "2 967 a),  the  olvos  4fffj.vpiff^tvos  of  Mk.  1523
(AV  '  wine  mingled  with  myrrh ' — see  CROSS,  §  5,

1  For other  proportions recommended by  various  classical
writers  see Iwan Miiller, Handb.  d.  klass.  AlttrtuMumut,


5330


WINE  AND  STRONG  DRINK

and  cp  ||  Mt.  2734),  and  the  p-^j-N  of  later  Jewish
literature  (Shir  Rabba  414).

Here  also  may  be  classed  another  popular  beverage
of  the  first  centuries  of  our  era  in  Palestine,  the  foreign
origin  of  which is betrayed bv its

30.  With  honey.  name  p^i  (variously  pointed  =

otV6/ue\i,  E.p.  Ignat.  ad  Trail.  62),  the  favourite  muhum
of  the  Romans.  As  the  name  also  indicates,  we  have
here  a  mixture  of  wine  and  honey  (Tfrtim.  11 1),  in  the
proportion  of  '  four  by  measure  of  wine  to  one  of
honey,'  to  which  pepper  was  added  as  flavouring  ('.46.
Zar.  30 rt).

It is  a  remarkable fact  that  the plain and literal
references  in  the  Bible  to  wine  and  strong  drink  are
_-. ,  exceeded  in  number  by  the  illustra-

31.  metaphors. tions and figures bo'rrowed from

their  preparation  and  use.  Only  a  few  typical  cases
can  be  here  adduced.  Passing  by  the  familiar  designa
tion  of  Israel  as  a  vine  and  as  the  vineyard  of  Yahwe,
we  have  in  the  treading  of  the  winepress  a  frequent  and
expressive  figure  of  the  divine  judgments  (Is.  63 zf.
Joel  3  [4]  13  Lam.  1 15  Rev.  14  igf. ).  The  action  of  the
must  under  fermentation  suggests  to  a  Hebrew  poet
a  novel  metaphor  to  express  agony  of  soul  occasioned
by  the  calamities  of  his  country  (Lam.  1  20  2n).  The
folly  of  attempting  to  force  the  '  new  wine  '  of  the  gospel
into  the  'old  wine-skins'  (Mt.  9 17  and  ||s),  the  worn-
out  forms  and  formulas  of  Judaism,  is  illustrated  by  the
familiar  figure  discussed  above  (§  17).  We  have  also
seen  how  the  treatment  of  the  wine  while  maturing  in
the  wine-jars  supplied  Jeremiah  with  an  image  for  the
easy-going  Moab,  who  had  not  been  '  emptied  from
vessel  to  vessel'  (48  n/i),  but  had  settled  contentedly
'  on  his  lees,'  like  the  callous  insouciant  contemporaries
of  Zephaniah  (liz).  By  the  superiority  of  old  wine  to
new  (cp  Lk.  039)  ben  Sira  illustrates  his  preference  for
an  old  and  tried  friend  over  one  whose  friendship  has
still  to  mature  (TraXcuoO/xcu  ;  Ecclus.  9 15  [<5  10]).
Perhaps  the  boldest  metaphor  is  that  in  which  the  in
toxicating  properties  of  wine,  as  contained  in  Yahwe's
'  cup  of  reeling,'  is  employed  by  prophet  and  poet  (Is.
51 1?/:  Jer.  25 15.^:  Ezek.  2833  Hab.  2i6  Pss.  60s  758)
as  'a  frequent  symbol  for  confusion,  bewilderment,  and
distress.  .  .  .  Drunkenness  may  typify  spiritual  blind
ness  or  perplexity  (Is.  19i4  Jer.  289).  It  also  supplies
the  figure  for  sailors  of  a  ship  in  a  storm  at  sea,  who
reel  about  the  deck  in  bewildered  witlessness  (Ps.
10727);  and  finally  it  is  combined  with  the  image  of
the  wind-tossed  booth  to  illustrate  the  convulsions  of
t'ae  earth  upon  the  Judgment-day'  (Is.  242o).'~

This  symbolism  may  be  said  to  reach  its  highest  point
in  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist.

With  regard  to  the  attitude  of  OT  and  NT  to  the
general  question  of  the  use  of  fermented  beverages,  it  is
_ ,  worthy  of  note  that  while  tiros  in  the  OT
',  .  sometimes  denotes  the  unfermented  must,

,  I  ?  there  is  no  trace  in  Hebrew  literature,  from
rinks.  tjie  ear]jest  period  to  tne  c]0se  of  the

Mishna,  of  any  method  of  preserving  it  in  the  un
fermented  state.  Indeed  it  has  been  maintained  that
'  with  the  total  absence  of  antiseptic  precautions
characteristic  of  Orientals,  it  would  have  been  impossible
..  to  do  so'  (Prof.  Macalister  in  Hastings'  DD  2s4/',  in
this  agreeing  with  many  modern  authorities).  Through
out  the  OT  the  use  of  wine  as  a  daily  beverage  (see
MEALS,  §  12)  appears  as  an  all  but  universal  custom
(for  the  exceptions  see  NAZIRITE,  and  RECHABITE  ; 3
priests  also,  while  on  duty,  had  to  abstain  from  wine

1  This  name,  however,  may  have  supplanted  an  earlier  native
designation,  since  honied  wine  was  known  to  the  Assyrians  from
an  early  period,  see  Del.  Ass.  HIVB,  s.i>v.  'daspu'and  'dussupu.'

2  Quoted  from  a  most  suggestive  paper,  entitled  '  A  Tentative
Catalogue  of  Biblical  Metaphors'  by  Claude  G.  Montefiore  in

JQR  3662.

3  Schiirer  ((7/K(3),  2  569)  combats  the  generally  received  view
that  the  Essenes  also  were  abstainers.

5321


WISDOM  LITERATURE

and  strong  drink:  Lev.  10g  ;  cp  Ezek.  442i).J  Even
its  use  to  the  extent  of  exhilaration  is  implicitly  approved
(Gen.  4834  Judg.9i3  Ps.  104is  Pr.  :jl7),  whilst  the
value  of  alcohol  as  a  stimulant  in  sickness  and  distress
is  explicitly  recognised  (Pr.  316;  cp  i  Tim.  623).  The
views  of  the  biblical  writers  on  this  subject,  in  short,
may  fairly  be  summed  up  in  the  words  of  Jesus  ben
Sira  (about  180  B.C.):  'Wine  drunk  in  measure  and
to  satisfy  is  joy  of  heart  and  gladness  of  soul '  ( Ecclus.
3128  RV  ;  cp  v.  27,  and  for  the  converse  vv.  zg/.),  or
in  those  of  a  somewhat  later,  or  it  may  be  contemporary,
Jewish  writer,  the  Pseudo  -  Aristeas  :  Tr\r)v  4v  7rd<rt
jUerptoTTjs  KoiKov  (in  all  things  [according  to  the  context  :
eating,  drinking,  and  pleasures]  moderation  is  good  ;
ed.  Wcndland,  223).  Whilst  this  is  so,  the  opposition
of  biblical  writers  to  immoderate  indulgence  in  wine
and  strong  drink  is  too  explicit  and  too  well  known  to
require  further  elaboration  here.2  The  problems  raised
by  the  very  different  conditions  of  the  modern  world
were  of  course  undreamt  of  by  the  biblical  writers.

A.  K.  s.  K.

WINNOWING  (!Ttt  ;  Ruth  82  Is.  30 24). See  AGRI
CULTURE,  §  9.

WISDOM  LITERATURE

Definition  (§  i).  Ethics  ($  9/).

Early  philosophy  (§  ?f.).  World-questions  (§§  11-13).

The  Sages  (§  4).  Decline  (§  14).

Their  teaching  (§§  5-8).  Bibliography  (§  15).

'  Wisdom  Literature '  is  the  usual  designation  of  those
old-Hebrew  writings  which  deal,  not  with  the  Israelitish

i T>  £ -x- national  law  and  life,  but  with  universal

1.  Denmtioii.

moral and religious principles of all

human  life.  It  is  thus  sharply  distinguished  from  the
PROPHETICAL  LITERATURE  [</.?'.]  (whose  central  theme
is  the  obligation  to  serve  Yahwe  alone  and  no  other
god),  from  the  LAW  LITERATURE  [t/.-1.]  (which  is
mainly  concerned  with  ritual),  and  from  the  Liturgical
Literature  [see  PSALMS,  etc. ]  (which  is  the  expression
of  religious  emotion).  As  its  lower  limit  we  may  take
the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  —  after  this  the
Jewish  thought  occupies  itself  with  other  things  ;  it  may
be  considered  to  include  all  reflective  writings  before
Philo,  who  forms  a  new  category.  Inasmuch  as  it
seeks  to  discover  what  is  permanent  and  universal  in
life  (which  is  the  aim  of  philosophy)  it  may  be  de
scribed  as  the  pre-Philonic  Hebrew  philosophy.  The
books  and  psalms  in  which  it  is  contained,  arranged  in
what  is  taken  in  this  article  to  be  the  general  chrono
logical  order,  are  :  Job,  certain  Psalms  (such  as  8  19  29
37  49  73  90  92  103  104  107  139  147  148),  Proverbs,
Ben-Sira  (Ecclesiasticus),  Ecclesiastes,  Wisdom  of
Solomon,  to  which  may  be  added  the  earliest  sayings
of  the  heads  of  schools  (reported  in  Pirke  Aboth}.  For
details  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  articles  on  the
several  books.

The  Israelites, like  all  other  peoples,  must  have  re
flected more or less, from the moment when they
attained a settled civilisation, on

2.  barly  jewisn  geneml  questions  of  ]jfe. The  lowest
philosophy; form ()f such retjcction appears in

origin.  popular proverbs  and fables, which

express,  usually  in  a  one-sided  and  superficial  way,  the
result  of  the  ordinary  common-sense  experience  and
observation  ;  such  are  Jotham's  fable  (Judg.  98-is),  and
the  proverbs  cited  in  i  S.  10 12  2  S.  58  20 18  Jer.  31  29
(  — Ezek.  182).  Nathan's  apologue  (2  S.  12i-4>  and  the
allegories  in  Is.  5 1  /  Ezek.  16  17  23  are  of  a  higher

1  It  has  often  been  remarked  that  Ezekiel  in  his  ideal  sketch
of  the  restored  temple  worship  makes  no  provision  for  the  use  of
wine,  which  had  from  time  immemorial  a  recognised  place  in
the  ritual. [On  the  daily  libation  of  wine  at  the  morning  and
evening  sacrifice,  see  SACRIFICE,  §  35,  and  cp  Ecclus.  50  is/-]

2  We  may  note  in  particular  the  deutero-canonical  writers
(e.g.,  i  Esd.  84^,  and  the  frequent  denunciation  of  excess  in
Ecclesiasticus)  :  also  Philo's  treatises  '  on  the  planting  of  Noah '
and  '  Drnnkenness.' In  the  latter  occurs  the  fine  saying  (sect.
32)  regarding  aicparov  «ai  rriv  a.tf>po<rvvr)<;  <jia.pfia.Kov.

5322


WISDOM  LITERATURE

literary  and  moral  character  ;  but  they  are  moral  and
religious  discourses  (such  as  form  the  staple  of  the
prophetic  books)  directed  against  particular  cases  of  sin
rather  than  reflections  on  life.1

In  the  Pentateuch,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Historical
Books  there  is  frequent  mention  of  '  wisdom '  (nc2n,
hHkindk)  and  'wise  men'  (n'Oarr,  Mkdmim).  In  all
these  cases  the  connection  shows  that  what  is  meant  by
'wisdom  '  is  either  the  skill  of  the  magician  (Ex.  7"),
or  of  the  artisan  (Ex.283  35 10  25  2  Ch.  26  [7]  Is.  40ao),
or  the  sagacity  of  the  man  of  affairs  (Gen.  41 33  Dt.  1 13
28.183142  Is.Ss),  or,  with  larger  scope,  the  broad
and  high-minded  intelligence  of  him  who  is  in  sympathy
with  the  divine  law  of  right  (Dt.  46  Is.  11  2).  In  the
passage  Is.  11 2  the  term  seems  to  approach  very  near
the  meaning  it  has  in  Job  and  Proverbs,  and  this  it
might  well  do  if,  as  is  probable,  this  passage  is  later
than  the  sixth  century  B.  c. ;  but  here  also  the  context
shows  that  the  wisdom  of  the  king  is  manifested  in  his
equitable  administration  of  affairs,  not  in  his  reflection
on  life.  '  Wise  men  '  are  spoken  of  as  a  class  by  some
of  the  earlier  prophets  (Is.  29  14  Jer.  88 /.  9  n  [12]  22^23]
18  18,  cp  Ezek.  726)  ; 2  but  their  wisdom  lies  in  practical
acquaintance  with  the  affairs  of  the  state  and  of  life.  A
fundamental  difference  between  them  and  the  sages  of
Proverbs  appears  in  the  fact  that  the  prophets  are
hostile  to  them  ;  they  were  probably  men  of  experience
and  practical  sagacity  whose  views  of  public  policy  were
opposed  to  those  of  the  prophets,  and  in  this  regard  they
belong  in  the  same  category  with  the  '  false  prophets '
(see  Jer.  8  ii ).  The  opposition  to  the  great  prophets
came  from  various  sources  —  among  others,  it  would
seem,  from  men  who  rejected  the  prophet's  claim  of  a
divine  revelation  (Jer.  89),  and  interpreted  the  existing
torak  in  their  own  way  (Jer.  88).  These  may  have  been
patriotic,  conscientious,  and  able  men  in  spite  of  the
denunciations  hurled  at  them  by  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  ;
but  their  wisdom  concerned  itself  not  with  universal
human  life,  but  with  the  political,  legal,  and  moral
questions  of  Israelitish  policy.  Solomon's  wisdom,  in
the  only  example  of  it  given  in  OT  (i  K.  816-28),  is
administrative  ;  later  Jewish  legend  (see  Wiinsche,  op.
cit.)  represents  it  as  skill  in  giving  and  answering
riddles.  Of  the  proverbs  and  songs  and  sayings  about
plants  and  animals  ascribed  to  him  in  i  K.  59-14
(429-34),  nothing  has  survived.  His  reputation  for
wisdom  rests,  no  doubt,  on  some  real  fact  ;  he  was,
very  likely,  a  man  of  sagacity,  and  may  have  been  the
author  of  some  shrewd  observations  on  men  and  things  ;
afterwards  it  may  have  become  the  custom  to  ascribe  to
him  all  anonymous  songs  and  apophthegms,  summed
up  by  the  editor  of  Kings  in  large  round  numbers.  In
a  later  age,  when  his  fame  was  established,  his  name
was  assumed  in  certain  books  (Ps.  72  Pr.  Cant.  Eccl.
\V.  Sol.,  Pss.  of  Sol.)  in  accordance  with  a  recognised
literary  habit  of  the  times.

Outside  of  Israel  the  centres  of  wisdom  mentioned  in
OT  are  Egypt,  Edom  or  the  East,  Babylon,  and  perhaps
Tyre  (i  K.  5io/  [43o/.]  Ob.  8  Jer.  41  49 7  Is. 44 25  Ezek.
283).  Egypt,  from  a  remote  time,  had  its  moralising
sages,3  Babylon  was  the  home  of  astrology  (Is.  47  10-13),
and  Tyre  was  renowned  for  artistic  and  commercial  skill
(Ezek.  27)  ;  of  Edom  we  know  only  its  repute  (Ob.  8

Jer.  497) from  it,  at  a  later  time,  come  apparently  the

Three  Eriends  in  Job. Of  all  Israel's  neighbours  it  was,

1  The  riddle,  which  is  a  mere  exercise  of  ingenuity,  does  not
come  into  consideration  here  (see  RIDDLE). The  same  word
(rrvn)  it  is  true,  is  used  for  Samson's  riddle  (Judg.  14  12)  and  the
moralising  discourse  (if  Ps.  78  ;  but  the  different  application  in
the  psalm is  an indication  of  the  advance  of  thought.  _ On
Hebrew  riddles  see  A.  Wiinsche,  '  Die  Ruthselweisheit  bei  den
Hebraern'(in//'r,  1883).

2  Hos.  14  10  [9]  appears  to  be  a  late  editorial  addition.

3  For  the  Egyptian  gnomic  literature  see  Records  of  the  Past,
and  Griffith,  art. '  Egyptian  Literature,"  in  the  Library  of  the
Worlds  Kest  Literature. For  Habylonian  magical  texts  and
riddles,  see  RP,  and  Jaeger,  in  Beitrfige  z.  Assyriologie,  1892.

5323


3.  Growth.


WISDOM  LITERATURE

so  far  as  we  have  exact  information,  only  from  Egypt
that  she  could  have  learned  gnomic  lore  in  the  earlier
period,  and  it  is  precisely  from  Egypt  (if  we  may  judge
from  the  religious  history)  that  she  seems  to  have
received  the  least  intellectual  stimulus.  It  thus  appears
that  the  history,  as  detailed  in  OT,  gives  no  warrant
for  supposing  that,  down  to  the  close  of  the  sixth  century
B.C.,  there  was  in  Israel  any  universal  or  philosophic
treatment  of  moral  and  religious  problems.

Though  there  were,  however,  no  systematic  discussions
of  these  questions  in  the  pre-exilic  and  exilic  periods,
there  was  the  germ  of  larger  thought.  The
prophetic  declaration  that  God  desires  men's
love,  not  their  sacrifices  (Hos.  66),  the  formulation  of
the  principle  of  individual  moral  responsibility  (Dt,
24  16  Jer.  31 30  Ezek.  184),  and  the  announcement  of  the
obligation  to  love  one's  neighbour  as  one's  self  (Lev.
19i8)  contain  the  substance  of  what  was  afterwards
developed  into  a  universal  religion.  To  a  man  of  the
sixth  century  B.C.  who  recognised  the  significance  of
these  principles  it  might  have  seemed  that  the  natural
process  of  national  growth  would  carry  Israelitish
thought  beyond  the  limits  of  nationalism  to  a  moral  and
religious  system  which  would  transcend  all  that  was
local  and  temporary.  There  is,  in  fact,  every  reason
to  believe  that  the  growth  of  the  Israelitish  people  in
ethical  and  religious  thought  was  sound  and  continuous.
After  the  heroic  period  of  struggle  for  a  unitary  concep
tion  of  the  divine  government  of  the  world,  in  which
the  fresh  spontaneous  prophetic  feeling  played  a  great
part,  came  a  time  of  quieter  reflection,  when  the  nation
was  obliged  to  face  the  question  of  orderly  organisation
on  the  basis  of  definite  written  law.  The  attempt  to
formulate  principles  of  organisation  must  have  forced
the  larger  problems  of  life  on  the  attention  of  the
thinkers  of  the  time.  How  far  this  process  would  have
gone,  and  what  direction  it  would  have  taken,  if  the
lews  had  been  all  massed  in  their  own  land  under  an
independent  national  government  it  is  impossible  to  say.
From  the  sixth  century,  however,  they  were  never  inde
pendent  except  in  a  partial  way  for  a  century  of  Macca-
bcean  rule.  Moreover,  what  is  of  more  consequence,
the  old  national  isolation  vanished  for  ever  ;  Jews  were
scattered  over  the  whole  area  of  Western  civilisation,
and  Judcea  was  a  petty  province  exposed  on  all  sides  to
the  inroads  of  new  ideas.  Israelitism  was  a  single  fact
hemmed  in  by  great  peoples,  Babylonian,  Egyptian,
Persian,  Greek — it  maintained  itself,  but  not  without
modification.  The  Jews  were  persistent  and  sympa
thetic,  gave  and  took,  wove  into  their  own  system  what
they  got  from  without,  and  lived  in  an  atmosphere  of
comparison  and  adaptation.  From  Babylonia  they  seem
to  have  received  suggestions  of  literary  work  and  of  a
regular  liturgical  cultus,  from  Persia  the  form  of  an
elaborate  angelology  and  demonology  and  the  doctrine
of  a  bodily  resurrection,  from  Egypt  and  Greece  the  belief
in  the  ethical  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  from  Greece,
further,  a  touch  of  philosophy.  Out  of  all  these  influ
ences  sprang  that  attitude  of  reflection  which  produced
the  Wisdom  Literature.  The  experience  of  the  Jews
repeated  that  of  many  other  civilised  peoples— they
were  educated  by  contact  with  their  neighbours.  The
post-exilian  Jewish  thought,  whose  basis  and  soul  was
the  native  intellectual  force  of  the  people,  was  constantly
stimulated  and  broadened  from  without,  but  received  its
direction  from  the  course  of  the  national  fortunes.

In  estimating  the  literature  of  the  post-exilian  Jews  two
features  of  their  social  position  should  be  borne  in  mind  :  (i)
Though,  so  far  as  records  go,  they  were  not  persecuted  by
their  conquerors  till  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  B.C.,
their  political  dependence  probably  exposed  them  in  some
degree  to  oppression  and  humiliation  on  the  part  of  foreigners
and  apostate  fellow-countrymen  ;  (2)  While  not  giving  up  th
agricultural  life  in  Palestine,  they  came  more  and  more  to  live
in  cities— to  no  small  extent  in  their  own  land,  but  especially  in
foreign  countries  (see  Job  29  7  31  32  and  Pr.  and  Ecclus.  pautm)
—and  thus  had  occasion  to  observe  and  acquire  the  virtues  and
vices  of  urban  life.  Hence,  in  part,  the  prominence  given  in  t  ic
wisdom  books  to  the  insolence  of  the  rich,  to  sexual  immorality.

5324


4 ThP


WISDOM  LITERATURE

and  to  the  duties  and  dangers  of  the  business  life  ;  and  hence,
also,  came  fuller  opportunity  of  contact  with  the  philosophical
thought  of  the  time.

The  Jewish  sages  or  philosophers  formed  a  distinct  class
sharply  differentiated  from  prophets  (see  PROPHET),

priests  (see  PRIEST),  and  SCRIBES  (?.f.  )•
The  difference between the point  of

view  of  the  sage  and  that  of  the  prophet  or  the  priest  is
obvious,  and  he  is  no  less  distinct  from  the  scribe,  if
this  term  is  understood  to  mean  '  one  learned  in  the
scriptures.'  A  member  of  any  one  of  these  classes
might,  it  is  true,  be  also  a  member  of  any  other  class  :
a  priest  might  be  a  prophet  or  a  scribe  or  a  sage,  and
so  with  the  others.  But  in  becoming  a  sage,  one
assumed  a.  particular  attitude  toward  life,  and  thought
and  spoke  in  accordance  with  that  attitude.  The
cultivation  of  learning  and  thought  began  with  the
priesthood,  which  was  the  custodian  of  the  Tordh.  The
Tordh,  however,  had  two  sides,  the  ritual  or  liturgical,
and  the  civil  and  moral,  and  the  priesthood  soon  split
into  two  divisions  which  devoted  themselves  severally  to
these  two  classes  of  duties.  The  second  class  (which
soon  came  to  include  others  than  priests),  composite  in
nature,  in  its  turn  called  for  division  ;  one  set  of  men
cultivated  the  study  of  the  national  code  of  law,  becom
ing  necessarily  expounders  of  the  national  scriptures  —  -
these  were  the  lawyers  or  scribes  ;  others  were  attracted
by  the  study  of  universal  moral  truth  —  these  were  the
sages.

The  aim  and  function  of  the  sage  are  clearly  described
by  Ben  Sira  (Ecclus.  39i-n)  :  the  wise  man,  whilst  he
meditates  on  the  law  of  God,  will  search  through  the
world  for  knowledge,  and  will  gain  honour  and  renown
among  all  men  for  his  acute  sayings  and  his  practical
understanding.  The  sages  made  the  pursuit  of  wisdom
the  chief  aim  of  life.  For  most  of  them  (for  all,  so  far
as  our  knowledge  goes,  except  Kohe'leth  and  Agur)  the
basis  of  wisdom  was  religious  faith.  This  conception
was  a  necessary  one  for  the  devout  Jew  for  two  reasons  :
first,  since  God  was  held  to  be  universal  and  absolute
ruler,  it  followed  that  he  was  the  bestower  of  all  gifts  of
learning,  including  physical  and  psychological  know
ledge  (Wisd.  7i6-2i),  and  doubtless  all  the  science  of
the  time  ;  and  second,  so  far  as  wisdom  was  regarded
as  the  guide  to  the  best  life,  it  must  be  founded  on  the
divine  moral  law,  which  sprang  from  God's  wisdom  and
was  enforced  by  his  power.  This  religious  conception  of
wisdom,  however,  did  not  prevent  the  widest  study  of
men  and  things,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  examples  of
Ben  Sira  and  the  author  of  Wisdom  of  Solomon  ;  there
must  have  been  many  Jews,  certainly  from  the  fourth
century  B.C.  onwards,  who  went  outside  of  Israelitish  learn
ing.1  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  such
men  when  they  declared  that  the  fear  of  Yahwe  was  the
beginning  of  wisdom  :  they  might  hold  to  this  central
dogma,  and  at  the  same  time  yield  to  their  thirst  for
the  knowledge  which  was  to  be  found  only  in  foreign
lands  and  books  ;  they  might  believe  that  Yahwe  was
the  teacher  of  foreign  sages,  or  they  might  follow  their
bent  without  troubling  themselves  to  solve  the  apparent
contradiction  that  whilst  Yahwe's  revelation  of  wisdom
to  his  people  was  complete  and  all-sufficient,  there  was
also  other  wisdom  which  was  good.  A  similar  remark
holds  of  the  maxims  of  prudence  and  shrewdness
which  abound  in  proverbs  and  Ecclesiasticus  ;  these,
though  they  had  no  immediate  connection  with  the  fear
of  God,  might  be  considered  as  a.  part  of  the  scheme
of  life  which  God  had  ordained  ;  more  probably  the
moralists  wrote  what  they  thought  desirable,  and  the
question  of  logical  harmony  did  not  occur  to  them.
Philosophic  schools,  in  the  full  Greek  sense,  the  Jewish
sages  did  not  form  —  they  had  no  speculative  philosophy
proper.  There  were,  however,  theoretical  differences

1  Cp  Plumptre's  biography  of  Koheleth  in  his  Ecclesiastes  (in
Canth.  Bible,  i88i)and  the  criticism  of  it  by  Bois,  in  his  Origines
d.  1.  Phil.  Judeo-  Alexandrine,  1890.

5325


WISDOM  LITERATURE

among  them,  especially  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the
divine  government  of  the  world,  and  in  regnrd  to  the
dignity  and  possible  happiness  of  huitmn  life.  It  is
probable  that  a  sort  of  academic  life  gradually  established
itself.

Whilst  in  Job  (12  2  15  10  32  7)  the  wisdom  is  that  of  experience
and  tradition,  there  is  in  Proverbs  (1  2-6  22  17-21),  Ecclesiasticus
(0824 — 39  10),  and  Ecclesiastes  (12  n)  a  distinct  recognition  of
professional  study  and  of  a  body  of  teaching.  In  the  second
century  B.C.  there  existed  an  incipient  University  (Antigonus
of  Soko  and  his  successors),  and  before  this  there  must  have
been  some  form  of  the  higher  teaching  (cp  EDUCATION,  g  5).
The  thought  of  the  great  scholars  no  doubt  took  a  wide  range  ;
we  have  recorded  only  so  much  of  it  as  survived  the  revisions  of
generations.

There  was  a  stirring  intellectual  life,  of  which  we  find
not  a  few  traces  in  the  extant  literature.1  When  the
Jews  began  to  be  influenced  by  organised  bodies  of
foreign  thought  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Of  early  Persian
literary  life  we  unfortunately  know  nothing,  and  it  is  not
probable  that  Jews  came  into  intellectual  contact  with
Greeks  before  the  time  of  Alexander.  Immediately  after
his  death  Greek  schools  of  philosophy  sprang  up  abun
dantly  in  Egypt  and  Western  Asia,  and  from  them,  it
seems  probable,  Jewish  sages  got  ideas  which  coloured
their  thought.  No  doubt  they  learned  something  of
all  the  current  science  ;  but  they  have  left  no  full  state
ments  of  their  non-religious  opinions  (hints  in  Ecclus.
43,  Wisd.  7,  etc.).  Here  we  shall  be  obliged  to  con
fine  ourselves  to  the  main  points  of  the  moral  and
religious  thought,  referring,  for  other  ideas,  to  the
commentaries.

Part  of  the  thought  of  the  wisdom  books  they  have

in common with preceding  and con-
5.  Teaching  of  temporary  literature,  and  this  may  be
the  Sages  :  the  dismissed  with  a  brief  mention.
Old  material. They  inherited  the  belief  in  monotheism,

and  in  the  practically  unlimited  character  of

the  divine  attributes  pertaining  to  knowledge  and  power.2  For
them,  as  for  the  prophets,  God  is  teirible  to  those  who  violate
his  commands  (Job  10  Prov.  1  20-31  Ecclus.  27  29  Wisd.  5),  a
compassionate,  forgiving  saviour  to  those  who  fear  and  obey
him  (Job  5  18  Ps.  103  Ecclus.  2  n  17  29  Wisd.  Iti  7).  They  take
monogamy  for  granted, ;i  and  recognise  a  well-ordered  family-life
and  all  the  ordinary  virtues.  They  retain  the  common  view  of
man  as  a  being  made  up  of  body  and  soul,  and  possessing
conscience  and  freedom,  while,  at  the  same  time,  he  is  absolutely
controlled  by  God  ;  with  their  predecessors  (Dt.  24  16  Jer.  31  30
Ezek.  184)  they  reject  the  old  conception  of  the  solidarity  of  the
family  and  the  nation — or,  more  exactly,  they  ignore  it.  They,
however,  retain  the  traditional  sharp  division  of  men  into  the
two  classes  of  good  and  bad.  Here  also  should  probably  be  put
their  silence  respecting  the  miraculous.  In  the  OT,  miracles
are  described  or  mentioned  only  in  works  written  long  after  the
events  described.  There  are  no  miracles  between  Hezekiah  and
the  Book  of  Daniel  ;  Nehemiah  says  nothing  of  supernatural
intervention,  and  the  Maccabaean  apparitions  and  signs  are
recorded  not  in  i  Mace.,  but  in  2  Mace.  Miracles  play  no  part
in  the  writings  of  the  Prophets  or  in  the  Psalms,  except  as
reminiscences  (Is.  C3  12  Ps.  105  etc.)  or  vague  expectations  (Is.  11
Zech.  14  Joel  3).  In  the  Wisdom  books  they  are  referred  to  only
as  events  of  the  ancient  history,  and  only  in  Ecclesiasticus
(44  48)  and  Wisdom  (10-lil).  In  a  word,  neither  in  the  gnomic
literature  nor  elsewhere  in  the  OT  does  the  miraculous  enter
into  the  texture  of  the  thought.

Proceeding,  now,  to  examine  the  characteristic  thought
of  the  Wisdom  books,  we  have  first  to  note  its  relatively

non-national character  : it lays little
6.  Character-  stress Qn natjonal institutions, laws,
istic  thought :  and  hopes .  but  k  holds  to  some  ex_
the  ritual. {ent to  tne  morai  ancj  reljgious  superi
ority  of  Israel  over  all  other  nations.

The  sacrificial  ritual  is  referred  to  a  few  times  as
an  existing  custom  (as  in  Prov.  158  Ecclus.  34 18-20
Eccles.  5i),  but  rather  with  the  purpose  of  controlling
it  by  moral  considerations,  and  faithfulness  in  the  pay
ment  of  tithes  (Prov.  89)  and  vows  (Eccles.  64)  is
enjoined.  The  sages  (like  the  prophets  and  the  Gospels)
recognise  the  propriety  of  observing  the  custom  ;  but

1  Cp  the  evidences,  in  the  Talmud,  of  thought  which  went
outside  of  the  current  orthodoxy.

-  On  the  apparent  polytheistic  conception  of  Pss.  58  82  see  the
Commentaries.

3  Israelitish  polygamy  had  probably  disappeared  by  the  be
ginning  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.

5326


WISDOM  LITERATUKE

they  do  not  put  it  in  the  same  category  with  obedience
to  moral  principle.  Such  things  as  circumcision  and
the  Sabbath  they  take  for  granted,  but  find  no  occasion
to  mention.  It  is  noteworthy  that  they  do  not  refer
to  the  private  reading  of  the  sacred  books,  or  to  syna-
gogal  services.  It  is  certain  that  they  were  well  ac
quainted  with  the  old  literature,  and  that  this  had,  in
their  time,  a  semi-sacred  character  ;  but  reading  was  an
art  confined  to  the  few,  instruction  was  largely  oral,  and
the  duty  of  reading  was  not  a  thing  that  could  be
insisted  on  for  the  masses,  and  for  students  it  was  taken
for  granted.  Synagogues  hardly  existed  before  the
second  century  K.  c. ,  and  attendance  on  the  weekly
gatherings  was  a  custom  which  did  not  need  to  be
enjoined.  Forgiveness  of  sin  is  not  connected  with
sacrifice,  but  with  the  mercy  of  God  and  obedience  to
him  (see,  e.g. ,  Job  8  Ecclus.  17 as/.  Wisd.  1 1 23).  This,
however,  is  not  peculiar  to  the  sages  ;  it  is  a  part  of
the  general  Israelitish  conception  ;  in  the  Torah  there  is
no  sacrificial  atonement  except  for  sins  of  ignorance.1
The  negative  attitude  of  the  Wisdom  books  towards
sacrifices  and  the  Temple  ritual  in  general  must  be
ascribed  to  the  progress  of  moral  and  religious  thought.
All  the  cultivated  world  of  the  time  was  moving  away
from  this  external  sort  of  service.  This  was  notably  the
case  in  Greece  and  Rome,  and  the  same  tendency
(formulated  in  the  Gospels)  is  visible  in  the  sayings
ascribed  (in  Pirke  Abotli]  to  the  early  Jewish  teachers.
The  moral  side  of  the  relation  between  man  and  God
was  of  necessity  emphasised.

The  silence  of  the  sages  respecting  Messianic  hopes  is
to  Ixi  explained  partly  by  their  philosophic  individualism,

_ m.  ,. partly  by  the  circumstances  of  the  times.

7.  The  nation.  '  •  f  , r

There  are  glowing  pictures  of  the  future

of  the  nation  in  prophetic  writings  as  late  as  the  fourth
century  B.C.  (Is.  11  Joel  34  Zech.  9-14);  but  of  this
there  is  in  Job  and  Proverbs  not  a  word,  in  Ecclesiasticus
only  a  general  wish  (Ecclus.  47  22  50  22-26),  in  Wisdom
only  a  look  to  the  life  to  come  (Wisd.  5).  The  sages
held  that  the  one  thing  necessary  for  all  men  was
individual  righteousness  ;  they  might  thus  have  been
comparatively  indifferent  to  hopes  of  national  independ
ence  and  glory,  they  might  sympathise  with  their  suffer
ing  fellow-countrymen  (Wisd.  1-6)  without  cherishing
political  dreams.  They  may  also  (like  the  Pharisaic
party  at  a  later  time)  have  convinced  themselves  that
resistance  to  the  great  military  powers  was  useless,  and
that  the  true  mission  of  the  Jewish  people  was  to  culti
vate  knowledge.  Their  attitude  towards  foreign  nations
was  not  hostile,  but  friendly  ;  they  recognised  the
excellence,  in  certain  regards,  of  the  civilisation  of  these
peoples,  utilised  them  by  becoming  their  pupils  in
philosophy,  and  thus,  while  remaining  Jews,  became  in
a  measure  cosmopolitan,  and  began  the  formal  fusion
of  Semitic  and  Hellenic  thought.

On  the  other  hand,  the  belief  remained  that  Israel
stood  in  a  peculiar  relation  with  God,  had  a  special
revelation  of  his  will,  and  was  entitled  to  his  special
protection  (Ecclus.  24  44-50  Wisd.  10-19).  On  this
point  there  may  have  been  diversity  of  view  ;  there  is  no
reference  to  it  in  Job  and  Proverbs.  In  these  books
the  name  '  Israel '  does  not  occur,  and  the  national
Torah  is  not  mentioned.  It  is  hardly  probable  that
the  sages  (except  Agur  and  Koheleth)  were  wholly
without  national  pride ;  but  their  national  feeling
receded  before  their  philosophic  and  religious  devotion
to  virtue.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  prominence  given
in  the  wisdom  books  (omitting  Eccles. )  to  national
topics  increases  as  time  goes  on  :  there  is  nothing  of  it
in  Job,  next  to  nothing  in  Proverbs,  somewhat  in
Ecclesiasticus,  more  in  Wrisdom.  This  fact  is  probably
to  be  attributed  partly  to  a  change  in  the  condition  of
the  Jewish  people,  and  partly  to  the  personal  feeling  of

1  On  this  point,  cp  WRS  Rel.  Sem.W,  ch.  11;  Smend.
A  Tliche  Rel.-Gesch.  §  21 ;  Montefiore,  Hibb.  Led.  Lect.  9  ;
also  SACRIFICE,  g§  t^ff.

5327


WISDOM  LITERATURE

the  writers.  At  the  time  when  Job  and  the  greater  part
of  Proverbs  were  composed  (that  is,  in  the  4th  and  3rd
cents.  B.C.)  the  nation  was  tranquil — so  far  as  the
records  go  there  was  no  persecution,  there  was  nothing
to  call  forth  an  expression  of  national  feeling.  In  Ben
Sira's  time  (about  190  B.C.  ),  the  Jews  had  begun  to  be  in
volved  in  the  conflict  between  Egypt  and  Syria  ;  but  his
Ode  to  Heroes  (Ecclus.  44-50)  seems  to  have  been
suggested  partly  by  his  patriotic  feeling,  partly  by  his
admiration  for  the  high  priest  Simon,  then  lately  de
ceased.  Wisdom  was  written  at  a  moment  (about  50  B.  C. )
when  the  memory  of  scorn,  insult,  and  oppression  was
fresh.  Koheleth  stood  so  far  away  from  his  nation  that
no  reference  to  its  fortunes  could  be  expected  from  him.
What  most  particularly  characterises  the  Wisdom

8.  The  nature Literauture is  its conception  of  virtue
- . .  or  righteousness,  and  its  discussion  of

the  moral government  of the  world.
These  points  we  may  now  proceed  to  consider.

The  sages  do  not  enter  into  any  formal  investigation
of  the  nature  of  virtue.  They  assume,  in  general,  that
it  is  sincere  adhesion  to  the  moral  law  (Job  29-31  Prov.
Ecclus.  Wisd. ,  passim}.  This  definition  is  not  affected
by  their  eudnemonistic  theory — one  may  look  to  a
reward  and  yet  be  sincere  ;  nor  is  its  reality  destroyed
by  the  maxims  of  selfish  worldly  wisdom  which  are
occasionally  found  in  their  writings  (particularly  in
Ecclesiasticus).  But  in  Job  and  Proverbs  and  the
succeeding  books  we  meet  a  conception  of  the  moral
life  which,  while  not  without  a  point  of  connection  with
the  prophetic  thought,  still  goes  far  beyond  anything  in
the  earlier  literature  ;  virtue  is  practically  identified  with
knowledge.  Knowledge,  it  is  true,  is  a  necessary  con
dition  of  obedience,  and  is  so  spoken  of  in  the  Prophets
(Is.  13  69  Jer.  422  64);  but  the  sages  treat  it  as  if  it
were  the  same  thing  as  obedience.  The  central  fact
in  the  books  just  named  is  wisdom,  which  is  made  to
include  all  the  duties  of  life  from  the  lowest  to  the
highest.  The  ideal  person,  he  who  stands  for  the  right
against  and  above  the  wrong,  is  the  wise  man.  When
we  recollect  that  in  the  Prophets,  and  to  some  extent  in
Job  (5 15  3724),  human  wisdom  is  looked  on  as  a  thing
alien  to  or  opposed  to  God,  it  is  evident  that  Jewish
thought,  in  representing  wisdom  as  the  one  thing
needful,  has  taken  a  new  direction.  This  was  the
doctrine  of  Greek  philosophy,  and  we  therefore  seem
\varranted  in  supposing  that  it  was  from  the  Greeks  that
it  came,  in  its  full  form,  to  the  Jews.1  Instead  of  the
simple  demands  of  earlier  times,  the  sole  worship  of
Yahwe  and  obedience  to  his  ritual  and  moral  laws,  there
has  now  arisen  a  science  of  living,  in  which  intellectual
insight  is  the  central  faculty,  it  being  assumed  that  he,
and  only  he,  who  sees  will  do.  Wickedness  is  folly,  the
bad  man  is  a  fool  ;  2  the  guide  to  right  living  is  the  sage,
the  duty  of  the  young  is  to  seek  his  instruction.  The
moral  and  religious  organisation  of  the  Jews  corre
sponded  to  this  conception  of  life  ;  there  were  schools
like  those  of  Athens  and  other  Greek  centres,  and  the
synagogue  was  also  doubtless  a  house  of  instruction.
This  idea — that  life  is  a  moral  training — proved  to  be
permanent  ;  the  Jews  never  gave  it  up — it  was,  in  fact,
an  essential  element  in  the  growth  of  the  world.  But
a  pious  Israelite,  while  he  accepted  wisdom  as  the
guide  of  life,  could  not  fail  to  identify  its  moral  code
with  the  law  of  God,  since  he  looked  on  this  law  as
the  perfect  expression  of  duty.  This  identification  is
accordingly  made  in  Proverbs,  Ecclesiasticus,  and
Wisdom.  The  terms  '  instruction  '  and  '  the  law  of
Yahwe '  are  used  interchangeably,  and  '  wisdom  '  itself
is  said  to  be  the  same  with  '  the  fear  of  Yahwe.'

Freedom of ethical discussion is, however, not

1  A  similar  influence  is  visible  in  the  stress  laid,  by Rab
binical Judaism, on knowledge of  the Law (Jn.  749, Pirlt.
^.25).

2  S'lN  occurs  only  twice  in  Job  (62^),  and  7»D3  not  at  *!!»
the  two  terms  are  common  in  the  other  books.

5328


WISDOM  LITERATURE

diminished  by  this  quasi -nationalistic  definition  of
wisdom.  The  sages  do  not  confine  themselves  to  the
Prophets  and  the  Torah,  but  seek  their  maxims  every
where,  chiefly  by  observation  of  actual  life,  possibly,
also,  in  such  Greek  and  other  writings  as  they  had
access  to.1  Nevertheless  there  is  no  reason  to  regard
their  acceptance  of  the  law  of  Yahwe  as  a  pretence.
They  were  perfectly  sincere  in  treating  the  divine  will  as
the  final  standard  of  right,  only  they  enlarged  the  defini
tion  of  the  '  law  of  the  Lord,1  making  it  comprehend  all
the  deliverances  of  their  moral  consciousness  ;  for  those
who  would  be  faithful  at  once  to  their  national  traditions
and  to  their  own  convictions  there  was  no  other  course.
The  sages  thus  represent  the  ethical  ideas  and  usages  of
their  time,  and  are  in  this  regard  valuable  as  making  a
contribution  to  the  history  of  ethical  thought.  It  is  also
true  that  they  assume  the  position  of  independent  moral
teachers,  with  reason  and  conscience  as  their  guides  ;  they
do  not  lay  claim  to  revelation  or  inspiration  from  God,
and  they  appeal  only  to  the  good  sense  of  their  readers.
All  this  is  in  accordance  with  their  philosophical  point
of  view  ;  they  wrote  simply  as  moralists,  never  citing
the  Law  as  authority,  yet  by  no  means  setting  them
selves  above  revelation — -rather  they  accepted  revelation,
and  believed  in  the  Tightness  and  authority  of  their
own  teaching,  and  saw  no  incongruity  in  these  two
positions.'2  Of  their  books  two  (Ecclesiasticus  and
Wisdom)  were  excluded  from  the  canon,  two  (Job  and
Eccl. )  were  substantially  modified  by  interpolations  and
additions,  and  two  (Prov.  and  Eccl.)  reached  canonical
dignity  only  after  a  struggle.

The  human  quality  of  wisdom  is  sometimes  treated
as  natural  intellectual  acumen  and  breadth,  sometimes
„  as  the  direct  gift  of  God  ;  but  there  is  no

discrepancy  between  these  views.  The
)m-  latter  belongs  to  the  old-Israelitish  theo
cratic  faith,  according  to  which  all  powers  of  body  and
mind  come  immediately  from  Yahwe.  That  the  gnomic
writers  regard  •  wisdom  '  (niran.  hokmdh}  as  primarily  an
intellectual  faculty  appears  from  its  various  synonyms,
such  as  '  understanding  '  or  'intelligence'  (nva,  bind/i),
'shrewdness'  (ns*ij?,  'orindh],  'sagacity'  (naip,  inZ-
simmdh,),  'practical  ability'  (n»»:w,  tUXiyy&k),  They,
in  fact,  treat  it  also  as  a  purely  natural  power,  subject
to  ordinary  conditions  of  training  and  growth,  and  to  a
certain  extent  under  the  control  of  its  possessor.  They
thus  collocate  the  divine  and  the  human  points  of  view.
This  sort  of  collocation  or  combination  appears  also  in
the  relation,  as  conceived  by  the  sages,  between  human
wisdom  and  divine  wisdom.  Whilst  in  the  Prophets
and  the  Law  it  is  God's  apartness,  sacredness,  or
holiness  that  is  put  most  prominently  forward,  it  is
of  wisdom  that  the  sages  think  as  his  chief  attribute.
By  it  he  is  said  to  direct  the  whole  course  of  nature
and  the  whole  life  of  man.  As  in  the  beginning  the
breath  of  God  gave  life  to  man,  so  the  divine  wisdom,
filling  and  ordering  all  things,  yet  able  to  choose  its
own  course,  enters  into  the  souls  of  those  who  fear  him,
and  brings  them  into  unison  with  his  thought.  This
conception,  indicated  in  Prov.  2io  Ecclus.  622,  is  more
distinctly  stated  in  Wisdom  (14),  as,  in  fact,  it  belongs
to  the  more  definitely  philosophical  side  of  the  idea,
and  is  an  approach  to  personification.

Definite  personification  of  Wisdom  is  found  in  Job  23
Prov.  822-31  Ecclus.  24  Wisd.  7  8  (and  also  10-19).  In
the  first  passage3  she  is  extolled  as  a  most  precious

1  For  example,  the  resemblances  between  the  Jewish  gnomic
books  and  the  lYuijuiai  Moi/darixoi  which  go  under  the  name  of
Menander  are  many  and  striking,  though  the  resemblances  may
often  be  accidental,  and  the  date  of  the  Menander  material  is
uncertain.

2  It  must  be  recollected  that  at  this  time  the  full  conception
of  revelation  had  hardly  been  formulated.

3  The  chapter,  as  it  stands,  appears  to  be  an  interpolation.
It  decidedly  interrupts  Job's  discourse,  breaking  the  connection
between  27  6  and  '29  2  ('27  7-23  does  not  belong  to  the  speech  of
Job),  and  does  not  accord  with  Job's  words  as  elsewhere  given,

5329


WISDOM  LITERATURE

thing,  known  to  God  alone,  but  she  has  no  demiurgic
function  ;  and,  if  the  last  verse  of  the  chapter  be
genuine,  the  personification  is  half  given  up.  In
Prov.  8  she  is  the  companion  of  Yahwe  (though  his
creature)  in  the  primeval  work  of  creation,  in  which  she
takes  part  as  sympathetic  friend  (God's  foster-child).
Hen  Sira  represents  her  as  compassing  the  universe,  only
however,  to  take  up  her  abode  in  Israel.  The  com-
pletest  philosophical  personification  is  found  in  Wisdom,
in  which  she  is  substantially  identical  with  the  Stoic
Logos.  The  progress  in  the  conception  is  obvious ;
Wisdom  is  unspeakably  precious  (Job),  is  the  companion
of  the  divine  creative  energy  (E'roverbs),  is  an  effluence
from  the  divine  glory,  the  all-powerful  maker  of  all
things,  material,  intellectual,  spiritual  (Wisdom);  only
Ben  Sira  appears  to  interrupt  the  line  of  development
by  practically  identifying  Wisdom  with  the  Jewish  Law.
This  interruption  will  disappear  if  his  description  be
earlier  than  that  in  Proverbs  ;  or  if  the  identification  of
Wisdom  with  the  Law  be  regarded  as  showing  a  com-
pleter  national  assimilation  of  the  conception.  However
that  may  be,  the  general  advance  in  the  thought  remains
unaffected.  That  its  final  form  is  Greek  is  universally
held,  and  the  same  origin  is  probably  to  be  assigned  to
the  earlier  forms.  In  the  more  distinctively  Israelitish
parts  of  the  OT  (the  Prophets  and  the  Torah)  there  is
no  personification  of  a  divine  attribute,1  and  we  here
naturally  think  of  foreign  influence,  Persian  or  Greek.
The  Jews  may  conceivably  have  got  it  from  the  Gathas
(or,  from  the  popular  ideas  therein  represented)  in  which
such  personification  plays  so  prominent  a  role  ;  but  in
the  Gathas  wisdom  is  not  personified,  and  is  not  the
principal  attribute  of  God,  and  to  none  of  the  Amesha-
Spentas  are  cosmogonic  or  universal  functions  assigned.2
One  of  the  most  striking  features  of  the  biblical  repre
sentation  is  the  conception  of  the  world  as  an  orderly
unity,  a  cosmos— a  conception  found,  however,  only  in
the  Wisdom  Literature  (in  which  certain  Psalms  are  to
be  included);  it  is  clearly  indicated  in  Job  (28  38  39),
and  expressed  more  distinctly  in  Ecclesiasticus  (24  42
43),  Proverbs  (the  '  Righteous  Order'  of  the  Gathas
corresponds  to  the  Jewish  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,
chap.  8),  and  Wisdom  (chap.  7).  This  conception  is
hardly  Jewish  or  Persian ;  it  is  undoubtedly  Greek.
With  it  we  must  connect  the  disposition  (shown  in  the
passages  just  cited,  and  in  Pss.  104  107  139)  to  make
wide  surveys  of  natural  phenomena.  The  movement  of
thought  to  which  it  belongs  was  a  scientific  one,  and
rested  on  a  serious  contemplation  of  all  the  phenomena
of  the  world,  including  the  life  and  soul  of  man.  It  is
no  doubt  to  Greek  influence  that  we  must  ascribe  the
selection  of  wisdom  (rather  than  power,  kindness,  or
holiness)  as  the  attribute  distinctively  representative
of  God.

The philosophy of the sages does not include
psychology or  moral  and  religious  inward  experience.


10.  The


They have no theories of  free-will, of  the


tii 1  Selles's  °f  sin'  °f  the  way  °f  salvation. Their
C


ouve.


interest  is  in  practical  questions  of  life,  and  in


pre-eminence  of  wisdom  as  the  guide  of
man.  Their  theory  of  the  ethical  life  is  simple  ;  every
man  may  do  right  if  he  will,  and,  if  he  docs  wrong,  he
must  bear  the  consequences  ;  men  are  divided  into  two
classes,  the  good  and  the  bad— every  man  must  belong
to  one  of  these  classes,  and  is  to  be  treated  according

or,  indeed,  with  the  tone  of  the  rest  of  the  book.  For  reasons
stated  above  it  seems  to  be  earlier  than  Prov.  822-31  ;  it  is
probably  to  be  put  later  than  the  rest  of  Job.  By  P.ickell,
Budde,  and  others  it  is  regarded  as  belonging,  in  part  or  in
whole,  to  Job's  address.  This  point  does  not  affect  the  general
view  taken  above.

1  The  partial  personification  of  the  '  word  '  of  Yahwe  in  Is.
55  10  f.  is  not  a  case  in  point  ;  the  attribution  of  objective  power
to  the  spoken  word  belongs  to  the  old  popular  belief  (Gen.  2733
Judg.  172  28.213).

2  (See  CREATION-,  §  9,  end.) The  date  of  the  Gathas  can
hardly  be  regarded  as  fixed  with  certainty. Cp  ZOKOASTRIANISM,


533°


WISDOM  LITERATURE

to  his  position.  This  neglect  of  the  shades  of  men's
characters  was  doubtless  to  some  extent  a  feature  of  the
times  (the  nice  balancing  of  qualities  and  impulses  is  a
comparatively  recent  mode  of  thought) ;  but  it  was  due
in  great  part  to  the  judicial  nature  of  the  moral  teaching
of  the  sages  ;  a  man,  they  appear  to  have  held,  must  be
judged  by  his  deeds — \ve  cannot  see  his  heart,  and  we
must  estimate  him  by  the  total  outcome  of  his  thought,
that  is,  by  his  act.  In  the  same  way  we  may  explain
the  fact  that  no  account  is  taken  of  temptation  and
struggle — that  is  the  man's  own  affair,  with  which  the
judge  has  nothing  to  do.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this
strict  external  way  of  judging  man  has  its  advantages  ;
weakness  is  as  dangerous  as  badness,  and  we  must  face
the  facts  of  life.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gnomic
writings  lose  educational  power  by  their  failure  to  take
account  (as,  for  example,  Marcus  Aurelius  does)  of
men's  inward  experiences  ;  they  press  the  rule  home,
but  do  not  come  as  sympathetic  helpers  of  the  inner
life  ;  they  warn,  but  do  not  persuade,  the  bad  man.
Their  appeal  is  simply  to  man's  intelligence  ;  if,
they  say,  he  does  not  see,  there  is  no  help  for  him.
That  they  say  nothing  direct!}"  of  the  sense  of  duty  is
characteristic  of  OT  thought  in  general,  and  of  their
point  of  view  in  particular.

The  Hebrew  language  contains  no  specific  terms  for
'  duty  '  and  '  conscience  ' — a  fact  which  signifies,  of
course,  not  that  the  Israelites  did  not  have  these  ideas,1
but  only  that  their  ethical  point  of  view  did  not  lead
them  so  to  analyse  their  experience  as  to  create  a
demand  for  such  terms.  These  words  are  lacking  also
in  Wisdom,  though  the  Greek  language  contained
certainly  one  of  them.  '  The  sages  preferred  not  to  rely
on  so  uncertain  a  thing  as  sense  of  duty  ;  to  their
exhortations  they  add  a  further  consideration  or  motive.
Two  motives'2  for  welldoing  are  presented  in  the
Wisdom  Literature.  One  is  the  individual  prosperity
and  happiness  which  it  confers  (so  the  Three  Friends  in
Job,  Prov. ,  Ecclus. ,  Eccl. ,  Wisd.  3-5);  the  other  is  the
beauty  of  moral  perfectness  (Wisd.  7);  Job  himself  says
nothing  of  motives,  contenting  himself  with  affirming
his  integrity.  The  eudajmonism  of  the  first  group  of
books  is  that  of  the  OT  generally.3  There  is  a  frank
appeal  to  what  is  held,  not  without  good  ground,  to  be
the  most  powerful  motive  for  the  mass  of  men — the
desire  for  personal  wellbeing.  As  in  the  Prophets
national  prosperity,  so  here  individual  prosperity,  is  the
reward  of  a  morally  pure  life.  There  is  no  reference  to
the  public  good,  no  recognition  of  the  unity  of  the
world  or  the  solidarity  of  society,  no  mention  of  personal
purity  as  in  itself  a  desirable  object  of  effort.  Doubtless
the  writers  of  these  books  were  in  sympathy  with  the
best  practical  morality  of  their  time,  and  had  aspirations
after  perfection  ;  but,  as  practical  moralists,  they  pre
ferred  to  omit  all  that  seemed  theoretical  or  out  of
reach,  and  to  confine  themselves  to  what  they  thought
would  be  immediately  serviceable.  The  praise  of
wisdom  in  Wisd.  7  is  Greek  rather  than  Hebrew,  and,
from  its  sublimated  form,  could  act  as  moral  stimulus

1  We  may, perhaps,  recognise  the  conception  of  conscience
in  Ecclus.  142:  'happy  is  he  whose  soul  (that  is,  whose  self)
does  not  condemn  him.' Cp  HEART.

2  All  ethical  theories  are  eudaemonistic — they  must  assign  a
motive for  welldoing,  and  that  motive must  be  happiness  in
some  form. The  important  point  is  whether  the  eudsemonism
is  individualistic  or  universalistic  ;  in  the  former  case  the  man
looks  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  own  immediate  desires,  in  the
latter  case  to  the  happiness  of  the  world,  of  which  he  is  a  part.
Under the second head comes the ethical system in which
desire  to  do  the  will  of  God  is  the  motive  ;  for  such  a  motive  is
morally  pure  only  when  the  will  of  God  is  done  because  it  is
morally  good, that  is, because  it  seeks the  happiness  of  the
whole.

»  The  NT  system  differs  from  that  of  the  OT  and  the
Apocrypha  (except  Wisdom)  in  that  the  reward  offered  is
eternal  salvation,  and  the  obligation  is  more  definitely  recognised
to  bring  it  within  reach  of  all  men,  whereby  a  universalistic
character  is  given  to  the  desire  for  happiness.  The  later  OT
prophets  also  look  to  an  impartation  of  Israel's  blessedness  to  all
nations.

5331


WISDOM  LITERATURE

to  very  few  men  ;  and  the  author,  in  the  practical  part
of  his  work  (chaps,  o-o)  relics,  for  his  motive,  on  the
rewards  and  punishments  dispensed  by  God.

The  mingling  of  worldly  shrewdness  and  unworldly
elevation  in  the  Wisdom  books  is  a  natural  result  of

•11 «m,« ._»i  tne circumstances. The authors of

11.  Tne  moral  .,

code  these books were practical teachers,

dealing  with  all  of  human  life  that  they
knew,  and  giving  the  results  of  their  experience,  observa
tion,  and  reflection  ;  and  they  were  independent  thinkers,
not  absolutely  bound  by  any  code.  Their  independence
makes  them  all  the  more  interesting  and  important,
and  they  must  be  treated  not  as  a  mere  mass,  but  as
individuals.  Their  observations  are  coloured  by  their
characters  and  surroundings.  Ben  Sira's  shrewdness
sometimes  degenerates  into  meanness  or  hypocrisy
(8817),  and  Kohe'leth's  experience  made  him  one-sided
and  cynical.  But  the  prominence  given  to  the  economic
virtues  (especially  in  Proverbs  and  Ecclus. )  is  legitimate
and  necessary.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Wisdom
Literature  also  represents  the  highest  ethical  standard
of  the  time.  Job's  confession  of  ethical  faith  (Job
31)  leaves  little  to  be  desired,  and  the  same  may  be
said  of  passages  in  Proverbs  (as  lOia  24 17  2621),
Ecclesiasticus  (4gf.  5iof.  282  292)  and  Wisdom  (723
87)  ;  only  Koheleth  has  nothing  to  say  of  the  self-deny
ing  and  self-forgetting  virtues.  This  higher  standard
was  that  which  the  world  had  reached.  The  process  of
social  and  ethical  unification,  begun  by  the  Babylonian
empire,  was  carried  on  by  the  Persian  and  Greek
conquests,  and  the  sages  of  all  lands  were  at  one  in
inculcating  justice  and  kindness.  But  no  people  of
pre-Christian  antiquity,  as  far  as  our  records  go,  made
so  varied  and  complete  a  collection.

The  most  important  and  the  most  interesting  questions

of  the  Wisdom-books  are  those  which  relate  to  the  divine

control  of  the  world. First  in  time  came  the  general

inquiry  into  the  moral  government  of  the  world,  and  then,

somewhat  later,  the  question  as  to  the  value  of  human  life.

The idea of  a universal divine control of  things

appears  as  early  as the  first  of  the  writing  prophets

_.. . (Am.  1/1  9?),  but,  for  a  considerable  time,

' . ,no  difficulty  seems  to  have  arisen  in  con-

. ,  .  ,  nection  therewith  ;  the  accepted  prophetical

wor  a.  tneorv  down  to  the  middle  of  the  sixth
century  B.  c. ,  was  that  all  things  were  ordered  in  the
interests  of  Israel  (Is.  lO.^Jer.  1 10  25 14  Ezek.  25  3^ ).  A
perplexing  character  was  given  to  the  situation  by  the
national  disaster  of  the  sixth  century,  but  the  theory
was  not  disturbed  ;  and  in  none  of  the  proposed
solutions  of  the  problem  of  the  day  (Is.  402  Zech.  3  Is.
52 13-63 12)  was  the  divine  justice  called  in  question.
In  the  course  of  time  the  progress  of  thought  transferred
the  inquiry  from  the  sphere  of  the  nation  to  that  of  the
individual  ;  it  was  no  longer  '  why  does  righteous  Israel
suffer  ? '  but  '  why  does  the  good  man  suffer  and  the
bad  man  prosper?'  The  old  arguments  were  dis
carded,1  and  the  philosophers  addressed  themselves  to
a  candid  examination  of  the  facts  of  life.  Before  look
ing  at  their  arguments  we  ma}'  recall  the  fact  that  God
is  regarded  by  them  as  the  sole  agent  in  the  control  of
the  world.  The  old  notion  of  his  local  limitation
lingered  (Ecclus.24 10,  cp  Wisd.  814),  though  it  is  not
prominent,  and  the  purely  spiritual  conception  of  him
seems  not  to  have  been  reached  ;  he  is  never  called  '  a
spirit.'2  Nevertheless  he  is  regarded  as  supreme  and

1  The  'Satan'  of  Zechariah  appears,  in  larger  form,  in  the
prose  introduction  to  Job  (which  is  a  recension  of  an  earlier
folk-story),  but  is  not  mentioned  in  the  poem,  nor,  in  this  con
nection,  in  any  other  Wisdom  book.

-  No  formulation  of  this  conception  is  found  in  any  Jewish
writing  before  the  end  of  the  first  century  of  our  era  (Jn.  4  24),
at  which  time  the  local  idea  of  God  still  existed  (Jn.  4  20).  The
doctrine  of  the  immateriality  of  God  (as  i<oOs)  is  as  early  as
Aristotle,  and  its  adoption  by  Jews  and  Christians  was  probably
furthered  by  the  influence  of  the  later  Platonists  and  Stoic>  (as  in
Philo  and  the  Fourth  Gospel).  On  the  position  of  the  Talmud
see  Weber,  Jiici.  Thcol.  chap.  11.

5332


WISDOM  LITERATURE

in  himself  sufficient,  and  the  disposition  of  the  sages  is
to  ignore  intermediaries  between  him  and  the  world.
The  old  '  spirit  of  Yahwe,'  which  plays  so  prominent  a
part  in  the  early  narratives,  is  here  not  mentioned.1
Angels  appear  rarely  in  Job,  Kcclesiasticus,  and
Wisdom,  and  not  at  all  in  Proverbs  and  Ecclesiastes  ;
when  they  are  introduced,  it  is  not  as  messengers  sent
to  protect  and  guide  heroes  and  prophets,  but  as
attendants  on  the  person  of  Yahwe. 2  Of  the  mass  of
demons  of  the  old  popular  belief  only  Satan  survives  in
the  Wisdom  Literature,  and  he  is  there  (if  we  omit  the
prologue  of  Job)  mentioned  only  once,3  and  in  the
latest  book  of  the  group  ( Wisd.  224).  The  role  ascribed
to  him  in  this  book  is  significant.  The  Hebrew  heavenly
Satan,  the  adversary  of  Israel  and  the  accuser  of  men,
passed  gradually,  probably  under  the  stimulus  and
direction  of  Persian  demonology,  into  the  form  of  an
independent  Power,  at  enmity  with  God  and  man.*
Wisdom  gives  us  the  earliest  extant  formulation  of  the
conception  (forced  on  Jewish  thinkers  by  their  sense  of
God's  absolute  justice)  of  a  demonic  author  of  moral
evil.  In  general,  it  may  be  said  that  the  theology  of
the  sages  was  free  from  ethically  obstructive  anthro
pomorphism.  In  their  system  the  older  apparatus  of
intermediaries  was  supplanted  by  the  more  refined
conception  of  Wisdom  ;  in  Wisd.  106  that  is  ascribed
to  Wisdom  which  in  Gen.  19  is  ascribed  to  angels.5

It  was  doubtless  the  Jews'  exalted  conception  of  the

moral purity of the One God that led them to the

_ TT- . , discussion of the justness of his

13.  Historical  government  of  the  world. The  Greeks

occasion  tor _  „ t — „„„„ ;,,*^ *u;^


discussion.


appear not to have gone into this


inquiry.  They  were  especially  attracted
by  such  problems  as  the  constitution  of  man,  the  nature
of  virtue,  the  organisation  of  society.  Their  conception
of  God  did  not  force  them  to  hold  him  responsible  for
everything  ;  when  they  considered  his  nature,  they
either  (like  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  the  Stoics)  contented
themselves  with  assuming  his  perfect  justness,  and
referring  evil  to  other  sources,6  or  (like  the  Epicureans)
rejected  or  ignored  the  supposition  of  a  divine  oversight
of  the  world.  For  the  Jewish  philosopher,  however,  to
whom  life  was  God,  it  was  a  necessity  to  attempt  to
harmonise  God  and  the  world.  The  historical  occasion
for  the  Jewish  discussion  seems  to  have  been  given  by
the  condition  of  society  in  the  fourth  century  n.  c. ,
when  jews,  scattered  throughout  the  already  decadent
Persian  empire,  had  frequent  occasion  to  note  the
apparently  irrational  inequalities  of  men's  fortunes  ;  the
question  arose  :  Does  a  man's  lot  in  this  life  bear  any
relation  to  his  moral  character  ?

We  may  distinguish  four  stages  in  the  progress  of
the  discussion  ;  in  the  first  three  the  future  life  is
ignored,  in  the  fourth  it  is  considered.

i.  In  the  Hook  of  Job  the  question  is  argued  from
several  different  points  of  view,7  but  without  reaching  a

1  The  expression  'spirit  of  God,'  in  which  the  'spirit'  is  part
of  God's person, occurs rarely  (Wisd.  1  7 Oiy 1- i Pr.  1 23,
perhaps  in  JobS'Js; the  genuineness  of  Job33.j  is  doubtful);
its  anthropomorphic  tone  may  have  made  it  distasteful  to  the
sages.

2  That  they  did  not  vanish  from  the  popular  faith  is  evident
from  Daniel,  Enoch,  and  the  later  literature  (see  ANGELS).

3  Probably  not  in  Ecclus.  21  27.

4  This  development  appears  to  have  occupied  several  centuries  ;
Satan  appears  as  a  great  demonic  Prince  first  in  the  Similitudes
of  Enoch  (53  3  546).

5  The question as to how God created the world is not
discussed; the  picture  of  the  divine  creative  act  in Job 88 7
(cp '2l'>  7) appears to be Jo some extent independent of the
account in  Gen.  1. God is  conceived  of  always as  standing
outside  of  and  above  the  world, except perhaps in  Wisd.  7.
On  the  use  of  mythological  ideas  in  the  Wisdom  books  see  the
Commentaries  on  these  books,  and  on  Isaiah  and  Psalms,  and
H.  Gunkel,  SchiSfifung  u.  Chaos. See  also  CKEATIOX;  §21.

6  As,  for  example,  to  matter  and  to  bad  men. Neither  of
these  explanations  could  be  accepted  by  a  pre-Christian  Jew
who  held  with  firmness  to  the  national  faith.

7  The Book will  here  be  treated  simply  as  a  collection  of
discussions,  without  inquiry  into  its  composition. The  addresses
of  Elihu  and  Yahwe  may  be  regarded  as  appendages  to  the


170


ay  be  rega
5333


WISDOM  LITERATURE

definite  conclusion.  The  indictment  of  the  divine
government  is  put  sharply  by  Job,  who  appeals  to
ordinary  observation  and  to  his  own  experience.  The
traditional  defence,  in  the  mouth  of  the  Three,  is
comparatively  monotonous  and  weak  ;  with  the  exception
of  the  suggestion  of  Kliphaz  (Job5i7),  that  the  suffering
of  good  men  is  disciplinary,  their  discourse  is  little  more
than  the  assertion  of  a  theory,  and  Job  remains  un
convinced  (Job31  35-37).  Klihu,  besides  repeating  the
orthodox  view,  expands  the  suggestion  of  Kliphaz,  and
declares  that  the  unsearchableness  of  God  is  a  sufficient
answer  to  all  objections  ;  and  this  last  is  the  point  urged
in  the  Yahwe-speeches.1  The  Hook  thus  practically
gives  up  the  general  question  as  insoluble  ;  Job
maintains,  against  the  Friends,  his  sceptical  position,
and  only  yields  to  the  representation  of  the  Yahwe-
discourse  which  declares  the  phenomena  of  the  divine
government  to  be  incomprehensible  for  man  ;  and  the
explanation  of  Elihu,  since  it  does  not  touch  on  the
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  ignores  half  the  problem.

The  Hook  of  Job  is  the  only  serious  contribution  made  by  the
earliest  generations  of  Jewish  philosophers  to  the  problem  of  a
theodicy.  It  shows  that  the  problem  existed  and  was  grappled
with.  The  arguments  of  the  discourses  of  Elihu  and  Yahwe
were  no  doubt  accepted,  by  some  Jewish  thinkers,  as  satisfactory;
but  those  of  Job  must  have  appealed  to  others.  His  scepticism
appears  to  be  purely  Jewish  ;  there  is,  so  far  as  we  know,  no
outside  source,  Babylonian,  Persian,  Egyptian,  or  Greek,
whence  it  may  have  come.  The  man  Job  was  the  creation  of  a
Jewish  genius,  who,  not  unaffected  by  the  culture  of  his  time,
boldly  faced  the  problem  presented  by  the  monotheistic  faith,
but  found  no  adequate  solution.  For  a  parallel  to  bis  thought  in
his  own  age  we  have  to  go  to  India.  (Cp  Jon  [BooK],  §§  8  15.)

2.  The  Book  of fob had no  immediate successor.
For  some  reason  it  did  not  appeal  to  the  next  following
generations.- It may  be surmised that the practical
moralists  regarded  such  speculations  as  futile,  as,  indeed,
they  were  not  in  keeping  with  the  Jewish  genius. The
authors  and  compilers  of  Proverbs  and Kcclesiasticus,
avoiding  discussions  of  divine  justice,  assume  that  the
government  of  the  world  is  righteous,  that  the  compensa
tion, in this life, for  virtuous  and vicious  conduct is
moral. It  is  substantially  the  pro-exilic  view  ; but  it  is
refined  and  broadened. The  earthly  fortune  of  men is
regarded  not  baldly  as  the  result  of  an  arbitrary  divine
decree,  but  as  also  the  product  of  natural  social laws.
These  laws,  it  is  true,  are  thought  of  as  made  by  God,
so  that  all  compensation  goes  back  to  him  ; nevertheless
man's freedom and the control of natural law are
recognised. This  position,  namely,  that  God  works  in
and  through  society, relieves  the old  theory  of  much
that  is  difficult. It  was  the  product  of  deeper  reflection
on  life,  induced  by  the  wider  social  connections  of  the
Jews,  under  the  more  or  less  definite  guidance  of  Greek
habits  of  thought. Thus,  for  a  considerable  period  the
body  of  Jewish moralists  appear  to  have  come  to  the
conclusion  that  speculations  about  divine  justice  were
useless, and that the  only practical position was the
assumption  that  the  world  is  governed  morally.

3.  It  seems  to  have  been  during  the  second  and  the
first  century B.C. that  doubt  reappeared  in Agur  and
Kohe"leth, under  the  form  of  philosophic  agnosticism.
The  Book  of  Job  had  adduced  the  incomprehensibility
of  God  as  a  motive  for  reverence  and  trust  ; Agur  and
Koheleth  appear  to  make  it  a  ground  of  indifference.
The  isolation  and  the  consequent  obscurity  of  Agur's
words (Prov.  30 1-4) make it difficult to define his
position  with  exactness  ; but  he  seems  to  be  satirising
or protesting  against  the pretensions  of  certain theo-
lon-ians  who undertook to  explain the  method of  the


dialogue  ;  it  is  immaterial,  for  our  purposes,  whether  they  were
added  by  the  author  of  the  dialogue,  or  by  other  persons,  nor
will  the  bearing  of  the  argument  be  seriously  affected  if  the  man
job  be  supposed  to  represent,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  natioi
Israel  fcp  Jon  ii.].

1  The  Prologue  and  the  Epilogue  appear  to  have  nothing  to
do  with  the  real  argument.

'-'  The  argument  of  the  man  Job  is  ignored  in  succeedinf
Jewish  literature,  except  by  Koheleth  and  Agur.  In  the  NT
Job  is  mentioned  only  (Jas.  5  n)  as  an  example  of  endurance.

5334


WISDOM  LITERATURE

divine  government.  Kohe'leth  similarly  sees  in  the
control  of  natural  law  the  impossibility  of  coming  in
contact  with  God.1  Job  had  affirmed  this  impossibility
in  the  form  of  an  agonising  cry  after  God  ;  these  men
set  it  forth  coolly  as  a  philosophic  thesis.  Neither  of
them  directly  calls  God's  justice  in  question ;  but
Kohe'leth,  in  his  sweeping  and  sardonic  survey  of  the
injustices  of  life,  silently  assumes  that  the  world  is
conducted  neither  rationally  nor  morally.  If  he  had
not  been  a  Jew,  he  might  have  passed  lightly  over  the
theocratic  difficulty  ;  being  a  monotheist,  he  was  bound
to  hold  the  creator  responsible  for  his  creation.  He
may  not  employ  technical  philosophic  terms  ;  but  his
whole  conception  of  the  world  is  philosophic.  He
seems  to  have  been  an  isolated  thinker.  His  book
was  too  interesting  to  be  ignored  ;  but  it  was  greatly
modified  before  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  general

public  [cp  ECCLESIASTES, K.OHELETH].

4.  It  is  possible  that  Koh^leth  intends  to  deny  and
reject  definitely  the  doctrine  of  ethical  immortality  which
was  probably  in  his  time  making  its  way  among  the
Jews.  Certainly  his  affirmations  of  the  emptiness  of
the  future  life  are  many  and  pointed,  and  they  stand,
by  their  dispassionateness,  in  marked  contrast  with  the
passionate  hopelessness  of  Job.  However  that  may  be,
Koheleth  is  the  last  of  the  Jews  to  ignore  the  life  to  come.
The  new  doctrine  gained  general  acceptance,  is  taken
for  granted  in  Wisdom,  and  its  reception  closed  the
discussion  of  God's  justice.  In  declaring  that  the  future
will  wipe  out  the  apparent  injustice  of  the  present
Wisdom  virtually  affirms,  with  Job  and  KShe'leth,  that
this  injustice  exists  to  human  sight,  and  is  inexplicable
when  the  present  alone  is  considered.  It  thus  virtually
denies  the  position  of  Proverbs  and  Ecclesiasticus. 2

The  question  of  the  value  of  human  life  was  closely

connected  with  that  of  the  divine  control,  and  its  discus-

_.  . - sion followed the  same  lines. What

*'  ^?  °  may  be  called  the  healthy  natural  view
'  — namely,  that  life  may  be  honourable
and  happy  if  it  is  morally  and  religiously  good — is
taken  in  Proverbs,  Ecclesiasticus,  and  Wisdom,  and
the  gloomier  view  by  Job  and  Kohe'leth.  Between
these  two  last  there  is  the  difference  that  is  referred
to  above ;  one  is  tortured  by  the  uncertainties  and
pains  of  life,  the  latter  calmly  affirms  its  emptiness.3
This  difference  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  philosophic
training  or  to  the  temperament  of  Kohe'leth,  or  to  both
of  these  causes.  The  question  was  substantially  solved,
as  before,  by  appeal  to  the  life  to  come.  No  Wisdom
book  finds  a  source  of  happiness  in  man's  love  to  God
and  communion  with  him.  The  germ  of  this  concep
tion  is  expressed  by  Hosea  (Hos.  66)  ;  but  it  appears
to  have  been  overlaid  by  the  sense  of  God's  majesty.
The  nearest  approach  to  it  is  made  in  Wisdom  ( 7 10
82) ;  but  there  it  is  not  God  but  wisdom  that  is  loved.

In  all  this  discussion  it  is  physical  evil  alone  that  is
considered  ;  the  sages  are  at  one  with  other  OT  writers
in  not  undertaking  to  deal  with  the  question  of  the
origin  of  moral  evil. 4  They  do  not  purposely  avoid  the
question  ;  rather  it  did  not  present  itself  to  them,
Man's  liability  to  sin  was  accepted  as  an  ultimate  fact.
The  problem  of  the  reconciliation  of  God's  goodness

1  This  is  clear when his  book  is  freed  from  orthodox  in
sertions.

2  Why  Wisdom  says  nothing  of  a  bodily  resurrection  is  not
clear  ;  the  idea  hnd  been  accepted  by  some  Jews  (Daniel)  long
before  its  time. Perhaps  the  author  thought  of  it  as  a  relatively
unimportant  incident  of  the  future  life,  and  he  might  the  more
easily  pass  it  by  if,  as  is  probable,  the  resurrection  was  confined
in  the  current  belief  to  Israelites. Possibly  be  did  not  accept  it.
The  future  which  he  had  in  mind  concerned  the  nobler  life  of
the  soul,  and  included  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews.

3  Kohileth  (Eccl.  224),  like  Ben  Sira  (Ecclus.  30  23,  Heb.  of
40  is),  advises  enjoyment  of  the  enjoyable  things  of  life.

•*  Gen.  If.  describes  the  first  human  sin,  but  not  the  psycho
logical  beginning  of  evil  ;  and  its  purpose  is  not  so  much  to
relate  the  origin  of  sin  as  to  account  for  certain  great  facts  of
human  experience,  namely,  birth,  toil,  and  death.  Wisdom
2  24,  though  it  substitutes  the  devil  for  the  serpent  of  Genesis,
comes  hardly  nearer  a  solution  of  the  question.

5335


WISDOM  (BOOK)

with  the  existence  of  moral  evil  was  thus  left  untouched.
Here,  again,  it  was  doubtless  in  large  measure  the
overwhelming  sense  of  divine  absolute  authority  which
made  the  Jews  intellectually  unfriendly  to  such  an
inquiry.1

The phase of  Jewish thought represented by the

W'isdom  books  lasted  into  the  first  century  of  our  era,

15 Decline  of  encnnS  w'tn  Pml°  °f  Alexandria. It  is,

AU TIT-  j however, to  be  observed  that his  ex-

tne  Wisdom-

-  . , ,  positions  take  the  form  of  commentaries

i  era  ure. on  t]ie  'porjjn — ne  tnjnks  jt  necessary

to  rest  his  conclusions  on  an  inspired  authority — and
that,  on  the  other  hand,  his  system  is  simply  Greek
thought  in  a  Jewish  dress.  The  spontaneous  philo
sophical  teaching  of  the  Jews  reached  its  culmination  in
the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  (which  was  probably  composed
before  the  beginning  of  our  era).  As  early  as  the
middle  of  the  second  century  B.C.,  the  national  interest
began  to  turn  in  other  directions — political  and  legal  ;
the  Messianic  enthusiasts  wrote  apocalypses  and  hymns,
and  those  who  were  more  concerned  with  the  social
organisation  of  the  nation  developed  the  jurisprudence.
The  troublous  times  which  succeeded  cramped  the
creative  power  of  the  people.  Few  of  the  gnomic
sayings  of  the  Pirkc  Aboth  can  be  called  philosophical,
and  later  collections,  such  as  the  Alphabet  of  Den  Sira,
show  no  originality.  The  spirit  of  the  Wisdom  Literature
was  not  revived  till  long  afterwards,  when  the  Jews
began  to  devote  themselves,  under  different  conditions,
to  the  study  of  Greek,  Arabian,  and  modern  European
philosophy.  The  august  figure  of  the  creative  Wisdom
(almost  an  hypostasis)  is  not  referred  to  in  the  NT,  and
plays  little  part  in  later  Jewish  thought.2  The  philo
sophy  of  the  earlier  time  remains  a  unique  and  inspiring
creation  of  the  Jewish  mind.

Besides  commentaries,  articles  in  dictionaries,  and  histories  of

old-Hebrew  literature  and  of  old-Hebrew  religion,  the  following

works  may  be  mentioned  :  Gfrorer,  Philo,

16.  Bibliography. 1831;  Dahne,  Jnd.-Alex.  Religionsphih-
sofhic, 1834 ; Bruch, Weisheitslehrc  ii.

Hebrder,  1851;  M.  Nicolas,  Doctrines  relig.  d.  Juifs,  1860;
J.  Hooykaas,  Gesch.  d.  deafening  i>.  d.  •wijsheid  onder  d.  Heb.,
1862;  M.  Heinze,  Lehrev.  Logos,  1872;  K.  Siegfried,  Philo  v.
Alexandria,  1875  ;  Derenbourg.  Hist,  et  geogr.  d.  I.  Palestine,
1877;  J.  Drummond,  Philo  Juda-us,  1888;  C.  G.  Chavannes,
La  Religion  dans  la  Bible,  1889  ;  H.  Bois,  Origines  d.  I.  Phil.
Judco-Alexandrinc,  1890;  A.  Aall,  Gesch.  d.  Logosidee,  1896;.
T.  K.  Cheyne,  Job  and  Solomon,  1887,  and  Jewish  Religious
Life  (American  Lectures),  1898.  c.  H.  T.

WISDOM  (BOOK)

Name  and  plan  (§  if.).  Literary  form  (§§  13-16,  18).

Structure  and  aim  (§§  3-5).  Legendary  additions  (§  17).

Position  (§  6).  Historical  conditions  (§  iqyC).

Teaching  (§§  7-12,  18).  Text  and  Versions  (§  2i/l).

Bibliography  (§  23).

WISDOM  OF  SOLOMON,  or  simply  Wisdom,  one

of  the  Apocryphal  books  of  the  OT  (see  APOCRYPHA,

§8).

The  title  varies  slightly  in  different  MSS  of  the  Septuagint :

(J5B*  <TO<t>ia  SaAio^wi'Os,  ©B  <T. 2aAa>ju.uii<, ©K <r. SnAo^/Wro?,

©A a: 2oAoji(oiros ; the Latin has Liber

1. Name  and Sapieniiie; the  Syriac,  ed.  Lagarde  (Mus.

plan.  Brit.  14,443),  'Thegreat WisdomofSolomon';

in  Walton,  '  The  book  of  the  great  Wisdom

of  Solomon,  son  of  David,'  with  the  remark,  'concerning  which

there  is  doubt  whether  some  other  Hebrew  sage,  writing  in  the

spirit  of  prophecy,  did  not  compose  it  in  the  name  of  Solomon,

and  it  was  so  accepted.'

The  book  appears  to  have  been  written  to  console
and  instruct  the  Jews,  and  to  warn  their  enemies,  in  a
time  of  severe  trial ;  the  author's  particular  point  of
view  is  indicated  by  the  title.  The  book  divides  itself,
by  its  subject  matter,  into  two  main  parts,  each  of  which
may  be  further  subdivided.  Thus : — I.  The  part  played

1  However,  the  question  stood  outside  the  range  of  thought
of  the  ancient  world  in  general,  unless  it  be  held  to  form  a  part
of  the  pantheistic  systems  of  India.

2  The  Sophia  of  the  Kabbfila  is  a  different  conception  from
the  Wisdom  of  Proverbs  and  of  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  though
the  two  doubtless  spring  in  part  from  the  same  source,  and
have  some  things  in  common.

5336


WISDOM  (BOOK)

by  Wisdom  in  human  life  (1-9)  :  (i)  Her  moral  demands
and  her  rewards  (1-5)  ;  (2)  Her  nature  and  powers
(6-9).  II.  Illustrations  of  her  power  taken  from  the
ancient  history  of  Israel  (10-19) :  (i)  The  patriarchs
and  the  exodus  (10/);  (2)  The  Canaanites  (12)  ;  (3)
Digression  on  idolatry  (13-15)  ;  (4)  Contrast  between
God's  dealings  with  the  Israelites  and  his  treatment  of
the  Egyptians  (Id- 19).

The  author  makes  his  first  section  (and  so  perhaps  the  whole
book  is  to  be  considered)  an  address  to  kings  (1  i  0  1-21),  appar
ently  wishing to influence the potentates in

2.  Outline,  whose  hands  lay  the  outward  fortunes  of  the
Jews  ;  but  his  discourse  is  of  a  general  nature,
applying  to  all  men.  He  begins  by  affirming  that  unrighteous
ness  is  alien  to  Wisdom  and  is  punished  with  death  by  God,
though,  in  truth,  God  does  not  desire  the  destruction  of  any,
but  the  wicked,  against  his  purpose,  call  down  death  on  them
selves  (1);  then,  passing  to  the  moral  question  raised  by  the
absence  of  just  compensation  in  this  world,  he  observes  that  the
wicked  (by  whom  he  appears  to  mean  Jewish  apostates),  because
they  deny  future  retribution,  give  themselves  up  to  sensual
enjoyment  here,  and,  because  they  are  reproved  by  the  righteous,
hate  and  persecute  them,  not  knowing  that  God  created  man  to
be  immortal  ('2);  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sufferings  of  the
righteous  in  this  world  are  only  a  chastening,  their  hope  is  full
of  immortality,  hereafter  they  shall  be  honoured  and  happy,  and,
in  fact,  the  wicked  even  in  this  life  are  miserable,  and  their
offspring  is  cursed  (3  1-12);  he  adds  (against  a  current  view)
that  happiness  does  not  consist  in  children  and  old  age,  childless
virtue  is  better  than  vice  with  children,  and  the  truly  venerable
age  is  wisdom  and  probity  (3  13-4  9)  ;  then,  resuming  the  general
argument,  he  observes  that  the  value  of  righteousness  will  be
demonstrated  hereafter,  when  good  men,  here  scorned  by  the
bad,  will  be  blessed,  whilst  the  bad,  crushed  by  divine  wrath,
will  be  forced  to  acknowledge  the  folly  of  their  course  (4  io-5  23).
In  view  of  all  this  he  proceeds  to  assure  kings  that  the)'  need
wisdom  in  order  that  they  may  govern  worthily  and  attain  to
immortality  ('.'>  1-21),  and  king  Solomon  (with  whom  the  author
here  identifies  himself)  describes  his  own  experience,  how  he
had  loved  and  sought  after  wisdom,  what  great  things  she  had
taught  him,  with  what  wonderful  power  and  beauty  she  is
endowed,  she  being,  indeed,  an  effluence  and  image  of  God,
how,  therefore,  he  had  desired  to  dwell  with  her  always  as  his
spouse,  and  he  besought  God,  who  alone  could  give  her,  to
bestow  her  on  him  (622-821)  ;  then  follows  the  prayer  in  which
the  young  king,  acknowledging  and  pleading  human  weakness,
begs  that  Wisdom  and  God's  Holy  Spirit  may  be  sent  down  to
him  from  the  holy  heavens  (9).  The  prayer  concludes  with  the
reflection  that  men  of  former  generations  were  guided  by
Wisdom,  and  thus  the  author  passes  naturally  to  his  second
division,  a  review  of  the  old  history.  Wisdom,  he  says,  pre
served  and  guided  the  patriarchs,  from  Adam  to  Joseph,  and,
by  Moses,  led  the  Israelites  victoriously  from  Egypt  (10).  The
remainder  of  the  book  (from  chap.  11  i),  no  longer  occupying
itself  with  wisdom,  takes  the  form  of  an  address  to  God,  detail
ing  his  special  miraculous  care  of  Israel,  particularly  in  the
treatment  of  Egypt,  with  brief  reference  to  the  conquest  of
Canaan.  The  author,  undertaking  to  give  a  religious-philosophi
cal  sketch  of  the  history,  points  out  that  the  Egyptians  were
punished  by  means  of  their  animal  gods,  yet  not  wholly  de
stroyed,  but  given  space  for  repentance  (11);  that  the  Canaanites
also  were  punished  for  their  sins,  but  not  blotted  out  at  one
blow,  G_od  doing  all  things  in  just  measure,  and  training  his  own
people  in  righteousness  by  the  spectacle  of  the  castigation  of
their  enemies  (12 1-22),  and  (the  main  argument  being  now
resumed)  that  the  Egyptians,  through  the  terrible  punishment
inflicted  on  them  by  means  of  their  own  gods,  were  compelled
to  acknowledge  the  true  God,  whom  they  had  before  declared
that  they  did  not  know  (12  23-27).

At  this  point  the  author  pauses  in  order  to  explain  the  nature
and  origin  of  idolatry  (i.e.,  polytheism).  The  least  blameworthy
(though  still  an  inexcusable)  form  of  idolatry,  he  says,  is  the
worship  of  the  powers  of  nature,  by  whose  beauty  men  were
naturally  attracted  (13  1-9),  whilst  the  worship  of  beasts  and
stones  and  images  made  by  human  hands  is  ridiculous  (13  10-19),
as,  for  example,  the  homage  paid  by  seamen  to  images  (14  1-5),
and  all  idolatry  is  accursed  as  having  been  the  source  of
moral  corruption  (146-12);  idolatry  originated  in  a  desire  to
honour  dead  children  and  kings,  and  was  helped  forward  by  the
skill  of  artists,  who  made  beautiful  images  (14  13-21),  and  so  came
all  the  frightful  vices  of  society,  for  which  men  will  surely  be
punished  (1422-31),  from  which  idolatry  Israel  kept  free,  whilst
Israel's  enemies  fell  into  this  childish  absurdity  (15).  Returning
now  to  the  history,  the  author  declares  that  God  did  indeed
send  plagues  on  his  people  (in  the  wilderness),  not  dealing  with
them  in  destructive  fury,  but  chastising  them,  and  further,
making  nature  fight  for  them  (in  Egypt),  and  giving  them
angels'  food,  that  they  might  learn  to  trust  in  him  (Id)  ;  that  the
contrast  in  God's  dealing  further  appears  in  his  appalling  the
Egyptians  with  a  horror  of  darkness  and  monstrous  apparitions,
while  the  Israelites  had  light  and  guidance  and  the  comfort  of  a
pillar  of  fire  and  a  friendly  sun  (17  1-184),  that  it  is  visible  in  the
remarkable  destruction  of  the  Egyptian  firstborn  (when  the
almighty  Word,  a  fierce  warrior,  leaped  down  from  heaven  into
the  doomed  land),  whilst  the  plague  (in  the  rebellion  of  Dathan
and  Kotah),  which  devastated  the  Israelites,  was  subdued  by

5337


WISDOM  (BOOK)

the  intervention  of  Aaron  (18  5-25),  and  finally,  that  it  is  to  be
seen  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Red  Sea,  when  the  Egyptians
were  punished  for  their  treachery  to  strangers  (worse  than  that  of
Sodom),  whilst  the  freed  Israelites  roamed  over  beautiful  pastures,
and  thus  in  all  things  God  magnified  and  glorified  his  people  (19).

Certain  features  of  the  book  have  given  rise  to  doubts
as  to  its  complete  and  unitary  character.  The  abrupt
3  Unity  c'ose  °^  tne  h'stol"ic^  sketch,  which  ends
*"  with  the  entrance  of  the  Israelites  into
Canaan,  has  suggested  the  view  that  the  work  is  not
complete  (Calmet),  that  the  continuation  of  the  his
torical  sketch  was  abandoned  by  the  author  as  too  large
an  undertaking,  or  cut  short  by  some  accident  (Grotius,
Hasse,  Eichhorn),  or  that,  having  been  written  by  him,
it  was  lost  by  the  accidents  of  time  (Heydenreich).
This  consideration,  though  not  without  force,  is  not
decisive  ;  the  author  may  have  stopped  at  this  point
because  he  thought  the  illustrations  given  from  the
earliest  history  sufficient,  or  because  he  wished  to  single
out  the  Egyptians  (Ewald),  or  (Grimm)  because  he
felt  that  the  later  history  was  lacking  in  picturesque  and
dramatic  character,  and  that  it  chronicled  chiefly  the
subjection  of  the  Israelites  to  their  enemies.  The
question  of  completeness  may  be  left  undecided  ;  but  it
may  be  said  that  the  work,  in  its  present  form,  does
not  necessarily  make  the  impression  that  it  is  a  fragment.

Nor,  perhaps,  is  it  possible  to  decide  with  certainty
whether  the  book  is  the  production  of  one  man.  The
two  main  divisions  are  not  very  closely  connected  ;
the  history  of  the  fathers  in  the  second  part  (which
is  at  once  a  glorification  of  Israel,  and  an  attack  on
idolatry  in  general  and  Egyptian  idolatry  in  particular)
may  appear  to  be  quite  distinct  from  the  praise  of  wisdom
in  the  first  part,  which  is  a  philosophical  consideration
of  the  life  of  the  author's  own  clay  ;  Solomon  is  not
introduced  till  chap.  6  ;  after  11  i  the  narrative  does  not
mention  wisdom,  but  is  wholly  concerned  with  the
history  ;  and  the  style  changes,  being,  in  the  first  part,
relatively  simple  and  direct,  with  constant  regard  to  the
Hebrew  principle  of  parallelism,  whilst,  in  the  second
part,  it  is  ambitious,  grandiloquent,  or  turgid,  compli
cated  and  artificial,  often  without  parallelism.  On  the
other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  a  logical  unity  is  recog
nisable  in  the  fact  that  the  two  points  of  attack  in  the
work,  apostasy  and  idolatry,  represent  the  two  great
enemies  of  the  later  devout  Judaism,  and  that  a  conscious
ness  of  unity  is  shown  in  9i8,  which  makes  the  transition
from  the  first  part  to  the  second,  and  has  not  the  appear
ance  of  an  editorial  insertion  ;  that  the  similarity  between
1  i  and  6 1  suggests  that  the  same  speaker  is  intended
throughout,  that  the  non-mention  of  wisdom  after  Hi
is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  author  became  so  immersed
in  his  historical  sketch  (which  he  meant  as  an  indictment
of  his  o\vn  contemporaries)  thatheforgot  the  philosophical
thesis  with  which  he  set  out,  that  the  change  of  style  is
a  natural  consequence  of  the  change  of  subject  matter,
the  moral  and  philosophical  discussions  falling  more
easily  into  the  form  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  the  dramatic
scenes  of  the  earlier  history  readily  suggesting  legendary
touches  and  highly -coloured  language,  and  that  there
are  marked  resemblances  of  tone  and  style  in  the  two
parts — e.g. ,  the  rush  of  thought  of  the  second  part  is
paralleled  in  the  description  of  the  wicked  (5)  and  of
wisdom  (722-81),  and  the  religiously  elevated  and  digni
fied  tone  of  the  first  part  appears  here  and  there  in  the
second  (cp  113-15  9i-6  with  1123-26  12ig  16;).  On  the
whole  it  seems  easier  to  account  for  the  differences  of
matter  and  style  under  the  supposition  of  one  single
author  than  to  explain  the  unity  under  the  supposition
of  two  or  more  authors.

In the  last  century  there  were  several  attempts to
ascribe  the  book  to  a  number  of  hands.

This  analysis  was begun, according to Bretschneider, by

Houbigant,  who  divided  the  work  into  two

4.  History  Of parts,  chaps.  1-9  and  chaps.  10-10,  and  was

Criticism. herein  followed  by  Doeclerlein  ;  only,  whilst

Houbigant  ascribed  the  first  part  (written  in

Hebrew)  to  Solomon,  and  the  second  (written  in  Greek)  to  a  later

5338


WISDOM  (BOOK)

writer,  Doederlein  denied  the  Solomonic  authorship ;  from  this
analysis  Eichhorn  dissents  only  in  making  the  division  at  11  a
and  regarding  the  whole  hook  as  having  been  originally  written
in  Greek,  and  Bertholdt  begins  the  second  part  with  13.  Nach-
ligal's  proposal,  to  cut  the  book  up  into  a  number  of  parts  and
make  it  an  anthology,  met  with  no  favour,  and  Bretschneider
contented  himself  with  dividing  Eichhorn's  first  section  into  two,
thus  making  three  sections  in  the  book,  of  which  the  first  (1  i-Gs),
a  fragment  of  a  larger  work  written  by  a  Greek-speaking  Jew
(who,  however,  was  not  imbued  with  Platonic  philosophy),  at
the  time  when  Antiochus  Epiphanes  was  meditating  his  assault
on  the  Jewish  religion,  deals  with  the  'righteous,'  that  is,  the
faithful  part  of  the  Jewish  people  ;  the  second  (t>  9-10),  composed
by  an  Alexandrian  Jewish  contemporary  of  Philo,  is  devoted  to
wisdom;  the  third  (12-1!'),  of  the  same  period,  is  the  work  of
a  Jewish  partisan,  and  chap.  11  is  the  insertion  of  an  editor.

The  arguments  used  by  these  scholars  (given  at  length
by  Grimm)  are  substantially  those  which  are  mentioned
above.  No  one  since  Bretschneider's  time  has  advocated
such  a  dismemberment  of  the  book,  and  at  present  its
unity  is  generally  regarded  as  certain  or  probable.

The  aim  of  the  work  appears  from  what  has  been
already  said.  The  author  is  equally  concerned  to  rebuke
..  apostate  Jews  and  idolatrous  Gentiles,  to  con-
'  sole  and  encourage  his  suffering  fellow-country
men,  and  to  extol  the  greatness  of  his  nation.  He  calls
on  princes  to  observe  that  virtue,  though  here  oppressed,
will  be  rewarded  in  the  next  world,  that  wisdom,  which
is  the  source  of  virtue  and  the  informing  spirit  of  all
things  good,  is  the  gift  of  the  God  of  Israel,  that  in  the
past  she  has  saved  men  from  great  perils,  and  that  God,
in  ancient  times,  glorified  his  people  Israel  by  delivering
them  from  the  hands  of  their  enemies  ;  especially  that,
for  their  sake,  he  formerly  inflicted  terrible  punishment
on  the  Egyptians.  In  a  word,  he  comforts  his  people
(and  warns  their  enemies)  by  assuring  them  that  God  is
on  their  side.

The  work  appears  to  have  been  always  held  in  high
estimation. From  its  inclusion  in  the  Septuagint  we
„  may  probably  infer  that  the  Egyptian  Jews

-tortunes.  attacneci  great  value  to  it  from  the  time
of  its  composition,  whether  or  not  they  regarded  it  as
canonical  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term.1  As  to  the
position  assigned  to  it  by  early  Palestinian  Jews,  the
only  evidence  is  that  which  may  perhaps  be  derived
from  its  recognition  in  the  XT.  There  are  a  number
of  coincidences  of  expression  which  have  been  held
by  some  scholars  to  indicate  a  use  of  the  book  by
some  XT  writers  ;  lists  of  such  expressions  may  be
found  in  Xitzsch,  Kern  (in  the  Tubingen  Zeitsch.  f.
T/'u'ologie,  1835),  Stier  (Apokryphen,  1853),  and  others.
On  the  other  hand,  Tholuck,  Grimm,  Farrar,  and  other
writers  regard  the  resemblances  as  too  general  to  prove
quotation.  From  the  nature  of  the  material  it  is  hardly
possible  to  speak  decidedly  on  this  point  ;  but  a  com
parison  of  certain  passages  makes  it  not  improbable  that
the  book  was  known  to  Paul  and  some  of  his  followers,
and  suggested  to  them  certain  expressions  and  lines  of
thought.

For  example,  5  17  f.  Eph.fi  13  f.  (nwoirAiav,  Ouipaica.  SiKaio-
<nii'»)s),  7  25  f.  Heb.  1  3  (aTraiiyacrjaa),  (115  2  Cor.  64  (/Sapvi'ei,
/Sapoi/fxeim),  0  16  Jn.  3  12  (comparison  of  earthly  things  and
heavenly  things  as  to  the  difficulty  of  understanding  them),  11  i5_/C
13  1-8  14  24-26  Rom.  1  20-32  (description  of  the  blindness  and  vices
of  the  Gentile  world),  1123  Acts  1"  3o(trapopas,  v7repi8aji>,  God's
overlooking  of  men's  sins),  167  iTim.  4  10  (God  the  Saviour  of
all  men).

Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  generally  agreed  that,  from  the
end  of  the  first  century  onwards,  it  was  esteemed  and
used  by  Christian  writers.

Clement  of  Rome,  in  i  Cor.  27,  has  an  almost  exact  verbal
reproduction  of  1122  12  12,  and  so  Irenseus  in  Adv.  //rt*r.  4  38,
cp  0  19  ;2  the  later  Patristic  writers  generally  regarded  the  work

1  It  is  possible  that  it  was  through  the  Christians  that  the
book  received  its  place  in  the  Greek  collection  of  Jewish  Scrip
tures,  but  to  this  view  there  are  serious  objections  ;  it  is  not  likely
that  the  early  Christians  would  adopt  any  non-Chiistian  book
which  did  not  have  some  sort  of  Jewish  authority  (see  CANON,
§58).

2  In the canon of Melito (in Eus.  7/^224) the expres
sion  Trapoifii'ai  »cai  •>) ero<j>ia  should  probably  be  read  w.  17  KCU
<ro<i>ia.. In  the  et  sapientia  Snlontonis  of  the  Muratorinn  Frag
ment  Credner  reads  ut  instead  of  et,  and  Grimm  doubts  whether

5339


WISDOM  (BOOK)

as  inspired,  though  Origen,  Eusebius,  and  Augustine  denied  the
Solomonic  authorship  (see  Clem.Al.  Strom,  ed.  Potter,  609;
Hippolytus,  ed.  Lagarde,  66;  Cyprian,  K.vliort.  Mart.  12;
Ongen,  Cont.  CW.  872  ;  Euseb.  Prtrp.  1  n  ;  August.  DC  Doctr.
Christ.  '2  8),  and  the  title  17  mxi/aperos  votjtia.  was  given  to  it,  as  to
Hen  Sira  (see  ECCI.ESIASTICUS)  ;  homilies  on  it  appear  to  have
been  composed  by  the  presbyter  Bellator  (so  Kabanus  Maurus,
Pnef.  in  libr.  Sa/>.),  and,  from  Rabanus  onwards,  there  is  a  con
tinuous  line  of  expository  works.

It  has,  with  few  exceptions,  been  regarded  by  Christian
scholars  as  a  work  of  high  value,  in  spite  of  its  occasional
turgid  rhetoric  and  narrow  nationalism  ;  so  Luther  and
most  writers  up  to  the  present  time.  Pellican  held  it  to
be  inspired  ;  but  in  this  view  he  stands  almost  alone
among  Protestants.  The  opinion  as  to  its  canonicity
has  varied  greatly.  The  fathers  cited  it  freely  as
'  Scripture '  or  as  of  divine  authority,  but  apparently
without  having  in  mind  the  question  of  canonicity.
Augustine  seems  to  be  the  first  writer  who  formally
included  it  in  the  list  of  canonical  books.  It  was
recognised  as  canonical  by  the  Roman  Church  in
the  decree  of  the  council  of  Trent,  and  shared  the
fortunes  of  the  other  Apocryphal  books  in  the  contro
versies  between  Protestants  and  Catholics  in  the  seven
teenth  century,  in  the  movement  which  banished  the
books  from  the  publications  of  the  British  and  Foreign
Bible  Society,  in  the  German  discussions  of  1851-1855.
We  may  be  content  to  say  that  the  Palestinian  Jews
did  not  accept  it  as  an  inspired  Scripture  (their  standard
being  in  some  regards  local  and  narrow),  that  it  was  so
accepted  probably  by  the  Egyptian  Jews  (though  it  is
not  cited  by  Philo),  certainly  by  many  Patristic  writers,
that  it  is  now  accepted  by  the  Roman  and  Anglican
churches,  and  rejected  by  the  various  Protestant
churches,  and  that,  for  the  rest,  it  must  stand  on  its
own  merits.

The  book  assumes  the  divine  oneness,  omnipresence

(lj 12 1), omniscience (1; 7 16), and omnipotence

_,.. . (1123),  and  God's  providential  care  of

7.  fctmcal the  wor]d  (u3). it  cans him (13i)

and  religums lfae  who £, (c'p ^ Ex  gM) Th^

ideas.  Workl,  it  says,  was  created  by  God
(9g),  not  out  of  nothing,  but  out  of  formless  matter
(Hi?).  It  ascribes  to  him  wisdom  (see  below),  justice
(12is),  and  kindness  (1 13  1123-26  1213-16  15i  16?),  and
calls  him  Father  (14s),  but,  like  the  Pentateuch,  the
Prophets,  and  the  Psalms,  represents  him  as  the  especial
friend  and  guardian  of  Israel  (162  18i8  1922):  Israel
he  chastens  (1223),  other  nations,  the  enemies  of  his
people,  he  punishes  (12 20),  yet  with  the  design  of  lead
ing  them  to  repentance  (12a-2o).  But  chaps,  ll/.  clearly
express  the  idea  that  the  enemies  of  Israel  are  predestined
to  be  cursed,  and  this  conception  is  naively  put  by  the
side  of  the  proclamation  of  God's  universal  love.  The
idea  of  an  all-controlling  fate,  superior  to  God,  is  not
found  in  the  book.  The  dvdyKr)  of  1 9  4  is  the  '  destiny  '
determined  by  God  ;  the  term  is  Greek,  the  conception
is  Hebrew — it  is  the  OT  idea  of  divine  predestination.

The  word  of  God  is  simply  the  utterance  of  his  will

(9 1  161226)  and  never  approaches  the  Philonian  Logos,

,  , even  in  the  fine  passage  (18 15)  in  which

8.  Word,  spirit,  {he  ,  almighty  word/  a  fierce  warrior,

wisdom,  etc. ]eaps  down  froni  |he  divine  throne  into

the  doomed  land  of  Egypt,  or  in  9i,  in  which  'word'
is  indeed  a  parallel  to  'wisdom'  (v.z),  but  wisdom  is
here  not  a  personification,  but  a  simple  attribute  of  God,
and  the  thought  of  5i  is  that  of  Ps.  889.  The  con
ception  of  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  is  the  same  as  that  in
the  later  (exilian  and  post-exilian)  OT  books,  the  term
being  equivalent  to  '  being  or  person  of  God  '  ;  it  is  an
anthropomorphic  expression,  based  on  the  assumption
that  God,  like  man,  has  a  separate  inward  principle  or
true  being.  This  spirit  is  said  to  fill  the  world,  to  con
tain  all  things,  to  be  in  all  things  (ly  12 1),  and  is
identified  with  wisdom  and  with  God  (14-7).  It  is  the
holy  spirit  of  God  (Is.  63 io/.  Ps.  51  n  143io),  which  is

the  reference  is  not  to  the  canonical  Book  of  Proverbs  rather  than
to  our  Apocryphal  Wisdom.

5340


WISDOM  (BOOK)

sent  from  heaven  (as  a  divine  breath  or  influence)  to
console  men  (9  17),  and,  as  a  divine  teacher,  cannot  dwell
with  unrighteousness  (15).  This  representation  does
not  reach  hypostatisation  ;  but  it  is  a  very  vigorous
personification  (cp  Rom.  8).  A  similar  remark  is  to  be
made  of  the  conception  of  wisdom  regarded  as  an
attribute  of  God,  only  the  description  is  here  more
elaborate,  and  there  is  a  nearer  approach  to  hypostatisa
tion.  Wis;lom,  it  is  said,  was  with  Clod  when  he  made
the  world  (cp  Prov.  822-31)  and  knew  his  will,  sits  ever
by  his  throne,  and  is  his  intimate  associate  (949  83),
she  is  an  effluence  from  his  glory,  the  mirror  of  his
power,  the  image  of  his  goodness  (7z5/),  she  is  ani
mated  by  an  acute,  vigorous,  benevolent  spirit,  is  of
perfect  beauty,  knows,  directs,  controls  all  things  (722-29
ii  81),  transforming  the  souls  of  men  (727),  bestowing
on  them  all  virtues  (84-8),  and  guiding  their  outward
fortunes  (10),  coming  to  dwell  with  them  as  beloved
friend  and  counsellor  (829),  but  bestowed  only  by  God,
and  to  be  obtained  from  him  by  prayer  (821  9).  She
is  thus,  on  the  one  hand,  substantially  identical  with
Philo's  Logos,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  blends  insensibly
with  the  human  quality  of  wisdom.

Other  quasi-hypostatical  intermediaries  between  God  and  the
world  are  recognised  by  some  modern  writers  (as  Bois)  in  the
terms  'power'  (13),  'justice'  (Is),  'providence'  (143  17  2),
'mercy'  (1(5 10),  'hand'  (11  17),  '  hypostasis  '  (10  21);  but  this
seems  to  be  reading  too  large  a  meaning  into  the  terms  in
question  (see  WISDOM  LITERATURE,  §  8)  ;  as  to  the  '  hypostasis '
or  '  substance  '  of  16  21  it  appears  to  be  simply  manna.

The  conceptions  of  '  wisdom  '  and  '  spirit '  stand  mid
way,  in  the  line  of  advance  toward  hypostatisation,
between  the  earlier  ideas  of  the  OT  and  \he  later  ideas
of  Philo  and  of  the  NT.

Of  other  supernatural  beings  there  is  mention  of  only
Gentile  deities  and  the  devil.  The  former  are  declared,
with  greater  distinctness  than  is  found  in  the  OT,  to  be
nonentities,  invented  by  the  folly  of  men  (14  is/  ).  The
existence  of  the  devil  is  assumed,  and  he  is  identified
(224)  with  the  serpent  of  Gen.  3.  The  name  for  him
here  used  (5id/3o\os)  is  probably  taken  from  the  Septua-
gint,  which  so  renders  the  Hebrew  Satan  in  Ps.  109
(108)6  Jobl6/,  2i^,  iCh. -2li  (BA;  not  L)  ;  the
identification  of  the  serpent  with  a  supreme  evil  spirit
occurs  only  here  and  in  Secrets  of  Enoch  (813-6)  in  the
extant  Jewish  pre-Christian  literature,1  and  in  both
books  his  seduction  of  Eve  is  ascribed  to  his  envy.
This  identification  probably  sprang  from  a  deepening
sense  of  sin,  and  from  a  growing  conviction  of  the
necessity  of  separating  God  from  the  moral  evil  of  the
world.  The  author's  silence  respecting  demons  and
angels  (in  which  he  accords  with  the  other  wisdom
books)  is  possibly  due  to  the  philosophical  nature  of
his  thought,  in  which  wisdom  takes  the  place  of  all
other  good  intermediary  agents  (see  WISDOM  LITERA
TURE,  §  n),  and  the  one  demon,  the  devil,  is  held  to
be  sufficient  to  account  for  the  evil  of  the  world.

The  doctrine  of  the  book  concerning  man  is  in  part
an  expansion  of  the  teaching  of  the  OT.  There  is
9  Man  n°  tric!lotorny  (body,  soul,  spirit),  only  the
dichotomy  of  the  inward  principle  of  life  (soul,
spirit)  and  its  outer  casement  (body).  The  soul  or  spirit
the  author  represents  (herein  following  Gen.  2?)  as
breathed  into  the  body  by  God  (15  n),  and,  at  death,
received  into  the  other  world  never  to  return  (cp  the
avowal  of  ignorance  on  this  point  in  Eccles.  821).  The
question  of  human  freedom  is  not  formally  discussed,
and  probably  did  not  present  itself  to  the  author's  mind
as  a  problem  to  be  solved.  Freewill  is  assumed  in  some
passages,  as  in  1  16,  in  which  it  is  said  that  bad  men  call
down  destruction  on  themselves,  and  in  0613,  in  which
they  attribute  their  wretchedness  to  their  own  folly.  On
the  other  hand,  man  is  said  (12 10  13 1)  to  be  foolish  by
nature,  unable  of  himself  to  know  God,  and  yet  (223,
which  gives  an  interpretation  of  Gen.  1 27)  the  image  of

1  In  the  Sibylline  oracles  (149)  the  tempter  of  Eve  is  the
'serpent,'  and  in  the  Enoch  Similitudes  (696)  one  of  the  evil
'  angels '  (see  note  of  R.  H.  Charles  in  his  ed.  of  Enoch).

5341


WISDOM  (BOOK)

God's  being.  Of  a  control  by  God  of  human  thought
and  destiny  nothing  is  said  directly.

The  work  passes  beyond  the  OT  and  Semitic  thought
in  general  in  its  adoption  of  the  Platonic  theory  of  the
pre-existence  of  souls  (820,  and  cp  158  16),  and  this
involves  a  sort  of  predestination  ;  Solomon  says  that
being  good  he  came  into  an  undefiled  body.  Still,  the
author's  practical  view  of  moral  life  does  not  seem  to  be
materially  affected  by  his  philosophical  theories  ;  he  holds
to  moral  weakness,  general  divine  control  of  life,  and
moral  responsibility  without  troubling  himself  to  define
the  limits  of  these  facts,  and  he  appears  to  adopt  the
OT  division  of  men  into  good  and  bad,  going  beyond
the  later  OT  books,  however,  in  recognising  the  possi
bility  of  passing  from  one  class  to  the  other.1  Hut  his
horizon  is  here  limited — he  has  in  mind  the  flagrant
sinners  of  his  time,  the  apostates  and  the  idolaters,  and
he  cannot  be  said  to  express  a  general  view  of  the  ethical
capacity  of  man.  He  holds,  however  (9 15),  that  the
corruptible  body  presses  down  the  soul  (cp  2  Cor.  64).

Sin,  disobedience  to  God's  moral  law,  is  represented
in  one  passage  (224)  as  having  been  introduced  into  the

10  Sin world  by  the  devil  (for  death  is  the  result  of

sin),  in  another  passage  (142?)  as  the  result  of
idolatry.  This  apparent  discrepancy  does  not  point  to
two  authors,  but  comes  from  a  shifting  of  the  point  of
view.  Following  Gen.  3  the  author  says  that  sin,  as  an
historical  fact,  made  its  first  appearance  in  the  world  in
the  disobedience  of  Eve,  and,  like  the  OT,  he  does  not
think  of  explaining  its  psychological  origin  ;  but,  looking
at  the  vices  of  the  society  of  his  own  time,  he  traces
them  all  to  idolatry,  which  is  the  negation  of  the  know
ledge  of  God  ;  the  vagueness  of  his  thought  on  this
point  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that  he  not  only  gives  no
chronological  beginning  of  idolatry,  but  refers  it  to  an
intellectual  weakness  (13i  14 14)  whose  origin  he  does
not  explain.  He  falls  back  on  the  teaching  of  observa
tion  that  men  are  by  nature  morally  weak  (013),  and
must,  in  order  to  be  saved  from  error,  be  instructed  and
strengthened  by  God  (los/. ).  This  natural  moral
weakness  he  (like  the  OT)  does  not  bring  into  historical
connection  with  the  transgression  of  Eve  or  of  Adam.
The  spiritual  safeguard  against  sin,  union  of  heart  with
God,  is  finely  expressed  in  152/  :  'even  if  we  sin,  we
are  thine,  knowing  thy  power  [that  is,  submitting  our
selves  humbly  to  thy  righteous  and  merciful  control]  ;
but  we  will  not  sin,  knowing  that  we  are  accounted  thine,
for  to  know  thee  is  perfect  righteousness.'  Faith  (only
814)  is  used  in  the  general  sense  of  acceptance  of  God's
will,  and  trust  in  him  for  protection.

For  the  wicked,  it  is  said  (810-1217  43),  there  is
retribution  in  this  life,  and  men  are  punished  by  means

11  p *  of their sins (11  16), but the  real and

universal  recompense  of  moral  conduct
comes  in  the  future  life.  Here  the  author  passes  quite
beyond  the  OT  thought,  in  which  Shfiol  has  no  ethical
character,  and  the  resurrection  (Dan.  12)  is  confined  to
Israelites.  Hereafter,  he  declares  (3-5),  the  position  of
all  men  will  be  determined  by  their  moral  character —
the  righteous  will  have  peace  and  glory,  the  wicked
will  be  in  misery  (4 18-20  172i);  passages  like  Z>ii,f.
in  which  the  transitory  hope  of  the  wicked  is  contrasted
with  the  everlasting  hope  of  the  righteous,  must  be
interpreted,  from  the  general  thought  of  the  book,  to
mean  not  the  annihilation  of  the  ungodly,  but  their
endless  misery.  Possibly  the  author  here  has  in  mind
the  denial  of  future  retribution  in  Ecclesiastes,  more
probably  he  is  opposing  a  general  Sadducean  opinion
of  his  time.  He  makes  no  reference  to  purgatorial
future  punishment  or  to  a  bodily  resurrection,  unless  the
latter  be  involved  in  the  'glorious  kingdom'  (5i6  620)
and  dominion  over  the  nations  (38)  which  the  righteous
are  to  receive,  and  this  is  not  probable,  since,  if  resur
rection  had  been  meant,  there  seems  to  be  no  reason

1  This  possibility  is  assumed  in  a  simple  unreflective  way  in
Ezek.  18.

5342


WISDOM  (BOOK)

why  it  should  not  have  been  distinctly  mentioned.
The  conditions  of  the  future  life  are  stated  in  the  most
general  way — there  are  no  details  of  happiness  and
torment,  only  vague  mention  of  light  and  darkness,
with  no  clear  indication  of  place,  no  distinct  heaven  or
hell.  The  author  contents  himself  with  emphasising
the  fundamental  fact  of  moral  retribution  ;  his  reticence
as  to  details  may  be  due  to  his  philosophical  dislike  of
the  crude  pictures  in  such  books  as  Enoch  (see  ESCHA-
TOLOGY,  index,  s.vv.  '  Heaven,'  '  Hell').  Man,  he  holds
(here  again  following  Gen.  3),  was  created  to  be  im
mortal  (in  this  world  apparently),  and  would  so  have
been,  but  for  the  entrance  of  death  through  the  envy  of
the  devil,  and  the  folly  of  the  first  human  pair.  All
good  ethical  human  qualities,  wisdom  and  righteousness,
are,  according  to  the  author,  the  gift  of  God,  or  of
God's  minister,  Wisdom  (7i6  84  94  12).

Besides  general  Tightness  of  conduct  he  particularises
(87)  the  four  virtues  of  Greek  philosophy — moderation,
practical  sense, justice, and courage  or
12.  Virtue, f t-t  H  <  'v d,  'v i 8LKa.ioffvv


dvSpeia) — as  things  than  which  there  is  nothing  more
profitable  in  life,  and  these  also  he  represents  as  the
gift  of  Wisdom.  His  more  general  catalogue  of  virtues
(722  f. )  embraces  the  gentler  quality  of  '  philanthropy,'
and  the  Hebrew  idea  of  'holiness,'  and,  following  the
OT,  he  represents  the  combination  of  justice  and
philanthropy  (12 19)  as  something  which  is  taught  us  by
the  example  of  God  himself.  His  ethical  code  thus
offers  a  happy  union  of  Jewish  and  Greek  elements  ;  of
ethical  philosophy  proper  (inquiry  into  the  basis  of
moral  beliefs  and  conduct)  he  has  nothing.  On  the
other  hand,  in  his  ethical  attitude  toward  non-Israelitish
peoples  he  is  narrow  ;  like  the  prophets,  he  sees  nothing
good  in  other  civilisations  (as,  for  example,  the  Egyptian),
but,  from  his  national  religious  point  of  view,  involves
them  in  one  sweeping  condemnation.  He  was  a  pupil
of  the  Greeks  ;  but  he  does  not,  by  a  single  word,
express  sympathy  with  their  thought  and  life,  or  betray
any  suspicion  that  they  have  played  an  important  part
in  the  divine  education  of  humanity.  He  recognises
only  one  true  law  of  life,  and  this,  he  says  (184),  is  to
be  given  to  the  world  by  Israel ;  this  is  the  view  of  the
exilian  and  post-exilian  prophets,  but  in  our  author  we
expect  some  modification  of  the  old  statement.  There
is  no  trace  of  asceticism  in  the  book  ;  the  passage  (813-
46)  which  has  been  so  interpreted  is  really  a  protest
against  what  the  author  regarded  as  the  undue  importance
attached  by  some  to  the  possession  of  children,  and  a
repetition  of  the  OT  declaration  (Is.  56 4/. )  that  bodily
conditions  shall  not  determine  membership  in  the
Israelitish  community.  It  was  an  old  complaint  of  the
pious  in  Israel  that  the  wicked  were  often  well  provided
with  children  (Ps.  17 14).  a  gift  which  was  supposed  to
be  a  special  mark  .of  divine  favour  (Ps.  1'273-s  128s).
Ren  Sira  had  already  (161-4)  protested  against  the
exaggerated  form  of  this  view,  and  our  author  makes  a
special  application  of  the  protest  to  the  case  of  illicit
unions  ;  it  is  better,  he  says,  to  have  no  children  than
to  obtain  them  by  immoral  unions  ;  the  virtuous  woman,
though  barren,  shall  be  blessed  in  the  final  divine
visitation,  and  the  eunuch,  if  he  be  righteous,  shall
have  compensating  part  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord  (so
Is.  56s),  that  is,  shall  be  deemed  worthy  of  an  honour
able  position  in  the  public  worship.  Such  an  opinion
cannot,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  springing  from
Therapeutist  hostility  to  marriage.  The  fine  thought
that  honourable  old  age  is  not  measured  by  number
of  years  (48/. )  which  is  a  correction  or  revision  of  Prov.
1631  Ecclus.  264-6,  though,  according  to  Philo  (De  I'it.
contempt.  8),  it  expresses  a  principle  of  the  Therapeutoe,
is  of  too  general  a  nature  to  be  regarded  as  borrowed
from  them  ;  it  is  found  in  the  Stoics  (cp  Cic.  De  Fin.  3),
and  looks  not  to  contempt  of  life,  but  to  emphasising
the  better  side  of  life.

With  all  his  strong  national  feeling,  he,  like  the  other

5343


WISDOM  (BOOK)

Hokmah  writers  (see  WISDOM  LITERATURE,  §  6),  lays
.,  ._  ,  .  no  stress  on  the  national  ritual  of
P'  worship  ;  he  mentions,  as  historical
facts,  the  offering  of  sacrifice  by  the  Israelites  (189)  and
of  incense  by  Aaron  (1821),  puts  into  Solomon's  mouth
(98)  the  words  'temple,  altar,  tabernacle,'  and  quotes
(814)  a  reference  to  the  temple  from  the  OT  (Is.  56s),
but  otherwise  ignores  the  external  cultus.  He  regards
prayer  and  praise  as  the  highest  expression  of  religious
feeling.  He  draws  largely  from  the  Pentateuch  and
somewhat  from  Isaiah  and  the  Psalms,  but,  after  the
manner  of  the  time,  does  not  name  them  or  other
sacred  books,  or  make  allusion  to  the  existence  of  a
sacred  canon.

The  book,  in  spite  of  some  glaring  faults,  deserves

to  be  ranked  among  the  masterpieces  of  reflective  verse.

_  ..  If  it  cannot  be  called  poetry,  it  is  an

. 1  erary ac]nljrable  example  of  elevated  sticho-

metric  writing,  with  not  a  few  really

poetical  passages.

The  number  of  its  stichoi  is  variously  stated  (in  Swete's  ed.
of  the  Sept.)  at  1124  IB],  1121  [«],  and  1092  [A];  the  Latin
translation  has  a  few  lines  not  found  in  the  Greek.1  The  author
employs,  not  metre,  but  the  Hebrew  parallelism,  and  the
Hebrew  system  of  ictus,  a  certain  succession  of  accented
syllables,  between  which  come  varying  numbers  of  unaccented
syllables;  in  the  passages  (such  as  103921),  in  which  there  are
suggestions  of  Greek  iambic,  dactylic,  and  asynartete  metres,
the  combinations  of  syllables  are  probably  either  accidental
(such  as  are  sometimes  found  even  in  modern  prose  works),  or
the  occasional  imitations  which  a  writer  acquainted  with  Greek
poetry  might  permit  himself."

The  construction  of  the  book  is  skilful. After  show

ing  men's  supreme  need of  righteousness, the  author

_ ,  dramatically  introduces  the  two  classes

15.  btructure.  jnto wnjc^ mankind is divided, and

describes  their  contrasted  fates.  On  the  basis  of  this
picture  he  appeals  to  kings  to  embrace  wisdom,  as
whose  exponent  and  laudator  Solomon  appears,  giving
his  own  experience,  and  extolling  wisdom  as  the  source
of  all  knowledge,  physical,  moral,  and  religious,  as  an
effluence  from  God  and  his  companion  and  co-worker,
and  as  the  teacher  and  saviour  of  men  of  ancient  times.
In  illustration  of  this  last  point  he  gives  a  sketch  of  the
history  of  the  patriarchs  and  of  the  deliverance  of  the
Israelites  from  Egyptian  bondage  and  their  conquest  of
Canaan.  This  plan  of  the  work  was  well  fitted  to
commend  it  to  the  author's  contemporaries  ;  the
philosophical  praise  of  wisdom  is  justified  by  the  ex
hibition  of  its  practical  value,  and  the  whole  picture
conveys  encouragement  to  the  suffering  righteous,  and
a  solemn  warning  to  all  the  enemies,  apostate  and
Gentile,  of  the  chosen  people,  whose  special  possession
and  guardian  wisdom  is.

The  style  varies  in  the  different  parts.  The  first
part  (chaps.  1-9)  approaches  the  evenly  balanced  aphor-
istic  form  of  Proverbs,  with  the  distinctive
.  characteristics  of  the  Hebrew  parallelism  ;
but  it  is  made  up  of  connected  discourses,  each  of
which  aims  at  a  definite  demonstration  or  exposition,
and  the  style  is  far  more  flowing  than  that  of  Proverbs
and  Ben  Sira,  in  this  respect  rather  resembling  Ecclesi-
astes.  In  the  second  part  (chaps.  10-19),  whilst  the
stichometry  is  maintained,  with  a  flavour  of  parallelism,
the  nature  of  the  subject  matter  produces  an  approach
to  simple  prose,  with  an  inflation  born  of  the  desire  to
make  the  history  impressive.  In  both  parts  power  of
imagination  is  conspicuous  ;  the  pictures  of  the  final
overthrow  of  the  wicked  (517-23)  and  the  terrors  of  the
Egyptians  (17  f.}  have  the  cumulation  and  rush  in
which  Ezekiel  is  a  master,  and  many  of  the  epithets
have  an  ^Eschylean  force  and  majesty  ;  it  is  perhaps
this  torrent-like  movement  that  most  impresses  the
reader  in  the  author's  descriptions.  Nor  is  he  lacking
in  something  that  resembles  humour  as,  in  the  descrip-

1  See  Berger,  Hist.  d.  1.  J'utg-afe.  etc.

2  On  apparent  examples  of  Greek  metrical  lines  see  Farrar
and  Bois.

5344


WISDOM  (BOOK)

tion  of  the  manufacture  of  an  idol  by  the  carpenter
(13  11-19),  which  is,  however,  only  a  slight  expansion  of
an  OT  passage  (Is.  44  12-17).  He  is  fond  of  assonance,
alliteration,  and  paronomasia,  as  well  as  of  comparison
and  metaphor,  has  many  instances  of  chiasm  (as  815
4z),  and  in  one  case  (617-20)  employs  the  sorites.  This
last  use  is  taken  from  Greek  logic,  of  the  others  there
are  many  examples  both  in  the  OT  and  in  Greek
writers.  Throughout  he  shows  fulness,  richness,  and
vitality  of  conception,  which  is  constantly  in  danger  of
running  into  exaggeration  and  bombast.  The  nature
of  his  material  does  not  call  for  direct  descriptions  of
external  nature  ;  but  in  a  number  of  passages  he  shows
a  fine  feeling  for  colour,  form,  and  movement  (see
59-1221-23  11  18  182  17  18-21).  The  author's  noteworthy
command  of  Greek  suggests  that  he  was  well  read  in
Greek  poetical  and  philosophical  literature.

His  vocabulary  is  rich  and  picturesque  ;  he  uses  a  number  of
uncommon  terms,  is  fond  of  compounds,  and  has  himself
originated  compounds  or  given  peculiar  significations  to  exist
ing  forms,  as  <j>i\6\fivxe  (1125),  Mover  of  souls'  (so  Damasc.
225i),  and  perhaps  TrpwroTrAaoros  (7  i  10  i).  He  has  taken  a
number  of  expressions  from  the  Septuagint,  as  TreYpas  aicpoTO/iou
(1X4,  see  Ut.  815);  TOV  OVTO.  (13  1,  see  Ex.  3  14)  ;  <f>iatnfipa.s
ovpavov  (132,  see  Gen.  1  14)  ;  o-iroSbs  17  Kap&ia.  avrov  (15  10,
see  Is.  44  20).  On  the  other  hand,  his  frequent  Hebraisms
(most  of  which  occur  in  chapters  1-11)  show  that  he  was  deeply
imbued  with  the  style  of  the  OT  ;  thus  words,  as  ovcoAioi  (1  3)  ;
<ru>/JLa.Ti.  (1  4)  ;  aytov  Tri/eu/iia  (1  5  9  17)  ;  ta^ara  ('2  16)  ;  e/ccTTTJa-oi'Tai
(•">  2)  ;  £i)\ov  (5  17)  ;  /ndratoi  (13  i)  ;  modes  of  expression,  such  as
those  in  4  17  16s  13  (cp  I  S,  26)  ;  and  the  use  of  the  connectives
KO.I,  Se,  yap  and  the  like.*

The  data  for  the  determination  of  the  origin  of  the
book  are  found  in  its  use  of  other  books, the  nature
'ts ^eas> an<^ t^e  historical con-


17 Siena  of
date  :  ideas.


dions  which  il


.

A  comparison  of  4  i  (on  childless  virtue)
with  Ecclus.  10  1-4  suggests  that  our  author  was  acquainted
with  tfle  latter  work.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  he  used  the
.Septuagint  translation  of  the  Pentateuch  and  Isaiah;  whether
he  had  the  Septuagint  Psalms  is  doubtful  —  in  3  i  he  has  an
allusion  to  Ps.  31  5  [6],  in  15  1  5/1  he  gives  rather  a  paraphrase  than
a  citation  of  Ps.  1104-7  (=135  15-17),  i"  1620  (from  Ps.  78  25)  he
has  dyye'Awi'  rpo<|»jc  where  &  has  ap-rov  a.,  and  in  10  17  (from
Ps.  10639)  ne  nas  e'S  <rxfnr\v  r)ju.epa?  where  our  Hebrew  has
simply  'covering'  and  the  psalm  in  <S  (Ps.  105  [104]  39)  els  <TK.
aiirois,  from  which,  in  view  of  his  fondness  for  paraphrasing,  it
cannot  be  shown  that  he  did  or  did  not  have  the  Psalms  in
Greek.  There  is  uncertainty  also  about  the  relation  of  2  24
{'  the  envy  of  the  devil  ')  to  a  similar  statement  in  Secrets  of
Enoch  31  3  (and  cp  Jos.  Ant.  i.  14  Sanhedrin,  59).  The  con
ception  may  have  been  an  old  one,  derived  by  Wisdom  and
Secrets  of  Enoch  from  a  common  source,  though,  as  it  is  not
found  in  Enoch,  it  probably  arose  not  long  before  the  beginning
of  our  era.  The  picture  of  reward  and  punishment  in  the  future
life  is  similar  to  that  given  in  the  Enoch  similitudes.  There  is
no  reason  to  suppose  that  our  author  quotes  from  Philo.

Legendary  additions  to  the  OT  narrative,  so  frequent
in  Wisdom,  do  not  appear  in  any  other  book  earlier

18.  Legendary  th*n 2 Macc' &***  ^* /' !s
,  ,?.  . J  only  necessary  to  compare  our  author  s

sketch  of  the  early  history  (10-19)
with  that  of  Ecclus.  (44-49)  to  see  the  great  difference
between  the  methods  of  the  two  writers  ;  the  latter
keeps  himself  strictly  to  the  OT  text,  the  former  revels
in  fanciful  embellishments  (11  15  16  1/.  918  /]  21  /".  17  fig/.
15-19  18i2/I  17-19  19II/.  1721).  This  may  be  accounted
for  in  part  by  the  supposition  that  the  Alexandrian
Jews  were  very  free  in  their  dealing  with  the  sacred
books  ;  but,  as  2  Macc.  shows  that  there  was  a  similar
tendency  in  Palestine,  we  are  led  to  refer  it  rather  to
a  natural  growth  of  legend,  of  which  there  are  many
examples  in  later  Apocryphal  books  and  in  the  Talmud.3
The  allegorising  method  of  interpretation,  if  found  in
Wisdom,  would  doubtless  be  Alexandrian,  but  would
not  give  great  aid  in  determining  its  date,  since  this
method  of  interpretation  was  in  use  long  before  Philo's
time.  But  it  does  not  seem  to  be  employed  by  our
author.

1  For  full  lexicographical  lists  see  the  commentaries  of  Grimm
and  Farrar.

a  The  treatment  of  Gen.  62  in  Enoch  is  mythological  ex
pansion  under  Persian  stimulus.

3  Cp  also  Gal.  8191  Cor.  10  4  2  Tim.  3  8.

5345


WISDOM  (BOOK)

The  cases  cited  (by  Bo:-)  are  not  properly  allegorising  ; the

Eillar  of  salt  (10  7)  is  a  •monument,'  not  a  symbol,  of  an  un-
eheving  soul ;  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  (10  17)  is  not  a
'  manifestation '  but  a  creation  of  \Visdom  ;  the  bronze  serpent
(105-7)  is  not  a  symbol,  it  is  an  instrument  and  assurance  of
salvation;  the  Egyptian  darkness  (17  21)  is  an  'image, 'a  faint
physical  suggestion,  of  the  darkness  of  future  punishment ;  on
the  high-pnest's  robe  (1«24)  was  the  whole  cosmos,  but  only  as
the  glory  of  the  fathers  was  on  the  four  rows  of  stones,  and  the
divine  majesty  on  the  tiara  ('holy  to  the  Lord').  Reuss's
remark,  that  the  Egyptians  are  introduced  throughout  as  a  type
of  pagans  in  general,  and  that  the  history  is  regarded  as  a  sort
of  theory,  is  correct ;  through  the  Egyptians  the  author  l
his  own  contemporaries.  Thi*,  howaver.  is  not  allegorising ;  it

i may  be  called  a  first  step  toward  the  method  so  fully  de\

by  Philo,  but  it  has  not  reached  the  point  of  seeing  in  things

j and  persons  merely  representations  of  religious  truth.

The  author's  silence  respecting  Messianic  hopes  is  a
trait which he  has  in common  with other sapiential

19.  Eschatology.  T^?  <S^.WISDOM  LITEKATL-RE,

8  5/-  )•  and  's  not  an  exact  indication
of  date.  His  picture  of  the  sufferings  and  future  glory
of  the  righteous  (2-5),  though  it  may  be  based  on  Is.  f>3
and  has  been  regarded  by  some  expositors  as  a  predic
tion  of  the  Messiah,1  presents  no  individual  human
deliverer,  but,  after  the  manner  of  the  prophets,  simply
represents  pious  Israel  as  destined  to  be  glorified.  In
part  of  the  late  pre-Christian  Palestinian  literature  also
(as  Dan. ,  Sib.  Or.,  i  Macc. ,  Pss.  of  Sol.)  it  is  the
nation  that  is  the  centre  of  hope  ;  it  is  only  in  the  later
portions  of  Enoch  (as  chap.  46)  that  a  personal  Messiah
plays  a  real  role  (see  MESSIAH,  §  7  ;  ESCHATOLOGY,
§  &S/.).  That  Wisdom  has  a  well-developed  doctrine
of  ethical  immortality,  and  yet  says  nothing  of  resur
rection,  may  be  due  to  its  Egyptian  origin.  The  idea
of  resurrection  was  a  Palestinian  growth,  based  on
Jewish  convictions,  but  shaped  under  the  stimulus  of
Zoroastrianism,  and  it  may  well  have  lagged  behind  in
Egypt.  On  the  other  hand,  Alexandria  was  the  meeting-
place  of  old  Egyptian  and  Greek  ideas  out  of  which  the
monotheistic  Jews  could  easily  fashion  an  elevated  moral
conception  of  the  world  to  come.  Each  Jewish  centre
would  thus  work  out  its  own  favourite  idea  of  the  future,
and  the  fusion  of  the  two  ideas  would  take  time.  This
fusion  had  certainly  occurred  before  the  composition  of
the  earliest  NT  book,  and  apparently  also  before  the
time  of  the  Enoch-section  chaps.  91-104,  a  tract  which
in  some  respects  resembles  our  book,  the  date  of  which
is,  however,  uncertain,  though  it  may  probably  be  put
in  the  first  century  B.C.  (cp  Charles,  Book  of  Enoch).
Wisdom  appears  to  have  been  written  before  the  fusion
of  the  two  ideas  was  accomplished  in  Egypt  ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  the  author's  Hellenising  tendency  may
have  led  him  to  discard  the  notion  of  a  kingdom  of  the
righteous  on  earth,  though  such  a  notion  may  have
been  known  to  him  (cp  87  with  Dan.  123).  It  is  diffi
cult  to  say  when  the  Egyptian  Jews  began  to  formulate
a  doctrine  of  ethical  immortality  ;  it  may,  perhaps,  be
surmised  that,  since  the  editor  of  Ben  Sira,  writing  132
B.C.,  says  nothing  of  it,  it  did  not  appear  before  the
first  century  B.  C.

An  indication  of  date  might  be  obtained  if  we  could
determine  with exactness the  relative  development  of
9ft r t Greek  conceptions  in  our  author  and  in
: Philo. It is generally admitted that
conception.  Wisdom is deep]y  imbued  with Greek
philosophical  thought ; the  conceptions  of  a  beautiful
and  logically  arranged  cosmos,  and  of  a  wisdom  which
is  the  divine  agent  in  creation  and  in  the  control  of  the
world  (besides  the  minor  points  referred  to  above)  betray
the  influence  of  the  Platonists  and the  Stoics. The
same  general  ideas  are  found  in  Philo,  as  whose  con
temporary,  accordingly,  our  author  is  regarded  by  some
expositors. On  the  other  hand,  the  differences  between
the  two  writers  are  obvious  ;  ~  besides  many  divergencies

1  So Tertullian, Cyprian, Hippolytus, Origen, and many
interpreters  of  the  Church  of  Rome ; see  Westcott's  note in
Smith.  DB,  art.  'Wisdom  of  Solomon."

2  The two  are compared by  Grimm,  Prummond, Menzel,
Farrar, Bois,  and  others. Siegfried,  in Hastings'  DB,  notes
differences  between  the  two.

5346


WISDOM  (BOOK)

in  explanation  of  particular  points  (which,  however,
would  not  necessarily  prove  them  not  contemporaries),
there  is,  for  example,  the  great  difference  in  the  employ
ment  of  the  allegorical  method  of  interpretation,  which
probably,  though  not  certainly,  points  to  the  precedence
of  Wisdom  in  time.  The  main  point  of  comparison
is  the  conception  of  the  divine  self-manifestation  through
intermediate  agencies,  and  herein  Philo  and  Wisdom
differ  in  two  respects :  first,  whilst  Philo  names  as
chief  agent  the  Logos,  and  has  comparatively  little  to
say  of  Wisdom,  Wisdom  gives  the  first  place  to  Wisdom
(not  going  beyond  the  OT  in  his  conception  of  the
'word'),  and  thus  appears  to  range  itself  along  with
those  earlier  more  Hebraistic  books  (Proverbs  and  Ben
Sira)  in  which  the  divine  attribute  plays  the  most  impor
tant  role,  Philo,  on  the  other  hand,  advancing  to  the
more  definitely  Stoic  idea  ;  and  secondly,  Philo  treats
the  conception  in  a  more  scientific  way,  undertaking  to
state  with  philosophic  precision  the  nature  of  the  relation
between  God  and  his  personified  energy,  whilst  in
Wisdom  this  relation  is  assumed  without  explanation.
From  this  it  may  probably  be  inferred  that  our  author
had  not  grasped  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  the  Logos,  which,
seeing  his  fondness  for  Greek  ideas,  he  would  hardly
have  failed  to  do  if  he  had  lived  as  late  as  the  first  half
of  the  first  century  of  our  era.

The  historical  conditions  to  be  accounted  for  are :  the
persecution  of  faithful  Israelites  by  Gentiles  and  apostate

21  Outward  Jews'  am11  lh°  author's  sPfucial  grudge
conditions.  afiunst f  the  Epptians  There  was  a
class  of  apostate  Jews  from  the  time  of
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  187  B.C.  (Jos.  Ant.\\\.(>]  down
to  the  time  of  Philo  (Philo,  Confns.  Ling.  2  ;  Pimit.  2).
The  account  in  3  Mace,  of  an  Egyptian  persecution  in
the  time  of  Ptolemy  IV.  (221-217  B-c- )  being  generally
admitted  to  be  legendary,  the  periods  of  persecution
which  may  come  into  consideration  (see  Jos.  Cont.  Ap.
2s)  are  the  reigns  of  Ptolemy  VII.  (145-117  B.C.),
Cleopatra  (47-30  B.C.),  Caligula  (38-40  A.  D.  ),  and  (Jos.
DJ,  ii.  IS;/.)  Xero  (63  A.I).).  There  is  not  much
ground  for  choice  among  these  periods,1  at  most  it  may
be  said  that  the  comparatively  calm  tone  of  our  book
(as  in  14 16-20)  does  not  favour  the  seasons  of  bitterer
distress  (under  Caligula  and  Xero).  But  it  is  not
necessary  to  suppose  that  the  work  was  composed  in
the  midst  of  one  of  the  violently  hostile  movements.
The  author,  even  if  he  lived  in  a  relatively  quiet  time,
would  know  enough  of  the  general  fortunes  of  his  people
to  paint  his  pictures  of  suffering  (2-5  14).  Xor  is  his
reference  to  the  worship  of  the  statues  of  kings  ( 14  16-20)
chronologically  decisive,  for  divine  worship  was  paid  to
Ptolemy  L,  and  probably  to  Antiochus  II.,  as  well  as
to  Caligula  and  other  Roman  emperors.  The  author
is,  in  fact,  as  Grimm  remarks,  giving  a  learned  account
of  the  origin  of  idolatry,  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  assume
that  the  deified  princes  to  whom  he  refers  were  his  con
temporaries.  There  appears  to  be  nothing  in  the
historical  situation  depicted  to  prevent  our  following  the
literary  indications  and  assigning  the  work  to  some  time
before  that  of  Philo,  probably  to  the  first  pre-Christian
century.

Of  the  author  all that is clear  is that  he  was  an

Egyptian  Jew. His  strong  Jewish  feeling  appears  on

A tv> every  page  of  his book,  and his  Greek

22.  Autnor.  training and his hearty dislike of the

Egyptians  point  to  Alexandria  as  his  residence.  The
unsuccessful  attempts  to  identify  him  with  some  known
person  are  detailed  at  length  by  Grimm  and  Farrar.

The  reference  of  the  work  to  Solomon, 2  found  in  early  versions
(Sept.,  Syr.),  and  in  a  number  of  Patristic,  Rabbinical,  Roman
Catholic,  and  Protestant  writers  (as  late  as  1858  by  the  Catholic

1  Grimm's  remark  that  in  the  time  of  Nero  the  spirit  of  the
Jews  was  too  much  broken  to  produce  so  talented  a  book  as
Wisdom  is  not  convincing  ;  we  know  too  little  of  the  times  to
make  such  a  judgment.

2  [Revived  by  D.  S. Margoliouth  who  holds  that  there  are
references  to  this  book  in  Isaiah.]

5347


WISDOM  (BOOK)

J.  A.  Schmid),  was  rejected  by  Augustine  and  Jerome,  and  is
no  longer  seriously  considered.  Very  early  critics  thought  of
Ben  Sira  as  the  author  (see  Aug.  Doct.  Clir.  2,  8  ;  Retract.  2,  4),
or  of  the  famous  Philo  (see  Jer.  Prief.  in  Lib.  Sal.),  and  the
latter  view  was  adopted  by  Luther  and  a  number  of  other  theo
logians  ;  but  the  differences  between  those  two  writers  and  our
author  are  so  glaring  that  they  absolutely  exclude  such  an  identi
fication.  Other  Jewish  names  which  have  been  suggested  are
Zerubbabel  (by  J.  M.  Faber),  Aristobulus,  the  friend  of  Ptolemy
Philometor  (by  Lutterbeck),  an  older  Philo  (by  Drusius  and
others)  who  is  said  to  have  written  a  poem  on  Jerusalem  (cp
Jos.  Cont.  Ap.  1  23  where  a  non-Jewish  '  older  Philo,'  apparently
an  historian,  is  mentioned),  and  Apollos,  before  his  conversion
(by  Plumptre),  on  the  ground  that  he  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews,  and  that  the  similarity  between  the  epistle  and  Wisdom
is  so  great  as  to  suggest  a  common  origin.  None  of  these  sug
gestions  except  the  last  has  any  show  of  probability,  and  it  can
hardly  be  called  probable,  since  the  two  books,  though  not
without  a  certain  resemblance  in  style,  still  have  differences,
both  of  style  and  of  manner  of  thought,  too  great  to  be  explained
even  by  a  writer's  change  of  religion.  The  author  has  been
held  to  be  a  Christian  (by  C.  H.  Weisse  and  others)  on  such
grounds  as  his  supposed  reference  (3)  to  the  Messiah,  his  desig
nation  of  God  as  'father'  (143),  his  doctrine  of  future  ethical
retribution  (3-5),  and  the  supposed  mention  of  his  book  among
Christian  writings  in  the  Muratorian  Fragment  (but  the  last
supposition  is  probably  erroneous — see  above,  §  6,  n.  2),  and  the
authorship  has  been  assigned  (by  Noack)  to  Apollos,  after  his
conversion  to  Christianity.  But  a  Christian  book  without  a
single  distinctively  Christian  idea  (and  none  of  those  adduced  by
Weisse  are  distinctively  Christian)  would  be  an  incomprehensible
anomaly  ;  the  book  is  intelligible  only  on  the  supposition  that
it  was  written  by  a  non-Christian  Jew.  Finally,  as  has  been
pointed  out  above  (§  12),  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the
author  belonged  to  the  sect  of  the  Therapeutae  ;  he  has  no  trace
of  their  teaching,  and  it  does  not  seem  probable  that  a  member
of  that  sect  would  have  imbibed  Greek  learning  as  our  author
has  done.

The  Greek  text  is  given  entire  in  the  uncials  A  (Loncl.  1879-
1883),  B  (Rome,  1871),  «  (St.  Petersburg,  1862),  in part in  C

(Leipsic,  1845),  entire  in  the  cursives  H.  P.
23.  Greek  text.  23,  55,  68,  106  and  155  (not  entire),  157,  248,

253,  254,  261  (not  entire),  296  ;  nine  MSS  col
lated  by  Thilo  (but  not  published)  are  in  some  passages  adduced
by  \i\m.(Speciitten  exercc.  critt.  in  Sapient.  Sal.,  Halle,  1125; and
by  Grimm.  Swete  gives  the  various  readings  of  NAC.  The  text
is  well  preserved  ;  A  in  a  number  of  cases  offers  better  readings
than  B.  That  the  Greek  is  the  original  text  is  now  generally  be
lieved.  Faber's  argument  to  prove  a  'Chaldee '  (that  is  Jewish
Aramaic)  original  is  successfully  rebutted  by  Hasse  ;  thus  in  2  22
the  Syr.  for  Greek  ye'pas  is  explained  by  Faber  as  coming  from  a
confusion  of  Aramaic  pavoand  j'3'D.  but  it  is  rather,  says  Hasse,
a  misreading  of  the  Greek  (yr)pa?  for  ye'pas) ;  in  18  16  Syriac
'command'  for  Greek  'death  comes,  according  to  Faber,  from
a  misunderstanding  of  131  (which,  however,  is  not  Aramaic
but  Hebrew),  but  may  be  naturally  regarded  as  a  scribal  errone
ous  repetition  of  the  preceding  'command.'  So  also,  recently,
D.  S.  Margoliouth,1  whose  examples  are  not  more  convincing
than  those  of  Faber.  In  Wisd.  1  12  14  10  the  Greek  is  satis
factory  as  it  stands;  and  the  identity  of  the  expression  in  2  12
with  that  in  Is.  3  10  <0  (noted  by  Schleusner)  may  be  understood
as  a  borrowing  on  the  part  of  the  former,  or  as  a  very  late  in
sertion  in  the  latter.  Greek  is  too  free  and  idiomatic  to  be
taken  as  a  translation  ;  its  Hebrew  colouring  belongs  rather  to
the  thought  than  to  the  style. -

The  Old Latin  Version  was  adopted  by  Jerome  with  slight
changes; the  Clementine  text  of  1592,  with  corrections  from

Vercellone's  edition  of  1861,  is  given  in  the
24.  Versions, edition  of  Heyse  and  Tischendorf  (Leipsic,

'873),  with  the  readings  of  the  Codex  Ami-
atinus  in  the  margin  ;  the  Cod.  Amiat.  has  been  edited  by
Lagarde  (in  Mittcil.  i.).  It  is  in  general  a  literal,  faithful,  and
intelligent  translation  of  the  Greek.  It  occasionally  (as  in  417)
inserts  an  explicitum,  and  has  a  number  of  words  and  clauses
not  found  in  our  Greek,  as  1  15  (one  word,  and  in  some  MSS
one  line)  28  (one  line)  2  17  (one  line)  3i  (one  word)  414  (one
phrase)  61  (one  couplet)  (3  20  (one  word)  811  (one  line)  10  i
(two  words  in  the  Clem,  text,  but  not  in  Amiat.)  11 5  (one
and  a  half  lines)  11 8  (one  clause)  17  i  (several  words).  Some
of  these  additions  (as  3i4i4l7i)  are  explanations  of  the
translator,  and  none  of  them  commend  themselves  as  probably
belonging  to  the  original  text ;  thus  in  1  15  the  perpetua  weakens
the  aJSa.varo';  ;  in  28  the  line  '  let  there  be  no  meadow  which  our
jollity  does  not  traverse,'  though  in  itself  appropriate  and  good,
mars  the  couplet-arrangement  (three  couplets  in  TV.  7-9) ;  the
aphorism  of  fii,  'wisdom  is  better  than  strength,  and  a  sage
man  than  a  strong,"  interrupts  the  connection  of  thought  and  is
obviously  a  gloss,  as  are  the  insertions  in  811  10 1  11s  (two
glosses)  and  11  8.  A  certain  number  of  words  also  are  omitted  in
the  Latin,  the  translator  allowing  himself  some  freedom.  On  the
history  of  the  version  see  Berger,  Hist.  d.  I.  Vulgate,  1893,  and
on  the  MSS,  Thielmann,  Bericht,  etc.  1900.  On  the  vocabulary
cp  Grimm,  Cointn.  KGH,  pp.  $ff-

1  In  JRAS,  1890,  and  in  '  Lines  of  defence  of  the  biblical
revelation,'  1900.

2  Cp  J.  Freudenthal  m.JQR,  1891.

5348


WISDOM  OF  JESUS

The  Syriac  is  made  directly  from  the  Greek,  following  a  MS
resembling  Codex  Alex.  Whilst  in  general  it  renders  the  ideas
and  expressions  of  the  original  with  fidelity,  it  diverges  there
from  far  more  than  the  Latin.  It  adds  explicita  and  other
explanatory  words,  inserts  the  proper  names  (Cain,  etc.)  in
chap.  10,  transfers  a  number  of  Greek  words,  gives  free  transla
tions,  mistranslates  and  omits.  On  the  attempt  to  refer  it  to  an
Aramaic  original  see  Hasse.  For  the  Arabic  version  cp  Hasse,
for  the  Armenian  cp  Welte,  and  F.  H.  Reusck,  Liber  Sapient,
gnece,  etc.,  1858  ;  these  also  both  come  from  our  Greek.

For  general  works  on  the  Jewish  conception  of  wisdom  see

WISDOM  LITERATURE,  §  15. For  lists  of  critical  and  expository

works  up  to  1860  see  Bretschneider  and

25.  Bibliography.  Grimm.  Among  these  the  following  may
be  mentioned:  Rabanus  Maurus,  {856,

the  earliest  extant  commentator  (in  Migne);  Grotius,  Annata-
tiones,  1664  ;  Cornelius  a  Lapide,  Comment .  in  libr.  Sap.,  1613 ;
Cappellus,  Comment.  .  .  .  in  /"/',  1689  (scattered  observa
tions);  J.  M.  ¥tbxx,Prolvswnes,  1776-77  and  1786-87;  J.  G.
Hasse,  Sato/no's  U\-ishcit,  1785  ;  J.  G.  Kichhorn,  Einleitung
i.  d.  Apocr.  Schr.  d.  AT,  1795;  C.  G.  Bretschneider,  Lib.
Sapient.,  1804  ;  C.  L.  W.  Grimm  (in  Kurzgef.  exeget.  Hand-
buck  z.  d.  Apokr.  d.  A  T),  1860  (very  ful'l  and  judicious,
supersedes  his  work  of  1837).  Since  1860  have  appeared  com
mentaries  by  E.  C.  Bissell,  1880  (in  the  volume  on  the  Apocrypha
added  to  the  Lange  series),  F.  W.  Farrar,  1888  (in  Wace's
Apocrypha),  and  Siegfried  (in  Kautzsch's  Apokr.) ;  articles  in
Smith's  DB  (by  B.  F.  Westcou) ;  M'Clintock  and  Strong's
Cyclopedia;  Herzog-Hauck,  RE  (by  E.  Schurer,  see  also  his
GJl',  etc.  =  Hist.  of  the  Jewish  People,  etc.);  Hastings'  DB
(by  Siegfried);  and  annotated  editions  by  W.  J.  Deane  (The
Book  Of  Wisdom,  1881),  W.  R.  Churton(in  his  Uncanonical and
Apocryphal  Scriptures,  1884),  and  C.  J.Ball  (in  his  I'ariornm
Apocrypha.,  1892).  On  the  ethical  ideas  see  Kiibel,  'Die  Ethi-
schen  Anschauungen  d.  Weisheit  Salomonis,'  in  St.  Kr.  (1865).


WISDOM OF JESUS.
SlRACH.


C.  H.  T.

See ECCLESIASTICUS,


WISE  MEN  (DVpnn),  Gen.  418.  See  MAGIC,  §  3,
STARS,  §  5,  ZOROASTRIANISM  ;  cp  also  WISDOM
LITERATURE,  §  2.

WITCH  (!)v';3»).  Dt.  18  w,  WITCHCRAFT  (DDJ5),
i  S.  1523.  See  MAGIC,  §§23  3i/

WITHES,  GREEN,  AV'"S-  'green  [moist]  cords,'
RVmjl.  'new  bowstrings'  (C'n^  C"irP,  yethiirlin  lahim),  Judg.
167.  On  the  meaning  of  nS,  lah,  see  COLOURS,  §  17  ;  for  in',
yether,  see  CORD.  Bowstrings  of  'green  'gut,  not  yet  dried,
are  probably  meant.

WITNESS.  The  part  played  by  witnesses  in  Jewish
legal  procedure  has  been  dealt  with  in  LAW  AND
JUSTICE,  §  \off.

The  Hebrew  word  is  -\y,  'ed,  the  Aramaic  sdhdd
(Nina)  ;  and  in  two  passages  in  OT  these  two  terms  are
treated  as  synonymous  (Gen.  3X47,  -\y  \\  Nnnnb  ;  Job
16  19,  iy  ||  inb).  The  Arabic  word  is  ahid  or  sdhid  (cp
Palinyr.  ino  ;  see  Cook,  Aram.  Gloss.,  s.r.).  The  root
sahida  (=Aram.  sehed  ;  cp  inb'  with  Ar.  Lirada)  seems
to  have  meant  originally  '  to  be  present  '  (cp  the  use  of
suhridm  Koran  ,rSur.  74  13),  and  then  '  to  bear  (be  present
as)  witness.  '  Sdhid  is  both  a  witness  in  general,  and
one  who  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  his  creed  by  dying
(see  Sur.  471  396g).  The  original  meaning  of  the
Hebrew  root  was  perhaps  (as  Gen.  31  47  Job  16  19
suggest)  the  same  as  in  Arabic.

Gen.  31  44  43  52  describes  how  a  heap  of  stones  was  witness
O#  ;  was  present  to  remind)  of  some  transaction  ;  Dt.  31  19  21
says  that  the  song  of  Moses  was  witness  to  (">y  ;  existed  or  was
present  to  remind)  the  Israelites  of  a  great  achievement.  For
other  instances  of  the  use  of  -|y  in  a  similar  sense  see  BDB,
where,  however,  the  idea  of  the  root  is  taken  to  be  that  of
'reiterating,  hence  emphatically  affirming.'

The  word  used  in  the  NT  is  /j.dpTvs  (fjuiprvp-).  It
was  employed  by  Christians,  as  by  Muhammedans,  to
describe  (i)  simply  one  who  witnessed  to  the  truth,  and
then  (2)  particularly  one  who  gave  evidence  of  the  truth
by  dying,  and  so  '  a  martyr.  '

For  (i)  see  Acts  1  22. The  word  is  already  used  in  the  second


Het>v<TOv<rai>  e/c  TOV  aijuaro;  TIUV  ayiuiv, (cai  fK  TOM
fJiaprvpuv  'Ir)(Tov.

5349


WONDERS

In  ancient  times  the  heroes  of  mankind  were
commonly  represented  as  being  distinguished  from
other  men  by  (amongst  other  characteristics)  the
manner  in  which  they  entered  and  departed  life.  They
were  not  born  in  the  usual  way,  or,  if  so,  out  of  due
course  ;  they  disappeared  from  life  in  a  mysterious  way,
or  they  showed  themselves  superior  to  death  by  dying
cheerfully  under  painful  circumstances.  Thus  both  by
their  birth  and  by  their  death  they  witnessed  to  their
superiority.  This  was  specially  the  case  with  founders
of  religions.  But  '  the  faithful '  were  also  called  upon
to  bear  witness.  While,  however,  the  master  gave
evidence  of  the  truth  of  his  claims  by  the  wonderful
words  and  works  of  his  whole  life,  '  the  faithful '  could
in  most  cases  only  witness  to  the  truth  of  them  by  follow
ing  the  master's  teaching  even  unto  death.  Disciples,
therefore,  in  some  cases,  sought  and  actually  found
martyrdom  ;  in  other  cases  they  are  represented  by  tra
dition  as  having  so  suffered,  whether  they  did  so  or  not.
The  idea  of  witness  by  miracle  and  martyrdom  is  confined
to  no  single  religion.  Cp  WONDERS.  M.  A.  c.

WIZARD  (»jyT),  Lev.  20 27. See  MAGIC,  §  4,  iii.

WOLF  (3N?;1  AYKOC  ;  lupus).  This  is  the  usual
word  for  'wolf,'  though  in  Is.  1822  RV  renders  r>N,
'iyylm,  and  SBOT  D'an,  tannim,  by  'wolves';  see
JACKAL,  and,  on  the  variety  of  terms  for  wild  animals,
CAT.  In  Is.  116  a  notable  reference  is  made  to  the
wolf,  which  as  a  type  of  ferocity  is  brought  into  contrast
with  the  lamb.2  The  full  force  of  the  phrase  employed
is  that  the  wolf  will,  as  it  were,  become  a  gcr  or  client
of  the  lamb  (cp  STRANGER).

The  wolf  (Canis  lupus)  has  a  very  wide  range,  ex
tending  practically  throughout  North  America  (X.  of
Mexico),  Europe,  and  Asia.  Many  local  varieties  occur,
which  have  been  by  various  authorities  raised  to  the
rank  of  species.  The  wolf  is  still  found  in  Palestine
(and  Arabia,  cp  Doughty,  Ar.  DCS.  1327).  It  is  there
somewhat  lighter  in  colour  and  has  a  stronger  and
stouter  build  than  in  Europe,  rarely  moves  in  packs,
and  prowls,  sometimes  in  pairs,  round  the  sheepfolds
at  night.  By  day  it  frequents  the  rocky  valleys.
Naturally  it  plays  a  large  part  in  the  life  of  the  Israelites,
and  the  references  to  its  boldness  and  ferocity  are
frequent  (cp  Gen.  49 27  Jer.  56  Ezek.  2227  Hab.  1  8
Zeph.  83).  However,  if  the  cubs  be  removed  at  a  very
early  age  they  are  susceptible  of  training,  though  they
can  rarely  be  trusted  with  strangers.

The  word  for  '  wolf  is  frequently  used  as  a  personal
and  clan  name  (cp  Cook,  Aram.  Glass,  s.v.  13x1,  and
see  ZEEB),S  and  it  has  accordingly  been  held  that  it  was
a  totem-animal  among  certain  communities  (at  least)  of
the  ancient  Semites.4  For  the  wolf  in  Semitic  legend
and  folklore  see  WRS,  Kinship,  198,  Rel.  Sent.1®  88.

A.  E.  s.

WOMAN  (HLj'N),  Gen.  222.  See  FAMILY,  especially
§§  4-6;  MARRIAGE,  esp.  §§  47;  LAW,  §  14^;
SLAVERY  ;  and  cp  ADAM,  esp.  §  3^.

WONDERS.  The  KV  shows  some  uncertainty  as
to  the  translation  of  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  synonyms.

(i)  nfl'lD,  mophcth,  is  rendered  by  'wonder'  in  Dt.  13  i  [2]
28  46  EV,  but  in  Ex.  7  9  Dt.  S'l  3  EV  by  '  miracle.'  The  mean
ing  of  the  root  is  uncertain,  but  see  BDB  and  cp  below
under  (5).


1  According  to  Tft.omm.A(S3.ugethiere,  303^),  3NT  is  the  jackal ;
see  on  the  other  hand  ZDMG,  1880,  p.  373,  and  cp  JACKAL.
The  Ass.  cognate  zlbu  appears  to  denote  also  a  bird  of  prey.

2  Compare  the  contrast  in  Mt.  10  16,  'sheep  in  the  midst  of
wolves,'  and  Acts  20  29,  where  Paul  at  Miletus  warns  the  '  flock  '
against  the  AUKOI  /Sapeis.

3  The  fact  that  the  name  'wolf  is  given  to  a  sickly  child,
'  that  their  human  fragility  may  take  on  as  it  were  a  temper  of
the  kind  of  those  animals '  (cp  Doughty,  A  r.  Des.  1  329)  does
not  weaken  the  above  argument,  since,  in  some  cases,  this  name
is  borne  not  by  individuals  but  by  whole  clans  (cp  Kin.  iyjf.).

4  See Robeitson Smith,  /.  Phil.  9  75  ff. and cp Frazer,
Fausanias,  -'  iqsf.

535°


WONDERS

(2)  t^S,  pele' ;  lit.  'wonder,'  so  EV  Is.  29  14  ;  cp  Judg.  6  13,
aiphlaoth,  AV  'miracles,'  RV  'wondrous  works.'

(3)  n'lK, '8th; lit. 'sign,'  so  commonly  in EV,  Dt.  13  i [2]
2846  etc. In  Nu.  14  22  Dt.  11  3,  KV  '  signs,'  AV  '  miracles.'

(4)  Svva.fi.if, lit. 'power.' In Mk.  1*39, AV 'miracle,' RV

I  mighty  work.' Cp  Acts 2 22  'a  man,  approved  by  God  among
you, by  miracles  (RV  'mighty  works'),  wonders,  and  signs,'
. . . fiiWfieo-t  <cai  re'pacri  KO.L <njftftoi? — a  suggestive passage.
In  Acts  S  13  19  1 1  i  Cor.  12  10  2  8  Gal.  85,  EV  'miracles';  but
in  Heb.  24,  AV  'miracles,'  RV  'powers.

(5)  T«'pa?,  Acts  2  22  (i  8  15  12  Heb.  24,  EV  'wonders.' Two
derivations  are  noted  in  Grimm-Thayer  (Lexicon,  s.z>.),  neither
of  which  can  be  pronounced  very  satisfactory. They  are  :  (i)
'  apparently  akin  to  the  verb  Trjpe'oi ;  accordingly  something  so
strange  as  to  cause  it  to  be  "watched"  or  "observed"'; (2)
connected 'with  acmjp  atrrpairn,  etc.,  hence  "a sign in  the
heavens."' If  the  Heb.  mdfkltk(l,  above)  be  connected  with
Ar.  'ip/in  'to  suffer  evil '  (see  BDB,  s.v.  nBN),  we  might  perhaps
Compare  for  re'pas  the  root  reipaj  '  to  suffer  distress  ' ;  the  idea
would  then  be  'a  calamity  or  catastrophe  =  a  portent.'

(6)  o-Tjjueioi',  lit.  'sign,'  like  (3)  above. So  in  Mk.  ?>i\f. Lk.

II  16  29J< Mt.  12  $S  f. 1614 Jn.  218030 i  Cor.  1  22 Acts  2  22
Heb.  24. But AV '  wonder,' RV rsign,' Rev.  12 1  ; EV
'miracle,'  Lk.238  Acts4i622; AV  'miracle,'  RV  'sign,1  Jn.
45  4  11)41  2  it  23  82  6226  731  9  16  1147  1237  Acts 6 8  S6  15  12
Rev.  13  14  10  14  19  20.

The  original  idea  in  the  word  'wonder'  (Lat.
'  iniraculum,'  Angl.  '  miracle')  seems  to  have  been  that
of  turning  aside  through  a  feeling  of  fear  or  awe  (see
Skeat,  Etymol.  Diet.,  s.v.).  The  savage  'ignorant  of
the  very  rudiments  of  science,  and  trying  to  get  at  the
meaning  of  life  by  what  the  senses  seem  to  tell'  (to
quote  Tylor,  Anthrop.  343)  would  often  turn  aside
when  he  came  face  to  face  with  something  new,  un
expected,  or  extraordinary.

'  The  emotion  named  Wonder  is  founded  on  relativity.  It  is
more  than  simple  novelty.  One  degree  beyond  novelty  is
surprise',  or  the  shock  of  what  is  both  novel  and  unexpected.  .  .
Wonder  contains  surprise,  attended  with  a  new  and  distinct
effect,  the  effect  of  contemplating  something  that  rises  far  above
common  experience,  which  elevates  us  with  a  feeling  of
superiority'  (Alexander  Bain,  The  Emotions  and  the  frill,
%5f.  [1899])-

'  A  wonder '  then  is  something  which  cannot  be
explained  from  the  ordinary  experience  of  mankind  in
general  at  a  given  time,  but,  as  Hobbes  pointed  out
(Leviathan,  chap.  27),  '  seeing  admiration  and  wonder
are  consequent  to  the  knowledge  wherewith  men  are
endued,  some  more,  some  less,  it  followeth  that  the
same  thing  may  be  a  miracle  to  one  and  not  to  another.'
As  regards  many  of  the  wonders  that  surrounded  them
(the  wonder  of  life,  the  wonder  of  creation)  primitive
men  would  be  very  much  on  a  level  and  would  all  be
satistied  with  a  fanciful  explanation  ;  but  with  regard
to  others  (the  wonder  or  effect  of  certain  herbs,  for
instance)  some  men  would  soon,  at  first  by  chance,
attain  some  ^measure  of  knowledge  and  thereby  them
selves  become  relatively  wonderful  and  wonder-workers
(medicine-men,  obi-men).  In  the  eyes  of  his  admirers,
however,  the  man  who  is  relatively  wonderful,  soon
grows  to  be  very  much  more  than  this.  Obviously,
therefore,  there  is  a  very  close  connection  between
wonders  or  miracles  and  myths  ;  the  growth  and
development  of  both  would  go  on  almost,  if  not  quite,
simultaneously.  Obviously,  too,  the  wonder  is  closely
connected  with  exorcism  and  sorcery.

'  Exorcism  and  sorcery  pass  insensibly  into  miracle.  .  .  If
the  marvellous  results  are  ascribed  to  a  supernatural  being  at
enmity  with  the  observers,  the  art  is  sorcery ;  but  if  ascribed  to
a  friendly  supernatural  being,  the  marvellous  results  are  classed
as  miracles  '  (Herbert  Spencer,  Principles  of  Sociology^},  1  246).

The  very  word  in  English,  as  we  have  seen,  indicates
the  way  we  must  take  if  we  wish  to  understand  the
meaning  of  wonders.  It  is  clear  that  a  thorough
examination  of  the  subject  would  involve  an  investiga
tion  into  the  evolution  of  ideas  in  general,  into
psychology,  anthropology,  comparative  religion  and
mythology.  If  Dr.  Bacon  in  his  new  definition  of
higher  criticism  is  thinking  of  the  comparative  method,
such  an  investigation  would  indeed  come  within  the
province  of  that  science.  '  If  a  new  definition  of  the
higher  criticism  may  be  permitted  so  late,'  he  says,
'  we  should  call  it  the  study  of  the  origin  and  develop
ment  of  ideas'  (Triple  Tradition  of  the  Exodus,  xxxiii. ).

5351


WONDERS

In  any  case,  in  view  of  the  results  of  the  comparative
method  of  study,1  it  is  impossible  to  treat  the  subject  of
wonders  or  miracles  on  the  old  lines.  Here,  however,
it  need  only  be  pointed  out  that  it  is  now  evident  that
no  religion  can  be  isolated  and  treated  separately  ;  that
myths,  and  wonders,  whether  natural  (cp  below)  or
supernatural,  are  not  peculiar  to  any  one  system  ;  and
that  the  ideas  of  primitive  man,  or  the  savage,  have
left  their  mark  even  on  the  most  advanced  religions.

Comparative  mythology  shows  that  man  has  given
explanations  of  the  universe  which  indicate  that  the
mind  moves  everywhere  along  very  similar  lines.
Comparative  religion  teaches  that  even  when  men  had
attained  to  no  small  degree  of  general  culture  they
still  demanded  outward  and  visible  signs  of  the  efficacy
of  their  faith.  The  sage,  or  the  founder  of  a  religion,
who  claimed  to  enlighten  his  fellows,  was  expected  to
produce  evidence,  apart  from  his  teaching,  that  he  was
endowed  in  a  peculiar  and  extraordinary  way.  As  a
witness  to  his  superiority,  he  was  expected  to  perform
wonders  (or  give  a  sign,  cp  [3]  and  [6]  above).  And
as  such  a  one  was  in  most  cases,  owing  to  his  superior
knowledge,  on  a  higher  level  than  his  contemporaries,
he  was,  no  doubt,  often  as  a  matter  of  fact  able  to  do
things  which  to  them  appeared  wonderful ;  he  may  often
have  been  able  to  cure  diseases,  perhaps  even  to  restore
to  life  a  body  that  was  to  all  appearance  lifeless  ;  he
was,  no  doubt,  often  able  to  exercise  a  remarkable
influence  over  men's  minds,  and  perhaps  to  cure
certain  mental  diseases.  It  is  difficult  to  calculate
the  effect  that  such  a  display  of  power  would  have
on  those  who  did  not  understand  its  nature.  It  is
easy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  understand  that  such
evidence  of  a  power  out  of  the  common  having  been
furnished,  wonders  of  a  different  nature  would  also  be
ascribed  to  the  master  by  his  disciples,  especially  after
his  decease.  His  works  and  his  teaching  would  seem
to  combine  to  suggest  that  he  did  not  belong  to  the
life  of  the  earth  ;  he  must  be  a  favourite  of  one  of  the
deities,  or  of  the  Deity,  or  a  son  of  one  of  the  deities,
or  of  the  Deity,  or  even  an  actual  deity  come  in  the
flesh.  The  wonders  with  which  he  would  now  be  ac
credited  would  no  longer  be  relative  and  natural,  but
absolute  and  supernatural  (i.e.,  miracles).  It  would
be  represented,  especially  after  his  decease,  that  the
manner  of  his  appearance  in  the  world,  and  of  his
disappearance  from  it  when  his  mission  had  been
accomplished,  were  alike  remarkable  ;  that  if  his
mother  was  human,  his  father  was  divine,  that  if  he
seemed  to  die  like  other  men,  it  was  not  so  in  reality.
He  would  no  longer  be  described  as  merely  healing
diseases,  physical  and  psychical,  by  natural,  but  little
understood,  means.  He  has  become  superior  to  the  laws
of  nature.  He  walks  upon  the  sea  and  stills  its  waves,
commands  the  wind  and  the  storm,  cures  instantane
ously  the  deaf,  the  dumb,  and  the  blind,  brings  to  life
those  who  have  actually  died.

This  process  went  on  even  in  the  middle  ages.  '  Principles  of
myth-formation,  belonging  properly  to  the  mental  state  of  the
savage,  were  by  its  aid  [the  doctrine  of  miracles]  continued  in
strong  action  in  the  civilised  world.  Mythic  episodes  whirh
Europeans  would  have  rejected  contemptuously  if  told  of  sav  .me
deities  or  heroes,  only  required  to  be  adapted  to  appropriate
local  details,  and  to  be  set  forth  as  miracles  in  the  life  of  some
superhuman  personage  to  obtain  as  of  old  a  place  of  credit
and  honour  in  history '  (Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,®  13717!).
Writings  in  which  miracles  figure  are  not  historical  in  the
modern  and  scientific  sense  of  the  word.

Many  of  the  OT  and  NT  narratives  in  which  'wonders'
figure  have  been  treated  in  special  articles,  and  from  various
points  of  view.  See,  for  instance,  CREATION,  DELUGE,  Df

1  Prof. Cheyne was one of  the  first critics to  apply  this
method  in  the  case  of  biblical  study. See  in  £f>  !)l,  the  arl
'  Cosmogony '  (0  446^),  '  Deluge'  (7  54 t'ff.),  'Jonah' (IS  7
also Tk.  Rev.  211-219  ('877). For  more  recent  examples  see
CREATION, DELUGE,  JONAH,  PURIM, etc.,  and cp  DEMONS,
TEMPTATION. See  also  S.  A.  Cook, '  Israel  and  Totemism.j
in  JQK,  April  1902  ;  A.  S.  Peake,  art.  '  Unclean,'  in  Hastings'
£>U.

5353


WOOD

DIVINATION,  MAGIC,  PLAGUES,  ACTS,  GOSPELS  (cp  JESUS),
JOHN,  LAZARUS,  MAKY,  NATIVITY,  RESUKKECTION,  SIMON
PETER,  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS,  TEMPTATION.  See  further  R.  W.
Mackay,  The  Tubingen  School  ami  its  Antecedents  (186-));
Hugo  Winckler,  Geschichte  Israels,  2  (1900);  Th.  Trede,
\Vnnderglaube  in  Heidentum  und  in  der  alien  Kirche  (1901);
Supernatural  Rel.  (new  ed.  1902).  Cp  O.  Holtzmann,  Lcben
Jesu.  The  following  works,  amongst  others,  have  to  be  taken
account  of:  Grant  Allen,  Evolution  of  the  Idea  of  God  ;  Clodd,
Myths  and  Dreams;  Frazer,  Golden  Bough;  Huxley,  Hume,
also  Science  and  Hebrew  Tradition  and  Science  and  Christian
Tradition;  Lang,  Custom  and  Myth,  and  Myth,  Ritual,  and
Religion  ;  Lubbock  (Avebury),  Origin  of  Civilisation  (I5)
1889);  J.  M.  Robertson,  Christianity  and  Mythology  (1900);
Herbert  Spencer,  The  Study  of  Sociology  (ISS)  and  Principles
j>f  Sociology;  Tylor,  Early  Hist,  of  Mankind  ((3),  1878),
Anthropology  (1881),  Primitive  Culture,  (fl>,  1891).  Cp  also
Darwin,  Descent  of  Man  ;  Quatrefages,  The  Human  Species
(ISS)  ;  Tolstoy,  What  is  Religion  ?  M.  A.  C.

WOOD  (f  17),  Gen.  6  14. See  FOREST,  and  the  special
articles.


WOOF  p-ltf),  Lev.  1348  RV'"i>r-  'knitted  stuff.1 See
WEAVING,  §  7.

WOOL  (")E>Vi  stfmer  ;  epION)-  The  sources  of  wool
available  in  ancient  times  to  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine
were  three  in  number  —  the  sheep,  the  camel,  and  the
.goat  ;  J  but,  except  where  another  animal  is  distinctly
mentioned  (Mk.  16  Mt.  84  i  S.  19  13),  we  may  assume
that  the  wool  of  the  sheep  is  meant.  An  Arabic  saying
(cp  Bochart,  Hicroz.  2442)  declares  that  the  best  wool
is  that  of  the  nakad  (see  SHEEP)  ;  it  was  this  wool
which  Mesha,  king  of  Moab,  sent  as  tribute  to  the  king
of  Israel  (2  K.  84  RV).  Wool  is  probably  the  worst
conductor  of  heat  of  all  the  materials  used  for  clothing,
and  for  this  reason  amongst  others  has  from  the  earliest
times  been  used  as  a  covering.  The  finest  wool  is  that
cut  from  the  young  sheep  of  about  eight  months  old,
and  is  known  as  lamb's  wool  (  Prov.  27-^3  26)  ;  later
shearings  yield  the  wether  wool,  which  is  either  unwashed
or  washed,  the  animal  in  the  latter  case  being  washed
before  submitting  to  the  shears.  As  is  still  the  case  in
pastoral  countries,  the  annual  sheep-shearing  was  in
ancient  times  an  occasion  of  great  gatherings  and
rejoicings  (i  S.  252  2  S.  1823;  see  FEASTS,  §  2  f.  ).
The  wool  is  usually  cut  a  few  days  after  the  washing,
by  which  time  it  has  dried.  A  skilful  shearer  will
remove  the  whole  of  the  fleece  in  a  continuous  sheet,
which  is  then  sorted  according  to  its  quality.  The
wool-stapler,  whilst  doing  this,  removes  the  larger  and
more  conspicuous  impurities,  bits  of  straw,  etc.  The
wool  is  then  carefully  washed  with  soft  water  and  soap,  i
and  dried.  At  this  stage  it  is  still  in  the  condition  of
matted  locks  as  they  come  from  the  body  of  the  animal,
and  before  it  can  be  woven  it  must  be  teazed,  combed
and  spun  into  a  thread  (see  WEAVING).  According  to
EV  the  wool  of  Damascus  was  especially  prized  at  Tyre  i
(Ezek.  27  18);  ©,  however,  substitutes  'wool  from
Miletus,'  and  Davidson  says,  '  possibly,  wool  of  Zachar.  '
It  is  a  matter  for  the  textual  critic  (see  JAVAN,  §  \g).
On  the  prohibition  to  wear  '  a  mingled  stuff,  wool  and
linen  together'  (Lev.  19ig  Dt.  22n  f),  see  LINEN,  7,
n.  2,  and  Crit.  Bib.  ad  loc.  A.  K.  s.

WORD  (o  Aoroc)- On  'the  \Yord  '  see  LOGOS.

WORLD. The  words  are: (i)  ]'~)N,  etvs,  Gen.  1  24  ;
(2)  "?3n,  tebel,  i  S.  28  ;  (3)  aty,  'Plant,  Ps.  73  12  ;  (4)  lj?ri,  he  led, ;
Ps.  17  14  ;  (=,)  'nn,  hddel,  Is.  38  n  ;  (6)  alwi; Heb.  1  2  ;'  (7)  yrj  ;
(8)  KOCT/XO?,  Jn.  1836;  (9)  oifcou/xeVr),  Heb.  25. See  KAKTH.

WORM.  Worm  is  the  rendering  of  the  following
Hebrew  words  :  —  •

i. DD,  s>is  (crfy)  in  Is.  51  8,  f  where  obviously  the  larva

1  '  Wool  is  a  modified  form  of  hair,  distinguished  by  its  slender,
soft,  and  wavy  or  curly  structure,  and  by  the  highly  imbricated
or  serrated  surface  of  its  filaments  '  .  .  .  '  At  what  point  indeed
it  can  be  said  that  an  animal  fibre  ceases  to  be  hair  and  becomes
wool  it  is  impossible  to  determine,  because  in  every  characteristic
the  one  class  by  imperceptible  gradations  merges  into  the  other,
so  that  a  continuous  chain  can  be  formed  from  the  finest  and
softest  merino  to  the  rigid  bristles  of  the  wild  boar.  '—Ency.
B>it.»\  s.v.  'wool.'

5353


WORMWOOD

or  caterpillar  of  some  clothes-moth is  intended See
MOTH.

2.  yjin, tula (also nySin  and nj"?in, from a root
meaning  '  to  gnaw  '  [Del.  Heb.  Lang.  66 /. ;  I>rol.  115]  ;
cp  nii'Wio  and  niynSo  as  applied  to  the  teeth),  and

3.  rrn,  rimmak  (cp  Ar.  rannna  '  lie  rotten,'  rimmaP"1
'rottenness'),  are  the  words  most  commonly  employed,
and— as  in  vulgar  speech— indicate  not  so  much  earth
worms  (which  indeed  are  found  in  Palestine,  cp  below),
as  any  ^elongated  crawling  animal. <£S  renders  generally
by  (TKitiXTjf,  and in Job  ffairpia,  and,  less  often  ff^\f/it,
Vg.  vermis,  piitredo,  tinea. The  tola which  was  bred
in the manna (Ex.  1620, in v. 24 rimmdh) means
obviously  the  larva  of  those  flies  which  breed  in  organic
matter. In  hot  countries  Hies  breed  with  extraordinary
rapidity,  and  maggots  not  uncommonly  appear  in  sores,
etc.  ;  whence  several  allusions  are  made  in  the  OT  and
Apocrypha  to  their  parasitical  tendencies  and  especially
to  their  habit  of  preying  upon  the  dead  (Job  7  5  21  26
2420  but  cp  © Is.  14  ii,  cp  also  i  Mace.  26a  Ecclus.
10n  193).1 In  this  connection  we  find  in  pre-Christian
times  the  first  reference  to  the  '  fire  and  worm '  which
afterwards  became  popularly  connected  with  the  notions
of  a  future  punishment  (Is.  6624  ;  cp  Ecclus.  7  17  Judith
1617  and  Mk.  9  44^).

Death  by  worms,  regarded  with  special  horror  by  the  ancients
(Herod.  4  205),  is  said  to  have  been  the  fate  of  Antiochus
Epiphanes  (2  Mace.  9  *,ff.\  and  of  Herod  Agrippa  (Acts  12  23)  ;
but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  such  statements  about  eminent
but  unpopular  characters  were  frequently  made  by  their  political
opponents  in  order  to  discredit  their  memory.  Cp  DISEASES,
ad  fin.,  and  HEROD,  §  12,  ad  Jin.

The  reference  to  the  destruction  of  vineyards  (Dt.
2839),  or  of  gourds  (Jon.  47),  by  a  'worm,''  probably
indicates  some  beetle — or  rather  insect -larva — which
injures  roots  or  other  parts  of  plants  ;  but  it  may  refer
to  certain  members  of  the  MyriapoJa  (Centipedes),  which
have  similar  destructive  habits  and  are  very  numerous
in  Palestine.  With  the  former  we  may  compare  the
Gk.  l\f/,  ?£  and  Lat.  convolvulus,  a  kind  of  vine-weevil
(cp  Pliny,  AW2247).

Wood-worms,  the  larvae  of  wood-boring  beetles,  though  un-
mentioned  in  MT,  are  referred  to  in  Bar.  0  19  [20],  in  I'roV.  124
<B,  where  a  bad  woman  is  likened  to  iv  jvAw  <nctoA>jf  (3"
VrTSi'Vp),  a'so  2o20rt  (5,  aicrn-ep  crrjs  [er]  ifj.o.Ti<a  KO.L  ericuiATjf
fu'Au)  OUTCOS  Aurn;  dv&pbs  /SAanrti  Kap&iai',  and  the  Vg.  of  2  S.  238
(ipse  est  quasi  tenerrimus  ligni  vermiculus,  qui  octingentos  inter-
fecit  impetu  uno).

Finally  we  may  note  the  metaphorical  use  of  '  worm'  to  denote
a  man  of  low  estate  or  in  a  miserable  position,  Fob2f>6  Ps.
22_e[7]  Is.  41  14  [not  ®],  cp  //.  13054:  ui<rre  <ncwAif£  erri  yai'jj

4.  px  'Sni,  zohalc  ares,  AY  'worms  of  the  earth1
(Mi.  7 17),  might  possibly  refer  to  true  earth-worms
(Oligochajtn) ;  but  the  literal  meaning  is  'crawling  things
(cp  ©  ffvpovres  yijf)  of  the  earth,1  and  it  is  more  likely
that  serpents  are  intended  (so  RV,  cp  Dt.  3224).

Of  the  Oligochaeta  a  dozen  species  from  Palestine  have  been
described,  all  belonging  to  'the  genus  Allolobophora,  to  which
fourteen  out  of  the  nineteen  British  species  belong.  Five  of  the
dozen— viz.,  A.  calighi<>sa,A.  chlorotica,  A.fa-tida,  A.  rencta,
and  A.  rosea — are  also  British.  They  are  not  found  in  the  arid
and  sandy  regions,  but  are  by  no  means  uncommon  in  the  more
fertile  districts.  Cp  TOLA,  COLOURS,  §  14.

5.  3,T1,  rakab,  Hos.  5  12  AV'»k'.  (tcvrpov  [BAQ]=  =C'p?).  The
word  properly  means  'rottenness'  (see  BDB) ;  in  Prov.  124
14  30,  however,  ©  gives  er/coiArjf .  CT»JS,  just  as  in  Job  it  renders
DD  by  a-mrpia  (see  above),  rakab  also  occurs  in  the  Hebrew  of
Ecclus.  43  20,  where  Taylor  (JQR  10  471  ;  ll'istiimi  of  Ben  Sira,
\\iif.)  adopts  the  rendering  'skin-bottle,'  and  refers  to  Geiger's
view  of  Job  13  28  (O.<TKO<;,  (P),  which  he  apparently  favours.  The
text,  however,  is  most  probably  corrupt  ;  for  3p12  we  should  read
ni^3,  bcrekoth,  rendering  'and  he  congeals  ponds  by  his  cold.1
A.  E.  S.-S.  A.  C.  ,  1-4;  T.  K.  C. ,  5.

WORMWOOD  (njl6  Dt.  29 18  [17]  Prov.  54  Jer.
9  15  [14]  23  15  Lam.  3  15  19  Am.  67  (ii2|2  and  di^irtfos  Rev.

1  In  the  difficult  passage  Job  lit  26,  '  worms  destroy  this  body,'
no  mention  of  worms  is  made  by  the  MT  ;  cp  RV,  and  see
Jon,  §  6,  col.  2474.

2  In  this  last  verse  AV  has  '  hemlock.1

5354


WORSHIP

8  nt).  The  Hebrew  word  la  an  Ah  is  in  (J?  variously  rendered
jriicpt'a  Dt.  29  18  [17]  Lam.  3  19  Am.  612,  \o\rj  Prov.  64  Lam.
8  15,  avdyxai  Jer.  9  15  [14],  oSvvri  Jer.  23  15,  and  v>(/o«  Am.  5  7.!
The  word  auj/ivdos  nowhere  occurs  in  ©  ;  but  Aq.  had  a\fiivOiov
for  la'anah  in  Prov.  64  Jer.  2815  Lam.  3 19  ('!),  for  mr  in
Jer.  9  15  [14].  Vg.  has  amaritudo  in  Dt.  29  18,  but  everywhere
else  absinthium  -a  rendering  which  is  also  supported  by  Pesh.
and  Tg.

The  origin  of  the  word  la'ilndh  is  obscure,  and  the
references  to  it  in  OT  are  so  purely  symbolical,  that  we
learn  nothing  but  that  it  was  an  edible  substance  of
extreme  bitterness  ;  it  is  usually  coupled  with  e'tn,  roS,
or  c'jo  «s,  me  ro$  (see  GALL),  and  once  with  n"vna
mtrorim  (Lam.  815,  see  BITTER  HERBS).  But  a  con
sensus  of  ancient  tradition  is  in  favour  of  the  identifica
tion  with  wormwood,  and  it  may  well  denote  the  product
of  one  or  more  species  of  Artemisia  (perhaps  Artemisia
jiidaica]  of  which  as  many  as  seven  are  enumerated  by
Tristram  (FFP  331)  as  found  in  Palestine.

N.  M. — W.  T.  T.-D.

WORSHIP.  See  TEMPLE,  §§  34^  ;  SACRIFICE  ;
also  SYNAGOGUE,  PRAYER,  and  SALUTATIONS.

WORSHIPPER  (NCCOKOROC).  RV  TEMPLE-
KEEPER.  See  NEOCOROS.

WREATH. I.  ^HJ,/&//7,  iK.7i7.f SeeFRiNGES.

2.  rv  7,  loyilh,  i  K.  7  29  30  36,  RV  '  wreaths  of  hanging  work ' ;
but  the  meaning  is  doubtful  and  even  the  reading  uncertain.
See  under  LAYER,  §  i.

WREATHEN  WORK,  (i)  nbi;,  'dbdth,  Ex.  28 14,
etc.  See  CORD.  (2)  i"l23B',  sebakiih,  i  K.  7  17,  etc.  See  NET,  5.

WRESTLING.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the
early  Hebrews  had  wrestling -matches.  The  story  of
Jacob  wrestling  with  the  flohim  or  divinity  (Gen.  8224-31)
seems  to  presuppose  this.  If  the  cycle  of  Jacob-
narratives  were  as  near  to  the  original  folk-tales  as  the
cycle  of  Samson-narratives,  we  should  perhaps  have
found  Jacob  indulging  like  Samson  in  sportive  exhibi
tions  of  his  strength,  for  the  ancestors  of  the  Hebrews
(not  Samson  alone)  were  imagined  as  endowed  with
Herculean  strength  (cp  Gen.  29 10  Bl^sf-  3226).  It  is,
however,  no  sport — this  wrestling  of  Jacob  with  the
divine  being  ;  it  is  the  conquest  of  the  god  of  an  already
conquered  people  which  has  to  be  effected.  This  is  the
historical  meaning  of  the  story.  Penuel  was  possibly
the  citadel  of  SuccoTH  (i/.v. ),  and  within  the  precinct  of
the  citadel  was  the  sanctuary  (see  GIDEON,  §  2).  The
Jacob-tribe  had  '  contended  with  men '  and  had  '  pre
vailed  ' — i.e.,  had  conquered  Succoth  and  Penuel
externally  (Judg.  816  /. )  ;  but  its  admission  to  full
religious  privileges  had,  according  to  the  myth,  to  be
obtained  by  force.  Sargon  carried  away  the  deities  of
conquered  places  ;  but  the  Jacob-tribe  meant  to  remain
at  Succoth  and  Penuel,  and  consequently  had  to  convert
a  hostile  divinity  into  a  friend.  Cyrus  did  the  like  at
Babylon  by  geniality  towards  the  priesthood  (CYRUS,
§  6)  ;  the  Jacob-tribe  chose  to  describe  its  victory  in  the
symbolic  language  of  mythology.  The  myth  grew  pale,
and  the  later  writers  did  not  understand  it.  Hosea
thought  that  Jacob's  conduct  was  blameworthy  ;  a  later
writer  modified  the  story  by  the  statement  that  Jacob
'wept  and  made  supplication  to  him,'  and  it  is  this
later  writer  whom  modern  preachers  justifiably  follow,
for  he  has  shown  them  how  to  '  turn  dross  into  gold. '  2
The  word  rendered  '  wrestled '  in  Gen.  32  (p3N*1  v.  25  [24] ;
"ipZNH,  v.  26  [25])  has  been  connected  by  some  with  p3N,  'dbak,
'  dust,  as  if  = '  to  dust  oneself  ;  others  compare  M  H  pZN,  'iibak,
'  to  entangle.'  P>ut  probably  the  word  is  corrupt  (see  Crit.  Bib.).

1  The  translator  seems  in  this  last  case  to  have  read  n?l'D7
and  in  the  two  cases  in  Jer.  to  have  wrongly  connected  the  word
with  root  njj;.

2  Hos.  12  2/.  [-$f.]  belongs  to  Hosea,  who  blames  Jacob  :  the
continuation  is  in  TV.  7-9  [8-10]. I'v.  4-6  [5-7]  are  eulogistic  of
Jacob. The  expression  'turn  dross  into  gold'  is  from  Gunkel,
whose  treatment  of  the  story  shows  much  insight,  though  he  has
missed  the  probable  historical  origin  of  the  story.

5355


WRITING

In  Gen.  30s  the  right  word  is  used— viz.,  7RBJ,  prop,  'to  be
twisted  together ' ;  see  N APHTALI,  §  3.  Cp,  further,  MANASSF.H,
§  4-

In  the  NT  ir6.\rj  '  wrestling'  is  used  as  a  figure  for  a
spiritual  struggle  (Eph.  612)  ;  we  might  have  expected
paxy  (Delitzsch,  in  his  Heb.  NT,  renders  nonSo)  ;  the
Christian's  struggle  not  being  against  flesh  and  blood
can  hardly  be  called  a  '  wrestling. '  But  the  word  came
naturally  to  his  lips.  The  palrestra  was  not,  it  seems,
forbidden  to  Christians  ;  the  writer  of  2  Mace.  4  ™ff.  (cp
CAP)  was  naturally  more  sensitive,  and  denounces  the
priests  of  Jerusalem  who,  in  the  Hellenising  movement
under  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  '  hastened  to  take  part  in
the  unlawful  provision  for  the  palcestra. '  The  word  is
happily  adopted  by  RV,  following  the  precedent  of
'  synagogue '  ;  primarily  it  means  a  wrestling  school.

Wrestling  was  a  favourite  exercise  in  ancient  Egypt
(Wilk.  Anc.  Eg.  2437  6292).  It  is  said  to  have  been
introduced  into  the  Olympic  contests  in  the  eighteenth
Olympiad,  from  which  date  it  continued  to  form  one  of
the  five  games  of  the  pentathlon.  T.  K.  C.

WRITING.  In  the  study  of  writing  it  is  important
to  remember  that  the  word  has  several  meanings,

1 The wn'ch  must  be  carefully  distinguished. In

,  ',  ,  .  its  widest  sense,  it  includes  both  ideo-
'  graphic  and  phonetic  writing.  Ideographic
writing  consists  in  the  use  of  symbols  to  represent
visible  objects  or  the  ideas  which  are  associated  with
those  objects  ;  by  phonetic  writing  is  meant  the  use  of
symbols  to  represent  the  sounds  or  combinations  of
sounds,  which  constitute  some  particular  language.
When  each  symbol  denotes  a  single  sound,  the  writing
is  said  to  be  alphabetic ;  when  each  symbol  denotes  a
syllable,  the  writing  is  called  syllabic.  It  is  probable
that  writing  was  at  first  purely  ideographic  ;  but  the
oldest  systems  of  writing  known  to  us,  namely,  the
hieroglyphic  writing  of  Egypt  and  the  cuneiform  writ
ing  of  Babylonia,  consist  of  ideographic  and  phonetic
symbols  combined  in  various  ways.  Both  in  Egypt
and  in  Babylonia  the  art  of  writing  was  practised  con
siderably  more  than  three  thousand  years  before  the
Christian  era.  With  these  systems,  however,  we  ate
not  at  present  concerned,  since  there  is  no  reason  to
believe  that  they  were  at  any  time  in  use  among  the
ancient  Hebrews,  who,  like  their  neighbours,  the  Moab-
ites,  the  Phoenicians,  and  the  Aramaeans,  employed  a
purely  alphabetic  system,  consisting  of  twenty-two
letters,  usually  known  as  the  Semitic  alphabet.  From
the  Phoenicians  this  alphabet  was  borrowed,  with  certain
important  modifications,  by  the  Greeks ;  from  the
Greeks  it  passed  on  to  the  other  nations  of  Europe,  so
that  in  popular  language  the  term  '  writing '  is  confined
to  alphabetic  writing.  When  we  speak  of  the  writing
of  Egypt  and  Babylonia,  we  are  liable  to  forget  that  in
this  case  '  writing '  means  something  quite  different  from
that  which  we  ordinarily  understand  by  it.

The  origin  of  the  Semitic  alphabet  is  extremely
obscure.  In  the  ancient  world  the  invention  was
_.  .  .  commonly  ascribed  to  the  Phoenicians,1
°  '  sometimes  to  the  Aramaeans  -  or  the
Egyptians ; 3  but  these  theories  seem  to  have  been
based  upon  mere  conjecture,  as  was  the  case  with  so
many  other  beliefs  current  among  the  ancients  respect
ing  the  origin  of  arts,  institutions,  and  the  like.'4  In
modern  times  also  the  theory  of  the  Phoenician  origin
of  the  alphabet  has  been  frequently  maintained,  and
many  scholars  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  Phoe
nicians  simply  adapted  to  their  own  use  certain  of  the

1  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  5  12  [13]  (see  also  7  57)  ;  Lucan,  Pharsal.
3  220.

2  Diod.  Sic.  5  74,  Clem. Alex.  Stromattis,  \  16.

3  Plato,  Phtrdrns,  58,  274  D  ;  Cicero,  De  nat.  dear.  822.

•*  That  any  genuine  tradition  about  the  origin  of  the  alphabet
should  have  survived  must  appear  highly  improbable  when  we
consider  that  the  inventors  of  the  vowel-points  were  completely
forgotten,  although  they  lived  in  a  much  later  and  a  far  more
civilised  age.

5356


WRITING

phonetic  signs  employed  in  Egyptian  writing.1  Others
have  supposed  that  the  alphabet  was  developed  out  of
the  Babylonian  cuneiform  character.'2  Hut,  as  Winckler
has  recently  observed,  the  arguments  for  attributing  the
invention  of  the  alphabet  to  the  Phoenicians  are  far
from  satisfactory.3  We  have,  it  is  true,  no  right  to
maintain,  with  Winckler,  that  the  hypothesis  is  improb
able  in  itself,  for  mere  generalisations,  such  as  the
statement  that  mercantile  peoples  are  deficient  in
creative  power,  prove  nothing  at  all.  Nor  is  much  to
be  said  in  favour  of  the  rival  theory  put  forward  by  him,
namely,  that  the  alphabet  was  invented  in  Babylonia,
since  the  Babylonians,  so  far  as  we  can  ascertain  at
present,  never  made  use  of  it  for  writing  their  own
language.  The  inscriptions  in  the  Semitic  character
which  appear  on  some  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  weights
and  contract-tablets  prove,  indeed,  that  the  alphabet
was  known  in  Babylonia  ;  but  as  these  inscriptions  are
in  the  Aramaic  language  it  would  seem  that  the  Semitic
character  was  introduced  into  Babylonia  by  Arameeans.
The  arguments  which  Winckler  derives  from  the  shapes
of  the  letters  are  likewise  very  precarious.  From  the
fact  that  'Ayin  is  represented  by  a  circle  he  argues  that
this  letter  was  not  originally  included  in  the  alphabet
and  that  the  Semitic  character  must  therefore  have  been
invented  by  a  people  to  whom  the  sound  of  'Ayin  was
unknown.  But  the  circular  form  of  'Ayin  may  be  ex
plained  by  the  obvious  supposition  that  it  is  meant  to
represent  an  'eye'  (Heb.  'dyin],  precisely  as  every
other  letter  seems  to  have  been  originally  a  rude  portrait
of  some  well-known  object,  the  name  of  which  happened
to  bi-gin  with  the  sound  intended.  In  some  cases  both
the  sliape  and  the  name  of  the  letter  clearly  indicate
the  object  chosen,  and  this  serves  to  show  that  the
inventors  of  the  alphabet  spoke  a  Semitic  language.
But  whether  they  were  Phoenicians,  Aramaeans,  or
members  of  some  other  Semitic  people  it  is  at  present
impossible  to  decide.4

We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  inventors  of  the
alphabet  endeavoured  to  distinguish  the  sounds  of  their
language  with  scientific  precision.  It  would  appear
that  when  two  or  more  consonantal  sounds  bore  a.
certain  resemblance  to  one  another  they  were  sometimes
represented  by  a  single  letter  ;  thus  the  ancient  Semitic
alphabet  had  only  one  sign  for  the  two  sibilants  which
were  afterwards  known  as  Sin  and  Shin  and  distin
guished  by  a  diacritical  point  (jy,  y).  In  this  case  the
distinction  of  sound  must  have  existed  from  the  beginning
(as  is  proved  by  comparative  philology),  and  became
even  more  marked  in  later  times  ;  we  may  therefore
assume  that  it  existed  likewise  in  the  intermediate
period,  when  the  alphabet  was  invented.  Since  the
inventors  of  the  alphabet  ignored  this  distinction,  they
mav  have  ignored  others  also,  and  accordingly  the  fact
that  the  ancient  Semitic  character  does  not  discriminate
between  certain  sounds  which  are  expressed  by  different

letters  in  Arabic  (e.g. ,  f  and  "?• ,  £"  and  9" )  is  no  proof

that  the  alphabet  originated  among  a  people  who  in
pronunciation  assimilated  these  sounds  to  one  another.

Of  all  known  inscriptions  in  the  Semitic  character  the

oldest  which  can  be  dated  with  certainty, namely  the

... ., inscription of Mesha'  king  of Moab,

Liqmty. belongs  to  the  earlier  half  of  the  nillth

century  B.C.  See  MKSHA.  The  inscription  of  Panammu,
king  of  Ya'dl,  in  the  extreme  N.  of  Syria,  appears  to
have  been  set  up  about  the  beginning  of  the  eighth
century  ;  it  is  written  in  a  peculiar  Aramaic  dialect.8

1  De  Rouge,  Memoire  sur  I  origin?  egyptienne  de  T  alphabet
fhhiicien  (Paris, 1874);  Maspero,  Hist,  ancienne  des  peuples
det  Oriental  745  (Paris,  1893).

2  Deecke  in  ZDMGZ\  [1877]  102-116.

3  Wi.  Gesch.  Isr.  1  (1895)  125.7:

4  The  reasons  which  make  it  necessary  to  suspend  our  judg
ment  on  this  question  are  well  pointed  out  by  Lidzbarski  in  his
Haniilntch  tier  nordsem.  Efigrapkik  [1898],  1 173^

5  See  D  H  M  Die  altsemitischen  Inschriften  von  Sendschirli
(Vienna,  1893),  and  cp  ARAMAIC  LANGUAGE,  §  2.

5357


WRITING

Some  Phoenician  and  Aramaic  inscriptions  are  perhaps
rather  older  than  these  two ;  but  there  is  no  clear  evidence
to  show  how  long  before  the  ninth  century  the  Semitic
alphabet  was  invented.  Noldeke  has  observed  that  the
style  of  the  inscription  of  Mesha'  seems  to  imply  the
existence  of  a  historical  literature  among  the  Moabites
of  the  period,  and  what  we  know  of  the  Moabites  would
lead  us  to  suppose  that  their  civilisation  was  decidedly
less  advanced  than  that  of  their  neighbours  to  the  W.
Thus  we  may  conclude  with  certainty  that  at  the  time
of  Mesha'  the  Semitic  alphabet  was  not  a  very  recent  in
vention.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  in  the  ninth
century  B.C.  the  shapes  of  the  letters  were  almost
identical  in  regions  so  far  apart  as  Moab  and  Ya'd!
does  not  favour  the  view  that  the  alphabet  had  been  for
many  centuries  in  common  use,  for  in  that  case  local
types  would  have  tended  to  diverge  more  widely,  as  is
shown  by  the  later  history  of  Semitic  writing.  More
over,  the  tablets  discovered  at  Tell-el-Amarna  in  1887
prove  that  about  1400  B.C.  the  Canaanite  princes  con
ducted  their  official  correspondence  with  the  Egyptian
court  in  the  Babylonian  language  and  character.  It
would  be  very  rash  to  conclude  from  this  that  the
cuneiform  character  was  then  commonly  employed  by
the  natives  of  Canaan,  for  documents  written  in  a
foreign  language  and  in  an  extremely  difficult  character
can  have  been  intelligible  only  to  a  small  class  of  pro
fessional  scribes,  most  of  them,  perhaps,  slaves  imported
from  other  countries.1  But  it  is  evident  that  if  the
Canaanite  princes  employed,  in  their  correspondence
with  Egypt,  a  language  which  was  neither  that  of
Canaan  nor  that  of  Egypt,  we  may  with  some  plausi
bility  conjecture  that  the  Canaanites  at  that  period  had
no  writing  of  their  own.

The  OT  does  not  supply  us  with  the  means  of  dis
covering  how  or  when  the  alphabet  became  known  to
the  Israelites.  In  Genesis,  as  has  often  been  remarked,
there  is  no  allusion  to  writing  of  any  kind,  whereas
Moses  is  represented,  even  in  the  older  parts  of  Exodus
(JE),  as  practising  the  art  (Ex.  '244).  But  from  this  we
cannot  safely  conclude  more  than  that  writing  had  been
in  use  among  the  Israelites  for  some  time  before  the
period  of  the  narrator,  who  probably  lived  in  the  ninth
century  B.C.  Nor  does  Judg.  f>i4  throw  any  light  on
the  question  ;  whatever  the  phrase  nab  C2t?  may  mean,
it  cannot  be  explained  as  '  the  pen  of  the  scribe,'  since
e3B>  never  has  this  sense  either  in  Hebrew  or  Aramaic.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  ordinary  Hebrew  noun  for
'writing,'  namely  nap,  from  which  nob  'a  scribe'  is
derived,  has  no  etymological  connection  with  any  of
the  verbs  which  signify  'to  write'  (nro,  ppn,  cc'i).  and
this  fact  tends  to  support  the  theory  that  neo  is  a  foreign
word  ;  whether  it  was  borrowed  from  the  Assyrian,  as
some  scholars  suppose,  is  uncertain.

The  name  of  the  old  Canaanite  city  nsavv-.p  (Josh.  15  15  /
Judg.  In/.)  might  suggest  that  the  word  nEB,  in  the  sense  of
'writing,'  was  known  already  to  the  Canaanites  before  the
Israelite  invasion;  but  since  the  root  -123'-  has  a  variety  of
meanings  (in  Hebrew  'to  count,'  'to  relate,'  in  Aramaic  'to
shave  the  hair '),  it  is  altogether  illegitimate  to  found  any  argu
ment  upon  the  name  in  question.  Cp  KIKJATH-SKFHEK.

In  the  days  of  the  later  kings  of  Judah,  the  art  of

writing  must  have  been  very  extensively  employed,  to

„,  judge  by  the  frequent  allusions  to  it  in  the

4.  Types. propnets especially Isaiah. The oldest

extant  specimens  of  Israelite  writing,  namely  the  Siloam

inscription3  and  a  number  of  engraved  seals  and  gems,

1  Even  in  Babylonia  itself,  where  the  language  of  the  Tell-el-
Amarna tablets was actually  spoken, the knowledge of  the
cuneiform  character  was,  in  all  probability,  confined  to  a  small
proportion  of  the  inhabitants.

2  It  is  possible  that  HSD  in  -iBp-rrip  has  no  connection  with
the  Heb.  root  133.  since  Phoen.  Q  may  correspond  to  Heb.  j,
e.g.,  Phoen.  -,;D  =  Hel>.  137. The  existence  of  a  root  net  "lay
be  inferred  from  the  name  of  the  place  |"ISI  (•tJIBI,  '  to  Ziphron,1

Nu.  349).

3  See  Dr.  TBS  pp.  xiv-xvii.

5358


WRITING


WRITING


seem  to  belong  to  this  period.  Here  the  shapes  of  the
letters  closely  resemble  those  in  the  inscription  of  king
Mesha'.  One  of  the  oldest  Phoenician  inscriptions,
that  which  is  found  on  the  fragments  of  a  bronze  bowl
dedicated  to  the  Baal  of  Lebanon  (CIS  i.  no.  5,  see
PHOENICIA,  §  18),  exhibits  much  the  same  type.  But  the
ordinary  Phoenician  writing  has  a  decidedly  more  modern
appearance ;  the  down-strokes  become  elongated,  so  as
to  present  to  the  eye  a  series  of  parallel  lines,  and  the
letters  thus  acquire  an  air  of  uniformity  which  is  lacking
in  the  older  style.  Another  type  is  offered  by  the
Aramaic  inscriptions  and  papyri  of  the  Persian  and
Macedonian  period.  The  distinctive  feature  of  these  is
that  certain  letters  (3,  i,  y,  -i)  have  open  tops,  as
though  their  upper  portion  had  been  cut  off.  A  further
development  of  this  Aramaic  writing  appears  in  the
Nabatrean  and  Palmyrene  inscriptions,  of  the  first
century  B.  c.  and  onwards,  which  are  specially  remark
able  for  their  frequent  ligatures  or  joining  of  the  letters,
a  feature  common  to  all  the  later  styles  of  Aramaic
writing  in  use  among  Christians.  As  the  Aramaic
language  gradually  superseded  Hebrew  and  the  kindred
dialects  spoken  in  Palestine,  the  Aramaic  letters  became
more  and  more  familiar  to  the  Jews.  The  coins  of  the
Hasmonasan  dynasty  and  those  struck  during  the  two
Jewish  revolts  (66-70  and  132-135  A.u. )  bear  legends
in  the  old  Hebrew  character  ;  but  some  Jewish  inscrip
tions  of  about  the  time  of  Christ  are  in  the  Aramaic
writing,  though  the  language  is  Hebrew.  The  particular
variety  of  the  Aramaic  character  which  came  into  use
at  this  period  was  called  by  the  Jews  kgthdb  mirubba
(>'3ip  ana),  'square  writing,'  or  ktthab  assurl (n?B!N  ana),
'Assyrian  writing,'  a  name  probably  due  to  the  fact
that  it  was  employed  by  the  peoples  of  NE.  Syria.
One  of  the  most  ancient  specimens  of  the  square
writing  is  the  inscription  over  the  sepulchre  of  the  Bfne
Hesir  (vm  '33.).  a  Jewish  family,  near  Jerusalem  ;  J  the
character  bears  much  resemblance  to  the  Nabatasan,
but  the  lines  are  straighter  and  the  ligatures  less
frequent.  In  the  fully  developed  form  of  the  square
character  the  ligatures  disappear  altogether.  There  is
reason  to  believe  that  at  the  time  when  the  text  of  the
OT  was  definitely  fixed — i.e. ,  about  the  beginning  of  the
second  century  after  Christ — the  square  character  was
generally,  if  not  invariably,  employed  in  MSS  of  the
OT.-  Since  that  period  it  has  continued  in  use  among
the  Jews  with  very  little  modification.  Strangely
enough,  the  Samaritans  alone  remained  faithful  to  the
old  Hebrew  writing,  though  in  their  attempt  to  adorn
it  they  gave  it  a  somewhat  fantastic  appearance.3

At  a  period  which  it  is  impossible  to  determine
accurately,  but  in  any  case  several  centuries  before  the
Christian  era,  the  Semitic  alphabet  was  introduced  into
Arabia  and  employed  for  writing  various  Arabian  dia
lects,  as  is  proved  by  many  inscriptions  which  have
been  discovered  in  that  country.  Some  of  these  were,
until  lately,  known  by  the  incorrect  name  Himyaritic.
The  alphabet  in  which  they  are  written  is  evidently
derived  from  that  of  the  northern  Semites  ;  but  it  con
tains  several  additional  consonants,  invented  for  the
purpose  of  expressing  certain  Arabic  sounds  which

1  See  Chwolson,  Corpus  Inscr.  Heb.  no.  6  (St.  Petersburg,
1882).

2  In the recently discovered fragments of  Aquila's Greek
translation  of  the  OT  (ed.  F.  C.  Burkitt,  Cambridge,  1897)  the
Divine  name  y-h-w-h  is  written  in  a  corrupt  form  of  the  old
Hebrew  alphabet,  not,  as  we  might  have  expected,  in  the  square
character. Rut  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  Hebrew
MSS  used  by  Aquila  were  written  in  the  old  alphabet  through
out  :  the  Divine  Name,  which,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  not
pronounced  by  the  reader,  may  still  have  been  written  in  the
ancient  style  after  the  rest  of  the  text  had  been  modernised.

3  Tables  showing the forms  of  the  letters  used  by  the  N.
Semitic  nations  at  different  periods  are  found  in  Stade's  Lehr-
buch  tier  hebriiischen  Cratnmatik  (1879)  and  Noldeke's  Kttrz-
gefasste syrische Gratnmatik  (1880, ('-'1898), but far fuller
information may  be obtained  from the magnificent table  by
Euting  in  Chwolson's  Corpus  Inscr.  Heb. See  also  P.  Berger,
Histoire  lie  fecriture  dans  rantiquiti  (Paris,  1891).

.53.S9


were  not  represented  in  the  older  Semitic  writing.  The
so-called  Himyaritic  inscriptions  fall  into  two  classes,
according  to  dialect — those  in  Sabaean  and  those  in
Minoean.  Both  dialects  seem  to  have  been  spoken  in
S.  Arabia  at  about  the  same  period,  and  to  have  been
carried  northwards  by  mercantile  colonists.  Among
these  inscriptions  there  are  very  few  of  which  the  date
can  be  ascertained  even  approximately.  The  theory  of
Glaser,  Hommel,  Sayce,  and  others,  that  the  Minoean
inscriptions  are  of  enormous  antiquity  and  that  the
latest  of  them  were  set  up  about  1000  B.C.,  has  been
completely  overthrown  by  the  discovery  of  a  Minaean
inscription  which  is  dated  from  '  the  twenty-second  year
of  king  Ptolemy,'  so  that  it  cannot  be  older  than  the
third  century  B.C.1  The  dialect  of  the  so-called
Thamudaean2  inscriptions,  recently  discovered  at  Al-
Ula,  about  150  m.  NNW.  of  Medina,  differs  greatly
both  from  the  Sabttan  and  the  Mina,-an  ;  but  the  writing
is  nearly  the  same.  Whether  D.  H.  Miiller  be  right  in
considering  the  Thamuda.-an  character  an  earlier  form
of  the  Sabrean  is  uncertain.  By  the  beginning  of  the
seventh  century  of  our  era  both  the  Thamudaean  and
the  Sabnsan  writing  had  become  obsolete  in  Arabia,  for
the  alphabet  employed  by  the  Arabs  at  that  time — the
parent  of  the  Arabic  character  now  in  use — was  derived
from  the  Nabatcean.  In  Eastern  Africa,  however,  the
Sabaean  alphabet  left  a  descendant,  namely  the  very
peculiar  character  known  as  the  /Ethiopia

The  names  by  which  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  were
known  among  the  Jews  appear  for  the  first  time  in  the

N  .  LXX  text  of  Lam.  1-4.  Here  the  MSS,  it

'  .  , ,  is  true,  vary  to  a  considerable  extent ;  but

'  '  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  names  are
substantially  identical  with  those  which  were  used  by  the
Jews  in  the  Middle  Ages.  It  would  seem,  however,
that  in  very  early  times  certain  of  these  names  were
pronounced  otherwise,  since  the  names  of  the  Greek
letters,  which  were  borrowed  from  the  Phoenicians,
sometimes  diverge  notably  from  the  ordinary  Jewish
forms  ;  thus  rdyii/ua  (for  Ta/uXa)  and  'Pi2>  (cp  Heb.  pjo,
'head')  appear  to  have  a  more  primitive  vocalisation
than  ^D'J  (<§  yi/j.e\  or  yi/J.\)  and  o-\  (<S  pijxs  or  pys).
Accordingly  the  fact  that  tri  is  not  a  Hebrew  but  an
Aramaic  form  cannot  be  regarded  as  proving  anything
with  respect  to  the  ultimate  origin  of  the  names.  That
the  names  w^ere  liable  to  undergo  great  change  in  various
times  and  places  is  shown,  moreover,  by  the  /Ethiopia
alphabet,  in  which  several  of  the  names  are  quite  different.
We  must  not  therefore  be  surprised  to  find  that  among
the  Jewish  names  of  the  letters  there  are  some  of  which
the  meaning  is  altogether  obscure,  namely,  nn,  j<i,  rrn,
n'D.  'ns.  i'ipi  and  IB.

The  order  in  which  the  letters  were  arranged  is  shown
by  the  acrostich  poems  in  the  OT  (Pss.  25  34  37  111/.
119  145  Prov.  31 10-31  Lam.  1).  In  Lam.
2-4  the  order  is  slightly  different,  since
.  B  precedes  y.3  Among  the  Phoenicians

alphabet.  the  arrangernent  Of  the  letters  seems  to
have  been  the  same  as  among  the  Jews,  for  the  Greek
alphabet  in  its  primitive  form  corresponded  to  the
Hebrew.  By  what  principle  the  order  was  originally
fixed  it  is  impossible  to  discover.

Ancient  inscriptions  in  the  Semitic  alphabet,  like  the

, oldest inscriptions in Greek, are
7  Direction  of %vriuen  from  Hght  to  left The  sole

the  writing  exceptions  to  this  mie  are  found
punctuation,  etc.  among  the  Sabsean  inscriptions,  a
few  of  which  are  written  j3ovffTpo<f>r)d6v  —  i.  e. ,  in

1  See  the  papers  by  DHM  in  the  Vienna  Oriental  Tourn.  (Die
Wiener  Zeitschr.filr  die  Kunde  des  Morgenlandes)  8  i-io  161-
166  (1894).

2  Named  after  the  Thatniid  (Gk.  oi  BafiouSrji'oO,  an  Arabian
tribe  who  inhabited  those  parts  about  the  fourth  century  after
Christ. The  authors  of  these  inscriptions,  however,  call  them
selves  not  Thamnd,  but  L ihyan  (j <n9)  ;  see  DHM  Epig.  Denk.
aus  Arabien  (Vienna,  1889).  3  See  LAMENTATIONS.


6.  Order
of  the


WRITING


WRITING


lines  running  alternately  from  right  to  left  and  from
left  to  right,  a  fashion  common  among  the  Greeks  in  the
sixth  century  B.C.1  In  the  inscription  of  King  Mesha'  a
dot  is  placed  after  each  word  and  a  vertical  stroke  at  the
end  of  each  sentence.  Similar  dots  are  found  in  the
Siloam  inscription  and  in  some  others  ;  but  whether  they
were  used  by  ordinary  Hebrew  writers  may  be  doubted.
In  any  case  the  OT  contains  very  many  textual  corrup
tions  which  are  due  simply  to  wrong  divisions  of  words.2
Such  mistakes  were  greatly  facilitated  by  the  absence  of
special  forms  for  final  letters,  like  those  used  in  the  writ
ing  of  the  later  Jews,  Syrians,  and  Arabs.  In  Hebresv,
Phoenician,  and  Aramaic  inscriptions  a  line  frequently
ends  in  the  middle  of  a  word  ;  but  in  the  later  Jewish
style  this  is  not  allowed,  and  in  order  to  fill  up  a  line
the  scribes  are  accustomed  to  '  expand '  certain  letters,
especially  x,  n,  S,  n,  and  n.

The  letters of  the  Semitic  alphabet  were originally

used  as  consonants  only,  the  vowels  being  unexpressed.

O  t-h Such a  system  must, of  course, give  rise

, to  endless  ambiguities, for in the Semitic

°  P  ''  languages  some  of  the  most  important  gram
matical  distinctions  (e.g. ,  the  difference  between  an
active  and  a  passive  verb)  often  depend  solely  on  the
vowels.  The  reason  which  led  the  Semites  to  content
themselves  with  this  imperfect  method  seems  to  have
been  that  writing  was  at  first  employed  only  for  short
and  well-known  formulas,  such  as  votive  inscriptions,
funereal  inscriptions,  and  the  like,  not  for  literary  works
properly  so-called.  At  length  certain  of  the  consonants
(K,  n,  t,  and  •>)  came  to  be  used  also  as  vowels  ;  but  this
modification  was  introduced  very  slowly.  In  Phoenician
inscriptions  the  vowels  are  never  expressed  save  in  a  few
cases  at  the  end  of  a  word.  In  the  inscription  of  King
Mesha'  and  the  Siloam  inscription  the  vowel-letters  are
inserted  somewhat  more  freely,  but  very  much  less
freely  than  in  the  present  text  of  the  OT.3  Among  the
Israelites,  before  the  exile,  the  general  rule  seems  to
have  b^'en  that  no  vowels  were  expressed  in  writing
except  the  diphthongs  an  and  ai  (which  were  repre
sented  by  i  and  >  respectively),  and  most  of  the  long
vowels  at  the  end  of  words.  The  use  of  vowel  letters
for  //,  o,  and  i  in  the  middle  of  words — which  is  frequent
in  the  MT — apparently  came  into  fashion  at  a  very  late
period,  as  a  careful  examination  of  (5  shows.4  The
orthography  of  the  present  Jewish  OT  is  probably  the
result  of  a  revision  (or  of  several  revisions)  by  the  scribes,
for  in  all  parts  of  the  OT  the  use  of  the  vowel-letters  (or,
as  they  are  often  called,  mat  res  lectionis]  is  approxi
mately  the  same,  that  is  to  say,  the  oldest  books  do  not,
in  this  respect,  differ  materially  from  the  latest.  But
though  we  find  a  general  uniformity  of  spelling  through
out  the  whole  of  the  OT,  there  are  numberless  incon
sistencies  in  matters  of  detail,  and  it  often  happens  that
within  the  space  of  a  few  verses  the  same  word  is  spelt
in  two  or  more  different  ways.  In  no  case,  therefore,
have  we  any  guarantee  that  the  vowel-letters  in  our  text
go  back  to  the  time  of  the  author,  aad  to  base  historical
arguments  on  the  spelling  is  quite  illegitimate.0  Even

1  The  ,-Ethiopic  writing,  as  is  well  known,  always  runs  from
left  to  right  ;  the  oldest  extant  specimens  of  this  writing,  namely,
two  inscriptions  at  Aksiim  in  Abyssinia,  probably  belong  to  the
sixth  century  after  Christ.

2  See  Dr.  TBS  xxx-xxxii.

3  Thus  the  Siloam  inscription  has  B'K  (thrice)  for  C*'X,  and

nasnn  (twice)  for  traxnn.

*  Dr.  TBS  p.  xxxiiiy: It  must  be  remembered  that  many  words
whi  :h  the  later  Jews  pronounced  with  o  or  u  originally  had  the
diphthong  an. Thus  when  we  find  -ny  and  N!>10  '"  l^.e  Siloam
inscription,  we  ere  not  to  reckon  these  as  cases  in  which  0  was
expressed  by  v

*  Thus  the  well-known  fact  that  the  form  Kin  is  sometimes
employed  in  MT  instead  of  the  fern. n»n  proves  nothing  as  to
the  usage  of  the  ancient  Hebrew,  since  the  i  in  this  case  was
probably  inserted  by  late  scribes  (cp  Dr.  Dent.  Introd.  p.  Ixxxvin).
In Moabite  the  masc.  form  is  written xn,  and  in  Phoenician
inscriptions  we  find  «n  for  masc.  and  fern,  alike,  the  pronunciation
of  course  varying  according  to  the  gender.


in  the  Middle  Ages,  long  after  the  text  had  been  fixed,
there  was  still  a  considerable  amount  of  divergence
between  the  MSS  as  to  the  insertion  of  the  vowel-letters
in  particular  passages.1  In  MSS  of  the  Mishnah  and
other  post-biblical  Jesvish  writings,  the  vowel-letters  are
employed  much  more  frequently  than  in  the  OT  ;  thus
1  and  -  often  stand  for  the  short  vowels  //  and  I,  which
is  very  rarely  the  case  in  copies  of  the  OT.

Though  the  insertion  of  vowel  -  letters  doubtless  ex
cluded  certain  ambiguities,  the  writing  was  still  very  far

9 Vowel fr°m  being  an  adequate  representation  of

points  etc  the  lansuaee- Not  only  niany  of  the

vowels  but  also  the  doubling  of  consonants
and  other  important  phonetic  distinctions  remained
unexpressed.  At  length,  several  centuries  after  the
Christian  era,  systematic  efforts  were  made  by  the  Jews,
the  Syrians,  and  the  Arabs  to  remove  this  practical
inconvenience.  It  cannot  be  a  mere  accident  that  among
all  three  nations  the  introduction  of  the  so-called  vowel-
points  took  place  about  the  same  period  ;  but  how  and
where  the  idea  originated  is  quite  uncertain.  As  early
as  the  fifth  century  after  Christ  Syrian  scribes  had
adopted  the  practice  of  distinguishing  certain  words,
which,  though  spelt  alike,  were  pronounced  differently,
by  means  of  a  dot  placed  above  or  below  ;  and  it  has
been  conjectured  by  Ewald  and  others  that  this  was  the
origin  both  of  the  Syrian  and  of  the  Jewish  systems  of
vocalisation.  In  any  case,  it  would  seem  that  at  the
beginning  of  the  fifth  century  the  vowel -points  were
unknown  to  the  Jews,  and  that  by  the  end  of  the  eighth
century  they  had  been  in  use  for  some  time.  The
Jewish  scholars  who  introduced  these  signs  into  the  text
of  the  OT  are  commonly  known  as  the  Massoretes — i.e. ,
traditionalists,  from  the  late  Heb.  word  massoreth  (rnec)i
'  tradition. '  Respecting  their  names  and  dates  history
is  altogether  silent.  Though  their  work  was  of  enormous
importance,  it  must  be  remembered  that  among  the  Jews,
as  among  the  Syrians  and  Arabs,  the  vowel-points  have
never  been  regarded  as  an  essential  part  of  the  writing  ;
in  particular  the  MSS  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,
from  which  lessons  were  read  in  the  synagogues,  a|rpear
to  have  been  generally,  if  not  always,  written  without
points,  down  to  the  present  day.  Those  MSS  of  the
Hebrew  OT  which  are  '  pointed  '  fall  into  two  principal
classes,  according  to  the  method  of  vocalisation  em
ployed.  The  great  majority  exhibit  the  so-called  Pales
tinian2  system,  whilst  others,  of  which  the  best-known
example  is  the  St.  Petersburg  Codex  of  the  Prophets
written  in  916  A.D.  (published  in  facsimile  by  Strack
in  1876),  have  the  Babylonian  (or  superlinear)  vowel-
points.  These  two  systems  possess  so  much  in  common
that  they  must  necessarily  be  derived  from  the  same
original  ;  but  the  precise  relationship  between  them  is
still  disputed.  Both  represent  a  very  late  stage  in  the
pronunciation  of  the  Hebrew  language,  or  rather  they
express  the  language,  not  as  it  was  actually  spoken,  but
as  it  was  chanted  in  the  synagogues  of  the  period. :!  The
most  important  difference  between  the  Palestinian  and
the  Babylonian  systems  is,  that  the  Palestinian  alone  has
a  special  sign  for  the  short  vowel  e  (Seghol).  The  Baby
lonian  system  underwent  considerable  change  in  course
of  time,  as  is  shown  by  the  different  forms  which  it
assumes  in  our  MSS  ;  but  it  was  ignored  altogether  by
the  great  Jewish  commentators  and  grammarians  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  at  length  sank  into  oblivion,  until  it

1  See,  e.g.,  Co.  Das  Buck  des  Prof-keten  Ezechicl,  1886,  p.  7-

2  Also  called  '  Tiberian,'  from  the  fact  that  the  city  of  Tiberias
was  one  of  the  principal  seats  of  Jewish  learning  from  the  second
century  onwards.

3  The  pronunciation  of  Hebrew  words  given  in  the  IS  I and
other  Greek  sources  is  often  more  primitive  than  the  pronuncia
tion  expressed  by  the  vowel-points. It  should  also  be  noticed
that  the  consonant  text  and  the  vocalisation  are  frequently  at
variance  with  one  another,  since  the  former  presupposes  a  more
ancient  pronunciation  than  the  latter. Thus  in  the  very  first
word  of  the  Hebrew  OT,  n"f  »n.3,  the  N  must  originally  have
been  pronounced  as  a  consonant,  but  is  treated  by  the  Massoretes
as  mute.

5362


WRITING

became  known  to  European  Hebraists  in  the  nineteenth
century.

Both  the  Palestinian  and  the  Babylonian  systems  of
vocalisation  are  combined  with  an  extremely  elaborate
system  of  accents,  which  were  intended  to  indicate  not
only  the  place  of  the  accent  in  individual  words,  but  also
the  musical  intonation  adopted  in  chanting,  and  hence  the
greater  or  less  degree  of  connection  between  the  different


YEAR

parts  of  sentences.1  A  special  method  of  accentuation  is
employed  in  the  poetical  books  of  the  OT — i.e.,  Psalms,
Proverbs,  and  Job.2  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  observe
that  for  us  the  value  of  the  accents  consists  in  the  light
which  they  throw,  not  upon  the  real  meaning  of  the  text,
but  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  text  was  understood
by  the  Massoretes.  A.  A.  B.


X


XANTHICUS  (5AN9IKOC[AV]),  2  Mace.  113°3338.
See  MONTH.


XERXES  (L'TllETIg),  Esth.  1  i  RV»g-,  EV  AHASU-
ERUS  (q.v. )


Y


YARN.  See  LINEN,  i,  WEAVING,  and  on  2  S.
1727/  [ROGELIM]  see  BED,  §  3.

i.  pt2N,  'etun,  Prov. 7i6  RV.  See  LINEN,  §  la.  2.  Ezek.
27  19  RV  ("?«M2).  See  UZAL.  3.  niJJO,  mikweh,  i  K.  10  28  AV.
See  CHARIOT,  §  5,  n.  3,  WEAVING,  §  2.

YEAR  (H3K*,  sdndh).  Day,  month,  and  year  are  all
indicated  by  nature  itself  as  means  for  the  measure
ment  of  time.  These  three  units  are  quite  independent,
however,  and  stand  in  no  direct  or  simple  relationship
to  each  other,  and  wherever  an  artificial  reduction  of
the  larger  unit  to  terms  of  either  of  the  two  smaller
is  attempted  in  the  absence  of  exact  astronomical
knowledge,  inaccuracies  and  dislocations  become
inevitable.  These  are  not  so  great  when  the  largest  of
the  three  units — the  year — is  measured  in  terms  of  the
smallest — the  day  ;  but  they  become  serious  when  the
middle  unit — the  month — is  taken  as  the  basis  for
establishing  a  ratio.

The  former course  (making  the  day  the  unit)  was

taken  by  the  Egyptians  ;  they  had  observed  that  after

about  365 days  the sun returns to the

1.  In  Egypt.  same  pOSition  in  the  celestial  sphere,  and
accordingly  fixed  their  year  as  being  365  days. They
altogether left out of account any reference to the
course  of  the  moon,  although  some  reminiscence  of  it
may  be preserved in their division of the year into
twelve  equal  parts  of  thirty  days  each,  to  which  were
added  the  five  remaining  days  as  supernumerary  (the  so-
called epagomenai). Even thus, however, it was an
artificial  product  that  had  been  manufactured  from  the
natural  year  which  contains  5  hours  48  minutes and
48 seconds  more than 365 complete days  ; and the
Egyptian  year,  which  on  every  fourth  anniversary  began
a  day  too  soon,  was  still  a  vague  year,  although  it  was
only  after  the  lapse  of  1461  Egyptian  years— a  so-called
Sothis  period  (see  CHRONOLOGY,  §  19)— that  the  differ
ence  amounted  to  a  year  too  many.

The  second  course  (making  the  month  the  unit)  was

chosen  by  Mohammed, whose  intention  in  prohibiting

the  occasional  insertion  of  an  intercalary

2.  In  Islam.  montj1  was  to  frame  a  rational  calendar,
but who thereby only  succeeded in creating  another
artificial  product  completely  differing  from  the  natural
year,  namely  the  so-called  purely  lunar  year  which  with
its twelve  lunar months (354 to 355 days) annually
begins  the  new  year  some  ten  or  eleven  days  too  soon.

The  calendar of  Israel  and  the  Jews  avoided  both

the  extremes  just indicated, which are the  necessary

. consequences of  a  too  exclusive  regard

3.  in  Israel.  either  {o  the  day  or  to  the  monl^  m

determining  the  length  of  the  year.  With  the  Israelites
the  method  to  be  followed  was  decided  by  practice,
unhampered  by  any  dominating  theory  about  the
natural  year.  This  of  course  did  not  exclude  modifica
tions  as  time  advanced,  and  ultimately  the  modifications
led  in  the  case  of  the  Jewish  calendar  to  a  product

5363


much  more  complicated  than  is  exhibited  either  in  the
Egyptian  or  in  the  Mohammedan  ;  it  has,  however,
this  advantage  over  both,  that  the  Hebrews,  at  least  in
their  reckoning  of  the  years,  though  not  always  in
their  delimitation  of  them,  remained  in  agreement  with
the  number  of  the  natural  years.

With  the  ancient  Israelites,  as  probably  at  the  outset
with  all  peoples, the  year  was  a  solar  one,  that  is  to

say,  a  natural  year  which  was  sufficiently
4 A  solir

defined for practical purposes by the

year.  regular  recurrence  of  the  seasons.  To
this  also  the  Hebrew  word  for  year  seems  to  have
reference  ;  for  in  n:B>,  sAndh,  at  least,  as  in  fviavrbs
[fr/os,  ecos],  annus[n.nn\i\us],  jakr,  year  (cp  Gk.  yvpovv),
it  seems  permissible  to  conjecture  some  sort  of  reference
to  a  return  to  a  starting-point,  a  repetition  of  the  same
circular  course.  The  solar  character  of  the  Hebrew
year,  however,  is  demonstrated  beyond  all  doubt  by  the
ancient  determinations  of  time  according  to  the  seasons
of  the  year  and  the  agricultural  operations  dependent
on  these.  Thus,  for  example,  the  annually  recurring
harvest  festival  or  feast  of  weeks,  dated  by  the  harvest
(Ex.  23i6<z  3422  Dt.  169),  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  dated
by  the  ingathering  (Ut.  1613).  It  is  proved  also  by
indications  which  clearly  show  that  stated  religious  or
political  actions — dependent  in  fact  on  the  period  of
the  year — always  occurred  at  the  same  time  of  the
year.  Thus  for  example  the  autumn  festival  falls  at
the  end  of  the  year  (Ex.  23i6£  34 22)  ;  the  going  forth
of  the  king  to  battle  at  the  return  of  the  year
(aS.lli  iK.202226  iCh.20i  2Ch.36io).  Lastly
it  is  shown  by  the  ancient  names  of  months  which  are
unmistakably  connected  with  the  regular  recurrence
of  phenomena  of  the  seasons  (see  MONTH,  §  2).

The  length  of  the  year  was  hardly  so  accurately
determined  as  to  render  impossible  all  uncertainty  in  its
1  fh  m^asurement-  Probably  its  limits  to
6.  Its  lengtn.  SQn)e  extent  depended  on  weather-
conditions  and  the  labours  necessitated  by  these.  At
least,  we  have  no  indication  from  the  earlier  times
which  would  point  to  any  exact  definition  of  the  year  by
any  precise  number  of  days.  Not  till  post-exilic  time
does  P  seem  to  betray  acquaintance  with  the  fact  that
the  year  consists  of  365  days,  when  he  so  states  the
number  of  the  years  of  Enoch's  life  (Gen.  623;  see
ENOCH,  §  6)  or  when  he  represents  the  Flood,  which
began  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  second  month,  as
coming  to  an  end  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  thr
second  month  of  the  following  year  (Gen.  7"  814).
This  last  procedure  is  certainly  to  be  taken  as  sho\\in,<,

1  As  to  the  points  in  which  the  Babylonian  accentuation  differs
from  the  Palestinian,  see  Wickes'  Treatise  on  the  Accentuation
of  the  Tiventy-one  so-called  Prose  Books  of  the  OT,  Oxford,
1887,  pp. 142-150. It  should  be  mentioned  that  Dr.  Wickes
regards  the  term  '  Babylonian  '  as  a  misnomer.

2  See  Wickes,  A Treatise  on  the  Acct*t**tit*  of  the  Thret
so-called  Poetical  Books,  Oxford,  1881.

5364


YEAR

that,  assuming  as  he  did  for  primitive  times  an  accurate
dating  according  to  lunar  months  of  which  twelve  made
an  ordinary  year  of  355  days,  he  wished  by  adding  on
ten  days  more  to  bring  the  year,  thus  reckoned,  up  to
the  full  length  of  a  natural  year  of  365  days.  Whether
also  the  feast  of  the  New  Year  (for  which  we  have
evidence  from  the  exilic  period;  Ezek.  40 1,  cp  Lev.
2^9),  which  was  observed,  not  on  the  first  but  on  the
tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  is  based  on  a  similar
reckoning,  can  hardly  be  made  out.  At  all  events,
whatever  may  have  been  the  freedom  allowed  in  the
measurement  of  any  particular  year,  there  are  certain
facts  which  show  that  the  real  length  of  the  actual
year  was  by  no  means  altogether  obscure  even  in  the
pre-exilic  period.

According  to  the  reckoning  in  use  then  (in  the  pre-
exilic  period)  the  change  of  the  year  took  place  in
6.  Beginning,  autumn,  when  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth
had  been  gathered  in  and  the  former
rain  (rnia,  moreli]  was  preparing  the  fields  for  fresh
tillage  and  a  renewal  of  the  yearly  cycle.  The  autumn
festival,  or  feast  of  the  ingathering  (fj'pun  in,  hag
Ad' a  si  f  A),  with  which  the  yearly  round  of  feasts  was
closed,  was  observed  '  at  the  outgoing  of  the  year '
(flJB'n  riNsa,  bfseth  hassdndh — Ex.  23  16)  or  '  at  the  year's
revolution  '  (rro'n  nsipn,  t&kuphath  hassdndh — Ex.  34 22).
These  definitions  of  the  oldest  legislation  are  so  clear
and  distinct  as  to  make  further  proof  unnecessary.

If  any  further  proof  were  requisite,  it  might  be  urged  that  the
passover  could  not  have  been  observed  in  accordance  with  the
precept  of  the  newly-found  law  unless  the  new  year  was  in
autumn  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah  (2  K.  '23  23  ;  cp  22  3),
and  that  on  no  other  assumption  can  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim
be  made  to  synchronise  with  the  first  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar
(Jer.  25  i)  and  with  the  year  of  the  battle  of  Carchemish  (Jer.
4(5  2).  Such  inferential  arguments  are  needless.  Besides,  the
text  of  these  passages  (cp  (B>)  is  not  in  a  satisfactory  condition.

It  is  wholly  unwarranted,  however,  to  regard  the
autumn  as  marking  the  change  of  the  economic  year,
and  to  set  over  against  this,  as  the  ordinary  calendar
year,  a  civil  year  that  had  its  commencement  in  spring.
There  is  absolutely  no  evidence  for  any  such  system  of
double  accounts  before  the  exile.

The  expression  'at  the  return  of  the  year  '(.tyj:n  j-QIC'flS ;  28.
Hi  i  K.  2022  26),  which  is  used  more  than  once  with  reference
to  campaigns  beginning  in  spring,  does  not  speak  of  a  beginning
of  the  year,  but  is  couched  in  such  general  terms  as  to  contain  a
definite  date  only  when  one  knows  that  the  spring  is  the  time
for  campaigns  to  begin,  and  in  itself  means  nothing  more  than
'  in  the  following  year."

There  is  all  the  less  reason  for  this  postulating  of  a
beginning  of  the  year  in  spring — in  the  interests  of  the
late  P  (Ex.  122),  and  in  contradiction  to  the  terms  of
the  oldest  legislation  (Ex.  23  16  3422) — inasmuch  as  the
period  of  the  exile  itself  bears  witness  to  the  observance
of  the  New  Year  festival  in  autumn,  and  in  the  end  the
old  custom  once  more  triumphed  over  the  later  innova
tion  which  for  a  time  had  held  the  year  to  begin  in
spring.  See  NEW  YEAR,  §  i.

The  question  as  to  the  relation  of  the  months  to  the

year is more  difficult. For  the  earlier  ages  it  is  im-

_ T>.1nj.' possible to  say  anything  with  certainty.

i. xVcltlljlOU ,. . ,  , .,

,  , Probably the months and the years

' ., simply  ran  a  parallel  course,  without  any

months.  Jf

attempt being made to fix a point of

coincidence  at  which  the  year  and  the  monthly  cycle
might  take  a  common  beginning.  The  fact  that  in  the
exile  the  New  Year  festival  was  held  on  the  tenth  day
of  a  month  without  any  sense  of  strangeness  (Ezek.  40  r,
cp  Lev.  25g)  seems  to  point  to  this.  When  necessity
arose,  doubtless  no  difficulty  was  felt  in  making  a
thirteenth  month  follow  upon  the  ordinary  twelve  within
the  same  year  ;  but  there  was  not  as  yet  any  definite
rule,  and  the  text  of  i  K.  47-20,  which  speaks  of  the
division  of  Solomon's  kingdom  into  twelve  districts,
each  of  which  was  called  upon  to  maintain  the  expenses
of  the  royal  household  for  a  month,  has  unfortunately
reached  us  in  such  an  imperfect  state  of  preservation

in  5365


YEAR

that  we  are  unable  to  see  in  it  clear  evidence  of  a  year
of  twelve  months  ;  it  is  possible  even  that  Judah  may
have  been  thought  of  as  the  thirteenth  district,  with  this
as  its  special  privilege  that  it  tjecame  liable  to  the  tax
only  in  intercalary  months.  In  substance,  then,  what
we  are  able  to  say  is  this  :  In  the  pre-exilic  period  it
was  natural  years  that  regulated  the  chronology,  the
change  of  the  year  fell  in  autumn,  and  the  months,
which  followed  the  moon,  were  allowed  to  take  their
own  way,  without  concerning  themselves  much  about
the  year.

As  in  so  many  other  things,  the  exile  brought
profound  changes  into  the  Jewish  Calendar.  Away
g  Exilic  f">ni  tlle'r  I1;U'VC  soi1'  w'lh  which  their
changes  worsn'P  nac*  stood  in  such  intimate  con
nection — a  connection  which  Deuteronomy
indeed  had  already  been  recently  seeking  to  sever —
they  were  now  all  the  readier  to  take  over  the  Babylonian
calendar,  which  they  had  learned  to  recognise  as  the
more  scientifically  regulated  one.  This  change
announces  itself  in  a  new  terminology  for  the  months
and  in  a  transference  of  the  beginning  of  the  year.
Down  to  the  exile  the  months  had  been  designated  by
their  ancient  names  (so  even  in  Deuteronomy)  ;  in  the
exile  comes  in  the  custom  of  distinguishing  the  months
from  each  other  by  numbers,  and  also  of  placing  the
first  month  in  spring  (cp,  to  begin  with,  the  exilic
redactors  of  Jeremiah  and  Kings,  Ezekiel,  Haggai,  and
Zechariah,  then  P  and  the  final  redactor  of  the
Hexateuch  {e.g.,  Dt.  1 3],  and  also  Chronicles).  In
course  of  time  even  the  foreign  Babylonian  names  for
the  months  began  to  come  in  ;  but  except  in  Ezra  6 15
(in  an  Aramaic  passage)  and  in  Neh.  (1  i  2i  615)  their
ordinal  numbers  are  also  at  the  same  time  given  (so  in
Esther  and  in  Mace. ). !  The  transference  of  the  begin
ning  of  the  year  to  the  spring  is  already  witnessed  to
by  the  numbering  of  the  months  beginning,  as  in  the
Babylonian  Calendar,  with  the  spring  month  ;  but  we
have,  besides,  express  evidence  in  the  ordinance  of  P
in  Ex.122  'This  [the  current,  Passover]  month  shall
be  unto  you  the  beginning  of  months  :  it  shall  be  the
first  month  of  the  year  to  you. '  The  evidence  here
supplied  does  not  lose  in  weight  even  if  the  verse  should
prove  to  be  due  to  a  later  editor.  For  in  any  case  the
change  of  the  era  is  carried  back  to  a  divine  command,
given  of  old  to  Moses  and  Aaron  while  still  in  the  land
of  Egypt.  But  this  of  itself  proves  that  the  Israelites
had  once  made  use  of  another  era  (that  beginning  in
autumn),  and  that  its  place  was  taken  by  the  spring  era
only  at  a  later  date.

In  P's  account  of  the  deluge  a  further  proof  of  this  author's
knowledge  of  the  earlier  employment  of  an  autumn  era  is
obtained,  only  if  we  hold  ourselves  shut  up  to  the  conclusion
that  he  considered  the  flood  to  have  begun  in  autumn.  But  in
that  case  P  has  not  only  carried  back  the  later  designations  of
the  months  to  that  patriarchal  period,  but  has  also  adapted  these
in  academic  fashion  to  the  autumn  era  by  designating,  in
accordance  with  this  latter  era,  as  the  second  month,  that  which
by  the  spring  era  was  the  eighth  (cp  Gen.  7  n  84^  13^)-

At  what  date  this  change  came  in  cannot  be  gathered
from  the  passage  before  us  ;  but  the  whole  manner  of
P,  which  is  to  carry  back  all  the  ordinances  of  the  post-
exilic  community  to  Moses,  renders  it  probable  that  in
this  ordinance  also  we  see  the  sanctioning  of  an  innova
tion  that  had  been  introduced  at  the  time  of  the  exile,
and  the  date  of  which  admits  of  being  definitely  fixed  by
means  of  the  new  designations  the  months  then  received.

The  memory  of  the  older  custom  of  beginning  the
year  in  autumn  wns  still  vivid  during  the  exile  and  took
concrete  shape  in  an  ecclesiastical  New  Year's  festival
(Ezek.  40i  Lev.  25g  Nu.  29i;  cp  Lev.  23 24).  In  this
way  from  henceforward  there  was  observed,  alongside
of  the  official  civil  New  Year  in  spring,  an  ecclesiastical
New  Year  in  autumn,  which  was  held  by  the  ancient
pre-exilic  custom.  The  beginning  of  the  civil  year  fell
thus  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month  (or  Nisan,  cor
responding  to  what  had  formerly  been  known  as  Abib).
1  In  Zech.  \^  7  i  the  names  of  the  months  are  a  later  insertion.
5366


YEAR

The  ecclesiastical  New  Year  on  the  other  hand  did  not
remain  unaltered.  At  first  it  was,  as  already  stated,
observed  according  to  Ezek.  40 1  (cp  Lev.  25  9)  on  the
tenth  of  the  seventh  month  (Tishri)  ;  but  afterwards  it
was  transferred  to  the  ist  of  Tishri  (Lev.  23 24  Nu.

29 1  [P]).

The  day,  in  the  passages  last  cited,  indeed  is  called  no  longer
fOB'H  C'K"!,  r&s  /lalsiimih,  as  is  the  day  of  the  new  year  in
Ezek.  40 1,  but  nynR  QVj  yfni  tern  ah,  'day  of  blowing  of
trumpets'  (Nu.  21'  i  J  cp  ni'VW  ]i"l3'>  zikrdn  teru'dh,  'a
memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets,1  Lev.  2824);  but  Lev.  258;?:
leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  '  trumpet-blowing '  must  be
taken  as  the  characteristic  feature  of  the  New  Year's  day,  and
that  the  exilic  New  Year  festival  had  to  give  up  its  place  to  the
day  of  atonement  (D"1E3  CV,  ySm  kifipfirim,  'Lev.V&zj/.;  cp
NEW  YEAN)  now  transferred  to  loth  of  Tishri.

How  the  insertion  of  a  thirteenth  month  which  from
time  to  time  was  necessary  was  arranged,  we  have  no
means  of  knowing,  the  OT  being  silent  on  the  subject.
The  fact,  however,  that  such  insertion  was  actually  made
in  order  to  keep  the  beginning  of  the  year  in  approximate
coincidence  with  the  vernal  equinox,  does  not  admit  of
doubt ;  it  was  the  practice  of  the  Babylonians  from
whom  the  entire  new  calendar  was  borrowed.

The  arrangement  thus  made  was  not  disturbed  till

long  afterwards,  and  even  then  probably  only  on  account

of  the  Seleucidan  calendar  which  made

9. Seleucidan he  be<,jnnjnp,  Of  the  year  in  autumn.

n  Q  1  A«  f  I  Q  f  *

At  the  same  time  it  remains  a  question
whether  any  such  alteration  in  the  manner  of  reckoning
time  can  be  proved  from  I  Mace.,  for  th'Te  are  two
opposing  views  as  to  the  interpretation  of  the  dates
there  given.  Wellhausen  (IJG  208)  maintains  that  in
i  Mace,  also  the  Seleucidan  autumnal  era  is  followed.
On  the  other  side  range  themselves,  amongst  others,
Cornill  (Die  siebzig  Jahrwochcn  Daniels,  20  / ,  1889)
and  Schiirer  with  convincing  reasons  for  concluding
that  i  Mace,  in  its  dates  follows  the  Babylonian  vernal
era  taken  over  by  the  Jews  during  the  exile.

They  urge  :  (i)  the  dates  would  not  fit  the  events  to  which  they
are  assigned,  if  the  Seleucidan  era  be  assumed.  To  take  a
simple  example,  the  events  related  in  i  Mace.  10  1-21  impera
tively  demand  a  longer  space  than  the  fourteen  days  which  are
all  that  can  be  given  them  on  the  view  adopted  by  Wellhausen.
(2)  The  designation  of  the  months  by  ordinal  numbers,  of  which
the  first  is  given  to  the  month  that  occurs  in  spring,  would  be
very  strange  if  the  year  were  held  to  begin  in  autumn,  for  in
that  case  the  seventh  to  the  twelfth  month  of  a  given  year
would  fall  in  point  of  time  before  the  first  to  the  sixth  of  the
same  year  (cp  i  Mace.  4  52  where  the  ninth  month  is  Chislev,
102i  where  the  seventh  is  the  month  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles
[Tishri],  and  Ii>i4  where  the  eleventh  month  is  Shebat).1  (3)
Similar  modifications  of  the  Seleucidan  era  in  accordance  with
the  requirements  of  local  calendars  can  be  shown  to  have
occurred  elsewhere.  In  fact  for  the  city  of  Damascus  the  use
of  exactly  the  same  era  can  be  proved  (Sehiirer).

We  may  conclude  that  in  the  first  century  B.C.  (as  is
to  be  inferred  for  the  second  at  any  rate  from  Est.  87)
the  official  era  began  the  year  in  the  spring  (on  the  ist
of  N'isan);  for  it,  accordingly,  the  spring  of  312  B.C.
marked  the  beginning  of  the  first  year  of  the  Seleucidan
era.  N'or  is  it  necessary  to  assume  any  other  mode  of
reckoning  in  i  Mace. ,  as  a  mere  discrepancy  about  a
single  date  is  not  reason  enough  for  postulating  a  special
era  for  the  book.

When  we  come  to  the  first  century  of  our  own  era,
however,  the  case  is  different.  For  Josephus  confines  the
year  that  has  its  beginning  in  spring  to  religious  affairs
only  ;  for  buying  and  selling  and  all  manner  of  secular
business,  on  the  other  hand,  the  beginning  of  the  year
is  in  autumn  (Ant.  i.  Ss)-2  In  full  agreement  with

1  If  in the present text of  Neh.  1  i 2  i, Chislev  precedes
Nisan of  the same year  (the year that is  described as  the
twentieth)  the  case  is  somewhat  different  from  that  referred  to
in  the  text,  their  respective  designations  as  '  the  ninth  '  and  '  the
first'  month  being  avoided. Rut  too  much  stress  ought  not  to
be  laid  upon  these  passages,  inasmuch  as  in  Neh.  1 1  the  name
of  the  king is  not  given  where  certainly  it  might  have  lx;en
expected,  and  thus  the  accuracy  of  the  tradition  as  a  whole
becomes  open  to  question.  _  ,  • •

2  The  passage  runs :  '  But  Moses  appointed  Nisan  which  is
Xanthicus  as  the  first  month  for  their  festivals,  leading  forth  the

5367


YEAR

this  are  the  regulations  of  the  Mishnah  which  (Rcsk
hashshdna,  1  1)  distinguishes  four  commencements  of  the
year,  of  which  the  ist  of  Elul,  the  new  year  for  the
tithing  of  cattle,  and  the  ist  of  Shebat,  the  new  year
for  the  fruit  of  fruit-trees,  may  be  left  out  of  accoflnt,
as  being  merely  the  terms  with  reference  to  which
accurate  reckoning  of  sacred  dues  was  fixed.  What  is
important  to  notice  here  is  that  the  ist  of  Nisan  is  there
given  as  the  new  year  for  kings  and  for  the  sacred  feasts
(that  is,  as  in  Josephus,  for  religious  affairs),  whilst  the
ist  of  Tishri  is  the  new  year  for  the  years,  for  the
Sabbatical  years,  for  the  years  of  Jubilee,  for  tree-plant
ings  and  vegetables  (and  so  for  the  enumeration  of  the
years).  Hence  the  rabbinical  formula  explains  itself  :
"  Nisan  is  the  first  of  the  months  of  the  year,  but
Tishri  is  the  beginning  of  the  year."  l  From  that  day
to  the  present  the  ist  of  Tishri  has  continued  to  be
New  Year's  Day,  and  thus  it  is  correct  to  say  that  the
reckoning  of  the  year  according  to  the  vernal  era,
which  was  adopted  by  the  Jews  in  the  exile  from  the
Babylonians  and  afterwards  received  the  sanction  of  P,
was  only  an  episode  —  a  large  one  it  is  true,  from  the
sixth  to  the  last  century  B.C.  —  in  the  history  of  the
Hebrew  and  Jewish  Calendar.

Throughout  all  these  changes  the  year  had  remained
solar.  Owing  to  the  very  absence  of  any  definite  in
flexible  rule,''1  —  which,  had  it  existed  in  the  early  times,
must  necessarily  have  been  incomplete  and  inaccurate
—  for  the  insertion  of  the  intercalary  months,  the  year
was  saved  from  becoming  a  vague  year.  This  great
advantage  was  purchased,  it  is  true,  at  some  cost  ;  it
made  the  year  of  variable  length,  according  as  a  month
had  been  inserted  or  not,  and  according  to  the  number
of  months  of  twenty-nine  days  and  thirty  days  respec
tively  contained  in  it  ;  3  and  the  ist  of  Nisan,  like  New
Year's  Day,  the  ist  of  Tishri,  did  not  always  occur  at
precisely  the  same  point  of  time  but  varied  within  a
limited  period,  just  as  the  yearly  Christian  festivals  now
(Easter,  Ascension,  Whitsunday)  are  not  fixed  but
movable  feasts.

The  same  peculiarities  are  still  displayed  by  the  Jewish  year
even  after  the  adoption  of  a  special  rule  for  intercalation.  Even
at  as  late  a  date  as  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  it  was
the  part  of  the  Sanhedrin  in  each  individual  case  to  decide  on
the  ground  of  direct  observation  whether  the  insertion  of  a
thirteenth  month  was  required  or  not,  just  as  also  the  visibility
of  the  crescent  moon  decided  whether  or  not  the  month  had
ended  on  the  twenty-ninth  day.  The  intercalary  month  was
introduced  after  Adar  and  before  N  isan,  and  the  decision  as  to
the  insertion  (~)O>)  of  a  month  and  the  conversion  of  the  year
into  an  intercalary  year  (n~n>2  '"UC'),-1  was  effected  in  the  course
of  the  year  itself,  often  not  till  the  month  Adar,  and  even  then
sometimes  not  till  after  the  feast  of  Purim,  —  in  other  words
hardly  fourteen  days  before  the  beginning  of  the  intercalary
month,  which  also  bore  the  name  of  Adar  (TIKI,  '3B;ri  "HX,  or


Hebrews  from  Egypt  in  this  month  ;  he  also  made  the  year  to
begin  from  it  as  regards  all  the  solemnities  of  divine  worship,
though  as  to  buying  and  selling  and  all  other  affairs  he  preserved
the  ancient  order  '  (Mu>u<nr)s  6e  rov  Ni<ra»>,  os  e<rn  Eac#i/c6s,  piTJra.
irpwroi'  firi  TOUS  eoprais  aipure  Kara  TOVTOV  <f  Aiyiin-rou  TOVS
'K/Jpatou?  npoayayiiii'.  OVTOS  £'  avrtu  *cat  Trpb?  a7ra<ras  ras  eis  TO
9eiov  Ti|uas  ^px61'-  f"'1  nevroi.  ye  Trpacrec?  (cai  <oi>os  KOJ.  TJJV  aAAtji'

5cOlKTJ<7ll/  TQV  7TptUTOI>  KO(T^OV  Oie^uAa£e).

1  rue'rt  rve'jo  KI.I  ".e-m  n:ern  'srin1?  prm  tein  jo*:-

2  No  such  rule  can  be  found,  as  Klostermrmn  has  supposed,
in  the  institution  of  the  year  of  jubilee. As  any  evidence  that
the  precepts  regarding  it  were  ever  observed  is  wholly  wanting.
the best theory  —  supposing, what  is  not very  probable, that
yflfrfl  means  intercalation  —  is  that  the  idea  was,  by  means  of  an
artificial  expedient,  introduced  as  an  afterthought,  to  bring  into
conformity  with  the  solar  year  the  old  year  which  was  errone
ously  assumed  to  have  been  lunar. What  P  has  to  tell  about
the  year  of  jubilee  is  learned  theory  merely,  that  was  never
realised  in  practice.

3  The  rule,  naturally,  was  that  each  year  ought  to  have  six
months  of  twenty-nine  days  and  six  months  of  thirty  day*  (ep
Bk.  of  F.noch  78  is./);  it  is,  however, assumed  to  be  po-

in  the  Mishnah  ^Artikhin  22)  that  a  year  may  have  as  t.
four  months,  or  on  the  other  hand  as  many  as  eight  months,  of
thirty  days  each. The  length  of  the  year  thus  varied  from  352
to  356  days,  an  intercalary  year  from  382  to  386  days.
*  An  ordinary  year  was  called  ntJ'E'fl  H)ff.

5368


YEAR

Jewish  tradition  hands  down  a  number  of  criteria
whereby  to  decide  whether  a  month  requires  to  be
inserted  or  not  ;  but  in  all  cases  the  decisive  considera
tion  is  this,  that  the  passover,  which  has  to  be  celebrated
at -full  moon  in  Nisan  (i4th  Nisan),  must  not  come
before  the  vernal  equinox,  but  must  be  celebrated  when
the  sun  is  in  Aries  (fv  Kpiip  TOV  ijXiov  KatfeoTtDros ;  Jos.
Ant.  iii.  10 5).  Of  course  the  Jews  of  that  period  had
arrived  by  practice,  if  they  had  not  already  learned  it
from  the  Greeks  who  had  long  been  acquainted  with  the
eight-years'  cycle  (the  o/craerrjpts),  at  the  generalisation
that,  broadly  speaking,  an  intercalary  month  became
necessary  thrice  every  eight  years.  Hut  ultimately,  when
regulating  their  calendar  in  the  fourth  century,  they
adopted  from  the  Greeks  the  nineteen-years'  cycle  (frvfa-
KaideKaerTipis).  dating  from  the  Athenian  astronomer
Melon  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  in  accordance  with
which  seven  out  of  every  nineteen  years  (the  3rd,  6th,
8th,  nth,  i4th,  zyth,  and  igth)  require  an  intercalary
month.  When  this  rule  is  followed,  the  difference  in
nineteen  years  amounts  only  to  a  little  over  two  hours.
The  Jews  of  the  present  day  still  adhere  to  this  Metonic
calendar.

Alongside  of  the  division  of  the  year  into  months,
immemorial  usage  sanctioned  a  division  by  the  seasons


ZABDI

also,  and  events  were  dated  in  accordance  with  the
characteristic  occupations  of  the  successive  periods  of
the  year  (thus,  barley  harvest  in  28.219  Huthl22
Judith  82;  wheat  harvest  Gen.  30 14  Judg.  15 1  Ruth
2  23  ;  the  ingathering  of  green  crops,  Am.  7  i  [see  Wellh.
ad  loc.~\  •  the  ripening  of  the  earliest  clusters  of  grapes,
Nu.  1820).

Usually  only  two  seasons  of  the  year  were  formally  dis
tinguished — '  summer  and  winter '  [autumn]  (r|"irr)  J"J3,  Gen.
822  Ps.  74  17  Zech.  14s,  cp  Is.  186)  or  'winter  and  harvest
time'  (TSJ31  r\-\h,  Am.  815  Prov.  204),  or  'cold  and  heat'  Op
Qni,  Gen.  822),  or  '  sowing  and  reaping '  P'SJJ^  jn.T>  Gen.  8  22),
or  'ploughing  and  reaping'  (Ti'pl  B^'in,  Gen.  456  Ex.  34  21).
Winter  also  (WD,  Cant.  2  n)  is  specially  mentioned.

Cp  especially  Dillmann's dissertation on the calendar  (sec

MONTH,  §  end),  We.  Prol.  112-114,  Keste,  go/.,  IJG,  passim ;

Klo. Pentateuch, 419-447 ('Ueber die

10.  Bibliography,  kalendarische  Bedeutung  des  Jobel-
jahres');  Schurer,  G/K  1  26-33  ((3)32-40),

and  623-634  (I3)  745-760) ;  A.~AT(3>,  325-326,  and  the  chrono
logical  treatises,  especially  that  of  Ideler,  referred  to  under
CHRONOLOGY,  §  85.  K.  M.

YELLOW.  For  (i)  nh>',  sdkub,  Lev.  183032.  see
COLOURS,  §  7  ;  and  for  (2)  p^pT.  ytrakrak,  Ps.  68  13,  see  §  n
and  cp  §  5.

YOKE  (tty),  i  S.  67. See  AGRICULTURE,  §  4.


Z


ZAANAIM,  THE  PLAIN  OF,  AV,  with  Zaanannim
in  mg.  and  RV  text  —  mg.  BEZAANANNIM  \q.v.~\  —  (C'3V^3  }"l7K
[Kt.],  C"331'S3  X  [Kr.],  translated  Tr\eov£KTOvvT<i>v  [B],  ava-
iravonevtav  [AL],  ^J.^-V  _2>  »  [Pesh.],  Sennim  [Vg.]).

The  nomadic  journeys  of  Heber  the  Kenite  extended
to  '  the  plain  of  Zaanaim,'  or  —  the  only  correct  render
ing  so  far  as  p\st  is  concerned  —  'the  oak  (or,  sacred
tree?)  of  Bezaanannim,1  Judg.  4n  (cp  MOREH,  THE
PLAIN  OK).  It  is  against  AV's  interpretation  that
according  to  rule  p^x  ('  oak')  would  require  the  article;
on  the  other  hand,  such  a  name  as  BEZAANANNIM  (q.v.}
is  against  all  analogy.  See  L'rit.  Bib.  T.  K.  C.

ZAANAN  (|3XV),  M'-  1  "t  ;  see  ZENAN.
ZAANANNIM,  THE  OAK  IN  (


/ucoAa  (cai  /3ecre;u.ia>'  [B],  |U.r)Awi/  K.  3<?crera.i/i/i  [A"],  but  (oAa/x
o-eei'ai'etju  [L],  Pesh.  vemen  sail  am  [Pesh.]  ;  Saananim  [Vg.]),
RV  Josh.  1933  (also  in  Judg.  4n);  AV  (Josh.  I.e.).  arbitrarily,
'[from]  Allon  to  Zaanannim,'  RV«H,r-  (ll.cc.)  'the  oak  (or
terebinth)  of  Bezaanannim  '  ;  mentioned  in  the  definition  of
the  W.  boundary  of  Naphtali,  Josh.  11)33  (CP  ADAMI-NEKEB).
See  BEZAANANXI.M.

ZAAVAN(pTltt,  in  Sam.  }L")T  ;  zoyKAM  [BADEL]),
b.  Ezer,  b.  Seir  the  Horite,  Gen.  8(127  ;  i  Ch.  142  (AV
ZAVAN  ;  &ZOYK&N  [A],  Z&Y&N  [!••])•

ZABAD  ("QT,  abbrev.  for  -inna|  ;  see  NAMES,
§  50,  ZEBADIAH  ;  zAB<\A  [XAL]).'  i.  A  Judahite,
descended  from  the  Egyptian  or  Misrite  JARIIA  (q.if.  ),
i  Ch.  2  s6/.  (fa/3e5  [BA]).  Under  the  designation
'  Zabad  ben  Ahlai  '  he  appears  in  i  Ch.  11  41  as  the  first
of  the  sixteen  additional  names  in  the  Chronicler's  list
of  David's  heroes,  as  compared  with  2  S.  288-39  (fa/3er
[BX],  fa/3ar  [A]).  See  AHLAI,  and  note  that  -Six,
like  m',  occurs  as  a  corruption  of  Svenv  (Che.).
Perhaps  va  in  v.  20  should  be  -137.  A  southern  clan-
name  is  expected  (see  SHUTHELAH).

2.  Mentioned  among  the  b'ne  EPHRAIM  (§  12)  i  Ch.
?2i  (fa,3e5  [BA],  om.  L  ?).

3.  One  of  the  assassins  who  slew  Joash  (2  Ch.  2426  ;
fajSeX  [B],  fa/3e0  [A],  fa/3a0  [L])  ;  see  JOZACHAR  and
JEHO/.ADAD.

4-6.  In  list  of  those  with  foreign  wives  (see  EZRA  i.  §  5  end),
viz.—  4.  One  of  the  b'ne  ZATTU  (g.v.\  Ezra  1027  (£a/3<xSaj3  |B])
=  i  Esd.  928  SABATUS,  RV  SABATHUS  (<ra/3a0os  [BA]).  5.  One
of  the  b'ne  HASHUM,  Ezra  10  33  (£a/3eA  [BN],  fa/Sfiai  [L])  =
i  Esd.  933  BANNAIA,  RV  SABANNEUS  (<ra/3a»'i/aious  [B],  ^ar.
[A],  £a/3Sia  [L]).  6.  One  of  the  b'ne  NEBO  (f.v.)  Ezra  1043

5369


(o-eSe^  [BN]  om.  A)=iEsd.933,  Zabadaias,  RV  Zabadeas

(saMa«S[BA]).

ZABADEANS,  RV  Zabadseans,  an  Arabian  tribe,
living  near  Damascus,  which  was  attacked  and  spoiled
by  Jonathan  (i  Mace.  12si  ;  z&BaAiMOYC  [VA],  -eoyc
[N]  ;  sUbidtive  [Push.]).  Josephus  (Ant.  xiii.  5io),  by
a  very  natural  confusion,  calls  them  Nabatruans.  In  the
Mtgillath  Tdanlth,  §  33,  it  is  said  that  '  on  the  seven
teenth  day  of  Adar  the  heathen  rose  up  against  the
remnant  of  the  scribes,  in  the  city  of  Chalchis  and
'N-QT  n'3  (in  J.  Taa>ii~f/i,2i3,  pirn)  ;  but  there  was
deliverance  to  the  house  of  Israel. ' J  This  is  referred  to
the  incident  in  i  Mace,  by  Derenbourg  (Hist.  Pal.  99 /. )
and  Wellhausen  (Phar.  it.  Sad.  58)  ;  but  not  by  Schiirer
(GJlr\  187).  Chalchis(c1p'?D,etc.)isthemodern'^wyara/
about  7  m.  clue  E.  of  it  is  ez-Zebedani,  a  town  and
district  6|  hrs.  N\\r.  of  I  )amascus  on  the  way  to  Baalbek,
and  on  the  W.  slope  of  the  Anti-libanus  (cp  ABANA).
It  is  therefore  extremely  probable  that  in  the  modern
ez-Zebedani  we  have  a  trace  of  the  former  existence  of
an  Arabian  tribe  of  Zabadeans  in  that  district.  The
name  occurs  not  unfrequently  in  this  region,  for  there  is
a  Kefr  Zebad  a  short  distance  NW.  of  ez-Zebedani,  and
forms  of  the  same  name  are  often  met  with  on  inscriptions
from  Tadmor  and  its  environs.2  s.  A.  c.

ZABBAI  ("3T,  either  miswritten  for  ZACCAI,  or  from
Zabdai  or  ZEBADIAH  ;  see  §  52,  and  cp  perhaps  *3T  in
Palm,  [cle  Vogue,  Svr.  Centr.  28]  ;  z<\Boy  [BXA]).

1.  One  of  the b'ne BEBAI \q.i>.\ Ezra  10  28  (frflovO  [L})  =
i  Esd.  929  JOSABAD,  RV  JOZA  Hnus  (s"a/35o?  [B],  u^a|3a&>c  [A],
fafiovO  [L]).

2.  Father  of  Baruch,  who  helped  to  repair  the  city  wall  (Xeh.

3  20,  fa|3pou  [N],  pa£/9ai  [L]). The  reading  of  the  Kr.  is  ZACCAI
(<2l),  which  is  supported  by  Pesh.  and  Vg.  (ZACHAI).

"ZABBUD  (-J3T.  Kt-).  Ezra 8 14-  EV. See  ZABUD,  2.

ZABDEUS  (zABAAiOC  [BA]),  i  Esd.  921  =  Ezra  10 so,
ZEBADIAH,  9.

ZABDI  ("':|3T,  either  a  gentilic,  of  which  there  are
two  expanded  forms  ZABDIEL  and  ZEBADIAH,  or,  if
these  names  have  a  religious  reference,  a  shortened  form,
produced  by  omitting  7S  or  IV  ;  note  that  Zabdi,  i,  is

1  See  Dalman,  Aram.  Dialektf>roben,  334  (Leipsic,  1896).

2  On  a  Greek  inscription  (Waddington,  2597)  mention  is  made
of  oi  ex  yei/oOt  <Ja/3Si/3ii)Af«ji',  a  family  whose  name  was  a  com
pound  of  Zabdi  and  the  Palmyrene  deity  Bd.

5370


ZABDIEL

a  Zarhite  (Che. ).  Cp  the  Syr.  Zabdai  in  NT  for  Zebe-
dee  ;  fa/35[e>  [BAL]).

i.  b.  Zerah  of  Judah,  an  ancestor  of  ACHAN  (Josh.  7  i  17 /.,
£a/x/3p[<:]i l  [HFJ,  £<x/3pi  [A]);  in  i  Ch.  26  his  name  appears  as
ZIMKI  (q.v.).

•2.  Of  BENJAMIN  (§  9),  assigned  to  the  b'ne  SHIMEI  (q.v.);
i  Ch.  8  19  (£r/3«t  [L]).

3.  The  SHIPH.MITE  (i  Ch.  2727  ; 'DBB'ri, faxpet o roO <rffyi>ei
[B], fa/3«i  .  . . <r«(#>n [A], £a|3£i .V. o-a<|)anit [L]), who was
over  the  vineyard  produce  in  David  s  time,  perhaps  a  native  of
SHEPHAM  (q.v.).

4.  b.  Asaph, an  ancestor  of  MATTANIAH  (Neh.  11  17,  om.
B,X*A,  £e\p[e]i  [NC-amg.  *UP-L])  see  ZICHRI  (no.  n).

ZABDIEL  PN^I,  either  an  expansion  of  the
gentilic  ZABDI  [y.v.],  or  a  religious  name  =  'gift  of  God,'  §§  21,
27  ;  the  attribution  ofjashobeam  [see  i]  to  the  b'ne  Perez — i.e.,
probably  [see  PEREZ]  to  the  Zarephathites—  and  the  designation
of  Zabdiel,  2,  as  '  son  of  the  [southern]  Gileadites  '  [see  below],
and  of  Zabdiel,  3,  as  an  Arabian,  together  with  many  plausible
parallels,  favour  the  former  view  [Che.] ;  ^a/36[e]tr)\  [BAL]).

1.  Father  of  JASHOBEAM  (i  Ch.2?2).

2.  'Overseer'  of  the  priests,  temp.  Nehemiah  (Neh.
11  14). He  is  designated  (at  first  sight  very  strangely)
D'Vnan-ja  (RV  '  the  son  of  HAGGEDOI.IM,'  RVm«- •  one
of  the  great  men  ' ;  AV '  the  son  of  [one  of]  the  great
men '  ; fiaSiijX [B],

/j.€ya\(i}v  [Nc-ams-  L],

It  can,  however,  be  shown  (cp  SHAPHAT,  3)  that  there  was  a
Gilead  in  the  Negeb,  and  the  case  of  n*Sl3  ('  Gedaliah '),
from  n'lSj — i.e.,  *i?3i  'the  Gileadite  ' — justifies  us  in  reading
DHJ??jirrj3j  ' son  °f  tne  Gileadites  '  (for  parallels  in  Neh.  3  8,  see
PERFUMER).  See  Crit.  Bib.  (Che.).

3.  '  The  Arabian,'  who  took  off  the  head  of  Alexander
Balas  and  sent  it  to  Ptolemy  (i  Mace.  11 17  :  fa/35i7;\  6
apat//  [ANY],  ^sa'T  [Pesh.]  ;  2  Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  48  ;  fa/3«-
Xos). Possibly  the  Diodes  of  Diod.  (Fr.  xxxii.  10 1),  see
IMALCUE.

ZABUD  (T13T,  a  name  belonging  to  the  same  group
as  Zabdi,  Zabdiel,  Zebadiah,  and  in  its  origin  therefore  most
probably  a  clan-name  [Che.],  but  probably  understood  in  later
times  as  meaning  'given  [by  God]'  ;  cp  §  56 ;  the  fem.  form  is
ZEBUDAH.  The  correct  reading,  however,  both  of  i  and  of  2
may  be  ZACCUR).  3

1.  b.  Xathan,  priest  (AV  '  principal  officer  '  ;  cp  2  S.
818, AV 'chief rulers') and 'friend' (i.e. , 'chief
courtier  '),  of  king  Solomon,  i  K.  4st  (fa/3oi>0  [B],  fa/3/3.
E-^]' faX°"P  [L] — i.e., -ii3T which is the reading of
some  MSS  ; cp  jasj). (5,  however  (except  A,  which
adds  upevs),  omits  'priest.' Probably  'friend'  (nj?n  ;  on
the  pointing  see  HUSHAI,  n.  i)  is  a  gloss  on  jna,  or,  as
•we  should  rather  read,  ?3b  (see  MINISTER  [CHIEF]);  cp
the  paraphrastic substitute  for n':n3 (rather  C'JDD)  as
applied  to  sons  of  David, in i  Ch.  1817. The  whole
passage  (i  K.  4s^6a)  is  thus read by Klostermann,

'  And  Zabud,  son  of  Nathan,  the  king's  friend  [njn  ;  or
' '  adjutant  "=  JDD?],  his  (i.e. ,  Azariah's)  brother, was  chief
of  the  palace'  ;  see  AHISHAR,  but  cp  Crit.  Bib.  for
another  explanation  of  -insrrm  (ninrx).  T.  K.  c.

2.  A  Jew  belonging  to  the  b'ne  Bigvai, who  came
with  Ezra  from  Babylon,  Ezra  8 14  (EVZABBUD,  follow
ing the consonants  of  the Kt. 1131  [Ba.  Ginsb.  ]  and
the vowels of the Kr. -nsi  ; fafiovd [A] ; om. B  ;
faxxovp  [L] ; cp  L  in  no.  i)=i  Esd.  84of,  where  for
'  and  Zabud  '  we  read  '  the  [son]  of  ISTALCURUS  '  [EV]
(i<TTa.Ka\Kov  [B],  6  TOU  iffTa\Kovpov  [A],  but  /col  faicxovp
[L]),  a  monstrous  name  made  up  of  '  Iztal '  (a  misread
ing of  -on, 'and Zabud') and '  ZACCUR  ' (nnt), the
reading  of  the  Kr.  and  EVm£-  in  Ezra.

1  The  ft  is  to  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  in  JAMBRI,
fi«crr)ju/3pi.'a.  etc.,  the  confusion  of  3  and  a  is  phonetic,  of  T  and
•1  graphic  (cp  SBOT,  'Chron.'  ad  lac.,  and  see  Dr.  TBS
p.  Ixviii).

-  Cp  perhaps  with  this  the  Palm,  name  S^'T  (Mordt.  Beitr.  z.
Kund.  Palm.  no.  6q).

3  Zabud,  i,  is  the  '  Kaxovp  son  of  Nathan  6  o-vju/3ouAos '  men
tioned  in  i  K.  2  46  h  (B)  where  82,  93,  108  etc.  read  £aK\ovp,  52,
55,  etc.,  £dxovp.  Note  that  in  4  s_/?  £axovp  is  read  by  82,  108,
and  £a.K\ovp  by  93.  See  COUNSELLOR.

5371


ZACHARIAS

ZABULON  (zABoyAcoN  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.4i3  15  AV,
RV  ZEBULON.

ZACCAI  ('3T  written  '3T  ;  abbrev.  from  ZACHARIAH,
§  52,  cp  HAGGAI),  the  name  of  a  post  -exilic  family;  Ezra  2  9
(&KXOV  [B],  -Xa.v  [Avid.],  -Xaiou  [L]),  Neh.  7  14  (frOov  [BKJ.'faic-
\ovp  [A],  fa«xaiou  [L]).  In  i  Esd.  5  12  it  is  |AV]  COKBE,  or
[RV]  CHUKHE  (\op?e  [BA],  fa^ai  [L]).  Zaccai  is  the  Kr.  also
in  Neh.  820,  where  K.tb.  has  ZAUBAI  (q.v.).

ZACCH^US  (zAKXAIOC  [AV;  Ti.  WH],  see
ZACCAI).

1.  AV  Zaccheus,  an  officer  belonging  to  Judas  the  Maccabee
(2  Mace.  10  19),  identified  by  some  with  the  Zacharias  of  i  Mace.
656.

2.  A  chief  publican  (dpxtreXoii'Tjs)  who  received  Jesus
on  his  entry  into  Jericho  (Lk.  19  i-io). There  is  much
picturesqueness in the  narrative  ; even if only  a  re
flection  of  the  more  historical story  in  Lk.  627-32, no
one  would  wish  to  lose  the  beautiful  picture  of  the  care
of  Jesus for the meanest and most despised. The
improbabilities  can  hardly  be  denied. The  only  com
plete  parallel  to  Lk.  19s  is  in  Jn.  147,'  which  occurs  in
the ill-attested narrative of Nathanael. Nor is the
crowd  of  curious  followers  (v.  3) natural; it  was  the
object of  Jesus  on  this  journey  to  avoid observation.
Zacchaeus's solemn act of  atonement  for  injustice is
also very abruptly introduced, nor can one easily
believe  that  Jesus,  in  his  present  circumstances,  would
have  openly  announced  his  intention  of  lodging  with  a
publican (see PUBLICAN). Zacchoeus's name, too
(=pure,  innocent),  as  Keim  (Jesu  von  Naz.  849)  points
out,  is  suspiciously  prophetic  of  his  act  of  repentance.
To  identify  him  either  with  NATHANAEL  (q.v.  )  or  with
Paul  (the  little)  does  not  help  us  at  all. On  Lk.  194,
see  SYCOMORE.

A  late  tradition  (Clem.  Rec.)  makes  Zacchaeus  a  comrade  of
Peter.  T.  K.  C.

ZACCUR  (1-13T,  see  NAMES,  §§  32,  52  ;  but,  the
names  with  which  Zaccur  and  ZICHRI  [y."'.  ]  are  grouped  being
originally  ethnics,  it  is  plain  that  Zaccur  and  Zichri,  too,  are
ethnics  which  have  been  converted  into  personal  names  ;  cp
ZACHER,  ZECHARIAH,  and  see  below  ;  £aK\ovp  [BNAL]).

1.  Father  of  SHA.MMUA(  =  Shimei),  of  REUBEN  (§  ii/i)  ;  Nu.
13  4  [P]  (&KXVP  [HJ,  ^pov  [A],  £a.  Xovp  [F],  fryxovp  [L]).

2.  AV  Zacchur,  a  Simeonite,  brother  of  Hainmuel  =  Jerah-
meel,  and  Shimei  =  Shimeoni  ;  i  Ch.  426  (om.  B,  £a\ovp  [L]).

3.  A  Merarite  Levite,  brother  of  SHOHAM3=Mose,  and  'Ibri  =
'Arabi—  i.e.,  N.  Arabian  (i  Ch.  2427).

4.  An  Asaphite  Levite,  brother  of  Nethaniah  =  Ethani,  and
Asharelah  =  JizreeK or 'Jezreelite' (i  Ch.  25  2  10  ; <rcucxovs,
£axx°v6  [B])"  ;  see  ZICHRI, u.

5.  Ezra  8  14  EVmK-  (fa/c^oup  [L]). See  ZABUD,  2.

6.  b.  Imri  (  =  Amariah  =  Jerahmeel)  in  list  of  wall-builders  (see
NEHEMIAH,  §  if.  ;  EZRA  ii.,  §§  16  [i],  15  d),  Neh.  82  (<Ja/3aoup


7.  Levite  signatory  to  the  covenant,  grouped  with  SHEREBIAH
and  SHEBANIAH,  both  ethnics  (see  EZRA  i.,  §  7)  ;  Neh.  10  12  [13]
(£*W  [B],  frKX<ap  [A],  <raXXu,p  [„?]).

8.  b.  Mattaniah  (i.e.,  Ethani  or  Temani),  and  father  of  HANAN
(q.v.)  ;  Neh.  13  13  (<ra/cXovp  [L]).

A  writer  in  J'SBA  has  suggested  that  Zechariah  and  the
related  names  may  be  connected  with  Zakkara,  the  name  (of
uncertain  pronunciation)  of  allies  of  the  Purusati  (  =  Peli5tim?  —
see  PHILISTINES,  §  3).  But  if  so,  why  do  we  not  find  any  of
these  names  given  to  Israelites  of  central  Palestine  (see  DOR,
§  2)?  It  is  more  probable  that  Zacher  (Zecher),  Zaccur,  and
Zichri  with  Zechariah  were  originally  the  clan  -names  Zerah
and  Zarhi  respectively.  Cp  ZERAH.  T.  K.  C.

ZACHARIAHirr-QT). i.  2  K.  14z9  158-12
and  (2)  2  K.  182  :  see  ZECHARIAH,  2,  3.

1  in  RV,


AV  ZACHARIAS,  9.
Zachariah


tas)  Mt.  2835  Lk.  11  51

ZACHARIAS, in NT RV
[BAL  ;  Ti.  WH]).

1.  A  priest  (i  Esd.  1  s). See  ZECHARIAH,  19.

2.  The  name  in  i  Esd.  115  corresponding  to  HEM  AN  in  the
I1  passage  2  Ch.  35  15  (d5L  ai/u.ai'=  Heman).

3.  RV  ZARAIAS  (q.v.)  in  i  Esd.  58  (fapaiou  [B],  (Japeou  [A],

1  Plummer,  indeed  (St.  Luke,  434),  thinks  that  'there  is  no
need  to  suppose  that  Jesus  had  supernatural  knowledge  of  the
name.  .  .  .  Jesus  might  hear  the  people  calling  to  Zacchaeus,
or  might  inquire.'  So  Weiss  (Lel'en  Jcsu,  ~1  417),  '  Jesus  ^easily
learned  the  name  and  character  of  the  notorious  man.'  But
this  is  hardly  in  accordance  with  the  intention  of  the  evangelist,
or  with  the  natural  impression  of  readers.

5372


ZACHARIAS

0-apouou  [L]). AV,  following  the  Geneva  Bible,  gives  ZACHARIAS.
See  SERAIAH,  8.

4.  i  Esd.  6  i  7  3,  see  ZECHARIAH,  i.

5.  i  Esd.  83044. 6.  it.  v.  37  (£axap«u  [B]). 7. i  Esd.  927;
see  ZECHARIAH,  20,  21,  22.

8. Father of JOSEPH (temp. Judas Maccabaeus), i  Mace.
5  18  56-62.

9.  Son  of  Barachias  ;  according  to  Mt.  2835,  the  last
Jewish  martyr  of  the  pre-Christian  period.  All  the
innocent  blood  shed  on  the  land  (firl  TTJS  yrjs)  from
that  of  Abel  to  that  of  Zacharias,  son  of  Barachias
('whom  ye  slew  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  altar,'
see  RV)  is  to  be  visited,  says  Jesus,  '  on  this  generation.'
Lk. ,  however  (list),  is  without  'son  of  Barachias,'  and
Jerome  says  that  '  in  the  Gospel  used  by  the  Nazarenes
[the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews],  instead  of
son  of  Barachias  we  find  written  son  of  Joiada'  (in  I.e.
Mt. ).  We  may,  therefore,  disregard  the  artificial
Gnostic  and  patristic  legends,  which  state  (see  Prot-
evang.  Jac.  23  /". ,  and  cp  Keim,  Jesus  of  Nazara,  2209)
that  Herod,  who  supposed  John  to  be  the  Messiah,
murdered  Zacharias  the  father  of  John  the  Baptist  in
the  temple  by  the  altar  of  sacrifice  (see  10) ;  and  not
less  the  hypothesis  that  Jesus  refers  prophetically  to
Zacharias  the  son  of  Baruch  (but  Niese  has  Bapeis),
who  was  killed  '  in  the  middle  of  the  temple '  in  the
first  Roman  war  (Jos.  BJ\\.  64).  It  is  possible,  how
ever,  that  '  Barachias '  means  the  father  of  Zechariah
the  well-known  prophet,  and  that  it  is  a  mere  clerical
error  for  'Joiada';1  possible,  too,  that  the  whole
passage  has  been  filled  out  by  a  later  writer  who  knew
of  the  horrible  murder  mentioned  by  Josephus.  This
assumes  that  Jesus  really  meant  Zechariah  b.  Jehoiacla
(ZECHARIAH,  15).  But  the  reason  given  for  the  phrase
'from  Abel  to  Zechariah  b.  Jehoiada'  (that  Chronicles
is  the  last  book  in  the  Jewish  Canon)  seems  very
inadequate  (see  GOSPELS,  §  150).  According  to  N.
Schmidt  (JBL  1922,  n.  i),  Mt.  23  33  once  formed  part
of  an  'Apocalypse  of  Jesus'  (cp  Mt.  24)  which  cannot
have  been  written  long  before  the  end  of  the  first
century  (cp  We.  7/G<3>  366;  Skizzen,  6  [1899]  20  ff.}.
If  so,  the  reference  to  Zechariah  b.  Baruch  was  full  of
significance  to  the  original  readers.

10.  The  father  of  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST  (q.v.),  men
tioned  only  in  Lk.  1 5  8-23  39-79  82.  He  was  of  the
course  of  Abijah  (see  Schur.,  Hist.ii.lzriff.),  and  his
home  was  in  an  unnamed  '  city  of  Judah. '  According  to
a  comparatively  early  tradition  the  '  city '  is  'Ain  Karim
(see  BETH-HACCEREM),  and  Mar  Zakaryd  is  the  precise
spot  where  Zacharias  dwelt ;  even  recently  Schick  has
spoken  a  word  for  this  tradition  ( 7.DP  V  22  [1899]  goff. }.
But  the  fact  that  no  name  is  given  most  probably  indi
cates  that  the  narrative  in  Lk.  1  had  but  recently  arisen
when  it  was  admitted  by  Lk.  into  his  Gospel  ;  the
narrator  hoped  to  be  able  to  supply  the  name  later  (cp
an  analogous  case  in  i  S.  13  i,  if  H.  P.  Smith's  view  is
correct).  Though  JUTTAH  (q.v.}  is  philologically  and
otherwise  improbable,  'Ain  Karim  (Schick)  and  Hebron
(Ew. ,  Keim)  are  also  baseless  fancies.  From  Lk.  1  3o
we  should  expect  some  city  near  the  desert  to  be  meant.
It  was  in  the  temple,  however,  that  Zacharias  is  said  to
have  received  a  divine  announcement  of  the  birth  of  a
son  ;  the  announcement  is  made  in  terms  partly  re
sembling  those  used  to  Manoah's  wife  in  Judg.  13s/
Zacharias  craved  a  sign,  and  is  punished  by  dumbness
until  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  When  the  child  is
born,  the  father  names  him  John  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  Is).
The  Protev.  Jac.  seeks  to  improve  upon  this  by  making
Zacharias  the  high  priest :  he  enters  the  Holy  of  Holies
in  his  sacred  attire.  We  are  not  told  that  it  was  merely

'  a  voice'  (Bath  kol ;  cp  Mt.  3 17)  that  Zacharias  heard  ;
the  parallel  of  the  oracle  given  to  John  Hyrcanus,  the
high  priest,  as  he  was  offering  incense  alone  in  the
temple  (Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  103),  is  therefore  imperfect.
The  long  stay  of  Zacharias  in  the  temple,  and  the
surprise  which  it  produced  (Lk.  I2i),  may,  however,
1  Cp  the  inaccuracy  of  the  Tg.  on  Lam.  2  20  (ZECHARIAH,  15)


ZADOK

be  paralleled  by  the  long  stay  of  Simon  the  'Righteous
in  the  temple  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  when  he
prayed  that  the  sanctuary  might  not  Ije  destroyed
(Talm.  Jer.  }'oma,5y).  Cp  INCENSE,  §  7,  n.  On  the
legendary  death  of  Zacharias,  see  above,  9.  Cp  JOHN
THE  BAPTIST.  T.  K.  c.

ZACHER,  or,  as  RV,  ZECHER  (-QJ  ;  ZAXOYP  [B].
fa«x-  [A],  f'Xpi  [L]),  i  Ch.  8  31^,  called,  in  i  Ch.  9  37  ZECHARIAH
(g.v.,  6).  On  the  possible  ethnic  character  of  Zecher  see
ZACCUR.


1.  The  Zadok
of  David.


ZADOK  (pm,  once  p'lS,  i  K.  126  ;  'just,'  §  56/.  ;
cp  JEHOZADAK,  and  see  SADUUCEES.!  Similar  in  meaning  is  the
form  Zadduk  [plis],  which  is  not  unfrequent  in  post-biblical
times,  cp  Atflth,  4  56  ;  Strack,  ad  loc.  ;  Lag.  Nam.  225  ff.  Sad-
duk  is  the  form  generally  presupposed  by  ©HNAI.  [O-O.&&OVK]  ;
<ra6<uK,  (B^KA  in  nos.  2-5  [and  BA  in  2  S.  with  exception  of  2  S.
81781  Ch.  29  22  A],  is  somewhat  less  common.  Other  variations
are  <raaSovK,  Ezra"  2  [A];  <ra&&ov\,  Ezek.  -40  46  [A];  <ra66oic,
Neh.  11  II  [L],  and  craS&uK,  28.1024-27  [L]  ;  <ra&ovK,  28.817
i  Ch.  6  38  [53]  15n[L],  Neh.  11  ii  [«],  iK..44  [B],  •*,  28.  817
[Al  ;  ia/3oK,  2  S.  15  27  [A].  SADDUC,  RV  SAUDUK  (i  Esd.  8  2  ;
o-aSSovKov  [A])  ;  SAUOC  (4  Esd.  1  i).

i.  Zadok  the  son  of  Ahitub,  a  priest  who  held  a
prominent  place  at  David's  court  and  played  a  great
part  in  securing  the  throne  for  David's
successor.  We  know  nothing  of  his
real  origin,  nor  can  we  say  when  or
how  he  became  priest  in  the  royal  sanctuary  at  Jeru
salem.  We  learn,  however,  from  2  S.  817  ff.  (cp
2023-26,  and  see  Bu.  Ki.  .S'</.  247,  254)  that  he  was
associated  with  Abiathar  (for  the  correct  reading  see
Driver,  TBS  ad  loc.  }  and  with  some  of  David's  own
sons  in  the  priestly  office  at  Jerusalem.  Like  Abiathar
he  was  true  to  his  sovereign  during  Absalom's  revolt  ;
like  him  he  bore  the  ark  of  Yahwe  when  David  was
fleeing  eastward  from  the  royal  city  ;  at  David's  request
he  with  Abiathar  bore  the  palladium  of  Israel  back  to
the  capital,  and  there  with  Abiathar  did  the  work  of  a
spy  and  supplied  the  king  with  information  about  the
designs  of  Absalom  and  the  other  rebels.  So  far  Zadok
had  been  closely  associated  with  that  older  and  greater
priest  who  represented  the  ancient  family  of  the  b'ne
Eli  and  that  sanctuary  at  Shiloh  in  which  they  had
ministered.  In  the  end  he  supplanted  Abiathar
altogether.  For  Zadok  joined  Nathan  the  prophet,
and  Benaiah,  captain  of  the  foreign  guards,  in  the
harem  intrigue  which  set  aside  Adonijah  the  legitimate
heir,  and  placed  Solomon  the  son  of  Bath-sheba  on  the
throne.  Abiathar,  on  the  contrary,  stood  by  Joab,  the
royal  princes,  except  of  course  Solomon,  and  the  rest
of  the  more  conservative  party.  Naturally,  therefore,
when  Solomon  became  king,  it  was  Zadok  who  anointed
him  ;  Abiathar,  on  the  other  hand,  was  banished  to
Anathoth  ;  the  family  of  Eli  forfeited  the  priesthood.
and  the  chief  care  of  the  royal  chapel  or  temple  at
Jerusalem  was  entrusted  to  Zadok  and  his  descendants.
In  their  hands  it  remained  down  to  the  time  of  the
exile  ;  but  we  have  in  i  S.  2ss  /  interesting  evidence
.  that  the  prior  claims  of  the  b'ne  Eli  and  their
2-  Za(i°.  eminence  long  l>efore  Zadok  had  been  heard
and  Ell.  of  %vere  not  forgotten.  The  author  of  the
passage  in  question  probably  belonged  to  the  period  of
the  Deuteronomic  reform.  Like  Jeremiah  (7  12  266)  he
regarded  the  temple  at  Shiloh  as  the  precursor  of  the
temple  at  Jerusalem.  He  felt,  therefore,  that  some
reason  must  be  given  for  the  fact  that  the  family  of
Eli  which  had  officiated  so  long  in  Shiloh  did  not  con
tinue  to  do  so  in  Jerusalem.  Political  grounds  and  the
authority  of  the  king  to  regulate  the  service  in  his  own

1  [There  is  another  view  as  to  the  origin  of  Zadok—  viz.,  that
it  is  a  modification  of  a  gentilic  name.  This  seems  to  be  favoured
by  an  examination  of  the  names  with  which  this  name  is  associ
ated  in  Chron.  and  Neh.  It  will,  however,  be  permissible  to
hold  that  the  Zidkites  (originally,  it  would  appear,  settled  n


meaning  'just,  righteous'  (cp  ZEDEKIAH,  §  i).— T.  K.  c.]
5374


ZADOK


ZALMON


chapel  had  satisfied  the  religious  ideas  of  a  simpler  age,
but  did  not  by  any  means  appear  sufficient  to  one  who
had  imbibed  the  ideas  of  Deuteronomy  and  regarded
the  priesthood  as  directly  subject  to  divine  regulation.
Accordingly  he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  an  anonymous
prophet  the  prediction  that  Eli's  indulgence  of  his
depraved  sons  was  to  be  visited  upon  his  descendants
by  the  loss  of  the  priesthood.  Instead  of  the  b'ne  Eli
Yahwe  was  to  raise  up  a  new  priestly  race,  and  they
were  to  perform  priestly  functions  before  the  anointed
king  of  Judah.  The  new  family  of  priests  was  to  share
in  the  perpetual  endurance  of  the  royal  house.  In
contrast  with  the  Zadokites,  the  b'ne  Eli  were  to  sink
into  obscurity  and  want.  They  were  to  petition  their
rivals  for  the  most  subordinate  offices  of  the  priesthood.
Here  perhaps  the  writer  is  thinking  of  the  priests  at  the
high  places  who  had  been  driven  by  Josiah  from  their
occupation,  and  had  to  depend  for  the  future  on  the
grace  of  the  priests  at  Jerusalem.  True,  the  Deutero-
nomical  code  had  given  the  country  Levites  right  to
sacrifice  at  Jerusalem  (Dt.  18?/. );  but  though  some
provision  was  made  for  them,  the  generous  rate  of  D
proved  impracticable.  See  ELI.

It is in any  case  certain that Ezekiel during the
exile,  in  a  prophecy  which  was  written  about  573  B.  c. ,
vindicated  the  sole  right  of  the  Zadok-


3.  Zadok  and
Ezekiel.


ites  to  the  priesthood. He  draws  the


sharpest  line  of  demarcation  between
the  sons  of  Zadok  and  other  Levites.  In  D  all  Levites
form  an  ideal  unity,  all  have  in  theory  equal  rights.
Ezekiel,  on  the  contrary,  passes  sentence  on  the  mere
Levites,  holding  them  responsible  for  that  worship  on
the  high  places  which  was  to  him  no  better  than
idolatrous.  In  time  to  come  they  are,  he  says,  to  be
debarred  from  '  approaching  '  Yahwe  in  priestly  service.
They  are  to  be  content  with  menial  work,  such  as  the
slaughter  of  victims  and  cooking  their  flesh,  keeping
guard  over  the  temple  doors,  etc. ;  only  such  Levites  as
were  sons  of  Zadok  might  presume  to  lay  the  fat  and
blood  on  the  altar  (Ezek.  44  is/. ).

T\vo  changes  were  yet  to  be  made  in  the  position  of

the  sons  of  Zadok, one  enhancing their prestige, the

_ ,  , . _ other modifying the exclusiveness of

4.  Zadok  in  P.  thdr c]aims Firstt whereas Ezekiel

frankly  took  for  granted  the  novelty  of  those  unique
rights  which  he  claimed  for  the  Zadokites,  the  '  Priestly
Code'  somewhat  later  put.  the  divine  election  of  the
priestly  house  back  to  the  very  dawn  of  Israel's  history,
back  to  the  time  when  Yahwe  chose  Aaron  as  his  priest.
Hence  the  Chronicler  (iCh.  653)  was  obliged  to  trace
the  genealogy  of  Zadok  to  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron.
In  the  next  place  the  ideal  of  Ezekiel  was  not  perfectly
realised.  No  doubt  few  Levites  of  inferior  family,  in
proportion  to  the  Zadokite  priests,  returned  under
Zerubbabel  and  later  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  (Neh.
?39/.  EzraSa/". ).  Thus  the  Zadokites  cannot  have
had  serious  difficulty  in  securing  that  pre-eminence  which
Ezekiel  claimed  for  them.  Nevertheless  it  seems  that  a
certain  Daniel  of  the  sons  of  Ithamar  (Ezra  82;  see
DANIEL,  3)  accompanied  Ezra  and,  owing  perhaps  to
the  wealth  and  consideration  which  his  family  enjoyed,
contrived  to  share  in  those  priestly  privileges  which  D
had  assigned  to  all  the  Levites.  Such,  at  least,  is  the
ingenious  theory  of  Kautzsch  (Sf.  A>. ,  1890,  p.  778/1 ),
and  we  may  in  any  case  be  sure  that  some  Levites  who
did  not  claim  origin  from  Zadok  were  priests  in  the
second  temple.  In  their  favour,  then,  the  theory  of
descent  was  modified.  It  was  said  that  Aaron  had
two  sons  who  left  issue  :  Eleazar,  father  of  that  line
to  which  legitimate  high  priests  belonged,  and  Ithamar,
the  ancestor  of  legitimate  priests  but  not  of  legitimate
high  priests  (so  P  in  Ex.  623  Lev.  106  Xu.  428,  so  also
i  Ch.  246).  The  Chronicler  assigns  sixteen  classes  to
the  sons  of  Eleazar — i.e. ,  the  Zadokites — and  half  that
number  to  the  descendants  of  Ithamar  (i  Ch.  244).  'n
this  way  also  he  is  able  partially  to  reconcile  the  double

5375


priesthood  of  Zadok  and  Abiathar  with  the  notions  of
his  own  time,  since,  as  descendants  of  Ithamar,  the
b'ne  Eli  were  often  lawful  priests,  though  not  high
priests.  See  ELEAZAR,  ELI,  ITHAMAR,  and  cp,  further,
SADDUCEES.

2.  Father  of  JERUSHA  (g.i>.'\  (2  K.  15  33  2  Ch.  27  1,  <roScop  [B]).

3.  b. Baana,  in  list  of  wall-builders  (see  NEHEMIAH,  §  i/.',
EZRA  ii.,  §8  16  [i]  15^),  Neh.  34(<ro5ouic  [Nl);  he  is  doubtless  the
signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  EZKA  i.,  8  ?)  mentioned  in  Neh.
1021  [22]  (va&ovie  [A],  <TO£&OVK  [HK],  e&Staic  [L]). In  both  cases
the  name  occurs  together  with  Meshezabeel.

4.  b.  IMMER  [?.?'.]  (Neh.  820,  <ra&ov\  IK!)-

5.  A  scribe,  temp.  Ezra  (Neh.  1813,  <ra.S&ovie  [B]).

W.  E.  A.

ZAHAM  (DOT  ;  pooAAAM  [B],  ZAAAM  [A],  ZAAM
[L]),  a  son  of  Rehoboam  (2  Ch.  11  19).  Perhaps  from
cm  =  ^««cnT  ;  note  <SBA  and  cp  RAHAM  (Che.).

ZAIR  (in  locative  iTVL'S  ;  eic  ceioop  [B]  I  om.  A;
€K  Cicop  [L]),  a  place  on  the  way  to  Edom,  where
Jehoram,  king  of  Judah,  '  rose  up  by  night  and  smote
the  Eclomites  who  had  surrounded  him  '  (2  K.  821).  See
JEHORAM,  2.  It  is  strange  to  find  that  he  also  smote
'  the  captains  of  the  chariots,'  and  we  are  in  doubt  as
to  the  true  reference  of  the  following  clause,  '  and  the
people  fled  to  their  tents.'  According  to  Benzinger  and
Kittel,  after  v.  2ia,  the  original  narrative  must  have
stated  how  Jehoram  was  surrounded  in  Zair  (?)  by  the
Edomites  ;  v.  21^  (beginning  rt^'S  eg  rcrr'rn,  EV  'and
he  rose  [up]  by  night  ')  must  relate  a  defeat  of  Jehoram
which  nearly  issued  in  the  death  or  captivity  of  the  king.
The  people  who  fled  can  only  be  the  men  of  Judah.
Stade,  in  ZA  7TF  21  337-340  (1901),  once  more  examines
the  passage,  2  K.  821-24,  reaffirming  his  conclusion  in
Gl  71  537,  n.  i,  so  far  as  regards  taking  C'HN  as  the
subject  of  cp,  and  xn  as  an  intentional  alteration  or
correction.

Instead  of  331,1  *~\O  flNl,  Benzinger  and  Kittel  would  read
something  like  (or  WN)  i?i'  '~\71  'IE"!.  Both,  however,  hesitate  to
identify  Zair.  Ewald  thought  of  Zoar  (~lp>)  ;  it  is  objected  that

this  place-name  in  <S  is  or)yo>p  or  <riy<ap  (implying  y=  c,  ),  whereas

^>
Zair  is  <reuap,  <ruop(i.e.,  J?=5-);  see  Buhl,  Edomittr,  65. The

case,  however,  becomes  entirely  altered,  if  ch]~IN  nas  been  mis-
written  (as  in  other  passages)  for  C~N.  It  is  a  plausible  theory
that  the  passages  relative  to  Edom  in  2  Samuel  and  Kings  (most,
if  not  all  of  them)  in  their  original  form  referred  to  '  Aram  '  —  i.e.,
Jerahmeel,  rather  than  to  Edom  (cp  SACI.,  J  3  ;  JOKTHEEL,  2  ;
KKZIN;  SALT,  VALLEY  OF;  ZOBAH).  2K.82i  now  becomes
plain.  Emending  the  text  in  accordance  with  numerous  analogies
we  get,  'And  Joram  passed  over  to  Missur,  and  all  the  chariots
with  him,  and  [Aram]  the  Jerahmeelites  smote  him  and  the
captains  of  the  chariots  ;  and  the  people  fled  to  their  tents.'
Missur  was  presumably  a  N.  Arabian  town,  so  called  from  the
region  of  Missur  or  Misrim  (see  MIZRAIM)-  It  may  have  been
originally  intended  in  the  list  given  in  Josh.  15  52-54  by  ZIOR

(?•<•'.).

Miihlau  (Riehm,  Hll'B,  1813)  thinks  Conder's  identification
of  Zair  with  the  pass  ez-Zuweret,  in  the  SW.  of  the  Dead  Sea,
worth  consideration  ;  Buhl,  however  (Eefomitfr,  65,  n.  2),  finds
it  inconsistent  with  13JT1  (but  ©  has  avifri,  7JH,  which  may  be
right).  T.  K.  C.

ZALAPH  (^  ;  ceAe  [B],  cAAe(b  [X],  -ceA  [AL]).
father  of  Hanun  (Neh.  830).

ZALMON  (jtoVjf,  see  §  4).  The  name  occurs  twice
in  the  OT,  more  frequently  in  the  Talmud,  but  without
topographical  data  (Neub.  Gtog.  275).

i.  (fpfMwv  [BAL],  acppuv  [<PM  in  Moore],  fff\fj.wv  [Eus.
OS  295  73,  without  indication  of  site]  ).  The  name  given
in  MT  to  a  mountain  near  Shechem1  (Judg.  94St).

In  the  underlying  story,  however,  the  scene  of  the  <
Abimelech  seems  to  have  been  placed  in  the  Negeb,  in  and  near


1  One  might  naturally  think  of  Gerizim  ;  the  argument  offered
for  connecting  the  name  with  the  southern  peak  of  Hermon  is
perfectly  absurd  (see  Moore,  Judges,  265).

537<>


ZALMON

be  taken  to  confirm  thin.  For  pain  (a-tpfjuav)  is  probably  a
popular  corruption  of  'jNOnT,1  ar"J  we  shall  see  (see  ZALMON,  ii.)
that  poSs  's  not  improbably  a  popular  corruption  of  ^x^c"  ',
now  Jerahmeel '  and  '  Ishinael '  are  repeatedly  used  as  synonyms
so  that  in  one  form  of  the  original  story  Mt.  Jerahmeel  may  have
been  spoken  of,  and  in  another  Mt.  Ishmael.  The  corruptions
'  Hermon'  and  'Zalmon'  may  of  course  have  been  made  very
early.  The  equation,  Hermon  =  Jerahmeel,  illustrates  Enoch  66
where  the  fallen  angels  are  said  to  have  descended  on  Mt.
Hermon.  Probably  Mt.  Jerahmeel  was  meant  in  the  original
story ;  six  of  the  names  of  the  fallen  angels  are  clearly  corrupt
forms  of  Jerahmeel.  The  early  legends  may  all  have  a  Jerah-
meelite  or  N.  Arabian  setting.  Cp  ZALMO.NAH.

2.  AV  SALMON  (<reX/xwi>  [BX] ;  (reX/xw  [Ra]),  accord
ing  to  most,  a  mountain  or  mountain-range  (Ps.  6814
[is]t).  the  dark  rocks  of  which  (as  if  pe^s  meant  '  dark-
coloured,'  from  fja^x  ;  cp  rnaSs)  set  off  the  brilliance  of
the  snow,  when,  as  in  the  depth  of  winter,  snow-falls
occurred.  The  psalmist  is  thought  to  compare  the  dead
bodies,  or  perhaps  the  glistening  arms  or  ornaments,  of
slain  warriors  to  snow  on  Zalmon.  Wetzstein  (Ab/i.
appended  to  Del.  Hiob,  and  elsewhere)  compares  the
cHraXuapo?  of  Ptol.  5  15  (var.  led.  aXcraXauos,  aX<ra5a^ios)
which  is  a  name  for  the  Hauran  mountain  range  (alluding
to  the  dark  volcanic  rocks).  This  is  thought  to  be  con
firmed  by  reference  to  the  Jebel  Hauran  in  v.  15  [16],
where  Wetzstein  regards  the  phrase  c*3J33  in  as  a
picturesque  description  of  the  crater-formation  of  this
highly-volcanic  region  (so  Che.  Ps. I";  Guthe,  ZDP L',
1889,  p.  231;  Buhl,  cautiously,  Pal.  118;  but  not
GASm.  HG  550).

The  whole  passage,  however,  seems  to  be  corrupt,  and  an
adequate  restoration  can  only  be  hoped  for  by  a  searching  re-
examination  of  the  whole  passage  (see  Che.  /'s.'-1).  Among  the
current  emendations  of  po"7S,  Krochmal's  JUi^S  (derived  from
Tg.)  is  the  most  plausible.  Duhm's  J^u:3  and  Lagarde's  1H3
^!?.?!?  leave  p.-1?;*'  in  all  its  unexpected  and  unlikely  prominence.

T.  K.  C.

ZALMON  I  po'py ),  the  Ahohite,  one  of  David's  heroes  ;

28. 232st  (eAAcoN  —  i.e.,  |PJ?  [B],  ceAAcoM  [A],
eAlM&N  [L]  ;  Pesh.  salmun.Vg.  selmon)  =  i  Ch.  11  29f

(lLAi,  fyy;  HAei  [B«],  HAi  [sup  ras  A"],  HA&  [L] ;
Pesh.  'all;  'ilai).  See  NAMES,  §  4.

Inferring  from  the  reading  of  (J5ML  jn  2  S.  that  the  form  in  y
is  original,  Kittel  ('  Chron.'  \nS3OT)  would  read  jS'^j;,  'Allman,
and Marquart compares ALEMETH (?.r>.)  =  ALMON  (but both
these names  are probably  corruptions  of '  Jerahmeel '). The
name  pcSs,  however,  is  in  itself  highly  probable. The  three •
names  psSjj,  JWlsSsi  a"d  iUD^X  a"  point  to  the  Negeb— all  are :
N.  Arabian,  and  all  are  (or  spring  from)  popular  corruptions  of
Sx>C™ — a  synonym,  be  it  observed,  of  ^xariT- Cp  Xu.  14  o, •
if  the  view  (Crit.  Bib.)  is  correct  which  makes  cSs  13  Cn  1]Cn> I
C'T'HT.  an  editorial  attempt  to  make  sense  of  the  badly-written
words of  a  gloss  on 'the  people of  the land,' viz., C'^XCrtT j
P'^KOm1  C'SN'"^-" ('  Jerahmeeiites, Ishmaelites, Jerahmeel-
ites'), for  which  numerous  parallels  can  be  offered (see Crit.
Bib). '  They  are  our  bread  '  and  '  their  shadow  has  departed
from them '  are  clearly impossible. There is indeed another
theory,  which  would  be  tempting,  if  we  were  to  look  at these
names  by  themselves,  and  not  in  the  light  of  convergent  text-
critical  arguments— viz.,  to  find  in  pnSs  a  trace  of  the  god  ch'S
(SLM)  worshipped  at  Teima  (see  ZALMUNNA). But  in  similar
cases  a  better  solution  is  generally  forthcoming. Certainly  one
of David's heroes might well have  a  name corrupted from
'  Ishmael '  or  'Jerahmeel.'  T.  K..  C.

ZALMONAH  (npi?V:  ceAMOONA  [BAL]).  a  stage
in  the  wandering  in  the  wilderness  (Xu.  33 41/1 ).

The  preceding  station  is  Mt.  Hor — i.e.,  according  to  the  theory
which  best  accounts  for  a  multitude  of  facts,  Mt.  Jerahmeel  (see
MOSES,  §§  14-18,  with  n.  2,  col.  3217).  Another  name  of  some
part  of  the  chief  Jerahmeelite  mountain -range  was  probably
Zalmon— /.^.,  Ishmael  (a  synonym  of  Jerahmeel).

It  is  reasonable  to  think  that  the  name  '  Zalmonah '
is  only  a  doublet  of  '  Hor,'  and  that  in  reality  the  same
mountain  district  is  meant  by  both  names.  See,  how
ever,  WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OF.  T.  K.  c.

ZALMUNNA  (r 3D1? V  :  CAAMANA  [KARaTL],  c&A-
MAN  [R*],  but  ceAMANA.  [B]),  a  Midianite  prince  always

1  Note  that  in  the  MT  of  Ps.  42  7  [6]  extern'  (Jerahmeelim)
has  become  e'SlSin-  See  MIZAR,  THE  HILL  OF.

5377


ZAPHNATH-PAANEAH

mentioned  with  ZKBAH  [?.v.](Judg.  84.^,  Ps.  83  n).  His
name  (the  pointing  of  which  seems  designed  to  suggest
the  interpretation  '  protection  refused  ')  is  very  probably
compounded  with  that  of  the  old  deity  c^x -  (see  TKMA).
For  the  second  part  of  the  name  we  may  compare  the
OT  yjo',  pan,  and  perhaps  also  nyjo  on  a  Nnlxttaean
inscription  from  Hegra  (cp  Moore,  Judges,  220),  or
the  first  part  of  the  place-name  Viryj  (Josh.  I9ij;  cp
npn,  v.  13,  and  see  Neubauer,  Athenaum,  a8th  Feb.
1885  ;  Baethg.  Deitr.  8o/).  s.  A.  C.

ZAMBRI,  i.  (zAMBpei  [B],  -pic  [A])  i  Esd.934  RV
(AV  Zambia)  — F.zra  10  42  AMAKIAH,  3.

2. (j-aAifip[€]t  [ANY])  i  Mace.  2s6,  RV  ZlMKl,  q.v.

ZAMOTH  (z*,MOe  [BA]),  i  Esd.  928  =  Ezra  1027,
ZATTU.

ZAMZUMMIM  (D'BTOT;  ZOXOMCIN  [B],  -MM€.N
[Ba-b],  ZOMZOMMCIN  [A],  zo/v\/V\€iN  [FL]),  a  branch
of  the  REPHAIM  (i/.v. },  so  called  by  the  Ammonites  (Dt.
2ao)f.  Some  compare  Ar.  samsama,  'a  distant  rustling
sound,"  and  zizim,  'the  hissing,  whistling  sound  made
by  the  jinn  of  the  desert  in  the  night'  (so  Schwally,
ZATW,  1898,  p.  138,  and  W.  R.  Smith,  ap.  Dr.
Deut.  40).

But  these  early  names  are  so  liable  to  corruption  that  the  view
given  elsewhere  of  the  probable  variant  ZUZIM  (q.v.)  is  perhaps
more  probable.  -p.  K.  C.

ZANOAH  (H13T,  probably  an  expanded  Jerahmeelite
clan-name  [cp  Shelah  and  Sha'ul],  and,  if  so,  pre
sumably  to  be  added  to  the  group2  containing  |aazaniah,
Jezaniah,  Aznoth-tabor,  Uz/en-sheerah  ;  the  superficially
obvious  meaning  'stench,'  though  defensible  [NAMES,
§  106],  is  hardly  plausible,  and  the  parallels  for  such  a
name  are  all  textually  suspicious — see,  e.g. ,  MADMEN,
OPHNI,  ZIPHRON  ;  Z&NCO  [BNAL]).

1.  The  name  of  a  personified  clan  together  with  its
chief  centre,  i  Ch.  4 18  (fafj.uv  [BA],  j'aj-we  [L]).

The  reputed  father  is  Jekuthiel,  a  name  which,  like  Joktheel
and  Eltekeh,  is  most  probably  one  of  the  many  current  corruptions
of  Jerahmeel. 3  The  clan  referred  to  was  therefore  of  the  Xegeb
(see  closing  paragraph).

2.  A  city  in  the  SHEPHF.LAH  (i/.v.).  Josh.  1034  {ravta
rB]). Also  (Ges. -Bu. )  mentioned in  N'eh.  813  i^avdiv
[L])  and  11 30  (om.  BNA,  favwe  [Nc-anl-  inf-]). Robin
son  (j97?2343)  identifies  with  /.antt , a  ruin  z\  m. S.
from  'Ain  Shems  (see  BETH-SHEMESH). In  the  preced
ing  and  following  groups  of  names  in  Josh.  1.^34  occur
Zorah  and  Soco,  which  apparently  suits  the  proposed
identification. In  OS  20838  159 12' Zanoah  is  stated  to
be  in  the  district  of  Eleutheropolis.

3.  A  city in the  hill-country  of.  Judah, Tosh.  15s6
(i~a.Kava.fifj., taking  in  ppn  from  v.  57  [B], favov  [L]).
Van  de  Velcleand  Robinson  identify  with  Za'rtt'ifa,  a  ruin
S\V.  of  Yutta  (Jutta,  mentioned  in  the  preceding  group
in  Tosh.),  though,  being  nearly  as  far  S.  as  esh-Shuweike
(Socoh),  it  might  seem  more  plausible  to  connect  the
name  with  2.

There  is,  however,  an  element  of  uncertainty  in  these  identi
fications,  owing  to  the  transference  of  names,  and  to  the  geo
graphical  mistakes  of  redactors  (see  SOCOH).  The  original
Xanoah,  like  the  original  Socoh,  was  most  probably  in  the  Xegeb.
In  Neh.  11 30  'Adullam,'  which  follows  'Zanoah,'  was  very
probably  a  Jerahmeelite  city  in  the  Negeb,  and  '  Lachish '  has
arisen  out  of  '  Eshcol '  (see  NEGEB,  §  7).  T.  K.  C.

ZAPHNATH-PAANEAH,  RV  Zaphenath-paneah

1  So  Noldeke  and  Clermont-Ganneau,  Neubauer  (Athentrum,
/.f.)  suggests  that  the  same  divine  name  should  be  read  in  Nu.
14g;  D7i'  (not  c'-'S,  '  their  shadow- '!)  has  departed  from  them,
but  Yah  we  is  with  us.'  ffSBAFi.'s  o  xaip6<;  must  have  arisen  out
of  o  icupios  which  a  few  MSS  and  the  Arm.  actually  have  (cp
Neub.  I.e.).  The  MT,  however,  makes  a  very  satisfactory
sense.  In  folk-lore  the  shadow  is  often  identified  with  the  object
itself  (cp  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,(-\  \  287),  and  the  loss  of  the
shadow  is  regarded  as  the  loss  of  life  itself.  [Note,  however,
the  solution  of  the  text-critical  problem  given  elsewhere
(ZALMON,  2).]

'-  See  SHAPHAN,  UZZEN-SHEKRAH.

3  See  NEGEB,  §  7,  and  cp  JOKTHEEL.

5378


ZAPHON


ZA/V\4>ANH,  ACAM<J>ANH,  CA(t>A/v\4>ANH  [Aq.],  CA<})A6-
(J)ANH  [Syni.  ]),  the  Egyptian  name  reported  to  have  been
given  to  Joseph  by  the  Pharaoh  (Gen.  41  45).  For  the
older  explanations  see  below.  It  has  now  become
customary  to  seek  explanations  of  the  name  from  ancient
Egyptian.  Lenormant  compares  the  title  of  Ka-mose,  a
king  of  the  seventeenth  dynasty,  'zaf-n-to,'  '  nourisher  of
the  world'  (Hist,  anc,  de  FOr.,  1869,  1363);  this,  he
holds,  explains  Zaphnath.  Since  the  time  of  Lepsius
(Einl.  in  d.  Chronologieder  Agypten,  1  382)  most  scholars
have  explained  mys  by  the  Egyptian  pa-anh  (das  Leben,
la  vie,  life).  Brugsch  (Gesch.  Ag.,  1877,  p.  248)
formerly  interpreted  the  whole  name,  '  governor  of  the
district  of  the  place  of  life  '  (i.e.  ,  of  the  Sethroitic  nome);
but  in  1891  (Die  Aegyptologie,  240)  he  adopted  Stein-
dorffs  explanation  (see  ZA  2742),  which  is  also  given  by
Crum  in  Hastings'  D£\66s^,  as  the  only  admissible  one,
under  the  term  jephnoute  fonch  (:e[<f]-/>-niite[r~\-[e'\f-onh},
'God  speaks  (and)  he  lives,'  Lieblein,  however  ('  Mots
Egyptiens  dans  la  Bible,  '  PSBA,  May  1898,  pp.  202/1),
criticises  this,  and  proposes  the  form  cfnti  pa-anh,  '  he
who  gives  the  nourishment  of  life.'  Finally,  Marquart
('Chronol.  Untersuch.  ,'  Philologus,  7  676  /.  )  thinks
that  ru  (=}n)  indicates  that  Joseph  was  a  worshipper
of  Iten,  the  solar  disk,  the  god  honoured  by  Amen-
hotep  IV.  ;  mils]  is  misplaced,  and  belongs  to  the
name  of  Joseph's  wife  (crux).  The  present  writer  held
out  as  long  as  he  could  for  an  Egyptian  explanation,
regarding  russ  as  a  corruption  of  rays,  find  explaining
the  latter  in  Lepsius'  way  ;  he  inclined  to  read  Joseph's
Egyptian  name  as  Pa-anh,  or  rather  Pianhi,  which  is
the  name  of  a  famous  king  of  the  twenty-fifth  dynasty  ;
this  might  mark  the  date  of  the  Joseph  narrative  in  its
present  form  ;  see  EGYPT,  §  6s/.,  JOSEPH  ii.  ,  §§  4,  n.
It  is  of  course  possible  that  the  redactor  of  the  beautiful
Joseph-story  may  have  had  such  a  name  as  Pianhi  in
his  mind.  But  it  can  be  made  highly  probable  that
underneath  our  Joseph-story  there  was  another,  the
scene  of  which  was  laid  in  the  Negeb  and  in  the  land
of  Misrim.  If  we  accept  this,  we  may  reasonably
suppose  that  rufls  is  a  corruption  or  alteration  of  riEis.
and  mys  of  ons-  The  marriages  of  Joseph  and  of
Eleazar  b.  Aharon  are  plainly  parallel.  Eleazar  (Ex.
625)  marries  a  daughter  of  PUTIEL  (  =Zarephathi),
and  has  a  son  named  PHIXEHAS  (=Jerahrneel)  ;  Joseph
marries  a  daughter  of  Potiphera  (  =Zarephathi),  and
his  own  name  is  called  Zarephath  -  jerahmeel.  The
marriage  of  Moses  will  also  be  remembered  ;  his  wife's
name  was  Zipporah,  which  (see  MOSES,  §§  2,  4)  is  most
probably  a  modification  or  distortion  of  the  place-name
Zarephath.

The  plausibility  of  Egyptological  explanations  must  be  ad
mitted,  even  if  we  hold  that  the  original  narrators  had  a  N.
Arabian,  not  an  Egyptian  horizon.  Already  Jerome  says,
'  Interpretatur  sermone  /Egyptio  .  .  .  salvator  mundi,  eo  (juod
orbern  terra;  ab  imminente  famis  excidio  liberavit."  Onk.  gives,
'  The  man  to  whom  mysteries  are  revealed  '  ;  ps.-Jon.,  '  the  man
who  reveals  mysteries.'  Similarly  Jos.  Ant.  ii.6  i,  Pesh.,  Saad.
See  also  Harkavy,  fourn.  As.  15  (1870)  178  ff.\  Wiedemann,
Sanunlung  altiig.  \lrorter,  21  ;  Levesque,  Rev.  Bit!.,  1899,
pp.  wff.  T.  K.  C.

ZAPHON  (pSy.  cp  Sapuna  in  the  Amarna  Tablets

174  16, a S. Pal. city  [see  KA  7^3>  479],  and  BAAL-

ZEPHON), a  Gadite  city  —  cp  the  Gadite

1.  _Tne names jiss and j'rsi'  —  lying '  in the

traditional  vallev  •_,-,_  of  the:  jordan  (josh.  13  27

CA(|>AN [B]. -o>N [AI/I), and again,

according  to RV1"*-, in  the  account  of  the  quarrel  of

the  Ephraimites  with  Jephthah  (Judg.  12  1  rmss  RVms-

1  to  ZAPHON  '  ; KecJ>eiNA  [A],  ce(J>HNA  [L]  ;  "'  north

wards'  EV  and  <J5B)  ; but  others  question  the  text  (see

JEPHTHAH,  §  3,  n. i). It  is  mentioned  after  Beth-

nimrah and Succoth. The Jer. Talm. (Sheb.  9  2

fol. 38  tf) identifies it  with  ina, the later  'Amatho,

Amathus,  and  mod.  'Amateh,  a  little  to  the  N.  of  the

Zerka  (Jabbok)  on  the  E.  bank  of  the  Jordan,  and  at

5379


ZAREPHATH

the  mouth  of  the  Wady  er-Rugeib  ;  *  but  Buhl  considers
this  doubtful  (Pal.  259;  Ges.-Bu.  s.v.  ).  Josephus
(Ant.  xiii.  12s)  mentions  Afftatfuav  (Sohlatter,  ZDPl'
19224,  A<ra.(f>wv)  'not  far  from  the  river  Jordan'  (oi>
TfoppuOfv  rod  'lopSdvov  Trora/uoO).

The  occurrence  of  Sapuna  as  a  S.  Palestinian  place-
name  and  of  Baal-zephon  in  the  account  of  the  Exodus
we'^ make us somewhat critical


2 Later
resear  h  a


towarc's  trie  statements  of  the  traditional


text  respecting  a  trans-Jordanic  Zaphon.
There  is  also  strong  reason  to  think  that  when  Jeremiah
gives  prophetic  warning  of  an  invasion  of  Jewish
territory  from  the  north  (e.g.,  Jer.  1  \t,f.  46  61)  it  is  not
of  the  Scythians  nor  of  any  modern  people  that  he  is
thinking,  but  of  a  people  inhabiting  a  land  called
Zaphon  or  Zaphan  (cp  ZEPHANIAH).  So  in  Joel  2  20
'  the  northern  [army],'  as  EV  renders,  should  rather  be
'  the  Zephonite,'  and  in  Ezek.  386  it  is  from  the  land  of
Zaphon,  in  N.  Arabia,  that  the  terrible  hordes  of  Gog
are  to  appear.  In  Jer.  15  12  too,  '  iion  from  the  north'
should  not  improbably  be  '  iron  from  Zaphon  '  ;  the
following  words  '  and  brass  '  remind  us  that  TUBAL-
CAIN  —  i.e.  ,  the  Kenite  Tubal  according  to  the  general
view  —  was,  '  [the  father  of]  every  artificer  of  brass  and
iron  '  ;  and  that  Rehoboth  was  in  David's  time  richly
supplied  with  brass  (see  TEBAH).

It  would  take  too  much  space  to  show  what  a  bright  light  this
theory  (in  connection  with  the  larger  historical  theory  of  the
relations  between  Israel-Judah  and  Jerahmeel)  throws  on  many
passages.  But  it  may  be  well  to  point  out  (referring  for  details
to  Crit.  Bib.  )  that  underlying  the  story  of  the  Gileadite  Jeph
thah  there  is  an  earlier  story  of  a  Jephthah  in  the  Negeb,  and
that  the  troublesome  word  njlSS  (EV  northward)  in  Judg.  12  i
should  probably  be  rendered  'to  Zaphon  '  ;  the  original  narrative
meant  a  locality  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb.  Also  that  in  Josh.
1827  the  mention  of  Succoth  and  Zaphon  is  followed  by  'the
rest  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon.'  It  appears  as  if
P  had  access  to  early  lists  of  names,  the  geographical  reference
of  which  he  did  not  always  understand.  T.  K.  C.

ZARA  (ZARA  [Ti.  WH]),  Mt.  13  AV,  RVZERAii,  i.

ZARACES,  RV  Zarakes  (ZARION  [B],  ZARAKHN
[AL]),  in  i  Esd.  138  represents  the  JKHOAHAZ  (q.v.  )  of
the  corresponding  passage  2  Ch.  864.  According  to
2  Ch.  Jehoahaz  was  taken  by  N'echo  to  Egypt  ;  but
in  the  i  Esd.  passage  he  is  brought  by  Joakim  out  of
Egypt.  This  and  other  differences  seem  to  be  due  to
the  fact  that  the  author  of  i  Esd.  was  copying  from  a
corrupt  or  illegible  Hebrew  MS.

ZARAH  (IDT),  Gen.  8830  AV,  RV  ZERAH,  i.

ZARAIAS  (ZARAIOY  [BD-  (*)  i  Esd.  58  =  Ezra22
SERAIAH,  7.  (2)  i  Esd.  82  (fa.pa.iov  [A])  ;  see  ZEKAHIAH  (i).
(3)  i  Esd.  8  31  (£xpatov  [RAL])  ;  see  ZERAHIAH  (2).  (4)  i  Esd.
8  34  (£apaias  [BA])  ;  see  ZEBADIAH  (3).

ZARDEUS  (ZARAAIAC  [A]),  i  Esd.  9  28  =  Ezra  10  27
AZIZA.

ZAREAH  (ilinS),  Neh.  11  29  AV,  Zareathites
(Ttinsn).  i  Ch.253  AV.  See  ZORAH.

ZAREPHATH  (n?H>*  ;  -  cApenTA  [BAL]),  a  place
on  the  high-road  between  Tyre  and  Sidon  (cp  Jer.  OS
1544),  where,  according  to  the  traditional  text,  Elijah
resided  with  a  widow  after  leaving  the  brook  Cherith
(i  K.  17  g/  cecpGA  [A  in  z:  9]  ;  cp  Lk.  426  cApeiTTA
THC  CIAOGNIAC  ',  RV  'Zarephath,  in  the  land  of
Sidon  ').

But  the  difficulty  of  supposing  that  this  Phosnician  woman
was  a  worshipper  of  Yahwe  is  very  great,  and  since  (i)  CHEKITH
(y.v.)  must  certainly  be  Rehoboth,  and  (2)  even  the  traditional
text  elsewhere  makes  Elijah  seek  out  a  refuge  in  N.  Arabia
(i  K.  10  ;  see  MIZRAIM),  we  are  compelled  to  suppose  corruption
of  the  text,  and  to  read  in  i  K.  17  9,  '  Arise,  get  thee  to  Zarephath,

1  For  Amathus,  cp  Burckh.  Syr.  346,  Buhl,  Pa!.  259,  and
Schiir.  Gjy\22if.  It  is  often  mentioned  by  Jos.  (cp  A>it.
xiii.  83  xiv.  64  £/\.&  5),  and  is  placed  by  him  on  the  Jordan.
Eus.,  on  the  contrary,  makes  it  21  R.  m.  from  Pella  (OSW.i--).

-  Lagarde  (fibers.  84,  note  *)  finds  the  vocalisation  strange  ;
in  Palestine  we  should  expect  rlST!f.

5380


ZAREPHATH

which  belongeth  to  Musur'  (TSsS  "WN).  Zarephath  is  also
mentioned  as  a  border-city  of  Canaan  in  Obad.  20  (<rape</>0o>i>
IQaJ),  not,  however,  on  the  north,  but  on  the  south  (see
NEGEB,  §  3  ;  SEPHARAD).  A  district  of  the  Negeb,  in  the  far
S.  of  Palestine,  was  called  after  the  Zarephathitesl  (i  S.  30  1 6),
and  David's  bodyguard  was  partly  composed  of  Zarephathites.
It  is  true,  '  Pelethites,'  not  '  Zarephathites,'  is  the  traditional
reading  in  2  S.  8  18  etc.  ;  but  pi-let  hi  and  a\so  feleth  in  i  Ch.  '2  33
(Nu.  It!  i)  are  corrupt,  and  ought  probably  to  be  read  siire-
phiithi  and  sarffliath  respectively  (see  PELETH,  PELETHITES,
and  cp  PALI'!,  i).

It  is  also  highly  probable  that  the  Zarephathites  are  the  foes
referred  to  in  2  S.  21  15-22.  The  nature  of  the  war  with  the
Philistines  here  referred  to  has  surprised  many  readers ;  it
contrasts  strongly  with  the  warfare  described  in  i  S.  31.  If,
however,  Pclistini  should  rather  be  Satvf  hat/urn  (as  certainly
in  i  S.  30  16),  we  can  much  more  easily  understand  the  narrative.
That  '  Oath  '  and  '  Gob  '  should  rather  be  '  Rehoboth '  is  pointed
out  elsewhere  (REHOBOTH).  It  was  the  warriors  of  Musri  (see
MIZKAIM,  §  2  b),  famous  in  later  tradition  for  their  unusual
stature,  who  at  the  time  referred  to  gave  David  so  much  trouble.
Musri  may  originally  have  included  Zarephath  and  Rehoboth
(see  below,  on  Gen.  lOi^yC).  Not  improbably  2  S.  21  15  ff.  is
properly  the  sequel  of  2  S.  5  17-25.  There  is  considerable  reason
to  suppose  that  David  conquered  Rehoboth  (miswritten  in  2  S.
21  i8^C  Gob  and  Gath)— one  of  the  chief  cities  of  his  foes— and
fetched  the  ark  of  Yahwe  from  the  house  of  OBED-EDOM  the
Rehobothite  (not  'the  Gittite').  A  series  of  important  cor
rections  also  becomes  highly  probable  in  28.517-25.  'Philis
tines  '  should  probably  be  '  Zarephathites  '  (DTI2"I!>);  '  the  valley
of  Rephaim '  should  be  '  the  valley  of  the  Jerahmeelites  ' ;  '  over
against  the  mulberry  trees '  should  be  '  over  against  [Perez  of]  the
Jerahmeelites';  'in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees'  should  be
_  in  Perez  of  the  Jerahmeelites.'  Perez,  be  it  noted  here  again,
is  surely  a  corruption  of  Sarefath  (Zarephath)  ;  see  PEKEZ.  Con
sequently  '  Baal-perazim '  may  well  come  from  '  Baal-sarefath
(or  -sarefathim).'  Lastly,  in  the  descriptive  phrase  'from  Geba
as  far  as  the  approach  to  Gezer '  (r>.  25)  the  proper  names  should
be  '  Rehoboth  '  and  '  Gadesh  '  =  '  Kadesh  '  respectively.  It  also
becomes  probable  that  '  Perez-uzzah  '  in  2  S.  08  has  arisen  out  of
'  Sarefath-azzah '  (strong-Zarephath).  Cp  PERAZI.M,  PEREZ-
UZZA.  This  involves  parallel  corrections  in  28.238-23.  The
'Philistines'  should  very  probably  be  'the  Zarephathites,' just
as  in  -'.  21  'Egyptian'  should  doubtless  be  'Misrite'  (see
MIZKAIM,  §  2  b).  David  and  his  gibbHrttn  are  fighting  in  the
region  which  adjoins  their  own  homes  (cp  HARARITE,  JEKAB-
ZEEL,  ZIKLAG),  to  maintain  their  hold  on  the  '  cities  of  the  Jerah
meelites'  (see  i  S.  3029).  The  'Valley  of  Rephaim'  should
again  be  the  'Valley  of  the  Jerahmeelites,'  and  'Bethlehem'
(r?'.  14-16)  is  an  early  corruption  (like  Ir  hammelah)  of  Beth-
jerahmeel.  It  may  be  added  that  it  is  probably  the  '  Zarephath
ites,'  not  the  '  Philistines,'  who  fight  against  Keilah  in  the  true
text  of  i  S.  23  1-5.  Thvis  in  the  story  of  David,  not  less  than  in
that  of  Jacob,  there  are  traces  of  a  more  ancient  and  in  some
respects  very  different  underlying  narrative.  Cp  also  SAUL.

It  is  moreover  in  a  high  degree  probable  that  the  '  En-mishpat '
of  Gen.  147,  which  is  loosely  identified  in  an  inserted  gloss
with  '  Kadesh,'  should  be  corrected  into  '  En-  (or  rather  '  Ir-)
Zarephath' — i.e.  '  fountain  (raftier,  city)  of  Zarephath.'  Cer
tainly  this  helps  to  produce  a  consistent  story ;  Kadesh  and
Zarephath  will  be  found  (see  SODOM)  to  be  both  mentioned  in  the
more  ancient  narrative  which  underlies  our  Gen.  14,  as,  according
to  the  view  proposed  above,  both  names  occur  in  the  story  which
underlies  28.517-25.  And  the  only  plausible  explanation  of
'  Hassophereth  '  or  '  Sophereth  '  in  Ezra  2  55  Neh.  7  57  is  that  it
is  a  corruption  of  the  same  ancient  place-name  Zarephath.

This  latter  correction  points  the  way  to  another  of  much
greater  importance — viz.  CTlSTa  (Sarefath im)  for  C'DIOS  in  Gen.
10  14  (see  PATHKUSIM).  That  Misrim,  not  Mizraim,  was  the  son
of  Ham(Jerahmeel),  is  a  view  which  sheds  a  bright  light  on  a
series  of  obscure  names  (cp  Crit.  B!b.\  And  no  one  can  fail  to
see  at  once  how  easily  Zarephath  might  be  miswritten  as  PUT
(Gen  10e)  and  as  ZEPHATH  (??.?'.).  The  difficulties  of  the
narrative  in  Judg.  1 17  are  considered  elsewhere  (HOKMAH).  Jt
may,  however,  be  pointed  out  again  that  the  starting-point  of  the
Judahites  was  Kadesh-' barnea '  (see  JERICHO,  §  2).  There  is
a  place  on  the  way  to  Hormah,  or  rather  Rahamah  (see
HOKMAH),  which  they  would  naturally  attack  in  passing;  it
is  Sebaita^  (24  m.  NNE.  of  'Ain  Kadis).  The  ruins  (of  the
Byzantine  period)  are  imposing ;  doubtless  they  stand  on  the
site  of  much  older  cities.  At  the  entrance  of  the  only  pass  by
which  Sebaita  can  be  approached  is  a  ruined  fort  on  the  top  of
a  hill ;  this  was  probably  an  appendage  of  the  ancient  Zephath,
which  in  spite  of  the  imperfect  phonetic  correspondence  of  the
names  must  be  the  Zephath  or  Zarephath  of  the  OT.3  We  can
now  fully  understand  the  journey  of  Elijah  related  in  i  K.  17  9.

1  See  NEGEB,  §  2.  i.  The  commentators  treat  the  difficulty
of  '  the  land  of  the  Philistines '  too  lightly.  The  view  here
adopted  is  that  by  an  error  of  the  scribe  31^  has  become  t'73-

-  We  might  also  think  of  Mesraifeh,  N.  of  Sebaita,  but  this  is
geographically  less  plausible.  Least  probable  of  all  sites  is  the
Nakb  es-Safa,  SE.  of  Kurnub,  though  this  commended  itself  to
Robinson  (7>'jV(-)  '2  181).  See  Trumbull,  Kaiiesh-Barnea..

3  See  Palmer,  Desert  of  the  Exodus,  •yjijf.',  Rowlands,  the
discoverer  of  the  site,  took  the  same  view  (G.  Williams,  Holy
City,  1  464) ;  also  Furrer  (Riehm,  HIVBV\  654/1).

5381


ZARETHAN

It  is  an  easy  day's  journey  from  Ruheibeh  (REHOBOTH,  MT's

'  Cherith  ')  to  Sebaita,  though  Palmer  was  accidentally  delayed.

Possibly  the  name  Zarephath,  as  applied  to  ;i  Phoenician  town,

appears  under  the  disguise  of  MlSUFHOTH-MAIM  in  Josh.  11  8

The  Phoenician  Zarephath  is  the  Zarputa  of  the
Egyptian  Pap.  Anast.  1  (Rpfl)  2  no),  and  the  Sariptu
of  the  Taylor  inscription  of  Sennacherib  (AT?  290)
Miihlau  (HWRW,  1814)  supposes  glass-manufacture  to
have  flourished  at  Zarephath  ;  Masius  (in  Poole's  Syn.)
thought  of  the  smelting  of  metals.  The  modern  name
of  Zarephath  is  Sara/end,  which  is  now  about  a  mile
from  the  coast,  but  was  on  the  shore  in  the  time  of  the
Crusaders.  See  Rob.  /?A>247s;  Thomson,  L.  and  B.
itejtf.  Cp  PHCKNICIA,  gjj  4,  6.

In  2^8.  83  12  106  8  we  hear  of  a  '  Hadad-ezer,  .  .  .  king  of
Zobah,'  whose  realm  we  must  suppose  to  have  been  either  in  Syria
or  in  N.  Palestine  (see  ZOIIAH).  It  is  however,  somewhat  more
probable  that  rials  (Zobah)  is  a  mutilated  and  corrupt  form  of
n£Tli;,  Sarefalh.  The  name  Hadad-ezer  for  a  N.  Arabian  king  is
perfectly  credible.  The  'images'  of  the  Zarephathites  (not
Philistines  ')  are  spoken  of  in  2  S.  5  21  (an  old  narrative).
An  obscure  passage  in  Judg.  177  becomes  more  significant  if
we  suppose  a  reference  to  Zarephath.  The  young  Levite  there
spoken  of  is  described  as  '  out  of  Bethlehem-judah,  of  the  family
of  Judah.'  As  Budde  rightly  sees,  there  is  something  wrong
here  ;  he  would  correct  '  Judah  '  into  '  Moses '  (cp  18  30).  More
plausibly  we  may  read  'from  Beth-jerahmeel,  from  Zarephath  of

Judah'  (sKanT  for  n-iirv  cns,  and  ns-isa  for  rinse-so;  cp

niE'ie'D  for  JVEns  in  Josh.).  Tradition  seems  to  connect  the
Levites  with  Kadesh,  which  was  not  far  from  Zarephath.  For
other  supposed  disguises  of  Zephath  or  Zarephath,  seeSHAPHAT,
TISHBEH  ;  cp  also  MICAH,  BOOK  OK.  §  4(/);  MEARAH  ;

MlSREPHOTH-MAIM,  TlKZAH,  ZAKETHAN.  f. J{_  c.

ZARETHAN,  RV  of  (a)  Josh.  3i6  (/>)  i  K.4i2  (c)
746.  The  same  name  is  clearly  represented  by  ZEKEDAH  (</)
2  Ch.  4  17  and  (e)  i  K.  11  26,  probably  also  by  ZEKERAH  (/)
Judg.  722.  In  (a)  and  (c)  MThas  [rr.:»  ;  in  (/•)  njrns  (locative),
AV  ZARTHANAH  ;  in  ((/)  firms  (locative);  in  (*•)  rrns.T  ©  in

(a)  gives  Kafliatpeii/  [B],  Ka/na&apte]^  [AFL],  which  Hollenbergl
takes  to  be  a  development  of  <rapf>av  ;  (/•)  crfo-atfai-  |  B],  eo-Atai-0ai>
[A],  a-apOav  [L];  in (c)  o-eipa  [B],  criapap.  [A], crap0a»  [L];  in
(<{)  0-ipSaOai [B], cra<Sa0a [A], <raptl$a6la [L]  ; in  (e)  y <rapeipa
[BL],  YI  aapifia  [A],  and  in  the  long  additional  passage  (5Ii[-  twice
has  crapeipa.

Let  us  assume  provisionally  the  correctness  of  the
textual  readings,  and  consider  the  geographical  bearings

1.  JOBh.3i6etc.  °f  («)(*)  ""I  (/)•  From  (,/).  which
corresponds  with  (c),  it  is  plain  that
the  Chronicler,  or  the  compiler  from  whom  he  drew,
identified  Zarethan  and  Zeredah.  From  (_/")  we  mav  at
least  infer  that  Zererah  (?)  lay  to  the  S.  of  Abel-meholah.
A  more  definite  result  is  gained  from  (c),  where  (if  the
text  is  in  the  main  correct)  it  is  stated  that  Zarethan
was  situated  near  Succoth  in  the  Jordan  valley.  From

(b]  no  inference  is  possible  in  the  present  state  of  the  text.
A  still  more  important  passage  is  Josh.  3i6  (a). We

learn  from  it  that  Zarethan  lay  beside  the  city  called
Adam  or  Aclamah  (see  An.\M,  i. ).  Between  Adam  or
Adamah  and  Succoth  this  passage  (see  JKRICHO,  §  4),
together  with  i  K.  746,  suggests  that  there  was  a  ford  by
which  the  main  road  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  such  a  ford
there  is  near  the  Jisr  ed-Damieh,  at  the  confluence  of  the
Jabbok  and  the  JORDAN  (</.r. ,  §  7).  We  must  there
fore  at  any  rate  reject  all  forms  of  the  theory  that
Zarethan,  which  lay  'beside'  that  city,  was  in  the
vicinity  of  Beth-shean.2  More  acceptable  geographically
is  the  view  of  Van  de  Velde,  who  connects  Zarethan
with  the  lofty  Karn  Sartabeh  (the  joano  of  the  Mishna),3
the  great  landmark  of  the  Jordan  valley,  W.  of  Jisr  ed-
Damieh.  To  this  we  shall  return  present!}'.

We  pass  on  to  the  difficult  passage  marked  above  as

1  Dcr  Char,  der  Alex.  Uebers.  dcs  B.  Jos.,  17.

2  In  PEFQ,  1874,  p.  182,  Conder  finds  a  trace  of  the  name  in
the  'Ain  Zahrah  and  the  Tulul  Zahrah,  3  m.  W.  of  Beisan. At
this  point  the  opposite  cliffs  approach  so  closely  that  a  blockage
of  the  river  (such  as  a  shock  of  earthquake  might  occasion)  would
leave  its  bed  temporarily  dry. Tyrwhitt  Drake  {PEfQ,  1875,  p.
31)  thought  of  Tell  Sarem,  3  m.  S.  of  Beisan  ;  but  he  relied  on
©A'S  corrupt  reading  ariapa.fi  in  I  K.  7  46.

3  Kask  ha-ShAnah,  23;  cp  Neubauer,  Geog.  du  Taint,  p.  42

5382


ZABETH-SHAHAR

(e).  It  is  plausible  to  infer  from  the  fact  that  <5L  places
_.  .  Jeroboam's  residence  at  the  time  of

5tic-  his  son's  illness  at  <rapeipa,  whilst  MT
gives  the  name  as  Tirzah  (i  K.  14 17),  that  the  true  name
of  Jeroboam's  city  was  Tirzah.  It  is  very  possible,
however,  that  both  Zererah  and  TIRZAH  (q.v.)  conceal
some  other  name,  and  if  our  view  of  Solomon's  reign
and  of  the  extraction  of  Jeroboam  is  correct  (see
SOLOMON),  the  name  underlying  them  is  ZAREPHATH
(q.  v. ).  This  would  not,  however,  justify  us  in  substi
tuting  at  once  Zarephath  for  Zarethan  in  (a),  (b},  (c),
(d),  and  (/. ).  The  tejct  of  these  passages  urgently  needs
to  be  examined  with  a  more  searching  criticism.  The
claims  of  the  Karn  Sartabeh  deserve  at  least  a  hearing
(cp  JERICHO,  §  2),  and  if  this  site  be  adopted  Abel-
meholah  will  probably  be  the  oasis  of  Karawa,  N.  of
Sartabeh.  See  JERICHO,  §  2.  It  is  not  necessary  to
assume  that  Sartabeh  and  Sarethan  are  connected  as
names.  The  question  is  purely  geographical.

Karn  Sartabeh  is  thus  described,

'  The  top  of  the  mountain  is  a  cone,  artificially  shaped,  and

some  270  ft.  high. On  all  sides  but  the  west  this  is  practically

unapproachable ;  on  the  west  a  trench has  been

3.  Kam  cut,  and  the  saddle  thus  made  lower.'  'The
Sartabeh.  ™i"s  on  the  summit  consist  of  a  central  struc
ture  with  a  surrounding  wall,  and  of  an  aque
duct  with  cisterns.  An  old  road  leads  up  from  the  south,  with
rock-cut  steps  in  one  place.'  '  The  general  appearance  of  the
place  is  that  of  a  fortress.'  (PEFM'i^f.)

We  must  not,  however,  treat  this  as  more  than  a  provisional
and  (in  spirit)  conservative  conjecture,  and  it  may  be  permissible
to  refer  in  advance  to  the  treatment  of  passages  containing
Zererah  in  Crit.  Bib.  See  also  SUCCOTH,  and  cp  Buhl,  Pal.  181.

T.  K.  C.

ZARETH-SHAHAR  pHD'H  TTM),  Josh.  13 19  AV,
RV  ZEKETH-SHAHAR  (t/.v.  )•

ZARHITES  ("rn-Til),  Nu.26i3  AV. See  ZERAH,  i.

ZARTANAH  (rurm),  i  K.4i2  AV,  RV  ZARE
THAN  (q.v. ).

ZARTHAN  (|ri~l>'),  i  K.  746  AV,  RV  ZARETHAN
(q.v.).

ZATHOE,  RV  Zathoes  (zA0OHC  [BA]),  i  Esd.
8  32  =  Ezra  8  5.  See  JAHAZIEL,  5;  SHECHANIAH,  3;
ZATTU.

ZATTU  (XWT  ; zAGeoyA  [AL], ZAeoyi*.  [BN]);

The  b'ne  Zattu,  a  family  in  great  post-exilic  list  (see  EZRA  ii.
§  9,  §  8  c),  Ezra28  (reckoned  at  945;  $a6ova.  [B])=Neh.  7  13
(reckoned  at  845  [840  BJ ;  £x00ovfia  [K])=i  Esd.  5  12,  Zathui
((O.TOV  [B],  £a#Som  [A]);  represented  among  the  signatories  to
the  covenant  (see  EZRA!.  §  7),  Neh.  10 14  [15],  AV  Zatthu
(i^aSQovia.  [A],  -OQauas  [L]),  and  in  the  list  of  those  with  foreign
wives  (see  EZRA  i.  §  5  end),  Ezra  1027  (£<x0ova  [Al)=i  Esd.  9  28,
ZAMOTH  (fafiod  [BA]).  The  name  is  to  be  restored  in  the  list
of  families  in  Ezra's  caravan  ;  see  JAHAZIEL,  5.

ZAVAN  (jWT),  i  Ch.  1  42  AV  =  Gen.  8627,  ZAAVAN.
ZAZA (NTT, §  58; abbrev., cp  ZIZA  ; OZAM  [B],

o£x£a,  ?  o  £a.£a  [A],  £Y;i£a  [L]),  b.  Jonathan,  a  Jerahmeelite  (i  Ch.
233!). See  JERAHMEEL,  §  2  (c).

ZEALOT  (o  ZHAooTHc)-  the  Greek  equivalent  of  the
Semitic  o  KANANAIOC  (see  CANAN^:AN).  Apart  from
the  use  of  the  word  in  a  theological  sense  (cp  e.g.  i  Cor.
14  12,  frjXwral  Trvevfjidruv  \_  =  weviJa.TiKG)v\,  zealous,  or
emulous,  of  spirits  [  —  spiritual  gifts]  ;  and  the  OTuse  of
N3p,  kanna,  of  God's  zeal  for  the  keeping  of  the  law,
etc.,  Ex.  20s  34i4),  it  is  applied  distinctively  to  a  sect
whose  tenets  are  virtually  identical  with  those  of  the
ASSASSINS  (q.v.),  of  whom  they  are  indeed  the  fore
runners.  As  such  it  occurs  only  twice  in  the  NT  (Lk.
615  Actslis,  AV  ZELOTES)  with  reference  to  SIMON
(q.v.  no.  5]).  For  Hai/ai/cucs  see  Mt.  104  Mk.  3i8.

Of  this  sect  JUDAS  of  Galilee  was  at  one  time  a  leader.
Against  the  view  that  the  author  of  the  Assuinptio  Mosis  was  a
zealot  (Schiir.  Gl'l  2635),  see  APOCALYPTIC  LITERATURE,  §  65.

ZEBADIAH  (HH3T,  inHIlT,  properly  an  expanded
N.  Arabian  clan-name[Che.,  see^ABDl,  and  cp  ZAUDIEL],  though
susceptible  of  the  religious  explanation,  '  Yahwe  has  bestowed,'
cp  Jehozabad,  §  27  ;  £a/3«Sia  [BNAL])

5383


ZEBOIM

j,  2.  Assigned  to  the  Benjamite  (see  BENJAMIN,  $  9)  clan
BERIAH  (i  Ch.  8  15,  afa0o/3ia  [B],  .  .  .  Sta  [A]),  but  in  v.  17  to
ELHAAL.  The  context  probably  refers  to  the  Negeb.  J'he
names  are  very  nearly  all  unmistakably  Jerahmeelite;  'Oath,'
as  often,  may  have  grown  out  of  a  mutilation  of  '  Rehoboth  '
(Che.).

3.  b.  Jeroham  of  Gedor,  one  of  David's  warriors  (i Ch.  127,
£a/3i6ta  [B)). See  DAVID,  §  u  (a)  iii.

4.  b.  Asahel,  one  of  David's  captains  (i  Ch.  277,  <x/3ifta«  [B],
£zj3Sia«  [Al,  -«ata«  [I.]). Sec  DAVID,  ?  n  (c)  i.

5.  b.  Ishniael,  ruler  of  house  of  Judah  (2  Ch.  19  u,  <Jo/38[«]ias
[BA],  £a/3a£taf  [L]). Possibly  originally  the  same  as

6.  The  Levite  who  with  others  was  sent  to  the  cities  of  Judah
with  the  book of  the mrt' rrnn  (zCh.178,  £a££[e]ias  [BAL]).
The  neighbouring  names  suggest connection  with  the  Negeb
(Che.).

7.  b. Meshelemiah, a  Korhite  (i Ch.  26  2, £a/3o£ias [AL],
faxapias  [B]).

8.  b.  Michael,  one  of  the  b'ne  Shephatiah,  a  post-exilic  family,
Ezra  8  8  (£o£«eia [B], -iias [A], -Siov [L]); in I Esd.  8  34
ZARAIAS  (£apatas  [BJ  om.  A,  frp&ta<;  [L]).

o.  b.  IMMER  [f.v.]  (Ezra  10  20,  fa)3«[e]ta  [BKA],  -5ia«  [L],  in
i  Esd.  821  ZADDEUS  (frpSaioi  [BA],  a£a<ria«  [L]).

ZEBAH  (POT,  z£Bee  [BNARTL] ;  '  victima,  sive
hostia,'  Jer.  OS  49g)  a  Midianite  king  or  chieftain,
mentioned  with  Zalmunna  in  the  story  of  Gideon
(Judg.  85-21  ;  cp  Ps.  83  ii  [12]).  Just  as  Zalmunna  cor
responds  to  Oreb  (the  vowels  in  both  names  are  un
original)  in  the  parallel  narrative,  so  Zebah  corresponds
to  Zeeb.

The  originals  of  the  two  former  names  are  probably  Ishmael
and  'Arab  ;  the  common  original  of  the  two  latter  may  be  Zebib
'  the  long-haired."  See  GIDEON,  OREB,  ZALMON,  2,  ZALMUNNA.

T.  K.  C.

ZEBAIM  (D*3-Vrt),for  '  Pochereth  of  Zebaim,'  Ezra
257  AV.  RV  has  POCHERETH-HAZZEBAIM  (q.v. ).

ZEBEDEE  (zeBeAa,ioc  [Ti.  WH],  §  52  -—i.e.  H3T,
see  ZEHADIAH),  of  Galilee,  the  father  of  James  and
John  (Mt.  42i  etc.).

ZEBIDAH  (!TTaT:,  Kt.),  2  K.  23  36  RV,  AV
ZEBUDAH  (q.v.).

ZEBINA  (N^at,  as  if  '  bought,'  from  Aram.  J2T,  §  83,
cp  Palm.  N32TC,1  but  perhaps  really  a  popular  corruption  of
SxyCE"  [tne  h  in  which  name  is  often  corrupted  in  the  mouth
of  the  people  into  j  (Che.)] ;  cp  also  Ass.-Aram.  1037 ;  Hilprecht
gives  the  Jewish  name  Zabina  from  Nippur,  fifth  century;
(avfiiva.  [BJ,  fafiftfiva  [K),  om.  A,  gtfievti  [L]),  one  of  the  b'ne
Nebo  (i.e.  Nadabu  ?—  see  NEBO  iii.  2)  who  joined  in  the  league
against  alien  marriages;  Ezra  10 43.!

^ZEBOIIM  or  Zeboim  (D'2X,  DW3V,  D'N3S.  Kt.;
D''nS  Kr.  always)  Gen.  10  14  Dt.  29  Hos.  11.  t  See
ADMAH  AND  ZEBOIM.

ZEBOIM.  i.  The  valley  of  Zeboim  (DT2-Vn  i|  ;  rAi
THN  c&MCiN  [B] ;  om.  A  ;  P-AIAN  THN  CA.B&IN  [L])-
a  locality,  apparently  E.  of  Michmash,  mentioned  in
the  description  of  the  path  taken  by  one  of  the  plunder
ing  bands  of  the  Philistines  (i  S.  13i8).  The  passage
should  perhaps  read  thus,  '  another  band  took  the
direction  of  the  Gilgal2  which  looks  down  upon  the
valley  of  Zeboim  toward  the  wilderness. '  The  '  wilder
ness'  is  thought  to  consist  of  the  summits  and  precipitous
sides  of  the  mountains  between  the  central  district  of
Benjamin  and  the  Jordan  valley.  There  Grove,  in  1858,
found  a  wild  gorge  bearing  the  name  of  Shakk-ed-Daba
— i.e.,  '  ravine  of  hycenas,'  which  exactly  corresponds  to
the  Hebrew  name.  Up  this  gorge,  which  is  N.  of  the
point  at  which  the  Wddy  el-Kelt  enters  the  Jordan
valley,  runs  the  path  by  which  Grove  was  conduc-tiM
from  Jericho  to  Mukhmas  (Smith's  DB^  iii.  1819).
Marti  however  (7.DPV  7125 /:),  thinks  of  the  \\\i./y
Abu  Daba  ,  a  lateral  valley  which  joins  the  II  \iJy  cl-K'clt

1  See  Cook,  Aram.  Gloss.  71,  who  also  quotes  the  Gk.  form
/ue<Jaj3/:Jai'a«. The  initial  o  may  remind  us  of  the  initial  c  in
oWc  and  rPoSe'D  (see  MESHULLAM,  MESHELEMIAH).

2  MT has  S33H  'the border,'  but this does  not  suit the
following participle. Hence  some  (We., Dr., Ki.,  Bu.)  read
jnjp,  rendering  '  the  hill,'  and  with  doubtful  justice  claiming  to
follow  (P. But  can  5:33  be  so  rendered  ? H.  P.  Sm.  reads  -yajn
(•ya/3ee  [B],  TI\V  yaftaa  [L]),  but  Pjpt'jn  is  masc. 7I3JJ1  probably
comes  from  >lVja  C1  8.13415),  which  is  itself  most  probably  a
corruption  of  $NDnV- See  RACHEL'S  SEPULCHRE.

5384


ZEBUDAH

from  the  S. ,  and  makes  the  plausible  suggestion  that  in
ancient  times  the  present  II  \~u1y  el-Kelt  bore  the
appellation  '  Valley  of  hyamas,'  which  now  survives  only
in  smaller  gorges.  Cp  G.  A.  Smith,  HG,  291  ;  Buhl,
Pal.  98.

2.  A  Benjamite  town  or  village,  Neh.  11  34t  (C'l'is  ;  om.  BNA ;
<re/3oei|u  [xca.  mg.  inf.];  o-e/Sweii/  [L]),  mentioned  between  Hadid
and  Neballat.  -p_  K.  C.  4

ZEBUDAH  (iTT13T,  Kr.  ;  •  given  [by  God],'  §  56),  as
AV,  or  ZEBIIJAH  (n*J*3J,  Kt.  which  Vg.  and  Pesh.
follow),  as  RV,  mother  of  jehoiakim,  2  K.  2336f  (ieAA<\
[B] ;  eieAAM>  [A]— i.e.,  JIDLAPH  [,/.!•.] ;  &MITA.A  [L]
— i.e. ,  HAMUTAL  [q.v.~\  ;  in  a  Ch. 865,  however,  <5BA
gives  the  name  as  i"TVl3T  =  Zaccurah  ze[K]xcop<\ ;
A.MIT&A  [L]).

Hilprecht  quotes  a  Jewish  name  Zabuda  on  a  tablet
from  Nippur  (5th  cent.  B.C.).  It  is  tempting  to  explain
the  name  '  one  given  [by  God].'

Some,  however,  of  the  names  of  this  form  (§  56)  clearly  have  a
gentilic  meaning,  and  Jehoiakim's  mother  (like  several  other
queen-mothers)  came  from  the  Negeb  (see  RUMAH).  T.  K.  C.

ZEBUL  (^31,  zeBoyA  [BAL]),  a  Shechemite,  the
'  ruler '  (~)L")  of  the  city  in  the  time  of  Abimelech,
represented  in  the  artful  speech  of  Gaal  as  a  mere  officer
(Tp3)of  the  king,  Judg.  928^:  See  ABIMELECH,  GAAL,
and  cp  We.  fJG,  27.

See  also  SHECHEM,  §  2  ;  'Zebul'  is  a  possible  corruption  of
'  Ishmael.'

ZEBULUN,  but  ZARULON  in  AV  of  Mt.  4 13  15  and
Rev.  7&  (J-'PQT,  Zebiilun,  eighteen  times,  especially  in

Ch.  Is. Ps.  ;  t>12T, Zebulun, twenty-six

1.  Name : -  i.»,»J  „ ,

.. . . times ; |-"-OT, Zebulun, Tudtr.  1  -JOT  ;
application.

Z&BoyAcoN  [BAL];  Josephus  also  THC
z&BoyAHC  [-4 nt.  v.  7 14,  §  272],  zABoyAoy  [gen.,  ix.
132,  §  267];  gentilic  "07QT,  ZABoyA60N[e]iTHC  [BAL
Jos.],  Zebulunite,  Nu.  2627,  but  Zebulonite,  Judg.
12 n_/".).  A  late  writer  adds  the  name  of  Zebulun  in
his  reference  (Is.  823^)  to  the  deportation  of  Tiglath-
pileser  described  in  2  K.  lozg  (see  NAPHTALI,  §  3).
The  'land  of  Zebulun,'  he  says,  had  shared  the  dark
fate  of  the  '  land  of  Naphtali. '  Only  in  one  other  place,
however,  do  we  hear  of  a  land  of  Zebulun  (see  §  7).
The  real  territorial  name  may  have  been  Naphtali  (see
NAPHTALI,  g§  2,  end,  4).  One  of  the  sources  of  Josh.,
indeed,  seems  to  have  known  of  twelve  towns  (Josh.
19 15  b) l  which  were  regarded  as  Zebulunite.  Whether,
purposely,  however,  or  accidentally,  only  five  of  the
names  have  been  preserved  (see  §  9  i. ).

Even  the  form  of  the  name  is  rather  uncertain. In

the  Hebrew  consonantal  text  it  is  spelled  in  three  ways

_  (traditionally vocalised Zebulun, Zebulun

.  orm.  ancj  ^bulun  :  see  above,  §  i,  begin.),  the
first  of  which  would  suggest  a  form  Ziblon  like  Shim'on,
SIMEON  (q.v.  §  8).  MT,  however,  vocalises  them  alike,
with  a  full  vowel  between  the  last  two  radicals  :  zebul.

i.  The  word  2£/<«/(Ba.  NB  129)  without  the  nominal  termina
tion,  is  always  written  731,  zebul  (without  1),  like  DN3  ID',
whereas  7?33  as  constantly  has  the  \  The  scrifitio  dffectiva
may,  however,  be  simply  because  zebul  was  an  archaic  word.
Kven  if  the  old  pronunciation  was  zebul  (not  zebul),  which  would
according  to  traditional  pronunciation  have  given  zebol  (like  "UD
etc.),  the  addition  of  the  termination  to  zebol  would  give  zebul-,
just  as  mancis  becomes  menusah.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the
second  vowel  was  a,  the  name  might  be  from  zubfd  ;  cp  Zubala,
a  place  in  lat.  29},  18  mils  from  el-fcCa'  i"  'he  Jauf  (D.  H.  Miiller,
Hamd&nfs  Geog.  Siidarabiens,  IS3  247^).

ii.  Names  ending  in  -on  are  common  (see  SIMEON,
§  8,  and  cp  ZION).  Not  so  names  in  -fin.  Jgshurun
and  JCduthun  are  no  doubt  exactly  parallel  ;  but  till
the  literary  history  of  those  words  is  more  firmly
established  they  afford  no  sure  basis  for  comparison.2

1  So  MT  and  <0L;  ©BA  avoids  the  resulting  discrepancy  by
omitting  the  clause.

2  Hommel finds names in -fin, apart  from  such  names  as
Haldun, in  S. Arabia : Kaidun, Saywiin  (Glaser : Hommel,
Auf.  u.  Abhandl.  99),  but  only  from  »'y  roots.

S38S


ZEBULUN

Unless  the  -On  of  the  Greek  Zaboulfm  is  due  to  assimilation  to
the  Greek  termination  of  that  form,  which  is  unlikely,  since  the
o  is  preserved  in  the  Greek  form  of  the  gentilics  (see  g  i,  begin.),
the  name  must  in  the  second  century  B.C.  have  lieen  pronounced
ZabulOn.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  Josephu*  twice
gives  the  name  without  the  termination  -on  (see  a!>ove,  g  i,
begin.).  Moreover,  would  not  an  original  on  have  become  6n
(cp  REUBEN,  §  9  i.)?

If  the  name  was  pronounced  at  all  like  Zebulon  it  is
difficult  not  to  connect  it  with  the  divine  name  Baal-

3.  Meaning.  zebul  ^  skiPwith-  {Q*  n*4*  [1899],
B  and  cp  BAALZEBUB,  §  3)  ;  cp  the  Punic
name  (fern.)  73IN7J73  (CIS  i.  lf>Si/,  from  Tharrus).
and  73101?  (inscription  from  Citium,  1.  4  :  NOld.  ZA
9400-405),  and  see  below,  §  6.  If  the  noun  ZBL
designates  a  lofty  mansion,  especially  for  a  god  (see
§  4),  it  is  difficult  not  to  think  of  the  mountain  referred
to  in  Dt.  33 19  (see  §  6),  especially  as  the  mountain
names  Lebanon,  Sirion,  Hermon  all  end  in  -on  (cp
Jebel  Hauran  and  Zion).  Zebulun  would  then  be,  in  a
modified  sense,  a  geographical  name,  like  Ephraim  and,
perhaps,  Naphtali.1  Of  course  there  is  no  suggestion
of  that  kind  in  Gen.  There  we  seem  to  have,  as  often,

4  OT  explana-  Uv°  '  exPlanrUions '  of  the  name  (Gen.

tions  3029). Yah  we had presented Leah

(29  a  a)  with  a  noble  gift  (z<!bed,  as  if
the  name  were  Zebiidon  [E?])  ;  or  her  husband  (bd'al),
in  consideration  of  Leah's  having  presented  him  with  a
sixth  son,  would  act  (29  a  f3)  in  a  certain  way :  MT
'3731'  (transliterated  by  Jerome  iezbuleni),  the  meaning
of  which  is  uncertain,  as  the  verb  occurs  nowhere  else.

<5  gives  aipenei  (which  usually  renders  in3,  'choose,'  but
sometimes  Snn>  'spare,'  j-rjn,  'delight  in'),  of  which  Jerome
says :  LXX  interpretati  sunt  diliget  me ;  cp  Eth.  yafakerani,
'  will  love  me  ' ;  Josephus,  '  one  born  as  a  pledge  of  benevolence
to  me  '  (T)Vt\vpa.<TiJ.evov  evcoi'a  rjj  Trpb?  aiiT»ji>  :  Ant.  i.  19  7,  §  308).
Aquila,  however,  has  crwoiiojcrei  /xot,  which  is  followed  by
Jerome  himself,  'habitabit  mecum ' ;  cp  Pesh.  nethnakkepk  li.
'  will  adhere  to  me.'

EV,  following  Vg. ,  renders  '  will  dwell  with  me '  ;
and  this  rendering  is  retained  silently  by  Gunkel  (Gen.^
[1902]  ad  loc.},  also  by  Ball  (S DOT' ad  loc.  [1896]).
Other  recent  writers,2  however,  have  adopted  the
suggestion  of  Guyard  (/.  As.  1878,  b,  pp.  220-5),  l'lat
'3731'  is  to  be  explained  by  Ass.  zabalu,  which  usually
means  'carry,'  'bring'  (cp  Ar.  zabala,  Syr.  s?bal],  but
sometimes  apparently  lift  up.3

If  zabal  meant  '  lift  up  '  in  Hebrew,  '3731'  in  Gen.
3020  would  mean  'will  honour  me.'  The  person
indeed,  writer  or  copyist,  to  whom  we  owe  the  present
text  of  Gen.  49 13  seems  to  have  given  ZBL  its  now
traditional  meaning  of  'dwell'  (cpjre");  on  the  other
hand  730^  in  v.  15  (Issachar)  suggests  the  Assyr.  zabalu
(see  next  §,  mid.).

The  history  of  the  district  inhabited  by  Zebulun  was
eventful  enough  (cp  NAPHTALI,  §  3,  ISSACHAR,  g§  4-6,

5  References GAUI-EF-  §  2-  J'HHTAH-EI.). It  felt

S'  the  heavy  tread  of  Thothmes  III.  (see
the  list  of  places,  above,  col.  3546),  and  became  a  part
of  the  Egyptian  empire.  Burna-Buryas,  the  Babylonian
king  (about  1400),  regarded  the  district  as  in  the
Pharaoh's  (Amenhotep  IV.)  land,  and  complained  to
him  that  his  agents  had  been  maltreated  at  Hi-in-na-tu-
ni  (see  HANNATHON)  ;  and  letter  196  tells  that  its
governor  had  rescued  Lapaya  and  sent  him  home  (31/1 ).

1  For  Land's  explanation  of  a  confessedly  difficult  name  see
below.

2  For  example  Cheyne  (Isa.  !i\(af.  [1882]),  Delitzsch  (Hcb.
Lang.  $?,/.  [1883]  =  Prol.  6-2  f.  [1886]),  Schrader  (A".-/  7'{-)ad  fa;
[1882!).

3  Delitzsch  cites  5  R  42  a-b  43  subtulu  sa  GAPI  (=/>/«),  'the
lifting  up  of  the  breast.' Moreover  the  '  lofty  temple  '  of  Marduk


r-j/(z  R  2fi59  c  [cp  Br.  6148]),  'lifting  up  the  head,'  su-kit-u  sa
ri-si  (2  R  303  a  [cp  Br.  3614!),  and  on  the  other  hand  \ozabal
in  the  phrase  i-na  za-bal  ra-ma-ni-su  (2  R  l.r>  45  e  [Briin.  3415]).
Muss-Arnolt  compares  2  R  47  a-b  13  where  ma-ltir  da-'-tu,
'receiver  of  a  bribe,' is  equated  with  sarru  za-al'-bi-lu  :  see
Beitr.  z.  Ass.  2  280.  Guyard's  suggestion  was  contested  by
Halevy  (#.£/,  1885,  a,  p.  299,  1887,  a,  p.  148)  ;  cpalso  XOldeke,
ZDMG  40  729.

5386


ZEBULUN

What  elements  were  united  in  the  population  of  the
district  in  the  times  referred  to  in  the  earliest  notices  in
the  OT  we  cannot  say.  On  a  famous  occasion  they  are
said  to  have  manifested  a  noble  valour  (Judg.  620)  led
by  their  leaders  (v.  M^).1  Cp  also  46  10,  and  see
NAPHTALI,  §  3.  According  to  J  (Judg.  130)  Zebulun
was  not  able  to  expel  the  Canaanites  from  Kitron  and
Nahalol  (§  9  i. )  ;  but  they  had  to  join  the  labour  gangs.2
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  whilst  a  similar  state
ment  is  made  about  the  Naphtalite  Canaanites  in  v.  33,
in  Gen.  49 15  the  subject  of  the  sentence  is  an  Israelite
tribe  (cp  below,  n.  3)  :  it  is  the  Issacharites  them
selves  that  join  the  gangs.  Or  should  the  last  couplet
of  v.  15  (Issachar)  belong  to  v.  14  (Zebulun)?  'rno1?  '  to
bear '  (or  should  we  read  'jatV)  would  then  be  a  play  on
the  name  Zebulun,  if  ^31  in  Hebrew  really  meant  '  to
carry'  (cp  above,  §  4,  end).  Moreover  it  is  not  at  all
certain  that  the  subjects  to  the  various  verbs  in  Judg.
1  27-36  are  original  ;  they  may  in  some  cases  be  incor
rectly  supplied.3  We  cannot  tell  how  the  newcomers
came  to  terms  with  those  who  were  already  in  possession.
According  to  the  '  Blessing  of  Jacob '  indeed  Zebulun
plants  himself  on  the  sea  coast  (Gen.  49 13).  At  a  much
later  time,  too,  'the  way  of  the  sea'  (QTJ  TVI)  is  a
synonym  for  Zebulun  or  Naphtali.  In  Judg.  5 17  the
saying  is  transferred  to  Asher  (cp  Gunkel,  Gen.W  425).
The  ideas  which  underlay  these  statements  are  lost  to
us.4  The  transit  traffic  was  no  doubt  important.  On
the  via  marts  from  Damascus  across  the  upper  Jordan
at  Jisr  el-banal  and  down  through  Galilee  to  the  coast
see  Schumacher,  Janlan,  55,  and  PEb'Q,  Ap.  1889,  p.
78  f. ,  GASm.  HG  425-30.  This  same  overland  traffic
may  be  what  is  referred  to  in  the  grandiloquent  terms
of  the  saying  in  the  '  Blessing  of  Moses  '  (Dt.  33 18/  )  :

'The  abundance  of  the  seas  do  they  suck
And  the  hidden  things  of  the  sand.  . .  .'5

No  doubt  the  Testament  of  Zebulun  has  much  to  tell  about
successful  fishing,  and  Targ.  Onk.  speaks  even  of  subduing
provinces  with  ships,6  whilst  Talm.  Shabb.  26,  refers  to  the
wealth  derived  from  traffic  in  purple  d\'es  (cp  the  Issacharite
TotaA  and  PUAH  :  see  ISSACHAR  §  7),  to  which  Targ.  pseudo-Jon,
adds  the  making  of  glass.  The  view  suggested  above,  however,
is  perhaps  more  historical.  Stucken,  accepting  the  references
to  maritime  life,  connects  Zebulun  with  the  sign  Capricornus
(MI'G,  1902,  p.  189).

Dt.  33i9<z,  on  the  other  hand,  contains  a  couplet  (see
next  g)  which  suggests  that  the  population  was  mixed.
The  Aramrean  element  must  have  become  strong.
There  would  no  doubt,  however,  be  a  strong  Israelite
party.  It  seems  to  have  been  able  to  make  its  voice
heard  (see  JONAH,  GATH-HEPHER).  On  the  possibility
that  '  a  greater  than  Jonah '  also  came  from  a  Zebulun-
ite  town  see  NARARETH.  The  connection  of  Galilee
with  Juda-a  in  later  times  (see  GALILEE,  §3,  XAPHTALI,
§  3)  seems  to  be  reflected  in  Ps.  68  27  [28]  (chiefs  of
Zebulun,  chiefs  of  Naphtali).7  On  Zebulunite  'judges'
see  below,  §  7.

How  Dt.  33194  was  meant  to  be  read  is  uncertain  ;
but  it  appears  to  tell  of  comings  of  many  to  some

1  Credit  is  given  them  for  a  share  in  another  struggle  (Gideon-
Jerubbaal)  in  the  present  text  of  Judg.  (135^,  but  not  in  723.

2  DC  's  tne  Sang  °f  tne  corvee,  not  the  labour. Cp  conversely
the  Assyr.  idiom  a za-bi-il  kit-du-ri  used  of  the  corvee,  not
the  gang.

3  Cp  for  example  how  Targ.  Jer.  has  inverted  the  saying  in
Gen.  49  15^  referred  to  above.

4  Gen.  49  13  has  been  emended  and  will  be  emended  again  and
again. It  seems  to  contain  doublets. N1.11  is  hardly  possible.

5  Rertholet  suggests  that  '3BJ."1  represents  a  verb,  preserved  in
(S's Ka.-TOi.Kovv  TU>V  ="2"',  viz.,  the  verb  E'3D  =  D33,  'gather.' Ball
had  suggested  12EB>1  ('pour  out') or  isD"  ('drain'). What  (B's
e/x7ropia  (for 'PCp) represents is not clear ; Cheyne  (Exp.T
10  238_/C)  suggested  n>:n  (wrongly  for  72"1,  whence  MT  7in). He
restored  :  '  And  the  treasures  of  merchants  shall  they  suck.'

6  Pesh.  finds  ships  mentioned  in  Gen.  49,  and  Ball  there  (FSB  A
17  i67/r  [1895!)  and  in  Dt.  33  (PSff.-i  18  129^  [1896]).

7  The  flattering  account  of  the  tribal  eponym  in  Test.  12  Patr.
(Zebulun)  is  remarkable.

5387


ZEBULUN

mountain1  where  sacrifices  were  offered.  If  there  was
6  Cults  a  re''Si°us  fa""-  not  at  all  a»  unlikely  thing,2
'  it  would  explain  the  inflow  of  wealth.  What
the  mountain  referred  to  is  it  is  impossible  to  guess  (cp
ISSACHAR,  §  2):  3  we  may  only  be  sure  that  it  was  not,
as  the  Targum  imagined,  Zion.  It  must  have  been
some  mountain  not  far  from  Esdraelon.  Was  it  per-
h,aps  the  mountain  where  in  the  Elijah  story  the
sacrifices  were  offered  ?  Was  the  Baal  whose  defeat
was  witnessed  by  Ahab  known  as  Baal-zebul  ?  Ahab's
wife  is  said  to  have  been  called  Jezebel.  His  son,  too,
when  ill  sent  to  inquire  of  Baal-zebul.  No  doubt,  as
the  story  now  reads,  Baal-zebul  was  the  god  (€5L  +
•trpocr 6x01^/^0-  —  ppr)  of  Ekron.  That,  however,  may
be  a  gloss  (or  does  Ekron  come  from  Jokneam,  on  the
edge  of  Carmel  ?)  :  we  have  no  knowledge  anywhere
else  of  such  a  god  at  Ekron.  The  embellished  tale  of
Elijah  calling  down  fire  on  the  messengers  may  be  a
very  late  accretion  (Be.  Ki. );  but  the  mountain  on
which  the  prophet  (originally  Elisha?)  was  said  to
have  been  found  sitting  by  the  messenge rs  of  the  oracle-
seeking  king  must  surely  have  been  some  well-known
sacred  eminence.  May  it  not  have  been  the  height  of
Baal-zebul  ?  And  may  that  not  have  been  the  mountain
of  Zebulun  of  Dt.  33  iga  ?

Baal-zebul  would  then  naturally  suggest  the  Baal-lebanon  of
C/Sl  5,  which  Jensen  identifies  with  the  god  Amurru,  '  lord  of
the  mountain  '  (bel  Sadi  :  ZA  11  305)— the  Aramsans  expressly
say  that  Ahab's  god  is  a  'god  of  the  mountains  '  (c%nn  TtSx) — a
west-Semitic  form  vof  the  storm-god  Ramman.  Ramman,  in
fact,  shares  with  Samas  the  title  of  bel-biri  (5  R  03  2,  35^),
'oracle-god,'  and  as  'god  of  the  storm-flood'  (bel  al'ftbi)  he
wields  both  the  lightning  (i  K.  IS  38)  and  the  axe  (cp  2  K.  64-7  ?)
(Zimmern,  KA  7  <3l  433  447^).  When  Elisha  is  hard  pressed  by
the  Aramaeans  it  is  '  the  mountain  ' 4  that  is  seen  to  be  full  of
chariots  of  fire  (2  K.  6  17).  Was  it,  in  the  original  form  of  the
story,  earth  from  that  sacred  mountain  that  the  Rimmon-
worshipper  wanted  (2  K.  5  17)  to  insure  his  success  (2  K.  o  i  a/3)'?
That  the  holy  mountain  was  identified  locally  need  not  prevent
the  prevalence  of  a  less  concrete,  more  mythological,  idea
(SiNAi,  CONGREGATION  [Mouxr  OF],  BAAL-ZEUUB).

Of  the  place-names  connected  with  Zebulun  Rimmon
is  not  the  only  one  to  suggest  a  religious  cult.  On  a
possible  connection  of  Bethlehem 5  with  Lahamu,  see
ELHAXAN  (§  2,  end).  On  suggested  traces  of  'Athe
and  Kasin  see  ETH-KAZIN.  Cp  von  Gall,  Allisracl.
Kultstiitten,  124-126.

How  much  significance,  if  any,  is  to  be  attached  to
the  fact  that  Zebulun  is  classed  with  Issachar  as  a  Leah

A  T  Vi  t  "h  tr>')e  whilst  Naphtali  goes  with  Dan  as
lDe<  a  Bilhah-Rachel  tribe,  is  disputed  (see
RACHEL,  §  i,  ZILPAH,  §  zf.,  and  cp  TRIBES,  §§  n  ff.).
The  Bilhites,  Naphtali  and  Dan,  may  have  been  regarded
as  farther  from  the  centre  ;  they  were  not  in  historical
times  of  any  importance.  Zebulun,  indeed,  is  not  much
more  prominent.  None  of  the  great  actors  in  the
Palestinian  drama  is  assigned  to  the  tribe  (see,  however,
§  5  end).  Its  brother  tribe,  however,  may  have  played
some  part  in  the  history  of  Israel  (see  ISSACHAR,  g  4)  :
it  is  mentioned  before  Zebulun  not  only  in  the  story  of
[acob's  family  but  also  in  most  of  the  lists  of  the  tribes.
It  is  rather  remarkable,  therefore,  that  the  order  is
reversed  in  five  more  important  passages  :  the  three
poetical  pieces  (Judg.  5  Gen.  49  Dt.  33),  and  the  two
places  dealing  with  the  partition  of  Canaan  (Nu.  34 19-29

1  For in  <B  reads  f^o\odpcv(rov<n.v — i.e.,  either  rp,-|  (Josh.
23s  t)  or  cinn  (often),  or  (Ball)  jt"in — but  the  Greek  text  is  not
to  be  preferred.

2  Cp  C.  H.  Graf,  Der  Segen  Moses,  46  ;  on  religious  fairs  cp
Sprenger, Alte Gcog. Arab.  223_/l Unfortunately  we  have
little  direct  information  about  the  visitations  of  sanctuaries  at  a
distance. There  was  probably  a  good  deal  of  it. Cp  'Dan  to
Beersheba,'  Expositor,  5th  ser.,  8411-421  (1898).

3  It  may  be  noted,  however,  that  the  boundaries  of  Zebulun,
Naphtali,  and  Issachar  are  represented  as  having  met  at  Tabor
(cp  TABOR,  §  2). Cp  Hos.  5  i,  and  see  v.  Gall,  Altisratliiisclie
Kultstiitten,  124^

4  The  scene  seems  in  the  present  text  to  be  laid  at  Dothan.

5  Dodo  the  Bethlehemite  can  hardly  be  ,-uppo-ed  to  belong  to
N. Palestine; otherwise  the  Zebulunite I'.ethlehem  might  be
referred  to  in  connection  with  the  suggestion  in  ISSACHAK,  §  2.

5388


ZEBULUN

Josh.  19).1  Cp  ISSACHAR,  §  i,  end ;  TRIBES,
§  10,  iii.

On  the  assumption  of  the  early  arrival  of  Issachar
and  Zebulun,  their  being  nevertheless  'younger'  than
the  more  southern  tribes  has  been  explained  by  Steuer-
nagel  as  due  to  their  arriving  later  at  their  final  seat
(Einiuanderung,  33,  c).2  In  fact  he  thinks  he  has
found  evidence  that  the  Zebulunites  settled  in  mid-
Palestine  for  a  time  before  moving  northwards.  The
'judge'  Elon  (Judg.  \'lnf. )  is  obviously  the  eponym  of
a  city  or  clan  (or  both)  Elon.  In  any  case  he  is  said
to  have  been  buried  in  a  city  the  name  of  which  is
vocalised  in  MT  as  AIJALON  (</.v. ,  2),  but  should
perhaps  be  ELON  (q.v. ,  2).  No  such  town  being
assigned  to  Zebulun  in  Josh.  19 10-16,  Steuernagel
supposes  that  the  Elon  meant  is  the  Elon  assigned
in  1943  to  Dan,  and  that  the  words  '  in  the  land  of
Zebulun'  were  added  to  'Elon'  in  Judg.  12 12  by  a
copyist  who  wished  to  exclude  this  very  identification,
which  seemed  to  him  obviously  incorrect.  Steuer
nagel,  on  the  contrary,  thinks  that  the  excluded
interpretation  is  correct,  and  therefore  holds  that
Zebulun,  like  NAPHTALI  (q. v. ,  §  i),  halted  in  central
Palestine  for  a  time.  He  admits,  however,  that  the
identification  he  assumes  is  precarious.  It  is;  moreover,
the  assertion  that  no  town  Elon  is  assigned  to  Zebulun
in  Josh,  must  be  qualified  by  reference  to  the  incom
pleteness  of  the  list  of  towns  (see  below,  §  9  i).

It  has  been  customary  to  assign  to  Zebulun  the
'judge'  Ibzan  on  the  ground  of  his  being  called  a
Bethlehemite.  Winckler,  however,  holds  that  the
Bethlehem  intended  is  the  southern  town,  which  at  that
time  would  be  a  part  of  '  Benjamin'  (see  above,  col.
2583  n.  r).  On  the  other  hand  it  is  difficult  to  dis
sociate  Ibzan  (|X2N)  from  Ebez  (j'2N  :  Josh.  192o),  a
town  assigned  to  Issachar  (cp  ABEZ),3  between  which
and  Zebulun  there  was  probably  no  clear  demarcation.

P's  genealogy  of  Zebulun  is  slight  :4  it  contains  three
names5 — Sered  (or  Seded?)  and  Jahleel,  which  we  can

_ n . . hardly  venture  to distinguish from

8.  treneaiogicai.  the  towns  Sarid  and  Xahalal  of  josh

19  10  15,  in  spite  of  the  differences  in  the  spelling, "  and
Elon,  on  which  see  above  (preceding  §).  Gaddiel,  too,
the  Zebulunite  'spy,'  was  perhaps  assigned  to  one  of
these  three  (Sodi,  'TiD  =  i(')-iD  :  Nu.lSio).

Is  Parnach,  -313,  the  '  father  '  of  Elizur  the  Zebulunite  delegate
to  survey  \V.  Palestine  (Nu  34  25),  a  corruption  of  the  same
name?  Helon  (?Sn)  the  'father'  of  the  Zebulunite  census-
delegate  (Nu.  1  9  2  7  7  24  29  10  16)  may  come  from  Elon.

i. Towns. — Of  the  five  towns  remaining  out  of  the

list  of  twelve  originally  given  as  we  have  seen  (§  i)  in

_  ,  . . Josh.  19 (v.  15), the only  one that

9.  lieograpmcal.  can he identified  with  certainty  is

BETHLEHEM  (q.v.  :  ttet-Lahm,  7111.  NW  of  Nazareth).
On  the  other  four,  of  which  Nahalal  has  been  referred
to  (§  8),  and  Shimron  is  of  interest  in  connection  with
the  Sa-me-na  of  Esarhaddon  (see  SIMEON,  §  6  iii.),
see  KATTATH,  XAHALAL,  SHIMKOX,  and  IDALAH.
As  often,  two  of  the  five  (Kattath  and  Nahalal,  called
Nahalol)  are  probably  the  towns  which  J  tells  us
Zebulun  did  not  secure  (Judg.  130).  P  adds  the  infor
mation  that  of  forty-eight  cities  assigned  to  the  Levites
four  were  Zebulunite  (Josh.  21  35)  :  the  Nahalal  just

1  The  accidental omission  of  Zebulun in i  Ch.  2-9 and of
Issachar  in  Judg.  1  27-36  may  be  in  some  way  connected  with
this  change  of  order.

2  Land,  on  the  other  hand,  speaking  of  the  name  Zebulun,
'  the  most  difficult  to  explain,'  says  (assuming  that  zabal  means
'dwell'),  'Can  the  tribe  at  some  time or  other  have  been  so
named  by  its  neighbours  or  kindred  because  it  had  a  fixed  abode
earlier  than  they?  '  (De  Gids,  Oct.  1871,  p.  21,  n.  i).

3  Similarly Kartan is  assigned in josh.  '21  32 to  Naphtah,
Kartah  in  v.  34  to  Zebulun.

4  On  its  omission  in  i  Ch.  2-9  see  above,  n.  i.

6  In  Jubilees  34  20  Zebulun's  wife  is  Ni'iman  [Eth.],  Adni
[Syr.]  ;  the  Rk.  of  Jashar  gives  Marusa  (cp  Charles,  Juh.  206).

o  For  Nahalal  =  Jahleel  cp  Jemuel  =  Nemuel  in  REUBEN
(§  12).

5389


ZECHARIAH

mentioned,  two  of  the  tosvns  to  be  referred  to  im
mediately  (Jokneam,  which,  according  to  Josh.  19  n,  did
not  belong  to  Zebulun,  and  Dimnah  =  Rimmonah)  and
KARTAH  (Kartan  in  Josh.  21  32  is  Naphtalite).

11.  Boundary. — According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  v.  122,
§  84)  the  Zebulunites  were  settled  as  far  as  Gennesaret
(fj.^XPl YfvijffapiSos)  and  about Carmel and  the  sea.
The  delimitation  of  territory  in  Josh.  19 10-14  cannot  be
really  made  out. The  line  is  given  first  westwards  (v.
10  f. ), and  then  eastwards  (12 /. ), of  a  place  already
referred  to  (§  8)  called  Sarid in  MT, which  may  be
Tell Shadud (see SARID). Westward the line is
drawn  past '  Dabbesheth'  (see  MAKALAH,  DABBESHETH)
to  the  wady  that is  before  Jokneam (Tell  Kaimun).
Eastward  it  is  drawn  to  CHISLOTH-TABOR  (Jksdl)  and
on  to  DABERATH  (Debiiriyeli),  which  belonged,  accord
ing  to  2128,  to  Issachar,  thence,  if  the  text  is  sound  and
\ye  do  not  suppose  a  fusion  of  two  accounts,  turning
sharp  W.  to  JAPHIA  (  Yd/a),  only  to  recover  a  position
N.  of  Iksal  but  W. of  Deburiyeh  at  GATH-HEPHER
(el-Meshhed),  and  continue  a  course  due  N.  (see  ETH-
KAZiNJto  RIMMON  [RV  ;  ©Lom.]  (Rummaneh)  on  the
S.  margin  of  the  plain  of  Buttauf,  across  which  it  con
tinues  (see NEAH, HANNATHON) to the 'valley of
JIPHTAH-KL'  (q.v.),  somewhere  near  Tell  Jafat,  due  E.
of  Haifa. The  intention appears  to be  to  give  the
southern  and  eastern  boundary. ' Real  definite  frontiers
there  cannot  have  been, as  the  discrepant  data  show
(cp  also  ISSACHAR, NAPHTALI,  ASHER). Generally,
Zebulun  must  have  lain  NW.  of  Issachar, W. of  the
southern  part  of  Naphtali,  and  S(E).  of  Asher. On  the
exuberant  fertility and busy  life  of the country, see
GASm.  IfG  chap.  20,  and  cp  GALILEE,  §  4.

H.  \v.  H.

ZECHARIAH  (irrpT,  more  often  rrpT,  as  if
'  Yahwe  remembers  '  [§§  32,  52]  ;  but  the  original  form
of  Zechariah  was  probably  Zichri,  which  (see  ZICHKI)
is  a  clan-name.  A  study  of  the  names  with  which
'Zechariah'  is  grouped  (e.g. ,  Meshelemiah,  from
Ishme'eli)  strongly  confirms  this  [Che.];  ZAX^P'^c]
[BXAQL]  whence  the  Grcecised  form  ZACHARIAS
&.».]).

1.  b. Berechiah, b.  Iddo  (also  loosely, b.  Iddo), a
prophet who, together with Haggai, is our best
authority  for  the  religious  state  of  the  early  post-exilic
community  at  Jerusalem, and  is  the author of  Zech.
1-8. To  these  prophets  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple
is largely due (Ezra 5i 614). It is probably this
Zechariah  who  is  mentioned  as  a  priest  in  Neh.  12  16
(cp  no.  n).

2.  Son  of  Jeroboam  II.,  king  of  Israel,  and  the  fifth
and  last  king  of  the  house  of  JEHU  (2  K.  1429  15 8-12  ;
AV  ZACHARIAH,  afaptas  [B  in  1429,  A]). He  reigned
but six months, and was then slain by Shallum b.
Jabesh  in  IBLEAM  (q.v. ). On  the  date  of  his  accession,
see  CHRONOLOGY,  §  34.

3.  The  father  of  Abi  or  Abijah,  the  mother  of  Hezekiah  (2  K.
18  2,  AV  ZACHARIAH,  £axxatou  [A] ;  2  Ch.  29  i).

4.  A  chief  of  REUBEN  (§  13),  i  Ch.  67.

5.  b.  Meshelemiah  a  Korhite  Levite,  praised  for  his  'discreet
counsel '  (i  Ch.  9  21  26  2  14).

6.  b.  JEHIEL,  of  KENJAMIN  (§  9  ii./3),  i  Ch.  9  37,  (£a\\ovp  [A],
£rXP«  [L]),  who  in i  Ch.  831 is  called ZACHER, RV  Zecher
("ID^  in  pause,  £a.xovP  t^l>  faKXovP  [A],  &\p<-  [L]).

7.  A  Levite,  a  temple  musician  (i  Ch.  15  18  20  10  5),  perhaps
the  same  as  (5).

8.  A  priest  (i  Ch.  1624).

9.  b.  Isshiah,  a  Levite  (i  Ch.242s).

10.  b.  Hosah,  a  Merarite  Levite  (i  Ch.  26  n).

it. Father  of  Iddo,  a  Manassite  (i  Ch.  27  21,  (apS[(]iov  [RA]).

12.  One  of  Jehoshaphat's  commissioners  for  teaching  the  Law
(2  Ch.  17  7). See  BEN-HAIL.

13.  An  Asaphite  Levite  (2  Ch.  2014). [  =  26,  see  MATTHA-

NIAH.]

14.  A  son  of  Jehoshaphat  (2  Ch.  21  2).

15. b.  Jehoiada,  a  reforming  chief  priest  in  the  reign

1  Is  the  omission  of  a  western  boundary  to  be  connected  in
some  way  with  the  references  to  the  sea  in  Gen.  49 14  Dt.
S3  i8/.  ?

5390


ZBCHARIAH,  BOOK  OF

of  Joash,  who  was  stoned  to  death  in  the  temple  court,
at  the  king's  command  (2  Ch.  2420^,  a^'afitat  [BA]
Jos.  Ant.  ix.  86  ;  cp  references  in  Jer.  Talm.  Taanith,
69 1  2,  Bab.  Talm.  Sunhedrin,  96z,  Lightfoot,  Temple-
Sen'ice,  36).  It  was  a  Jewish  saying  that  the  blood
stains  were  never  washed  away  until  the  temple  was
burnt  at  the  captivity.  The  Targ.  on  Lam.  2zo  ('  Shall
the  priest  and  the  prophet  be  slain  in  the  sanctuary  of
Yahwe?  ')  refers  this  especially  to  Zechariah,  but  through
a  confusion  calls  him  the  son  of  Iddo.  On  the  possible
reference  to  Zechariah's  death  in  Mt.  23 35  Lk.llsi,  see
ZACHAKIAS  (9).

16.  A  prophet  who,  according  to  the  Chronicler,  was
as  influential  with  Uzziah  as  the  priest  Jehoiada  had
been  with  Joash  (2  Ch.  26  5). Probably  'in  the  vision
of  God'  (/.'".)  should  rather  be  'in the fear  of  God'
(see  kV'"»-) — i.e. for  nitna  we  should  read  rmT3  (©,
Tg. , Pesh., Ar. , and some MSS). According  to
Hitzig  the  author  of  Zech.  9-11.

17.  An  Asaphite  Levite  (2  Ch.  20  13,  a£apta?  [B]).

18.  A  Kohalhite  Levite  (2  Ch.  34  12).

19.  A  '  ruler  of  the  temple '  in  the  time  of  Josiah  (2  Ch.  35  8)  ;
according  to  I'ertheau,  'priest  of  the  second  order,'  cp  2  K.25i8
Jer.  52  24. In  i  Esd.  1 8,  ZACHARI  AS.

Among  the  lists  of  the  exiles  who  returned  in  Ezra-Neh.  we
find  seven  men  of  this  name  :

20.  One  of  the b'ne  Parosh  (Ezra  8316  Neh.  84,  cp  i  Esd.
8  30  44).

21.  One  of  the  b'ne  Bebai  (EzraSn,  a^apias  [B],  cp  i  Esd.
837,  <,aXaPKu|B]).

22.  One  of  the  b'ne  Elam  (Ezra  10  26,  cp  i  Esd.  9  27).

23.  A  Judahite,  ancestor  of  Athaiah  (\eh.  11  4).

04.  A Shilonite  (Neh.  11  5, 0r,feia  [B], 6»r,6eia  [Kl).

25.  One  of  the  b'ne  I'ashhur  (Neh.  11  12,  (Ja^apeta  [B]).

26.  An  Asaphite  (Xeh.  12  35  41  [om.  BN*A)  [  =  13].

27.  b.  Tcberechiah,  a  contemporary  of  Isaiah  (82),
who  served  with  L'riah  the  priest,  as  a.  '  trustworthy
witness '  in  connection  with  the  sign  Maher-shalal-
hashbaz.  Some  identify  him  with  the  father  of  Abijah,
3  ;  others,  with  the  Levite,  17.  Hitzig  makes  him  the
author  of  the  anonymous  chaps.  1'2-14  of  Zechariah,
Bertholdt,  the  author  of  chaps.  9-11.  Observe  that
the  name  of  his  father  is  essentially  the  same  as  that
of  the  father  of  the  well-known  prophet  [i].

ZECHARIAH,  BOOK  OF. Zechariah,  son  of  Bere-
chiah,  son  of  Iddo,  or  by  contraction  son  of  Iddo  (see
ZKCHARIAH,  i),  appeared  as  a  prophet


1.  Chaps.  1-8  :
contents.


in  Jerusalem  along  with  HAGGAI  (g.v. ),


in  the  second  year  of  Darius  Hystaspis
(520  B.C.),  to  warn  and  encourage  the  Jews  to  address
themselves  at  length  to  the  restoration  of  the  temple,
which  then  still  lay  in  ruins.  Supported  by  the  prophets,
Zerubbabel,  the  governor  of  Judah,  and  Joshua,  the  high
priest,  set  about  the  work,  and  the  elders  of  Judah  built
and  the  work  went  forward  (EzraSi/.  614'!.  The  first
eight  chapters  of  the  book  of  Zechariah  exactly  fit  into
this  historical  setting.  They  are  divided  by  precise
chronological  headings  into  three  sections — (a)  li-6,
in  the  eighth  month  of  the  second  year  of  Darius  ;  (/>)
1  7-1115,  on  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  eleventh  month
of  the  same  year  ;  (c)  7-8,  on  the  fourth  day  of  the
ninth  month  of  the  fourth  year  of  Darius.  The  first
section  is  a  preface  containing  exhortation  in  general
terms.

The  main  section  is  the  second  (b),  containing  a  series
of  night  visions,  the  significant  features  of  which  are
pointed  out  by  an  angel  who  stands  by  the  prophet  and
answers  his  questions  :

1  7-17.  The  divine  chariots  and  horses  that  make  the  round  of
the  world  by  Yahwc's  orders  return  to  the  heavenly  palace  and
report  that  there  is  still  no  movement  among  the  nations,  no  sign
of  the  Messianic  crisis.  Seventy  years  have  passed,  and  Zion
and  the  cities  of  Judah  still  mourn.  Sad  news!  but  Yahwe
gives  a  comfortable  assurance  of  his  gracious  return  to  Jerusalem
and  the  rebuilding  of  his  temple.

1  18-21  [2  1-4].  Four  horns,  representing  the  hostile  world-
power  that  oppresses  Israel  and  Jerusalem,  are  routed  by  four
smiths.

2 1-13  [5-17].  The  new  Jerusalem  is  laid  out  with  the
measuring  line.  It  is  to  have  no  walls,  that  its  population  may

S39I


ZECHARIAH,  BOOK  OF

not  be  limited,  and  it  needs  none,  for  Yahwc  is  its  protection.
The  catastrophe  of  Babel  (the  land  of  the  north)  is  near  to  come  ;
then  the  exiles  of  Ziun  shall  stream  back  from  all  quarters,  the
converted  heathen  shall  join  them,  Yahwe  himself  will  dwell  in
the  midst  of  them  ;  even  now  he  stirs  himself  from  his  holy
habitation.

3  i -io. The  high  priest  Joshua  is  accused  before  Yahwe  by
Satan,  but  is  acquitted  and  given  rule  in  Yahwc's  house  and
courts,  with  the  right  of  access  to  Yahwe  in  priestly  intercession.
The  restoration  of  the  temple  and  its  service  is  a  pledge  of  still
higher  things. The  promised  'branch'  (or  'shoot,'  nOi)>  the
Messiah,  will  come  ; the  national  kingdom  is  to  be  restored  ;
and  a  time  of  general  felicity  dawns,  when  ever)'  man  shall  sit
happy  under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree. As  by  rights  the
Messianic  kingdom  should  follow  immediately  on  the  exile,  it  is
probable  that  the  prophet  designs  to  hint  in  a  guarded  way  that
Zerubbabel,  who in  all  other places  is  mentioned along  with
Joshua,  is  on  the  point  of  ascending  the  throne  of  his  ancestor
David. The  jewel  with  seven  facets  is  already  there,  only  the
inscription  has  still  to  be  engraved  on  it  (89). The  charges
brought  against  the  high  priest  consist  simply  in  the  obstacles
that  have  hitherto  hindered  the  restoration  of  the  temple  and  its
service  ;  and  in  like  manner  the  guilt  of  the  land  (3  9)  is  simply
the  still  continuing  domination  of  foreigners.

4  1-14. Beside  a  lighted  golden  candlestick  of  seven  branches
stand  two  olive  trees — Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  the  two  anointed
ones — specially  watched  over by him whose seven eyes run
through  the  whole earth. This  explanation  of  the  vision  is
separated  from  the  description by  an  animated  dialogue,  not
quite  clear  in  its  expression,  in  which  it  is  said  that  the  mountain
of  obstacles  shall  disappear  before  Zerubbabel,  and  that,  having
begun  the  building  of  the  temple,  he  shall  also  bring  it  loan  end
in  spite  of  those  who  now  mock  at  the  day  of  small  beginnings.

61-4.  A  written  roll  flies  over  the  Holy  Land  ;  this  is  a  con
crete  representation  of  the  curse  which  in  future  will  fall  of  itself
on  all  crime,  so  that,  e.g.,  no  man  who  has  suffered  theft  will
have  occasion  himself  to  pronounce  a  curse  against  the  thief  (cp
Judg.  17  2).

65-1?.  Guilt,  personified  as  a  woman,  is  cast  into  an  ephah-
measure  with  a  heavy  lid  and  carried  from  Judah  to  Chaldaea,
where  it  is  to  have  its  home  for  the  future.

G  1-8.  The  divine  teams,  four  in  number,  again  traverse  the
world  toward  the  four  winds,  to  execute  Yahwe 's  commands.
That  which  goes  northward  is  charged  to  wreak  his  anger  on
the  N.  country.  The  series  of  visions  has  now  reached  its  close,
returning  to  its  starting-point  in  1  "j  ff.  [On  the  'mountains  of
brass '  see  BRASS  ;  and  on  the  colour  of  the  horses  see  COLOURS.]

An  appendix  follows  (09-15).  Jews  from  Babylon  have
brought  gold  and  silver  to  Jerusalem  ;  of  these  the  prophet
must  make  a  crown  designed  for  the  '  branch  '  who  is  to  build
Yahwe's  house  and  sit  king  on  the  throne,  but  retain  a  good
understanding  with  the  high  priest.  Zerubbabel  is  certainly
meant  here,  and,  if  the  received  text  names  Joshua  instead  of
him  (fin),  this  is  only  a  correction,  made  for  reasons  easy  to
understand,  which  breaks  the  context  and  destroys  the  sense  and
the  reference  of  '  them  both  '  in  v.  13.

The  third  section  ("yT),  dated  from  the  fourth  year  of  Darius,
contains  an  inquiry  whether  the  fast  days  that  arose  in  the
captivity  are  still  to  be  observed,  with  a  comforting  and  en
couraging  reply  of  the  prophet.

Kosters  (Herstel  ~'iui  Israel,  1894)  laid  stress  upon
the  fact  that  neither  in  Haggai  nor  in  Zechariah  do  we
find  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  represented
as  consisting  of  returned  exiles. The

, ,  . fact  is  as  stated  ;  but  it  does  not  pre-

elude  us  from  supposing  that  the  return
of  a  band  of  exiles  may  have  marked  the  starting-point
of  a  new  era  of  Jewish  history.  Few  in  number  they
indeed  were,  and  they  did  not  assume  an  exclusive
attitude  towards  the  vastly  more  numerous  class  of  Jews
who  had  remained  behind  in  Judaea,  whom,  rather,  on
the  contrary,  they  sought  to  win  over  to  their  own  view,
and  urged  to  congregate  in  and  around  Jerusalem,  so
as  to  make  the  desolate  ruins  once  more  the  focus  of  a
new  theocracy.  Stade  thinks  that  the  buoyancy  and
joyous  hopefulness  which  we  perceive  in  Haggai  and
Zechariah  may  have  been  due  to  the  revolt  of  Smerdis.  *
But  such  a  shaking  of  the  Persian  empire  after  the  death
of  Cambyses  could  not  possibly  have  been  predicted  as
still  future  (Hag.  26)  two  years  after  its  occurrence,  and
at  a  time  when  it  had  already  been  almost  recovered
from,  and,  moreover,  the  Jews  could  hardly  have
rejoiced  so  heartily  over  it,  their  feelings  towards  the
Persians  being  friendly.  It  seems  more  likely  that  the
Jews  heard  with  gladness  of  the  conquest  of  Babylon —
that  is  to  say,  the  second — under  Darius  Hystaspis.
The  vengeance  on  Babylon,  which  Cyrus  had  not  fully

1  [Gl'fl  113.  The  revolt  of  Nidintu- Bel  in  521  has  also  been
suggested  (Che.  Jew.  Rel.  Life,  14).]

5393


2.  Their
historical


ZECHARIAH,  BOOK  OF

carried  out,  now  at  last  seemed  to  be  accomplished  and  the
wrath  of  Yahwe  against  the  land  of  the  North  to  fulfil
itself  (Zech.  68  26[io]/. ).  Thereby  also  was  quickened
the  more  general  Messianic  expectation  that  all  nations
would  at  last  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Yahwe.

Throughout  the  first  eight  chapters  the  scene  is
Jerusalem  in  the  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Darius.
Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  the  prince  and  the  priest,  are
the  leaders  of  the  community.  The  great  concern  of
the  time  and  the  chief  practical  theme  of  these  chapters
is  the  building  of  the  temple  ;  but  its  restoration  is  only
the  earnest  of  greater  things  to  follow — viz.,  the  glorious
restoration  of  David's  kingdom.  The  horixon  of  these
prophecies  is  everywhere  limited  by  the  narrow  con
ditions  of  the  time,  and  their  aim  is  clearly  seen.  The
visions  hardly  veil  the  thought,  and  the  mode  of  expres
sion  is  usually  simple,  except  in  the  Messianic  passages,
where  the  tortuousness  and  obscurity  are  perhaps  in
tentional.  Noteworthy  is  the  affinity  between  some
notions  evidently  not  framed  by  the  prophet  himself  and
the  prologue  to  Job, — -the  heavenly  hosts  that  wander
through  the  earth  and  bring  back  their  report  to  Yahwe's
throne,  the  figure  of  Satan,  the  idea  that  suffering  and
calamity  are  evidences  of  guilt  and  of  accusations  pre
sented  before  God.

Passing  from  chaps.  l->3  to  chaps.  9^,  we  at  once
feel  ourselves  transported  into  a  different  world.

Yahwe's  word  is  accomplished  on  Syria-Phoenicia  and  Philistia
(HADKACH  [q.v.\  and  Damascus  are  first  mentioned);  and  then

the Messianic kingdom begins in Zion,

3.  Chaps.  9-14  :  and the Israelites detained among the

Contents. heathen, Judah and Ephraim combined,

receive  a  part  in  it.  The  might  of  the  sons
of  Javan  is  broken  in  battle  against  this  kingdom  (chap.  f).
After  an  intermezzo  of  three  verses  (10 1-3 :  '  Ask  rain  of
Yahvve,  not  of  the  diviners')  a  second  and  quite  analogous
Messianic  prophecy  follows.  The  foreign  tyrants  fall ;  the
lordship  of  Assyria  and  Egypt  has  an  end ;  the  autonomy
and  martial  power  of  the  nation  are  restored.  The  scattered
exiles  return  as  citizens  of  the  new  theocracy,  all  obstacles
in  their  way  parting  asunder  as  when  the  waves  of  the
Red  Sea  gave  passage  to  Israel  at  the  founding  of  the  old
theocracy  (103-12).  Again  there  is  an  interlude  of  three  verses
(lli-3):  fire  seizes  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  and  the  oaks  of
Bashan.  This  is  followed  by  the  difficult  passage  about  the
shepherds.  The  shepherds  (rulers)  of  the  nation  make  their
flock  an  article  of  trade  and  treat  the  sheep  as  sheep  for  the
shambles.  Therefore,  the  inhabited  world  shall  fall  a  sacrifice
to  the  tyranny  of  its  kings,  whilst  Israel  is  delivered  to  a  shepherd
who  feeds  the  sheep  for  those  who  make  a  trade  of  the  flock
(Jfii'.T  '.'}>'33,  Il7ii  =  'they  that  sell  them,"  v.  5)  and  enters  on
his  office  with  two  staves,  '  Favour'  and  '  Union.'  He  destroys
'  the  three  shepherds '  in  one  month,  but  is  soon  weary  of  his
flock  and  the  flock  of  him.  He  breaks  the  staff  '  Favour' — i.e.,
the  covenant  of  peace  with  the  nations— and  asks  the  traders  for
his  hire.  Receiving  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  he  casts  it  into  the
temple  treasury  and  breaks  the  staff  'Union' — i.e.,  the  brother
hood  between  Judah  and  Israel.  He  is  succeeded  by  a  foolish
shepherd,  who  neglects  his  flock  and  lets  it  go  to  ruin.  At
length  Yahwe  intervenes ;  the  foolish  shepherd  falls  by  the
sword  ;  two-thirds  of  the  people  perish  with  him  in  the  Messianic
crisis,  but  the  remnant  of  one-third  forms  the  seed  of  the  new
theocracy  (11  4-17  taken  with  13  7-9,  according  to  the  necessary
transposition  proposed  by  Ewald).  All  this  must  be  an  allegory
of  past  events,  the  time  present  to  the  author  and  his  hopes  for
the  future  beginning  only  at  1117  187-9.

Chap.  12  presents  a  third  variation  on  the  Messianic  promise.
All  heathendom  is  gathered  together  against  Jerusalem  and
perishes  there.  Yahwe  first  gives  victory  to  the  countryfolk  of
Judah  and  then  they  rescue  the  capital.  After  this  triumph  the
noblest  houses  of  Jerusalem  hold,  each  by  itself,  a  great  lamenta
tion  over  a  martyr  '  whom  they  have  pierced  '  (or  '  whom  men
have  pierced  ').  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  readers  will
know  who  the  martyr  is,  and  the  exegesis  of  the  church  applies
the  passage  to  Christ  [cp  HADAD-KI.MMON].  Chap.  13  1-6  is
a  continuation  of  chap.  12  ;  the  dawn  of  the  day  of  salvation  is
accompanied  by  a  general  purging  away  of  idolatry  and  the
enthusiasm  of  false  prophets.  Yet  a  fourth  variation  of  the
picture  of  the  incoming  of  the  Messianic  deliverance  is  given  in
chap.  14.  The  heathen  gather  against  Jerusalem  and  take  the
city,  hut  do  not  utterly  destroy  the  inhabitants.  Then  Yahwe,
at  a  time  known  only  to  himself,  shall  appear  with  all  his  saints
on  Mount  Olivet  and  destroy  the  heathen  in  battle,  while  the
men  of  Jerusalem  take  refuge  in  their  terror  in  the  great  cleft
that  opens  where  Yahwe  sets  his  foot.  Now  the  new  era  begins,
and  even  the  heathen  do  homage  to  Yahwe  by  bringing  due
tribute  to  the  annual  feast  of  tabernacles.  All  in  Jerusalem  is
holy  down  to  the  bells  on  the  horses  and  the  cooking-pots  [cp
Crit.  Bib.].

5393


ZECHARIAH,  BOOK  OP

There  is  a  striking  contrast  between  chaps.  1-8  and
chaps.  9-14.  The  prophecy  1-8  is  closely  tied  to  the
4  Ch  act  situation  and  the  wants  of  the  com
munity  of  Jerusalem  in  the  second  year
of  Darius  I. ,  and  all  that  it  aims  at  is  the  restoration
of  the  temple  and  perhaps  the  elevation  of  Zerubbal>el
to  the  throne  of  David.  Chapters  9  ff.  contain  no
trace  of  this  historical  situation  and  deal  with  quite
other  matters.  They  are  more  obscure  and  more
fantastic.  There  are  corresponding  differences  in  style
and  speech  ;  and  it  is  particularly  to  be  noted  that,
whilst  the  superscriptions  in  chaps.  1-8  name  the
author  and  give  the  date  of  each  oracle  with  precision,
those  in  the  second  part  (9i  12 1)  are  without  name  or
date.  That  both  parts  do  not  belong  to  the  same
author  must  be  admitted.

Most  recent  critics  make  the  second  part  the  older.  Chaps.
9-11  are  ascribed  to  a  contemporary  of  Amos  and  Hosea.  about
the  middle  of  the  eighth  century  B.C.,  because  Ephraim  is  men
tioned  as  well  as  Judah,  and  Assyria  along  with  Egypt  (10  10),
whilst  the  neighbours  of  Israel  appear  in  !)  if.  in  the  same  way
as  in  Amos  1-2.  That  chaps.  12-14  are  also  pre-exilic  is  held  to
appear  especially  in  the  attack  on  idolatry  and  lying  prophecy
(13  1-6);  bill,  as  this  prophecy  speaks  only  of  Judah  and  Jeru
salem,  it  is  dated  after  the  fall  of  Samaria,  and  is  assigned  to  the
last  days  of  the  Judsean  kingdom  on  the  strength  of  12  n,  where
an  allusion  is  seen  to  the  mourning  for  King  Josiah,  slain  in
battle  at  Megiddo.

It  is  more  likely  that  chaps.  9-14  all  together  are  of

much  later  date. These predictions  have no  affinity

_ . ._ either with the prophecies of Amos,

.  rro  a  y  j^oseaj  anfj  isajani  or  w;th  that  of  Jere
miah.  The  kind  of  eschatology  which  we
find  in  Zech.  9-14  was  introduced  by  E/.ekiel,  who  in
particular  is  the  author  of  the  conception  that  the  time
of  deliverance  is  to  be  preceded  by  a  joint  attack  of  all
nations  on  Jerusalem,  in  which  they  come  to  final  over
throw.  Trie  importance  attached  to  the  temple  service,
even  in  Messianic  times  (Zech.  14),  implies  an  author
who  lived  in  the  ideas  of  the  religious  commonwealth  of
post-exilic  times.  So  also  the  use  of  '  Zion '  as  a  name
for  the  theocracy.  The  diaspora  and  the  cessation  of
prophecy  (13i-6)  are  presupposed.  A  future  king  is
hoped  for  ;  but  in  the  present  there  is  no  Davidic  king,
only  a  Davidic  family  standing  on  the  same  level  with
other  noble  families  in  Jerusalem  (12712).  The
'bastard'  (mixed  race)  of  Ashdod  reminds  us  of  Neh.
1823^;  and  the  words  of  9  12  ('to-day,  also,  do  I
declare  that  I  will  render  double  unto  thee')  have  no
sense  unless  they  refer  back  to  the  deliverance  from
Babylonian  exile.

Whilst  chaps.  9-14,  are  thus  all  later  than  chaps.  1-8,
they  are  not  themselves  homogeneous  ;  they  fall  into
two  well-marked  divisions — 9-11  and  12-14.

The  latter  division  [12-14]  contains  two  prophecies

which  are  little  more  than  a  standing  dogmatic  formula

, _  of  eschatology  filled  up  with  concrete

6. Composite.  detailSi and  can be understood well

enough  (if  need  be)  without  our  knowing  the  his
torical  setting.  The  actual  situation  at  the  time  of
composition  discloses  itself  only  in  one  or  two  features,
as,  for  example,  when  the  country  of  Judah  is  contrasted
with  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  deliverance  of  the
city  comes  from  the  country — a  feature  which  seems  to
indicate  the  Maccabcean  period.

The  former  division  (9-11),  on  the  other  hand — which
again  falls  into  two  sections,  9i-ll3  nnd  11  4-'7  +  13?-9
— is  much  more  concrete  and  cannot  be  understood  at
all  if  the  date  of  its  composition  is  not  known.  In
9i-lls  we  find  that  it  is  the  Greeks  (9 13  I  cp  JAVAN)
who  are  the  heathen  power,  the  enemy  of  God,  which
must  be  overthrown  before  the  Messiah's  kingdom
can  come.  Assyria  and  Egypt,  which  take  the  place  of
Javan  in  chap.  10,  are  the  kingdom  of  the  Seleucidae
and  the  Ptolemies.  The  region  of  HADRACH  (</.v.),
Damascus,  and  Hamath,  against  which  the  wrath  of
Yahwe  is,  in  the  first  instance,  directed  (9i/. ),  is  the
seat,  not  of  the  old  Assyrians,  but  of  the  Seleucidae.

5394


ZECHER


ZBDEKIAH


And  inasmuch  as  Assyria  here  takes  precedence  of  Egypt
_  ,  we  are  able  to  fix  the  date  of  the  present
'  section  more  precisely  as  falling  somewhere
within  the  first  third  of  the  second  century  B.C.,  for  it
was  not  till  the  beginning  of  that  century  that  the  Seleu-
cidae  became  masters  of  Judasa(SELKUCiD.*:,  §  7/.).  The
second  section  (114-17  +  187-9)  will  also  be  of  this  date  ;
for  a  right  understanding  of  it  a  correct  apprehension
of  the  historical  situation  is  still  more  indispensable,
though,  indeed,  rendered  very  difficult  not  only  by  the
bad  state  of  the  text,  but  also  by  our  defective  know
ledge  of  this  period  of  Jewish  history.  By  the  owners
of  the  sheep  who  traffic  in  them  we  are  to  understand
the  Seleucid  sovereigns  who  carried  on  a  remunerative
business  in  farming  out  their  flocks  to  the  shepherds.
The  shepherds  are  the  high  priests  and  ethnarchs  of
the  Jews  ;  by  the  rapid  and  violent  changes  of  the
shepherds  the  events  which  preceded  and  led  up  to  the
Maccabaean  revolt  are  denoted.  They  were  all  of  them
worthless  whether  they  traced  their  descent  from  Zadok
or  from  Tobias.  At  last  the  measure  of  iniquity  was
filled  up  by  Menelaus,  who  may  very  well  be  meant  by
the  last  cruel  shepherd  who  is  to  bring  on  the  cata
strophe  and  the  judgment  (11  isff-}-  The  prominent
man,  who  is  an  exception  to  the  rest,  and  does  not
come  into  the  series,  who  takes  upon  him  the  office  of
shepherd  in  the  interests  of  the  flock,  but  gives  it  up
when  he  sees  that  the  flock  is  unworthy  of  his  care,
might  be  Hyrcanus  the  son  of  Tobias.  According  to
the  (legendary)  accounts  we  have  of  him  he  was  a  man
of  proud  disposition  and  lofty  plans  who  lived  in  undis
guised  enmity  with  his  brethren  the  Tobiadae,  overcame
them  and  put  two  of  them  to  death,  and  yet  was  unable
to  hold  his  own  in  Jerusalem  (Jos.  Ant.  xii.  49  [§  222],  ed.
Niese).  In  any  case  he  was  a  person  of  quite  a  different
sort  from  the  ordinary  Jewish  aristocrat.  It  is  natural
to  ask  how  we  are  to  suppose  that  at  his  departure  he
obtained  his  reward  for  having  been  shepherd.  For,  as
a  rule,  the  order  was  reversed  and  shepherds  paid  for
the  right  of  feeding  the  sheep.  But  this  trait  in  the
picture  is  more  easily  understood  in  the  case  of  Hyrcanus,
whose  position  was  quite  exceptional,  than  in  that  of
the  other  shepherds.  Perhaps  his  adherents  may  in  the
end  have  given  him  money  to  leave  Jerusalem  when  the
good  understanding  between  them  had  come  to  an  end
and  various  external  dangers  were  threatening.  It  is
worth  noticing  that  the  reward  received  by  the  shepherd
is  cast  by  him  into  the  temple-treasury  (Ilia)  ;  accord
ing  to  2  Mace.  3 ii,  Hyrcanus,  the  son  of  Tobias,  had  a
deposit  there.

Literature. — The  literature  of  the  book  is  cited  by  C.  H.  H.
Wright,  Zcchariah  and  his  Prophecies^-)  1879.  See  also
Static,  'Deuterozacharia'  (ZATll',  1881-2);  and  Wellhausen
and  Nowack's  editions  of  the  Minor  Prophets.  [Cp  also
G.  A.  Smith,  Twelve  Prophets,  vol.  ii.,  and  PROPHECY,  §  47.]

J.  W.

ZECHER  (IDT),  iCh.  831,  RV.  See  ZECHARIAH,
i.  6.

ZECHRIAS  (zexpioy  [B]  ezepioy  [A]),  i  Esd.
81,  RV  =  Ezra7i,  A/.ARIAH,  3.

ZEDAD  Cm';  only  in  ace.  iYViy  ;  rrm  [Sam.];
C&RAA&K  [BL],  CAA&A&K  [A],  CAAA&K  [F],  Aradath
[It.]),  one  of  the  points  in  the  ideal  northern  frontier
of  Canaan  according  to  P  or  the  later  redactor  (Nu.
348),  and  also  mentioned  in  the  ||  passage  of  Ezekiel
(47is;  for  ©  see  later).  Robinson  (BR  8461  n.),
Wetzstein  (Reisebeticht,  88),  Furrer  (7.DPV  827),
Miihlau,  and  Socin,  identify  it  with  the  the  large  village
Sadad,  between  Riblah  and  Palmyra  (long.  37°  E. )  ;
but  this  is  too  far  E.  if  it  is  considered  that  both
Hamath  and  Damascus  are  meant  to  be  excluded.  It
is  also  an  objection,  that  the  implied  view  of  the
northern  frontier  assumes  a  large  part  of  the  Lebanon
district  to  be  included  within  the  Israelitish  border.
Many  besides  Buhl  (Pal.  66)  will  think  that  this  carries
idealisation  beyond  what  is  probable  (cp  HOR,  MOUNT).

5395


Van  Kasteren  (Rev.  bibl.,  1895,  p.  30)  adopts  the  read
ing  Zerad,  and  plausibly  identifies  with  Khirbet  Serddd,
between  Merj  'Ayun  (where  he  places  '  the  entrance  of
Hamath')  and  Hernion,  to  the  S.  of  Kh.  Sanbarlyeh
(see  SIBKAIM).

With  regard  to  the  second  passage  :  Cornill  thinks  that  the
original  reading  (see  t£5)  must  have  been  simply  'to  the  entrance
of  Hamath'  and  that  '  Zcdadah  '  (.i.e.,  'to  Zedad  ')  was  inter
polated  after  '  Hamath  '  from  Nu.  348.  '(To)  Hamath  '  before
'  Zedadah  '  was  thus  rendered  useless,  and  so  the  two  names
changed  places  (see  MT).  The  original  (B  of  Kzek.  did  not,  it
is  assumed,  contain  the  interpolation.  The  scribe  who  altered
it  simply  made  an  insertion  ;  hence  the  existing  MSS  of  <B
represent  '  Hamath  '  not  only  after  but  also  before  '  Zedadah  '
[13],  Tj^aS'eA.  [A],  TjjiacraiAaa/uya  IQ],  afioAaai/uaS'


-,

According  to  the  view  of  the  geographical  definitions  in  Nu.
34  and  Ezek.  47  13  _^  advocated  elsewhere  (see  KIBLAH,
SIBKAIM)  the  region  referred  to  in  the  original  text  may  have
been,  not  the  land  of  Canaan,  but  the  Negeb.  In  that  case,
Mt.  Hor=Mt.  Jerahmeel,  Hamath  =  Maacath,  Zedad  or  Zerad
probably=Missur,  and  Ziphron  or  Sibraim  (to  be  idemified)  =
/arephath.  Cp  ZEKOK.  T.  K.  C.

ZEDECHIAS,  RV  Sedekias  (ceAeKiAc  [BA])
i  Esd.  1  46.  See  ZEUEKIAH  i.

ZEDEKIAH  (-IrVplV.  also  iVjm*,  see  i,  2,  5,
ceA6KlA[c]  ;  cp  Siclka,  the  name  of  a  king  of  Ashkelon,
temp.  Sennacherib  [A'sl  7"'-'  165]).

i.  The  last  king  of  Judah  (597-586),  a  son  of  JosiAH
(2  K.  24  /  2  Ch.  36io/:;  in  i  Ch.  Sis1  Je'r.  27  12
293  49s  "'i-"1*)'  According  to  2  K.


1  Na  e  J  2.3  4s?  "'i-"1*'  According  to  2  K.
'  24  17,  his  original  name  was  Mattaniah  ;  the
king  of  '  Babel  '  (^33)  '  changed  his  name  '  to  Zedekiah
(Sidkiyah)  when  he  raised  this  uncle  of  the  deposed
king  to  the  throne  of  Judah.  This  act  of  sovereignty  is
in  itself  probable  ;  cp  the  new  name  imposed  by  Asur-
bani-pal  on  Necho  I.2  (Limir-isakku-Asur,  'let  Asur's
viceroy  see.')

The  special  appropriateness  of  the  name  selected  is  not  obvious.
Parallel  names  suggest  that  '  Zedekiah  '  (Sidkiyah)  means
properly  '  Zidkite,"  and  even  if  we  suppose  (rationally  enough)
that,  when  borne  by  the  king,  it  acquired  the  new  meaning
'righteousness  of  Yah  we,  '3  that  is  by  no  means  a  clear  expression
of  Zedekiah's  relation  to  his  suzerain.  No  fully  satisfactory
explanation  of  this  has  been  offered  ;  and  yet  Hebrew  onomat-
ology  cannot  afford  to  confess  itself  baffled.  The  theory  that  in
many  passages  '  Babel'  (^33)=7KOrTV  suggests  an  explanation.
Since  rp,T  's  'n  some  OT  passages  probably  miswritten  for  'm'»
it  follows  that  this  great  race-name  may  possibly  be  represented
by  in'-4  Now  Sidkiyahu,  '  righteousness  of  Jerahmeel,'  is  a
name  that  might  conceivably  be  given  to  a  royal  vassal  of
Jerahmeel,  after  he  had  sworn  fidelity  (Ezek.  17  13)  to  his
suzerain.

Zedekiah  was  only  twenty-one  at  his  accession  and  it
is  probable  that  the  queen-mother  Hamutal  made  up  by


2.  Dangers.


her  own  energy  for  the  weakness  of  her


son.  This  certainly  seems  to  be  implied
by  what  Ezekiel  says  of  her  in  one  of  his  striking
similitudes5  (Ezek.  195).  Whether  it  was  so  or  not,
there  was  on  the  part  of  the  rulers  no  just  political
insight.  Fidelity  to  the  suzerain,  and  a  strict  mainten
ance  of  the  old  moral  traditions  of  Israel,  would  have
insured  a  peaceful  though  inglorious  existence  for  king
and  people  (cp  Ezek.  176  14).  But  the  deportation  of
a  large  part  of  the  upper  class  brought  wealth  and
political  power  to  those  who  had  had  none  of  the
necessary  training.  These  '  new  men '  soon  displayed
in  an  intensified  degree  the  vices  of  the  worst  of  their
predecessors  (Ezek.  222527  246),  and,  with  an  obstinacy
which  it  is  difficult  for  us  moderns  to  understand,
cherished  the  hope  of  quickly  throwing  off  the  foreign
yoke.  Meantime  those  who  had  gone  into  exile  with

1  On  the  strange  insertion  of  Zedekiah  in  r.  16  among  the
sons  of  Jehoiakim,  see  Benzinger,  who  thinks  that  the  author  of
the  text  may  really  have supposed  Zedekiah  to  have  been  the
son  of  Jehoiakim,  but  does  not  mention  the  possibility  that  the
scribe  may  have  misread  the  text  before  him. ,T~2T  (Zechariah)
would  be  a  very  possible  name.

2  Tiele,  BAG  356.

3  Cp  NAMES,  §  36,  and  note  also  Sidki-ilu,  the  name  of  an
Ass.  eponym  (Del.  Ass.  HU'B  5643).

4  Cp  TEBALIAH. The  same  explanation  applies  to  all  the
names  ending  in  or  beginning  with  in'.

5  See  Kraetzschmar,  ad  loc.

5396


ZEDEKIAH

Jehoiachin  looked  on  at  a  distance  with  mingled  contempt
and  indignation  (Ezek.  11 15  l-lzi/.),  and  Jeremiah,  not
less  than  Ezekiel,  recognised  the  moral  incapacity  of
the  new  lords  of  Jerusalem.

Whether,  or  how  far,  Nebuchadrezzar,  king  of
Babylon,  interfered  in  the  affairs  of  Judah,  remains
obscure.  The  redactors  of  the  narrative  and  prophetical
writings  certainly  believed  that  the  power  which  broke
up  the  national  existence  was  the  Babylonian.

When  we  look  beneath  the  surface,  however,  we  suspect  that
there  has  been  a  great  misunderstanding,  and  that,  according  to
the  extant  fragments  of  the  old  Hebrew  records,  when  restored
to  something  not  unlike  their  original  purity,  it  was  the  king  of
Jerahmeel  in  N.  Arabia  who  invaded  Jewish  territory,  who  be
sieged  and  took  Jerusalem,  and  once  and  again  carried  away  its
inhabitants.  We  do  not  know  enough  of  the  political  condition
of  N.  Arabia  to  say  what  nation  is  represented  by  the  archaising
name  Jerahmeel,  but  assume  that  tiiere  must  have  been  some
power  capable  of  enforcing  his  will  on  S.  Palestine.  It  is
possible,  of  course,  that  the  role  of  the  N.  Arabians  was  subor
dinate  to  that  of  the  Babylonians  (cp  OBADIAH  [BooK],  §  7);
but  this  is  only  a  hypothesis.  All  that  we  know  is  that  N.
Arabia  was  for  a  long  time  regarded  as  the  great  oppressor  of
Israel.  There  is  to  some  extent  a  similar  problem  with  regard
to  the  captivity  of  the  northern  Israelites  and  the  subsequent
invasion  (or  invasions)  of  Judah  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah.  We
are,  however,  in  a  worse  position  with  regard  to  the  captivities
of  Judah,  for  we  have  as  yet  no  cuneiform  records  of  Babylonian
interference  with  Judah  at  the  reported  times  of  those  cap
tivities.

Another  troublesome  N.  Arabian  potentate  was  the  king  of

Misrim  ;  here  again  the  name  is  an  archaism.1 According  to  our

revised  text  of  2  K.  242  'bands'  of  Misrites  had

3.  The  already  brought  Judah  very  low  in  the  reign  of
Misrites.  Jehoiakim  ;  it  is  to  such  incursions,  we  believe,
that  the  so-called  Scythian  prophecies  of  Jeremiah
really  refer  (see  PROPHET,  §  26,  end).  But,  according  to  Jer.
27  i  ff.  (substituting  for  the  introductory  verse  the  passage
which  now  appears  as  2S  i),2  the  king  of  Aram  (i.e.,  not
the  great  king  of  Jerahmeel,  but  some  inferior  king  on  the
border  of  Jewish  territory)  and  the  king  of  Missur3  sent
ambassadors  to  Zedekiah,  to  concert  a  revolt.  Evidently  a
change  of  circumstances  had  occurred,  and  the  Misrites  were
now  no  longer  anxious  for  the  destruction  or  weakening  of
Judah.  This  king  of  Missur  is  no  doubt  the  personage  miscalled
Pharaoh  Hophra  in  the  common  text  of  Jer.  44  30.*  For  a  time
the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Jerahmeelites  (which  we  refer  to
by  anticipation)  was  interrupted  by  a  friendly  diversion  on  the
part  of  a  Misrite  army.

It appears to be a trustworthy tradition that the

prophet  Jeremiah exhorted the rulers and people of

. , Judah to abstain from any act of

4>  J£re?ua'n'  rebellion,  and  that  in  doing  so  he  was
/.edefcian,  ana  diametricany  opposed  to  prophets  of
the  war-party.  an  inferior  order  (see  jEKEM1AHi  §  2  .

PROPHET,  §§  24-26).  We  have  also  records  of  embassies
of  Zedekiah  to  the  great  king  of  S^^.5

What  messages  were  carried  by  these  embassies,  we
cannot  of  course  say  ;  the  embassies  had  for  their
primary  object  the  conveyance  of  the  annual  tribute  of
Judah,6  until  the  fatal  year  when  Zedekiah  rebelled.

According  to  Winckler  (K'AT^,  278 /.},  who  holds
that  Zedekiah's  suzerain  was  the  king  of  Babylon,7  the
embassies  had  another  most  important  object,  viz.,  the
bringing  about  of  the  restoration  of  the  cultus  of  Yah  we
in  the  temple,  which,  he  thinks,  was  in  abeyance
throughout  the  reign  of  Zedekiah  owing  to  the  destruc
tion,  or  at  any  rate  the  removal,  of  the  sacred  vessels.
He  does  not,  however,  say  that  the  official  worship  of

1  Cp  Winckler,  KA  TM  141.

2  See  Duhm's  commentary.

3  Only  two  kings  are  meant. '  Edom  '  and  '  Moab '  should  be
'Aram' (Jerahmeel) and Missur. '  B'ne Ammon,' 'Tyre/
'  Zidon  '  are  also  wrong  ;  read  '  B'ne  Jerahmeel '  and  '  Missur'
(see  Crit.  Bib.).

4  jnan  's  a  dittographed  njTS,  and  this  springs  out  of  1x13
Pir'u.

5  I.e.,  Jerahmeel  (Jer.  20  3  51  59,  where,  following  (5,  we  read
nxo  instead  of  n«  —  '•?•,  'from'  instead  of  'with'  Zedekiah).
Guthe,  however  (Gl'f,  223),  thinks  that  Zedekiah  went  in  person
on  the  occasion  referred  to. Certainly  Manasseh,  when  sum
moned  by  Esar-haddon  to  his  durbar,  was  careful  to  obey. But
the  theory  adopted  in  the  text  is  safer.

8  In  51  59  read  nmo  ~vy  (©  ap\<av  Siapoiv ;  see  SERAIAH).

7  Winckler's  theory,  however,  could  of  course  be  accommo
dated  to  the  view  that  the  real  suzerain  of  Judah  at  this  time
was  the  king  of  Jerahmeel.

172  5397


ZEDEKIAH

Marduk  and  Xabu  was  introduced  into  the  temple,  or
that  Zedekiah's  accession  to  the  throne  was  without  the
sanctions  of  Yahwism.  He  thinks  that  it  was  only  the
•orthodox,  monotheistic  Yahwe  -  cultus '  which  was
abolished  ;  the  '  ordinary  Canaanitish  forms  of  cultus '
( '  no  doubt  partly  identical  with  those  of  Zedekiah ' )
were  either  allowed  to  remain,  or,  as  the  case  might  be,
set  up  anew.  And  when  Jeremiah  (27 17)  urges  the
people  to  '  serve  the  king  of  ^23  '  that  they  might  'live,'
he  means,  '  give  up  the  hope  of  the  restoration  of  the
cultus  in  the  sense  of  Josiah  and  of  orthodoxy,  and  be
content  with  what  is  left.'  'This,'  Winckler  adds,  'is
the  precise  opposite  of  the  demands  of  the  Yahwe-party,
to  which  Jeremiah,  as  a  pro-Babylonian,  is  absolutely
opposed.'  This  scholar's  view  of  Jeremiah's  attitude  is
altogether  original,  and  the  hypothesis  of  the  abolition
of  Yahwe-worship  is  difficult  to  work  out.  For  instance,
why  should  Zedekiah  have  given  his  support  (as
Winckler's  interpretation  of  Jer.  29s  implies  that  he  did)
to  a  request  for  milder  treatment  by  the  Babylonians,
when  one  of  the  chief  objects  of  the  party  in  favour  of
this  request  was  the  restoration  of  Jeconiah  or  Jehoiachin?
And  is  there  any  trace  in  Jeremiah  or  in  Ezekiel  of  the
supposed  fact  that  the  Yahwe-cult  in  the  temple  had
been  violently  closed,  or  in  the  records  of  the  life  of
Jeremiah  that  this  enthusiast  for  Yahwe  was  '  content
with  what  was  left1  after  this  catastrophe  had  occurred?
Cp  SHESHBAZZAR.

It  is  true,  the  popular  cults,  chief  among  which  was
the  imported  Jerahmeelite  cult  of  Baal  (i.e. ,  the  sun-

K Poli<ri  m  QTiH SOt1)' and llle SrcM '  C'llsllitC  ' or

morality  'Ishmaelitish'  goddess  (i.e.,  either  the
^"  moon,  or  less  probably  the  planet
Venus),1  attracted  the  majority  more  than  that  of
Yahwe  (as  exhibited  in  Deuteronomy).  Not  only
Jeremiah  but  also  Ezekiel 2  expresses  the  utmost  horror
at  this  apostasy,  as  they  regard  it.  Both  prophets  are
fully  conscious  of  the  connection  between  a  low  type  of
religion  and  immorality.  It  also  appears  that  even
those  who  professed  fidelity  to  Yahwism  had  extremely
callous  consciences.  Of  this  we  have  a  striking  evidence
in  Jer.  348-22.  Certain  rich  citizens  of  Jerusalem,  we
are  told,  emancipated  their  Hebrew  slaves  at  the
beginning  of  the  siege  (according  to  the  prescriptions
of  Ex.  21 1-4  Dt.  1012),  but  after  the  temporary  raising
of  the  siege  resumed  possession  of  them.  The  motive
which  induced  the  masters  temporarily  to  liberate  their
slaves  was  probably,  not  humanity,  but  the  desire  to
increase  the  number  of  the  available  defenders  of  the
walls  of  Jerusalem.

It  was  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign  that  Zedekiah  finally
gave  way  to  the  war-party  and  rebelled  against his  suzerain,

first, however, taking the precaution of
6.  Rebellion. '  sending his ambassadors to c'"ISD ('"•'•>

Misrim,  not  Misraim),  that  they  might  give
him  horses  and  many  warriors'3  (Ezek.  17  is).  A  striking
picture  is  drawn  by  Ezekiel  ('21  21  [26]_/C)  of  the  king  of  ^33
(Jerahmeel)  standing  where  the  ways  divide,  and  shunting  the
arrows  before  the  teraphim,  and  then  inspecting  the  liver  of  a
sacrificed  animal — two  forms  of  divination,  the  first  of  which  is
specially  characteristic  of  Arabia,  not  of  Babylonia.'*  There
was  a  chance  that  he  might  have  led  his  army  against  Rabbath-
bne-ammon,  or,  as  we  should  most  probably  read,  Rehoboth-
bne-jerahmeel,  by  which  is  meant  the  capital  of  Misrim.  But
the  oracle  decided  him  on  going  to  Jerusalem.  So  the  Jerah
meelite  army  encamped  against  that  strongly  fortified  city.  On
his  side,  the  king  of  Misrim  was  not  idle.  In  the  spring  of  587
a.  Misrite  army  advanced  towards  Judah,  or  perhaps  towards
Riblah — i.e.,  not  the  northern  Riblah,  on  the  E.  bank  of  the
Orontes,  but  a  southern  Riblah,  or  rather  Jerahmeel,  in  the

1  Read  riSOn  f°r  tne  improbable  nr3T  in  Jer.  824  ;  rvVKJflW'
for  niStO  in  2  K.  285;  and  tajW  nrSo  (' Ishmael's  Queen')
for  Q'QOT)  nr^O  in  Jer.  7  18  44  \T  jf.  (but  cp  QUEEN  OF  HEAVEN).
So  too  D1HK  0'nS.X  in  Jer.  1 16  7  18  194  443  8  probably  comes
from  'pxarn*  'nStf)  'the  g°ds  of  Jerahmeel.' Cpalso  Crit.  Bib.
on  Zeph.  1  5.

2  Ezek.  8  seems  to have  been  much  misunderstood  by  com
mentators. See  Crit.  Bib.,  and  cp  TAMMUZ.

3  Winckler,  it  is  true,  supposes  this  to  refer  to  Sheshbazzar.

4  See DIVINATION, § 2, and cp Lyall, Ancient Arabic
Poetry,  106.

5398


ZEEB

southern  Hamath  or  Maacath  (see  Run.  AH).  It  was  a  futile
attempt  ;  flushed  by  victory  the  Cushite  invaders  returned,  and
on  the  ninth  day  of  the  fourth  month  of  Zedekiah  's  eleventh
year,  the  city  was  taken.  Zedekiah  and  his  most  faithful
warriors  took  to  flight.  He  was  caught,  however,  and  brought
to  Riblah.  There  his  sons  were  put  to  death  before  his  eyes  ;
he  himself  was  blinded  (cp  Ezek.  12  13),  and  carried  in  chains  to
the  city  of  his  foes.l  How  Ezekiel  regarded  his  fate,  we  know
from  a  fiery  denunciation  (Ezek.  21  25  [30]^).  Cp  ISRAEL,
§§  $i/.,  JEKEMIAH,  §  2.

2.  b. Chenaanah, a  leading prophet  among  those
consulted  by  Ahab  as  to  the  success  of  his  proposed
expedition  against Ramoth-gilead. By  means  of  iron
horns  the  prophet  symbolically  announced  that  Yahwe
would  grant  Ahab  successive  victories  over  Aram. The
dispute  with  MICAIAH  (q.v.  ) is  told in i  K.  '22  n^
(.Tpns)' 2  Ch.  18io^ The  passage  not only  throws
light  on  the  differences  among  the  prophets,  but  also  is
important  for  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  prophet-
hood.

See  PROPHET,  §  7,  where  it  is  maintained  that  the  original
ncbftin  came  from  N.  Arabia,  and  that  the  Aramaeans  with  whom
Israel  contended  were,  mainly  at  any  rate,  those  of  the  southern
Aram  —  i.e.,  the  Jerahmeelite  border-land.  For  '  Ben  Chenaanah  '
we  should  probably  read  Hen  Kenizzi  '  ;  cp  '  Elisha,  ben
Shaphat  '  —  i.e.,  '  Elisha,  ben  Sephfuhi.'  Elisha  was  known  as  a
Zarephathite,  Zedekiah  as  a  Kenizzite  (or  Kenite?).

3.  b. Maaseiah,  one  who '  prophesied  a  lie  '  in  the
time  of  Jeremiah,  Jer.  1§2i/. See  SEDECIAS,  i.

The  passage  has  been  much  misunderstood.  For  roasted  in
the  fire  '  (t^NS  Q^p)  we  should  read  W'N3  o'jBp  '  killed  in
Asshur,'  Asshur  is  a.  synonym  for  Jerahmeel  —  the  name  of  the
N.  Arabian  land  whither  (see  ZEDEKIAH,  i)  the  Jews  were
carried  into  exile.  What  follows  ic'N  jy  is  an  interpolation
(down  to  crPJTlX  on  which  see  AHAn,  2.

4.  b.  Hananiah,  a.  high  officer,  temp.  Jehoiakim,  Jer.  8612.

5.  AV  ZIDKIJAH. Signatory  to  the  covenant  (see  EZKA  i.,
§  7)  ;  Neh.  10  i  [2]  (iTfm  ;  creSeiaas  [B«A],  mos  o-apoia). He  is


placed  together  with  Nehemiah,  the  Tirshatha,  before  the  list  of
priestly  families. Was  he  Nehemiah's  secretary  (Ryssel)?  or

E  resident  of  the  council  of  the  elders  (E.  Meyer,  Entst.  136)?
ee  TIRSHATHA.

L's  reading  is  n'33B'  (<"Xel/tas)i  Shecheniah  ;  in  r'.  4  we  find
iT33i;'>  Shebaniah.  T.  K.  C.

ZEEB  (3N7),  Judg.  "25. See  OREB.

ZELAH  (1??V  Sela'},  a  city  of  Benjamin,  grouped  by
P  (see  TARAI.AH,  KIRJATH-JKAKIM)  with  '  the  Jebusite,
the  same  is  Jerusalem,'  and  Gibeah  or  Kirjath  (Josh.
1828  ;  om.  B,  CHA<\[A],  ceA&  [L]>,  also  referred  to  as
containing  the  sepulchre  of  Kish  (2  S.  21  14  ;  eN  TH
TrAeypA  [BAL],  RV  here  Zela).

We  cannot  avoid  utilising  the  results  of  our  criticism  of  the
text.  In  the  list  of  cities  of  Benjamin  (as  well  as  in  some  of  the
accompanying  tribal  lists)  there  seems  to  have  been  serious
geographical  confusion.  The  Gibeonite  cities,  for  instance  —
Gibeon,  Beeroth  (from  Rehoboth),  Chephirah  (a  doublet  to
Beeroth),  and  Kirjath-jearim  (as  later  inquiry  suggests,  Kirjath-
jerahmeel)—  were  originally  represented  as  in  the  Negeb.  So
too  the  Zela  of  Josh.  1828  was  probably  in  the  Negeb.  It  is,
however,  hardly  possible  to  transfer  the  family  of  Saul  from  the
territory  usually  known  as  Benjamite  to  the  Negeb  ;  the  relations
between  Saul  and  David  forbid  this.  Some  of  the  names  of  the
Negeb,  however,  appear  to  have  been  carried  northward  by  the
clans  when  they  left  the  Negeb.  This  may  well  have  been  the
case  with  Zela,  or  rather  —  the  name,  like  so  many  other  names
in  Josh.  18  and  in  the  story  of  Saul's  personal  history,  being
evidently  corrupt  —  Shalisha.  See  LAISHAH,  and  SAUL,  §  4,
where  it  is  pointed  out  that,  according  to  what  is  supposed  to
be  the  true  text  of  i  S.  31  11-13,  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan
were  brought  by  the  men  of  Beth-gilgal  (in  Benjamin)  to  the
sacred  tree  at  Beth-gilgal,  and  there  buried.  From  i  S.  25  44  it
appears  that  Laish,  or  rather  Shalishah,  was  either  identical
with,  or  near,  Beth-gilgal  (see  GALLIM,  LAISHAH,  PALTI).  The
same  name  seems  to  underlie  '  [Bar-]zillai  '  in  2  S.  17  27  (see
MEPHIBOSHETH,  §  2),  21  8  (see  MERAB),  and  should  be  restored
in  fosh.  1828,  2  S.  21  14.  Cp  ZELF.K.

Some  (t.ir.,  Petrie)  identify  the  Zelah  (Sela')  of  Josh,  with  the
Zilu  of  the  Amarna  Tablets  (181  41  45),  a  place  which,  like
Lachish,  threw  off  the  Egyptian  authority.  T.  K.  C.

ZELEK  (P/?V).  an  Ammonite,  one  of  David's  heroes

(2  S.  23  37  [36],'  eAeie  [B],  (TjSAe-yi  [A],  6  aMpav[t]irri  [BA],
0-aAaaS  o  ai'a/ui  [L]  ;  I  Ch.  11  39,  <T«Ar)  [BN],  creAATjK  [AL],
o  ann<av[c]i  (BA],  .  .  .  -«/u  [**],  o  a/j.fj.a.vi  [L]).


ZELOPHEHAD

'312J'  (Ammonite)  is  probably  here,  as  in  some  other  passages
(e.g.,  i  S.  11  2  S.  \(t/.,  see  REHOUOTH,  SAUL,  §  if.),  a  corruption
of  ''rNOnT  (Jerahmeelite) — i.e.,  '  Zelek '  came  from  the  Jerah
meelite  Negeb.  There  are  two  place-names  with  which  p^jj
may  be  compared  :  (i)  nj^D  (SAI.ECAH),  the  name  of  one  of  the
'cities  of  the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Cushan '  (JB'2,  not,  as  MT  and
(P,  1^3;  see  O(J,  and  (2)  J^pS  (ZIKLAG),  for  a  time  David's
city,  a  name  which  may  be  a  corruption  of  ns^n  (Halusah).
It  is  safest  to  choose  the  latter,  p^jj  may  be  miswritten  for  r^>n
(Hillez)  which  we  know  to  be  a  Paltite1 — i.e.,  Zarephathite —
(2  S.  23  26 ./I)  and  Jerahmeelite  (i  Ch.  239)  name,  and  may
indicate  a  connection  with  the  city  of  Halusah.  Marquurt
(/•'unit.  22),  it  is  true,  connects  p^S  (cp  <PU  and  (B1-)  with
V/s,  but  we  do  not  expect  David  to  have  a  connection  with
the  centre  of  Saul's  clan  (see  ZELA).  T.  K.  C.


1  Josephus  cleverly  works  out  the  narrative  (Ant.  x.  8  2).
5399


ZELOPHEHAD  OnB7y ;  CAATT<NAA  [BAL,  but
C6.A4>.  A,  in  Josh.,  c&TT<}>.  B,  in  Ch.],  which  suggests
"inSPy,  Salpahad  —  i.e.,  perhaps  'protection  [?y,
"shadow"]  from  terror,'  §  43,  or  [Paterson,  SBOT,
on  Nu.  27],  '  the  Dread  One  is  shadowed  '  ;2  see,  how
ever,  beJow).  Zelophehad  (Zalpahad?)  is  variously
represented  as  the  second  son  of  Manasseh  (i  Ch.  7  15  ;
see  ASRIKL),  and  as  b.  Hepher,  b.  Gilead,  b.  Machir,
b.  Manasseh  (Josh.  17s). 3  He  is  said  to  have  had  no
sons,  but  five  daughters — viz.,  Mahlah,  Noah,  Hoglah,
Milcah,  Tirzah  (Nu.  263327i  36n  Josh.  17s)-  These
daughters  are  said  (Nu.  27 1-4)  to  have  approached
Moses,  Eleazar,  the  princes,  and  all  the  congregation
with  a  petition  to  be  allowed  to  receive  an  inheritance
as  representing  their  father,4  who  died  in  the  wilderness,
and  had  no  sons.  A  favourable  answer  was  given
(TV.  7-11);  but  the  decision  was  supplemented  later
(Nu.  36)  by  an  order  that  heiresses  should  marry  within
their  own  tribe.  Accordingly  Zelophehad's  daughters
are  said  to  have  married  their  father's  brothers'  sons.

That  P  had  access  to  old  lists,  is  undeniable ;  but  he
not  unfrequently  represents'  corrupt  forms  of  the  same
name  as  independent  members  of  genealogies.  It  is
therefore  not  impossible  that  in  the  list  of  six,  formed
by  Zelophehad  and  his  daughters,  the  same  name  in
different  forms  may  occur  several  times.  There  is
plausibility  in  the  view  that  the  name  which  underlies
Zelophehad,  Mahlah,  and  Milcah  is  Salhad,  which,  as
has  been  shown  elsewhere  (GALEED,  §  i),  may  underlie
Sahadutha  in  Gen.  31  47,  and  appears  in  Dt.  3 10  and
elsewhere  as  SALECAH  (q.v. ).  It  is  indeed  probable
that  in  one  form  of  the  patriarchal  story  Hauran  was
much  referred  to  (cp  HARAN).  The  objection  that
Salhad  was  on  the  E.  side  of  the  Jordan,  whereas  it
appears  that  P  did  not  recognise  Manasseh  as  having
inheritances  in  Gilead,5  is  not  as  important  as  it  seems,
for  the  tradition  that  Zelophehad  was  '  son  of  Hepher,
son  of  Gilead,'  cannot  be  annulled  by  bracketing  'son
of  Gilead,'  etc. ,  in  Josh.  17 3.  In  determining  the  sense
of  Zelophehad  and  the  other  names,  we  cannot  ignore
the  asserted  connection  of  Zelophehad  with  Gilead.6
But  further  inquiry  seems  to  be  bringing  out  these
results — that  the  school  of  writers  represented  by  P
had  access  to  lists  in  which  several  tribes,  including
Manasseh,  were  located  in  the  Negeb,  that  Og's
traditional  kingdom  was,  not  in  Bashan,  but  in  Cushan,
and  hence  that  Salecah  is  not  the  original  name  in
Dt.  3 10,  etc. ,  but  some  Negeb  name  such  as  Halusah.

This  being  the  case,  the  name  of  Machir's  sister  n:1?".!
(HAMMOLECHETH)  will  be  miswritten.  not  for  Salecah,  but  for
Jerahmeel[ith],  and  those  of  her  sons  Ishhod  (cp  HODESH),  and
Mahlah  will  stand  for  Ashhur  and  Jerahmeel  respectively.  So,
too,  of  the  five  daughters  of  Zelophehad,  the  first,  the  fourth,

1  PELETH  (q.v.)  in  i  Ch.  233  is  a  'son'  of  Jerahmeel— i.e.,
Zarephath  was  the  centre  of  a  subdivision  of  the  Jerahmeelites.

2  For  another  suggestion  see  MANASSEH  i. ,  §  9  [i.].

3  On  the  analysis  of  Tosh.  17  1-6  see  Oxf.  Hex.  2  17  ;  Steuer-
nagel,  HK  Josh.  217;  Kuenen,  Th.  T  11  487

••This  passage  is  inconsistent  with  Josh.  176,  which  implies
that  each  of  Zelophehad's  daughters  received  a  '  part. '
»  This  is  Steuernagel's  view  (HK  Josh.  215,  foot).
6  Cp  MANASSEH  i.,  §§  5,  9.

5400


ZELOTBS

and  possibly  the  third  will  represent  Jerahmeel,  the  fifth  (Tirzah)
will  come  from  Zarephath,  tlie  second  (Noah)  from  some  form  of
Manahath  (b.  Shobal),  and  Zelophehad  will  presumably  be  a
compound  of  two  ethnic  or  tribal  names,  and  since  these  names
have  to  be  Negeb  names,  the  most  probable  explanation  of  the
name  is  Ishmael-hadad  (cp  n'vj  with  nSjy  [SnELEi'Hj,  and  nshl
[Zii.PAH],  which  almost  certainly  come  from  SxVDE")-  Hadad
appears  in  Gen.  25  15  as  the  eighth  son  of  Ishmael.  Hepher
and  Gilead,  with  which  Zelophehad  is  also  genealogically
connected,  are  Negeb  names.1

The  meaning  of  the  statement  that  Zelophehad  had  five
daughters,  of  course  is  that  there  were  five  minor  clans  de
pendent  on  the  great  central  clan  called  Zalp-had,  or  Ishmael-
hadad.  T.  K.  C.

ZELOTES  (ZHAOOTHC), Lk.  615  AV,  RV  ZEALOT


ZELZA.H  (n>7>*),  i  S.  102.  See  RACHEL'S
SEPULCHRE.

ZEMARAIM  P'.TOV  ;  see  Kittel,  SBOT,  Heb.,  on
2  Ch.  1:54,  and  on  termination  see  NAMES,  §  107).
i.  The  name  of  a  city  of  Benjamin,  grouped  with
Beth-arabah  and  Bethel  (Josh.  1822;  <rapa  [BJ,  cre/xpi/x
[A],  0-a/j.apeifj.  [L]).

2.  The  name  of  a  mountain  '  in  the  hill-country  of
Ephraim,'  from  the  top  of  which  ABIJAH  delivered  an
address  to  Jeroboam  and  the  Israelitish  army  (2  Ch.
184;  ffofjiopwif  [BAL],  ffa.fj.apuv  [Niese],  or  ffc/j-apuv
[Xaber],  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  11  2  =  §  274).  See  Bertheau.
Both  i  and  2  suggest  most  interesting  problems.

Conder  (PEF,  1877,  p.  26),  following  Van  de  Yelde
and  Robinson,  identifies  i.  with  the  ruin  es-Samra,
2-3  m.  \V.  from  the  Jordan  and  15-16  m.  in  a  direct  line
E.  from  Bethel,  and  points  out  that  there  are  two  ruins
close  together  bearing  the  same  name  (Samra).  Buhl
(Pal.  180)  inclines  to  accept  this  combination.  Those,
however,  who  take  this  line  must,  at  any  rate,  separate
the  city  from  the  mountain  called  Zemaraim,  for  a
situation  overlooking  the  Jordan  valley  will  hardly  suit
the  Chronicler's  narrative  ;  v.  19  suggests  that  the  spot
was  not  far  from  Bethel.  The  matter  needs  re
consideration.

We  have  now  to  indicate  the  new  position  of  the  questions
resulting  from  our  criticism  of  the  text,  and  first  of  that  relating
to  2.  We  have  seen  (JEROHOAM,  i  ;  REHOBOAM  ;  SHECHEM  ;
SHII.OH)  that  the  scene  of  the  narratives  respecting  Jeroboam
and  Rehoboam  (and  of  course  Abijah)  was  placed  by  the  original
writers  in  the  Negeb,  the  possession  of  which  was  coveted  both
by  Jeroboam  and  by  Rehoboam,  as  well  as  by  the  Jerahmeelites,
because  it  was  the  '  Holy  Land  '  of  Israel  and  of  Jerahmeel,
containing  the  most  ancient  sacred  spots  of  both  sections  of
Israel  and  of  the  closely  related  people  of  Jerahmeel.  '  Ephraim'
is  as  much  a  southern  as  a  northern  name,  and,  whatever  be  its
origin  (cp  REPHAIM),  is  a  synonym  of  'Jerahmeel.'  At  the
present  time,  Bethel  (perhaps  =  Dan—  i.e.,  Halusah,  see  Luz  ;
PROPHET,  §  10;  SHECHEM),  Jeshanah  (perhaps  misread  for
C$y,  the  southern  Shunem,  cp  SHEM,  SHUNEM),  and  Ephron
(probably  near  the  place  miscalled  Shechem,  but  really  named
Cusham-jerahmeel,  see  SHECHEM,  2  ;  MACHPELAH),  wt-re  in  the
hands  of  Jeroboam.  According  to  the  Chronicler  (2  Ch.  13  19),
Rehoboam  took  these  cities  from  Jeroboam.

Turning  now  to  i,  we  have  seen  that  P,  as  a  geographer,
often  works  on  lists  which  properly  belong  to  an  ancient
geographical  survey  of  the  Negeb.  This  is  the  case,  not  only
with  the  name-lists  of  Judah,  Issachar,  Asher,  and  Naphtah.
but  also  with  that  of  Benjamin  (cp  ZELA).  The  names  Jericho,
Beth-hoglah,  and  Emek-keziz  in  Josh.  18  21  probably  come  from
Jerahmeel,  Beth-meholah  (=  Beth-  Jerahmeel),  and  Maaoath-
cush,'  places  in  the  Negeb  ;  whilst  the  Beth-arabah  and  Zemaraim
in  v.  22  probably  come  from  Beth-'arab  and  Simnm  or  Simram.
To  say  where  these  places  stood,  except  that  one  of  them  is
presumably  REHOHOTH  (?.?'.),  is  beyond  our  power.  It  is
possible  (though  Gen.  10  18  confirms  s//i)  that  har-simrim  is  the
same  as  har-§imron  in  Am.  3g(?)  4i  Oi  (see  PROPHET,  §  35;
SHIMRON).  Perhaps  Simron  was  in  the  hands  of  Abijah
(according  to  the  Chronicler's  authority),  and  Jeroboam  had
come  with  the  object  of  besieging  it.  There  is,  at  any  rate,  no
reason  why  i.  and  2.  should  not  be  identified.  Cp  ZEMARITE.

T.  K.  C.

ZEMARITE CHEV), Gen.  10  18 i Ch.  1  16. See
GEOGRAPHY,  §  16,  4.
ZEMIRA, RV Zemirah (iTT-pf, AMARIAC [B],

1  For  the  southern  Gilead  cp  RAMOTH-GILEAD,  and  Crit.
Bib.  on  Jer.  8  22.


ZEPHANIAH

fan.  [A],  £a/xapta  [L]),  b.  Becher  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN
(g.v.f  §  g,  ii.  a),  i  Ch.  "8,  cp  ZIMKI  (836).

ZENAN  (|jy).  a  place  (as  the  text  stands)  in  the
SHEPHELAH,  mentioned  with  Hadashah  and  Migdal-
gad  (ceNNA[B],  -M  [A],  ceNAM  [1-])-  Josh.  1037J;
presumably  identical  with  the  ZAANAN  (J3XV)  of  Mic.
I'1  (CAINAN  [Aid.  and  some  MSS],  cCNNAN  tsome
MSS,  Syro-Hex.],  c€NNA*.p  [Ba-bACJ*],—  AAN  [cja]|.

The  probability  is,  however,  that  there  is  a  mistake,  ami  tli.it
neither  the  Zenan  of  Joshua  nor  the  Zaanan  of  Micah  was  in
the  Shephelah.  As  in  the  case  of  other  lists  of  tribal  place-
names,  P  seems  to  have  been  indebted  in  Josh.  1^33/71  to  lists
of  place-names  belonging  to  different  parts  of  the  Negeb  (see
WAKS  OF  THE  LOKLI  [BOOK  OK]).  Among  the  names  which,
critically  considered,  are  specially  favourable  to  this  view,  are
Eshtaol,  Zorah,  En-gannim,  Tappuah,  Jarmuth,  Adullam,
Socoh,  Mizpeh,  Joktheel,  Lachish,  and  we  may  now  add  Zenan,
Hadashah,  and  Migdal-gad,  which  are  grouped  together  in
:•'.  37.  That  Zenan  may  be  presumed  to  be  identical  with  the
Zaanan  of  Micah,  is  obvious.  Now,  if  Mic.  1  be  criticised  in
combination  with  other  prophecies  relative  to  an  invasion  of
Judah,  it  will  appear  that  the  invaders  are  more  probably
Jerahmeelites  from  the  S.  than  Assyrians  from  the  N.,  and,  if
we  grant  this,  it  will  at  once  appear  doubly  probable  that  the
place  which  has  a  melancholy  precedence  in  Mic.  \  among
those  which  suffer  from  the  invasion  is,  not  p~lpU'  (Samaria),
but  plOt!*  (SHIMRON)  in  the  Negeb.  See  PROPHET,  $  38.
HNS  \v\\\  therefore  presumably  be  =  ;j,'i-  (Zoan),  and  j;j  (Zin),
both  of  which  forms  appear  to  have  been  connected  geo
graphically  with  the  famous  Kadesh  (cp  PAKAUISE,  §  6;
SUUOM).  The  original  form,  therefore,  of  the  names  in  josh.
15  37  was  not  improbably  '  Zoan,  Kadesh,  Jerahmcel-gad  [or
simply  Jerahmeel),' and  in  Mic.  In,  besides  Shaphir  (Shamir?),
and  Beth-ezel — the  latter  of  which  is  clearly  a  Negeb  name — we
may  recognise  Jerahmeel  (N^  nD'3"n^y  =  '?N~nT  rOC")  and
Zoan.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  Zoan  or  Zaanan  (Zenan),
like  ZIN  (<j.v.),  comes  from  the  widely-spread  race-name  Ishmael
through  the  intermediate  form  Zibeon  (pjns)-  See  ZIBEON,
and  cp  Crit.  Bib.  T.  K.  C.

ZENAS  (zHNAC  [Ti.  WH],  abbrev.  from  Zenodorus  ;
cp  ARTEMAS,  OI.YMI-AS,  and  NAMES,  §  86,  end),  a
lawyer  (PO/UI/COS),  is  thus  alluded  to  in  Tit.  813:  'Be
zealous  in  helping  Zenas  the  lawyer  and  Apollos  on
their  way,  that  they  want  for  nothing.'  Whether  he
was  a  Jewish  lawyer  or  a  Roman  jurisconsult  is  un
certain  ;  but  the  non- Hebrew  name  and  the  short
criticism  of  VO/J.IKOL  in  Tit.  89  (cp  Zahn,  Einl.  1435)
make  for  the  latter,  and*  the  association  with  Apollos
suggests  that  he  was  possibly  of  Alexandrian  origin.

In  the  lists  of  the  'seventy'  compiled  by  the  Pseudo-Dorotheus
and  Pseudo-Hippolytus  he  is  made  bishop  of  Diospolis,  and
he  is  mentioned  in  Metuea  of  the  Greek  church  as  author  of
the  (no  longer  extant)  Acts  of  Titus.

ZEPHANIAH (iT3£X, 'whom Yahwe hides,' or

I  defends,'  §  30,  to  which  add  the  references  C/S\.  \zo-j,

etc.  ;  Lidzbarski,  Handb.  359 [cp  also  below,
2-4];  CO<J>ONiA,c)-  i.  Son  of  Cushi,  the
''  ninth,  according  to  the  order  of  his  book,
among  the  twelve  minor  prophets,  flourished  in  the  reign
of  Josiah  of  Judah,  and  apparently  before  the  great
reformation  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  that  king  (621
B.  c. ).  For  various  forms  of  idolatry  put  down  in  that
year  (2  K.  23  4 /•  12)  are  spoken  of  by  Zephaniah  as  still
prevalent  in  Judah  (l4/. ),  and  are  specified  in  such  a
connection  as  to  imply  that  they  were  not  the  secret  sins
of  individuals,  but  held  the  first  place  among  the  national
backslidings  that  could,  as  the  prophet  teaches,  be  re
moved  only  by  a  sweeping  judgment  on  the  state.  Of
the  person  of  Zephaniah  nothing  is  known  ;  but  inas
much  as  his  genealogy,  contrary  to  the  usual  practice  in
the  case  of  the  prophets  (see  Is.  1 1  Jer.  1 1  Ezek.  13  Hos.

I 1  Joel  1 1)  is  carried  back  four  generations,  it  has  been
conjectured  that  his great-great-grandfather Hezekiah
(li)  is  the  king  of  that  name,  and  if  so  he  will  have
belonged  to  the  highest  class  of  Judasan  society.

The  genuineness  and  integrity  of  the  short  prophecy
ascribed  to  Zephaniah  do  not  seem  to  be  open  to  reason
able doubt. Stade (6/1.644) sus-
2.  Genuineness  (on account of the ideas

and  integrity.  expressed  in  them)  2i-3n  and  3;
and  it  is  true,  if  3  were  a  distinct  oracle,  there  would  be


ZEPHANIAH

no  cogent  reason  to  ascribe  it  to  the  author  of  the  two  I
chapters  that  precede ;  for  the  book  of  the  minor
prophets  is  made  up  of  short  pieces,  some  bearing  a  j
name  and  some  anonymous,  and  it  is  only  old  usage
that  ascribes  the  anonymous  pieces  to  the  last  preceding
prophet  whose  name  is  prefixed  to  his  prophecy.  But,
though  the  sequence  of  thought  in  the  book  of  Zephaniah
is  not  so  smooth  as  a  western  reader  may  desire,  a
single  leading  motive  runs  through  the  whole,  and  the
first  two  chapters  would  be  incomplete  without  the
third,  which,  moreover,  is  certainly  pre-exilic  (vv.  1-4)
and  presents  specific  points  of  contact  with  what  pre
cedes  as  well  as  a  general  agreement  in  style  and  idea
[see  further  §  6].

The  prophecy  may  be  divided  into  three  parts:  (i.)
3 Outline  of the  menace(l); (»•)  the  admonition

O. \J  Uull.UO Ul ,  ~ n \ /  •"• v ii_  '  /On

r-rmtMits (2l'37)  '• (»»• )  the  promise  (88-20).

The  dominating  motive  of  the  whole  is  the

approach  of  a  sweeping  and  world-wide  judgment,  which  the
prophet  announces  as  near  at  hand,  and  interprets,  on  the  lines
laid  down  by  Isaiah  in  his  prophecies  about  Israel  and  Assyria,
as  designed  to  destroy  the  wicked  and  prepare  the  way  for  the
visible  sovereignty  of  the  righteous  God  of  Israel  (1  ?f.  7  14-18).
As  regards  Judah,  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  first  and  third
chapters,  the  effect  of  the  judgment  will  be  to  sift  out  the  idolaters,
the  men  of  violence  and  wrong,  the  false  prophets  and  profane
priests,  the  hardened  men  of  the  world  to  whom  all  religion  is
alike  ('  the  men  that  are  thickened  on  their  lees,'  1  12),  and  who
deem  that  Yahwe  will  do  neither  good  nor  evil  (1468^  128  3_/C).
The  men  who  seek  meekness  and  righteousness  will  be  left,  a
poor  and  lowly  people,  trusting  in  Yahwe's  name  and  eschewing
falsehood  (23  3  12).  To  them  a  future  of  gladness  is  reserved,
a  peaceful  life  under  Yahwe's  immediate  kingship  and  loving
protection  (3  13-17).  Such  an  ideal  necessarily  implies  that  they
shall  no  longer  be  threatened  by  hostility  from  without,  and  this
condition  is  satisfied  by  the  prophet's  view  of  the  effect  of  the
impending  judgment  on  the  ancient  enemies  of  his  nation.  The
destruction  of  the  Philistines  on  the  W.  and  of  Moab  and
Ammon  on  the  E.  (24-10)  will  enable  the  Hebrews  to  extend
their  settlements  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Syrian  desert ;
and  their  remoter  oppressors,  the  Ethiopians  and  the  Assyrians,
shall  also  perish  (2  12-15).  That  Ethiopia  appears  instead  of
Egypt  is  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  time.  It  was
with  Ethiopic  dynasts  holding  sway  in  Egypt  that  Assyria  had
to  contend  during  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  when  the  petty
kingdoms  of  Palestine  were  so  often  crushed  between  the  collision
of  the  two  great  powers,  and  even  Psammetichus,  the  contem
porary  of  Josiah,  and  the  restorer  of  a  truly  Egyptian  kingdom,
was  nominally  the  heir  of  the  great  Ethiopian  sovereigns.

Zephaniah's  conceptions  are  closely  modelled  on  the
scheme  of Yahwe's  righteous  purpose  worked  out by
__. .  , Isaiah  a  century  before,  when  Judah  first
.Worm- felt  the  weight  of the  Assyrian  rod  ;  and
J °  ' they  afford  the  most  conclusive  evidence

of  the  depth  and  permanence  of  that  great  prophet's
influence.  But  in  one  point  there  is  an  important
divergence.  In  Isaiah's  view,  Assyria  is  the  rod  of
God's  anger  ;  and,  when  the  work  of  judgment  is
complete,  and  Yahwe  returns  to  the  remnant  of  his
people,  the  theodicea  is  completed  by  the  fall  of  the
unconscious  instrument  of  the  divine  decrees  before
the  inviolable  walls  of  the  holy  mountain.  Zephaniah,
in  like  manner,  looks  to  an  all-conquering  nation  as
the  instrument  of  divine  judgment  on  Judah  and  the
rest  of  the  known  world.  He  represents  the  day
of  Yahwe,  according  to  the  old  meaning  of  that  phrase
(\VRS,  ProphW  397/. ),  as  a  day  of  battle  (not  an
assize  day) ;  he  speaks  of  the  guests  invited  to  Yahwe's
sacrifice  (i.e.,  to  a  great  slaughter),  of  alarm  against
fenced  cities,  of  blood  poured  out  as  dust,  of  pillage
and  desolation  at  the  hand  of  an  enemy  (1?  13  16-18).
Beyond  this,  however,  all  is  vague  ;  we  hear  neither
who  the  sword  of  Yahwe  (2 12)  is,  nor  what  is  to
become  of  him  when  his  work  is  completed.  Isaiah's
construction  has  in  all  its  parts  a  definite  reference
to  present  political  facts,  and  is  worked  out  to  a
complete  conclusion  ;  Zephaniah  borrows  the  ideas  of
his  predecessor  without  attaining  to  his  clearness  of
political  conception,  and  so  his  picture  is  incomplete.
The  foreign  conqueror,  by  whom  Judah  is  to  be  chas
tised  and  Nineveh  and  Ethiopia  destroyed,  is  brought
on  to  the  stage,  but  never  taken  off  it.  It  is  safe  to
conclude  that  the  principal  actor  in  the  prophetic

5403


ZEPHANIAH

drama,  who  is  thus  strangely  forgotten  at  the  last,  was
not  as  real  and  prominent  a  figure  in  Zephaniah's
political  horizon  as  Assyria  was  in  the  horizon  of  Isaiah.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  reasonable  to  think  that  so  com
plete  a  reproduction  of  Isaiah's  ideas  in  the  picture  of  a
new  world-judgment  was  not  formed  without  some
stimulus  from  without ;  and  this  stimulus  has  been  found,
with  much  plausibility,  in  the  Scythian  invasion  of
western  Asia,  to  which  some  of  Jeremiah's  earlier
prophecies  (as  515-1761-622-25)  also  appear  to  refer
(see  ISRAEL,  §  39,  col.  2246).

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  comparison  between  Isaiah
and  Zephaniah  affords  an  instructive  example  of  the
5  Co  t  a.  t  Difference  between  original  and  repro-
with  Isaiah  ductive  Prophecy.  All  the  prophets
have  certain  fundamental  ideas  in  com
mon,  and  each  has  learned  something  from  his  pre
decessors.  If  Zephaniah  draws  from  Isaiah,  Isaiah
himself  drew  from  Amos  and  Hosea.  Isaiah,  however,
goes  to  his  predecessors  for  general  principles,  and
shapes  the  application  of  these  principles  to  the  con
ditions  of  his  own  time  in  a  manner  altogether  fresh
and  independent.  Zephaniah,  on  the  other  hand,  goes
to  his  predecessor  for  details  ;  he  does  not  clearly
distinguish  between  the  form  and  the  substance  of  the
prophetic  ideas,  and  looks  for  a  final  consummation  of
the  divine  purpose,  not  only  in  accordance  with  the
principles  of  Isaiah,  but  on  the  very  lines  which  that
prophet  had  laid  down.  These  lines,  however,  were
drawn  on  the  assumption  that  the  Assyrian  judgment
was  final  and  would  be  directly  followed  by  the  reign  of
righteousness.  The  assumption  was  not  justified  by
the  event ;  the  deliverance  and  reformation  were  incom
plete,  and  the  inbringing  of  the  reign  of  righteousness
was  again  deferred.  Zephaniah  sees  this,  but  fails  to
draw  the  true  inference.  He  postulates  a  new  crisis  in
history  similar  to  the  Assyrian  crisis  of  which  Isaiah
wrote,  and  assumes  that  it  will  run  such  a  course  as  to
fulfil  Isaiah's  unfulfilled  predictions.  But  the  move
ments  of  history  do  not  repeat  themselves  ;  and  the
workings  of  God's  righteous  providence  take  fresh  shape
in  each  new  scene  of  the  world's  life,  so  that  a  prediction
not  fulfilled  under  the  conditions  for  which  it  was  given
can  never  again  be  fulfilled  in  detail.  As  it  is  an
essential  feature  of  prophecy  that  all  ideas  are  not  only
presented  but  thought  out  in  concrete  form,  and  with
reference  to  present  historical  conditions,  the  distinction
between  the  temporary  form  and  the  permanent  religious
truth  embodied  in  that  form  is  also  essential.  The
tendency  to  confound  the  two — to  ascribe  absolute  truth
to  what  is  mere  embodiment,  and  therefore  to  regard
unfulfilled  predictions  as  simply  deferred,  even  where
the  form  of  the  prediction  is  obviously  dependent  on
mere  temporary  conditions  of  the  prophet's  own  time —
gained  ground  from  the  time  of  Zephaniah  onwards,
and  culminated  in  the  Apocalyptic  literature.  As  it
grew,  the  eternal  ideas  of  the  great  prophets  fell  into
the  background,  and  were  at  length  entirely  lost  in  the
crass  Jewish  conception  of  a  Messianic  age,  which  is
little  more  than  an  apotheosis  of  national  particularism
and  self-righteousness.

Zephaniah's  eschatology  is  not  open  to  this  charge  :
with  him,  as  with  Isaiah,  the  doctrine  of  the  salvation  of
the  remnant  of  Israel  is  inspired  by  spiritual  convictions
and  instinct  with  ethical  force.  The  emphasis  still  lies
(811-13)  on  the  moral  idea  of  the  remnant,  not  on  the
physical  conception  Israel.  He  does  not  yield  to  Amos
or  Isaiah  in  the  courage  with  which  he  denounces  sin
in  high  places,  and  he  is  akin  to  Hosea  in  his  firm  hold
of  the  principle  that  the  divine  governance  is  rooted  not
only  in  righteousness  but  in  love,  and  that  the  triumph
of  love  is  the  end  of  Yahwe's  working  (817).  Yet  even
here  we  see  the  difference  between  the  first  and  the  second
generation  of  prophecy.  The  persuasion  to  which
Hosea  attains  only  through  an  intense  inward  struggle,
which  lends  a  peculiar  pathos  to  his  book,  appears  in

54°4


ZEPHANIAH

Zephaniah,  as  it  were,  ready  made.  There  is  no  mental
conflict  before  he  can  pass  through  the  anticipation  of
devastating  judgment  to  the  assurance  of  the  victory  of
divine  love  ;  and  the  sharp  transitions  that  characterise
the  book  are  not,  as  with  Hosea,  due  to  sudden  revulsion
of  feeling,  but  only  mark  the  passage  to  some  new  topic
in  the  circle  of  received  prophetic  truth.

The  finest  thing  in  the  book — in  spite  of  certain
obscurities,  which  may  be  partly  due  to  corruptions  of
the  text — is  the  closing  passage  ;  but  the  description  of
the  day  of  Yahwe,  the  dies  tne  dies  ilia  of  1 15,  which
furnishes  the  text  of  the  most  striking  of  mediaeval
hymns,  has  perhaps  taken  firmer  hold  of  the  religious
imagination.  Least  satisfactory  is  the  treatment  of  the
judgment  on  heathen  nations,  and  of  their  subsequent
conversion  to  Yahwe  (38-io).  In  the  scheme  of  Isaiah
it  is  made  clear  that  the  fall  of  the  power  that  shatters
the  nations  cannot  fail  to  be  recognised  as  Yahwe's
work,  for  Assyria  falls  before  Jerusalem  as  soon  as  it
seeks  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  the  divine  commission,
and  thus  the  doctrine  '  With  us  is  God '  is  openly
vindicated  before  the  nations.  Zephaniah,  on  the  other
hand,  assumes  that  the  convulsions  of  history  are
Yahwe's  work,  and  specially  designed  for  the  instruction
and  amendment  of  Israel  (36/1),  and  neglects  to  show
how  this  conviction,  which  he  himself  derives  from
Isaiah,  is  to  be  brought  home  by  the  coming  judgment
to  the  heart  of  heathen  nations.  Their  own  gods,
indeed,  will  prove  helpless  (2n);  but  that  is  not
enough  to  turn  their  eyes  toward  Yahwe.  Here,  there
fore,  there  is  in  his  eschatology  a  sensible  lacuna,  from
which  Isaiah's  construction  is  free,  and  a  commence
ment  of  the  tendency  to  look  at  things  from  a  merely
Israelite  standpoint,  which  is  so  notable  a  feature  of
the  later  Apocalyptic.  W.  R.  S.

It  has  seemed  best  to  the  present  writer  to  leave  the
preceding  interesting  and  suggestive  article  substantially
as  it  stood  in  1888  ;  and  to  append  in  a  supplement
such  additions  as  seem  to  be  now  required.

The  integrity  of  the  prophecy  has  been  much  more
seriously  questioned  than  it  was  in  1888.

Kuenen  (§  78,  5-8)  in  1889,  whilst  defending

6. Recent 2i-3  n against Stade,  allowed  —  on  account,

Criticism,  chiefly,  of  the  great  contrast  between  the  de
nunciation  of  1  2 1  3  1-7  and  the  promises  of
814-20  —  that  ">  14-20  was  a  supplement,  dating  probably
from  shortly  after  the  restoration  in  B.C.  536.  Schwally
(ZAT',y,  1890,  218  ff~.,  238240)  ascribes  to  Zephaniah  only
12l3-t5,  and  possibly  2  1-4  (doubting  this  passage  on  ac
count  of  uy  and  rn:y  2  3)  ;  25-12  he  treats  as  exilic  (chiefly  on
account  of  the  '  remnant  '  2  7  9),  and  3  as  post-exilic  :  the  J  single
leading  motive"  appealed  to  above  by  Robertson  Smith,  he
considers  to  be  evidence  only  of  unity  of  redaction,  not  of
unity  of  author.  Wellhausen  (1892,  (ShSgS)  is  suspicious  of
2  3,  and  rejects  1-ja,c,  8-n  ;  he  treats  3  as  an  appendix,  added
subsequently  in  two  stages,  first  3  1-7  (cp  Mic.  ~  1-6),  and  then
38-20  (cp  Mic.  77-20) — 38-20  being  separated  from  3  1-7  on
account  of  the  sudden  change  of  tone  and  subject,  consolations
and  promises  following  immediately  upon  censure  and  rebuke,
and  the  heathen,  not  the  Jews,  being  threatened  with  punishment.
Budde  (St.  Kr.,  1893,  pp.  393.^)  would  admit  21-331-5786
[in  this  order]  11-13  as  'n  harmony  with  the  pre-exilic  period,
and  a  suitable  sequel  to  1  ;  2  4-15  he  rejects,  as  inconsistent  with

1  (Israel  no  longer,  as  in  1,  the  perpetrator  of  wrong,  but  the
victim  of  wrong,  which  is  now  \t>.  9  end]  to  be  avenged)  ;  3  <)f.
is  excluded as  breaking the  connection  betwen  38  and 3  IT  ;
and  3  14-20  is  alater  lyrical  epilogue  to  3  11-13. Cornill(/t;'«/.,(;')
1896,  §35,  3)  agrees  with  Budde. Davidson  (1896)  defends  (99  ff~.)

2  as  a  whole,  admitting  only  that  2  4-15  may  in  parts  have  been
expanded  (the  Xv«<i-rhythm  seems  intended  to  predominate  in
these  verses;  but in some places, especially  25  7, it  can be
restored  only  by  considerable  textual  alterations,  and  'is-n  do
not  conform  to  it  at  all)  ;  in  3  he  feels  doubtful  only  about  3  10
(which  is  textually  obscure  and  uncertain)  and  about  the  'ex
tremely  beautiful  passage  '  3  14-20,  which  seems  to  him  to  spring
from a  time when the  judgments  have already  fallen upon
Israel (v.  15),  and by its jubilant tone contrasts  strangely
with  the  dark  picture  of  guilt  3  1-3  7,  and  even  with  the  more
sombre  hopes  of  3  11-13. Nowack(i8g7)  in  2  agrees  closely  with
Wellhausen,  only  rejecting  2  15  as  well  as  2  7  a,c  8-n  ;  in  3,  how
ever,  he  rejects  only  (like  Budde)  3gf.  in  addition  to  3  14-20.
G.  A.  Smith  (1808)  accepts  (242-45)  the  whole  of  2  except  28-n  ;
in  3  he  regards  'Agf.  as  'obviously  a  later  insertion,'  and  3  14-20
as  clearly  an  epilogue  of  peace  and  hope  added  at  the  close  of
the  exile  or  after  the  return (44  /). Baudissin  (Einl. 1901,
p.  553^7!)  denies  to  Zephaniah  only  2  7*1,  <:,  8-n  and  814-20;

5405


ZEPHANIAH

he  thinks  3  1-13  also  to  be  an  addition  to  the  original  prophecy
(which  will  have  ended  with  2  12-15),  but  not  necessarily  by
another  hand  than  that  of  Zephaniah  himself.

Of  the  passages  which  have  been  thus  questioned,
2 1-3  may  be  accepted  as  Zephaniah's  without  any
scruple  :  it  forms  for  a  prophet  the  almost  necessary
counterpart  to  1.  In  24-7  the  only  suspicious  part  is  the
clause  2  7  c  (cp  the  remarks  below  on  3 18-20),  which  may
be  a  gloss  (Wellhausen,  Nowack)  ;  and  213-15  is  far
more  likely  to  have  been  written  before  the  destruction
of  Nineveh  in  607  than  after  it  (cp  also  §  3).  Against
3 1-8  11-13  no  reasonable  objection  can  be  urged  :  as
Budde  (396)  says,  we  are  here  in  the  pre-exilic
Jerusalem,  without  any  trace  of  the  exile  and  its  experi
ences.  Davidson  remarks  in  particular  that  3  1-7  is
characterised  generally  by  the  same  moral  earnestness
as  1 2-23,  ar>d  that  the  terms  of  3 1-4  are  such  as  are  not
likely  to  have  been  applied  to  Jerusalem,  except  in  the
pre-exilic  period  :  811-13  describes  the  Jerusalem  of  the
future,  purified  by  judgment,  and  naturally  therefore
differs  in  tone  from  81-7.  Schwally's  main  argument
(231^)  for  rejecting  38  cannot  be  sustained:  there
is  no  sufficient  reason  for  supposing  that  the  nations  are
there  gathered  together  against  Israel  (as  in  Ez.  38/1  and
post-exilic  passages)  ;  they  are  assembled  for  punish
ment,  and  Israel  is  included  among  them.  There  is,
however,  a  greater  consensus  against  Zephaniah's
authorship  of  28-n  89/1  and  814-20.  It  is  objected  to
23-10  (the  oracle  of  Moab  and  Ammon)  that  there  is
no  sufficient  motive  for  the  mention  of  these  countries
about  625  B.C.  (the  Philistines,  25-7,  would  be  on  the  line
of  march  of  the  Scythians  towards  Egypt  ;  indeed,
Herodotus  expressly  says  that  the}'  passed  by  Ashkelon,
lios),  that  the  reproaches  of  28io  presuppose  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  gave  occasion  for  them
(Ezek.  2036  8),  that  (see  Budde  above)  the  attitude  of
the  prophet  towards  Judah  is  here  the  exact  opposite  of
that  taken  by  him  in  1,  and  that  the  elegiac  measure,
which  at  least  predominates  in  24-712-15,  does  not
appear  in  28-io.  It  may,  however,  be  doubted  whether
the  terms  of  28  10  necessarily  refer  to  the  events  of  B.C.
586,  and  also  whether  our  knowledge  of  the  times  is
sufficient  to  justify  us  in  declaring  that  no  adequate
motive  then  existed  for  the  unfavourable  mention  of
these  arrogant  and  encroaching  (Is.  166  Am.  113)
nations  (Davidson  compares  01.2836);  if  Ezekiel,  in
spite  of  his  uncompromising  sense  of  Judah's  sin  (1-24),
nevertheless  resents  strongly  (25i-n)  the  unfriendly
attitude  of  Moab  and  Ammon,  why  may  not  Zephaniah
have  done  the  same  ?  The  argument  derived  from  the
change  of  rhythm  possesses  weight  ;  but  it  implies  that
we  are  right  in  emending  the  context  (25712)  so  as  to
restore  the  kind- rhythm,  and  also  that  we  have  valid
grounds  for  supposing  that  Zephaniah  would  desire  to
preserve  rhythmical  uniformity  throughout  the  entire
passage  (28  '  I  have  heard'  is  an  evident  reminiscence
of  Is.  166).  2  ii,  however,  connects  imperfectly  both
with  2 10  and  with  2 12  (observe  'ye  also'};  and  may
therefore  be  the  addition  of  a  reader,  who  desiderated
here  the  two  thoughts  which  the  verse  contains  ;  and
3g/  (the  conversion  of  the  nations) J  connects  extremely
badly  (notice  v.  9  '  for  then  ')  with  38  (the  judgment  on
the  nations — if  not,  indeed,  their  destruction,  lz/. ).
As  regards  814-20,  it  is,  no  doubt,  possible  that  it  is,  in
G.  A.  Smith's  words  (73),  a  '  new  song  front  God,'
which  came  to  some  prophet,  shortly  after  the  return,
and  expressed  for  the  remnant  that  survived,  the
'afflicted  and  poor'  people  of  v.  12,  the  brighter  hopes
which  the  restoration  fostered.  The  picture  which
the  verses  delineate  is,  however,  upon  any  view  of
their  origin,  an  ideal  one  ;  and  the  question  remains
whether  it  is  more  than  a  lyrical  development  of
the  thought  of  w.  11-13,  such  as  Zephaniah,  realising
vividly  in  spirit  the  blissful  future,  might  have  con-

1  There  is  manifestly  some  corruption  in  3  10  ;  but  the  homage
of  the  nations  is  more  consonant  with  the  context  than  the
homage  of  the  exiled  Jews.

5406


ZEPHANIAH

structed  himself.  Undoubtedly  the  terms  of  vv.  18-20
presuppose  exile,  whilst  w.  11-13  suggest  nothing  more
than  the  purification  of  Judah  in  its  own  home  ;  but
both  exile,  and  n-storation  from  exile,  are  contemplated
by  Jeremiah,  and  Zephaniah  might  have  added  the
closing  verses  of  his  book  man}'  years  after  811-13  was
written,  at  a  time  when  exile  was  seen  more  clearly  to  be
looming  in  the  future.  It  is,  however,  true  that  818-20
is  more  open  to  suspicion  than  814-17.  A  final  decision
on  the  entire  question  will  hardly  be  arrived  at  on  the
basis  of  Zephaniah  alone  :  it  will  depend  on  the  con
clusion  formed  by  the  critic  on  passages  of  similar  im
port  found  in  many  of  the  other  prophets  (cp  Introd.W
229 /.  273  306  f.  318  330  334  ;  and  Cheyne,  Pref.  to
WRS,  ProJ>h.W  xv ff.\

The  text  of  Zephaniah,  while  on  the  whole  well  pre
served,  is  in  several  passages  open  to  grave  suspicion,
_  ,  and  in  some  unquestionably  corrupt.  Many
'  of  these  have,  however,  been  corrected,
especially  by  Wellhausen,  chiefly  on  the  basis  of  ©.

A  full  discussion  of  the  text  belongs  to  a  commentary  (see  esp.
\Ve.,  Now.,  and  GASm.);  but  a  few  of  the  more  notable
passages  may  be  briefly  noticed  here  :  1  3,  '  and  the  stumbling
blocks  with  the  wicked,'  is  incongruous  with  the  context,  and
prob.  (We.  Now.)  a  late  gloss  ;  1  $b  omit  prob.  G'i'SC^n  and  the

1  after rtlrV?  (reading  then, 'and  the  worshippers  of  Yahwe,
who  swear  by  their  king  '  ['  Molech  '])  ;  2  i  K?31  ^ctenann  (Che.
Ru.)  '  get  you  shame,  and  be  ye  ashamed,  O  nation  unabashed,'
is  on  the  whole  most  prob.  (C'B'ip  means  '  to  gather  stubble  ') ;

2  2  for  the  first  two  clauses  (to  chaff)  read  with  Wellhausen
(nearly  as  (B)  '  before  j^'  become  as  chaff  that  passeth  au'ay'
(lav  j'b|  Vrrrrx?  C1B2);  2&a read  probably  (<5  We.) 'and
Chereth  shall  be  an  habitation  for  shepherds '  (HI 3  JT13 '"iivrn
D'^T  :  '  with  cottages  ' — or  even  '  with  caves  ' — '  for  '  is  an  im
possible  rendering  of  the  existing  Heb.)  ;  '2  7  read  (<B  We.)  '  and
the  coast  of  tlie  sea  (CM  ^n),  and  (We.)  '  by  the  sea  '  for  '  there
upon  '  (D^n  Vy  for  CH'Si') ; 2  1 1  at  least  nn,  '  make  lean '  (cp
Is  10  16  17  4,  though  the  word  is  here  strange)  for  nrj  ; 214
'ij'ijvrr'/S  cannot  be  right  ('all  the  beasts  of  the  nations  '  is  no
translation  of  it)  ;  then  for  Vip  '(their)  voice*  read  probably  (We.)
D13,  'the  owl '  (Ps.  1027),  and  for  2"\n,  'desolation,'  3ljf,  'the
raven' (®  Ew.  We.:  cp  Is.  34  n)  ;  3  3  !3"1J  ('  leave,'  lit.  cut  off,
hence  reserve  <?)  ;  or  'gnaw  the  bones, 'denom.  from  D1]?.)  is  very
suspicious  ;  87  read  with  <E>  We.,  for  'so  ...  concerning  her,'
'and  all  that  I  have  commanded  her  shall  never  be  cut  off  from
her  eyes'  (only  n'rj/'D  for  njiyp) ; 38  for  IJ'S, 'to  the  prey'
read  prob.,  with  <B Pesh.,  Hit/.,  Ru., We., Now., GASm.,
tJ/7, '  for  a  witness  '  ;  3  10  'SIS  H3  "inj;  ('  my  suppliants,  the
daughter  of  my  dispersed  '  ?)  is  extremely  suspicious  ;  3  15  read,
with©  Pesh.  and  nearly  all  moderns,  "ion,  'see,' for  'NTH,  'fear';

3  17  Ruhl  (ZATH', 1885,  p.  183)  for  »"irv  proposes  plausibly
c'T?.[io  '  wi"  renew  (Ew.  §  282  <!)  his  love  ' ;  3iSa  'for  '  (RV)  is
less  probable  than  '  away  from  ' ;  3  isi  is  suspicious,  though  the
clause might  be  rendered (better than  in RV), '  upon  whom
[referring  to  '  thee ']  reproach  is  a  burden '  ;  3  20  '  and  at  that
time  I  will  gather  thee  '  yields  an  excellent  sense,  but  it  cannot
be  extracted  from  the  existing  text.

As  has  been  remarked  already  (§§  3-5),  Zephaniah,  in
his  prophetic  ideals,  follows  largely  in  the  steps  of
_  ..  .  Isaiah.  With  Zephaniah  as  with  Isaiah,
.  e  igious  tjie  centraj  jcjea  ;s  t]lat  Of  a  judgment,
eac  mg.  to  ))e  executecj  by  Yahwe  upon  Judah,
which  will  sweep  away  from  it  the  proud,  the  religiously
indifferent,  the  scoffers,  the  men  who  abuse  their
privileges  and  their  position  (83^),  and  the  impeni
tent,  who  will  not  listen  to  'correction'  (827),  but
•which  will  leave  behind  a  meek  and  pious  'remnant,'
•who  trust  simply  in  their  God  (23  3izf. ;  cp  Is.  1432,  and
contrast  Is.  2  u  12  17  :  Zephaniah,  it  is  to  be  noted,
emphasises  more  strongly  than  Isaiah  does  the  particular
virtues  of  '  meekness'  and  '  humility').  With  Zephaniah,
however,  the  judgment,  more  distinctly  than  in  Isaiah
(313),  is  a  7£w/</-judgment  :  it  embraces  all  nations
(l2/  38),  not  only  Israel  (\*/.).  The  figure  of
Yahwe' s  'Day'  is  doubtless  suggested  by  Is.  2  \i  ff.\
but  the  imagery  of  war  and  invasion,  under  which  its
approach  is  pictured  (1 14-18),  is  Zephaniah's  own,  though

54°7


ZEPHANIAH

found  in  Isaiah  in  other  connections  (e.g.  026-30).  The
great  and  abiding  religious  value  of  the  book  consists  in
the  profoundly  earnest  moral  tone  which  pervades  it,
and  in  the  prophet's  deep  sense  of  the  sin  of  his  people,
and  of  the  stern  need  which  impels  Yahwe,  who  would
only  too  gladly  rejoice  over  his  people,  if  it  would
permit  him  to  do  so  (817),  to  visit  it  with  a  discipline
such  as  will  purge  away  its  unworthy  members.
Zephaniah's  gospel  has  been  described  as  '  simple  and
austere.'  It  is  true,  he  goes  back  to  and  insists  with
pathetic  eloquence  on  the  most  primary  and  rudi
mentary  of  religious  duties,  earnestness  and  sincerity  of
life,  justice  and  integrity,  humility  and  a  simple  trust  in
God.  '  A  thorough  purgation,  the  removal  of  the
wicked,  the  sparing  of  the  honest  and  the  meek  ;  in
sistence  only  upon  the  rudiments  of  morality  and
religion  ;  faith  in  its  simplest  form  of  trust  in  a
righteous  God,  and  character  in  its  basal  elements
of  meekness  and  truth — these  alone  survive  the  judg
ment '  (GASm.,  71).  He  does  not,  as  other  prophets
commonly  do,  call  the  wicked  to  repent,  or  dwell  upon
the  divine  grace  which  is  ever  ready  to  forgive  the
penitent  :  it  may  be  that  the  doom  seemed  to  him  to  be
too  imminent ;  the  time  for  pleading  was  past ;  there
remained  only  the  separation  of  the  evil  from  the  good.
But  he  recognises  and  teaches  clearly  the  moral  qualities
which  have  a  value  in  Yahwe' s  eyes,  and  will  not  be
swept  away  when  the  judgment  comes  (cp  Is.  8814-16).
Another  point  which  is  worthy  of  notice  is  Zephaniah's
comprehensive  view  of  history.  Yahwe's  hand  guides
the  movement  of  the  nations  ;  and  by  them  he  accom
plishes  his  purposes  of  discipline,  purgation,  and  salva
tion  (cp  Is.  165^).  His  ultimate  purpose  is  that
not  only  Israel  (811-13),  but  also  the  nations  (2n63g/.,
— whether  these  verses  be  Zephaniah's  or  not),  shall
become  the  loyal  and  faithful  servants  of  God.

Ewald,  Prophets^  3  ii,ff.  ;  the  Commentaries  on  the  Minor
Prophets  in  general  (Hitz.,  Keil,  Pusey,  Wellh.,  Nowack,

GASm.)  ;  A.  R.  Davidson  in  the  Canib.  Bible
9.  Literature. (1896); Duhm, Theol. der  Prof>h. (1875),

pp.  222-5 !  Kirkpatrick,  Doctr.  of  the
Prophets,  253  ff.  ;  J.  A.  Selbie's  art.  in  Hastings'  DB;  and  the
discussions  of  Kuenen,  Schwally,  etc.,  which  have  been  already
mentioned.  An  apocryphal  prophecy  ascribed  to  Zephaniah
('  And  the  spirit  took  me,  and  carried  me  up  into  the  fifth
heaven,  and  I  saw  angels  called  lords,'  etc.)  is  quoted  by  Clem.
Alex.  Strom,  5  n,  §  77  ;  some  other  fragments,  preserved  in  a
Coptic  version,  have  also  been  discovered  and  published  lately  :
see  APOCRYPHA,  §  21,  Schiirer,  '1 LZ,  1890,  col.  8  (who  agrees
that  Steindorffs  '  unknown  '  Apoc.  is  probably  that  of  Zeph.),
G/f'l3)  327I./C  [See  also  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE,  §  40,  and
SCYTHIANS,  §  6,  on  Zephaniah  and  Jeremiah,  with  reference  to
the  prophecies  on  'the  Scythians.']

w.  K.  s. ,  §§  1-5,  9  (partly)  ;
S.  R.  n. ,  §§  6-8,  9  (partly).

2.  A  Kohathite  (i  Ch.  621  [36],  <ra<;><ma  [RL],  -tou  [A])'

3.  b. MAASEIAH  (i),  a  priest  temp.  Zedekiah  ;  Jer.  21  i  29  25
29  37  3  52  24  (RNA  om.)  2  K.  25  18  (o-o.^oi'tai/  [L]).

4.  Father  of  JOSIAH  (2);  Zech.  61014.

[All  these  '  Zephaniahs  '  have  directly  or  indirectly  a  historical
interest,  and  even  if  it  be  contended  that  the  prophet  Zephaniah
must  have  given  his  name  a  religious  interpretation  (cp  the
statement  in  Is.  8  18),  and  have  considered  himself  a  guardian  of
the  truth  (cp  1 3,  though  to  be  sure  Schwally  and  Wellhausen
question  Zephaniah's  authorship  of  this  passage)  that  the  faithful
will  be  protected  in  the  day  of  Yahwe's  anger,  yet  it  is  at  any
rate  conceivable,  and,  if  we  consider  the  mass  of  evidence
arising  from  parallel  names,  even  probable,  that  the  '  Zephaniahs'
in  general  belonged  to  families  of  near  or  remote  Jerahmeelite —
i.e.,  N.  Arabian — affinities,1  and  the  view  is  capable  of  being
defended  that  all  the  names  with  which  '  Zephaniah  is  combined


Saphan  or  Saphon,  the  name  of  a  N.  Arabian  district  —  cp
ZAPHON  ;  and  a  parallel  to  the  confusion  which  may  seem  to
have  arisen  can  be  found  in  the  name  Eliahba  (K3n'^K)i  'f  this

1  It  is  worth  noticing  that  there  is  a  well-known  Israelite  gem
(Rrit.  Mus.,  No.  1032),  with  this  legend,  i.vjEX  f 3  ""::•-,  « '"--re,
even  if  Irving' be  rendered  'blackish'  or 'brownish '(so  Clermont-
Ganneau,  PEFQ,  1902,  p.  267),  we  must  at  any  rate  suppose
that  it  is  a  fantastic  variation  of  iris?  ~Tine'Ni  so  that  both
father  and  son  have  names  which  originally  belonged  to  districts
of  N .  Arabia.

5408


ZEPHATH

is  really  a  modification  of  Sxsnhl',  as  maintained  in  Crit.  Bib.
on  28.1832.  This  has  a  distinct  bearing  on  the  history  of
Israelite  religion.  The  third  Zephaniah  held  a  high  office  in  the
temple.  In  Jer.  2926  he  appears  as  the  successor  of  '  the  priest
Jehoiada,1  and  as  having  the  right  of  granting  or  refusing  access
to  the  temple.  It  was  held  to  be  his  duty  to  expel  prophetic
enthusiasts  ;  nevertheless  he  abstained  from  hindering  Jeremiah.
In  2  K.  25  18  (and  Jer.  5:2  24  ?)  he  is  represented  as  second  priest
(see  PRIEST,  §  5,  end).  The  fourth  Zephaniah  was  father  of  a
certain  Josiah,  into  whose  house  the  bearers  of  rich  offerings
from  S^a  entered  (temp.  Zerubbabel).  See  ZEKUHHAHEL,  and
cpHEN.  T.  K.  C.]


ZEPHATH  (nay;


20;


1  [BL],  Ce<J>ep


[A]),  a  Canaanite  city  taken  by  the  men  of  SIMMON
(§  4)  and  Judah  (Judg.  1  17).  Probably  a  corruption  of
ZARKPHATH  (q.v.)  [Che.].  For  a  northern  Zephath
see  PALESTINE,  §15,  col.  3546,  no.  116.

ZEPHATHAH(nrny,  Jos.  Ant.  viii.  12i,  CABA0A),
a  valley  'by  MAKKSIIAH  '  (</.7-.  ),  whore  Asa  defeated
Zerah  the  Cushite,  2  Ch.  1  4  10.  If  the  Mareshah  referred
to  is  the  Mer'as  S.  of  BOt-jibnn,  it  is  simplest  to  read
ruiBx.  Saphunah,  with  Hitzig,  Griitz,  Kohler,  Buhl,
Benzinger,  following  ©IIAI-,  Kara  ^oppa.v  (Pesh.  omits).

It  is  possible,  however,  that  there  was  a  Mareshah  in  the
Negeb,  near  Zephath  or  Zarephath,  and  that  Asa's  tight  with
Zerah  was  to  defend  Judahite  possessions  in  the  Negeb.  The
mention  of  Gerar  (7*.  14)  somewhat  favours  this  view  (see
GRKAR).  This  affects  the  question  as  to  the  birthplace  ol
Micah,  and  the  geography  of  Mic.  1  ioff.  T.  K.  C.

ZEPHO  (ias; coocj^p  [ADKL]),  b.  Eiiphaz,  an

Edomite  chieftain  or  rather,  reading  rfei*,  clan  (Gen.Sfin  15).
In  i  Ch.  1  30  his  name  appears  as  Zephi  ('3i'>  <ro>0ap  [RA],
O-CTT^OUJJ  [  L],  a  secondary  form  from  o-eTn^ovp]).  After  (5  (except
L  in  i  Ch.)  we  may  read  "ISis.  See  ZOPHAR.

ZEPHON  (P2V),  b.  Gad,  whence  the  family  of  the
ZKI-HONITKS  (TlSyn):  NU.  26i5  (<5,  v.  24,  c<\cJ>OGN
[BI.],  om.  A;  c<ubu>N[e]l  [RAL]).  In  Gen.  46i6
the  name  appears  as  ZIPHION  (j°VB¥,  aa<pwv  [AI)L]i.

Cp  ZAPHON,  which  may  with  much  plausibility  be
taken  as  the  name  of  a  district  in  N.  Arabia  (see  Crit.
Bib.  on  Is.  14  13  Jer.  1  i3f.  61  Ezek.  323o  386  etc.  ).

The  Gadite  clans  had  Jerahmeelite  names  (e.g.,  Shuni,  Areli),
perhaps  recording  a  sojourn  in  the  Negeb.  Hut  cp  GAD,  §  n.


ZER  ("iV  ;  TYROC  [I^AL])  an  unknown  'fenced  city*
of  Naphtali  mentioned  between  ZIDDIM  and  HAMMATII  (Josh.
1935).  It  is  probable  that  the  text  has  become  confused  and
amplified  through  the  recurrence  of  isCac)  and  (c')~!>,  and  that
IS  should  be  omitted.

ZERAH  (TnT,  if  primarily  a  personal  name  [cp  §  n]
may  be  equivalent  to  PIITN  [§  50],  or  to  the  Sab.
n.  pr.  mi  jl~l~n  '  magnificent  '  ;  cp  ZEKAHIAH,  also
JACOB,  col.  2311  ;  ZApA  [BADEFL]).

i.  Twin-brother  of  Perez  (Gen.  8830  [J],  46  12  [P]
AV  in  both  ZARAH,  Nu.  2620  [P],  Mt.  la,"  AV  ZARA)  ;
see  JUDAH,  §  2/,  PKRKZ.  In  the  only  other  passage
prior  to  P,  he  appears  as  the  ancestor  of  ACHAN  (]osh.
7i8  24  [JEJ,  cp  7  i  2220  [P]).  According  to  i  Ch.  26
his  sons  were  Zimri,  Ethan,  Heman,  Calcol,  and  Dara
(see  ETHAN).  The  B'ne  Zerah  were  a  family2  living  in
Jerusalem  in  post-exilic  times  (i  Ch.  96  ftpa  [L]),  a
member  of  which  was  the  royal  commissary  for  Jewish
affairs,  Pethahiah  (Xeh.  11  24';  om.  BX*A,  fape  [Nc-a]).

The  patronymic,  ZARHITE,  RV  Zerahite  (Nu.  2i>  20  THJri  ;
6  fopa[e]i  [BAFL1)  is  used  of  Achan  (  [osh.  7  17  [6]  £ap<x[e]t
[BAFLJ),  Sibbecai  (i  Ch.  27  n  T<3  fapia  |B1.  TC?  fapairrj  [I.],
om.  A),  and  of  Maharai  (//>.  7<.  13  ru>  £apei  [B],  TU>  -pai  [AL]);
and  occurs  also  in  EV  under  the  form  IZRAHITE  (n~T'n,  rather
'niTH)  applied  to  Shamhuth,  i  Ch.  278.  Here  Marquart,  Fund.
19,  would  read  'IT1J  C?  HVlrOfl  Iff,  see  SHAMMAH,  §  5.

2.  A  Gershonite  Levite  (i  Ch.  621  [6]  41  [26],  laapa,  (Jaapai
[Bl,  afapiou  [A  in  7'.  41]),  whose  son  is  named  Ethni  (?'.  41)  —  a
combination  which  resembles  Ethan  b.  Zerah  (f>.  stif.)  ',  see
ETHAN,  3.

1  For  the  final  K,  cp  <ra$eic,  i  S.  30  29  (B)  ;  a-apaSax  Nu.  34  8.
In  each  case  K  (of  KOLI)  follows.

a  See  Bertheau's  commentary,  but  note  the  (less  probable)
alternative  view  offered  in  Ryle,  Ezra-JVeh.  283.

S4°9


ZERAH

3.  b.  Reuel  [from  Jerahmeel?],  an  Edomite  clan  (pointing  r,^K
for  I^N,  EV's 'duke'),  Gen.  30  1 3  j7  [P],  ((apt  [ADEL],  £cp*
[I>  v.  17]),  i  Ch.  1  37  (fapes  [B],  fapt  [B'.b  AL]),  represented  as
the  father  of  JoBAB  [i/.r.]  (Gen.  30  33  [om.  EJ  i  Ch.  1  44).

4.  b.  SIMEON  (89), Nu.  26 13 [  P] ; i  Ch.424 (fap«s [B],
£apa<  [A]),  also  called  ZOHAK  (ink  J  eroap  ;  Gen.  4fi  10  [craaA  D),
Ex.  (iis). From  him  is  derived  the  patronymic  ZAKHITE,  RV
ZKKAHITE  ;  cp  i  supra.

5.  Zerah  the  Cushite,  (wan ;  fape  6  AWiof  ;  Jos.  Ant.
812  i  fa/xuos),  defeated  by  Asa,  king  of  Judah  (2  Ch.
14  9-15  [8-14]).  The  overwhelming  defeat  which  Asa  is
said  to  have  inflicted  upon  Zerah,  in  spite  of  his  relatively
small  force,  is  a  detail  peculiar  to  the  Chronicler.  To  take
the  story  as  it  stands  is  impossible  (see  CHRONICLES,
§  8  / ).  What  Asa's  power  really  amounted  to  we
know  from  i  K.  I;,  16-22  ;  of  Zerah  the  Cushite  nothing
is  reported  elsewhere.  It  is  true,  many  OT  critics  (incl.
Ewald  and  Graf)  have  adopted  Champollion's  view  that
Osorkon  I.  (22nd  dyn. )  is  intended  ;  others  (incl.  Sayce,
Crit.  A/on.  363 /!)  have  preferred  Osorkon  II.  But
why  either  king  should  be  called  a  Cushite  has  not  been
explained1  (see  the  suggestions  descril>ed  in  Kohler,
Bi/'l.  Gesch.  8321  ff.},  and  without  this  it  is  useless
to  show  that  Osorkon  II.  made  a  campaign  against
Syria  and  Palestine  (Naville,  Bubastis  \_EKF\,  1891,
p.  51).  Other  scholars  (incl.  Kuenen,  Stade,  Wellh. )
have  therefore  rejected  the  narrative  altogether.
Winckler,  however,  has  pointed  out  that,  as  probably
in  the  case  of  the  captivity  of  MANASSKH  [q.v.~\,  there
may  be  a  historical  element  in  the  statements  of  the
Chronicler,  and  suggested  that  'c'?3  should  perhaps  be
'a'a  Kassite  (^Chaldaean),  and  that  the  invasion  came
from  Babylonia  (A  T  Unters.  i6ojf. ).  More  satisfactory
is  his  later  view  ( KA  T^  144)  that  Zerah  was  a  'Cushite,'
in  the  sense  that  he  was  a  ruler  of  S.  Arabia  (Main).
Hommel,  on  the  other  hand,  points  out  that  several  of
the  oldest  princes  of  Saba  bore  the  title  rrn  (  =  mr  ;  see
a<t  i/iit.},  and  thinks  that  a  Saba-an  invasion  is  in
tended.2  The  evidence  of  the  Hebrew  texts,  how
ever,  points  rather  to  X.  than  to  S.  Arabia  as  indicated
by  Cush,  and  in  the  Ass.  texts  '  Kusi  and  Meluhha'  is
the  ordinary  designation  of  N.  Arabia.

That  Zerah  is  a  'Jerahmeelite'  name  is  beyond  question,  and
'Cushite'  and  '  Mlsrite'are  so  nearly  equivalent  that  'Zerah
the  Cushite'  may  have  meant  much  the  same  as  Zerah  the
Misrite.  Cp  '  Cushi,  king  of  Misrim,'  if  we  may  so  read  in  2  Ch.
12  2. a  This  view  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  the  description  of
Asa's  success  in  2  Ch.  14  13-15.  The  'cities  about  Gerar  '  are
surely  the  cities  of  the  Cushites.  Now  the  'Gerar'  referred  to
is  not  Umm  el-Jerar,  5  m.  S.  of  Gaza,  but  in  the  Wady  Jerur,
SW  of 'Ain  Gadis  (see  GEKAK).  In  r>.  15  moreover,  under
lying  the  present  corrupt  text,  is  the  statement  that  Asa  and
his  men  smote  and  carried  captive  the  Jerahmeelites.*  Clearly
'Jerahmeelites' and  '  Cushites  '  are  synonymous  terms.  Add  to
this  that  in  Iti8  the  allies  of  the  Cushites  are  called  the  Lubim.
'Lubim'  is  miswritten  for  'Ludim' — i.e.,  not  the  Lydian
mercenaries  of  Egypt,  but  'the  Gil'adim '—  i.e.,  the  men  of  the
southern  Gilead  (in  the  Negeb),  the  same  people  who  are
mentioned  in  2  Ch.  12  3  as  the  allies  of  '  Cushi,  king  of  Misrim. '

It  may  be  objected  (cp  GASni.  Twelve  Prophets,  2i53,'n.  6)
that  the  mention  of  Mareshah  (2  Ch.  \4gf.)  favours  the  theory
of  an  Egyptian  invasion,  and  at  any  rate  is  adverse  to  the  view
that  the  southern  Gerar  is  referred  to.  But  the  mention  of
the  valley  of  Zephathah  (r'.  10)  suggests  that  a  Mareshah  in  the
Negeb  is  intended,  and  this  suggestion  accords  with  the  other
phenomena  pointing  to  a  Cushite— i.e.,  N.  Arabian,  invader.  See
ZEPHATHAH.  It  is  probable  that  the  feud  between  the  Israel
ites  and  the  Jerahmeelites,  Cushites,  and  Misrites  was  long
anterior  to  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  T.  K.  c.

1  Sayce,  364,  frankly  calls  it  a  mistake  of  the  Chronicler. In
fact,  the  kings  of  the  twenty-second  dynasty  bear  for  the  most
part  Libyan  names  (see  EGYPT,  §  64).

2  Exp.TZ  378,  cp  4317:  ;  AHT  315,  note  r.

3  We  assume  that  ne"C'  is  miswritten  for  »CTJ. See  SHISHAK,
§2.

Read


Hommel,  it  is  true,  emends  differently  (Exp.  T,  as  above).  ®
has  <r/C7)i'as  KTIJCTCOM'  [KTiji'iui'J,  rovt  a/ua^oi-tilei?  (cp  22  i  aA[e]i/uo.-
^o«r?  [BA],  a/xacToptei/u  [L],  where  MT  has  HjnsS)  efeicodiair;
Pesh.  '  tents  of  the  Arabs.'  But  'SnX  and  rapo  are  DOt^  corrupt
fragments  of  7N!2nV-

5410


ZEBAHIAH

ZERAHIAH  (iTnif  'Yahwe  has  dawned,'  §  35,  cp
IZRAHIAH,  unless  both  these  names  are  modifications  of  ethnicsi
see  ZERAH,  and  note  that  the  whole  body  of  names  in  the
genealogical  scheme  connecting  Kleazar  b.  Aaron  with  Ezra,
etc.,  and  the  names  of  Izrahiah's  five  sons  in  i  Ch.  7  3,  and  that
of  Zerahiah's  son  in  Ezra  8  4,  admit  of  being  regarded  as  modified
ethnics  [so  Che.]  ;  fopcua  [HAL]).

1.  b.  Uzzi,  father  of  Meraioth  (i  Ch.  66  [632]  [<Japaid,  Capias
A]  51 [36], Ezra~4  =  4  Esd.  1  2 AKNA). In i  Esd.  82 he is
called  ZAKAIAS  (£a.paiov  [AL],  om.  B).

2.  Father  of  ELIEHOENAI  (=Ishmael?),  of  the  b'ne  Pahath-
moab  —  i.e.,  (most  probably)  Nephtoah-missur  —  a  district  in  the
Negeb, EzraS4 (£<xpeia. [B])=i Esd.  831 ZARAIAS (£apcuou
[HAL]). See  Crit.  Bib.

ZERED,  THE  VALLEY  OF,  or  BROOK  OF  (^113
TT).  ;  ^TU-  4>ApArTA  z<\per  [B],  z<\pe  [A],  zApe9

[L]  ;  Dt.  dy  ZAP6T  [BAL,  but  Z&pe  Aa!  once],  zApe9
[F]  ;  torrentem  Zared),  named  in  E's  itinerary  in  Nu.
21  12,  also  in  Dt.  2i3/.f  The  prevailing  tendency  is
to  identify  it  with  the  Wady  Kerak  (Dillmann,  Driver,
Steuernagel,  A.  T.  Chapman),  a  deep  and  narrow  gorge
running  past  Kerak  in  a  NW.  direction  to  the  Dead
Sea.  In  the  upper  part  of  its  course  it  is  called  the
Wady  'Ain  el-Franji.

There  is,  however,  reason  to  think  that  the  document  in
Nu.  21  has  come  down  to  us,  especially  so  far  as  relates  to
geography,  in  a  very  distorted  form.  See  NAHALIEL,  WARS
OF  THE  LORD,  BOOK  OK.  Upon  this  theory,  which  demands
close  examination,  '  Zered  '  should  be  some  place-name  in  the  E.
of  the  Negeb,  and  the  name  '  Zered  '  is  most  easily  accounted  for
as  a  corruption  of  Jizreel  (JEZREEL,  2).  T.  K.  C.

ZEREDA,  RV  Zeredah  (iTTT.y),  i  Kill  26  and
Zeredathah  (nmiV)  AV,  a  Chi  417.  See  ZARE-

THAN.

ZERERATH,  RV  Zererah  (iTT.1V  ;  r*P*r*Q&  [B],
Ka.1  {jfjv}  trwiiyfitfvi)  [AL]),  a  place  towards  which
the  Midianites  fled,  in  the  story  of  Gideon  (Judg.  722).
See  GIDEON,  ZARETHAN.

ZERESH  (rj;1T  ;  ZOOCAP<\  [BNL«x/s],  c.  [A]),  wife  of
Hainan  the  Agagite,  Esth.  01014  6i3.f

The  importance  attached  by  Haman  to  her  counsel  favours  the
view  that  she  was  originally  a  representative  of  some  place  or
clan.  Comparing  ZETHAR  (q.t'.),  and  assuming  that  the  scene
of  the  story  of  Esther  was  originally  laid  in  the  Negeb,  we  may
perhaps  see  in  Zeresh  (Zereth?)  a  mutilated  form  of  Zarephath.
Earlier  critics  explained  it  as  'golden'  (Pers.  ser,  'gold').  For
another  view  see  Jensen,  \VZKM,  1892,  p.  64.  Cp  also  PURIM,
§  7,  ESTHER,  §  3.  T.  K.  C.

ZERETH  (HIV),  b.  Helah,  a  Judahite  name,
i  Ch.  47  (apefl  [B],  craped  [A],  craprjfl  [L]).  Perhaps  a  corrupt
form  of  n?-]S  (Che.).

ZERETH  -SHAHAR, or (AV), Zareth  -  shahar

(in^'rrniy  ; cep&A&  KAI  c[e]iooN SN TOO opei

€N<\B [B], C&p6 KM CI60P G.  T.  O. £NAK [A], CAp0

e.  T.  o.  6MA.K  [L]),  a  Reubenite  city  of  doubtful  name
(see  below),  situated  'on  a  mountain  of  the  valley'
(Josh.  13ig)  —  i.e.,  on  one  of  the  mountains  E.  of  the
Jordan  valley  (cp  v.  27),  and  not  impossibly  on  that
described  at  length  in  Jos.  S/vii.  Q  1-3  (see  MACH/ERUS).
To  the  NW.  of  this  mountain  is  the  Wady  es-Sara,
with  a  hot  spring  called  'Ain  es-Sara  (ZDPl'lm  244  ;
cp  Tristram,  Land  of  Moab,  257  ff.},  in  which  name
Buhl  (Pal.  268)  finds  an  echo  of  rm,  Sereth.

Tlie  name  Zereth-hassahar,  however,  seems  to  become  clearer
from  the  point  of  view  adopted  in  the  article  SIHOX.  -inilTt
should  represent  iine'N  '  Ashhur'  (cp  i  Ch.  4  5),  and  rra  should
come  from  nsiai  '  Zarephath.'  Josh.  13  16-20,  as  it  now  stands,
may  not  correctly  represent  the  original  document.

T.  K.  C.

ZERI  plV),  i  Ch.253. In  i  Ch.  25  n  IZRI.

ZEROR  (ihy  ;  ApeA  [BA],  CAp&  [L]),  a  Benjamite,
ancestor  of  Kish  (i  S.  9  it)  ;  in  i  Ch.  8  30  ZUR.  Marquart
(Fund.  15)  prefers  -ns.  TIXD  might  be  possible  (cp  ZEDAD).

ZERUAH(nr-ny;  CAPOYA[A].  onBLseecol.  2404,
n.  2),  mother  of  Jeroboam  I.  (i  K.  11  26).  The  name  is  prob
ably  a  corruption  of  rrnsp,  'a  Misrite  (N.  Arabian)  woman.'
See  JEROBOAM,  i,  and  cp  ZERUIAH.  T.  K.  C.


ZERUBBABEL


zopoB&BeA,  commonly  ex-
54"


ZERUBBABEL

plained  as  =?22  1?1T  [cp  Kon.  2481,  /.  2], 'begotten

1 Data '"  Babylon. ' The  name  may  plausibly  be

brought  into  connection  with  a  name  found

on  two  Babylonian  contract  tablets  (marked  V.  A.  Th.

8 1  and V. A.  Th. 143 respectively, in 1'eiser's  Dab.

rertrage[i&<)o]},  ZKR-TIN-TIR-KI,  which  is  usually  read
Zer-  or  Zir-Babili,  though  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  phonetic-
reading  Zarubabil  is  found.  The  meaning  of  this  name,
in  its  full  form,  according  to  C.  II.  W.  Johns,  is
probably  '  Marduk  preserves  the  rightful  seed  [heir]  to
Babylon. '  This  assumes  that  the  name  is  a  contraction
from  Marduk-zaru-Babili-lisir  ;  see,  however,  below).

The  facts  of  the  history  of  Zerubbabel  are  much  dis
puted,  and  the  OT  references  still  appear  to  await  some
fresh  illumination.  These  references  (excluding  the
manifest  interpolations1  in  i  Esd.  4 13  56)  are:  Hag.
1 1  12  14  22421  23  Zech.  46  i  Ch.  819  Ezra  22  82  62  Neh.
7 7  i  Esd.  085670  62i82729f.  Authorities  agree  in
stating  that  he  was  son  of  Shealtiel  (or,  as  thrice  in
Haggai,  Shaltiel),  except  Zechariah,  who  is  silent  as  to
his  parentage,  and  the  Chronicler,  who  makes  him
the  son  of  Pedaiah,  and  the  nephew  of  Shealtiel.  The
Chronicler  represents  him  as  a  descendant  of  David.
In  the  other  passages  this  is  not  stated.  Haggai
four  times  appends  to  his  name  the  title  ' pehah  (see
GOVERNOR,  i)  of  Judah,'  and  Zechariah  implies  that
he  occupies  the  highest  position  among  the  Jesvs  at
home.  In  Ezra  2  2  =  Neh.  7  7  he  is  represented  as  the
leader  of  a  band  of  captives  who  returned  to  Judah.
Haggai,  by  the  title  'my  (=  Yahwe' s)  servant'  (Hag.
223  ;  cp  Zech.  38),  indicates  that  Zerubbabel  has  received
a  special  mission  from  God,  and  both  Haggai  and
Zechariah  (cp  also  Ezra  5i/  )  represent  Zerubbabel  and
Jeshua  or  Joshua,  the  high  priest,  as  having  been  insti
gated  by  them  to  rebuild  the  temple.  The  most  remark
able  reference  of  all  remains.  It  is  in  the  same  passage
of  Haggai  which  contains  the  address  to  Zerubbabel  as
'my  servant,"  and  consists  of  an  emphatic  statement
that  when  the  great  overthrow  of  the  powers  (or  power  ?)
hostile  to  Israel  occurs,  Zerubbabel  will  receive  the
highest  proofs  of  the  divine  favour  and  protection.  These
are  the  few  dry,  bare  facts  which  find  expression  in  the
MT.  The  earlier  tradition,  however,  was  certainly  not
so  meagre,  and  traces  of  the  fuller  record  can,  in  all
probability,  yet  be  discerned.  It  is  only  because  the
points  to  be  examined  are  so  new  that  there  is  still  con
siderable  divergence  of  opinion.

A  provisional  view,  which  probably  contains  some
historical  truth,  is  as  follows.  The  family  of  David  was

2 Provisional  not  alt°gether  ruined  bY  the  catastrophe

view  °f  the  exile' There  is  a  tradition  that

even  Jehoiachin  benefited  by  a  change

of  feeling  towards  him  on  the  part  of  Nebuchadrezzar's
son  and  successor,  EVIL-MERODACH  (q.  v. ).  It  is  also
stated  that  SHESHBAZZAR  (q.v.),  the  'prince'  (NTJ)  or
'  governor '  (nns),  received  the  sacred  vessels  from  Nebu
chadrezzar,  and  went  with  a  royal  commission  to  rebuild
the  temple,  that  he  did  actually  lay  the  foundation-stone,
but  that  the  building  was  soon  afterwards  interrupted.
This  Sheshbazzar  has  been  identified  with  the  Shenazzar
of  i  Ch.  818,  who  is  represented  as  a  son  of  Jeconiah.
It  is  supposed  that  Zerubbabel  had  succeeded  his  uncle
in  the  governorship  by  the  year  520  B.C.,  when  Haggai
and  Zechariah  stirred  up  the  people  to  resume  the
building  of  the  temple,  and  that  the  breaking  out  of
revolts  in  different  parts  of  the  Persian  empire  may
have  stimulated  hopes  of  the  revival  of  an  independent

1  On  these  see  EZRA  (THE  GREEK),  §  6,  and  cp  Guthe's  notes
in  Kau.  Af>okr.  (1898).  That  the  reai/nrxos  of  i  Esd.  458  was
originally  Zerubbabel  (cp  Jos.  Ant.  xi.  3  i)  is  plainly  impossible,
even  if  Zerubbabel  was  not  the  same  person  as  Sheshbazzar  or
Sanabassar,  and  was  not  the  leader  of  the  first  migration  of  the
Jews  to  Palestine.  According  to  Howoith,  however,  the  theory
respecting  Zerubbabel  here  referred  to  was  'a  sufficient  reason,
and  the  only  one,  for  the  eiasion  of  this  particularly  edifying
passage  from  the  canonical  Ezra,  and  in  consequence  its  exclusion
from  the  canon  '  ('  Some  Unconventional  Views  on  the  Text  of
the  Bible,'  PSBA  23  316).

54"


ZERUBBABEL

kingdom  under  the  Davidic  prince  Zerubbabel.  It  is
also  held  by  some  that  there  is  evidence  of  this  in  the
OT  itself.  Zechariah  (610)  mentions  the  arrival  at
Jerusalem  of  four  Jews  from  Babylon,  who  brought  gifts
of  silver  and  gold.  Wellhausen  thinks  that  in  Zech.
6 ii  the  text  has  been  deliberately  tampered  with.  The
crown  referred  to  must  surely  have  been  for  Zerubbabel.
This  must  either  have  been  expressly  stated  or  implied.
Wellhausen  himself  is  content  with  omitting  the  words
relative  to  the  high  priest,  Joshua,  as  inserted  at  a  time
when  the  high  priest  was  virtually  a  crowned  king  ;  but
it  may  also  be  held  that  the  name  Joshua  has  displaced
the  name  Zerubbabel.1  However  this  may  be,  the
sudden  disappearance  of  Zerubbabel  from  the  theatre  of
political  history  is  remarkable.2  It  has  been  suggested
that  he  may  have  been  recalled  or  even  put  to  death  by
the  Persians,  and  that  the  attempt  of  Tattenai  (see
TATNAI)  the  satrap  of  Syria  to  stop  the  building  of  the
temple  may  have  some  connection  with  this,  or  may  at
any  rate  imply  a  suspicion  of  the  disloyalty  of  the  Jews.
Later,  we  find  Sanballat  professing  that  there  is  a  report
tint  Nehemiah  aims  at  the  crown  (Xeh.  67).  This
report  was  doubtless  erroneous  ;  but  it  may  plausibly  be
supposed  to  be  based  on  the  fact  that  a  Jewish  pretender
had  really  come  forward  in  the  past.3

For  the  further  development  of  similar  ideas  see  Sellin,
Serubbabel  (1898),  where  it  is  supposed  that  Zerubbabel
is  the  martyr  referred  to  (many  think)  in  Is.  53,  and  the
same  writer's  Studien  zur  Entstehungsgesch.  der  jiid.
Gemeinde  nach  dem  bab.  Exil,  2  (1901),  where  some
retractations  are  made,  and  the  theory  is  placed  on  what
appears  to  the  writer  a  more  secure  basis.  Sellin  still
holds  that  Zerubbabel  came  to  a  violent  end,  but  no
longer  rests  this  on  Is.  53  or  on  any  other  passage  of
the  Of.  Winckler,  however,  is  bolder.  He  thinks
that  both  Sheshbazzar  and  Zerubbabel  were  set  aside
by  acts  of  the  Persian  authorities,  and  that,  whilst  Shesh
bazzar  was  treated  gently,  Zerubbabel  suffered  the
punishment  of  impalement ;  the  eulogium  of  Zerubbabel
is  to  be  found  in  Is.  53. 4

Stade((7('/2  127(1 838))  speaks  more  vaguely.  '  If  the  supreme
Persian  power  heard  of  the  hopes  attaching  to  the  Persian
governor  Zerubbabel,  we  cannot  wonder  that  it  did  not  accommo
date  itself  to  the  role  of  a  tree  undergoing  the  embrace  of  ivy.1

It  is  possible, however, that  these  theories  need to

be  revised in the light of  a more thorough criticism

.  of  the  text  of  the  OT  narratives. The  story

, ,  underlying  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  the  early

suggested  [)art  Q-f  Daniel  referSi  ;t  mav  be  held,  to  a

^'  X.  Arabian  captivity  of  the  Jews  and  to  a
subsequent  change  in  their  relations  to  their  captors.
It  is  unsafe  to  place  any  reliance  on  the  proper  names
in  their  present  form.  VziTU  (for  the  common  explana
tions  of  which  little  can  be  said5)  may,  like  ^ytt  and
Vai,  be  a  corruption  (manipulated  by  the  redactor)  of
httyser'1  (Ishmael).  This  has  the  advantage  of  accord
ing  with  the  theory,  which  appears  to  be  well  supported,
that  the  names  given  in  i  Ch.  3 19  to  the  sons  of  '  Zerub
babel,'  beginning  with  Meshullam  (  =  Ishmael),  are  all

1  So  few.  Rcl.  Life,  15,  n. Hitzig  supposes  a  mere  ordinary
accident. He  would  insert  the  words  '  of  Zerubbabel  and  of,'
thus  accounting  for  the  plural  '  crowns.' So  also  Marti  (in  Kau.
HS\

2  For  another  view  see  Guthe,  Gl'I  248  (Daritis's  division  of
the  empire  into  twenty  satrapies,  making  the  post  at  Jerusalem
Superfluous).

3  So  Jew.  Rel.  Life,  13-16,  which  was  written  independently
of  Sellin's  Serubbabel  (published  in  the  same  year  1898).

4  See  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD. Winckler's  theories,  as  given
in  AOF<xn&  KA  713),  have  passed  through  several  phases. There
is  a  convenient  summary  of  his  present  conclusions  in  the  latter
work,  pp.  291  ff.

5  '  Sown  in  Babylon  "surely  cannot  mean  'begotten  in  Babylon/
Rothstein  (Genealogie,  65)  thinks  that  the  name  was  given  to  his
son  by  Pedaiah  (  =  Sheshbazzar)  to  commemorate  the  happy  turn
in  the  fortunes  of  Israel,  and  that  the  return  of  Jewish  exiles  was
already  as  good  as  certain  when  the  child  called  Zerubbabel  was
born. Marquart  (Fund.  55),  however,  supports  the  view  that
Zerubbabel  (Zarubabili?)  is  a  Babylonian  name. But  the  name,
as  explained  above  by  Johns,  does  not  seem  at  all  a  likely  one
to  have  been  selected  for  a  Jewish  governor.

5413


ZETHAM

corruptions  of  gentilics  or  ethnics  belonging  to  the
Negeb.  That  '  Zerubbabel '  was  really  a  descendant  of
David  is  possible,  but  by  no  means  certain,1  and  the
same  may  of  course  be  said  of  Sheshbazzar. '-  Even  that
they  were  returned  exiles  is  doubtful.3  This  is  not  the
place  to  rewrite  the  history  of  this  period— or  rather  to
collect  the  fragments  of  its  history — from  the  new  point
of  view.  But  we  may  at  any  rate  suggest  that  critics  of
Zechariah  may  have  erred  in  supposing  that  the  donors
of  the  silver  and  gold  mentioned  in  Zech.  69^!  were
'Babylonian  Jews.'  These  persons  appear  rather  to
have  been  foreigners  such  as  are  referred  to  in  Is.  60 13,
and  their  gifts  are  such  niruo  ('offerings')  as  Haggai
most  probably  refers  to  in  the  famous  prophecy  in  Hag.
2?.  It  may  still,  however,  be  held  that  the  name  of
'  Joshua  ben  Jehozadak '  has  been  substituted  for  that
of  'Zerubbabel'  (Ishmael?),  and  the  view  that  a  move
ment  arose  among  the  Jews  in  favour  of  '  Zerubbabel  '
as  Messianic  king  still  appears  to  have  a  considerable
degree  of  probability.

Kothstein  (Die  Genealogie  des  Kiinigs  Jojachin  u.  seiner
nachkiunmcn  in  gtschiclitl.  Bcleucktung,  1902)  assumes  the
present  form  of  the  names  in  i  Ch.  817-24  to  be  fairly  correct.
Such  an  emendation  as  that  of '  Ohel '  into  '  Jehaiel  '(85)  is  at  any
rate  exceptional,  and  even  here  the  author  assumes  a  view  of  the
formation  of  the  name  'Jehaiel'  such  as  the  latest  editor  of
Chronicles  might  not  have  disowned.  The  theory  that  'Zerub
babel  '  was  the  son  of  Pedaiah  is  supported  by  some  new
historical  hypotheses,  the  basis  of  which,  however,  needs  careful
testing.  T.  K.  C.

ZERUIAH  (iT-m  ;  Piny,  'one  who  is  perfumed
with  storax  '  ?  §  71  ;  CApoyiA  [BAL]),  sister  of  David
(i  Ch.  2 16),  and  mother  of  JOAB,  AHISHAI,  and
ASAHEL.

So  at  least  the  Chronicler  represents;  2  S.  1725  w'"  l)e  con
sidered  presently.  It  would  be  strange,  however,  that  in  the
list  of  David's  high  officers  in  2  S.  8  16-18  Joab  should  be  the
only  one  whose  mother's  name  was  substituted  for  his  father's.
We  have  met  with  many  cases  in  which  the  ethnic  origin  of  a
name  has  been  disguised  by  the  addition  of  n  to  the  gentilic
ending  '.  It  is  therefore  not  improbable  that  Zeruiah  is  an
expansion  of  an  ethnic  name,  and  if  so  we  cannot  for  a  moment
doubt  what  that  name  is — it  is  '"ISO.  "11 X  and  "VI  are  several
times  given  by  an  error  for  "fiHO — i.e.,  Musri  in  N.  Arabia  (see
MIZRAIM,  §  zb),  and  Jeroboam's  mother  is,  by  a  similar  error,
called  ZEKUAH  (</•?'.),  instead  of  Misriyah.  In  2  S. '2  32  the
sepulchre  of  Asahel's  father  is  said  to  have  been  in  Bethlehem.
Bethlehem  probably  comes  from  Beth-jerahmeel.  and  there  was
doubtless  a  Beth-jerahmeel  in  the  Jerahmeelite  Negeb;  cp
MlCAH,  i.  It  was  from  this  Beth-jerahmeel  that  Joab  prob
ably  came,  and  if  so  we  can  easily  believe  that  his  father  might
be  called  (especially  by  those  who  dwelt  outside  the  Negeb)
Misri,  or  'Misrite,'  'Jerahmeelite'  and  'Misrite'  being  almost,
though  not  quite,  synonymous.  In  i  Ch.254  (RV)  we  meet
with  a  place  Atroth(ephrath)-beth-joab,  whose  people  were  'sons
of  Sahna'  (i.e.,  connected  with  the  Salmaeans — see  SALMAH).
This  indirectly  confirms  the  view  here  taken.  It  would  be  a
serious  objection  to  this  if  the  text  of  2  S.  1725  were  correct.
The  obscurity  of  the  passage,  however  (see  NAHASH),  suggests
a  doubt.  Elsewhere  (see  Crit.  Bib.)  it  is  proposed  to  read,
'  Now  Amasa  was  the  son  of  Ithra  an  Ishmaelite,  who  went  in
unto  Abigail,  the  daughter  of  Achish,  a  Misrite.'

We  can  now  understand  better  the  exclamation  ascribed  to
David  in  2  8.830,  'these  men  the  sons  of  Misri — i.e.,  fierce
Misrites  by  extraction  (MT  Zeruiah)— are  harsher  than  I.'
The  alternative  is  to  connect  ,Vnx  with  'TS  MASTIC  (f.v.),  com
paring  HS^T,  Zilpah,  'dropping';  see  NAMES,  §  71.  It  is  true,
Zilpah  too  admits  of  another  explanation  (cp  ZILPAH).  What
can  have  led  Josephus  to  say  (Ant.  vii.  1  3)  that  Jpab's  father
was  named  crovpi,  Suri,  it  is  difficult  to  say,  unless  it  be  that  in
i  Ch.  4  14  Joab,  '  the  father  of  Oeharashim '  (a  corruption  of
Geshurim),  is  called  Seraiah  (see  SERAIAH,  beg.).  T.  K.  C.

ZETHAM  (CnT,  explain  as  ZF.THAN,  ze9OM  [B],
ZAI8.,  zoG.  [A]I  ZH6AN  [L]),  a  Gershonite  Levite ;
i  Ch.  238  2622.

1  Cp  Kosters,  Herstel,  47  f.

2  According  to  the  theory  here  advocated,  '  Sheshba/zar '  «
an  alteration  of  a  name  with  N.  Arabian  affinities. The  first
part  may,  in  accordance  with  sound  method,  be  identified  with
OTi3. Again  and  again  in  the  MT  we  find  yigf  nm'  DID  written
in  error  for  tyi3- The  second  part  may  perhaps  be  a  corruption
of  IHfa.

3  Cp  EZRA-NEHEMIAH,  8  8 ;  ISRAEL,  §  51 ;  and  cp  Intr.  Is.
Prologue,  p.  xxxviii ;  Jew.  Rel.  Life,  6  ; Kent,  Hist,  of  the
Jewish  People  (Babylonian  Period,  etc.),  132/1

S4H


ZBTHAN

ZETHAN  (|JVT,  as  if  'olive'  [§  69],  but  the  neigh
bourhood  of  Bilhan  [if  it  be  ultimately  from  '  Jerahmeel'],
and  of  Tarshish  and  Ahishahar,  both  probably  from
Ashhur,  suggests  DSIV  as  the  original  of  IjIJVT  or
Zethan,  ZAI6AN  [«].  H6&N  [A],  zHGA  [L]).  b-  BII.HAN
in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.,  §§  3,  9  ii.  a),  i  Ch.
7  iof.

How  deceptive  apparent  tree-names  may  be,  appears  from
Birzaith  (mm,  f'es-  ' we"  °f  an  olive  '),  the  name  of  a  son  of
Malchiel  (from  'Jerahmeel').  Malehiel's  brother  is  Heber  (cp
Judg.  4n),  among  whose  sons  (all  probably  bearing  Negeb
names)  is  Japhlet  (cp  Peleth,  b.  Jerahmeel,  i  Ch.  2  33),  which
may  ultimately  come  from  ZAREPHATH  (g.z1.).  T.  K.  C.

ZETHAR  pnT,  &BAT&ZA  [BNALB]).  a  chamberlain
of  Ahasuerus,  Esth.  1  iof.

Geseni\ts,  'perhaps  "star"  Pers.  sitar.'  But  if  Mehuman  =
Heman,  Harbona  =  Hebron  (Rehoboth),  and  Carcar  =  Jerahmeel,
Zethar  as  probably  =  Zarephath.  Cp  VASHTI,  ZERESH,  and  see
otherwise  Marq.  j>"unii.  71.  T.  K.  C.

ZIA  (1VT  ;  zoye  [KA],  zed  [L]),  i  Ch.5i3,  a  name
in  the  genealogy  of  GAD  (q.v.,  i. ,  §  13)

ZIBA  (NirV,  and  fcOV  ;  on  origin,  see  below  ;  2  S.
164.  c[e]lB<\  [BAL],  ciBBA  [A  sometimes],  ciB&C
[Josh.  Ant.\\\.  5s]).  'Servant  of  the  house  of  Saul,'
and,  after  Saul's  death,  of  Mephibosheth  or  Meribaal.
On  the  obscure  story  of  his  treatment  of  Saul's  son  see
MEPHIBOSHETH,  §  2.  Ziba  seems  to  have  founded
an  important  family  ;  he  had  '  fifteen  sons  and  twenty
servants. '  He  himself  had  no  recorded  father  or  tribe.

Although  other  views  have  been  suggested  [cp  NAMES,
5§  51  68],  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  JQ'X  or  SOS  is  a  worn
down  form  of  "y^  (Sib'oni)  or  'JJ'~?  (Sim'onT)  =  '^NyBtT
(Ishme'eli).  Ziba,  like  Doeg  (see  SAUL,  §  za),  was  apparently  a
N.  Arabian  (2  S.  l>  2-12  16 1-4  19  17  29).  T.  K.  C.

ZIBEON  (piny,  'hya:na'?  §  68;  see  below;
CeBefCON1).  a  Hivite  (?'.  2)  or  rather  (see  v.  20)
Horite,  in  the  genealogy  of  the  Esau-tribe  (Gen.  862  20,
ceper-coN  [E],  2429;  i  Ch.  1 38,  ceBercoN  [A],  40).
In  v.  29  he  is  a  clan-chieftain  (IJ^K)  or  clan  (*)Wi  see  SS,
s.v.  P^K).

In  71.  24,  underneath  the  strange,  Midrash-Iike  text  of  the
redactor,  lie,  apparently,  the  words,  '  it  is  the  Anah  who  went
out  from  the  Jerahmeelites  in  the  desert '  ;  '  as  he  fed  the  asses '
is  woven  out  of  a  marginal  gloss  o'ClDrii  which  is  one  of  the
current  distortions  of  D'SsonT  (CP  SHECHEM,  2).  Another

fopular  corruption  of  the  same  word  is  probably  'in  (Horite).
n  v.  20  Zibeon  is  reckoned  among  the  sons  of  '  the  Horite,'  and
as  a  comment  on  'in  (Horite),  there  still  lies,  under  the  super
fluous  phrase  vixn  '3K"  (RV,  '  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  '),  the
gloss2  'Sxj?CC"  (Ishmaelite)  ;  '2E"  (like  '013')  being  one  of  the
corruptions  of  '^y.  We  are  now  prepared  to  consider  the  origin
of  the  name  Zibeon,  which  is  scarcely  = 'hyaena,'  as  WRS
(A  /'/;//.  9  90),  Gray  (HPN  95),  and  other  scholars  have
supposed,  but  is  rather  a  corruption  of  pj.'CtS'  (Sime'on),  used  as
an  equivalent  of  'cc?'  (Ismael),  unless  indeed  it  comes  directly
from  j'j'cc".  a  corruption  of  'QSP,  for  which  parallels  can  be
adduced.  Cp  ZIBA,  ZIN.  T.  K.  C.

ZIBIA  (X£V,  'gazelle,'  cp  TABl6A  [Acts  9 36]  ;
leBiA  [B]-  ceB-  [A],  c&B-  [1^]).  in  a  genealogy  of
BENJAMIN  (g.v.,  §  9,  ii.  /3),  i  Ch.  89.

ZIBIAH  (H^V,  §  68)  of  Beer-sheba,  the  mother  of
King  Joash  (2  K.  12  r  2  Ch.  24 1  :  A.BI&  [L,  in  Ch.
C6.BI&1  wj.:=>0^  [Pesh.],  sebia  [Vg]).

The  usual  explanation  '  gazelle '  (cp  n'3s)  for  Zibiah
and  Zibia  is  in  itself  plausible,  in  spite  of  the  pointing.
But  though  such  an  interpretation  may  possibly  be
ancient,  the  theory  that  early  Hebrew  personal  names
were  derived  from  animals  has  become  so  questionable
that  we  must  look  in  each  case  for  some  other  more
probable  explanation.

1  The  representation  of  y(  =  Ar.  £)  by  y  is  not  uncommon;
cp  \Vr.  C0tn/>.  Sem.  Gr.  42 f.,  and  see  BERIAH,  n.  i.

2  'in  is  probably  a  fragment  of  VxDTV,  of  which  tribal  name

'  is  used  as  a  synonym.

S4IS


ZIKLAG

Now  Zibia  (t«'3x)  in  i  Ch.  89  is  grouped  with  Jobab,  Mesha,
and  Malcam.  Judging  from  numerous  analogies  it  can  hardly
be  doubted  that  of  these  three  names  (a)  and  (c)  come  from
'Jerahmeel'  and  (b)  from  '  Ishmael,'  while  the  names  of  the
father  and  mother  (Shaharaim  and  Hodesh)  are  both  distortions
of  '  Ashhur  '  (a  synonym  of  Jerahmeel)  ;  naturally  enough  they
dwell  in  the  '  field  (highland)  of  Missur,'  2N1C.  as  often,  being
altered  from  Missur  (see  MOAU,  §§  i,  n.  i,  14}—  i.e.,  in  the  N.
Arabian  border-land.  It  now  becomes  probable  that  both  K'32
and  ,V3i',  together  with  «3'i:  (ZlBA)  and  C'J?3S  (ZEBOIM),  are
popular  corruptions  of  VNi'CB"  (Ishmael).  T.  K.  C.

ZICHRI  (H3T,  see  NAMES,  §§  32,  52,  but  cp
ZACCUR,  where  it  is  suggested  that  this  must  be  a  clan-
name  ;  note  the  ethnic  affinities  of  the  related  names  ;
zeXp[e]i  [BKAFL]).

1-3.  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.  $  9  ii.  ft),  i  Ch.  8,
where  observe  that  SIIIMEI,  SHASHAK  (probably),  and  JEROHAM
are  ethnics.

1.  b.  Shimei  (r>.  19  :  ^avpei  [B]).

2.  b.  Shashak  (v.  23  ;  £OXP<-  [A]).

3.  b.  Jeroham  (v.  27  :  £axpei  [B]).

4.  '  Father  '  of  Joel  (one  of  the  developments  of  Jerahmeel  '?),
in  list  of  Benjamite  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (EzKA  ii.,  §  5  [/>],
§i5[i]«):  Neh.  119.

5.  Of  REUBEN  (§  13,  end),  i  Ch.  27  16. The  name  stands  close
to  the '  Jerahmeelite  ' names, Shephatiah, Maacah, Kemuel,
Elihu,  etc.

6.  A  Judahite, father  of  AMASIAH  (2  Ch.  17  16  : £apei  [B],
frxpt  [A]). Amasiah,  like  Amasa  and  Amasai,  comes  ultimately
from  'Ishme'eli.

7.  An  Ephraimite  warrior  (2  Ch.  28  7  :  ef«Kp[e]i  [BA]  ,  ^a^apiat

8.  Father  of  ELISHAPHAT,  2  Ch.  23  i  (£ax<xpia  [B],  -lou  [A]).
Elishaphat  is  a  variant  to  SHEPHATIAH  (q.v.).

9.  b. Izhar, a Kohathite Levite (Ex.  (5  21 [P]). Izhar,
evidently  a  clan-name,  may  come  from  Mizri  (Misri).

10.  A  Levite  overseer,  b.  Eliezer,  b.  Mose  —  i.e.,  of  N.  Arabian
origin  (i  Ch.  2625).

11.  An  Asaphite  Levite  in  list  of  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem
(EZRA  ii.,  §  5  [(•},  §  15  [i]  a), i  Ch.  9  15,  in  ||  Neh.  11  17  called
ZABDI  ;  see  ZACCUR  (4). Brother  of  Micha  (from  Jerahmeel),
and  son  of  Asaph  (perhaps  from  Sarephath).

12.  A priest  of  the  course  of  Abijah,  temp.  Joiakim  (EZRA
ii.,  §  66,  § n) Neh.  12  17 BN*A, (om. frxapia-s  [L]). The
predominant  type  of  these  priestly  names  is  probably  ethnic  ;
MESHULLAM  (ij.  v.)  precedes  Zichri,  Pn.TAi(y.w.)  follows. Zichri
must  surely  be  a  clan-name  from  the  Negeb.  T.  K.  C.


ZIDDIM  (D^-Vn  as  if  'the  sides'),  more  correctly
HAZZIDDIM,  a  fortified  city  of  Xaphtali  (Josh.  1935;
assedim  [Vg,]  ;  AceAGIM  [Eus.  OS^  224  95]).  The
Jer.  Talm.  (Ifeg.  Ii)  represents  Hazziddim  to  be
Kephar  Hitja,  which  perhaps  =HattTn,  N\V.  of  Tiberias
(Xeub.  Gc'ogr.  207  ;  Buhl,  Pal.  219).  Some  MSS  read
D'nxn  (so  ©I!AL  TUV  Tvpluv}.  See  ZF.R.

[It  is  very  possible  that  P's  work  is  based  here  upon  a  geo
graphical  survey  of  the  Negeb,  which  included  the  cities  of  the
Naphtuhim  (see  Crit.  Bib.  on  Gen.  10  13).  Several  of  the  names
in  irv.  35-38  have  the  appearance  of  being  names  of  the  Negeb.
D'^ii'n  might  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  C'^E'1  (see
SIDDIM).  —  T.  K.  c.]

ZIDKIJAH  (n»p*lV)-  Neh.  10i  AV,  RV  ZEDEKIAH

(f'V: S).

ZIDON  (fn*V).  Gen.  10  15,  etc.  Zidonians
(DO'l-TV),  Ezek.  8230.  See  SIDON,  PHOENICIA,  §§  4  [7],

12, 2  I  f.

ZIF,  RV  Ziv  (IT),  i  K.  6137- See  MONTH,  §  2.

ZIHA  (NrPV,  §  51).  The  family  name  of  some
post-exilic  NETHINIM  ;  Ezra  2  43  (a-ovOia  [B],  aovaa  [A],  crovS-
Saei  [L])  =  Neh.  746  (<n;a  [BK],  oiaa  [Avid.]  o-ouAai  [L]  =  i  Esd.
629  (rjcrau  [BA],  <roi>8aei  [L],  ESAU  [EVJ);  Neh.  11  21  (<rtaA
[Nc.a  mg.  inf.]  Om.  BN*A,  <riaav  [L]).

ZIIM  (D^V)-  Is-  1321-  etc-  AVme-. See  CAT.
ZIKLAG  P?i?>*  ; in  pause  and  in  2  S.I  37,~>V  ; in

i  Ch.l2i2o[2i  Ba.,Ginsb.]  ^I'p''?;  usually  <reiceAaK[B],  o-iiceAay
[A],  o-eic.  [L]  ;  but  with  the  following  variants  <ri<«Aa)c  [B],
<TiKt\(y,  crfKfAa[icat],  <ruct\a.  [A],  (TKceAfT*  [Kc.a  mg.  inf.],  <rtKeAe9
[L]  ;  while  in  Ch.  B  has  wxAa,  onoicAa,  <rwyAa/ii  ;  and  K  <rw<cAa,
(rtaxay  ;  and  in  i  S.  30  i  [first  time]  B  and  L  read  (tetiAa  ;  Jos.
Ant.  vi.  13  10  criiceAAa  ;  S/cf/ff;  zetiaklag;  zenkiiltig).

We  first  hear  of  Ziklag  as  in  the  possession  of  Achish,
king  of  Gath,  by  whom  it  was  given  as  a  residence  to


ZILLAH

his  vassal  David  (iS.  276/.  ;  cp  861426  2  S.  1  1  4io
i  Ch.  12  1  20).  Ziklag  also  appears  with  other  places  in
the  far  S.  in  Neh.  11  28.  In  Josh.  1631  (P)  it  is  enumer
ated  among  the  more  remote  towns  of  Judah,  but  in
Josh.  19s  (P)  is  assigned  to  Simeon.  Conder's  identi
fication  of  Ziklag  with  /.uheilika  a  site  n  in.  K.  by  S.
of  Gaza,  and  19  m.  SW.  from  Beit-Jibrin  or  Eleuthero-
polis  (PEFQ,  1878,  pp.  12  /.},  has  been  generally  but
too  hastily  accepted.

The  nnme  is  certainly  corrupt,  but  not  so  far  as  entirely  to
obscure  the  true  name.  The  two  names  identified  by  Conder
begin  with  a  different  sibilant,  and  zuheilika  reminds  us  of  Ar.
zaliatiku,  '  declivities,'  a  name  which  applies  well  to  the  three
small  hills,  nearly  a  mile  apart,  on  which  (see  Conder)  the  ruins
called  Zuheilika  stand.  Ziklag  is  as  corrupt  as  Abishag  or  the
p^p*  (see  SACK)  of  2  K.  4  42.  It  is  best  to  read  JlsSn  or  nsSn
{cp  Ass.  halsu,  '  fortress  '),  an  ancient  and  famous  city  (see
BBRBO),  represented  by  the  mod.  Ha/asa,  in  the  Wfidy  'Asliij,
about  12  m.  S.  of  Beersheba,  on  die  way  to  Ruheibeh  or  Reho-
both  (see  map  of  NKGEII,  A  2,  after  col.  3376).  In  Josh.  10  56
Ziklag  is  grouped  with  Beth-marcaboth  which  should  be  read
Beth-rehoboth  (see  MAKCABOTH).  This  fits  in  perfectly  with
the  story  of  David's  raids  while  at  Ziklag.  The  name  Haliisah
or  Halasah  is  also  not  impossibly  concealed  tinder  Jekabzeel  or
KAUZKKL  (<f.r.)  ;  the  lists  of  P  and  of  the  Chronicler  often  con
tain  corrupt  variants  of  the  same  name,  given  as  names  of  dis
tinct  places  or  persons.  This  accords  with  the  view  that  2  S.
21  15-22  288-23  relates  to  a  war  of  David  with  the  Rehobothites
and  the  Zarephathites  (see  RKHOBOTH,  ZARKPH  ATM);  the  original
text  was  misunderstood  and  wrongly  edited.  Very  possibly  the
'  hold  '  (rniiD  to  which  David  '  fled  '  (read  rrp'l  for  TV1  in  2  S.
617)  and  where  he  was  when  he  longed  for  water  from  the
cistern  of  Bethlehem—  i.e.,  probably  a  'Bethlehem'  in  the
Negeb  —  was  that  of  HalCisah,  which  was  not  far  from  the  valley
of  Sarephath  (text,  '  Rephaim  '),  where  the  Zarephathites  (text,
Pelistim)  were  arrayed  against  him.  Halusah  may  likewise  be


n u  9. ossy uusa wa

originally  the  centre  of  the  cult  of  the  hero  ISAAC  \q.v.,  §  i).

The  above  view  was  formed  long  before  the  appearance  of
Winckler's  Gcscli.  1,  where  (185)  it  is  held  that  Ziklag  is  the
capital  of  the  Krethi  or  Cherethites  ;  cp  i  S.  30  14.

Perhaps  '  Ziklaggim  '  (or  Hahisathim)  may  underlie  the  diffi
cult  'Casluhim'  in  Gen.  1014.  See  MIZRAIM,  col.  3164,  n.  i.

T.  K.  C.

ZILLAH  (iT?V:  zeAA*.  [AEL]  ;  5/f  /./.../),  Gen.  4i9-33t.
See  CAINITES,  §  9.


ZILPAH  (rtfT,  zeA4>A.  [ADEL]),  the  mother  of  the
tribes  GAD  and  ASHER  (Gen.  30  10-13,  J  ;  8026  P)  ;  also

represented  as  the  maid of  Leah  (21*24

.,-  >  •

oo  26 P) and the concubine of Jacob

<30g  J  ;  37  2  46-8  P).  If  any  explanations  of  the  name
Zilpah  were  current  in  early  Israel,  the  editors  of  the
Genesis  narratives  have  not  preserved  them.  It  is
hardly  possible,  as  it  perhaps  is  in  the  case  of  Bilhah
(see  SHOT  on  Gen.  BQj),  to  guess  what  they  might
have  said.  J  The  nearest  approach  to  a  narrative
bearing  on  Zilpah  is  Gen.  37  2.  That  verse  seems  to
represent  a  version  of  the  Joseph-story  in  which  the
enmity  against  Joseph  was  confined  to  the  sons  of  Bilhah
and  Zilpah.2  Such  a  story  may  be  a  late  invention  to
remove  the  reproach  from  the  sons  of  Leah  (Gunkel,
ad  loc.),  in  particular  from  Judah;  but  P  may  have
found  it  in  sources  which  had  more  to  say  on  the
subject.  The  name  Zilpah  cannot  be  explained  from
the  vocabulary  of  the  remains  of  Hebrew  literature.
We  cannot  be  sure,  however,  that  Genesis  as  we  now
read  it  regards  Zilpah  as  Hebrew.  Her  mistress  is  a
daughter  of  Laban  (cp  RACHEL,  §  il>).

According  to  Test.  Xff.  Pair.,  Naph.  i,  indeed,  Zilpah  and
Bilhah,  who  are  sisters  (cp  Jubilees,  28  9),  are  daughters  of  a
maid  (iratiiVicr))  of  Laban  (Aii»a)  and  of  Rotheos  'of  the  stock
of  Abraham,'  who  was  carried  captive  from  a  place  called  Zelpha
(whence  the  name  of  his  first-born).  Elsewhere,  however,  the
sisters  are  daughters  of  Laban  himself  by  a  concubine  (Ps.-Jon.
on  Gen.  29  24  29,  Gen.  rabbet  74,  Pirke  Rat.  El.  36  ;  cp  Charles,
Bk.  o/Jub.  170).

The name Zilpah has accordingly been  explained

1  For  a  late  example  see  Test.  XI!.  Pair.,  Naph.  i,  quoted
below.

2  It  is  against  the  sons  of  Bilhah  and Zilpah that  Joseph
speaks  to  Jacob  in  Test.  XI  f.  Pair.,  Gad,  I.

S4I7


2 Zilnah
tribes

(ASHER,


ZILPAH

from the  Aramrean (Holzinger,  KHC on Gen.  30  9  ;
Baethgen,  Beitr.  160).

In  Aram,  \/  zip  means  '  to  drip,  trickle,'  1  in  Syriac  '  to  defile  '  ;
in  Assyrian,  where,  however,  there  is  the  natural  uncertainty  as
to  whether  the  first  radical  is  z  or  s,  it  occurs  as  za-lip-ti  —  e.g.,
in  the  recurring  phrase  \da-bi-ib\  za-lip-ti,  '  [planning]  hostility.'
If  the  theory  of  Aramaean  extraction  was  a  modifica
tion  of  an  older  story  (cp  l>elow),  the  name  may  have
l>een  earlier  Dilpah  (cp  Jidlaph,  the  '  uncle  '  of  Rebekah  ;
Gen.  2222),  the  root  of  which  does  occur  in  Hebrew.
On  the  assumption  that  the  name  has  been  nuxlified,
C.  Niebuhr  (Gesch.  1253)  connected  it  with  Zetophehad
(insSx  ;  for  a  suggestion  as  to  the  real  origin  of  which
strange  name,  however,  see  MASASSEH,  §  g/'),  whilst
Cheyne  formerly  connected  both  Zilpah  and  Zelophehad
with  '  Salhad  '  (above,  col.  2309  near  foot).  This
suggestion  he  regards  as  still  tenable  ;  but  his  present
view  is  different.  -

It  has  always  seemed  strange  that  such  widely
separated  communities  as  Gad  and  Asher  should  be
8rouPcc*  as  Zilpah  tribes.  Their  agreement
m  Bearing  names  of  deities  apparently  dis
tinct  from  Yahwe  has  been  noted  elsesvhere
i  n.  ;  GAD,  §  2),  as  also  their  Aramaean
elements  (AsHER,  §  3,  GAD,  §  2).  Whether  they  once
lived  together  is  uncertain.  It  has  been  thought  that
traces  of  an  early  stay  of  Asher  can  be  detected  S.  of  the
plain  of  Megidclo  (cp  ASHER,  §§  i  3).  The  presence  of
Beria  and  of  Heljer  and  Malchiel  as  father  and  sons  in
the  Asher  list  (Xu.  2644^)  an<i  the  same  three  names
(if  Michael  is  for  Malchiel)  in  nearly  the  same  relation
in  Benjamin  lists  (i  Ch.  813^  l(>f-)  and  of  a  clan
Beria  in  an  Lphraim  list  would  be  a  not  unnatural
result  if  Kphraim  and  Benjamin's  territory  had  been
earlier  occupied  by  Asherites  (so  Steuernagel,  EinivanJ.
3<3/.).  If  the  sons  of  Zilpah  are  meant  in  Genesis  to
be  regarded  as  older  than  Joseph  the  seniority  would  be
a  natural  way  of  representing  an  earlier  occupation  of
the  Kphraim  highlands  which  must  be  assumed  if  we
suppose  that  Asher  really  entered  Palestine  from  the  E.
We  might  suppose  that  a  Zilpah  tribe  \\as  settled  in  E.
Palestine,  that  part  of  it  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  after
staying  a  while  in  Ephraim  moved  northwards  and
took  the  name  of  Asher  (from  the  older  inhabitants  in
the  N.  ?  see  ASHER,  §§  i  3),  whilst  the  portion  of  the
Zilpah  tribe  which  remained  came  to  be  known  as  Gad.
On  the  other  hand  it  is  uncertain  when  we  are  meant  to
place  the  birth  of  the  sons  of  Zilpah.  Even  the  editor
need  not  have  intended  to  suggest  that  both  Gad  and
Asher  fall  between  Naphtali  and  Issachar  and  between
Naphtali  and  Joseph  (cp  RACHEL,  §  if).  The  sons'
births  may  have  been  grouped  artificially  to  facilitate
the  narrative  (cp  TRIBES,  §  gf.}.  Steuernagel,  indeed,
pleads  strongly  for  the  historical  trustworthiness  of  the

1  In  Arabic  'to  draw  near,'  but  zilf  a  garden;  in  Kthiopic
z,'lfut  =  reproof. Yakut  gives  a  water  on  the  way  to  Mekka,
Zuljat".  ii.  939  io_f.  (cp  ii.  955  iaf.).

2  [When  Steuernagel  (Eimvami.  47)  concludes  that  the  clans
derived  from  Zilpah,  like  those  derived  from  Bilhah,  were  re
garded  as  not  so  fully  Israelitish  as  the  Leah  and  Rachel  tribes
because  they  were  of  heathen  origin,  he  does  not  allow  for  the
possibility  that Leah  and her  maid  Zilpah  are  only  doubles  of
Rachel  and  her  maid Bilhah—  or,  etymologic-ally,  that  Leah,
Rachel, and Bilhah  are all corrupt fragments of  Jerahmeel
(JACOB,  §  3),  and  that  Zilpah  (with  which  Mr.  Hogg  compares
Jidlaph,  most  appropriately  from  the  present  point  of  view,  for
among  his  brothers  are  Kemuel  =  Jerahmeel,  and  Chesed  =  Cush)
is  an  equally  corrupt  fragment  of  a.  name  virtually  synonymous
with  Jerahmeel  —  viz.,  Ishmael. Nor  can the possibility  be
denied that 'Asher' may be connected with 'Asshur' or
'  Ashhur,'  one  of  the  ethnic  names  of  the  Negeb,  and  Dan  with
Adan  or  Adon—  another  of  these  names  (cp  PARADISE,  §  7,  end,
and  see  Crit.  Bib.}. And  only  a  very  close  examination  of  the
texts  can  assure  us  that Gad  and  Asher  were  not  originally
located  in  the  Negeb. That  the  tradition  made  some  of  the
clans  which  were  fused  with  the  Jacob  or  Israel  tribe  heathenish
(i.e.,  worshippers  of  gods  other  than  Yahwe),  will,  however,  be
universally  admitted. The  most  important passages  for the
textual  critic  are  perhaps  Gen.  2!»  I  (on  which  see  JACOB,  $  3)
and  31  23^  46^  (on  which  see  GALEED,  GlLEAD,  but  note
that  there  seems  to  have  been  a  southern  Gilead,  referred  to,
e.g.,  in  Jer.  822  [see  Crit.  Fib.],  and  the  probable  original  of
the  much-disputed  Lud,  Ludim).—  T.K.C.]


ZILTHAI

Hebrew  traditions,  and  the  case  can  be  made  very
plausible.  Who  are  the  'brothers'  whom  Jacob  finds
in  E.  Palestine  when  he  comes  with  Rachel  (and
Bilhah)  from  Laban  (Gen.  8132  37  46  54)  ?  Must  they
not  be  brother  tribes  who  had  remained  there  when
Jacob  moved  off?  And,  since  Gad  is  the  tribe  most
firmly  settled  there,  may  not  these  '  brothers  '  be  repre
sented  by  the  name  Zilpah  ?  Steuernagel  supposes  that
several  tribes  (Zilpah,  etc.)  accompanied  Jacob  on  its
journey  up  from  its  settlement  S.  of  Palestine.  The
representation  of  the  Zilpah  tribes  as  younger  than  the
four  Leah  tribes,  but  older  than  Issachar  and  Zebulun,
may  represent  a  theory  as  to  the  time  of  their  reaching
their  several  seats  ;  and  the  theory  may  be  correct.
There  are  great  difficulties,  however.  The  effect  of
system  may  indeed  be  far-reaching.  If  Asher  arrived
somewhat  early  W.  of  Jordan,  and  Gad  somewhat  late
E.  of  Jordan  (GAD,  §  8),  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
grouping  of  them  as  Zilpah  tribes  can  be  anything  but
artificial.  See,  further,  TRIBES.

Nor  is  it  easy  to  see  why  Zilpah  is  connected  with
Leah.  There  is  no  obvious  link  between  Gad  or  Asher

_..  ,  and  Judah  or  the  other  Leah  tribes.  Nor
'  j  T  v,  is  the  relation  of  Zilpah  to  Leah  even  in  the
a*  story  parallel  with  that  of  Bilhah  to  Rachel,
or  Hagar  to  Sarah.  In  the  cases  of  Bilhah  and  Hagar
the  maid's  children  are  born  before  her  mistress's  and
because  the  mistress  has  no  children  (cp  RACHEL,  §  i  /;).
In  the  case  of  Zilpah,  on  the  contrary,  Leah  has  no  less
than  four  children  before  the  maid  is  called  in.  Is  it
possible  that  Leah  represents  two  figures,  the  second
being  the  mother  of  Zebulun  and  Issachar?  These  two
sons  were  born  after  Zilpah's,  and  a  connection  among
the  four  is  more  easily  thinkable  than  in  the  case  of  the
other  Leah  tribes.  Issachar  may  have  possessed  part
of  the  highlands  of  Ephraim  at  one  time  (cp  ISSACHAR,
§4,  n.  2,  and  Steuernagel,  Einwand.  12  f.),  and  the
same  may  have  been  true  at  an  early  date  even  of
ZEBULL-N  (q.v.,  §  7).

On  the  other  hand,  the  same  possibilities  are  not
excluded  in  the  case  of  the  other  four  Leah  tribes  (see
SIMEON,  §  4).  It  is  conceivable  that  Asher  crossed
the  Jordan  into  Ephraim  before  Jacob-Rachel  came  to
occupy  the  place  of  the  older  Leah  tribes  (so  Steuer
nagel).  H.  w.  H.


ZILTHAI,  RV  Zillethai  (>n  *>>')•

1.  b.  SHIMEI  (<?.?'.)  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (?.v.,g  ii.  /3),
I  Ch.  8  20  (craASei  [15],  craAei  [A],  o-eAa0i  [L]).

2.  One  of  David's  warriors,  i  Ch.  12  20  (<re|xa6ct  [BN],  •yaAaflt
[A],  criAafla  [L]). See  DAVID,  §  n  n.  c.

ZIMMAH  (HST  ;  ze/vXMA  [BL]),  a  Gershonite  (Leviti-

cal)  name;  jCh.l^oIs]  (fa^a  [A]),  42(27]  (faMjaa;u  [B],  -jua
[A]),  2Ch.2'.li2(£Wia0[BA]).

ZIMRAN  (I-IDT  ;  Sam.  pDT  ;  plausibly  connected
with  "IDT,  'antelope'  [see  WRS,  /.  Phil.  992],  but  cp
ZIMRI),  the  eldest  of  Abraham's  'sons'  by  Keturah
(Gen.  252  i  Ch.  1  32  ;  zeBpAN  [A*E],  z€Mp-  [A],

ZGMBp- [AaB], ZOMBp- [Dsi1']  Z6/V\Bp.,  Z6MP&M  [!>])•

The  Zamareni,  a  tribe  of  the  interior  of  Arabia  (Plin.
NH  632,  Grotius),  and  Zabram,  the  royal  town  of  the
Kiva.idoKO\Tr'iTai,  W.  of  Mecca,  on  the  Red  Sea  (Ptol.
vi.  7  5,  Knobel)  have  been  supposed  to  represent  Zimran.
But  whether  we  ought  to  go  so  far  from  the  Keturite
centre  —  i.e.,  the  crip  px  (see  EAST,  CHILDREN  OF;
REKEM)  —  is  very  doubtful.

In  Jer.  25  25  we  find  a  people  called  '  Zimri  '  (Pesh.  '  Zimran  ')
mentioned  with  Arabia  (i.e.,  N.  Arabia),  Elam  and  Madai  (read
'  Jerahmeel  '),  and  SAPHON  (on  the  N.  Arabian  border).  Tuch
disputes  the  connection  between  'Zimran'  and  'Zimri,'  but,
from  our  present  point  of  view,  wrongly.  Both  in  Gen.  25  2  and
in  Jer.  25  25  a  N.  Arabian  people  is  required.  See  ZIMRI.

T.  K.  C.

ZIMRI  ("HOT,  a  shortened  form?  —  cp  the  name  Zim-
rida  in  Am.  Tab.  [of  governors  of  Sidon  and  of  Lachish],
also  in  an  early  Bab.  text,  BM  Cuneif.  Texts,  Pt.  iv.  ,
which  also  mentions  Zimri-hammu,  Zimri-hanata  the

5419


ZIN

Amorite  [Pinches]  ;  Hommel,  comparing  Old  Arab,
compound  names,  interprets  '  protection  '  [AHT  85,  cp
88,  230] ;  but  cp  ZIMRI,  2  ;  z<\/v\Bp[e]i  [BXAFL]).

1.  One  of  the  sons  of  Zerah  b.  Judah  (i  Ch.  26),  in
Josh.  7 1  called  ZABDI.

2.  A  descendant  of  Saul  mentioned  in  a  genealogy
of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.,  §  9,  ii.  /3),  i  Ch.  836  (fa/x/H  [A]  =
942). Cp  ZEMIRA.

3.  'Captain  of  the  chariots,'  who  conspired  against
Elah  king  of  Israel  and  killed  him,  and  to  secure  his
own  position  on  the  throne  exterminated  all  the  remnant
of  the  family  of  Baasha. After  a  seven  days'  reign  in
Tirzah  he  was  besieged  by  Omri  the  general,  whereupon
like  Sardanapalus  he  burnt  the  palace  over  his  head  and
perished  in  the  ruins  (iK.  169-20). In  ©  the  names
Zambri  and  Omri  are  much  confused.

4.  b.  SALU  (q.v.),  a  Simeonite  chief,  the  name  given
to  the  central  figure  in  P's  narrative  of  the  sin  of  the
b'ne Israel with Midian (Nu.  256-i8 P). Zimri had
brought  a  Midianitess  named  COZBI  to  the  camp,  and
Phinehas,  moved  to  indignation,  slew  them  both,  in  the
'tent' (nap);1 see  We. Prol.W  363, ET  356. See
PHINEHAS,  and  cp  DIBRI.  s.  A.  c.

ZIMRI  (HDT;  om.  ©;  Pesh.  'Amran;  Vg.  Zambri},
one  of  the  tribes  or  peoples  threatened  with  judgment
by  Jeremiah  (or  by  a  supplementer  who  assumes  Jere
miah's  mantle),  Jer.  2525.

A  revision  of  the  text  of  vv.  19-26  places  it  beyond  all  reason
able  doubt  that  a  N.  Arabian  people  is  meant.  See  ZIMRAN,
SHESHACH.

A  land  called  Zimri,  whose  king  was  allied  to  the  kings  of
Babylon  and  Elam  (Sir  H.  Rawlinson,  G.  Smith,  etc.),  does  not
exist  ;  the  right  reading  of  the  text  is  '  Namri '  (see  KB  1  140  iS6 ;
Schr.  KOFi-jo).  But  to  emend  Jeremiah's 'Zimri '  into 'Namri'
with  Winckler  (AOP'\  292),  or  'Gomeri'  or  'Gimirri'  (see
GOMER)  with  Rost  (Untersuch,  103  [1897])  and  Peiser  (ZATUr
17350  [1897]),  is  hardly  possible  if  we  duly  criticise  the  text  of
MX.  T.  K.  C.

ZIN  (|V.  ctellN,  CINA,  C6NA.;  in  Nu.  344  6NNAK
[B  ;  KAI  follows],  ceeNN&K  [AF],  GN<\K  [L],  in

Josh.  153,  GNNAK  [B],  ceNNdvK  [Ba'b],  CCN<\  [A],
CINA  [L];  Eus.  Jer.  eNNA  enna  {OS,  26837  118io];
see  below).  The  wilderness  N.  of  that  of  PAR  AN  (q.v.)  ;
the  most  important  place  in  it  was  Kadesh-barnea  in  its
oasis  (Nu.1321  20 1  27 14  8836  34  3  /  Dt.325i  Josh.
15 1  [fff/J.  A] 3).  More  precisely,  it  was  the  wild  mountain-
region  (Jos.  Ant.  iv.  46,  speaks  of  a  mountain  called
Sin)  rising  in  successive  slopes  from  the  'Arabah  in  one
direction  and  et-Tih  in  another,  which  now  bears  the
name  of  the  'Azazimeh  Arabs  who  inhabit  it.  See
WANDERINGS,  WILDERNESS  OF.  It  has  been  suggested2
that  Sin  may  mean  the  '  wall '  of  rock  within  which  the
wilderness  of  Zin  lies  (cp  ZION).

The  existence  of  -\/px  '  to  protect '  however,  is  very  question
able,  and  the  name  looks  as  if  it  had  been  worn  down  in  course
of  ages.  Analogy  favours  the  view  that  JTJ  (Zin),  iy%  (ZoAN),  ps
(ZENAN),  and  pus  (ZAANAN),  have  all  come,  through  pyas
(ZIBEON),  from  ^Ni'CE"  (Ishmael).

Lagarde,  however,  with  much  learning  and  plausibility,
suggests  a  derivation  from  p:»n,  which  in  Aram,  and
Ass.  means  '  axe,'  in  Ethiopic  '  iron '  (Alitlheil.  2361^  ;
cp  G.  Hoffm.  7.DMG  82753).  Tg.  Jer.  gives  in  Xu.
344  (for  ps)  H^na  TID,  'the  iron  mountain,'  presuppos
ing  ['in,  and  ©'s  form  ev^ctf*:]  may  ultimately  come  from
the  same  reading.

This  reading,  if  correct,  might  illustrate  a  number  of  references
to  iron  in  narratives  or  prophecies  which,  as  the  criticism  of  the
text  seems  to  show,  relate  to  the  Negeb.  See  Dt.  3  ii  (cp  OG)  ;
420  ('an  iron  furnace'  ||  'Misrim');  89  ('whose  stones  are
iron')  ;  Josh.  17  16  18  Judg.  1  19  4  3  13  (Kenizzites,  chariots  of
iron);  i  K.  22  n  (Zedekiah  the  Kenizzite  [see  ZEDEKIAH,  2],
'horns  of  iron  ')  ;  2  K.  6  6  (swimming  iron  ;  see  PROPHET,  S  7);
Jer.  15  12  ('iron  of  ZAPHON)  ;  Ezek.  27  12  19  (Tnrshish  [Asshur?]
and  Javan  [Jerahmeel  ?]  trafficking  with  iron)  ;  Am.  1  3  (the

1  On nap (whence  'alcove'),  which is  used to  denote  a
princely  tent,  as  well  as  the  bridal  pavilion,  see  WRS,  Kinship*
171,  292  ;  PAVILIO.V,  2  ;  TENT,  §  4  n.

2  Wetzstein,  in  Del.  Gen.,W  578.

5420


ZINA


ZIPH


[southern]  Arammites  thresh  [the  southern]  Gilead  with  instru
ments  of  iron).  Still  the  method  of  grouping  names  before
seeking  to  account  for  them  seems  to  favour  the  preceding
explanation.  The  fvva.[i<l  in  (B'5  and  the  xSji^  in  Tg.  Jer.  are  at
any  rate  exceptional.  T.  K.  c.

ZINA  (N^T),  b.  Shimei,  a  Gershonite  Levite  (iCh.

23  i o).  In  v.  n  the  name  becomes  ZIZAH  (nn).  ©UAL  reads
<J"i£a  in  both  places.

ZION  (ji'V,  C[C]ICON)-  The  designation,  properly,
of  the  '  Jebusite '  stronghold  at  Jerusalem,  which
after  its  capture  by  David  received  the  name  '  David's
burg,'  28.679.  Various  explanations  of  the  name
have  been  given.  Gesenius  (Thes.  1164)  and  Lagarde
(ijbers.  84,  n.*)  derive  from  ^/nns  'to  be  dry,'  cp

Syr. V0"*01!. which Lag. regards as the older

form.  Delitzsch  (Psalmea,®  l?o)  makes  the  primary
form  pis,  from  ms  'to  set  up.'  Wetzstein  (in  Del.
(7^«.<4)  578)  derives  from  ^/ps  'to  protect, '  so  that  the
name  would  mean  '  arx,  citadel '  ;  cp  ZIN.

It  may  be  better,  however,  to  add  p-i{  to  the  group  Zin,  Zenan,
Zaanan,  and  Zoan,  and  to  suppose  Zion  to  be  a  descendant  of
the  race-name  '  Ishmael '  through  the  intermediate  form
(ZlBBON).  Another  corruption  of  the  same  name  is  probably
(see  SHALE.M),  and  this  most  plausibly  accounts  for  a  much-  ,
disputed  name  cW'lT-  That  the  first  part  of  this  name  means  I
'city,'  Sayce  (see  col.  1*409,  top)  and  Nestle  (Philologia  Sacra,
17)  have  independently  seen.  We  must  now  add  that  cSt?  is  j
probably  =S«jin^",  and  that  this  is  a  type  of  corruption  which
occurs  frequently  in  the  OT.  Jerusalem,  then,  according  to
this  explanation,  was  originally  one  of  the  many  Ishmaelite  or
Jerahmeelite  settlements  in  Palestine,  a  view  which  is  supported
by  the  fact  that  Isaiah  ('2\>  i)  calls  the  city  of  David  '  Jerahmeel '
[corrupted  into  '  Ariel '],  and  by  the  equally  significant  statement
of  the  historian  that  after  taking  the  stronghold  David  '  built
round  about  Jerahmeel  and  within. '1  See  Crit.  Bib.  It  is  true,
David  is  said  (2  S.  56)  to  have  'gone  against  the  JeKusites,'  but
the  Jebusites  apparently  owe  their  existence  in  the  text  to
corruption,  and  in  an  earlier  form  of  the  text  this  seems  to  have
been  indicated  by  the  scribe  himself.  As  in  Gen.  36  20  [see
ZIBEOX]  and  elsewhere,  the  corrupt  reading  :-|Xn  'nil"  (EV  '  the
inhabitants  of  the  land  ')  has  grown  out  of '^Nyctj"  (Ishmaelites),
fixn  being  an  editor's  insertion  to  make  the  corrupt  <3jy  in
telligible.  The  earlier  text  appears  to  have  said  in  v.  6,  '  And
the  king  and  his  men  went  to  Jerusalem  against  the  Ishmaelites  ' ;
'  Ishmaelites  '  here  is  a  synonym  of  '  Jerahmeelites.'  To  this  we
must  add  that  the  '  lame '  and  the  '  blind  '  spoken  of  in  the  MT
(and  in  <S)  of  28668  are  as  imaginary  as  the  tribal  name
'Jebusite';  omj?  and  O'HDB  both  being  corrupt  fragments  of
C'StfSnT  (see  Crit.  Kib.,  and  cp  MEI-HIBOSHETH,  PHINEHAS).

This  is  no  digression  ;  it  had  to  be  shown  that  names  so  closely
connected  as  Zion  and  (Jeru-)salem  had  the  same  origin,  and  if
in  the  course  of  doing  so  we  have  been  enabled  to  show  that  the
early  historians  at  any  rate  did  not  'infer  incorrectly'  from  the
tribal  name  Jebusite  the  existence  of  a  city  called  Jebus2  (of
which  the  Amarna  correspondence  appears  to  have  known
nothing),  this  is  perhaps  at  any  rate  a  boon  for  future  students.
It  is  possible  that  the  error  »D13'  f°r  '"SxyDE"  's  really  a  some
what  ancient  one  (see,  e.g.,  Zech.  9  7).  But  Kzekiel  (lt>3  45)  is
still  aware  that  Amorites  (or  Arammites-— Jerahmeelites)  and
Hittites  (rather  Rehobothites)  formed  the  pre-Israelitish  popula
tion  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  Cp  OG.

The  term  'Zion'  (we  retain  the  term,  as,  even  if  a
corruption,  yet  an  ancient  and  a  popular  one)  belongs
properly,  as  shown  elsewhere  (JERUSALEM,  §§  17-20),
to  the  southern  part  of  the  eastern  hill,  where  the  'burg
of  David '  stood.  Above  the  '  burg '  rose  the  temple,
and  in  usage  'Zion'  represents  the  temple  hill  (2  K.
19si;  Is.  2423;  cp  1032).  Even  more  commonly,
however,  we  find  it  a  term  for  the  whole  of  Jerusalem,
whether  in  parallelism  with  Jerusalem  (Is.  4$  30i9
Am.  12  Mic.  3 10  12  Ps.  102 22)  or  alone  (Is.  127  28 16
Jer.  814  Lam.  5  ii ).  Often  it  is  personified  (Is.  40 9  41  27
51 3  52 1/  7  5920  60 14  668  Zeph.  3i6  Zech.  Ii7)  though
here  an  idealisation  has  taken  place,  the  '  Zion '  intended
being  really  the  company  of  those  residents  in  the

1  That  Ki^D  and  K'lWl,  wherever  they  occur,  are  mispointed,
can  hardly  be  doubted. They  are  corrupt  fragments  of  'jKCrTT
(see  MILLO). In  2  S.  69  the  p  prefixed  to  KT?an  has  arisen  in
this  way. The  scribe  began  to  write  Nl^O  without  the  initial  n>
and  left  ^0  uncancelled. Afterwards,  "70  was  ' corrected '  into  jo-

2  So  Driver,  in  Hastings,  DB  2  5541,  expressing  the  common
opinion.

S42I


Holy  City  in  the  period  of  the  Second  Isaiah  and  of
Ezra  who,  in  the  orthodox  sense  of  the  phrase,  '  feared
Yahwe.'  The  phrase  p'S  np,  literally  'the  daughter
Zion,'  is  an  idiomatic  expression  for  the  people  of
Jerusalem,  Is.  18  522  Jer.  431,  etc.  (see  DAUGHTER,  3).
It  remains  to  be  added  that  'Zion,1  in  i  Mace,
everywhere  means  the  temple  hill  (3664376055464863
7 33  10  ii  1427).  For  a  Hebrew  writer,  who  formed
his  style  on  classical  models,  this  was  natural.  Josephus,
writing  in  Greek,  does  not  use  the  name.  In  the  NT
it  occurs  only  in  quotations  from  the  OT,  except  in
Heb.  1222  (a  fine  rhetorical  passage)  and  in  Rev.  14 1.

How  fond  the  later  Jews  became  of  the  name  Zion
appears  most  clearly  from  the  Psalms.  See  especially
Ps.  87  5,  if,  with  Wellhausen,  we  may  follow  <5's  ^r-rjp
2[e]tw»',  ipfl  dvdpuiros),  and  render,

But  every  one  calls  Zion  his  mother,

And  of  it  is  every  one  native  ;

He  himself,  the  Most  High,  keeps  it.1

T.  K.  C.

ZIORPJTV  :  CCOpG  [B],  C60PAI6  [Bab"d-;  superscr.
Al]i  Cicop  [AL]),  a  place  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah
(Josh.  15s4f).  It  is  mentioned  with  Arab,  Beth-
tappuah,  Humtah,  Kirjath-arba  ('  the  same  is  Hebron').

The  names  Arab  and  Kirjath-arba  (surely  from  Kirjath-'arab)
point  to  the  Jerahmeelite  border.  So  also  does  Hurrftah  (i.e.,
Hamath  =  Maacah)  and  perhaps  Beth-tappuah  (see  NAI-HTL'-
HI.M).  '  Hebron  '  in  the  gloss  on  '  Kirjath-arba'  is  probably  (as
in  some  other  cases)  a  corruption  of  '  Rehoboth  ' ;  P  may  already
have  found  this  corruption  in  the  written  list  which  he  seems  to
have  used.  '  Zior,'  then,  is  probably  a  corruption  of  the  name
of  some  Jerahmeelite  place  near  Rehoboth.  One  cannot  help
thinking  of  Missur,  properly  the  name  of  a  region  (see  MIZRAIM,
§  2  b),  but  possibly  also  of  a  town  (cp  Cusham  -Jerahmeel
[SHECHEM]).  The  reading  of  ©AL  may  suggest  an  identification
with  ZAIK  (y.v.).

Van  de  Velde  and  Conder,  however,  identify  Zior  with  Sa'ir
or  (I'EJ-'M  3  309)  Si'air,  4^  m.  N.  from  Hebron,  where  a  tomb
of  Esau  is  shown.  Eusebius  ((>.$' 293  19)  mentions  a  village  Sior
between  /Elia  and  Eleutheropolis.  T.  K.  C.

ZIPH  (Sp  ;  z[e]ld>  [BAL]),  whence  the  gentilic
Ziphites,  or,  incorrectly  [sec  Ps.  54],  Ziphims  (D^D"T ;
z[e]i(j)Aiqi,  i  S.  23 19  26i  Ps.  54  title  zi^eoyc  T]).
i.  An  unidentified  town  belonging  to  Judah,  situated
towards  the  border  of  Edom  (Josh.  1524  [?  B]).  On  the
new  theory  which  makes  David  carve  out  for  himself
at  first  a  principality  in  the  Negeb,  this  more  southern
Ziph  may  have  a  claim  to  be  that  intended  in  the  early
tradition.  See  2,  end.

2.  A  town  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah  (Josh.  15  55  ;
oj'et/3  [B]),  mentioned  together  with  Maon,  Carmel,  and
I  Utah.  Its  connection  with  the  clan  of  Caleb,  which  at
one  time  had  its  seat  about  Hebron  (but  see  below),  is
expressed  in  genealogical  form  in  i  Ch.  242,2  and  again
in  i  Ch.  4 16,  where  Ziph  and  Ziphah  ( ns-n  f,'!  >  £a<t>a
Kai  £aipa  [B],  ^i<f>ai  K.  fcu<£a  [A],  £i<f>  K.  j~«£a  [L])  are
'sons'  of  (the  unknown)  JKHALELEKI,  d/.v.).  Ziph
and  that  part  of  the  wilderness  of  Judah  to  which  it
gave  its  name  are  mentioned  in  the  account  of  David's
outlawry  (i  S.  23 -nff.},  and  the  surrounding  hill  country
with  its  many  caves  supplied  admirable  '  lurking  places  '
and  'strongholds'  (18.281419,  and  cp  i  Mace.  231).
See  Conder's  description  of  the  fantastic  cones  and
knife-like  ridges  of  the  hills  of  Ziph  (PEFQ,  1875,

P-  43)-

Ziph  existed  in  the  time  of  Jerome,  who  places  it  8
R.  m.  from  Hebron  (OS'2' 159i4  ;  cp  20840 /.}.  This
is  too  much  by  nearly  half.  The  true  site  was  found
by  Robinson  at  Tell  Zif,  a  conspicuous  mound,  2882
ft.  above  sea-level,  and  8-9  m.  SE.  of  Hebron,  with  no
trace  of  buildings  at  the  present  day,  but  with  some
cisterns.  A  little  to  the  E. ,  on  a  low  hill  or  ridge,
there  are  broken  walls  and  foundations  ;  but  these  do
not  represent  the  city  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Ch.  11  8  ;
see  below).  Conder  endeavours  to  show  that  there

1  Furness's  translation  (Psalms,  SBOT). But  cp  Che.  Ps.,M
and  Pertholet.  Stellung,  182.

2  |uap[e]ura[s]  [BA](MT.  MESHA  [yr>.]), the  father '  of  Ziph,
is  in  2Ch.  118  mentioned  along  with  Ziph  (£eij3[BJ).

5422


ZIPHION

never  was  a  '\vocd  '  in  the  district  of  Ziph  (see  i  S.  23  15,
EV,  and  see  below).  '  The  country  is  emphatically  a
dry  land,  looking  down  on  the  barren  wastes  which  lie
above  the  Dead  Sea  between  Masada  and  Engedi.
There  is  no  moisture  capable  of  supporting  vegetable
growth  '  (PEFQ,  1875,  p.  45).  G.  A.  Smith  (HG  306  n.,
307  n.  )  substantially  agrees.

Among  the  many  difficult  points  connected  with  the  Hebrew
traditions  is  this  —  Was  the  chief  Calebite  city  Hebron  or  REHO-
BOTH  (,q.v.)t  If  the  latter,  then  the  Ziph  of  i  Ch.  242  may  be
that  mentioned  in  Josh.  15  24.  And  another  is  this—  Was  David's
Ziph  the  first  or  the  second  place  so  called?  The  ty"in  (HORESH)
of  i  S.  '23  15  may  very  well  be  a  corruption  of  TirtrN  (Ashhur)
which  seems  to  have  been  a  name  nearly  equivalent  to  Jerah-
meel.  We  may  also  doubt  about  Rehoboam's  Ziph,  as  well  as
about  the  other  names  in  zCh.  Il6-io(see  REHOBOAM).

T.  K.  C.

ZIPHION (i'VDV). Gen.  46i6=Nu.  26i5, ZEPHON


ZIPHRON  (|'nST,  scarcely  'stench,'  see  ZANOAH,
but  cp  NAMES,  §  106,  n.  i  ;  AecJjpcoNA  [B],  6<j>-
f  Bab]  ;  ze4>-  [AL]),  a  point  on  the  N.  frontier  of
Canaan,  Nu.  34gt-  According  to  Furrer  (ZDPl'&2%}
and  Socin  (Baed.<2>  395),  the  mod.  Zaferdnefi1  (Rob.
gives  es-Za'ferdneA),  ESE.  of  er-Restan.  This,  how
ever,  does  not  suit  Furrer'  s  own  view  of  the  frontier,
for  SaJad  (his  Zedad)  is  SSE.  of  Zaferdneh,  whereas
it  should  lie  to  the  N.  Hence  Mtihlau,  in  Riehm's
HWB,  following  Wetz.  (Reiseber.  88),  prefers  the  ruins
called  7.i  f  ran  ,  fourteen  hours  NE.  of  Damascus.

There  is  reason  to  think,  however,  that  the  description
originally  referred  to  the  Negeb  (see  ZEDAU),  that  Ziphron
corresponds  to  the  SIBRAIM  of  Ezekiel,  and  that  both  names
are  corruptions  of  Zarephath.  See  ZEDAD.  T.  K.  C.


ZIPPOR  piSS,  "ISV;  cemjuop  [BAFL]). BALAK

(g.z>.),  king  of  Moab,  is  called  'son  of  Zippor  '  (Nu.  22241016
23  18  Josh.  24  9  Judg.  1125),  i.e.,  either  son  of  a  person  called
Zippor  ('bird'),  or  'native  of  Zarephath,'  the  Zarephathites
being  a  section  of  the  N.  Arabian  Misrites  (see  ZAREPHATH,
MIZKAIM,  §  2/>).  It  is  probable  that  just  as  the  Edomite  king
Shaul  (AV  Saul)  was  a  Misrite  of  Rehoboth  (see  I!ELA),  so  the
Moabite  king  Balak  was  a  Misrite  of  Zarephath  (unless  indeed
Balak  was  king  of  Musri  ;  see  MOSES,  §  17).  The  Cushite  wife
of  Moses  bore  the  startlingly  similar  name  ZIPFORAH  (q.v.),
See,  however,  NAMES,  §  68.  T.  K.  C.

ZIPPORAH  (rn'By;  cencbco  p&  [BAFL]),  daughter
of  Hobab  or  Jethro,  'priest  of  Midian,'  and  wife  of
Moses  (Ex.  221,  J  ;  425,  J  ;  182,  E).

In  Nu.  12  ii  she  is  called  a  'Cushite  woman';  'Misrite'
would  perhaps  have  been  more  accurate,  but  Missur  (=  Musri)
and  Cush  in  N.  Arabia  were  contiguous  (see  CUSH,  2).  On  the
significance  of  her  name  (probably  a  distortion  of  Zarephath),
and  of  her  connection  with  Moses,  see  MOSES,  §§  4,  7,  and  cp
CIRCUMCISION,  §  2  ;  ZAREPHATH  ;  ZIPPOR.

In  its  present  form  the  name  means  'bird';  cp
NAMES,  §  68.  There  is  an  Aramaic  proper  name  N^y
in  CIS  (10i)  11  2  122;  the  Greek  equivalent  being
<re</></>epa  (S.  A.  Cook,  Aram.  Gloss.  102,  who  refers  to
Cl.  -Gan.  Kcc.  d'arckfol.  1885,  p.  23).  The  name
Zippor  (not  Zipporah)  occurs  as  a  woman's  name  in
Talm.  Jer.  Gittin,  5  3.  T.  K.  c.

ZITHRI,  RV  Sithri  ("nflD;  for  origin  see  SETHUR),

b.  Uzziel,  a  (Kohathite)  Levite,  Ex.  622  (erevpei  [B],  creflpei  [A],
o-erpt  [FLJ).

ZIV  (IT),  i  K.  6137  RV,  AVZiF. See  MONTH,  §  2  (2).

ZIZ,  GOING  UP  OF  (pyn  rpr»),  a  pass  in  the
S.  of  Palestine,  2  Ch.  20  16  (THN  &NABA.CIN  <\CA6
[BA],  T.  A.  THC  eioXHC  &CIC&[L]).  The^name  looks
suspicious  ;  but  the  ordinary  view  that  the  Wady  Hasasa,
by  which  the  old  Roman  road  leads  from  En-gedi  to
Jerusalem,  is  meant,  is  plausible.

The  mention  of  HAZAZON-TAMAR  (g.v.)  in  v.  2,  however,
introduces  a  perplexing  element  into  the  geography.  For  a
way  out  of  the  difficulty,  see  NEGEB,  §  7.  T.  K.  C.

ZIZA  (NT'T,  perhaps  abbrev.  ,  §  58,  cp  ZAZA,  ZUZIM).

1.  A  prince  of  SIMEON  (§  5  [ii.]),  temp.  Hezekiah  ;  i  Ch.  437
(acocraA  [B?],  fovfa  [A],  £<f>a  [L]).

2.  One of  Rehoboam's children by Maacah  ; 2  Ch.  11  20
(£«Ka  [BAL]).  _

1  For  a  southern  Zaferaneh  (cp  Rob.  BR  2  185)  see  ASPHAR.
5423


ZIZAH


ZOAR

),  i  Ch.  23  ii. See  ZINA.


ZOAN  (jy'V  ;  TANIC  [BNA]),  an  Egyptian  city.  ©,
Vg.  ,  and  Tg.  identify  it  with  Tanis,  certainly  correctly.
The  city  had  the  name  S'nt,1  in  Coptic  times,  Dja(a)ni
(also  Djaane,  Djani).  The  Greeks  called  it  Tdvis  (thus
(5).  The  modern  Arabic  name  is  San.  Consequently,
the  name  must  have  been  pronounced  Sa'ne,  Sa'ni,  by
the  Hebrews  (following  the  later  habit  of  dropping  the
feminine  termination  [tj).

The  city,  the  capital  of  the  I4th  nomos  of  Lower
Egypt,  near  the  NE.  edge  of  the  Delta,  was  situated
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tanitic  branch  of  the  Nile,  in
a  plain  which  is  at  present,  in  summer,  a  marshy  pro
longation  of  the  Menzaleh  lake,  in  winter  a  salt-desert.
The  modern  village  of  San  is  inhabited  mostly  by  fisher
men.  The  adjoining  mound,  San  el-hagar,  'stone
San,'  was  excavated  first  in  part  by  Mariette  in  1860,
then  completely  by  Petrie  (in  1883-84,  see  Tanis  1  and
2,  1885).  There  were  found  many  statues,  sphinxes,
obelisks,  etc.,  belonging  to  a  large  temple,  begun  (it
would  seem)  by  kings  of  the  sixth  dynasty,  continued
in  the  twelfth  dynasty,  and  completed  by  the  greatest
builder  among  the  Pharaohs,  Rameses  II.  See,  on  the
fragments  of  the  largest  monolithic  colossus  known,
EGYPT,  §  37.  The  temple  seems  to  have  had  a  length
of  about  1000  ft.  King  Psusennes  of  the  twenty-first
dynasty  built  a  huge  wall  of  bricks  around  it.  The
importance  of  the  city  is  shown  by  the  fact  that
Rameses  II.  seems  to  have  resided  there  and  that  the
twenty  -first  dynasty  originated  from  the  city.  In
Esarhaddon's  and  Asur-bani-pal's  time,  Sa'nu  or  Si'nu
was  the  seat  of  a  prince  ;  on  its  sack  by  the  Assyrians
see  TIRHAKAH.  In  Strabo  (802)  it  still  figures  as  a
considerable  place.  Of  its  ultimate  downfall  not  much
is  known.

The  biblical  mentions  are  as  follows.  In  Is.  19  n  13,
the  princes  of  Zoan  represent  Egypt  (13  ||  with  Noph-
Memphis).  In  304,  tnc  Israelites  are  blamed  for  send
ing  embassies  to  Zoan  ;  the  passage  looks  as  if  the
Pharaohs  were  still  residing  at  Zoan  at  times.  In
Ezek.  30  14,  Zoan  stands  parallel  with  the  old  capital  of
Upper  Egypt,  No,  which  shows  that  in  Lower  Egypt
only  Memphis  can  have  rivalled  Tanis  in  importance.
Perhaps  it  is  thus  to  be  explained  that  Ps.  78  (1243)
speaks  of  the  wonders  done  '  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in
the  field  of  Zoan  '  in  Moses'  time.  Zoan-Tanis  seems
to  have  been  considered  as  the  capital  of  Egypt,  or  at
least  of  the  Delta,  in  the  time  of  the  psalmist.  The
inference  that  Zoan  was  the  residence  of  Pharaoh  in
Moses'  time  and  that  '  fields  of  Zoan  '  and  Goshen  were
equivalent  expressions  has  often  been  drawn  by  scholars,
especially  by  Brugsch,  who  tried  to  show  the  identity  of
Rameses  and  Zoan.2  Brugsch's  arguments  however,
are  fallacious  (although  Rameses  II.  may  have  resided
here,  see  above)  ;  certainly  Goshen  cannot  have  extended
to  the  surroundings  of  Tanis.

The  curious  remark  Nu.  1822  (Hebron  was  built
seven  years  before  Zoan  in  Egypt)  seems  to  imply  that
the  writer  considered  Tanis  as  one  of  the  oldest  cities  of
Egypt.  Indeed,  we  can  trace  it  to  the  sixth  dynasty
(see  above)  ;  as  capital  of  the  nome  it  may  belong  to
prehistoric  times.  Chronological  conclusions  about  the
date  of  Hebron's  foundation  cannot,  of  course,  be  drawn
from  the  biblical  remark,  whether  taken  literally  or  not.3

w.  M.  M.
ZOAR pr'V, in Gen.  19  22  30 TINV  ;


*VkWA/l  V ^br

2  See  RAMESES,  5  3,  on  Brugsch's  argument  (followed  by  Ebers,
Durch  Goscn,  498),  and  EXODUS,  §  10.

3  A  stele  of  the  time  of  Rameses  II.,  found  at  Tanis.  was
curiously  dated 'year  400  of  king  Set.' If  this date has  a
historical  basis,  it  must  mean  that  about  1700  B.C.  the  cult  of
Set  was  established  (by  Hyksos-kings?),  not  that  Tanis  was  then
founded,  as  some  scholars  have  assumed.

5424


ZOBAH

[BXADEFQ] ;  cif-  [L]  ;  in  Gen.  13 10  zoropA
[ADEL];  in  Jer.  48  34  zofop  [BXA]  ;  Vg.  Segor),  a
locality  mentioned  in  Gen.  13io  1428  1922/30  Dt.
343  Is.  15$  Jer.  4834t-  It  is  commonly  placed  to  the
SE.  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  may  be  correct  so  far  as
Is.  15s  and  Jer.  4834  are  concerned,  but  hardly  for  Gen.
and  Dt.  (ll.cc.).

There  is  in  fact  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  for  the  view
that  the  chief  seat  of  the  southern  Israeliiish  legends  was  the
Jerahmeehte  territory,  bordering  on  Musri  and  Edom.  See
ISAAC,  JACOB,  and  especially  SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH.  The
play  on  the  meaning  of  '  Zoar'  in  Gen.  IS*  20  22  is  only  accounted
for,  if  the  true  name  of  the  city  was  ly^a,  or  rather  into — i.e.,
Missur  (Musri).  The  '  Zoar  '  of  legend  was  really  '  Missur  '  ;  it
was  one  of  the  cities  of  Musri  in  N.  Arabia,  towards  S.  Palestine.
Cp  MLSKAIM,  §  2  (A).  Upon  the  new  theory,  Gen.  13 10,  where
'  Zoar '  appears  to  be  distinctly  placed  in  the  Jordan  valley,
originally  ran  thus,  '  And  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  that
the  whole  of  Jerahmeel  (pT.l  133,  a  primitive  corruption  of
SNOTT)  w-as  well-watered,  [before  Vahwe  destroyed  Sodom  and
Gomorrah)  like  the  garden  of  Yah  we,  like  the  land  of  Misrim,
in  the  direction  of  Missur.'  Here,  however,  it  is  probable  that
Missur  really  means  the  land  of  Missur  ;  O'lliC  |"!N3  may  be
omitted  as  an  unintelligent  alteration  of  "IISO  ri3N3.  Hall  (cp
GARDEN,  84,  n.)  prefers  reading  JJ?S>  '  Zoan  '  (Pesh.  ?).  But
surely  '  like  the  land  of  Egypt '  was  clear  enough,  without  a
limiting  or  explanatory  appendage.  'Kgypt,'  however,  is  not
to  be  expected  in  this  context,  and  the  Hebrew  traditions
centre  (as  new  evidence  appears  to  show)  in  the  Negeb  and
the  N.  Arabian  border.  For  the  later  traditional  view  of  Zoar
see  MOAB,  and  on  the  whole  question  of  the  original  Zoar
cp  SODOM.  T.  K.  C.

ZOBAH  (niliV,  coyBA  [BAL]),  or  more  fully  ARAM-
ZOBAH  (rOI/D'TK,  Ps.  60  heading,  ccoBAA  [BKR]),
1  The  °r  ARAM-ZOBA  (N3iV  'N,  2  S.  1068,  but
prevalent  RV  AKAM-ZOBAH),  the  home  of  one  of
theory  1)avid's  'thirty'  (28.2836;  AyNA/v\ecoc
[HA],  MACCABA  [L]).1  also  the  name  of
an  Aramrean  state,  whose  king  Hadadezer  was  defeated
by  David  (2  S.  81-14  10  15  ff.).  In  I  S.  1447  'the  kings
of  Zobah  '  are  said  to  have  been  defeated  by  Saul,-  and
in  2  Ch.  83  Solomon  is  asserted  to  have  taken  Hamath-
zobah  (/3cu(70)/3a  [B],  ai/j.a-0' '  ffovj3a  [A],  ffj.a.0cr.  [L]);
the  latter  designation  is  thought  to  imply  the  same
(erroneous?)  conception  of  the  importance  of  Zobah
which  is  found  in  (a)  2  S.  83  8  10  15-1917,  but  not  in  the
narrative  (6)  which  contains  2  S.  10i-i4  ig£.  This  at
least  is  clear,  that  in  the  respective  strata  of  narrative
different  views  of  the  position  of  the  kingdom  of  Zobah
are  suggested.  If  the  view  implied  in  the  former
stratum  (a)  is  correct,  the  idea  that  David  was  one  of
the  mightiest  monarchs  of  his  time  is  not  an  extrava
gant  one,  for  here  the  kingdom  of  Zobah  under  Hadad-
ezer  is  represented  as  dominating  the  whole  of  Syria,
whereas  in  the  latter  stratum  (b]  Zobah  appears  with
BETH-REHOB,  MAACAH,  and  ISHTOB  or  TOB,  as  an  ally
of  the  Ammonites.  This  difference  of  view  has  been
explained  by  the  supposition  that  two  different  Zobahs
have  been  confounded  (see  DAVID,  §  9,  with  n.  2,
where  references  are  given  for  the  evidence).  One,  to
the  N.  of  Damascus  and  Hamath,  rich  in  copper
(28.88),  was  conceivably  the  mat  Nuhassi3  of  the
Am.  Tablets  (37  5  45  22,  etc. ),  if  Nuhassi  means  '  copper  '
(new),  according  to  Ilalevy's  theory  (REJ1^-zig\  cp
COPPER,  §  3).  The  other  Zobah  corresponds  to  the
'  districts  of  Subitu,'  referred  to  by  Asur-bani-pal  (KB
2217),  and  was  S.  of  Damascus,  perhaps  (so  Wi.  AOF
1467)  between  Hauran  and  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  Two
cities  of  the  former  Zobah  (as  we  may  provisionally  say)
are  named  in  2  S.  88,  viz. ,  Betah  and  Berothai  (on  these
see  TEBAH,  BEROTHAI,  BEROTHAH).

1  Marquart's  suggestion  (see  JOEL,  3)  to  read  •"iBSSri  is  only  a

step  towards  the  right  solution  (see  p  2).

2  This,  however,  is  probably  due  to  a  partisan  of  Saul,  who
wishes  his  favourite  to  vie  with  David  (SAUL,  §  3).

3  Halevy  supports  this  by  the  conjecture  that  rni!>  is  a  con
traction  of  '"I3i'~is, 'bright  yellow,'  and  compares  XaAict's  from
YaAicds,  'copper.' Chalcis  was  on  the  slopes  of  Antilibanus  (cp
Wi.  A  T  Unters.  180). On  the  situation  of  Nuhassi,  cp  Flinders
Petrie,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  179.

5425


ZOHELETH,  STONE  OF

The  preceding  theory  assumes  the  general  accuracy  of  the
M  1'  of  the  passage  of  2  S.  referred  to.  There  is  grave  reason,

however, to hold that this assumption is
2.  New  theory,  erroneous. The Aram with which David

had  relations  was,  according  to  the  still
discoverable  earlier  form  of  the  traditions,  not  the  northern  but
a  southern  Aram— i.e.,  the  Jerahmeelites  of  the  Negeb,  and,
if  we  use  the  many  parallels  and  analogies  of  other
passages,  it  is  not  difficult  to  recover  the  probable  oru
names  of  places  miswritten  by  the  redactor.  It  should,  1
first  of  all,  be  noticed  to  the  credit  of  Winckler  that,  n<,ii.  in^;
the  combination  of  lieth-rehob  and  Zobah,  and  the  dc
of  Hadad-ezer,  king  of  Zobah,  as  lieth-rehob,  he  has  si.
that  both  names  represent  one  and  the  same  state  (67  1  m /.).
This  is,  in  fact,  very  near  the  trut.'i.  The  statement  in  2  S.  «  3
should  probably  run  thus,  'And  David  smote  Hadad  [.  .  .  .],  a
native  of  Rehoboth,  king  of  Zarephath,1  when  he  went  to  turn
him  [David)  back  from  the  river  [of  Musri]. '2  Verse  8  in  its
original  form  probably  spoke  only  of  one  royal  city,  viz.,
Rehoboth  ;  of  this  Befall  gives  one  and  Berothai  another
corruption. 3  In  106  the  allies  of  the  b'ne  Ammon  were  probably
given  as  Aram-rehoboth  (to  which  Aram-zoba  is  probably  a
gloss),4  Maacah  (the  southern  Maacah),  and  Tuba!  ;  Helam  in
w.  i6f.  represents  Jerahmeel  (place-name).  In  18.1447
.•I31S  '3^0  ('  the  kings  of  Zobah  ')  is  miswritten  for  nSIX  ^KCrW
(Jerahmeel-zarephath);  see  SAUL,  $  3.  In  28.2830  we  need
not  question  the  reading,  '  Igal,  b.  Nathan,  of  Zobah,'  for
|  Zobah'  here  too  represents  'Zarephath,'  while  'Igal'  (like
'Joel'  and  'Gaal')  is  a  popular  corruption  of  'Jerahmeel.'
That  'Zarephath'  should  sometimes  be  used  comprehensively,
sometimes  with  a  narrower  reference,  affords  no  ground  for
surprise.  '  Zarephathites '  is  constantly  used  widely,  and  yet
primarily,  of  course,  it  merely  meant  the  people  of  the  city  of
Zarephath.  On  '  Hamath-zobah  '  (Maacath-zarephath),  2Ch.  83
see  SOLOMON,  §  7.

Noldeke  (BL  1  232)  places  Zobah  '  nearly  in  the  region  of
Emesa."  Elsewhere  (see  MEROM)  it  is  suggested  that  Merom
(Josh.  Us  7)  may  be  the  second  or  more  southerly  Zobah.

T.  K.  C.

ZOBEBAH  (ra3Sn),  with  '  Anub'  and  the  '  families
of  Aharhel,  the  son  of  Harum,'  is  (perhaps)  connected
genealogically  with  Tekoa  (MT  Coz  \_<].i'.]},  i  Ch.  49
(CABA0A  [B],  COOBHBA  [A],  CAB-  [I-])-  Sce  TEKOA.

ZODIAC  (n'njO),  Job3832  RV»ff-,  EVMAZZAROTH
(q.v. ).  See  also  STARS,  §  3  («/).

ZOHAR  ("in'S,  §  66  ;  '  reddish-white  ?  '  see  COLOURS,
§  7  :  CAAR  [BADEL]).

1.  Probably  the  name  of  the  clan  to  which  Kphron  the  Hittite
(from  Rehobothite  ['!],  see  REHOIIOTH)  belonged  (Gen.  23s  209).
Possibly  we  should  read  rpj,  ZEKAH.

2.  b.  SIMEON  (§  9) ;  see  Zerah  (4).

3.  b.  Ashhur,  a  Judahite  (i  Ch.  4  7  ; Kr.  "inXl, 'and  Zohar.'
RVmg-  ; Kt.  -ins",  see  IZHAR,  2  ;  icai  a.  [HA],  <cal  eicrap  [L]).

ZOHELETH,  STONE  OF  (H^TOn  |3X,  'Serpent's
Stone  '  [BDB],  but  see  below).  This  stone  was  evidently
sacred,  like  the  fountain  En-rogel  beside  which  it
stood,  and  in  the  building  which  enclosed  it  Adonijah,
as  claimant  of  the  crown  of  Israel,  probably  held  his
sacrificial  feast  (i  K.  lg).

Gk.  readings  are  :  \i9ov  rov  ^weAefl  [A],  .  .  .  liiv iv £ta\a&  [I,],
<Ju8>)  TOV  <C<ocA~c0ci  [I'll  cp  irapa.  TI\V  Tnjyiji/  T'I\V  iv  TU>  /SaffiAntci
7rapa6eicra>,  Jos.  Ant.  vii.  144.

There  must  have  been  something  remarkable  about
it.  Very  possibly  it  was  overlaid  with  a  '  brilliant  '
metal  called  n^ni,  zohfleth,  and  corresponding  to  the
Ass.  sahalii.5  There  were  two  brazen  pillars  before  the
temple  at  Jerusalem  (i  K.  417  21).  The  'stone  of
Zoheleth  '  may  have  been  a  ruder  pillar  of  the  same
sort.  Some  writers  would  place  Zoheleth  in  the  rocky
way  near  the  village  of  Silwan  (Siloah)  called  Zahweleh.
i  K.  141  implies  that  those  who  were  with  Adonijah
could  see  what  went  on  in  the  valley  of  Kedron  ;  this,
however,  would  have  been  quite  easy  from  Zahweleh
(see  Buhl,  Pal.  94  ;  Baed.<4>  100).

Wellhausen  (Heid.W  146)  suggests  a  connection  with  the
'  brilliant '  planet  Saturn  (cp  the  Ar.  proper  name  Zuhal).

1  The vague notice  in 2  S.  8 1 (where Q'nB'^>B represents
O'nSTi)  probably  comes  from  another  source.

2  Read,  with  Winckler,  ir«O  ink  U'??1?.

3  In Ezek.  47 16  the names should probably  be Maacath,
Rehoboth,  Zarephath  (see  SIBKAIM  and  Crit.  Bib.)

4  Note  that no  extra  number  of  warriors  is  put  down  for
Bcth-rehob.

5  Cp  the  passages  cited  by  Del.  Ass.  ffll'fi,  s.v. '  zahalu.'

5426


ZOHETH

Others  (e.g.  WRS,  KSP)  172,  and  Benzinger,  Kirn.  4)  doubt
fully  connect  the  sacred  fountain  and  stone  with  the  Dragon's
Well  of  Neh.  2 13  (see  DKAGON).  Zoheleth  might  mean
'serpent.'  T.  K.  C.

ZOHETH  (nrflT)  and  BEN-ZOHETH  (q.v. ),  sons  of
Ishi,  a  descendant  of  Judah,  iCh.  420  (zoo&N  [B],
ZCGXA6  [A],  ZAU)9  [L]).

ZOPHAH  (Hate  ;  CCOXA6-  coo(}>&c  [B]  -4>Ap,  -4>A

[A]),  <rou<f>a  [L]),  a  name  in  a  genealogy  of  ASHER  (q.v.,  §  4  2),

1  Ch.  7  35/t

ZOPHAI  ('Dte'),  i  Ch.  626  [n],  see  ZUPH.

ZOPHAR  pam'S  ;  ccocJ>Ap  [BNAC]),  one  of  Job's
friends,  a  Naamathite  (Job  2xi  Hi  20i  42g[and  17*?
<S]t)-  NAAMAH  (q.v. )  was  in  SW.  Judah;  but  the
clan  which  settled  there  was  doubtless  of  Calebite  and
therefore  of  Edomite  extraction  (cp  'Naam,'  i  Ch.4is).
The  poet  must  have  reckoned  '  Zophar '  as  an  Edomite.

Probably  the  writer  took  the  name  from  the  notices  in  Gen.
36  1 1  151  Ch.  1  36,  where  irjjj  (Gen.)  or  13^  (Ch.) — both  forms  mis-
written  for  IBIS  (see  (P) — occurs  among  the  sons  of  Eliphaz,  son
of  Esau.  (See  ZEPHO.)  Still,  '  Naamathite  '  is  hardly  the  name
we  expect.  Possibly  'riCJ?J  ma>'  have  come  from  «nQ«j,  and  this,
by  transposition,  from  'J2»jv  Zophar,  then,  like  Eliphaz  would
be  called  a  Temanite.

Dozy 's  correction  (see  Di.,  20),  viDjn-  'a  man  of  RAAMAH  '
(tf.v.),  and  Hommel's,  'yj;a,  '  Minaean'(cp  <B,  6  Mteju/aio?  and,

2  ii  42  \-je,  o  M[€]ipaiu)i/  /SacriAeus),  seem  less  plausible.

T. K.  C.

ZOPHIM  (D'S'-S.  CKOTTIAN  [BAFL]),  apparently  a
mountain-district  (mf,  see  FIELD,  i),  where  was  the
'height  of  the  Pisgah,'  Nu.  23 14.  Dillmann,  but  not
Kautzsch  (7/5),  renders  'x  rnb  '  the  field  of  watchers,'
and  supposes  that  there  in  times  of  danger  watchers
were  stationed,  or  else  that  there  diviners  were  wont
to  scan  the  heavens  or  the  flight  of  birds  for  omens.

In  Nu.  21  20,  however,  '  the  height  of  the  Pisgah  '  is  said  to  be
'in  the  highland  of  Moab,'  or  rather  (see  MOAB,  §  14)  'of
Missur.'  This  suggests  that  D'Si  is  a  corrupt  or  mutilated  form
of  the  name  of  a  region  or  a  clan — i.e.,  either  of  "IISO  or  of
DTIEHX.  It  was  in  fact  probably  a  mountain  not  far  from

•  T  :T  J

Zarephath  that  was  meant  in  the  original  story.  See  further
NEBO  i.,  §  2.  T.  K.  C.

ZOPHIM,  RAMATHAIM. See  RAMATHAIM.

ZOEAH  (Pliny,  as  if  '  hornet'  ;  cp  PIIHV  ;  CAR*.*.)-
A  city  repeatedly  mentioned,  but  not  easy  so  to  locate
as  to  suit  all  the  textual  phenomena.  It  was  closely
connected  with  the  story  of  Samson  ;  but  the  scene  of
this  story  seems  to  have  been  differently  viewed  at
different  times  (see  SAMSON).  It  was  Danite — of  that
there  can  be  no  doubt  (Judg.  182,  crapaX  [B]  ;  Josh.
194i,  aapa.6  [B]).

Zorah  is  included  in  the  same  group  with  Eshtaol  and  Ashna,
among  the  cities  of  the  Shephelah  (Josh.  1633,  AV  ZOKEAH,
paa  [B])  :  but  the  kernel  of  the  name  Eshtaol  (Shaol  or  Saul)  is
probably  Jerahmeelite.  It  is  also  mentioned  in  Neh.  11  29  (AV
ZAREAH,  om.  BN*A,  crapa  [L])and  in  2  Ch.  11  10  as  fortified  by
Rehoboam ;  but  in  both  passages  there  seems  upon  critical
grounds  to  be  reason  to  think  that  the  original  text  referred  to
places  in  the  Negeb.  In  i  Ch.  2  53  we  find  the  ZORATHITES
(AV  ZAREATHITES,  'Jljnsrt,  crapafWoi  [BA],  cro.paa.6i.  [L]  among
the  families  of  Kirjath-jearim,  cp  I  Ch.  4  2  (apadei  [I'],  o-a.pa.8i  [A],
eroAaSirjA.  [L]) ;  also  in  254  where  the  ZORITES  ('J,"12>rr,  rjcrapei
[B]  .  .  .  pact  [A],  crapaOi  [LI),  together  with  the  MANAHETH-
ITES  (?.?<.,  and  cp  MANOAH)  are  sons  of  Salma  the  'father'  of
Beth-lehem.  But  the  genealogy  is  Calebite  ;  jearim  in  Kirjath-
jearim  may  represent  '  Jerahmeel' ;  SHOBAL  and  SALMA  are
N.  Arabian  names,  and  Beth-lehem  certainly  represents  Beth-
Jerahmeel,  a  name  which,  in  such  a  context,  we  naturally  assign
to  the  Negeb.  Ephrath  too  is  primarily  a  name  of  the
Negeb.  It  would  seem  therefore  that  in  spite  of  the
assignment  of  Zorah  to  the  Shephelah  in  Josh.  1633,  and  its
combination  with  Aijalon  in  Josh.  194i_/I,  we  must  admit  that  a
confusion  has  been  made  by  the  redactors  of  the  OT  texts
between  a  Zorah  in  the  Shephelah  and  a  place  of  a  similar
name  (probably  1J?i>'  Zoar,  or  ~\W  Zur,  or  even  11SD  Missur),
and  of  equal  strategic  importance,  in  the  Negeb,  not  far  from
Beth-jerahmeel  (confounded  by  redactors  sometimes  with  Beth
lehem  in  Judah,  sometimes  with  Aijalon).

The  Zorah  of  the  Shephelah  would  be  the  modern
Sara,  which  stands  on  an  eminence  on  the  N.  side  of

S427


ZOROASTRIANISM

the  Wady  Sarar,  opposite  Beth-shemesh  and  14  m.  \Y.
from  Jerusalem.  On  the  importance  of  the  situation
see  GASm.  HG  218  /.  The  Zoar  (?)  of  the  Negeb  we
cannot  venture  to  locate.  T.  K.  c.

ZOROBABEL  (zopoBABeA  [Ti.  WH]). Mt.  1 J2/.
AV,  RV  ZKRUBBABEL. See  GENEALOGIES,  ii. ,  §  z(c).

ZOROASTRIANISM


Names  (§  i).
Early  obscurity  (§  2).
Ancient  accounts  (§  3).
Zoroaster  (§  $f.).
Date,  sources  (§  6yC).
Ormazd,  Ahriman  (§  8).
Other  spirits  (§§  9-11).
Dualism  (§  12).


Man,  judgment  (§§  13-15).
Ethics  (§  16).
Worship,  Magi  (§  17).
History,  origin  (§  i8/C).
Influence  on  Israel  (§$  20-22).
Resurrection, '  Wisdom,' etc.

.(§§  23-25)-
Literature  (§  26,  end).


Of Mazdaism, the religion  of the Perso- Iranians,
Zoroaster  is  regarded  as  the  prophet ;  hence  the  religion

, „  , is  often  called  Zoroastriaiiism. Western

1.  Names  tor

p .  writers, however, more usually speak

rsian of  {he  doctrjne  of  the  Magi. It  is  not

°^  '  easy  to  say  with  certainty  whether  or
not  we  are  entitled  to  interchange  the  three  terms,
Mazdaism,  Zoroastrianism,  and  Magism,  as  if  they
_  .  were  synonymous.  Positive  information
,'  .;•  regarding  the  religious  condition  of
8  ^'  Western  Iran  during  the  oldest  historical
period  is  almost  entirely  wanting.  It  is  not  absolutely
certain,  for  example,  of  what  faith  Cyrus  the  Great
was  an  adherent.  With  reference,  moreover,  to  the
antecedent  conditions  in  Eastern  Iran,  which  must  have
played  an  important  role  in  the  early  development  of
the  Persian  religion,  our  sources  are  very  scanty  through
out.  Our  oldest  positive  witnesses  for  the  belief  in
Mazda  are  the  comprehensive  inscriptions  of  Uarius  I.,
through  which  runs  a  strong  vein  of  faith  and  pious
devotion.  Darius  never  wearies  of  glorifying  the  just
and  good  guidance  of  the  supreme  god,  Aiiramazda
(Ormazd).  The  other  gods  are  mentioned  only  incident
ally.  Religious  matters  are  often  spoken  of  quite  in  the
style  of  the  later  Avesta.  The  greatest  evil  is  falsehood.
The  spirit  of  falsehood,  the  adversary  (cp  'Satan')  of
Mazda,  is  not  mentioned  by  any  name.  We  are  there
fore  confronted  by  the  question, — Is  the  mere  name  of
Mazda  itself  a  positive  proof  of  the  Zoroastrian  origin
of  the  early  Persian  religion,  or  must  the  dualism  be
explicitly  present  as  the  essential  mark  of  the  prophet's
teaching  ?  Herodotus,  moreover,  our  oldest  authority,
says  nothing  of  Ahriman  in  his  account  of  the  religion
of  the  Persians,  nor  does  he  mention  the  name  of
Zoroaster.  Accordingly,  C.  de  Harlez  disputes  the
view  that  the  Persians  under  the  first  Achasmenians
were  Zoroastrians.  He  also  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that
the  burial  rites  of  the  Persians,  as  pictured  by  Hero
dotus  (1140),  are  directly  opposed  to  the  Zoroastrian
injunctions.  Darmesteter  rightly  objects  that  it  is  not
the  intention  of  Darius  to  publish  a  creed  or  articles  of
faith.  Herodotus,  in  a  well-known  passage  (1 131-140),
describes  only  the  religious  usages  of  the  Persians,  and
expressly  states  that  he  does  not  know  the  whole  truth
regarding  their  customs  connected  with  the  disposal  of
the  bodies  of  the  dead.  Darmesteter  therefore  comes
to  the  conclusion  that  the  Zoroastrian  religion  was  in
force  in  Persia  at  the  time  of  Darius  I.  In  practice,
however,  it  was  only  the  priestly  caste  of  the  Magi  that
was  bound  to  rigid  observance  of  the  rule.  Among  the
laity  the  religious  prescriptions  and  usages  did  not  have
so  binding  a  force  nor  so  wide  a  scope  as  they  had  later
at  the  time  of  the  Sassanians.  Windischmann  had
already  expressed  the  conviction  that  Darius  and  his
successors  were  genuine  Zoroastrians,  the  name  Aiira
mazda  being  as  inseparable  from  the  religion  of  Zoro
aster  as  the  name  of  Christ  was  from  Christianity.
This  supposition  would  become  a  certainty  if  West  is
right  in  his  conclusion  that  the  Persian  calendar,  which
is  distinctly  Zoroastrian  in  its  naming  of  months  and

5428


ZOROASTRIANISM

•days,  had  been  introduced  at  the  time  of  Darius,  about
505  B.  C.  The  entire  question  as  to  the  Achcemenians
being  Zoroastrians  is  still  under  discussion.  We  know,
at  least,  that  Artaxerxes  I.  and  his  successors  were
Zoroastrians.

For  references  consult  C.  de  Harlez,  Avcsta,(-)  1881,  Introd.
x,  xvii,  ccx  ;  Durmesteter,  SHE  4  (1880),  Introd.  xliv  (2nd  ed.
1895);  Le  Zend-Avesta  (3  vols.,  1893),  vol.  3,  Introd.  Ixx  ;  Win-
dischniann,  Zoroastrische  Studicit  (1863),  121  ;  West,  SEE  47
(1897),  Introd.  xliv.

According  to  Herodotus  (1132)  no  Persian  could
sacrifice  without  a  Magian  priest.  This  indirectly  proves

, _ , that  there  was  a  religious  connection  be-
3.  Greeks

„ . tween the Persians and the Magians.

°  '  Everything  implied  in  the  statements  of
the  Greeks  regarding  the  usages  and  the  doctrines  of  the
Magi  is  genuinely  Zoroastrian.  The  Magi  allowed  the
bodies  of  their  dead  to  be  torn  by  dogs  and  birds  of  prey.
They  regarded  it  as  a  laudable  act  to  kill  as  many  ants,
snakes,  and  other  vermin  as  possible,  whilst  they  held
the  life  of  a  dog  as  sacred  as  the  life  of  a  man  (Herod.
1 146).  Marriage  of  near  relations  was  with  them  a  pious
custom  (Strabo,  15  20).  All  these  things  are  treated  with
some  fulness  in  the  Avesta.  Plutarch  (tie  Is.  et  Os.  46)
explains  the  Magian  zeal  for  destroying  all  unclean
animal  life  on  the  ground  of  the  Zoroastrian  theology,
and  quite  in  accordance  with  the  Avesta,  as  follows  :
'  Among  plants,  they  attribute  the  one  to  the  Good
Divinity,  the  other  to  the  Evil  Genius  ;  similarly  with
regard  to  animals  ;  the  dog,1  birds,  and  the  hedgehog
belong  to  the  Good  Divinity  ;  the  water-rat  belongs  to
the  Evil  One.  On  this  account  they  esteem  him  fortunate
who  has  killed  the  most  of  these  beasts.'  Plutarch
(I.e. )  gives  a  sketch  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Magian
Zoroaster  and  of  the  mythology  of  the  Magians.  He
clearly  develops  the  outlines  of  the  dualistic  system  ;
the  two  primeval  spirits  and  their  incessant  warfare  ;
creation  and  counter  -  creation ;  the  division  of  the
universe ;  its  limited  existence  ;  the  end  of  the  evil
principle ;  the  regeneration  and  purification  of  the
world  (de  Is.  47  ;  partly  drawn  from  Theopompus).

Areimanios  was  mentioned  for  the  first  time  beside  Oromazdes
in  a  lost  work  of  Aristotle,  according  to  Diogenes  Laertius
(prouem.  8).  The  name  of  Zoroaster  occurs  earlier  in  a  fragment
(29)  of  Xanthos,  and  in  Plato  (AlcU>.  1  122),  who  calls  him  the
son  of  Oromazdes.  For  Western  writers  Zoroaster  is  always
the  Magus  or  the  founder  of  Magianism  (Plut.,  I.e.;  Plato,  I.e. ;
Diog.  Laert.,  prooem.  2  ;  other  passages  in  de  Harlez,  o/>.  cit.,
189;  Max  Duncker,  GAW  4  50).  The  ancients  also  give  some
details  as  to  the  childhood  of  Zoroaster  and  his  hermit  life
(Pliny,  //.VS02;  Plutarch,  Numa,  4;  Dio  Chrysostom,_  2 60).
They  call  him  sometimes  a  Bactrian,  sometimes  a  Median  or
Persian  (op  Jackson  in  Jour.  Amer.  Or.  Sac.  10222).  No  reli
ance  can  be  placed  on  their  references  to  his  extreme  antiquity.
Hermippus  of  Smyrna  placed  him  5000  years  before  the  Trojan
War  ;  Xanthos,  6000  years  before  Xerxes  ;  Aristotle  assigned  him
3.  similar  antiquity  (Pliny,  //W30 1  2  ;  Diog.  Laert.  prooem.  2  ;  cp
Jackson,  Jour.  Am.  Or.  Soc.Vlj,,  and  Zoroaster,  150-178).
Agathias  (2  24)  rightly  remarks  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to
determine  with  any  certainty  when  he  lived  and  legislated.  '  The
Persians,'  he  adds,  'say  that  Zoroaster  lived  under  Hystaspes,
but  do  not  make  clear  whether  by  this  name  is  meant  the  father
of  Darius  or  another  Hystaspes.'

What  the  Greeks  regard  as  the  doctrines  of  the
Magi  the  Iranians  themselves  call  the  doctrines  of

Zoroaster. The  native  accounts  bring
4. Iranians


on  Zoroaster.


the personality  of Zoroaster into the


foreground.  To  him  alone  Mazda
vouchsafed  the  Law  and  the  Holy  Faith,  and  ordained
him  as  the  teacher  of  men.  The  Avesta,  or  Zoroastrian
bible,  makes  only  occasional  reference  to  the  external
circumstances  of  Zoroaster's  life,  for  the  part  of  the
Avesta  which  was  specially  devoted  to  the  story  of  his
life,  the  so-called  Spend- Mask,  is  lost.  Its  contents,
however,  have  been  worked  into  the  Pahlavi  literature,
which  in  three  places  gives  a  description  of  his  life.
These  interesting  accounts,  two  of  which  occur  in  the
fifth  and  seventh  books  of  the  Dinkard  and  one  in  the
Zartusht-namak,2  have  been  translated  by  E.  W.  West

1  Contrast  Is.  66  3  (see  DOG,  §  3).
2  This  forms  part  of  the  Selections  of  Zad-sparam.

173  5429


ZOROASTRIANISM

under  the  title,  '  Marvels  of  Zoroastrianism,'  in  SDE
47  (1897).

These  narratives  have  a  mythical  tinge  that  is  quite
oriental ;  they  are  not  histories,  they  are  legends.  Al
ready  in  the  Avesta  Zoroaster  appears  for  the  most  part
as  a  legendary  personality.

He  stands  in  personal  intercourse  with  the  divinity.  At  his
appearing  all  nature  rejoices  (}'asht,  1893)  ;  he  enters  into  con
flict  with  the  demons  and  rids  the  earth  of  their  presence  ( 1  'as/it,
17  19) ;  Satan  approaches  him  as  tempter  to  make  him  renounce
liis  faith  (I'endidad,  !'.» 6).  The  history  of  his  life  is  a  succession
of  nxarvels.  The  divine  powers  themselves  initiate  him  intc/
his  high  calling,  and  during  the  whole  of  his  prophetic  career
they  stand  by  him  with  their  counsel.

Many  scholars  therefore  have  regarded  the  personality
of  the  prophet  as  purely  mythical  (Darmesteter  ;  Kern,
according  to  Tiele,  Compendium,  §  99).  This  is  cer
tainly  going  too  far.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the
existence  of  the  religious  founder,  Zoroaster  ;  he  lives
too  strongly  in  tradition.  The  legend  of  Zoroaster  is
not  one  to  be  deprived  of  all  historical  foundation.

Zoroaster's  real  name  is  Zarathushtra,  Modern
Persian,  Zardusht ;  it  seems  to  mean,  '  Possessor  of

_ _ ,. old  camels.' His  father  was  Pourushaspa,

A-  '  i1  j  I"  of  the  noble  familv  of  the  Spitamas,  his
tional  data.

mother Uughdhuva. Regarding his

native  place  there  is  a  double  tradition.  According  to
one,  the  house  of  his  father  was  situated  in  Airyana
Vaejo  upon  a  hill  of  the  river  Dareja  (the  modern  Darya,
in  northern  Azerbaijan),  and  Zoroaster  was  born  there.
According  to  the  other  tradition  he  came  from  Kagha
(Rai  ;  see  RACKS)  in  Media  proper.  In  Sassanian
times,  Ragha  as  well  as  Atropatene  was  an  important
seat  of  the  priesthood.  In  Ragha  resided  the  Zara-
thushtrotema,  the  supreme  head  of  the  church.  The
riddle  of  the  contradiction  has  been  solved  by  Jackson.
According  to  a  statement  of  ShahrastanT,  Azerbaijan
was  the  home  of  Zoroaster's  father,  whilst  his  mother
was  by  birth  from  Rai  (Jackson,  J(>nr.  Am.  Or.  Soc.
16228  ;  Darmesteter,  SB/-'  4  Introd.  xlvii).

The  most  important  traditional  data  of  Zoroaster's
life  are  as  follows.  When  he  was  thirty  years  old,  in
a  vision  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  Daitya,  the
archangel  Vohumano  appeared  to  him  and  invited  him
to  a  conference  with  Mazda.  This  first  meeting,  which
is  recorded  also  in  the  Avesta  (  Yasna,  43).  is  to  be
regarded  as  the  coming  of  the  new  religion  and  as  the
beginning  of  a  new  era  of  the  world.  Seven  other
conferences  followed  in  the  next  ten  years.  In  the  first
two  years,  at  the  command  of  the  Lord,  Zoroaster
preached  the  new  doctrine  to  the  Kavis  and  Karpans —
i.e. ,  the  ruling  idolatrous  priests  of  the  land — in  the
presence  of  the  prince  of  the  region,  a  Turanian  ;  but
without  effect.  The  injunction  of  '  next  of  kin '
marriage  shocked  them.  He  then  betook  himself  to
Seistan,  to  Parshatgau,  who  allowed  himself  to  be
converted,  but  not  in  public.  It  was  only  Zoroaster's
own  cousin,  Maidyoi-maongha,  who  first  openly  pro
fessed  himself  his  disciple,  so  that  the  prophet  dis
heartened  cries  out  :  'In  ten  years  I  have  won  only  a
single  man  !  '  Mazda  now  sent  him  to  the  court  of
King  Vishtaspa.  There  he  had  first  to  undergo  cruel
imprisonment ;  but  after  two  years  he  finally  overcame
the  opposition  of  the  idolatrous  priests  and  converted
the  king.  At  this  time  also  the  brother  of  the  king,
Zairivairi,  as  well  as  the  king's  son,  Spentodata,  and
both  the  Vizirs,  namely,  the  brothers  Frashaoshtra  and
Jamaspa,  became  wholly  devoted  to  him.  Zoroaster
lived  to  see  the  great  religious  war  with  King  Arejat-
aspa,  who  invaded  Iran  with  the  Hyaonas  and  was
defeated,  but  met  his  death  by  the  hand  of  a  Turanian,
it  is  said,  at  the  age  of  77  years  and  40  days.  The
Avesta  does  not  definitely  express  itself  regarding  the
home  of  King  Vishtaspa  ;  it  is  only  the  latest  tradition
that  locates  the  seat  of  the  king,  and  also  the  scene
where  Zoroaster  successfully  taught,  in  the  E.  and
especially  towards  Bactria.

If  there  is  anything  historical  in  these  notices  it  is  the

5430


6.  Date.


7.  Teaching  :
sources.


ZOROASTRIANISM

figure  of  the  royal  patron  and  protector  Vishtaspa,
1  who  with  his  weapon  broke  a  path  for  the  truth,  and
became  the  arm  and  support  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,
and  freed  it  from  the  chains  in  which  it  had  lain  bound,
and  raised  it  to  power  and  spread  it  abroad '  (  Yasht,
1899-100).  His  influential  consort  Hutaosa  appears  to
have  led  the  way  by  good  example.  Zoroaster  found
strong  support  at  the  court,  moreover,  in  the  two
brothers,  Frashaoshtra  and  Jamaspa.  The  Gathas
never  mention  the  name  of  the  king  without  mentioning
with  praise  his  two  zealous  and  faithful  counsellors.  To
both  of  these  Zoroaster  was  related  by  marriage  ;  he
married  HvogvT  the  daughter  of  Frashaoshtra  ;  and
Jamaspa  married  Zoroaster's  daughter,  Pouruchista.

As  to  the  era  of  Zoroaster,  the  extravagant  dates
given  by  the  Greeks  have  no  value.  Modern  investiga-  !
tion  avoids  mere  guesses  and  places  more
reliance  on  the  native  statements.  We
have  two  dates  given  by  tradition.  The  one  makes  a
period  of  272  years  intervene  between  the  beginning  of
the  religion  (see  above,  §  5)  and  the  death  of
Alexander  the  Great  (323  B.C.);  whilst  according  to
the  other,  the  religion  had  existed  in  purity  for  about
300  years  before  the  invasion  of  Alexander.  According
to  the  first  statement,  Zoroaster  would  have  lived  from
625  B. c.  to  548  B.C.  West  makes  the  second  statement
the  basis  of  his  reckoning,  and  taking  account  of  a  slight
omission  in  the  traditional  chronology  makes  the  dates
660-583  B.C.  (cp  SBE  47,  Introd.  xxvii  and  xxxviii).
These  numbers  fall  within  historical  times,  and  the
former  conies  near  the  era  of  the  historical  Vishtaspa
(Hystaspes),  the  father  of  Darius  I.  WTith  this  Hystaspes,
who  was  satrap  in  Parthia,  it  was  formerly  usual  to
identify  the  Vishtaspa  of  the  A  vesta.  This  identification,
however,  falls  to  the  ground,  at  least  for  the  present,
because  of  the  totally  different  ancestry  of  the  historical
Hystaspes  and  of  the  Vishtaspa  of  the  legend.

The  chief  source  of  information  regarding  the  teaching
of  Zoroaster  is  the  Avesta.  This  was  redacted  in  the
time  of  the  Sassanidae  ;  it  is  drawn,
however,  in  part  at  least,  from  older
sources  and  tradition.  To  the  oldest
tradition  belonged  the  so-called  Gathas.  They  contain
remnants  of  the  addresses  and  sermons,  delivered  before
the  assembled  court,  and  put  by  tradition  into  the
mouth  of  the  prophet,  who  is  conceived  of  as  teaching,
exhorting,  and  seeking  to  win  recruits  for  his  cause.
The  Gathas  themselves  are  distinguished  in  two  respects
from  the  '  younger  (later)  Avesta.'

First,  the  person  of  Zoroaster  appears  much  less  legendary  in
the  Gathfts.  The  scenes  of  his  activity  and  teaching  are  placed
much  more  vividly  before  our  eyes.  His  relation  to  his  patrons  is
much  more  close  and  real.  The  Gathas  are  marked  hy  many
personal  allusions  and  references  which  are  unknown  to  the
younger  Avesta.  Secondly,  the  celestial  world  is  much  more

predominantly  abstract.  Material  and  naturalistic  divinities
like  Mithra  are  foreign  to  the  Gathas.  The  external  cult  and
ritual  sink  almost  entirely  into  the  background.  The  holy
drink,  the  Haoma,  is  not  mentioned.

These  two  considerations,  however,  are  not  enough
to  enable  us  to  distinguish  sharply  between  the  Gatha
Zoroastrianism  as  the  pure  and  original  doctrine  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  later  Zoroastrianism  as  systematically
developed  and  corrupted  by  the  older  popular  faith
on  the  other.  The  Gathas  are  really  not  properly
dogmatic  and  doctrinal  sermons  ;  they  are  rather  pro
phetic  sayings,  promises,  and  injunctions  intended
specially  for  the  narrower  community  of  the  faithful
and  initiated ;  they  represent  the  esoteric  side  of
Zoroaster's  teaching  in  its  ideal  bearing  rather  than  its
outward  rules  and  statutes.  The  Gathas  are  rather  the
philosophy  of  Zoroastrianism  ;  the  younger  Avesta  is
rather  its  theology  together  with  the  systematic  elabora
tion  of  the  Zoroastrian  doctrine.

The  supreme  God  is  Ahuro  Mazdao  (Anc.  Per.,
Aiiramazda,  Mod.  Per,,  Hormazd  or  Ormazd],  'the
wise  lord.'  He  is  called  also  Spento  Mainyush — i.e.,
'  the  holy  (lit. ,  weal-bringing)  spirit ' — and  he  is  the

5431


ZOROASTRIANISM

creator  and  regent  of  the  world.  His  sovereignty
8.  Zoroastrian-  °ver  ^e  universe  however,  is  con-
ism  :  Ormazd,  \ested  lf,  hls  foe'  the  fiend  Pnnieval-
Ahriman  Angro  Mainyush— i.e.,  '  the  destruc
tive  spirit. '  In  the  beginning  of  things
these  twin  spirits  existed  independently  of  each  other ;
they  became  aware  of  their  opposing  character  (  Yasna,
30  3)  and  swore  an  eternal  feud  (cp  Yasna,  45  2  and
Bundahish,  i.  14).  Both  spirits  possess  creative  power,
which  manifests  itself  in  the  one  positively  and  in  the
other  negatively.  Ormazd  is  light,  life,  and  activity,
the  soul  of  all  that  is  pure  and  good  ;  in  the  ethical
world  he  is  law,  order,  and  truth.  His  antithesis,
Ahriman,  is  darkness,  filth,  death,  and  reaction  ;  all
that  is  evil  in  the  world  ;  lawlessness  and  lies  spring
from  him.  Ormazd  has  his  throne  in  the  '  endless
light '  of  heaven,  in  Pararlise  ;  Ahriman  rules  in  the
cold  north,  in  the  endless  darkness  of  Hell,  from  which
he  breaks  forth  from  time  to  time.  Ormazd  alone
possesses  omniscience  and  prescience ;  Ahriman's
wisdom  is  backward  knowledge  (Bundahish,  i.  9)  ;  he  is
always  coming  too  late,  and  has  to  look  at  events  after
they  are  past.  For  the  time  being  the  two  spirits
counterbalance  one  another.  The  complete  sovereignty
of  Ormazd  is  to  come  to  pass  in  the  future  existence.
The  ultimate  triumph  of  the  good  spirit  is  an  ethical
demand  of  the  religious  conscience  and  the  quintessence
of  Zoroaster's  revelation.  His  doctrine  is  dualistic  in
so  far  as  it  sets  up  two  opposing  primeval  powers  ;  it  is
not,  however,  quite  consistent  ;  the  two  principles  are
not  endowed  with  equal  power.  The  dualism  of
Zoroaster  is  only  an  episode  in  the  existence  of  Ormazd,
who  is  the  supreme  and  only  god  from  the  beginning  of
the  world,  and  remains  so  to  eternity.

In  the  realm  of  light,  Ormazd  is  the  sovereign  lord.
As  a  spirit,  it  is  true,  he  is  invisible  to  men  ;  but  he  is
not  immaterial.  A  flaming,  firm,  exalted,  and
beautiful  body  is  attributed  to  him.  The  heaven  is  his
robe.  In  his  exalted  majesty  he  is  the  ideal  figure
of  an  oriental  king.  The  other  divine  powers  and
genii  are  his  creation,  helpers,  overseers,  and  servants,
his  instruments  and  his  leaders  in  the  war  against  evil.

Next  to  him  in  rank  stand  six  archangels,  the  Amesha

Spentas,  '  the  Immortal  Holy  Ones  '  ;  he  himself  is  often

_. counted  with  them  as  the  seventh. They

.'  .  resemble  the  ministers  of  some  autocratic
_  .  sovereign.  They  sit  round  about  Ormazd,

pen  as.  an^  ^e  j^^  counsel  with  them.  Accord
ing  to  their  names  they  are  pure  abstractions,  although
in  the  Gathas  they  are  already  represented  as  persons.
They  have  been  developed  partly  out  of  the  ethical  ideas  of
the  old  Aryan  belief.  As  a  whole,  however,  they  are  a
true  product  of  Zoroaster's  conception.  They  form  the
necessary  constituents  of  the  kingdom  of  Mazda  which
is  to  be  perfected,  and  in  them  the  tendency  of
Zoroastrianism  to  personify  abstract  ideas  takes  its
origin.  In  everything  the  Amesha  Spi-ntas  are  the
truest  fellow  -  workers  of  Ormazd.  The  care  and
guardianship  of  creation  is  entrusted  to  them,  and  they
are  regarded  as  tutelary  divinities  over  the  separate
kingdoms  of  nature.

The  names  of  the  Amesha  Spentas  are  :  (i)  Vohu  Mano  (Plut.
evi/oia),  Good  Mind — i.e.,  the  good  principle,  the  idea  of  the
good,  the  principle  that  works  in  man  inclining  him  to  what  is
good  ;  this  divinity  acts  also  as  genius  of  the  flocks.  (2)  Ashem,
or  generally  Ashem  Vahishtem  (dArjOeta),  corresponding  to  all
that  is  true,  good,  and  right — ideas  which,  to  Zoroaster,  are
practically  identical — upright  law  and  rule,  also  the  genius
presiding  over  fire.  (3)  Khshathrem,  generally  called  Khsha-
threm  Vainm  (ei-pop.ui),  the  power  and  kingdom  of  Ormazd,
also  the  genius  of  metals.  (4)  Armaiti  (<ro<f>ia),  or  the  spirit  of
docility  and  obedience,  early  represented  as  the  genius  of  the
earth.  (5)  Haurvatat  (n-AovTos),  holiness,  perfect  health,  the
genius  of  the  health-giving  waters.  (6)  Ameretatat,  immortality,
the  genius  of  plants.

The  other  good  spirits  of  Ormazd  are  comprised
under  the  name  Yazata  (Izeds),  'angels.'  These  are
partly  religious  and  ethical  abstractions  of  Zoroastrian
ism  like  Rashnu  (Uprightness)  or  Ashi  Vanuhi  (the  good

5432


ZOROASTRIANISM


ZOROASTRIANISM


Reward  of  Piety).  In  part  they  are  the  unforgotten
10  Oth  forms  of  Aryan  mythology,  such  as  Mithra
rood  smrits  and  Verethraghna  (tlle  genius  of  Victory,
'  '  the  Iranian  counterpart  of  the  Indian
Indra  Vrtrahan),  or  they  are  the  familiar  personi
fications  of  natural  phenomena  such  as  the  sun,  the
moon,  fire,  wind  (cp  Herod.  1.131).  In  the  Gathas
most  of  the  Yazatas  are  not  mentioned — even  such  as
hold  quite  an  important  place  in  the  later  system  and
ritual,  like  Mithra.  It  is  only  Sraosha  (holy  obedience)
and  Atar,  the  fire,  the  son  of  Ormazd,  that  play  a  more
important  role.  For  the  younger  Avesta,  special
mention  must  also  be  made  of  Anahita,  goddess  of  the
waters,  and  of  the  Fravashis  (Fervers),  the  spiritual
prototypes  of  men  and  of  the  good  creation  and  at  the
same  time  the  guardian  spirits  of  the  pious.

Ahriman  also  has  his  infernal  hosts  which  he  created
for  the  conflict  with  Ormazd.

These  are  endowed  with  less  individuality,

11.  Other  however,  than  those  of  the  kingdom  of  light.
evil  Spirits.  The  Druj  (Lie,  Falsehood),  for  example,  is
opposed  to  Asba  ;  Akem  Mano  (Bad  Thought)
to  Vohu  Mano  ;  and  Armaiti  to  TarOmaiti  (Pride  or  Presump
tion).  In  the  Gathas,  the  Druj  is  mentioned  more  often  than
Ahriman  himself.  In  the  later  texts,  the  word  Druj  signifies  a
special  class  of  female  demons.  The  most  familiar  of  these  is
Nasu,  the  corpse  spirit.  The  schematic  system  of  later  times
has  also  given  Ahrimanian  counterparts  to  each  of  the  other
Amesha  Spentas.  Myriads  of  demons,  Daevas  (Devs),  make
up  the  mighty  horde  of  Ahriman.  They  embody  all  the  dis
turbing  elements  in  nature  and  the  baser  instincts  in  man.  Of
most  of  them  we  know  only  the  names.  The  best-known  among
them  is  Aeshma,  the  demon  of  Wrath  (see  ASMODKUS).

As  soon  as  the  two  spirits  encounter  each  other  their

active or  creative, and  at the  same  time permanent,

TVi conflict  begins. The  history  of  this  conflict

'  ,,. . is the  history  of  the  world. Every  move

of Ormazd is met by a counter-move

(paitydra]  of  Ahriman.

Whatever  the  good  spirit  creates,  the  evil  spirit  sullies,  or,  as
the  text  says,  'just  like  a  fly  he  rushed  out  upon  the  whole
creation  '  (liundahish,  iii.  17).  No  sooner  has  Ormazd  created
the  world  than  Ahriman  brings  upon  the  earth  distress  in  the
form  of  plague  and  noxious  creatures.  Ormazd  brings  into
existence  the  primeval  bull  (prototype  of  all  animals)  ;  Ahriman
tortures  it  to  death  with  hunger,  sickness,  and  blows,  and  its
soul  (Geush  TJrva)  complains  before  the  throne  of  Ormazd  about
the  violence  it  has  had  to  suffer.  Ormazd  comforts  the  soul  of
the  creature  with  the  assurance  of  the  future  coming  of  Zoroaster
(Vasna,  29  ;  fSunda/iish,  4).  Ormazd  creates  the  first  man
(Gaya  Maretan) ;  Ahriman  incites  against  this  man  Asto-
Vidhotu,  the  demon  of  death,  and  thus  sets  death  in  opposition
to  life.l

A  great  cleft  runs  through  the  entire  world  and
divides  it  into  two  great  camps — the  kingdom  of  light
and  the  realm  of  darkness.  All  creation  is  divided  into
that  which  is  Ahura's  and  that  which  is  Ahriman's.
This  division  extends  even  to  the  language.  Whenever
mention  is  made  efface,  ears,  hands,  and  feet,  of  activity,
speaking,  going,  striving,  a  sharp  distinction  is  made
in  the  expression  between  good  and  evil  beings.  The
two  spirits  do  not  carry  on  the  struggle  in  person.
They  leave  it  to  be  fought  out  by  their  respective
creations  and  by  creatures  which  they  send  into  the
field.  The  field  of  battle  is  the  present  world.

In  the  centre  of  the  battle  is  man  ;  his  soul  is  the
object  of  the  war.  Man  is  a  creation  of  Ormazd,  who
therefore  has  the  right  to  call  him  to  account.  Ormazd,
however,  created  him  free  in  all  his  decisions  and  in
his  actions,  wherefore  he  is  accessible  to  the  influences
of  the  evil  powers.  This  freedom  of  the  will  is  clearly
expressed  in  Yasna,  31  n  :  'Since  thou,  O  Mazda,
didst  at  the  first  create  our  being  and  our  souls  in
accordance  with  thy  mind,  and  didst  create  our  under
standing  and  our  life  together  with  the  body,  and  works
and  words  in  which  man  according  to  his  own  will  can
frame  his  confession,  the  liar  and  the  truth-speaker
alike  lay  hold  of  the  word,  the  knowing  and  the
ignorant  each  after  his  own  heart  and  understanding.
Armaiti  searches,  following  thy  spirit,  where  errors  are

1  This  story  is  by  some  wrongly  connected  with  the  story  of
Adam  in  Genesis.

5433


found.'  Man  takes  part  in  this  conflict  by  all  his  life
and  activity  in  the  world.  By  a  true  confession  of  faith,
by  every  good  deed,  by  continually  keeping  pure  his
body  and  his  soul,  he  impairs  the  power  of  Aluiman
and  strengthens  the  power  of  goodness,  and  establishes
a  claim  for  reward  upon  Ormazd  ;  by  false  confession,
by  every  evil  deed  and  defilement,  he  increases  the  evil
and  renders  service  to  Ahriman.

The life of man falls into  two  parts — its earthly

portion  and  that  which  is  lived  beyond  the  grave. Tin:

1-? TWan VIP™ lot  ass'gned  to  h'm  after  death  is  the

j  C. *? result and consequence of 1.
and  hereafter.

upon  earth. No  religion  has  so  clearly

grasped  the  ideas  of  guilt  and  merit.  A  strict  reckoning
of  the  works  of  men  here  below  will  be  kept  in  heaven.
After  death,  at  the  end  of  the  third  night,  the  soul
arrives  at  the  head  of  the  Cinvato-Peretu,  or  Accountant's
Bridge,  over  which  lies  the  way  to  heaven.1  Here
takes  place  the  revealing  and  disclosure  of  all  its  past
-  j.  .  life,  the  judicium  particulare.  The

14.  Jumcmm  angd  Mithra  and  the  angel Raslinu

par  i  e.  majie  Up  ^e  account  and  reckoning

(SBE  2^258),  or  Rashnu  the  Just  weighs  the  good  and
the  evil  deeds  over  against  each  other  in  the  impartial
balance  that  does  not  vary  a  hair's  breadth  in  favour  of
any  man,  not  even  a  monarch  (SBE  24  18).

Perhaps  in  ancient  times  the  bridge  itself  was  conceived  of  as
a  sort  of  automatic  scale.  In  the  case  of  the  soul  of  the  just
whose  good  deeds  outweigh  his  evil  acts,  the  bridge  becomes
wide  and  easy  of  crossing  ;  and  at  this  moment  his  own  religion
comes  to  meet  him  in  the  shape  of  a  beautiful  maiden,  and
accompanies  him  to  Paradise  (Garodemanem),  where  Vohu  Mano
receives  him  (Vend.  1930-31).  In  the  case  of  the  soul  of  the
wicked,  however,  the  bridge  becomes  as  narrow  as  the  edge  of
a  razor,  and  when  he  reaches  the  middle  of  it  he  falls  off  and  is
plunged  headlong  into  hell  {SBE  17  48).

Should  the  evil  and  the  good  be  equally  balanced,
the  soul  passes  into  an  intermediate  stage  of  existence
(the  Hamestakan),  and  its  final  lot  is  not  decided  until
the  last  judgment.

Man,  however,  has  been  smitten  with  blindness  and
ignorance  ;  he  knows  neither  the  eternal  law  nor  the
things  that  await  him  after  death.  He  allows  himself
only  too  easily  to  be  ensnared  by  the  craft  of  the  evil
powers  who  seek  to  ruin  his  future  existence.  He
worships  and  serves  false  gods,  being  unable  to  dis
tinguish  between  truth  and  lies.  Thus  it  came  about
that  Ormazd  graciously  determined  to  open  the  eyes  of
mankind  by  sending  a  prophet  to  show  them  the  right
way  of  salvation.  According  to  the  later  legend  (  /  'end.
2i),  Ormazd  at  first  wished  to  entrust  this  task  to  Yima
(Jemshid),  the  ideal  of  an  Iranian  king  ;  but  Yima,  the
secular  man,  felt  himself  unfitted  for  it  and  declined
the  office.  He  contented  himself  therefore  with  estab
lishing  by  order  of  the  Lord  in  his  paradise  (vara]  a
heavenly  kingdom  in  miniature,  to  serve  at  the  same  time
as  a  pattern  for  the  heavenly  kingdom  that  was  to  come.
Zoroaster  at  last  was  found  fit  for  the  mission.  It  was
not  without  special  reason,  the  Gathas  believe,  that  the
calling  of  a  prophet  should  have  taken  place  precisely
when  it  did.  It  was,  they  held,  the  final  appeal  of  Ormazd
to  mankind  at  large.  Like  John  the  Baptist  and  the
apostles  of  Jesus,  Zoroaster  believed  that  the  fulness  of
time  was  near,  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand.
Through  the  whole  of  the  Gathas  runs  the  pious  hope
that  the  end  of  the  present  world  is  not  far  off.  Zoroaster
himself  hopes  along  with  his  followers  to  live  to  see  the
decisive  turn  of  things,  the  dawn  of  the  new  and  better
jeon.  Ormazd  will  summon  together  all  his  forces  for
a  final  decisive  struggle,  and  break  the  power  of  evil
for  ever  ;  by  his  help  the  faithful  will  achieve  the  victory
,.  .  over  their  detested  enemies,  the  daeva

15.  Judicium worshippers,  and  render  them  power-
umversale. ]ess Then  the  great  act  ( V(f/4)  will  be

accomplished.  Ormazd  will  institute  a  universal  world  •
judgment  (judicium  universal).

1  For  parallels  see  Che.  OPs.  433,  note  ee
5434


ZOROASTRIANISM

By  means  of  an  ordeal  of  fire  and  molten  metal  he  will  separate
the  good  from  the  wicked  and  will  judge  strictly  according  to
justice,  punish  the  wicked,  and  assign  to  the  good  the  hoped-for
reward.  Ahriman  will  be  cast,  along  with  all  those  who  have
been  delivered  over  to  him  to  suffer  the  pains  of  hell,  into  the
abyss,  where  he  will  thenceforward  lie  powerless.

Forthwith  begins  the  one  undivided  kingdom  of  God
in  heaven  and  on  earth.  This  is  called,  sometimes  the
good  kingdom,  sometimes  simply  the  kingdom.  Here
the  sun  will  for  ever  shine,  and  all  the  pious  and  faithful
will  live  a  happy  life  that  no  evil  power  can  disturb,  in
the  fellowship  of  Ormazd  and  his  angels  for  ever.

In  one  respect  with  regard  to  this,  there  has  come
about  in  the  later  writings  a  change  that  is  easy  to
understand.  In  them  the  catastrophe  and  renovation
of  the  world  are  placed  in  a  far  distant  future.  Whereas
in  the  Gathas  Zoroaster  himself  is  more  or  less  clearly
designated  as  the  Saoshyant  —  i.e.,  the  predestined
saviour  of  the  world — the  later  writings  look  for  the
appearance  of  this  Saoshyant  only  at  the  end  of  the
present  reon.

The  Avesta  does  not  contain  any  definite  statement  as  to  the
division  of  time  in  the  existence  of  the  universe  (yet  cp  Fragm.
Vend.  2  24).

According  to  the  Bundchesh,  the  duration  of  this  world  is
12,000  years  divided  into  periods  of  3000  years  each  (cp  Plut.,
tie  Is.  47).  In  the  first  3000  years  Ormazd  creates  his  creation
in  its  spiritual  form  or  prototype,  without  Ahriman  being  aware
of  it.  At  the  beginning  of  the  second  period  Ahriman  raises
himself  from  hell  into  the  light  and  perceives  the  start  which
Ormazd  has  obtained.  In  this  period  both  spirits  create  their
material  creation.  At  the  beginning  of  the  third  era  Ahriman
invades  the  creation  of  Ormazd,  and  during  this  period  good
and  evil  counterbalance  each  other.  At  the  beginning  of  the
tenth  millennium,  Zoroaster  appears,  and  a  new  prophet  is
to  spring  from  his  seed  after  each  of  the  three  remaining
millennia.  As  the  last  of  these  Messiahs  the  real  Saoshyant
shall  appear.

The  Saoshyant  with  his  helpers  will  accomplish  the
renovation  of  the  world  (frasho-kereti).  Ormazd  will
raise  the  dead  and  the  Saoshyant  will  assemble  them
all  in  one  place.  Everyone  must  descend  into  the  great
flood  of  molten  metal.  To  the  pious  this  lake  will  seem
like  a  flood  of  warm  milk  ;  but  to  the  wicked  it  will  feel
as  if  they  were  wading  in  molten  metal.  Then,  in
the  name  of  Mazda,  the  Saoshyant  will  distribute  unto
everyone  a  reward  according  to  his  works.  Ormazd
will  hurl  Ahriman  powerless  back  into  hell,  which  is
filled  up  with  the  molten  metal,  and  the  world  will  be
come  purified  for  ever  and  for  aye  (Bund.  30).  The
younger  (later)  Avesta  speaks  of  the  end  of  the  world
and  of  the  last  things  only  in  brief  allusions.  The
idea  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  quite  familiar
to  it  and  seems  to  be  referred  to  several  times  even  in
the  Gathas.

The  moral  and  ethical  teachings  of  Zoroastrianism  are
sound  and  consistent.  The  moral  code  is  summed  up
FtV  in  the  three  words ;  '  good  thoughts,  good
'  words,  good  deeds.'  Man  must  enlist  in
the  service  of  Ormazd  and  devote  himself  to  the  good
cause  with  his  whole  being,  and  he  must  do  every
injury  possible  to  Ahriman.  This  fundamental  prin
ciple  dominates  the  entire  religious  code  and  all  the
ecclesiastical  legislation.  Because  of  the  general  utility
of  its  precepts  this  code  represents  a  high  standard  of
civilisation  when  we  consider  the  early  times  to  which
it  belongs.  It  imposed  upon  the  faithful  the  duty  of
worshipping  Ormazd  and  his  spirits,  of  prayer,  sacrifice,
the  inviolability  of  his  creatures,  the  sacred  respect  for
the  cow  (emphasised  especially  in  the  Gathas),  attention
to  agriculture  and  arboriculture,  irrigation  of  dry  lands,
extermination  of  noxious  animals,  charity  toward  one's
co-religionists,  and  the  observance  of  absolute  truthful
ness.  Above  all  stands  the  law  of  chastity.  The  faith
ful  shall  preserve  purity,  both  of  body  and  of  soul.
The  soul  must  be  kept  pure  from  heretical  doctrines
and  the  influences  of  the  Devs,  the  body  must  be  kept
from  coming  into  contact  with  unclean  persons,  with
corpses,  filth,  or  other  Ahrimanian  objects.  Man  also
must  not  in  any  way  defile  the  pure  elements  of  Ormazd
such  as  fire,  water,  and  earth.  This  love  of  purity,

5435


ZOROASTRIANISM

which  as  a  principle  is  already  proclaimed  in  the  Gathas
( Yasna,  48s),  has  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  mos*
scrupulous  washings  and  lustrations  and  elaborate  cere
monies  of  purification,  as  well  as  of  man}'  strange
customs,  such  as  the  exposing  of  corpses  on  the  Towers
of  Silence  (Dakhmas).  According  to  strict  logic,  offences
against  the  precepts  of  the  law  cannot  be  undone  ;  but
in  the  heavenly  account  they  can  be  counterbalanced  by
;»  surplus  of  good  works.  The  elaborately  developed
system  of  Zoroastrianism  fixed  the  doctrine  of  equivalents
with  mathematical  precision,  and  definitely  assigned
certain  useful  and  pious  works  as  acts  of  penance  for
certain  sins.  But  corporal  chastisements  also  were
prescribed  ;  these,  in  the  main,  were  for  the  purpose
of  driving  out  the  Devs  that  had  taken  possession  of  the
sinner's  body.  In  later  times,  however,  matters  were
made  easier  for  the  sinner.  For  corporal  punishment
monetary  fines  could  be  substituted,  and  absolution  from
sin  became  more  and  more  a  means  of  grace  to  be  had
only  at  the  hands  of  the  church.  Confession  to  the
high  priest,  sincere  repentance  and  reform,  remove  every
sin  from  the  body  (SBE  24  95  and  Vend.  871).  For
such  a  confession  it  was  obligatory  to  recite  one  of  the
confessional  formulas  (Patets),  in  which  the  later
literature  abounds.

The  cult  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion  was  without  pomp.
The  sacrifice  is  described  by  Strabo  (732). The  sacred
fire formed the central point. The


17.  Worship.
The  Magi.


sacrificial  gifts  which  were  offered  were


meat  and  milk,  and  more  especially  the
sacred  drink  Haoma.  The  main  stress  was  laid  upon
prayer  and  the  ascription  of  glory  to  God.

The  systematic  development  of  the  teachings  of
Zoroaster  and  of  the  Zoroastrian  law  is  undoubtedly
the  work  of  the  priesthood  which  through  their  strict
exclusiveness  became  an  hereditary  caste.  In  the  \V.
they  were  called  Magi  ;  in  the  language  of  the  Avesta
they  are  termed  Athravan  ;  but  even  in  the  sacred  texts
the  word  Magi  occurs  in  a  few  instances.  The  Athravans
were  the  privileged  guardians  of  the  religion  and  the
leaders  of  worship.  They  alone  could  perform  the
sacrifices  (Herod.  1132),  and  carry  out  the  ecclesiastical
punishments  and  penances  ;  they  alone  could  interpret
the  law.  They  exercised  a  sort  of  spiritual  guardianship
over  the  laity.  Every  young  man,  after  his  reception
into  the  community  of  the  faithful,  or  Mazdayasnians,
had  to  select  a  spiritual  guide,  a  father-confessor  (Ratu).
The  priesthood  never  attained  political  power  —  or  never
even  claimed  it.

After  the  fall  of  the  Achsemenidae  (331  B.C.)  Zoroastrianism

lost  greatly  in  power  and  dignity. It  was  subsequently  re

habilitated,  however,  by  the  Sassanians,

18.  History  Of under  whom  it  reached  its  highest  pros-

Zoroastrianism. Parity. It was at this epoch that the

clergy  advanced  to  a  firmly-constituted

hierarchy,  and  Zoroastrianism  became  the  official  religion  of  the
state,  favoured  and  protected  by  the  government.  The  forma
tion  of  sects  was  at  this  period  not  infrequent  (cp  '  Manichansm^
in  EBW).  The  Zervanites  flourished  under  Yazdegard  II.
(438-457  A.U.).  They  represented  Ormazd  and  Ahriman  as
twin  sons  proceeding  from  the  fundamental  principle  of  all,  the
limitless  time  (Zn'an  akarana).  The  Mohammedan  invasion
(636  A.  D.),  with  the  terrible  persecution  of  the  following  centuries,
was  a  deathblow  to  Zoroastrianism.  In  Persia  itself  only  a  few
followers  of  Zoroaster  are  now  found  (in  Kirman  and  Yazd).
The  Parsees  in  and  around  Bombay  hold  to  Zoroaster  as  their
prophet  and  adhere  to  the  ancient  usages  ;  but  their  doctrine
has  reached  the  stage  of  a  pure  monotheism  (see  PARSIJES  in
EBP)).

If  we  inquire  into  the  origin  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion
we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  everything  which
's  written  on  this  point  must  necessarily
rest  UpOn  mere  conjecture.  Tradition
has  obliterated  every  trace  of  the  actual  process  by
which  the  faith  came  into  existence,  and  of  the  particular
factors  which  were  active  in  its  formation.  As  far  as
tradition  is  concerned  the  complete  doctrine  was  revealed
by  Ormazd  in  its  entirety.  Already  in  the  Gathas  the
belief  in  inspiration  predominates  ;  nevertheless  they
allow  us  to  read  between  the  lines  other  things  as  well.

5436


iq fl  ' '

urigin.


ZOROASTEIANISM

We  are  denied,  however,  a  clear  insight  into  the  popular
religion  before  Zoroaster  and  into  the  ancient  doctrines
of  the  Magi,  to  whom  Zoroaster  must  have  had  certain
relation,  whatever  the  exact  extent  of  that  relation  may
have  been.

The  Mazda-religion  is  distinguished  from  the  nature-
religion  of  kindred  peoples  by  its  dogmatic  character
and  by  the  unity  of  its  structure.  There  is  a  funda
mental  idea  in  it  which  is  developed  with  absolute  logic.
It  is  the  fundamental  dogma  of  the  two  spirits,  a  tenet
which  contains  both  the  problem  of  the  world  and  the
solution  of  its  enigma.  This  doctrine,  not  only  in  its
beginning  and  foundation,  but  also,  in  part  at  least,  in
its  detailed  structure,  is  the  product  of  a  single  creative
personality  ;  and  that  personality  was  Zoroaster.  It
was  a  new  religion  that  Zoroaster  taught.  This  must
not  be  taken,  however,  to  mean  that  everything  in
Zoroastrianism  is  absolutely  new.  Zoroaster  himself
says  that  his  desire  was  to  purify  the  religion  ( Yasna,
44g).  In  its  fundamental  teaching  as  well  as  in  its
completely  elaborate  system  Zoroastrianism  shows  un
mistakable  traces  of  the  old  Aryan  religion.

In  common  with  the  people  of  India,  Zoroastrianism  has  the
cult  of  fire  and  of  Haoina  ;  it  has  also  in  common  with  India
the  name  of  the  chief  sacrificial  priest  Zaota  (Sk.  /iflfii),  of  the
gods  Mithra  and  Verethraghna,  and  the  enforcement  of  minute
purificatory  precepts.  The  Zoroastrian  doctrine  of  the  weighing
of  good  and  bad  deeds  in  the  balance,  which  determines  the  fate
of  the  soul  after  death,  has  its  faithful  counterpart  in  the  Indian
doctrine  of  karnian  and  in  the  balancing  of  dharnia  and  at/A-
anna,  in  Mann,  Vi-zof.  It  is  only  with  Zoroaster,  however,
that  this  doctrine  is  developed  in  its  most  practical  and,  if  one
may  say  so,  business-like  form.  Already  in  Satapatha  Hrahmana
(11  2  7  33)  we  meet  with  the  conception  of  the  scale  in  heaven,  on
which  good  and  evil  deeds  are  weighed.  The  threefold  division
according  to  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds,  is  as  familiar  to  the
Hindus  as  to  Zoroaster.

It  has  been  believed  that  foreign  influences  even  are  I
traceable  in  Zoroastrianism  ;  but  this  remains  a  quite  •
obscure  point.  The  isolated  analogies  with  Turanian,
Assyro-Babylonian,  and  Hebraic  conceptions  cannot  be
accepted  as  giving  convincing  proof  of  actual  borrowing
on  the  part  of  Zoroastrianism  (cp  C.  de  Harlez,  Des
Origi nes  des  Zoroastrisme ;  Z.  A.  Ragozin,  The  story  of
Media,  Babylon,  and  Persia  (1888),  p.  147  ;  Tiele,
Compendium,  par.  109  ;  Darmesteter,  Le  Zend-Avesta,
3,  Introd.  Ixxivandlvii).  The  hypothesis  of  Darmesteter
that  the  doctrine  of  the  Gathas  was  influenced  by
Gnosticism,  has  hardly  found  any  adherents.

The  dualistic  idea  of  Zoroaster  is  not  adequately
explained  by  conceiving  it  as  a  remodelling  of  the  old
mythological  opposition  between  gods  and  demons,
influenced  and  favoured  by  the  sharp  contrasts  in  nature
in  the  Iranian  land  (Duncker,  102;  Darmesteter,  Ormazd
et  Ahriman,  88  271;  Ed.  Meyer,  GA  Is3i/).  Such
an  account  still  leaves  unexplained  the  transformation
and  radical  change  of  the  Aryan  devas  (gods)  into  the
Zoroastrian  daevas  (devils).  Just  as  the  fiendish
demons,  daevas,  are  opposed  to  the  good  god  Ahura  in
Zoroastrianism,  so  the  devas  and  asiiras  have  been
placed  in  opposition  in  India  from  the  earliest  times.
In  the  oldest  literature  this  opposition  is  not  as  yet  one
of  pronounced  hostility  ;  but  it  soon  becomes  so.  The
devas  remain  gods,  the  asuras  become  demons.
Between  these  two  phenomena  of  contrasted  meanings
there  must  be  a  connection  of  cause  and  effect.  They
point  to  an  old  opposition  in  the  Aryan  world  of  the
gods,  expressed  by  the  words  deva,  asura,  which  grew
to  be  more  and  more  distinct  and  sharp  with  both  races,
but  in  exactly  opposite  directions.  In  Iran  the  contrast
seems  to  have  led  at  first  to  two  distinct  cults,  to  an
Ahum  cult  and  to  that  of  the  Daevas.  This  seems  to
have  been  the  religious  condition  of  affairs  in  Iran  when
Zoroaster  appeared.  We  meet  with  hints  in  the  Gathas
which  show  us  that  the  people  were  divided  between
these  two  opposing  cults.  The  opposing  parties  are  not
separated  by  distance  in  space  or  by  difference  of  race  ;
they  are  found  side  by  side.  '  Hard  by  the  believer  in
Ahura  dwells  the  worshipper  of  the  daevas,'  complains

5437


ZOROASTRIANISM

Zoroaster.  Not  two  cults,  but  two  stages  of  culture,
are  struggling  for  the  primacy  ;  the  Ahura  worshipers
represent  the  higher  phase  ;  they  are  breeders  of  cattle,
and  in  their  eyes  the  cow  is  a  sacred  animal ;  the
worshippers  of  the  daevas  on  the  other  hand  maltivat
the  cow  and  slaughter  it  in  their  sacrifices.  From  this
religious  difference  and  dissension  Zoroaster  seems  to  have
received  his  first  impulse  for  appearing  in  public.  As
an  adherent  of  Ahura  whose  attribute  is  '  The  Wise
One,'  and  as  prophet,  he  will  warn  men  against  false
teachers  and  priests;  and  amidst  the  ditfri.--
creeds  and  beliefs  he  will  guide  them  to  the  wiser  choice
in  order  to  save  their  souls.  What  the  other  party
worship  as  gods  under  the  name  of  daeva  are  in  reality
powers  by  whom  unwitting  mankind  is  led  to  its
destruction — evil  powers,  false  gods,  devils.  Such  is
the  position  from  which  all  his  teaching  starts  ;  and
thus  the  change  in  the  conception  of  daeva  was  a
natural  development.  From  the  daevas  proceeds  all
the  evil  in  the  world.  But  Zoroaster's  speculation  does
not  stop  here.  The  daevas  themselves  anon  become
manifest  to  him  as  being  but  the  instruments  of  a  higher
principle,  that  is  the  spiritual  enemy,  Ahriman.  This
Ahriman  or  evil  principle  is  the  most  characteristic
product  of  Zoroastrian  speculation.  From  the  schism
or  religious  dualism  of  his  time  he  derived  the  idea  of
the  dualistic  scheme  of  the  universe  which  has  impressed
its  character  upon  the  whole  of  the  religion  called  by
his  name.

The  literature  of  the  subject  has  been  cited  in  the  course  of
the  article.  Consult  especially  Tiele,  Kompendium  der
Religionsgesch.,  or  (best  of  all)  Ed.  Meyer,  GA  530-573
(1884).  On  Zoroaster's  life,  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson's  Zoroaster,
the  Prophet  of  A  ncient  Iran  (New  York,  1898)  may  be  specially
recommended.  See  also  the  references  in  Cheyne,  OS's,  (see
below).  K.  F.  G.

The  question  of  the  influence  of  Zoroastrianism  on
Jewish  religion  can  only  relate  to  post-exilic  Jewish
20  No  early  reliSion-  There  is  no  evidence  of  any
{•nflnanna  no  Person  influence  on  Jewish  belief  before
the  exile  ;  the  reference  which  has  been
supposed  in  Ezek.  8 16  to  a  Persian
custom  is  based  on  a  mistake  (see  Cril.  Bib. ).  During
the  Babylonian  exile,  though  contact  with  Persians
was  doubtless  possible,  it  was  the  religion  of  Babylonia
that  naturally  exercised  more  influence  than  any  other
on  the  Jews.  In  the  Babylonian  hymns  we  find  a  near
approach  to  the  Jewish  conception  of  God,  and  to  the
Jewish  view  of  sin,  whilst  the  Babylonian  view  of  the
divine  creatorship  is  surpassed  in  grandeur  only  by  the
Zoroastrian.

In  the  period  which  we  may  conventionally  call  post-
exilic,  Persian  influence,  or,  more  definitely,  the
_  ,  ...  influence  of  Mazdaism  can  more  easily
11C>  be  supposed.  The  Jews  in  Palestine
cannot  have  been  subject  to  much  direct  influence  of
this  kind.  It  was  rather  indirectly,  through  the  large
Jewish  colonies  E.  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,
that  Palestinian  Judaism  was  affected  by  Persia.  These
colonies,  as  we  know,  kept  up  an  intercourse  with  the
community  in  Judaea.  It  is  very  possible  that  the  idea
of  bringing  what  Artaxerxes  is  represented  as  calling
'  the  wisdom  of  Ezra's  God  which  is  in  his  hand1  (Ezra
7zs)  in  book  form  to  Jerusalem  was,  if  not  suggested,
yet  strengthened  by  the  existence  of  a  book-religion  in
Persia,  and  it  would  be  unreasonable  not  to  suppose
that  Jews  in  and  near  Persia  gained  some  acquaintance
with  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  and  were  influenced  by  it.
The  high  moral  tone  of  the  best  Persians  (see  the
inscriptions  of  Darius)  and  of  their  religion  could  not
but  attract  the  best  Jews  (cp  Mai.  In),  and  the  Persian
folk-lore  would  be  equally  attractive  to  Jews  of  a  less
spiritual  turn  of  mind.  We  need  not,  of  course,
suppose  an  acquaintance  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  with
Zoroastrian  literature ;  the  ideas  of  book-religions  are
not  propagated  exclusively  by  the  sacred  writings.
Eschatological  and  demonological  ideas,  in  particular,

5438


influence  on
Israel.


22.  Later.


ZOROASTBIANISM

were  likely  to  be  communicated  by  word  of  mouth,  and
it  is  in  the  field  of  eschatology,  angelology,  and
demonology  that  Persian  influence  on  Judaism  may
most  surely  be  recognised.

Early  post-exilic  Persian  or  Zoroastrian  influence  is
not  easy  to  prove.  Jewish  scribes  and  editors  had
other  objects  than  that  of  enlightening  the  historical
students  of  to-day,  and  official  religious  writers  were
doubtless  anxious  to  check  foreign  influences,  and  to
conceal  the  tokens  of  their  existence.  Even  the  pro
tests  of  official  writers,  however,  are  useful  to  the
historical  student.  The  belief  in  Satan,  as  we  find  it
in  the  OT,  is  thoroughly  Jewish,  and  yet  it  would
hardly  have  assumed  its  actual  form  without  the  indirect
influence  of  the  belief  in  Ahriman  against  which  it
became  a  protest  (see  SATAN).  So  too  the  ancient
benediction  called  yoser  or  must  have  had  a  polemical
intention,  and  yet  the  custom  of  reciting  it  at  dawn  was
no  doubt  influenced  by  a  similar  Zoroastrian  usage.

It  would  somewhat  strengthen  the  case  for  Persian
influence  on  the  Jews  if  we  had  other  linguistic  proofs
besides  the  supposed  derivation  of  ASMODEUS  (q.v. )  from
Aeshma-daeva.

Such  proofs,  however,  are  wanting,  nor  can  the
generally  accepted  Zend  etymology  of  Asmodeus  be
called  quite  certain,  owing  to  the  imperfect
correspondence  of  the  qualities  of  the  two
demons.  The  question  needs  examination  in  con
nection  with  the  story  of  Tobit  (may  we  refer  in
advance  to  a  new  explanation  of  Asmodeus  in  Crlt.
Bib.  ?),  which  seems  to  have  passed  through  several
phases.  It  is  clear,  however,  that,  as  time  went  on,
Persian  and  Babylonian  influences  in  combination  were
more  and  more  felt  by  the  Jews.  Hence  it  is  difficult
to  say  whether  the  seven  evil  spirits  of  Mt.  12  45  are  to
be  traced  to  Babylon  or  to  Persia,  and  whether  the
Book  of  Revelation  (a  Jewish  even  more  than  a  Christian
work)  strikes  us  more  by  its  Persian  or  by  its  Babylonian
affinities.1  Such  a  competent  authority  as  E.  \V.  West
can  see  hardly  any  difference  between  the  Devil  of
this  book  and  the  Zoroastrian  Ahriman,  whilst  the
eschatology  of  the  later  Zoroastrian  books  has  a  most
striking  resemblance  to  that  of  Revelation.  The  contest
of  Michael  and  his  angels  with  the  dragon  and  his  angels
is  closely  parallel  to  the  contest  between  Vohumano
'  Good  Mind '  and  the  powers  of  evil,  and  to  the
1000  years'  conflict  with  Azhi  Dahaka  (the  destructive
serpent).  Nor  is  the  awful  '  lake  of  fire  '  wanting  in  the
later  Zoroastrian  books.

The  seven  'men,'  i.e. ,  angels,  in  Ezek.  9a,  together
with  the  seven  archangels  of  Tobit  may  supply  evidence
of  an  earlier  date  for  Persian  influence,  though  (without
here  raising  the  question  as  to  the  original  setting  of
the  story  of  Tobit)  it  may  be  admitted  that  the  Persian
Amshaspands  developed  out  of  Babylonian  germs.  In
fact,  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  clear  that  we  cannot
always  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between  original  and
imported  Persian  beliefs.  The  influence  of  Babylonia
upon  Persia  must  have  begun  earlier  than  used  to  be
supposed.  The  religion  of  Aiira-mazda,  in  spite  of  its
primitive  Aryan  roots,  must  have  been  influenced,  like
the  religion  of  Yahwe,  by  that  of  Babylonia.  For
instance,  both  the  seven  chief  good  spirits  and  the  seven
chief  evil  spirits  of  Zoroastrianism  have  indisputable
Babylonian  affinities.  Probably,  however,  it  would  be
correct  to  say  that  Gabriel  and  Michael  and  their  com
panions  are  more  directly  akin  to  the  Zoroastrian  Amesha
Spentas  or  Amshaspands  (whose  names  are  not  less
significant)  than  to  the  Igigi,  or  friendly  genii,  of  the
Babylonians.  But  the  seven  Amshaspands,  even  if
borrowed,  were  modified  Hebraistically,  Yahwe  not
being  (as  analogy  would  have  required)  one  of  the
seven.2  Cp  ANGELS,  §  4,  n.  i.

1  Gunkel  in  his  able  work  (SchSpf.  «. Chaos)  has  unduly
ignored  the  Persian  elements.

2  Cp  Mills,  'Zendavesta'(-$7?£),  8145.

5439


23.  Resurrection.


ZOROASTRIANISM

It  is  also  not  improbable  that  the  belief  in  guardian
angels  (Mt.  18 10  Acts  12 15)  was  promoted  by  the  Zoro
astrian  doctrine  of  fravashis  (which  may  also  illustrate
the  Jewish  belief  in  the  angelic  hosts) — a  doctrine  which
has  its  roots  in  primitive  Sumerian  beliefs.

'  That  the  fravashis  originally  meant  the  spirits  of  the  dead
(Lat.  manes)  is  certain  ;  but  that  this  conception  early  mingled
with  another — that  of  the  heavenly  prototypes  of  all  beings  of
the  good  creation,  which  were  objectified  and  regarded  as  the
Sabaoth  or  heavenly  hosts  even  by  the  Jews  is  equally  certain.
The  conception  of  prototypes  seems  to  be  of  Sumero-Accadian
origin;  "my  god"  or  ''my  goddess"  in  the  Babylonian
penitential  hymns  is  to  be  understood  of  a  guardian  spirit,
equivalent  to  the  worshipper's  "better-self,"  or  in  other  words,
"  of  a  fravashi "  '  (OPs.  499_/C).  Cp  Tiele,  HAG  554  ;  de  Harlez,
Avesta,  Introd.  cxix,  etc.;  Mills,  Zeni/avesta  (SBK),  8279 ;
Casartelli,  Philosophy  of  the  Mazdayasnian  Religion  under
the  Sassanids,  137 _ff.  ;  Spiegel,  Eran.  Alterthumskunde,  '2.  93  ;
Che.  OPs.  282,  335,  420.

How  early  the  resurrection-idea  appeared  among  the
Jews,  is  uncertain  (cp  ESCHATOLOGY,  index).  The
possibility  of  escaping  death  is
certainly  implied  in  the  story  of
Enoch  ;  but  this  story  was,  even  if  not  unknown,  not
popular  before  the  post-exilic  period.  It  appears  to
have  a  Babylonian  origin  (see  ENOCH).  We  are  on
much  safer  ground  when  we  connect  the  Jewish  belief
in  the  resurrection  with  Zoroastrianism.  Zoroastrian
eschatology  had  a  profoundly  moral  import  which  must
have  been  congenial  to  the  Jews.  The  leaders  of
Jewish  religion  no  doubt  adopted  the  resurrection
doctrine  long  after  it  had  been  grasped  by  individuals.
They  adopted  it  cautiously,  so  cautiously  that  we  might
easily  suppose  that  it  arose  quite  naturally  out  of  the
necessities  felt  in  their  own  spiritual  life.  This  was
certainly  not  the  case,  unless  Jewish  religion  is  to  be
viewed  as  a  quite  exceptional  product.  In  course  of
time,  it  was  felt  that  the  caution  of  the  earlier  leaders
was  unnecessary.  The  resurrection  might  safely  be
made  general,  and  the  retribution  of  the  wicked  be
made  as  conspicuous  as  that  of  the  righteous.  Nay,
the  awards  of  the  righteous  would  only  then  acquire
their  full  attractiveness  when  the  punishment  of  the
wicked  had  been  made  as  complete  as  possible.  As
time  went  on,  the  indebtedness  of  Jewish  to  Persian
belief  became  still  greater,  and  it  is  possible  that  the
Messiah's  function  of  raising  the  dead  (Jn.  625  28)  is  an
unconscious  copy  of  the  function  assigned  to  the  hero
Saoshyant  (the  Beneficent  One)  in  the  Avesta.1

The  Zoroastrian  origin  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrec
tion  and  of  the  renovation  of  the  world  is  in  itself
probable.  It  is  raised  almost  to  a  certainty  when  we
have  proved  the  late  origin  of  Is.  65  /. ,  which  clearly
expresses  the  hope  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new
earth2  (6617  6622),  and  of  Is.  24-27,  in  which  occurs
not  only  the  promise  of  the  abolition  of  death  (25  8a,
if  the  text  be  correct,  see  Grit.  Bib.  ad  loc. ),  but  also  a
distinct  anticipation  of  the  resurrection  of  deceased
Israelites3  (2619).  This  limitation  of  the  hope  to
Israelites  we  may,  as  suggested  above,  ascribe  to  the
caution  of  the  religious  leaders  of  the  Jews.

1  '  Whose  name  will  be  the  victorious  Saoshyant,  and  whose
name  will  be  Astvat-ereta. He  will  be  Saoshyant,  because  he
will  benefit  the  whole  bodily  world  ;  he  will  be  Astvat-ereta  (he
who  makes  the  bodily  creatures  rise  up),  because  as  a  bodily
creature  and  as  a living  creature,  he  will stand  against  the
destruction  of  the  bodily  creatures,  to  withstand  the  Druj  (the
Lie-Demon)  of  the  two-footed  brood'(r<w/,  13  129,  Darmesteter's
transl.). The  Bundahesk,  which  is  an  expansion  of  genuine  old
Zoroastrian  elements,  is  much  more  explicit  (see  ch.  :.0).

2  Dr.  Charles  seems  too  bold  in  pronouncing  the  expression


be  merely  figurative.  This  is  probable,  if  51  is/  is  to  be
regarded  as  a  part  of  the  Second  Isaiah's  work.  If,  however,
chaps.  40-55  were  appended  to  chaps.  40-48  in  the  time  of  Lzra
there  is  fairly  good  reason  for  not  minimising  the  force  of  the
language.

3  <P  perhaps  gives  the  hope  a  wider  scope ;  it  renders  26  19,
oyacmjcroi'Tai  oi  vfKpoi,  «a.\  eyepflrjcroi'Tat  oi  iv  TOIS  (UtyMWXf.
See  SBOT,  '  Isa.'  Heb.  172.

5440


ZOROASTRIANISM

The  results  here  arrived  at  are  not  affected  by  I  )armesteter's
later  views  on  the  Avesta,  for  (i)  the-^  \ic\vs  are  extremely
difficult  to  justify,  and  (a)  Darmesteter  in  i&^i,  admitted  '  that
the  dtfc.u  of  Ahrinian,  the  resurrection,  and  the  renovation  of
the  world,  were  already  dogmatically  fixed  in  the  time  of  the
Actaeraemdse.

It  is  much  less  certain,  and  yet  far  from  improbable,
that  the  interest  of  the  later  Jews  in  '  Wisdom  '  was
,__.  ,  ,  stimulated  by  a  kindred  phenomenon  in
Sdom.  Zoi.0.lstl.janism.  The  stress  laid  in  the
Avesta  and  elsewhere  on  the  two  kinds  of  Wisdom a
(heavenly  and  earthly)  reminds  us  of  the  references  to
two  kinds  of  Wisdom  in  Job  and  Proverbs.  In  later
times  the  Jews  identified  the  heavenly  Wisdom  with  the
Law  ;  they  took  up,  it  seems,  with  enthusiasm  the
Zoroastrian  idea  of  the  pre-existence  in  heaven  of  the
personified  divine  Law.  It  is  also  just  conceivable  that
the  comparatively  high  morality  of  the  pre-Maccabsean
Judaism  may  be  partly  due  to  the  influence  of  the
morality  of  Zoroastrian  ism.  Certainly  the  Zoroastrian
phrase,  'good  thoughts,  good  words,  good  deeds,'
might  have  been  taken  as  a  motto  by  the  Jewish  wise
men  and  psalmists,  and  if  the  received  text  of  Pss.  16
17  49  73  is  correct,  it  will  be  reasonable  to  compare
the  expressions  of  the  hope  of  immortality  and  resur
rection  which  that  text  may  be  held  to  contain,  with
expressions  of  the  same  hope  in  the  Gathas.  It  may
justly  be  questioned,  however,  whether  the  received  text
is  correct.  There  are  phenomena  which  no  grammatical
or  exegetical  subtlety  can  explain  away,  which  seem  to
compel  us  to  assume  corruption  of  the  text.  But  for
this,  we  should  certainly  not  be  greatly  surprised  to  find
the  hope  of  a  future  life  emerging  in  any  part  of  the
Psalter,  this  book  in  all  its  parts  being  certainly  a.  work
of  the  Persian  and  Greek  periods.

It  has  also  been  conjectured  that  the  early  myths  of
Genesis  have  a  Zoroastrian  origin.  This  view,  however,

_  T  .  _  ,  .  was  possible  only  before  the  wonder-
25.  Late  Judaism.  ,  ,  v  J.  ,.,  ,

ful discoveries in the libraries of

Assyria.  The  ultimate  sources  of  these  early  myths  are
probably  N.  Arabian  and  Babylonian,  whilst  the  second
Fargard  of  the  Zoroastrian  writing  called  the  Vendidad,
in  its  present  form,  may  even  have  been  influenced  by
the  narratives  in  Genesis.3  It  is  true,  the  Talmudic
and  Midrashic  statements  on  the  First  Man  exhibit
strong  Persian  elements.  But  this  is  only  what  might
be  expected  in  the  later  Judaism.  It  is  remarkable  that
under  the  Sassanid  kings  Zoroastrianism  appears  to
have  been  in  some  degree  affected  by  Jewish  influences  4
— a  slight  compensation  for  the  long-continued  indebted
ness  of  Jewish  to  Zoroastrian  belief.

Here  this  brief  survey  must  close.  A  full  exegetical
treatment  of  the  Biblical  passages  would  have  unduly
extended  this  article.  Enough  if  the  close  resemblance
between  Judaism  and  Zoroastrianism  has  been  brought
home  to  the  reader.  Elsewhere  a  parallel  between
Zoroaster  and  John  the  Baptist  has  been  suggested.
But,  if  we  may  follow  the  most  respected  authorities,
this  comparison  does  not  go  far  enough.  Indeed,  there
is  no  figure  equal  in  interest  to  Zoroaster's  :  he  is  a
prophet,  reformer,  sacred  poet  all  in  one,  and  has  left
an  abiding  impress  on  a  faith  which  is  as  strongly
moral  as  the  Jewish,  and  without  some  acquaintance
with  which  neither  the  later  Judaism  nor  the  later
Christianity  can  be  adequately  appreciated.

An  attempt  to  reconsider  the  relation  of  Judaism  to  Zoro
astrianism  on  the  basis  of  the  sacred  texts  and  of  the  most

modern  authorities  is  to  be  found  in  Cheyne's
26.  Literature.  Origin  o/tke  Psalter  (iZqi),  pp.  357,  394-4°9i

433*44°  I  '  Possible  Zoroastrian  Influences  on
the  Religion  of  Ancient  Israel,'  Expos.  Times,  June,  July,
August  1891  ;  'The  Hook  of  Psalms,  its  origin  and  relation  to
Zoroastrianism,1  Semitic  Studies  in  memory  of  A.  Kohut,
1897,  pp.  111-119;  Jew.  Rel.  Life  after  tlie  Exile,  74,  81,  151,
157,  210,  251,  258^?  See  also  Moulton,  Expos.  Times,  May  1898,

1  Le  Zcndavesta,  12  Ixxiii.

2  See  Che.  Expos.  5  j»/.  ;  Jew.  Rel.  Life,  157.
S  See  CREATION,  DELUGE.

*  Darmesteter,  Une  pricre  judfo-persane,  Paris,  1891.

S44I


;  coOfAP  [BAFL]),  an  Issacharite  (Nu.


ZUPH

Zuph  '


S.  9s,


ZUR

PP-  352  ff-  (essay  by  a  Zend  scholar,  putting  forward  the  same

§eneral  view  and  the  same  ILM  '-named  w..rk)  ;

tave, Uel'cr  it. J-'.injluss J. 1'iirsismus auf  ti.  Judentlnitn,
1898;  Soderblom,  La  I  'it-  future  d'apivs.  /,•  ffoftUitmt  (li)Ol);
Hoklen,  Vervaandttcha.fi  dtr  jiUtitck^ckrittl.  mil  ,(,->•/;
Escliatologie  (1902). Oldenberg  (Z  DMG  50  43-68  [i£</
fresh  reason  for  believing in close relali  :\\  date

between  Iranian  and  Babylonian  religion, rlomnu '  •••(J'.'^HA
21  137.^  [1899])  points  out  that  th< •

Assaramazu,  in  an  Assyrian  list  of  gods,  is  really  Ahui:i-m.i/d.i  ;
also  that  the  divine  names  Mitra  and  Marun,  found  in '
religious  texts,  are  the  same  as  the  Vedic Mitra  and
These names  were borrowed  by  the  As-  .tditig  to

Hommel,  in  the  Kassite  period  (1700-1200  B.C.).  Zimm
(A'A  T(3)  346  n.  i),  points  out,  in  harmony  with  tin
article,  that  the  relation  of  Parsism  to  Babylon  needs  to
closely  examined.  K.  F.  G.  ,  §§  1-19  ;  T.  K.  C.  ,  §§  20-26.

ZORZELLEUS  (zopzeAAeoy  [A]),  i  Esd.  5  38.
See  BAKXILI.AI,  2.

ZUAR

13  [!>]).
ZUPH  (5|-1D),  Dt.  1  1,  AV1"*-,  RV  SUPH  (q.v.).

as  if  'honeycomb').  The  'land  of
0-fi0  [BA],  ffitfta.  [L])  is  the  district
about  the  unnamed  city  where  Samuel  and  Saul  met.
In  i  S.  1  1  (vcuret/3  [B],  a  ova.  [A],  <ru0  [L]  ;  and  i  Ch.
635  [20],  Kr.  <rov<f>  [BA],  erou0i  [L])  the  descent  of
Elkanah  is  apparently  traced  back  to  an  ancestor  Zuph  ;
i  Ch.  626  [n],  however,  gives  the  name  as  Zophai,
or  as  we  might  vocalise,  Zuphi  —  i.  e.  ,  '  the  Zuphite  '
(<rov<t>[e]i  [BAL]).

Most  critics  also  find  "Sis  (a  Zuphite)  in  i  S.  1  I,  on  which
fp:T|3  at  the  end  of  the  verse  may,  it  is  thought,  be  a  gloss.  If,
therefore,  '  Zuph  'in  i  S.  9  5  is  the  same  as  '  Zuph  '  in  i  S.  1  1,
etc.,  the  'land  of  Zuph'  will  mean  probably  the  district  held  by
the  clan  Zuph.

It  appears,  however  (see  RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM),  that  the  MT
of  i  S.  1  1  (on  which  i  Ch.  C  35  [20]  depends)  is  very  corrupt,  and
that  no  use  can  be  made  of  PIS,  or  Zuph,  which  is  probably
incorrect.  The  case  is  the  same  with  '  Zuph  '  in  the  phrase
'  the  land  of  Zuph.'  Of  a  Zuph  in  Mount  Ephraim  (commonly
so  called)  we  know  nothing,  and  the  supposed  reference  to  such
a  land  throws  the  geography  of  Saul's  journey  into  great  con
fusion.  f]1jj  or  (see  (S>)  >]'X  in  i  S.  9  5  is  very  possibly  a  corrupt
fragment  of  JT3SD,  Mizpah  ;  it  is  the  Mizpah  referred  to  in  i  S.
7  5^fT  and  10  17,  and,  as  7  16  shows,  specially  connected  with
Samuel.  See  MlZHAH,  i.

Winckler  indeed  has  suggested  (Gf  2)  that  the  land  of  Zuph
(cp  Ramathaim-zophim)  was  in  the  territory  of  Benjamin  before
the  reduction  of  its  limits  by  David  (who,  according  to  Winckler,
conquered  Benjamin  and  excluded  from  it  '  the  hill  country
of  Ephrnim  ').  There  is  also  the  possibility  that  '  the  hill-
country  of  Ephraim  '  spoken  of  was  in  the  Negeb,  and  that  rp^,
as  well  as  MQ,  comes  from  nsix-  There  does  appear  to  have
been  a  southern  Ephraim,  and  though  to  find  it  in  i  S.  3  4  would
subvert  all  our  theories,  yet  we  must  leave  the  question  open
whether  the  home  of  Saul  may  not  have  been  in  the  Negeb,
improbable  as  this  may  seem.

P'S  is  also  supported  by  i  Ch.  6  20  Ktb.  On  the  form  -sis
(i  'Ch.  On)  cp  Kittel,  SBOT,  '  Chron.'  ad  lac.  In  T  S  li
Wellhausen,  Klostermann,  Marquart,  read  onEN  »ps,  '  Zuph
of  Ephraim.'  T.  K.  C.

ZUR  (and  its  possible  compounds).  We  find  T1V,
Zur  (sur),  used  as  a  synonym  for  God  or  as  an  element
in  a  compound  title  descriptive  of  God  as  the  Mighty
One,  in  Is.  17io,  and  in  many  late  exilic  and  post-exilic
passages.

See  Dt.  32  4  15  is  30  31  [Us],  37  i  S.  2  2  2  S.  22  [  =  Ps.  18]
3  3247[to]  23  3  Ps.  19  15  [Ml  28  i  »1  3[2]  62  378(2  6  7]  71  3  73  26
7835  8927  [26]  92i6[is)  9422  95  i  144i  [also  756,  ©]  Is.  264
30  29  44  8  Hab.  1  12.1

Among  these  passages  Dt.  324  '8  3°/.  *  S.  2=  Is.
448  Hab.  1  12  are  specially  important,  because  here  -BX,
'  Rock,"  appears  to  have  become  altogether  a  synonym
for  '  God.'2  To  these  we  may  perhaps  add  Josh.  15  58,
where  BETH-ZUR  (q.v.  )  may  mean  'house  of  Zur'  =
'  house  of  God.'  3  Are  we  to  suppose  that  phrases  like

1  Is.  30  29 and Hab.  1  121*  are  probably  late; see  the  com
mentaries  of  Marti  and  Nowack.

2  In  Ps.  756  we  should  probably  read  neither  1x1x3  nor  msa,
but  p*TO3  (cp  31  19  [18]).

3  Hommel  (A  HT  320,  cp  300)  also  compares  the  royal  name
•UH3  (Bir-sur)  in  the  inscription  of  Panammu,  king  of  Sam'al
(Sth  cent.),  and  the  S.  Arabian  woman's  name  Zuri-'addana.

5442


ZUE

1  rock  of  my  salvation  '  are  suggested  by  an  early  divine
title  mx,  Zur  ('  rock  ')  ?  If  so,  the  author  of  Dt.  32  and
those  who  followed  him  did  but  revert  to  an  ancient
usage  when  they  employed  Zur  and  Yahwe  synonymously.
And  if  this  early  divine  title  existed  among  the  Hebrews,
we  may,  not  without  some  plausibility,  regard  the  four
personal  names  ELIZUR,  PEDAHZUR,  ZURIEL,  and
ZURISHADUAI  (all  in  P)  as  ancient  names  preserved
by  the  late  Priestly  Writing.

The  literary  evidence,  however,  is  not  favourable  to
this  view  ;  and  on  the  sole  ground  of  the  place-name
Bethzur  (which  can  quite  well  be  explained  '  rock-house  '
or  '  rock-place  ')  we  cannot  venture  to  regard  as  beyond
all  doubt  the  early  existence  of  a  divine  name  Zur.  If,
therefore,  the  four  names  referred  to  really  contain  the
(late)  divine  name  Zur,  they  must  be  artificial  coinages
of  P.  But  it  is  an  objection  to  this  view  that  P  never
employs  the  title  mx  of  God.  Are  we  to  suppose,
then,  that  P  derived  the  names  from  some  other  late,
post-deuteronomic  writer?

The  difficulty  can  only  be  removed  by  a  keener  criticism  of
the  MT.  As  the  result  of  this  we  have  found  elsewhere  that
the  four  names  are  probably  corruptions  of  ethnics  or  gentilics.
The  corruptions  in  the  proper  names  of  P  are  so  numerous  that
this  theory  has  to  be  seriously  considered.  See  PEDAHZUR,
ZURIEL,  ZUKISHADDAI.  Cp  also  PASHHUR  ;  if  this  word  be  _a
corruption  of  Pedahzur,  we  get  another  set  of  references  to  this
name.  The  date  of  Jer.  20  (Pashhur  chapter),  however,  is
questioned  (see  JEREMIAH  ii,  §  6).

On  the  biblical  passages,  cp  Gray,  HPN  195  ff.,  and  On
Jewish  views  of  the  meaning  of  /ur  see  Wiegand,  ZA  Til  "10

T.  K.  C.


ZTJI1  OVJ,  abbrev.  ,  perhaps  from  "Ito'jp,  Missur  in
N.  Arabia  [see  MIZRAIM,  §  2/5]  cp  Rekem  =  Jerahmeel,
Reba='Arab;  COYP  [BAFL]).  i.  A  Midianitish
chief,  Nu.  25  15  31  8  Josh.  1821.

2.  A  name  in  a  genealogy  of  BENJAMIN  (q.v.,  §  9
ii.  j8),  cp  ZEROR  (i  Ch.  830  to-oi^  [A]  =936  laeip  [BNA1).
His  mother  bears  the  Jerahmeelite  name  MAACAH
(Che.).  See/(W?  Ilno-n3,  §§  10  f.

5443


ZUZIM

ZUEIEL  (^n-1V,  as  if  'my  rock  is  El,'  but  see
below  ;  coypmA  [BAFL]),  b.  Abihail,  'prince'  of  the
families  of  Merari  (Nu.  Sssit.

The  name  taken  by  itself  might  be  a  combination  of  two
names  of  God  (cp  ZUR).  But  if  Abihail  is  a  (popular)  corruption
of  '  Jerahmeel '  (see  MAHALATH,  and  cp  7JP3H,  if  correct,  in
i  Ch.  2  29)  and  if  '  Mahli '  is  a  corruption  of  '  Jerahme'eli '  and
'  Merari '  of  '  Misri '  (/.£'.,  '  belonging  to  Musur  or  Musri  [on  the
S.  Palestinian  border]'),  or  from  some  other  ethnic  (cp  MEKAB),
it  is  probable  that  *?K  is  simply  an  afformative,  and  that  »-|1S
implies  a  clan-name  -nx,  possibly  from  nsis,  and  ultimately  from
nans-  Gp  msa  (SUPHERETH).  T.  K.  C.

ZURISHADDAI  C^-VW,  §43-  as  i:  'my  rock  is
Shaddai,'  but  see  below  ;  coyp[e]lCAA<M  [BAF],  and
COypiC&Ae  [L]),  father  of  the  Simeonite  prince  Shelu-
miel,  Nu.  16  (2i2,  coyplC<\A<\ei  [F]  ;  73641  lOigt).
Under  the  form  SALASADAI  he  is  mentioned  along
with  his  son  SHELUMIEL  (q.-v. )  in  the  compiled  genealogy
of  Judith  (8  i,  ffapaaadai  [B],  <ra\a.  [A],  crapi.  [N]).
See  GENEALOGIES  i. ,  col.  1662,  n.  i.

US  (Zur)  and  ''HS*  (Shaddai  ?)  may  both  be  names  of  God  (see
ZUR,  SHADDAI).  But  names  (especially  in  P)  being  so  often
corrupt,  it  is  not  improbable  that  both  were  originally  ethnics,
and  ultimately  come  respectively  from  nS"li'  (Zarephath)  and
^ttyOV  (Ishmael).  See  ZURIEL  and  SHADDAI.  Asshur  =  the
southern  Geshur,  with  which  the  Simeonites  may  have  been
connected.  Possibly,  too,  the  Danite  name,  AMMISHADDAI
(q.v.),  maybe  a  distorted  form  of  Ishmael,  and  SHELUMIEL  (g.v).
may  also  have  a  tribal  reference.  T.  K.  C.

ZUZIM  (D'W),  a  people  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,
Gen.  14  st  (cp  HAM).  Sym.  £oifo/u|u.eij>,  ©AEL  S=9vr\  laxvpa.,
perhaps  reading  either  C"IH>'  (Klo.  Gesch.  107)  or  C'CVij;  (cp

Pesh.  NO'CTi  '  the  mighty  ones,'  and  the  form  c'DTCT.  ZAMZUM-
MIM.  See  E.MIM).  At  any  rate,  we  cannot  venture  to  connect  the
narrie  with  that  of  the  Roman  military  station  Ziza,  SE.  of
Heshbon.  Sayce's  theory  (Crif.  Man.  i6o/.)  is  also  too
hazardous.  Probably  the  Zuzim  are  to  be  identified  with  the
ZAMZUMMIM  (f.v.),  and  are  a  branch  of  the  Rephaim — i.e.,
probably  of  the  Sarephathlm.  C'TIT  may  in  fact  have  come  from
D'TIS  (Perizzites  (though  the  plur.  of  <n3  does  not  actually
occur) ;  vnS  itself  may  be  a  corruption  of  »n£ns-  See  PERIZ-
ZITE,  REPHAIM.  T.  K.  C.

S444


END OF VOL. IV
